
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Jun 22;96(13):7312-7.

The intracellular parasite Theileria parva protects infected T cells from
apoptosis.

Heussler VT(1), Machado J Jr, Fernandez PC, Botteron C, Chen CG, Pearse MJ,
Dobbelaere DA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunopathology, Institute of Animal Pathology, University of
Berne, CH-3012 Berne, Switzerland.

Parasites have evolved a plethora of strategies to ensure their survival. The
intracellular parasite Theileria parva secures its propagation and spreads
through the infected animal by infecting and transforming T cells, inducing their
continuous proliferation and rendering them metastatic. In previous work, we have
shown that the parasite induces constitutive activation of the transcription
factor NF-kappaB, by inducing the constitutive degradation of its cytoplasmic
inhibitors. The biological significance of NF-kappaB activation in T.
parva-infected cells, however, has not yet been defined. Cells that have been
transformed by viruses or oncogenes can persist only if they manage to avoid
destruction by the apoptotic mechanisms that are activated on transformation and 
that contribute to maintain cellular homeostasis. We now demonstrate that
parasite-induced NF-kappaB activation plays a crucial role in the survival of T. 
parva-transformed T cells by conveying protection against an apoptotic signal
that accompanies parasite-mediated transformation. Consequently, inhibition of
NF-kappaB nuclear translocation and the expression of dominant negative mutant
forms of components of the NF-kappaB activation pathway, such as IkappaBalpha or 
p65, prompt rapid apoptosis of T. parva-transformed T cells. Our findings offer
important insights into parasite survival strategies and demonstrate that
parasite-induced constitutive NF-kappaB activation is an essential step in
maintaining the transformed phenotype of the infected cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.96.13.7312 
PMCID: PMC22082
PMID: 10377411  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

