
1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 1999 Dec 15;72(1-2):87-94.

Modulation of host immune responses by protozoal DNA.

Brown WC(1), Suarez CE, Shoda LK, Estes DM.

Author information: 
(1)Washington State University, Department of Veterinary Microbiology and
Pathology, Pullman 99164-7040, USA. wbrown@vetmed.wsu.edu

The pathology caused by acute Babesia bovis infection is similar to that seen in 
severe human malaria caused by Plasmodium falciparum infection, which is related 
to dysregulated production of inflammatory cytokines and nitric oxide (NO). We
have observed induction of NO, inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and
inflammatory cytokines in macrophages by B. bovis. Furthermore, proliferation of 
lymphocytes from individuals never exposed to certain protozoal pathogens can be 
induced by crude protozoal parasite extracts. We have repeatedly observed
stimulation of naive PBMC from cattle to antigenic extracts of Babesia bovis.
Based on recent studies demonstrating the mitogenicity of bacterial and other
non-vertebrate DNAs for murine B cells and macrophages, the mitogenic properties 
of B. bovis DNA were examined. B. bovis and E. coli DNAs induced proliferation of
PBMC and purified B cells from non-exposed cattle. Stimulatory activity was
reduced by DNase treatment and methylation with CpG methylase, indicating the
presence of stimulatory non-methylated CpG motifs in the B. bovis genome. B.
bovis and E. coli DNAs enhanced IgG secretion by cultured B cells, stimulating
IgG1 and more strongly, IgG2. Several hexameric CpG immunostimulatory sequences
(ISS) active for murine B cells were identified in an 11 kb fragment of B. bovis 
DNA. An oligodeoxyribonucleotide containing one of these (AACGTT), located in the
rhoptry associated protein-1 (rap-1) open reading frame, stimulated B cell
proliferation. These studies identify a potential mechanism by which protozoal
parasites may modulate host immune responses, leading to consequences such as
hypergammaglobulinemia and splenomegaly. These results also support the use of
ISS as vaccine adjuvants to enhance Type 1 immune responses in cattle.

DOI: 10.1016/s0165-2427(99)00120-8 
PMID: 10614497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

