
1. Infect Immun. 2000 Sep;68(9):5139-45.

Babesia bovis-stimulated macrophages express interleukin-1beta, interleukin-12,
tumor necrosis factor alpha, and nitric oxide and inhibit parasite replication in
vitro.

Shoda LK(1), Palmer GH, Florin-Christensen J, Florin-Christensen M, Godson DL,
Brown WC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Vector-Borne Diseases, Department of Veterinary Microbiology and
Pathology, Washington State University, Pullman, Washington 99164-7040, USA.

The tick-transmitted hemoparasite Babesia bovis causes an acute infection that
results in persistence and immunity against challenge infection in cattle that
control the initial parasitemia. Resolution of acute infection with this
protozoal pathogen is believed to be dependent on products of activated
macrophages (Mphi), including inflammatory cytokines and nitric oxide (NO) and
its derivatives. B. bovis stimulates inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and
production of NO in bovine Mphi, and chemical donors of NO inhibit the growth of 
B. bovis in vitro. However, the induction of inflammatory cytokines in Mphi by
babesial parasites has not been described, and the antiparasitic activity of NO
produced by B. bovis-stimulated Mphi has not been definitively demonstrated. We
report that monocyte-derived Mphi activated by B. bovis expressed enhanced levels
of inflammatory cytokines interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta), IL-12, and tumor necrosis
factor alpha that are important for stimulating innate and acquired immunity
against protozoal pathogens. Furthermore, a lipid fraction of B. bovis-infected
erythrocytes stimulated iNOS expression and NO production by Mphi. Cocultures of 
Mphi and B. bovis-infected erythrocytes either in contact or physically separated
resulted in reduced parasite viability. However, NO produced by bovine Mphi in
response to B. bovis-infected erythrocytes was only partially responsible for
parasite growth inhibition, suggesting that additional factors contribute to the 
inhibition of B. bovis replication. These findings demonstrate that B. bovis
induces an innate immune response that is capable of controlling parasite
replication and that could potentially result in host survival and parasite
persistence.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.68.9.5139-5145.2000 
PMCID: PMC101760
PMID: 10948137  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

