
1. Parasite Immunol. 2001 Sep;23(9):463-71.

The age-related immunity in cattle to Babesia bovis infection involves the rapid 
induction of interleukin-12, interferon-gamma and inducible nitric oxide synthase
mRNA expression in the spleen.

Goff WL(1), Johnson WC, Parish SM, Barrington GM, Tuo W, Valdez RA.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Disease Research Unit, USDA-ARS, Washington State University, Pullman, 
Washington, WA 99164, USA. wgoff@vetmed.wsu.edu

Young calves possess a strong innate immunity against Babesia bovis infection
that lasts for approximately 6 months after birth and is abrogated with the
removal of the spleen. This immunity is characterized as cellular involving a
soluble mediator. Nitric oxide has been implicated by virtue of its babesiacidal 
affects in vitro, but questioned to be as effective in vivo, due to its ability
to downregulate type-1 immunity. Spleen cells were obtained from 4-month-old
calves and adult steers and processed for monitoring cytokine and inducible
nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) mRNA expression during the response to initial B.
bovis infection. The data provided evidence of a transient role for nitric oxide 
in innate immunity, characterized by brief iNOS induction in the spleen of calves
that was not detectable in the spleens of adults. The iNOS message followed the
early induction of interleukin (IL)-12 and interferon (IFN)-gamma message in
calves. The induction of IL-12 and IFN-gamma message in adults was delayed until 
IL-10 message was induced. Transformation growth factor-beta mRNA expression
levels were greater in spleen cells from adults early in infection and then
declined, whereas expression levels increased in spleen cells from calves later
in the infection process. Together, the data support the concept of 'first come, 
first serve' cytokine influence over cellular activities, the importance of a
type-1 response in the control of an initial infection and the need for tight
regulation in order to prevent pathology associated with over production of
nitric oxide and inflammatory cytokines.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-3024.2001.00402.x 
PMID: 11589775  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

