
1. Vet Clin Pathol. 2001;30(4):180-188.

Babesia gibsoni infection in a dog from indiana.

Irizarry-Rovira AR(1), Stephens J, Christian J, Kjemtrup A, DeNicola DB, Widmer
WR, Conrad PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA. irizarry@vet.purdue.edu

A 10-year-old spayed female mixed-breed dog was presented to the Purdue
University Veterinary Teaching Hospital (PUVTH) with complaints of persistent
anemia with occasional exacerbations, anorexia, and lethargy. The dog had been
presented to the referring veterinarian 2 months prior with multiple bite wounds 
received during a fight with 3 Pit Bull Terriers. The dog was discharged after
the wounds were cleaned and surgically closed. Upon admission to the PUVTH, blood
was collected for a complete blood count and biochemical analysis. Microscopic
examination of peripheral blood smears revealed intraerythrocytic protozoal
parasites consistent with Babesia gibsoni. Molecular analysis confirmed that the 
organism was B. gibsoni and that its 18S ribosomal RNA sequence was identical to 
that of other B. gibsoni isolates from Oklahoma, North Carolina, and Okinawa,
Japan. Hematologic changes included moderately severe, regenerative, macrocytic, 
normochromic anemia, with poikilocytosis, polychromasia, anisocytosis, and a
marked increase in nucleated RBCs. Biochemical changes included increased serum
alanine aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, and gamma-glutamyltransferase
activities. The dog was treated with imidocarb, but despite initial clinical
improvement, the dog died 2 weeks after the first dose. A necropsy was not
performed. The infection in this dog is the first reported case of B. gibsoni
infection in Indiana. Because of the widespread geographical distribution of the 
organism, veterinarians and veterinary clinical pathologists throughout the
United States should carefully examine Romanowsky-stained blood smears from
patients with acute hemolytic anemia for small intraerythrocytic babesial
parasites.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1939-165x.2001.tb00429.x 
PMID: 12024299 

