
1. Infect Immun. 2003 Apr;71(4):1911-8.

P-selectin contributes to severe experimental malaria but is not required for
leukocyte adhesion to brain microvasculature.

Chang WL(1), Li J, Sun G, Chen HL, Specian RD, Berney SM, Granger DN, van der
Heyde HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center,
Shreveport, LA 71130, USA.

Plasmodium berghei-infected mice, a well-recognized model of experimental
cerebral malaria (ECM), exhibit many of the hallmarks of a systemic inflammatory 
response, with organ damage in brain, lung, and kidneys. Identification of the
molecules mediating pathogenesis of the inflammatory response, such as leukocyte 
adhesion, may lead to new therapies. Indeed, mice lacking the cell adhesion
molecule P-selectin were significantly (P = 0.005) protected from death due to P.
berghei malaria compared with C57BL/6 controls despite similar parasitemia (P =
0.6) being found in both groups of mice. P-selectin levels assessed by the
quantitative dual radiolabeled monoclonal antibody technique increased
significantly (P < 0.05) in several organs in C57BL/6 mice infected with P.
berghei, supporting the concept of a systemic inflammatory response mediating
malarial pathogenesis. Intravital microscopic analysis of the brain
microvasculature demonstrated significant (P < 0.001) leukocyte rolling and
adhesion in brain venules of P. berghei-infected mice compared with those found
in uninfected controls. The maximum leukocyte adhesion occurred on day 6 of P.
berghei infection, when the mice become moribund and exhibit marked vascular
leakage into the brain, lung, and heart. However, P-selectin levels were
significantly (P < 0.005) increased in brain, lung, and kidneys during P. berghei
malaria in ECM-resistant BALB/c mice compared with those found in uninfected
BALB/c controls, indicating that increased P-selectin alone is not sufficient to 
mediate malarial pathogenesis. Leukocyte adhesion to brain microvessels of
P-selectin-deficient mice with P. berghei malaria was similar to that observed in
control mice. Collectively, these results indicate that P-selectin is important
for the development of malarial pathogenesis but is not required for leukocyte
adhesion in brain.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.71.4.1911-1918.2003 
PMCID: PMC152027
PMID: 12654808  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

