
1. J Immunol. 2003 Oct 15;171(8):4243-53.

Hemozoin increases IFN-gamma-inducible macrophage nitric oxide generation through
extracellular signal-regulated kinase- and NF-kappa B-dependent pathways.

Jaramillo M(1), Gowda DC, Radzioch D, Olivier M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Infectiologie, Département de Biologie médicale,
Faculté de Médecine, Université Laval, Ste-Foy, Québec, Canada.

NO overproduction has been suggested to contribute to the immunopathology related
to malaria infection. Even though a role for some parasite molecules (e.g., GPI) 
in NO induction has been proposed, the direct contribution of hemozoin (HZ),
another parasite metabolite, remains to be established. Therefore, we were
interested to determine whether Plasmodium falciparum (Pf) HZ and synthetic HZ,
beta-hematin, alone or in combination with IFN-gamma, were able to induce
macrophage (Mphi) NO synthesis. We observed that neither Pf HZ nor synthetic HZ
led to NO generation in B10R murine Mphi; however, they significantly increased
IFN-gamma-mediated inducible NO synthase (iNOS) mRNA and protein expression, and 
NO production. Next, by investigating the transductional mechanisms involved in
this cellular regulation, we established that HZ induces extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK)1/2 mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphorylation
as well as NF-kappaB binding to the iNOS promoter, and enhances the
IFN-gamma-dependent activation of both second messengers. Of interest, cell
pretreatment with specific inhibitors against either NF-kappaB or the ERK1/2
pathway blocked the HZ + IFN-gamma-inducible NF-kappaB activity and significantly
reduced the HZ-dependent increase on IFN-gamma-mediated iNOS and NO induction.
Even though selective inhibition of the Janus kinase 2/STAT1alpha pathway
suppressed NO synthesis in response to HZ + IFN-gamma, HZ alone did not activate 
this signaling pathway and did not have an up-regulating effect on the
IFN-gamma-induced Janus kinase 2/STAT1alpha phosphorylation and STAT1alpha
binding to the iNOS promoter. In conclusion, our results suggest that HZ exerts a
potent synergistic effect on the IFN-gamma-inducible NO generation in Mphi via
ERK- and NF-kappaB-dependent pathways.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.171.8.4243 
PMID: 14530348  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

