
1. Free Radic Res. 2003 Nov;37(11):1181-9.

The influence of oxidative bursts of phagocytes on red blood cell oxidation in
anemic cattle infected with Theileria sergenti.

Shiono H(1), Yagi Y, Chikayama Y, Miyazaki S, Nakamura I.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Biochemistry Section, Hokkaido Research Station, National
Agricultural Research Organization, 4 Hitsujigaoka, Toyohira, Sapporo, Hokkaido
062-0045, Japan. shiono@affrc.go.jp

The primary clinical symptom of Japanese bovine theileriosis, caused by the
intraerythrocytic protozoan Theileria sergenti, is anemia, but the underlying
mechanism of this anemia remains unknown. To elucidate the pathogenesis of anemia
developing in bovine theileriosis, we investigated the relationship between
oxidative bursts of peripheral blood phagocytes (neutrophils and monocytes) and
the oxidation of red blood cells (RBC) to the development of anemia in cattle
experimentally infected with T. sergenti. The levels of methemoglobin (MetHb) and
malondialdehyde (MDA), as a parameter of intracellular and membrane oxidative
damage in RBC and of production of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) in phagocytes, were
low before the onset of anemia; these parameters began to increase remarkably
with decreasing packed cell volume and increasing parasitemia during the course
of the anemia, which returned to initial levels during convalescence from anemia.
A positive correlation between H2O2 production of phagocytes and each of the
oxidative indices of MetHb and MDA was also noted during the onset of anemia. The
levels of antioxidants, namely reduced glutathione and glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase, in RBC also decreased during the progression of anemia. These
results suggest that oxidative damage of RBC has a close relationship with the
onset of anemia in bovine theileriosis, and that oxidative bursts of phagocytes
may play a part in the pathogenesis of anemia in infected cattle.

DOI: 10.1080/10715760310001607023 
PMID: 14703730  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

