
1. Microbes Infect. 2005 Aug-Sep;7(11-12):1204-10.

High levels of circulating cardiac proteins indicate cardiac impairment in
African children with severe Plasmodium falciparum malaria.

Ehrhardt S(1), Mockenhaupt FP, Anemana SD, Otchwemah RN, Wichmann D, Cramer JP,
Bienzle U, Burchard GD, Brattig NW.

Author information: 
(1)Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, Bernhard-Nocht-Str. 74, 20359 
Hamburg, Germany. ehrhardt@bni-hamburg.de

A role of the heart in the pathophysiology of severe Plasmodium falciparum
malaria has recently been suggested. The objective of the present study was to
substantiate this finding in a large group of African children and to correlate
results with metabolic conditions in these children. Furthermore, the impact of a
potential cardiac impairment on outcome in severe cases was assessed. Results may
have important implications on the currently ongoing debate on fluid management
in severe malaria patients. Plasma levels of N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic
peptide (NT-proBNP), heart-type fatty acid-binding protein (H-FABP), myoglobin
and creatine kinase muscle-brain (CK-MB) were compared in 400 African children
with severe and mild falciparum malaria. Plasma levels of these markers were
correlated with lactate and glucose blood levels, indicators for hypovolemia, and
with clinical outcome. Children suffering from severe malaria and children who
died (n = 22) exhibited high to very high levels of cardiac markers,
respectively. Cardiac factors themselves were not predictive of fatal outcome,
while, in multivariate analysis, lactic acidosis was the most important
biochemical predictor of death in the severe malaria group. Lactic acidosis and
hypoglycemia, however, result in cardiac impairment as defined by elevated levels
of circulating cardiac proteins. Our results point to hypovolemia as a major
underlying cause of lactic acidosis and hypoglycemia in African children with
severe falciparum malaria. These deleterious metabolic conditions contribute to
myocardial affection which was evident but not predictive per se of fatal
outcome.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2005.04.007 
PMID: 16002312  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

