
1. Microbes Infect. 2006 Mar;8(3):680-6. Epub 2006 Jan 11.

Memory T cells protect against Plasmodium vivax infection.

Jangpatarapongsa K(1), Sirichaisinthop J, Sattabongkot J, Cui L, Montgomery SM,
Looareesuwan S, Troye-Blomberg M, Udomsangpetch R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok
10400, Thailand.

Immunity induced by Plasmodium vivax infection leads to memory T cell recruitment
activated during "relapse" or "re-infection". This study aims to characterise
memory T cells in patients with acute or convalescent P. vivax infection.
Lymphocytes were collected from patients infected by P. vivax, immune controls
and naive controls. The proportion of immature memory T cells, expressing
CD45RO(+)CD27(+), and mature cells lacking CD27 was assessed. A statistically
significant increase in the median percentage of memory T cell subsets expressing
CD4(+) was observed in material from patients with an acute infection compared
with that from either naive or immune controls. The high percentage of memory T
cells in infected patients was maintained until 60 days post treatment. The
immune controls living in a malaria endemic area had a somewhat increased
proportion of memory T cell subsets expressing CD8(+). An approximately
three-fold increase of these cell types was shown in patients with an acute
infection and the level persisted until 60 days post treatment. Phenotypic
characterisation of the peripheral lymphocytes during acute infection revealed
that a large fraction of the lymphocytes carried the gammadelta phenotypes
suggesting a role for these cells in the early response against P. vivax. Very
low levels of P. vivax specific antibody were found. This might suggest that
cell-mediated immunity may play a greater role in the development of naturally
acquired protection against P. vivax infection than humoral immunity. Our results
provide further insight into the mechanism of cell-mediated immunity to P. vivax 
infection that could be important for the future development of a successful
vaccine and anti-malarial drug designation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2005.09.003 
PMID: 16469520  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

