
1. Lab Invest. 2006 Sep;86(9):873-88. Epub 2006 Jul 24.

Matrix metalloproteinases, tissue inhibitors of MMPs and TACE in experimental
cerebral malaria.

Van den Steen PE(1), Van Aelst I, Starckx S, Maskos K, Opdenakker G, Pagenstecher
A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunobiology, Rega Institute, University of Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium. philippe.vandensteen@rega.kuleuven.ac.be

Cerebral malaria (CM) is a life-threatening disorder and a major medical problem 
in developing countries. It is caused by the sequestration of malaria-infected
erythrocytes onto brain endothelia, followed by blood-brain barrier (BBB) damage 
and neurological deficit. In the present study, matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) 
were analysed in a mouse model of CM with Plasmodium berghei ANKA. Increased
numbers of gelatinase B (MMP-9)-positive cells, which were also CD11b(+), were
detected in the brain. In addition, activation of gelatinase B occurred in CM
brains, and not in brains of mice with non-CM. However, selective genetic
knockout of gelatinase B did not alter the clinical evolution of experimental CM.
To study other protease balances, the mRNA expression levels of nine matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs), five membrane-type MMPs, TNF-alpha converting enzyme
(TACE) and the four tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) were analysed
during CM in different organs. Significant alterations in expression were
observed, including increases of the mRNAs of MMP-3, -8, -13 and -14 in the
spleen, MMP-8, -12, -13 and -14 in the liver and MMP-8 and -13 in the brain. Net 
gelatinolytic activity, independent of gelatinase B and inhibitable with EDTA,
was detected in situ in the endothelia of blood vessels in CM brains, but not in 
brains of mice with non-CM, suggesting that metalloproteases, different from
gelatinase B, are active in the BBB environment in CM. The increase in MMP
expression in the brain was significantly less pronounced after infection of
C57Bl/6 mice with the noncerebral strain P. berghei NK65, but it was similar in
CM-susceptible C57Bl/6 and CM-resistant Balb/C mice upon infection with P.
berghei ANKA. Furthermore, in comparison with C57Bl/6 mice, a larger increase in 
TIMP-1 and a marked, >30-fold induction in MMP-3 were found in the brains of
Balb/C mice, suggesting possible protective roles for TIMP-1 and MMP-3.

DOI: 10.1038/labinvest.3700454 
PMID: 16865090  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

