
1. J Zoo Wildl Med. 2007 Jun;38(2):285-91.

Laboratory findings in acute Cytauxzoon felis infection in cougars (Puma concolor
couguar) in Florida.

Harvey JW(1), Dunbar MR, Norton TM, Yabsley MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, Box 100144, College of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.
harveyj@mail.vetmed.ufl.edu

Intraerythrocytic piroplasms, morphologically indistinguishable from Cytauxzoon
felis, were identified in stained blood films from more than one third of
free-ranging cougars (Puma concolor couguar) in southern Florida in a study that 
failed to demonstrate negative effects of piroplasm infection on measured
hematologic parameters. However, a recent study with a nested 18s rRNA polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) assay identified only 9% of the free-ranging cougars in
southern Florida as infected with C. felis but found 83% of these animals were
infected with an unnamed small Babesia sp. In this study, hematology and clinical
chemistry parameters were determined during the initial appearance of piroplasms 
in stained blood films of three western cougars housed in northern Florida. One
animal became ill, but the remaining two animals did not exhibit clinical signs
of disease. The hematocrit decreased in all three cougars concomitant with the
first recognized parasitemia. A regenerative response to anemia (increased
polychromasia, increased mean cell volume, and increased red cell distribution
width) was recognized in two cougars that were examined twice during the
following 2 weeks. Thrombocytopenia and probable leukopenia occurred in one
animal. The most consistent clinical chemistry findings were increased serum
bilirubin concentrations and increased alanine aminotransferase and aspartate
aminotransferase activities at the time of initial recognition of parasitemia.
Serum protein findings were not consistent in these cougars. The use of PCR and
determination of 18S rRNA gene sequences in the blood from these three animals
revealed infection with C. felis, but not with the Babesia sp. In this report, we
demonstrate that mild hemolytic anemia, and probably liver injury, occurs
concomitant with the initial discovery of C. felis piroplasms in stained blood
films.

DOI: 10.1638/1042-7260(2007)038[0285:LFIACF]2.0.CO;2 
PMID: 17679513  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

