
1. BMC Genomics. 2007 Dec 6;8:452.

Gene expression analysis reveals early changes in several molecular pathways in
cerebral malaria-susceptible mice versus cerebral malaria-resistant mice.

Delahaye NF(1), Coltel N, Puthier D, Barbier M, Benech P, Joly F, Iraqi FA, Grau 
GE, Nguyen C, Rihet P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Pharmacogénétique des maladies parasitaires-EA864, Université
de la Méditerranée, IFR48, Marseille, France. nicolasdelahaye@yahoo.fr

BACKGROUND: Microarray analyses allow the identification and assessment of
molecular signatures in whole tissues undergoing pathological processes. To
better understand cerebral malaria pathogenesis, we investigated intra-cerebral
gene-expression profiles in well-defined genetically cerebral malaria-resistant
(CM-R) and CM-susceptible (CM-S) mice, upon infection by Plasmodium berghei ANKA 
(PbA). We investigated mouse transcriptional responses at early and late stages
of infection by use of cDNA microarrays.
RESULTS: Through a rigorous statistical approach with multiple testing
corrections, we showed that PbA significantly altered brain gene expression in
CM-R (BALB/c), and in CM-S (CBA/J and C57BL/6) mice, and that 327 genes
discriminated between early and late infection stages, between mouse strains, and
between CM-R and CM-S mice. We further identified 104, 56, 84 genes with
significant differential expression between CM-R and CM-S mice on days 2, 5, and 
7 respectively. The analysis of their functional annotation indicates that genes 
involved in metabolic energy pathways, the inflammatory response, and the
neuroprotection/neurotoxicity balance play a major role in cerebral malaria
pathogenesis. In addition, our data suggest that cerebral malaria and Alzheimer's
disease may share some common mechanisms of pathogenesis, as illustrated by the
accumulation of beta-amyloid proteins in brains of CM-S mice, but not of CM-R
mice.
CONCLUSION: Our microarray analysis highlighted marked changes in several
molecular pathways in CM-S compared to CM-R mice, particularly at early stages of
infection. This study revealed some promising areas for exploration that may both
provide new insight into the knowledge of CM pathogenesis and the development of 
novel therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-8-452 
PMCID: PMC2246131
PMID: 18062806  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

