
1. J Cell Biol. 1991 Apr;113(1):87-101.

The entry of Theileria parva sporozoites into bovine lymphocytes: evidence for
MHC class I involvement.

Shaw MK(1), Tilney LG, Musoke AJ.

Author information: 
(1)International Laboratory for Research on Animal Diseases, Nairobi, Kenya.

We have examined the process of Theileria parva sporozoite entry into susceptible
bovine lymphocytes and have begun to identify one of the possible molecular
interactions involved in the process. The entry process involves a defined series
of events and we have used a number of experimental procedures in combination
with a method of quantitation to examine various aspects of this process. T.
parva sporozoites are nonmotile organisms and the initial sporozoite-lymphocyte
interaction is a chance event which can occur at 0-2 degrees C. All subsequent
stages in the process are temperature dependent, require the participation of
live intact sporozoites and host cells, and involve some cytochalasin-inhibitable
rearrangement of the host cell surface membrane or cytoskeleton. Sporozoite entry
can be inhibited by antibodies (mAbs) reactive with major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) class I molecules (IL-A 19, IL-A 88) and with beta 2 microglobulin 
(B1G6), whereas mAbs reactive with MHC class II molecules (IL-A 21, J 11), and a 
common panleucocyte surface antigen, (IL-A 87; a bovine equivalent of CD 11a)
have no effect. These results indicate that MHC class I molecules play a role in 
the process of T. parva sporozoite entry into bovine lymphocytes although as yet 
the precise role has not been determined. Once internalized within the
lymphocyte, a process that takes less than 3 min at 37 degrees C, the sporozoite 
rapidly escapes from the encapsulating host cell membrane; a process which occurs
concurrently with the discharge of the contents of the sporozoite rhoptries and
microspheres. The intracytoplasmic parasite is covered by a layer of
sporozoite-derived fuzzy material to which host cell microtubules rapidly become 
associated.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.113.1.87 
PMCID: PMC2288915
PMID: 1901066  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

