
1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2009 Jan 15;46(2):271-81. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2008.10.032. Epub 2008 Oct 30.

Malarial infection develops mitochondrial pathology and mitochondrial oxidative
stress to promote hepatocyte apoptosis.

Dey S(1), Guha M, Alam A, Goyal M, Bindu S, Pal C, Maity P, Mitra K,
Bandyopadhyay U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Indian Institute of Chemical
Biology, 4 Raja S.C. Mullick Road, Jadavpur, Kolkata 700032, West Bengal, India.

Activation of the mitochondrial apoptosis pathway by oxidative stress has been
implicated in hepatocyte apoptosis during malaria. Because mitochondria are the
source and target of reactive oxygen species (ROS), we have investigated whether 
hepatocyte apoptosis is linked to mitochondrial pathology and mitochondrial ROS
generation during malaria. Malarial infection induces mitochondrial pathology by 
inhibiting mitochondrial respiration, dehydrogenases, and transmembrane potential
and damaging the ultrastructure as evident from transmission electron microscopic
studies. Mitochondrial GSH depletion and formation of protein carbonyl indicate
that mitochondrial pathology is associated with mitochondrial oxidative stress.
Fluorescence imaging of hepatocytes documents intramitochondrial superoxide anion
(O(2)(-)) generation during malaria. O(2)(-) inactivates mitochondrial aconitase 
to release iron from iron-sulfur clusters, which forms the hydroxyl radical
((.)OH) interacting with H(2)O(2) produced concurrently. Malarial infection
inactivates mitochondrial aconitase, and carbonylation of aconitase is evident
from Western immunoblotting. The release of iron has been documented by
fluorescence imaging of hepatocytes using Phen Green SK, and mitochondrial (.)OH 
generation has been confirmed. During malaria, the depletion of cardiolipin and
formation of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore favor cytochrome c
release to activate caspase-9. Interestingly, mitochondrial (.)OH generation
correlates with the activation of both caspase-9 and caspase-3 with the progress 
of malarial infection, indicating the critical role of (.)OH.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2008.10.032 
PMID: 19015023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

