
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e25626. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025626. Epub 2011 Nov 17.

Elevated plasma von Willebrand factor and propeptide levels in Malawian children 
with malaria.

Phiri HT(1), Bridges DJ, Glover SJ, van Mourik JA, de Laat B, M'baya B, Taylor
TE, Seydel KB, Molyneux ME, Faragher EB, Craig AG, Bunn JE.

Author information: 
(1)Malawi-Liverpool-Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Programme, College of
Medicine, Blantyre, Malawi.

BACKGROUND: In spite of the significant mortality associated with Plasmodium
falciparum infection, the mechanisms underlying severe disease remain poorly
understood. We have previously shown evidence of endothelial activation in
Ghanaian children with malaria, indicated by elevated plasma levels of both von
Willebrand factor (VWF) and its propeptide. In the current prospective study of
children in Malawi with retinopathy confirmed cerebral malaria, we compared these
markers with uncomplicated malaria, non malarial febrile illness and controls.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Children with cerebral malaria, mild malaria and controls
without malaria were recruited into the study. All comatose patients were
examined by direct and indirect ophthalmoscopy. Plasma VWF and propeptide levels 
were measured by ELISA. Median VWF and propeptide levels were significantly
higher in patients with uncomplicated malaria than in children with non-malarial 
febrile illness of comparable severity, in whom levels were higher than in
non-febrile controls. Median concentrations of both markers were higher in
cerebral malaria than in uncomplicated malaria, and were similar in patients with
and without retinopathy. Levels of both VWF and propeptide fell significantly 48 
hours after commencing therapy and were normal one month later.
CONCLUSIONS: In children with malaria plasma VWF and propeptide levels are
markedly elevated in both cerebral and mild paediatric malaria, with levels
matching disease severity, and these normalize upon recovery. High levels of both
markers also occur in retinopathy-negative 'cerebral malaria' cases, many of whom
are thought to be suffering from diseases other than malaria, indicating that
further studies of these markers will be required to determine their sensitivity 
and specificity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025626 
PMCID: PMC3219631
PMID: 22125593  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

