
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e32694. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032694. Epub 2012 Mar 1.

Role of oxidative stress and apoptosis in the placental pathology of Plasmodium
berghei infected mice.

Sharma L(1), Kaur J, Shukla G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Panjab University, Chandigarh, India.

Placental malaria is a common clinical complication during pregnancy and is
associated with abortion, premature delivery, intrauterine growth retardation and
low birth weight. The present study was designed to delineate the underlying
mechanism of placental pathology during malarial infection with special reference
to oxidative stress and apoptosis. Experimentally, pregnant BALB/c mice were
infected with Plasmodium berghei infected red blood cells on gestation day 10.
The presence of malarial infection in placenta was confirmed by histopathological
studies. It was observation that infected placenta had plugged placental
sinusoids with parasitized red blood cells and malarial pigments. Interestingly, 
we found significant increase in the level of malondialdehyde, the index of
oxidative stress and decreased activity of catalase, the antioxidant in infected 
placenta. Furthermore, in infected placenta the oxidative stress mediated
apoptosis was determined by DNA fragmentation assay, ethidium bromide/acridine
orange staining and caspase activity. It was observed that oxidative stress begin
after second day of malarial infection. Interestingly, it was observed that there
was down regulation of anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 and up regulation of
pro-apoptotic protein Bax in infected placenta, suggesting the involvement of
mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis which was further confirmed by activation of
caspase 9. However, no change in the expression of Fas gene and caspase 8
activity, indicated the absence of death receptor pathway. Thus, it can be
concluded that the placental pathology during malarial infection is mediated by
mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis occurring due to augmented lipid peroxidation 
which may in turn jeopardise the materno-fetal relationship.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032694 
PMCID: PMC3291651
PMID: 22396790  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

