
1. Malar J. 2013 Feb 5;12:50. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-50.

A clinicopathological correlation of the expression of the angiopoietin-Tie-2
receptor pathway in the brain of adults with Plasmodium falciparum malaria.

Prapansilp P(1), Medana I, Mai NT, Day NP, Phu NH, Yeo TW, Hien TT, White NJ,
Anstey NM, Turner GD.

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department of Medicine, Oxford University, Oxford, UK.
panote.prapansilp@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Plasma angiopoietin (Ang)-2 is associated with disease severity and
mortality in adults and children with falciparum malaria. However the mechanism
of action of the angiopoietins in fatal malaria is unclear. This study aimed to
determine whether the expression of Ang-1 and Ang-2 and their receptor Tie-2 in
cerebral endothelial or parenchymal cells was specific to cerebral malaria (CM), 
correlated with coma or other severe clinical features, and whether plasma and
CSF levels of these markers correlated with the clinical and neuropathological
features of severe and fatal malaria in Vietnamese adults.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was performed for Ang-1, Ang-2 and Tie-2 on
post-mortem brain tissue from fatal malaria cases and controls. Quantitative
ELISA for plasma and cerebrospinal fluid levels of Ang-1, Ang-2 and Tie-2 was
done to compare fatal cases with surviving patients from the same study.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry revealed significant differences in expression in
endothelial and parenchymal cells compared to controls. However there was no
significant difference in expression of these markers on endothelial cells,
astroglial cells or neurons between CM and non-cerebral malaria cases.
Immunostaining of Ang-1, Ang-2 and Tie-2 was also not associated with Plasmodium 
falciparum-infected erythrocyte sequestration in the brain. However Ang-1 and
Ang-2 expression in neurons was significantly correlated with the incidence of
microscopic haemorrhages. Plasma levels of Ang-2 and Ang-2/Ang-1 ratio were
associated with the number of severe malaria complications and were significant
and independent predictors of metabolic acidosis and fatal outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: The independent prognostic significance of Ang-2 and the Ang-2/Ang-1
ratio in severe malaria was confirmed, although immunohistochemistry in fatal
cases did not reveal increased expression on brain endothelium in cerebral versus
non-cerebral cases. Activation of the Ang-Tie-2 pathway in severe malaria is
therefore related to acidosis, number of severity criteria and outcome, but is
not a specific event in the brain during cerebral malaria.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-50 
PMCID: PMC3570345
PMID: 23383853  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

