
1. Dis Model Mech. 2014 Feb;7(2):215-24. doi: 10.1242/dmm.013490. Epub 2013 Nov 28.

Hypoxia promotes liver-stage malaria infection in primary human hepatocytes in
vitro.

Ng S(1), March S, Galstian A, Hanson K, Carvalho T, Mota MM, Bhatia SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Homeostasis of mammalian cell function strictly depends on balancing oxygen
exposure to maintain energy metabolism without producing excessive reactive
oxygen species. In vivo, cells in different tissues are exposed to a wide range
of oxygen concentrations, and yet in vitro models almost exclusively expose
cultured cells to higher, atmospheric oxygen levels. Existing models of
liver-stage malaria that utilize primary human hepatocytes typically exhibit low 
in vitro infection efficiencies, possibly due to missing microenvironmental
support signals. One cue that could influence the infection capacity of cultured 
human hepatocytes is the dissolved oxygen concentration. We developed a
microscale human liver platform comprised of precisely patterned primary human
hepatocytes and nonparenchymal cells to model liver-stage malaria, but the oxygen
concentrations are typically higher in the in vitro liver platform than anywhere 
along the hepatic sinusoid. Indeed, we observed that liver-stage Plasmodium
parasite development in vivo correlates with hepatic sinusoidal oxygen gradients.
Therefore, we hypothesized that in vitro liver-stage malaria infection
efficiencies might improve under hypoxia. Using the infection of micropatterned
co-cultures with Plasmodium berghei, Plasmodium yoelii or Plasmodium falciparum
as a model, we observed that ambient hypoxia resulted in increased survival of
exo-erythrocytic forms (EEFs) in hepatocytes and improved parasite development in
a subset of surviving EEFs, based on EEF size. Further, the effective cell
surface oxygen tensions (pO2) experienced by the hepatocytes, as predicted by a
mathematical model, were systematically perturbed by varying culture parameters
such as hepatocyte density and height of the medium, uncovering an optimal cell
surface pO2 to maximize the number of mature EEFs. Initial mechanistic
experiments revealed that treatment of primary human hepatocytes with the hypoxia
mimetic, cobalt(II) chloride, as well as a HIF-1α activator,
dimethyloxalylglycine, also enhance P. berghei infection, suggesting that the
effect of hypoxia on infection is mediated in part by host-dependent HIF-1α
mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.013490 
PMCID: PMC3917242
PMID: 24291761  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

