
1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Mar 13;10(3):e1004003. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004003.
eCollection 2014 Mar.

Intracellular Theileria annulata promote invasive cell motility through kinase
regulation of the host actin cytoskeleton.

Ma M(1), Baumgartner M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Neuro-Oncology, Experimental Infectious Diseases and Cancer Research,
University Children's Hospital Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland; Molecular
Pathobiology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland; Graduate School for Cellular
and Biomedical Sciences, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Neuro-Oncology, Experimental Infectious Diseases and Cancer Research,
University Children's Hospital Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland; Molecular
Pathobiology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Microb Cell. 2014 Apr 24;1(5):154-157.

The intracellular, protozoan Theileria species parasites are the only eukaryotes 
known to transform another eukaryotic cell. One consequence of this
parasite-dependent transformation is the acquisition of motile and invasive
properties of parasitized cells in vitro and their metastatic dissemination in
the animal, which causes East Coast Fever (T. parva) or Tropical Theileriosis (T.
annulata). These motile and invasive properties of infected host cells are
enabled by parasite-dependent, poorly understood F-actin dynamics that control
host cell membrane protrusions. Herein, we dissected functional and structural
alterations that cause acquired motility and invasiveness of T. annulata-infected
cells, to understand the molecular basis driving cell dissemination in Tropical
Theileriosis. We found that chronic induction of TNFα by the parasite contributes
to motility and invasiveness of parasitized host cells. We show that TNFα does so
by specifically targeting expression and function of the host proto-oncogenic
ser/thr kinase MAP4K4. Blocking either TNFα secretion or MAP4K4 expression
dampens the formation of polar, F-actin-rich invasion structures and impairs cell
motility in 3D. We identified the F-actin binding ERM family proteins as MAP4K4
downstream effectors in this process because TNFα-induced ERM activation and cell
invasiveness are sensitive to MAP4K4 depletion. MAP4K4 expression in infected
cells is induced by TNFα-JNK signalling and maintained by the inhibition of
translational repression, whereby both effects are parasite dependent. Thus,
parasite-induced TNFα promotes invasive motility of infected cells through the
activation of MAP4K4, an evolutionary conserved kinase that controls cytoskeleton
dynamics and cell motility. Hence, MAP4K4 couples inflammatory signaling to
morphodynamic processes and cell motility, a process exploited by the
intracellular Theileria parasite to increase its host cell's dissemination
capabilities.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004003 
PMCID: PMC3953445
PMID: 24626571  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

