
1. J Infect Dis. 2015 Oct 15;212(8):1322-31. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiv217. Epub 2015
Apr 15.

The T-Cell Inhibitory Molecule Butyrophilin-Like 2 Is Up-regulated in Mild
Plasmodium falciparum Infection and Is Protective During Experimental Cerebral
Malaria.

Subramaniam KS(1), Spaulding E(1), Ivan E(2), Mutimura E(3), Kim RS(4), Liu X(5),
Dong C(5), Feintuch CM(1), Zhang X(1), Anastos K(6), Lauvau G(1), Daily JP(7).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology and Immunology.
(2)Department of Biomedical Laboratory Sciences, College of Medicine and Health
Sciences, University of Rwanda.
(3)Regional Alliance for Sustainable Development, Kigali.
(4)Epidemiology and Population Health.
(5)Department of Immunology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston.
(6)Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York.
(7)Departments of Microbiology and Immunology Medicine, Albert Einstein College
of Medicine, Bronx, New York.

Plasmodium falciparum infection can result in severe disease that is associated
with elevated inflammation and vital organ dysfunction; however, malaria-endemic 
residents gain protection from lethal outcomes and manifest only mild symptoms
during infection. To characterize host responses associated with this more
effective antimalarial response, we characterized whole-blood transcriptional
profiles in Rwandan adults during a mild malaria episode and compared them with
findings from a convalescence sample. We observed transcriptional up-regulation
in many pathways, including type I interferon, interferon γ, complement
activation, and nitric oxide during malaria infection, which provide benchmarks
of mild disease physiology. Transcripts encoding negative regulators of T-cell
activation, such as programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1), programmed death 1 ligand 
2 (PD-L2), and the butyrophilin family member butyrophilin-like 2 (BTNL2) were
also increased. To support an important functional role for BTNL2 during malaria 
infection, we studied chimeric mice reconstituted with BTNL2(-/-) or wild-type
hematopoietic cells that were inoculated with Plasmodium berghei ANKA, a murine
model of cerebral malaria. We found that BTNL2(-/-) chimeric mice had a
significant decrease in survival compared with wild-type counterparts.
Collectively these data characterize the immune responses associated with mild
malaria and uncover a novel role for BTNL2 in the host response to malaria.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiv217 
PMCID: PMC4577049
PMID: 25883389  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

