
1. Exp Parasitol. 2015 Oct;157:185-96. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2015.08.002. Epub 2015
Aug 20.

Clinical, haematological, cytokine and acute phase protein changes during
experimental Babesia gibsoni infection of beagle puppies.

Brown AL(1), Shiel RE(2), Irwin PJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Murdoch University Veterinary Hospital, College of Veterinary Medicine, School
of Veterinary and Life Sciences, Murdoch University, South Street, Murdoch,
Perth, Western Australia, 6150, Australia.
(2)University College Dublin Veterinary Hospital, Veterinary Science Centre,
School of Veterinary Medicine, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4,
Ireland.
(3)Murdoch University Veterinary Hospital, College of Veterinary Medicine, School
of Veterinary and Life Sciences, Murdoch University, South Street, Murdoch,
Perth, Western Australia, 6150, Australia. Electronic address:
p.irwin@murdoch.edu.au.

Babesia gibsoni is a haemoprotozoan parasite of emerging global importance. The
clinical presentation of babesial infections is diverse and the systemic
inflammatory response induced by infection is considered to be a major feature of
the pathophysiology of canine babesiosis. An experimental case-controlled
longitudinal study was conducted to assess the clinical, haematological, cytokine
and acute phase protein changes that occur during experimental B. gibsoni
infection of beagle puppies. Infected dogs became transiently pyrexic and
anaemic, intermittently neutropenic and transiently, but profoundly,
thrombocytopenic, although this had no apparent adverse clinical effect.
Experimental B. gibsoni infection also induced an acute phase response,
characterised by a marked increase in the concentration of C-reactive protein,
which was delayed in onset following infection but preceded the detection of
peripheral parasitaemia. Experimental B. gibsoni infection was also associated
with marked increases in the concentration of multiple cytokines which were also 
delayed in onset following infection and occurred subsequent to the detection of 
peripheral parasitaemia and the acute phase response. This study furthers our
understanding of the immune response that occurs during babesial infections and
the role that systemic inflammation plays in the pathophysiology of canine
babesiosis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2015.08.002 
PMID: 26297954  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

