
1. Brain Behav Immun. 2016 May;54:73-85. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2016.01.002. Epub 2016
Jan 4.

Suppressor of cytokine signaling 2 modulates the immune response profile and
development of experimental cerebral malaria.

Brant F(1), Miranda AS(1), Esper L(1), Gualdrón-López M(2), Cisalpino D(3), de
Souza DDG(3), Rachid MA(4), Tanowitz HB(5), Teixeira MM(1), Teixeira AL(1),
Machado FS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Health Sciences: Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine, School 
of Medicine, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil;
Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, Institute of Biological Science,
Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, Institute of Biological Science,
Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Biological Science, Federal
University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(4)Department of Pathology, Institute of Biological Science, Federal University
of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(5)Department of Pathology and Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, NY, USA.
(6)Program in Health Sciences: Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine, School 
of Medicine, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil;
Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, Institute of Biological Science,
Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil. Electronic
address: machadofs@icb.ufmg.br.

Plasmodium falciparum infection results in severe malaria in humans, affecting
various organs, including the liver, spleen and brain, and resulting in high
morbidity and mortality. The Plasmodium berghei ANKA (PbA) infection in mice
closely recapitulates many aspects of human cerebral malaria (CM); thus, this
model has been used to investigate the pathogenesis of CM. Suppressor of cytokine
signaling 2 (SOCS2), an intracellular protein induced by cytokines and hormones, 
modulates the immune response, neural development, neurogenesis and neurotrophic 
pathways. However, the role of SOCS2 during CM remains unknown. SOCS2 knockout
(SOCS2(-/-)) mice infected with PbA show an initial resistance to infection with 
reduced parasitemia and production of TNF, TGF-β, IL-12 and IL-17 in the brain.
Interestingly, in the late phase of infection, SOCS2(-/-) mice display increased 
parasitemia and reduced Treg cell infiltration, associated with enhanced levels
of Th1 and Th17 cells and related cytokines IL-17, IL-6, and TGF-β in the brain. 
A significant reduction in protective neurotrophic factors, such as glial cell
line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor
(BDNF), was also observed. Moreover, the molecular alterations in the brain of
infected SOCS2(-/-) mice were associated with anxiety-related behaviors and
cognition impairment. Mechanistically, these results revealed enhanced nitric
oxide (NO) production in PbA-infected SOCS2(-/-) mice, and the inhibition of NO
synthesis through l-NAME led to a marked decrease in survival, the disruption of 
parasitemia control and more pronounced anxiety-like behavior. Treatment with
l-NAME also shifted the levels of Th1, Th7 and Treg cells in the brains of
infected SOCS2(-/-) mice to the background levels observed in infected WT, with
remarkable exception of increased CD8(+)IFN(+) T cells and inflammatory
monocytes. These results indicate that SOCS2 plays a dual role during PbA
infection, being detrimental in the control of the parasite replication but
crucial in the regulation of the immune response and production of neurotrophic
factors. Here, we provided strong evidence of a critical relationship between
SOCS2 and NO in the orchestration of the immune response and development of CM
during PbA infection.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbi.2016.01.002 
PMID: 26765997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

