
1. Acta Trop. 2016 Jun;158:139-147. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2016.03.001. Epub
2016 Mar 4.

Cytokine modulation of human blood viscosity from vivax malaria patients.

Scherer EF(1), Cantarini DG(2), Siqueira R(3), Ribeiro EB(4), Braga ÉM(5),
Honório-França AC(6), França EL(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal
University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil. Electronic
address: edsonscherer1@hotmail.com.
(2)Institute of Biological and Health Science, Federal University of Mato Grosso,
Barra do Garças, MT, Brazil. Electronic address: deborah_giovanna@hotmail.com.
(3)Institute of Biological and Health Science, Federal University of Mato Grosso,
Barra do Garças, MT, Brazil. Electronic address: rennansiqueira@hotmail.com.
(4)Institute of Health Science, Federal University of Mato Grosso, Sinop, MT,
Brazil.
(5)Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal
University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil. Electronic
address: embraga@icb.ufmg.br.
(6)Institute of Biological and Health Science, Federal University of Mato Grosso,
Barra do Garças, MT, Brazil. Electronic address: denifran@terra.com.br.
(7)Institute of Biological and Health Science, Federal University of Mato Grosso,
Barra do Garças, MT, Brazil. Electronic address: dr.eduardo.franca@gmail.com.

Malaria is a major infectious disease in several countries and is caused by
protozoa of the genus Plasmodium. In vivax malaria patients, inflammatory
processes occur, as well as changes in cytokines and blood flow. The present
study analyzed the cytokine modulation of blood viscosity from patients infected 
with Plasmodium vivax (P. vivax). Blood samples were collected from 42
non-infected individuals (control group) and 37 individuals infected with P.
vivax. The IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, TNFα, TGF-β and IL-17 cytokine concentrations
in the serum were assessed, and the blood rheological properties were determined.
The analysis of blood viscosity for shear rates revealed that the blood viscosity
of the infected patients was significantly greater than that of the non-infected 
individuals. The viscosity of the blood was greater in the infected individuals
than in the non-infected subjects. The serum from individuals with P. vivax
infections exhibited higher IFN-γ and IL-17 concentrations and lower TGF-β
levels. Incubation of the blood from infected individuals with IL-17 or IL-17
associated with IFN-γ reduced the viscosity to rates equivalent to the blood from
non-infected individuals. Independently of cytokine modulation, no correlation
was found between the parasitemia and blood viscosity of the infected patients.
These data suggest that the alterations of blood viscosity are relevant as an
auxiliary tool for the clinical diagnosis of disease. In malaria, erythrocytes
are more sensitive to osmotic shock, and the reduction of viscosity by IL-17 may 
be related to a possible immunomodulator agent during infection.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2016.03.001 
PMID: 26948901  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

