
1. Comp Immunol Microbiol Infect Dis. 2016 Jun;46:1-6. doi:
10.1016/j.cimid.2016.03.002. Epub 2016 Mar 10.

Cholinesterases as markers of the inflammatory process associated oxidative
stress in cattle infected by Babesia bigemina.

Doyle RL(1), Da Silva AS(2), Oliveira CB(3), França RT(4), Carvalho FB(5),
Abdalla FH(5), Costa P(6), Klafke GM(7), Martins JR(7), Tonin AA(3), Castro
VS(4), Santos FG(8), Lopes ST(4), Andrade CM(9).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Veterinary Medicine, Department of Small Animal,
Veterinary Hospital, Universidade Federal de Santa Maria, Santa Maria, RS,
Brazil; Graduate Program in Biological Sciences: Toxicological Biochemistry,
Laboratory of Toxicology Enzymology, Department of Chemistry, Centro de Ciências 
Naturais e Exatas; Universidade Federal de Santa Maria, Santa Maria, RS, Brazil.
(2)Department of Animal Science, Universidade do Estado de Santa Catarina,
Chapecó, SC, Brazil.
(3)Graduate Program in Veterinary Medicine, Department of Microbiology and
Parasitology, Prédio 20, Universidade Federal de Santa Maria, Santa Maria , RS,
Brazil.
(4)Graduate Program in Veterinary Medicine, Department of Small Animal,
Veterinary Hospital, Universidade Federal de Santa Maria, Santa Maria, RS,
Brazil.
(5)Graduate Program in Biological Sciences: Toxicological Biochemistry, Division 
of Biochemistry and Oxidative Stress, Laboratory of Cell Therapy, Centro de
Ciências Rurais, Universidade Federal de Santa Maria, Santa Maria, RS, Brazil.
(6)Graduate Program in Biological Sciences: Toxicological Biochemistry,
Laboratory of Toxicology Enzymology, Department of Chemistry, Centro de Ciências 
Naturais e Exatas; Universidade Federal de Santa Maria, Santa Maria, RS, Brazil.
(7)Instituto de Pesquisas Veterinárias Desidério Finamor, Fundação Estadual de
Pesquisa Agropecuária (FEPAGRO), Eldorado do Sul, RS , Brazil.
(8)Centre for Biological Sciences, Department of Epidemiology and Microbiology,
Health Sciences, Universidade Federal do Piauí, Campus Senador Helvídio Nunes de 
Barros,Picos, PI , 64600-000, Brazil.
(9)Graduate Program in Veterinary Medicine, Department of Small Animal,
Veterinary Hospital, Universidade Federal de Santa Maria, Santa Maria, RS,
Brazil; Graduate Program in Biological Sciences: Toxicological Biochemistry,
Division of Biochemistry and Oxidative Stress, Laboratory of Cell Therapy, Centro
de Ciências Rurais, Universidade Federal de Santa Maria, Santa Maria, RS, Brazil.
Electronic address: cmelazzo@yahoo.com.br.

The objective of this study was to assess the influence of an asymptomatic
experimental infection by Babesia bigemina on cholinesterase's as markers of the 
inflammatory process and biomarkers of oxidative imbalance. For this purpose,
eight naive animals were used, as follows: four as controls or uninfected; and
four infected with an attenuated strain of B. bigemina. Blood samples were
collected on days 0, 7 and 11 post-inoculation (PI). Parasitemia was determined
by blood smear evaluation, showing that the infection by B. bigemina resulted in 
mean 0.725 and 0.025% on day 7 and 11 PI, respectively, as well as mild anemia.
The activities of acetylcholinesterase, butyrylcholinesterase and catalase were
lower, while levels of thiobarbituric acid reactive substances and superoxide
dismutase activity were higher in infected animals, when compared with the
control group. This attenuated strain of B. bigemina induced an oxidative stress 
condition, as well as it reduces the cholinesterasés activity in infected and
asymptomatic cattle. Therefore, this decrease of cholinesterase in infection by
B. bigemina purpose is to inhibit inflammation, for thereby increasing
acetylcholine levels, potent anti-inflammatory molecules.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cimid.2016.03.002 
PMID: 27260803  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

