
1. Malar J. 2017 Jan 24;16(1):42. doi: 10.1186/s12936-017-1683-5.

On the cytokine/chemokine network during Plasmodium vivax malaria: new insights
to understand the disease.

Hojo-Souza NS(1), Pereira DB(2), de Souza FS(3), de Oliveira Mendes TA(4),
Cardoso MS(1), Tada MS(2), Zanini GM(5), Bartholomeu DC(1), Fujiwara RT(1), Bueno
LL(6).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Parasitologia, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade 
Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(2)Centro de Pesquisa em Medicina Tropical, Porto, Velho, Rondônia, Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Ciência da Computação, Universidade Federal de São João
del-Rei, São João del-Rei, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(4)Departamento de Bioquímica e Biologia Molecular, Universidade Federal de
Viçosa, Viçosa, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(5)Instituto de Pesquisa Clínica Evandro Chagas, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(6)Departamento de Parasitologia, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade 
Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
llbueno@icb.ufmg.br.

BACKGROUND: The clinical outcome of malaria depends on the delicate balance
between pro-inflammatory and immunomodulatory cytokine responses triggered during
infection. Despite the numerous reports on characterization of plasma levels of
cytokines/chemokines, there is no consensus on the profile of these mediators
during blood stage malaria. The identification of acute phase biomarkers might
contribute to a better understanding of the disease, allowing the use of more
effective therapeutic approaches to prevent the progression towards severe
disease. In the present study, the plasma levels of cytokines and chemokines and 
their association with parasitaemia and number of previous malaria episodes were 
evaluated in Plasmodium vivax-infected patients during acute and convalescence
phase, as well as in healthy donors.
METHODS: Samples of plasma were obtained from peripheral blood samples from four 
different groups: P. vivax-infected, P. vivax-treated, endemic control and
malaria-naïve control. The cytokine (IL-6, IL-10, IL-17, IL-27, TGF-β, IFN-γ and 
TNF) and chemokine (MCP-1/CCL2, IP-10/CXCL10 and RANTES/CCL5) plasma levels were 
measured by CBA or ELISA. The network analysis was performed using Spearman
correlation coefficient.
RESULTS: Plasmodium vivax infection induced a pro-inflammatory response driven by
IL-6 and IL-17 associated with an immunomodulatory profile mediated by IL-10 and 
TGF-β. In addition, a reduction was observed of IFN-γ plasma levels in P. vivax
group. A lower level of IL-27 was observed in endemic control group in comparison
to malaria-naïve control group. No significant results were found for IL-12p40
and TNF. It was also observed that P. vivax infection promoted higher levels of
MCP-1/CCL2 and IP-10/CXCL10 and lower levels of RANTES/CCL5. The plasma level of 
IL-10 was elevated in patients with high parasitaemia and with more than five
previous malaria episodes. Furthermore, association profile between cytokine and 
chemokine levels were observed by correlation network analysis indicating
signature patterns associated with different parasitaemia levels.
CONCLUSIONS: The P. vivax infection triggers a balanced immune response mediated 
by IL-6 and MCP-1/CCL2, which is modulated by IL-10. In addition, the results
indicated that IL-10 plasma levels are influenced by parasitaemia and number of
previous malaria episodes.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-017-1683-5 
PMCID: PMC5260126
PMID: 28118834  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

