
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Sep 29;12:748097. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.748097. eCollection
2021.

Mild and Asymptomatic COVID-19 Convalescents Present Long-Term Endotype of
Immunosuppression Associated With Neutrophil Subsets Possessing Regulatory
Functions.

Siemińska I(1), Węglarczyk K(1), Surmiak M(2), Kurowska-Baran D(3), Sanak M(2),
Siedlar M(1), Baran J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology, Jagiellonian University Medical College,
Krakow, Poland.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Jagiellonian University Medical College,
Krakow, Poland.
(3)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Laboratory of Virology and Serology,
University Children's Hospital, Krakow, Poland.

The SARS-CoV-2 infection [coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)] is associated with
severe lymphopenia and impaired immune response, including expansion of myeloid
cells with regulatory functions, e.g., so-called low-density neutrophils,
containing granulocytic myeloid-derived suppressor cells (LDNs/PMN-MDSCs). These 
cells have been described in both infections and cancer and are known for their
immunosuppressive activity. In the case of COVID-19, long-term complications have
been frequently observed (long-COVID). In this context, we aimed to investigate
the immune response of COVID-19 convalescents after a mild or asymptomatic course
of disease. We enrolled 13 convalescents who underwent a mild or asymptomatic
infection with SARS-CoV-2, confirmed by a positive result of the PCR test, and 13
healthy donors without SARS-CoV-2 infection in the past. Whole blood was used for
T-cell subpopulation and LDNs/PMN-MDSCs analysis. LDNs/PMN-MDSCs and normal
density neutrophils (NDNs) were sorted out by FACS and used for T-cell
proliferation assay with autologous T cells activated with anti-CD3 mAb. Serum
samples were used for the detection of anti-SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing IgG and
GM-CSF concentration. Our results showed that in convalescents, even 3 months
after infection, an elevated level of LDNs/PMN-MDSCs is still maintained in the
blood, which correlates negatively with the level of CD8+ and double-negative T
cells. Moreover, LDNs/PMN-MDSCs and NDNs showed a tendency for affecting the
production of anti-SARS-CoV-2 S1 neutralizing antibodies. Surprisingly, our data 
showed that in addition to LDNs/PMN-MDSCs, NDNs from convalescents also inhibit
proliferation of autologous T cells. Additionally, in the convalescent sera, we
detected significantly higher concentrations of GM-CSF, indicating the role of
emergency granulopoiesis. We conclude that in mild or asymptomatic COVID-19
convalescents, the neutrophil dysfunction, including propagation of
PD-L1-positive LDNs/PMN-MDSCs and NDNs, is responsible for long-term endotype of 
immunosuppression.

Copyright © 2021 Siemińska, Węglarczyk, Surmiak, Kurowska-Baran, Sanak, Siedlar
and Baran.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.748097 
PMCID: PMC8511487
PMID: 34659245  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

