
1. Gastroenterology. 2021 Oct 13. pii: S0016-5085(21)03624-6. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2021.10.005. [Epub ahead of print]

An Antigenically Diverse, Representative Panel of Envelope Glycoproteins for
Hepatitis C Virus Vaccine Development.

Salas JH(1), Urbanowicz RA(2), Guest JD(3), Frumento N(1), Figueroa A(1), Clark
KE(1), Keck Z(4), Cowton VM(5), Cole SJ(5), Patel AH(5), Fuerst TR(3), Drummer
HE(6), Major M(7), Tarr AW(2), Ball JK(2), Law M(8), Pierce BG(3), Foung SKH(4), 
Bailey JR(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, The
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom; Wolfson Centre for Global
Virus Research, The University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom;
National Institute for Health Research Nottingham Biomedical Research Centre,
Nottingham University Hospitals National Health Service Trust, Nottingham, United
Kingdom.
(3)Institute for Bioscience and Biotechnology Research, University of Maryland,
Rockville, Maryland; Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics,
University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland.
(4)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California.
(5)Medical Research Council-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research,
Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(6)Viral Entry and Vaccines Group, Burnet Institute, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Peter Doherty Institute for
Infection and Immunity, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; 
Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.
(7)Division of Viral Products, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research,
United States Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland.
(8)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La 
Jolla, California.
(9)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland. Electronic address: jbailey7@jhmi.edu.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Development of a prophylactic hepatitis C virus (HCV) vaccine 
will require accurate and reproducible measurement of neutralizing breadth of
vaccine-induced antibodies. Currently available HCV panels may not adequately
represent the genetic and antigenic diversity of circulating HCV strains, and the
lack of standardization of these panels makes it difficult to compare
neutralization results obtained in different studies. Here, we describe the
selection and validation of a genetically and antigenically diverse reference
panel of 15 HCV pseudoparticles (HCVpps) for neutralization assays.
METHODS: We chose 75 envelope (E1E2) clones to maximize representation of natural
polymorphisms observed in circulating HCV isolates, and 65 of these clones
generated functional HCVpps. Neutralization sensitivity of these HCVpps varied
widely. HCVpps clustered into 15 distinct groups based on patterns of relative
sensitivity to 7 broadly neutralizing monoclonal antibodies. We used these data
to select a final panel of 15 antigenically representative HCVpps.
RESULTS: Both the 65 and 15 HCVpp panels span 4 tiers of neutralization
sensitivity, and neutralizing breadth measurements for 7 broadly neutralizing
monoclonal antibodies were nearly equivalent using either panel. Differences in
neutralization sensitivity between HCVpps were independent of genetic distances
between E1E2 clones.
CONCLUSIONS: Neutralizing breadth of HCV antibodies should be defined using
viruses spanning multiple tiers of neutralization sensitivity rather than panels 
selected solely for genetic diversity. We propose that this multitier reference
panel could be adopted as a standard for the measurement of neutralizing antibody
potency and breadth, facilitating meaningful comparisons of neutralization
results from vaccine studies in different laboratories.

Copyright © 2021 AGA Institute. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2021.10.005 
PMID: 34655573 

