
1. Work. 2021;70(2):387-393. doi: 10.3233/WOR-213602.

A study on the severity and prevention measures of COVID-19 among dental
professionals in clinical practice management.

Das G(1), Ahmed S(2), Ahmed AR(1), Tirth V(3)(4), Jamil S(5), Muhammad AA(6),
Islam S(7)(8), Tirth A(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prosthodontics, College of Dentistry, King Khalid University,
Abha, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Dow International Dental
College, Dow University of Health Sciences, Karachi, Pakistan.
(3)Mechanical Engineering Department, College of Engineering, King Khalid
University, Abha, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(4)Research Center for Advanced Materials Science (RCAMS), King Khalid University
Guraiger, Abha, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(5)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Dr Ishrat-ul-Ebad Khan Institute
of Oral and Health Sciences, Dow University of Health Sciences, Karachi,
Pakistan.
(6)Indus Health Network, Karachi, Pakistan.
(7)Civil Engineering Department, College of Engineering, King Khalid University, 
Abha, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(8)Department of Geotechnics and Transportation, School of Civil Engineering,
Faculty of Engineering, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Johor Bahru, Malaysia.
(9)Department of Public Health Dentistry, Kothiwal Dental College and Research
Center, Moradabad, India.

BACKGROUND: Medical professionals, especially dental professionals, have been
adversely affected by the pandemic of COVID-19 due to an increased chance of
exposure to patients because of close contact during treatments.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to evaluate knowledge about the disease and assess
ways of precautions to be taken during the pandemic.
METHODS: A questionnaire was developed and registered at Google Forms. The study 
population included dental practitioners, working in hospitals and clinics. A
total of 495 dental practitioners from 14 different countries across the world
responded. Most dentists were aware of the required modifications in the
management of patients. The points allotted for each correct/best answer by
participants for a group of questions regarding each component (Knowledge,
Perceptions, and Practices) were added/summed to generate an overall score for
each of the three components.
RESULTS: Both univariate and multivariate analysis employed for the evaluation of
results. Moreover, the total practice score was significantly associated with
gender and sector of practice. Multivariable analysis model using multiple linear
regressions was formulated by including those variables which were significant at
the univariate stage. Hence, the practice sector was the only variable found to
be significantly associated with the total knowledge score (p-value < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: This study, based on our experience and relevant guidelines and
research, introduces essential knowledge about COVID-19 and infection in dental
settings.

DOI: 10.3233/WOR-213602 
PMID: 34657847  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

