
1. Can J Urol. 2021 Oct;28(5):10834-10840.

Survey of COVID-19 impact on pediatric urology services.

Mallenahalli S(1), Fifolt M(2), Gundeti M(3), Lakshmanan Y(4), Gargollo P(5), Ost
MC(6), Dangle PP(7).

Author information: 
(1)University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Medicine, Alabama, USA.
(2)University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Public Health, Alabama, USA.
(3)The University of Chicago Medicine Comer Children's Hospital and Pritzker
School of Medicine Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(4)Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan, USA.
(5)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(6)West Virginia School of Medicine, Morgantown, West Virginia, USA.
(7)Department of Urology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Alabama, USA.

INTRODUCTION: To better understand how the COVID-19 pandemic has forced rapid
operational changes in the global healthcare industry, changes implemented on an 
individual, institutional basis must be considered. There currently is not
adequate literature about the overall impact COVID-19 has had on pediatric
urology services worldwide. We believe that they have dramatically decreased
during the COVID-19 crisis, but have adapted to accommodate changes. We
hypothesize that patient care was widely variant due to inadequate standardized
recommendations or crisis planning.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A web-based survey was deployed to 377 pediatric
urologists globally via email to analyze COVID-19's impact on various types of
pediatric urology practices. Key categories included impacts on elective
services, telemedicine use, finances, and recovery operations. A total of 114
responses were collected between April 29th - May 22nd, 2020.
RESULTS: The widespread cancellation of elective surgical procedures caused
significant disturbances in the field. There was a uniform, significant increase 
(75%) in telemedicine use across practices. The pandemic has created many changes
in care provision for physicians, institutions, and patients themselves.
Furthermore, the sudden economic burden on healthcare facilities could lead to
cost-cutting measures, creating further strain within institutions. Though
telemedicine has its limitations, it is a very viable option when traditional
services are unavailable.
CONCLUSIONS: Immediate steps should be taken to ensure that the recovery phases
of pediatric urology practices are as efficient as possible. Institutions should 
develop task forces to develop critical workflow processes in the event of health
crises, while still maintaining patient-centered care. This will be essential in 
maximizing appropriate care allocation.


PMID: 34657656  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

