
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Sep 30;12:717873. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.717873. eCollection
2021.

Diagnostic Vaccination in Clinical Practice.

Hansen AT(1), Söderström A(2)(3), Jørgensen CS(4), Larsen CS(5), Petersen MS(2), 
Bernth Jensen JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus,
Denmark.
(2)Department of Clinical Immunology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus,
Denmark.
(3)Department of Clinical Immunology and Transfusion Medicine, Karolinska
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Statens Serum Institut, Virus and Microbiological Special Diagnostics,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus,
Denmark.

Testing the antibody response to vaccination (diagnostic vaccination) is crucial 
in the clinical evaluation of primary immunodeficiency diseases. Guidelines from 
the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology (AAAAI) provide detailed
recommendations for diagnostic vaccination with pure pneumococcal polysaccharide 
vaccines (PPV). However, the degree of compliance with these guidelines and the
utility of the guidelines in actual practice are undescribed. To address this, we
systematically evaluated diagnostic vaccination in adult patients with suspected 
primary immunodeficiency diseases in a single tertiary center from 2011 to 2016
(n = 229). We found that full compliance with the AAAAI guidelines was achieved
for only 39 patients (17%), suggesting that the guidelines are not easy to
follow. Worse, interpretation according to the guidelines was heavily influenced 
by which serotype-specific antibodies that were used for the evaluation. We found
that the arbitrary choices of serotype-specific antibodies could change the
fraction of patients deemed to have 'adequate immunity' by a factor of four,
exposing an inherent flaw in the guidelines. The flaw relates to dichotomous
principles for data interpretation under the AAAAI guidelines. We therefore
propose a revised protocol for diagnostic vaccination limited to PPV vaccination,
subsequent antibody measurements, and data interpretation using Z-scores. The
Z-score compiles multiple individual antibody levels, adjusted for different
weighting, into one single continuous variable for each patient. In contrast to
interpretation according to the AAAAI guidelines, the Z-scores were robust to
variations in the choice of serotype-specific antibodies used for interpretation.
Moreover, Z-scores revealed reduced immunity after vaccination in the patients
with recurrent pneumonia (a typical symptom of antibody deficiency) compared with
control patients. Assessment according to the AAAAI guidelines failed to detect
this difference. We conclude that our simplified protocol and interpretation with
Z-scores provides more robust clinical results and may enhance the value of
diagnostic vaccination.

Copyright © 2021 Hansen, Söderström, Jørgensen, Larsen, Petersen and Bernth
Jensen.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.717873 
PMCID: PMC8514775
PMID: 34659207 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

