
1. Cell Rep. 2021 Oct 26;37(4):109881. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109881. Epub 2021 
Oct 8.

Structural mechanism of SARS-CoV-2 neutralization by two murine antibodies
targeting the RBD.

Errico JM(1), Zhao H(1), Chen RE(2), Liu Z(3), Case JB(4), Ma M(1), Schmitz
AJ(1), Rau MJ(5), Fitzpatrick JAJ(6), Shi PY(7), Diamond MS(8), Whelan SPJ(3),
Ellebedy AH(9), Fremont DH(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA; Department of Medicine, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO, USA.
(5)Washington University Center for Cellular Imaging, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(6)Washington University Center for Cellular Imaging, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA; Departments of Neuroscience and Cell
Biology and Physiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, 
USA; Department of Biomedical Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis,
St. Louis, MO, USA.
(7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, TX, USA; Sealy Center for Structural Biology and Molecular
Biophysics, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA; Sealy
Institute for Vaccine Sciences, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston,
TX, USA.
(8)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA; Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA; Department of Medicine,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA; The Andrew M. and
Jane M. Bursky Center for Human Immunology & Immunotherapy Programs, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(9)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA; Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA; The Andrew M. and Jane M.
Bursky Center for Human Immunology & Immunotherapy Programs, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(10)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA; Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA; The Andrew M. and Jane M.
Bursky Center for Human Immunology & Immunotherapy Programs, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA; Department of Biochemistry &
Molecular Biophysics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO,
USA. Electronic address: fremont@wustl.edu.

The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) pandemic has
necessitated the rapid development of antibody-based therapies and vaccines as
countermeasures. Here, we use cryoelectron microscopy (cryo-EM) to characterize
two protective anti-SARS-CoV-2 murine monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) in complex
with the spike protein, revealing similarities between epitopes targeted by human
and murine B cells. The more neutralizing mAb, 2B04, binds the receptor-binding
motif (RBM) of the receptor-binding domain (RBD) and competes with
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). By contrast, 2H04 binds adjacent to the
RBM and does not compete for ACE2 binding. Naturally occurring sequence variants 
of SARS-CoV-2 and corresponding neutralization escape variants selected in vitro 
map to our structurally defined epitopes, suggesting that SARS-CoV-2 might evade 
therapeutic antibodies with a limited set of mutations, underscoring the
importance of combination mAb therapeutics. Finally, we show that 2B04
neutralizes SARS-CoV-2 infection by preventing ACE2 engagement, whereas 2H04
reduces host cell attachment without directly disrupting ACE2-RBM interactions,
providing distinct inhibitory mechanisms used by RBD-specific mAbs.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109881 
PMCID: PMC8498651
PMID: 34655519  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests D.H.F. is a founder of
Courier Therapeutics. A.H.E. is a consultant for Inbios and Fimbrion
Therapeutics. M.S.D. is a consultant for Inbios, Vir Biotechnology, and NGM
Biopharmaceuticals and is on the Scientific Advisory Board of Moderna and
Immunome. D.H.F., M.S.D., and A.H.E. have received unrelated funding support from
Emergent BioSolutions. M.S.D. has sponsored research agreements from Moderna and 
Vir Biotechnology, A.H.E. has a sponsored research agreement from Abbvie, and
D.H.F. has a sponsored research agreement from Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals.

