
1. Prev Vet Med. 2021 Nov;196:105494. doi: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2021.105494. Epub
2021 Sep 15.

Cost-benefit and feasibility analysis for establishing a foot-and-mouth disease
free zone in Rukwa region in Tanzania.

Häsler B(1), Limon G(2), Queenan K(3), Rushton J(4), Madege M(5), Mlangwa J(6),
Mghwira J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Royal Veterinary College, Veterinary Epidemiology Economics and Public Health 
Group, Department of Pathobiology and Population Sciences, London, United
Kingdom. Electronic address: bhaesler@rvc.ac.uk.
(2)Royal Veterinary College, Veterinary Epidemiology Economics and Public Health 
Group, Department of Pathobiology and Population Sciences, London, United
Kingdom; The Pirbright Institute, Ash Road Pirbright, Woking, Surrey, GU24 0NF,
United Kingdom.
(3)Royal Veterinary College, Veterinary Epidemiology Economics and Public Health 
Group, Department of Pathobiology and Population Sciences, London, United
Kingdom.
(4)Institute of Infection and Global Health, IC2 Building, 146 Brownlow Hill,
Liverpool, L3 5RF, United Kingdom.
(5)Ministry of Livestock & Fisheries, Directorate of Veterinary Services, Dodoma,
Tanzania.
(6)Sokoine University of Agriculture, Department of Veterinary Medicine and
Public Health, College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, PO Box
3021 Chuo Kikuuu, Morogoro, Tanzania.

Tanzania has the second largest livestock population in Africa and livestock
keeping is an integral part of most people's livelihoods. Foot-and-mouth disease 
(FMD) is a transboundary disease, affecting cloven-hoofed animals, that is
currently endemic in Tanzania. The Tanzania Development Vision 2025 aspires to
make the livestock sector more competitive. Part of this plan foresees
establishing a FMD-free zone in the Rukwa region to be able to increase the
export of animals and animal products. The aim of this study was to assess the
economic efficiency and feasibility of establishing such an FMD-free zone and to 
advise policy makers on the profitability of the investment. A stochastic
benefit-cost model, set-up in Palisade @Risk for Excel for a time frame of ten
years, was developed to assess whether the benefits of establishing a FMD-free
zone would outweigh the costs. Data were collated from reviewing literature,
government statistics, and key informant interviews with farmers, traders and
veterinarians in Tanzania, and complemented by informed assumptions and expert
opinion. Moreover, feasibility aspects including underlying infrastructure,
market structures and resource availability were discussed based on key informant
interviews, literature review and historical analyses. The net present value for 
the establishment of a FMD-free zone was negative and the benefit-cost ratio was 
below one (mean 0.09, min 0.05 - max 0.15 in the scenario considering vaccination
of all susceptible domestic animals, and mean 0.11, min 0.06 - max 0.20 when
considering vaccinating cattle only), excluding potential benefits from trade.
The sensitivity analysis showed that variables related to the cost of vaccination
had the largest negative impact on the net present value. The proposed FMD-free
zone in Rukwa region is unlikely to be cost-effective with the current FMD status
and export trade prospects in Tanzania. Interviews with stakeholders revealed
that vaccine availability, funding, farmers' willingness to participate, and lack
of staff continuity in key roles were the main barriers to establish a reliable
FMD control programme in the country. Recommendations towards FMD control and
potential short and middle term strategies are discussed.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2021.105494 
PMID: 34656049  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

