
1. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci. 2021;183:355-409. doi: 10.1016/bs.pmbts.2021.06.007.
Epub 2021 Sep 23.

Flexible spandrels of the global plant virome: Proteomic-wide evolutionary
patterns of structural intrinsic protein disorder elucidate modulation at the
functional virus-host interplay.

Tahzima R(1), Haegeman A(2), Massart S(3), Hébrard E(4).

Author information: 
(1)University of Liège (ULg), Department of Integrated and Urban Phytopathology, 
Gembloux, Belgium. Electronic address: rachid.tahzima@uliege.be.
(2)Flanders Research Institute for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (ILVO), Plant 
Sciences Unit, Merelbeke, Belgium.
(3)University of Liège (ULg), Department of Integrated and Urban Phytopathology, 
Gembloux, Belgium.
(4)PHIM, Plant Health Institute, IRD, Cirad, Université de Montpellier, INRAE,
Institut Agro, Montpellier, France.

Intrinsically disordered proteins and regions (IDPs/IDRs) make up a large part of
viral proteomes, but their real prevalence across the global plant virome is
still murky, partly because of their massive diversity. Here, we propose an
evolutionary quantitative proteomic approach to foray into genomic signatures
that are preserved in the amino acid sequences of orthologous IDRs. Markedly, we 
found that relatively abundant IDP varies substantially in viral species among
and within plant virus families, including according to genome size, partition or
replication strategies. We also demonstrate that most encoded proteomic modules
of the plant virome contain multiple disordered features that are
phylogenomically preserved, and can be correlated to genomic, bio-physical and
evolutionary strategies. Furthermore, our focused interactome-wide analysis
highlights lines of evidence indicating that various IDPs with similar
evolutionary signatures modulate viral multifunctionality. Moreover, estimated
fractions of IDR in the vicinity of pivotal evolutionary structural domains
embedded in interaction modules are strongly enriched with affinity binding
functional annotations and relate to vector-borne virus transmission modes.
Importantly, molecular recognition features (MoRFs) are abundantly widespread in 
IDRs of viral hallmark modules and their binding partners. Finally, we propose a 
coarse-grained conceptual framework in which evolutionary proteome-wide IDP/IDRs 
patterns can be, rather, reliably exploited to elucidate their foundational
fine-tuning role in plant virus transmission mechanisms. While opening unexplored
avenues for consistently predicting virus-host functions for many new or
uncharacterized viruses based on their proteomic repertoire, other considerations
advocating further structural IDP research in Plant Virology are thoroughly
discussed in light of viral modular evolution.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.pmbts.2021.06.007 
PMID: 34656333  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

