
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 1;12:727861. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.727861. eCollection 
2021.

Monocyte Chemotactic Protein-Induced Protein 1 (MCPIP-1): A Key Player of Host
Defense and Immune Regulation.

Jin Z(1), Zheng E(2), Sareli C(3), Kolattukudy PE(4), Niu J(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University,
Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Office of Human Research, Memorial Healthcare System, Hollywood, FL, United
States.
(4)Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Central Florida College
of Medicine, Orlando, FL, United States.

Inflammatory response is a host-protective mechanism against tissue injury or
infections, but also has the potential to cause extensive immunopathology and
tissue damage, as seen in many diseases, such as cardiovascular diseases,
neurodegenerative diseases, metabolic syndrome and many other infectious diseases
with public health concerns, such as Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), if
failure to resolve in a timely manner. Recent studies have uncovered a
superfamily of endogenous chemical molecules that tend to resolve inflammatory
responses and re-establish homeostasis without causing excessive damage to
healthy cells and tissues. Among these, the monocyte chemoattractant
protein-induced protein (MCPIP) family consisting of four members (MCPIP-1, -2,
-3, and -4) has emerged as a group of evolutionarily conserved molecules
participating in the resolution of inflammation. The focus of this review
highlights the biological functions of MCPIP-1 (also known as Regnase-1), the
best-studied member of this family, in the resolution of inflammatory response.
As outlined in this review, MCPIP-1 acts on specific signaling pathways, in
particular NFκB, to blunt production of inflammatory mediators, while also acts
as an endonuclease controlling the stability of mRNA and microRNA (miRNA),
leading to the resolution of inflammation, clearance of virus and dead cells, and
promotion of tissue regeneration via its pleiotropic effects. Evidence from
transgenic and knock-out mouse models revealed an involvement of MCPIP-1
expression in immune functions and in the physiology of the cardiovascular
system, indicating that MCPIP-1 is a key endogenous molecule that governs normal 
resolution of acute inflammation and infection. In this review, we also discuss
the current evidence underlying the roles of other members of the MCPIP family in
the regulation of inflammatory processes. Further understanding of the proteins
from this family will provide new insights into the identification of novel
targets for both host effectors and microbial factors and will lead to new
therapeutic treatments for infections and other inflammatory diseases.

Copyright © 2021 Jin, Zheng, Sareli, Kolattukudy and Niu.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.727861 
PMCID: PMC8519509
PMID: 34659213  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

