
1. J Chem Phys. 2021 Oct 14;155(14):145101. doi: 10.1063/5.0065765.

All-atom molecular dynamics study of hepatitis B virus containing pregenome RNA
in solution.

Fujimoto K(1), Yamaguchi Y(1), Urano R(1), Shinoda W(1), Ishikawa T(2), Omagari
K(3), Tanaka Y(4), Nakagawa A(5), Okazaki S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Materials Chemistry, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan.
(2)Department of Integrated Health Sciences, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan.
(3)Curreio, Inc., Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Virology and Liver Unit, Nagoya City University, Nagoya, Japan.
(5)Institute for Protein Research, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.
(6)Department of Advanced Materials Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan.

Immature hepatitis B virus (HBV) captures nucleotides in its capsid for reverse
transcription. The nucleotides and nucleotide analog drugs, which are
triphosphorylated and negatively charged in the cell, approach the capsid via
diffusion and are absorbed into it. In this study, we performed a long-time
molecular dynamics calculation of the entire HBV capsid containing pregenome RNA 
to investigate the interactions between the capsid and negatively charged
substances. Electric field analysis demonstrated that negatively charged
substances can approach the HBV capsid by thermal motion, avoiding spikes. The
substances then migrate all over the floor of the HBV capsid. Finally, they find 
pores through which they can pass through the HBV capsid shell. Free energy
profiles were calculated along these pores for small ions to understand their
permeability through the pores. Anions (Cl-) showed higher free energy barriers
than cations (Na+ and K+) through all pores, and the permeation rate of Cl- was
eight times slower than that of K+ or Na+. Furthermore, the ions were more stable
in the capsid than in the bulk water. Thus, the HBV capsid exerts ion selectivity
for uptake and provides an environment for ions, such as nucleotides and
nucleotide analog drugs, to be stabilized within the capsid.

DOI: 10.1063/5.0065765 
PMID: 34654297 

