
1. Eur J Neurol. 2021 Nov;28(11):3870-3872. doi: 10.1111/ene.14966.

A fatal case of COVID-19-associated acute necrotizing encephalopathy.

Ziemele D(1)(2), Ķauķe G(1)(2), Skrējāne K(2), Jaunozoliņa L(2)(3), Karelis
G(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Riga East University Hospital, Riga,
Latvia.
(2)Rīga Stradiņš University, Riga, Latvia.
(3)Department of Radiology, Riga East University Hospital, Riga, Latvia.

INTRODUCTION: An increasing number of published reports on SARS-CoV-2
neurological manifestations have revealed a wide spectrum of symptoms, diagnostic
features, and outcomes. We report a fatal case of a COVID-19-associated acute
necrotizing encephalopathy (ANE).
CASE REPORT: We report a 70-year-old man brought to the hospital after a
generalized tonic-clonic seizure. He was confused and disoriented. Nasopharyngeal
swab testing for SARS-CoV-2 was positive. A head computed tomography (CT) scan
and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed no signs of acute pathology. After 
recurrent seizures, he was sedated and intubated. Throughout the days that
followed he remained in a therapeutic coma. After discontinuation of sedatives,
he remained unconscious. A repeated head CT scan showed signs of pontine edema,
and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed inhomogeneous
hyperintensities with microhemorrhages and small autonecrotic cavities in both
thalami, brain stem, and cerebellar peduncles. With a high suspicion of a
COVID-19-associated ANE, the patient was started on high-dose glucocorticoids;
however, he died the next day. The CSF tested negative for SARS-CoV-2.
DISCUSSION: A variety of COVID-19 neurological manifestations have been reported 
to date, including various forms of encephalitis and encephalopathy. In our
patient, encephalopathy with seizures was the presenting symptom of SARS-CoV-2
infection. The radiological findings on days 8 and 9 were consistent with an ANE.
The precise pathogenesis of ANE remains unclear; however, an immune-mediated
mechanism is suspected. Early diagnostics with prompt administration of
immunomodulators may be lifesaving. Suspicion of a COVID-19-related
encephalopathy/encephalitis should be raised in all patients with altered mental 
status, seizures, and/or coma.

© 2021 European Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1111/ene.14966 
PMID: 34655265  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

