
1. J Mol Med (Berl). 2021 Oct 18. doi: 10.1007/s00109-021-02114-x. [Epub ahead of
print]

COVID-19 in multiple-myeloma patients: cellular and humoral immunity against
SARS-CoV-2 in a short- and long-term view.

von Metzler I(1), Campe J(2)(3), Huenecke S(3), Raab MS(4), Goldschmidt H(4),
Schubert R(5), Rabenau HF(6), Ciesek S(6)(7)(8), Serve H(9)(10)(11), Ullrich
E(12)(13)(14)(15).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Johann Wolfgang Goethe University,
Frankfurt, Germany. ivana.metzler@kgu.de.
(2)Experimental Immunology, Department for Children and Adolescents Medicine,
University Hospital Frankfurt, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(3)Division of Pediatric Stem Cell Transplantation and Immunology, Department for
Children and Adolescents Medicine, University Hospital Frankfurt, Goethe
University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(4)Department of Medicine V, University Hospital Heidelberg, and National Center 
for Tumor Diseases (NCT), Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Division for Allergy, Pneumology and Cystic Fibrosis, Department for Children 
and Adolescents, University Hospital, Goethe-University, Frankfurt, Germany.
(6)Institute for Medical Virology, University Hospital Frankfurt, Goethe
University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(7)German Centre for Infection Research, External Partner Site, 60323, Frankfurt,
Germany.
(8)Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology (IME), Branch
Translational Medicine and Pharmacology, 60596, Frankfurt, Germany.
(9)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Johann Wolfgang Goethe University,
Frankfurt, Germany.
(10)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) partner site Frankfurt/Mainz, Frankfurt am
Main, Germany.
(11)Frankfurt Cancer Institute (FCI), Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany.
(12)Experimental Immunology, Department for Children and Adolescents Medicine,
University Hospital Frankfurt, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
evelyn.ullrich@kgu.de.
(13)Division of Pediatric Stem Cell Transplantation and Immunology, Department
for Children and Adolescents Medicine, University Hospital Frankfurt, Goethe
University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. evelyn.ullrich@kgu.de.
(14)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) partner site Frankfurt/Mainz, Frankfurt am
Main, Germany. evelyn.ullrich@kgu.de.
(15)Frankfurt Cancer Institute (FCI), Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany. evelyn.ullrich@kgu.de.

Multiple myeloma patients are often treated with immunomodulatory drugs,
proteasome inhibitors, or monoclonal antibodies until disease progression.
Continuous therapy in combination with the underlying disease frequently results 
in severe humoral and cellular immunodeficiency, which often manifests in
recurrent infections. Here, we report on the clinical management and
immunological data of three multiple-myeloma patients diagnosed with COVID-19.
Despite severe hypogammaglobulinemia, deteriorated T cell counts, and
neutropenia, the patients were able to combat COVID-19 by balanced response of
innate immunity, strong CD8+ and CD4+ T cell activation and differentiation,
development of specific T-cell memory subsets, and development of anti-SARS-CoV-2
type IgM and IgG antibodies with virus-neutralizing capacities. Even 12 months
after re-introduction of lenalidomide maintenance therapy, antibody levels and
virus-neutralizing antibody titers remained detectable, indicating persisting
immunity against SARS-CoV-2. We conclude that in MM patients who tested positive 
for SARS-CoV-2 and were receiving active MM treatment, immune response assessment
could be a useful tool to help guide decision-making regarding the continuation
of anti-tumor therapy and supportive therapy. KEY MESSAGES: Immunosuppression due
to multiple myeloma might not be the crucial factor that is affecting the course 
of COVID-19. In this case, despite pre-existing severe deficits in CD4+ T-cell
counts and IgA und IgM deficiency, we noticed a robust humoral and cellular
immune response against SARS-CoV-2. Evaluation of immune response and antibody
titers in MM patients that were tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 and are on active 
MM treatment should be performed on a larger scale; the findings might affect
further treatment recommendations for COVID-19, MM treatment re-introduction, and
isolation measures.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00109-021-02114-x 
PMCID: PMC8520766
PMID: 34657968 

