
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021 Oct 16. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14344. [Epub ahead of print]

Analysis of IgG, IgA and IgM antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 spike protein S1 in
convalescent and vaccinated patients with the Pfizer-BioNTech and CanSinoBio
vaccines.

Melgoza-González EA(1), Hinojosa-Trujillo D(1), Reséndiz-Sandoval M(1), Mata-Haro
V(2), Hernández-Valenzuela S(1), García-Vega M(1), Bravo-Parra M(2),
Arvizu-Flores AA(3), Valenzuela O(3), Velázquez E(4), Soto-Gaxiola A(5),
Gómez-Meza MB(6), Pérez-Jacobo F(7), Villela L(7)(8), Hernández J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Inmunología, Centro de Investigación en Alimentación y
Desarrollo, A.C, Hermosillo, Mexico.
(2)Laboratorio de Microbiología e Inmunología, Centro de Investigación en
Alimentación y Desarrollo, A.C, Hermosillo, Mexico.
(3)Departamento de Ciencias Químico Biológicas, División de Ciencias de la Salud,
Universidad de Sonora, Hermosillo, Mexico.
(4)Centro Estatal de la Transfusión Sanguínea, Secretaria de Salud del Estado de 
Sonora, Hermosillo, Mexico.
(5)Hospital General del Estado de Sonora "Dr. Ernesto Ramos Bours", Secretaria de
Salud del Estado de Sonora, Hermosillo, Mexico.
(6)Departamento de Hematología y Banco de Sangre, Ciudad de México, Hospital
Central Norte Pemex, Mexico.
(7)Universidad del Valle de México, Campus Hermosillo, Hermosillo, Mexico.
(8)Hospital Fernando Ocaranza, ISSSTE-Hermosillo, Hermosillo, Sonora, Mexico.

The SARS-CoV-2 virus was detected for the first time in December 2019 in Wuhan,
China. Currently, this virus has spread around the world, and new variants have
emerged. This new pandemic virus provoked the rapid development of diagnostic
tools, therapies and vaccines to control this new disease called COVID-19.
Antibody detection by ELISA has been broadly used to recognize the number of
persons infected with this virus or to evaluate the response of vaccinated
individuals. As the pandemic spread, new questions arose, such as the prevalence 
of antibodies after natural infection and the response induced by the different
vaccines. In Mexico, as in other countries, mRNA and viral-vectored vaccines have
been widely used among the population. In this work, we developed an indirect
ELISA test to evaluate S1 antibodies in convalescent and vaccinated individuals. 
By using this test, we showed that IgG antibodies against the S1 protein of
SARS-CoV-2 were detected up to 42 weeks after the onset of the symptoms, in
contrast to IgA and IgM, which decreased 14 weeks after the onset of symptoms.
The evaluation of the antibody response in individuals vaccinated with
Pfizer-BioNTech and CanSinoBio vaccines showed no differences 2 weeks after
vaccination. However, after completing the two doses of Pfizer-BioNTech and the
one dose of CanSinoBio, a significantly higher response of IgG antibodies was
observed in persons vaccinated with Pfizer-BioNTech than in those vaccinated with
CanSinoBio. In conclusion, these results confirm that after natural infection
with SARS-CoV-2, it is possible to detect antibodies for up to 10 months.
Additionally, our results showed that one dose of the CanSinoBio vaccine induces 
a lower response of IgG antibodies than that induced by the complete scheme of
the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14344 
PMID: 34655457 

