
1. Cureus. 2021 Sep 5;13(9):e17744. doi: 10.7759/cureus.17744. eCollection 2021 Sep.

A Surprising Cause of Liver Abscesses in a Post-Chemotherapy Patient: Herpes
Simplex Virus.

Ehwarieme R(1), Agarwal AN(2), Alkhateb R(2), Bowling JE(1), Anstead GM(3)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medicine/Infectious Diseases, University of Texas Health, San Antonio, San
Antonio, USA.
(2)Pathology, University of Texas Health, San Antonio, San Antonio, USA.
(3)Medicine/Infectious Diseases, South Texas Veterans Healthcare System, San
Antonio, USA.

Herpes simplex virus (HSV) hepatitis is a rare complication of HSV infection, and
a rare cause of hepatitis. It is often fatal, especially if the diagnosis and
treatment are delayed. Herein, we describe the case of a 31-year-old female with 
a history of receiving cytotoxic cancer chemotherapy five months prior who
presented with a one-week history of worsening abdominal pain and fever. She was 
noted to have an outbreak of genital herpes at the time of presentation. Computed
tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen showed innumerable hypodensities compatible
with hepatic micro-abscesses. A specimen from a subsequent liver biopsy revealed 
HSV-type cytopathic changes and nuclear staining with an anti-HSV
immunohistochemical stain. She was initially started on high-dose oral
valacyclovir for genital herpes and was noted to have rapid clinical improvement 
prior to the histopathologic diagnosis of HSV hepatitis. She achieved full
recovery while on oral valacyclovir. This is the first reported case of HSV
hepatitis treated with oral valacyclovir and the third reported case of HSV
hepatitis mimicking pyogenic abscesses on abdominal imaging. With the high
mortality rate associated with HSV hepatitis, one should consider the diagnosis
in all patients with multifocal liver lesions of unknown etiology, especially if 
genital herpes is present at the time of presentation, or in patients who are
immunocompromised.

Copyright © 2021, Ehwarieme et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.17744 
PMCID: PMC8491800
PMID: 34659957 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

