
1. BJPsych Open. 2021 Oct 7;7(6):e188. doi: 10.1192/bjo.2021.1030. eCollection 2021 
Nov.

Interplay between the genetics of personality traits, severe psychiatric
disorders and COVID-19 host genetics in the susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2
infection.

Heilbronner U(1), Streit F(2), Vogl T(1), Senner F(3), Schaupp SK(1),
Reich-Erkelenz D(1), Papiol S(3), Oraki Kohshour M(4), Klöhn-Saghatolislam F(3), 
Kalman JL(3), Heilbronner M(1), Gade K(5), Comes AL(1), Budde M(1), Andlauer
TFM(6), Anderson-Schmidt H(5), Adorjan K(3), Stürmer T(7), Loerbroks A(8),
Amelang M(9), Poisel E(2), Foo J(2), Heilmann-Heimbach S(10), Forstner AJ(11),
Degenhardt F(12), Zimmermann J(13), Wiltfang J(5), von Hagen M(14), Spitzer
C(15), Schmauss M(16), Reininghaus E(17), Reimer J(18), Konrad C(19), Juckel
G(20), Lang FU(21), Jäger M(21), Figge C(22), Fallgatter AJ(23), Dietrich DE(24),
Dannlowski U(25), Baune BT(26), Arolt V(25), Anghelescu IG(27), Nöthen MM(10),
Witt SH(2), Andreassen OA(28), Chen CH(29), Falkai P(30), Rietschel M(2), Schulze
TG(31), Schulte EC(32).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Psychiatric Phenomics and Genomics (IPPG), University Hospital,
University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(2)Department of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental 
Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Institute of Psychiatric Phenomics and Genomics (IPPG), University Hospital,
University of Munich, Munich, Germany; and Department of Psychiatry and
Psychotherapy, University Hospital, University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(4)Institute of Psychiatric Phenomics and Genomics (IPPG), University Hospital,
University of Munich, Munich, Germany; and Department of Immunology, School of
Medicine, Ahvaz Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences, Iran.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medical Center
Göttingen, Germany.
(6)Department of Neurology, Klinikum rechts der Isar, School of Medicine,
Technical University of Munich, Germany.
(7)Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA.
(8)Institute of Occupational, Social, and Environmental Medicine, Centre for
Health and Society, Faculty of Medicine, University of Düsseldorf, Germany.
(9)Department of Psychology, University of Heidelberg, Germany.
(10)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn School of Medicine &
University Hospital Bonn, Germany.
(11)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn School of Medicine &
University Hospital Bonn, Germany; and Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine
(INM-1), Research Center Jülich, Germany.
(12)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn School of Medicine &
University Hospital Bonn, Germany; and Department of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, University Hospital Essen,
University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany.
(13)Psychiatrieverbund Oldenburger Land gGmbH, Karl-Jaspers-Klinik, Germany.
(14)Clinic for Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Clinical Center Werra-Meißner,
Germany.
(15)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, University Medical
Center Rostock, Germany.
(16)Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, Augsburg
University, Medical Faculty, Germany.
(17)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapeutic Medicine, Research Unit for
Bipolar Affective Disorder, Medical University of Graz, Austria.
(18)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany.
(19)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Agaplesion Diakonieklinikum,
Germany.
(20)Department of Psychiatry, Ruhr University Bochum, LWL University Hospital,
Germany.
(21)Department of Psychiatry II, Ulm University, Bezirkskrankenhaus Günzburg,
Germany.
(22)Karl-Jaspers Clinic, European Medical School Oldenburg-Groningen, Germany.
(23)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Tübingen Center for Mental
Health, University Tübingen, Germany.
(24)AMEOS Clinical Center Hildesheim, Germany; and Center for Systems
Neuroscience Hannover, Germany.
(25)Institute for Translational Psychiatry, University of Münster, Germany.
(26)Department of Psychiatry, University of Münster, Germany; Department of
Psychiatry, Melbourne Medical School, The University of Melbourne, Australia; and
The Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, The University of
Melbourne, Australia.
(27)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Mental Health Institute Berlin,
Germany.
(28)NORMENT Centre and KG Jebsen Centre for Neurodevelopmental disorders,
Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Norway; and Division of
Mental Health and Addiction, Oslo University Hospital, Norway.
(29)Department of Radiology, University of California, USA.
(30)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Hospital, University
of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(31)Institute of Psychiatric Phenomics and Genomics (IPPG), University Hospital, 
University of Munich, Munich, Germany; Department of Psychiatry and
Psychotherapy, University Medical Center Göttingen, Germany; Department of
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins University, USA; and Department
of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental Health,
Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Germany.
(32)Institute of Psychiatric Phenomics and Genomics (IPPG), University Hospital, 
University of Munich, Munich, Germany; Department of Psychiatry and
Psychotherapy, University Hospital, University of Munich, Munich, Germany; and
Institute of Virology, Technical University Munich/Helmholtz Zentrum München,
Germany.

Background: The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)
pandemic, with its impact on our way of life, is affecting our experiences and
mental health. Notably, individuals with mental disorders have been reported to
have a higher risk of contracting SARS-CoV-2. Personality traits could represent 
an important determinant of preventative health behaviour and, therefore, the
risk of contracting the virus.
Aims: We examined overlapping genetic underpinnings between major psychiatric
disorders, personality traits and susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Method: Linkage disequilibrium score regression was used to explore the genetic
correlations of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) susceptibility with
psychiatric disorders and personality traits based on data from the largest
available respective genome-wide association studies (GWAS). In two cohorts (the 
PsyCourse (n = 1346) and the HeiDE (n = 3266) study), polygenic risk scores were 
used to analyse if a genetic association between, psychiatric disorders,
personality traits and COVID-19 susceptibility exists in individual-level data.
Results: We observed no significant genetic correlations of COVID-19
susceptibility with psychiatric disorders. For personality traits, there was a
significant genetic correlation for COVID-19 susceptibility with extraversion (P 
= 1.47 × 10-5; genetic correlation 0.284). Yet, this was not reflected in
individual-level data from the PsyCourse and HeiDE studies.
Conclusions: We identified no significant correlation between genetic risk
factors for severe psychiatric disorders and genetic risk for COVID-19
susceptibility. Among the personality traits, extraversion showed evidence for a 
positive genetic association with COVID-19 susceptibility, in one but not in
another setting. Overall, these findings highlight a complex contribution of
genetic and non-genetic components in the interaction between COVID-19
susceptibility and personality traits or mental disorders.

© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1192/bjo.2021.1030 
PMCID: PMC8503053
PMID: 34659794 

Conflict of interest statement: M.S. is a member of the advisory board of
Janssen. B.T.B. reports the following conflicts of interest: Advisory Board –
Lundbeck, Janssen-Cilag; Consultant – National Health and Medical Research
Council, Australia; Grant/Research Support – AstraZeneca, Fay Fuller Foundation, 
James & Diana Ramsay Foundation, National Health and Medical Research Council,
Australia, German Research Council (DFG), Sanofi, Lundbeck; Honoraria –
AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Lundbeck, Pfizer, Servier Laboratories, Wyeth 
Pharmaceuticals, Takeda, Janssen, LivaNova PLC. O.A.A. has received speaker's
honorarium from Lundbeck and Synovion, and is a consultant to HealthLytix. All
other authors do not report conflicts of interest with regard to this manuscript.

