
1. Am J Case Rep. 2021 Oct 17;22:e933272. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.933272.

Spontaneous Recovery of Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis Due to Primary
Epstein-Barr Virus Infection in an Adult Patient.

Matsuo Y(1), Iwanami K(2), Hiraoka E(1), Oda R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Bay Urayasu Ichikawa Medical Center,
Urayasu, Chiba, Japan.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, Tokyo Bay Urayasu Ichikawa Medical Center,
Urayasu, Chiba, Japan.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo Bay Urayasu Ichikawa Medical Center, 
Urayasu, Chiba, Japan.

BACKGROUND Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is a rare life-threatening
systemic hyperinflammatory condition. Most adult HLH cases are secondary to
infection, malignancy, and rheumatic diseases. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection
is the most frequent cause of infection-induced HLH. Early treatment with
dexamethasone, etoposide, and cyclosporine is generally recommended for adult
patients with HLH. However, this treatment regimen was established based on
pediatric clinical trial data; thus, its efficacy and validity in adults remain
unclear. Because little is known about the disease course of untreated adult
EBV-associated HLH (EBV-HLH), we report a case of an adult patient who recovered 
from EBV-HLH spontaneously without specific treatment and discuss potential
treatment strategies. CASE REPORT A 34-year-old man presented to the emergency
department with a 7-day history of fever, headache, and sore throat. The main
laboratory test abnormalities were elevated liver enzymes, hyperbilirubinemia,
hypertriglyceridemia, and hyperferritinemia. Serologic tests confirmed acute
primary EBV infection. He was diagnosed with EBV-HLH based on the HLH-2004
diagnostic criteria and the HLH probability calculator (HScore). Because he was
clinically stable, we did not initiate immunosuppressive/cytotoxic treatment
targeting HLH. High-grade fever persisted, but the abnormalities in his
laboratory data improved spontaneously, and he did not develop major organ
failure. His fever resolved on day 29 without HLH-specific treatment. CONCLUSIONS
In clinically stable adult patients with EBV-HLH without major organ failure, it 
might be an acceptable alternative to observe the patient for several weeks
before initiating HLH-specific treatment. Further research is required to better 
predict the subset of patients who can be safely observed without treatment.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.933272 
PMCID: PMC8532072
PMID: 34657119  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

