
1. Harm Reduct J. 2021 Oct 17;18(1):107. doi: 10.1186/s12954-021-00550-z.

Generating evidence on the use of Image and performance enhancing drugs in the
UK: results from a scoping review and expert consultation by the Anabolic Steroid
UK network.

McVeigh J(1), Hearne E(2), Boardley I(3), Bates G(4), Hope V(2), Ralphs R(5), Van
Hout MC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Substance Use & Associated Behaviours, Department of Sociology, Manchester
Metropolitan University, Manchester, UK. j.mcveigh@mmu.ac.uk.
(2)Public Health Institute, Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, UK.
(3)School of Sport, Exercise and Rehabilitation Sciences, University of
Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(4)Institute for Policy Research, University of Bath, Bath, UK.
(5)Substance Use & Associated Behaviours, Department of Sociology, Manchester
Metropolitan University, Manchester, UK.
(6)Faculty of Health, Public Health Institute, Liverpool John Moores University, 
Liverpool, UK.

BACKGROUND: The use of anabolic androgenic steroids (AAS) and associated image
and performance enhancing drugs (IPEDs) is now a global phenomenon. There is a
need to develop evidence to support the development of interventions to prevent
the commencement of use, to minimise the potential harms or to support those in
their cessation of use. While the United Kingdom (UK) is no exception to this
issue, its public health and legislative response to the phenomenon differs to
other countries and requires the examination of research specific to the UK.
Therefore, a scoping review has been conducted to examine the recent relevant
literature to help inform the development and evaluation of effective
interventions to reduce the harmful use of IPEDs.
METHODS: A comprehensive search strategy was developed for multiple bibliographic
databases, supported by and iterative citation searching process and complimented
by expert input from the Anabolic Steroid UK Network. Research conducted by or UK
academics or within the UK were eligible, if published in the previous five
years.
RESULTS: In total 87 eligible outputs were identified, including 26 review
articles, 25 qualitative papers and 24 quantitative papers. together with small
numbers of clinical studies/case reports (6) and commentaries/correspondence (6).
The most common topics of research were public health, treatment and harm
reduction (41), followed by studies focusing on epidemiology, sub-groups of
people using IPEDs and motivations for use (34). The studies illustrated the
diverse populations of people who use a range of enhancement drugs including
concomitant psychoactive drug use. A number of papers focused on blood borne
viruses and associated issues, while others reported on the uptake of needle and 
syringe programmes. No effectiveness evaluations related to any aspect of
treatment, harm reduction or other intervention were published during study
period.
CONCLUSION: There is a need for the development of effectiveness evaluations of
current interventions and any future service provision for people using image and
performance enhancing drugs. While there have been no studies of this nature to
date, this review illustrates the rich data that has been gathered through
diverse methodologies, that will assist in the development of future
effectiveness evaluations.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12954-021-00550-z 
PMCID: PMC8522223
PMID: 34657627  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

