
1. Semin Cancer Biol. 2021 Oct 14. pii: S1044-579X(21)00254-6. doi:
10.1016/j.semcancer.2021.10.004. [Epub ahead of print]

Dynamic impact of virome on colitis and colorectal cancer: Immunity,
inflammation, prevention and treatment.

Wang Z(1), Guo K(2), Liu Y(3), Huang C(4), Wu M(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, and
West China School of Basic Medical Sciences & Forensic Medicine, Sichuan
University, and Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, Chengdu 610041,
China; Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of North Dakota School of
Medicine and Health Sciences, Grand Forks, ND, 58202, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of North Dakota School of
Medicine and Health Sciences, Grand Forks, ND, 58202, USA.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, and
West China School of Basic Medical Sciences & Forensic Medicine, Sichuan
University, and Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, Chengdu 610041,
China. Electronic address: hcanhua@scu.edu.cn.
(5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of North Dakota School of
Medicine and Health Sciences, Grand Forks, ND, 58202, USA. Electronic address:
min.wu@und.edu.

The gut microbiome includes a series of microorganism genomes, such as
bacteriome, virome, mycobiome, etc. The gut microbiota is critically involved in 
intestine immunity and diseases, including inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and
colorectal cancer (CRC); however, the underlying mechanism remains incompletely
understood. Clarifying the relationship between microbiota and inflammation may
profoundly improve our understanding of etiology, disease progression, patient
management, and the development of prevention and treatment. In this review, we
discuss the latest studies of the influence of enteric viruses (i.e., commensal
viruses, pathogenic viruses, and bacteriophages) in the initiation, progression, 
and complication of colitis and colorectal cancer, and their potential for novel 
preventative approaches and therapeutic application. We explore the interplay
between gut viruses and host immune systems for its effects on the severity of
inflammatory diseases and cancer, including both direct and indirect interactions
between enteric viruses with other microbes and microbial products. Furthermore, 
the underlying mechanisms of the virome's roles in gut inflammatory response have
been explained to infer potential therapeutic targets with examples in specific
clinical trials. Given that very limited literature has thus far discussed these 
various topics with the gut virome, we believe these extensive analyses may
provide insight into the understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of IBD and
CRC, which could help add the design of improved therapies for these important
human diseases.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2021.10.004 
PMID: 34656791 

