
1. J Dent Hyg. 2021 Oct;95(5):41-46.

Face-touching Behavior during the COVID-19 Pandemic: Self-inoculation and
transmission potentials.

Wiener RC(1), Trickett Shockey AK(2), Waters C(3), Bhandari R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Associate professor and interim chair, Department of Dental Practice and Rural
Health, School of Dentistry; rbhandari@hsc.wvu.edu.
(2)Professor in the Department of Dental Hygiene, School of Dentistry.
(3)Research Labs Director, School of Dentistry.
(4)Assistant professor in the Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
School of Public Health; all at the Robert C Byrd Health Sciences Center North,
West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV, USA.

Purpose: Face-touching behavior has the potential for self-inoculation and
transmission of the SARS-2 Coronavirus. The purpose of this study was to observe 
unconscious face-touching behaviors of dental hygiene and dental students in a
non-clinical setting.Methods: Twenty minutes of archived proctoring videos of
dental and dental hygiene students (n=87) while taking final examinations were
watched for incidents of face-touching behavior. Data were analyzed for
descriptive frequencies; independent sample t-tests were used to determine
differences between dental and dental hygiene students and between males and
females.Results: There was a significant difference in face touching behaviors
between the student groups. Dental hygiene students (n=42) were observed 11.9
times (SD. 11.4) and dental students (n=45) were observed 8.9 times (SD, 7.9)
touching the nose, mouth, and eyes (T-zone) (p=0.049). Differences in frequencies
of touching the T-zone failed to reach significance between genders.Conclusion:
Findings suggest both dental hygiene and dental students frequently touch their
faces in non-clinical settings and need to be aware of this unconscious behavior.
Given the significance of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is important to identify and 
quantify known risk factors that can be easily addressed to prevent/reduce
infection transmission.

Copyright © 2021 The American Dental Hygienists’ Association.


PMID: 34654714  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

