
1. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2021 Nov 24;61(11):750-755. doi:
10.5692/clinicalneurol.cn-001623. Epub 2021 Oct 16.

[Subacute cognitive impairment and urinary retention due to primary central
nervous system post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder: a case report].

[Article in Japanese]

Yokoyama N(1), Kanbayashi T(1), Kobayashi S(1), Ishida T(2), Sonoo M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Teikyo University School of Medicine.
(2)Department of Pathology, Teikyo University School of Medicine.

We report a 66-year-old man with primary central nervous system post-transplant
lymphoproliferative disorder (PCNS-PTLD). He had received a living-donor kidney
transplantation at the age of 64 years. Although he had a good postoperative
course by continuing to take oral immunosuppressive agents, he was admitted to
our hospital for subacute cognitive impairment and urinary retention two years
after the transplantation. Brain MRI revealed high-intensity lesions on FLAIR and
T2-weighted images in the left parietal operculum, deep white matter around the
anterior horn of the lateral ventricle, and the genu and splenium of the corpus
callosum. A part of these lesions showed ring enhancement. The cerebrospinal
fluid examination revealed lymphocytic pleocytosis, elevation of protein level,
and mild hypoglycorrhachia. Blood tests showed no abnormalities except for
positive serum VCA-IgG antibody of Epstein-Barr virus. A brain biopsy was
performed and diagnosis of PCNS-PTLD was made. There was no evidence of systemic 
PTLD. We reduced the dose of immunosuppressive agents and started the initial
treatment with methylprednisolone pulse therapy. The patient showed a partial
response to the treatment and transferred to another hospital for subsequent
chemotherapy. PTLD is an important post-transplant complication that can affect
the patient's prognosis. The incidence of PTLD is increasing with the growing
numbers of transplantations and older age of donors and recipients. Although CNS 
involvement is known to be rare, PCNS-PTLD is an important differential diagnosis
when symptoms of CNS origin develop in post-transplant patients.

DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.cn-001623 
PMID: 34657922 

