
1. Hawaii J Health Soc Welf. 2021 Sep;80(9 Suppl 1):24-33.

A Report on the Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on the Health and Social Welfare 
in the City and County of Honolulu, Hawai'i.

Qureshi K(1), Buenconsejo-Lum LE(2), Palafox NA(1)(3), Arndt RG(4), Zhi Q(1),
Fernandez GK(3), Wasserman GM(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing and Dental Hygiene, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa,
Honolulu, HI (KQ, QZ).
(2)John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, Honolulu, HI
(LEB).
(3)Hawai'i State Department of Health, Communicable Disease & Public Health
Nursing Division, Honolulu, HI (GKF, GMW).
(4)Thompson School of Social Work & Public Health, University of Hawai'i at
Mānoa, Honolulu, HI (RGA).

To address the impact of COVID-19 in the state of Hawai'i, the Hawai'i Emergency 
Management Agency Medical Public Health Branch activated its' Community Care
Outreach Unit (CCO Unit). A team from this unit developed a survey to assess the 
impact, needs, and threats to the health and social welfare of individuals and
their families as they pertain to COVID-19. This article presents key findings
for the City and County of Honolulu (CCH). A total of 5598 CCH residents
responded. Approximately half of these respondents reported they or their
household members experienced reduced work hours or lost their job as a result of
COVID-19. In all questions related to paying for essential living costs, at the
time of the survey, the percentage of participants who expected to have future
problems nearly doubled. Those preparing for school in the fall school semester
expected challenges centered on insufficient funds to purchase school supplies,
lack of available face-coverings, and language barriers. Financial assistance,
rental assistance, and food assistance seemed to be more difficult to apply for
compared to health care services. The most common reasons for difficulty with
applications noted by residents included that they could not figure out how to
complete the form, did not have all the documents, or could not get through on
the telephone. About one-half of CCH participants reported feeling nervous more
than half of the days or nearly every day in the past 2 weeks. Most perceived the
severity of COVID-19 to be moderate to very high. Less than half reported knowing
how to provide care for someone in their family with COVID-19. Half of the CCH
participants reported that they practice social distancing usually or all of the 
time, and the majority reported wearing a face-covering usually or always when
outside of the home. A significant portion of respondents reported barriers for
providing care for a household member exposed or infected with COVID-19. Such
barriers included a lack of space in their home for isolation; not having enough 
cleaning supplies; no working thermometer in the home, or no family member
available to care for them. The results presented may provide a baseline for
understanding the impact, needs, and threats to the health and social welfare of 
individuals and their families in CCH and across the state of Hawai'i. Local
stakeholders can utilize this information in developing priorities, strategies,
and programs to address the pandemic as it continues to unfold and learn lessons 
for future pandemics.

©Copyright 2021 by University Health Partners of Hawai‘i (UHP Hawai‘i).


PMCID: PMC8504324
PMID: 34661125  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

