
1. Ann Work Expo Health. 2021 Oct 20. pii: wxab089. doi: 10.1093/annweh/wxab089.
[Epub ahead of print]

Efficiency of Community Face Coverings and Surgical Masks to Limit the Spread of 
Aerosol.

Chazelet S(1), Pacault S(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Research and Safety, Process Engineering Department, 1,
rue du Morvan - CS 60027 - 54519 Vandoeuvre Cedex, France.

In the current pandemic context of COVID-19, people wear different types of
masks, particularly in their workplace, to limit the spread of the virus.
Depending on their activity and work environment, employees are required to wear 
community face coverings, cloth masks with a transparent windows, surgical masks,
reusable masks, or respirators. The objective of this study was to evaluate the
efficiency as source control of these masks, i.e., when worn to protect the
environment from the spread of particles emitted by the wearer. An experimental
test bench including a dummy head and a breathing simulator associated with a
DEHS droplet generator emitting 1 or 3 µm particles in the exhaled stream is
used. Source control efficiency is calculated from the total flux of particles
emitted in the test section without and with a mask. Seventeen models of masks
are tested. Three breathing rate conditions were studied: from rest to heavy
breathing, with average rates of 13, 27, and 45 L/min. Source control
efficiencies vary from one mask to another. Among community face coverings (seven
models) the values ranged from 15.6 to 33.8% for a medium intensity breath. The
efficiencies of surgical masks (three models) ranged from 17.4 to 28.3% for the
same breathing cycle. The community face coverings and the disposable surgical
masks present equivalent values of source control efficiency, respectively, 25.9 
and 24.1% at 1 µm and 31.5 and 23.2% at 3 µm. The respirators show higher source 
control efficiency than the other types of masks (76.7% at 1 µm and 82.5% at 3
µm). The statistical analysis of the data shows no effect of the breathing flow
rate and an interaction effect between mask type and particle size. No
differences in source control were found for the two particle sizes or the
different experimental breathing rates for the respirators and the surgical
masks. But the community face coverings and the cloth masks with transparent
window present a source control efficiency which increases with the particle
size. Varying levels of efficiency were measured with higher source control for
respirators than for other types of masks. In the context of a respiratory
protection programme, they can provide an effective barrier to the spread of the 
virus. But these results show also that no mask can stop all the particles
emitted by its wearer. Regardless of the type of mask, other barrier measures
(ventilation, social distancing, and hygiene) are then necessary.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
British Occupational Hygiene Society.

DOI: 10.1093/annweh/wxab089 
PMID: 34668014 

