
1. J Virol. 2021 Oct 20:JVI0111021. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01110-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Key substitutions in the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 variants can predict
resistance to monoclonal antibodies, but other substitutions can modify the
effects.

Lusvarghi S(1), Wang W(1), Herrup R(1), Neerukonda SN(1), Vassell R(1), Bentley
L(2), Eakin AE(3), Erlandson KJ(4), Weiss CD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Viral Product, Office of Vaccine Research and Review, Center for
Biologics Evaluation and Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Silver
Spring Maryland, United States of America.
(2)Office of the Assistance Secretary for Preparedness and Response, U.S.
Department of Human Health and Services, Washington D.C., United States of
America.
(3)Division of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Disease, National Institutes of Health, Rockville,
Maryland, United States of America.
(4)Influenza and Emerging Infectious Diseases Division, Biomedical Advanced
Research and Development Authority, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
Washington, D.C., United States of America.

Mutations in the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 variants can compromise the
effectiveness of therapeutic antibodies. Most clinical-stage therapeutic
antibodies target the spike receptor binding domain (RBD), but variants often
have multiple mutations in several spike regions. To help predict antibody
potency against emerging variants, we evaluated 25 clinical-stage therapeutic
antibodies for neutralization activity against 60 pseudoviruses bearing spikes
with single or multiple substitutions in several spike domains, including the
full set of substitutions in B.1.1.7 (Alpha), B.1.351 (Beta), P.1 (Gamma),
B.1.429 (Epsilon), B.1.526 (Iota), A.23.1 and R.1 variants. We found that 14 of
15 single antibodies were vulnerable to at least one RBD substitution, but most
combination and polyclonal therapeutic antibodies remained potent. Key
substitutions in variants with multiple spike substitutions predicted resistance,
but the degree of resistance could be modified in unpredictable ways by other
spike substitutions that may reside outside of the RBD. These findings highlight 
the importance of assessing antibody potency in the context of all substitutions 
in a variant and show that epistatic interactions in spike can modify virus
susceptibility to therapeutic antibodies. Importance Therapeutic antibodies are
effective in preventing severe disease from SARS-CoV-2infection (COVID-19), but
their effectiveness may be reduced by virus variants with mutations affecting the
spike protein. To help predict resistance to therapeutic antibodies in emerging
variants, we profiled resistance patterns of 25 antibody products in late stages 
of clinical development against a large panel of variants that include single and
multiple substitutions found in the spike protein. We found that the presence of 
a key substitution in variants with multiple spike substitutions can predict
resistance against a variant, but that other substitutions can affect the degree 
of resistance in unpredictable ways. These finding highlight complex interactions
among substitutions in the spike protein affecting virus neutralization and
potentially virus entry into cells.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01110-21 
PMID: 34668774 

