
1. Hawaii J Health Soc Welf. 2021 Sep;80(9 Suppl 1):53-61.

A Report on the Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on the Health and Social Welfare 
in the County of Maui, Hawai'i.

Qureshi K(1), Buenconsejo-Lum LE(2), Arndt RG(3), Zhi Q(1), Nakamoto D(4), Pang
L(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing and Dental Hygiene, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa,
Honolulu, HI (KQ, QZ).
(2)John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, Honolulu, HI
(LEB).
(3)Thompson School of Social Work and Public Health, University of Hawai'i at
Mānoa, Honolulu, HI (RGA).
(4)Maui District Health Office, Hawai'i State Department of Health, Kahului, HI
(DN, LP).

The Community Care Outreach Unit of the Hawai'i Emergency Management Agency
(HI-EMA) Medical/Public Heath Branch conducted a survey to gauge the impact,
needs, and threats to the health and social welfare of individuals and their
families pertaining to coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). This article presents
key findings for the County of Maui (MC) in the state. A mixed-methods framework 
was utilized for survey distribution and recruitment of participants from across 
the state. Recruitment strategies included snowball sampling via website and
social media, and paper surveys. Descriptive analysis of the data is presented to
give a basic overview of the impact of COVID-19 in MC. A total of 883
participants in MC responded to the survey. Approximately one-third reported that
they or family members experienced reduced work hours or lost their job because
of COVID-19. In all questions related to paying for essential living needs, the
percentage of participants who expected to have future problems was higher than
the percentage who reported having current problems. Of those preparing for the
fall 2020 school semester, expected challenges included lack of funds to purchase
school supplies, lack of face coverings, and language barriers. Most participants
in MC perceived the severity of COVID-19 to be moderate to very high, and there
was a moderate level of knowledge about which groups are more at risk for
contracting severe COVID-19. Less than half would know how to provide care for
someone in their family with COVID-19. Several resource barriers for caring for a
family member with COVID-19 were identified. The COVID-19 pandemic has had a more
severe impact on Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander groups compared to others
in the county. The results may provide a baseline for understanding the impact,
needs, and threats to the health and social welfare of individuals and their
families in MC. Local stakeholders can utilize this information to develop
priorities, strategies, and programs to address the COVID-19 pandemic response in
MC.

©Copyright 2021 by University Health Partners of Hawai‘i (UHP Hawai‘i).


PMCID: PMC8504322
PMID: 34661128  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

