
1. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2021 Oct;25(19):5947-5964. doi:
10.26355/eurrev_202110_26872.

Modulation of host epigenome by coronavirus infections and developing treatment
modalities for COVID-19 beyond genetics.

Rabaan AA(1), Al Mutair A, Alhumaid S, Al Alawi Z, Al Mohaini M, Alsalman AJ,
Fawzy M, Al-Tawfiq JA, Almahmoud S, Alfouzan W, Bilal M, Dhawan M, Mohapatra RK, 
Tiwari R, Khan Z, Mitra S, Emran TB, Dhama K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, Johns Hopkins Aramco Healthcare, Dhahran,
Saudi Arabia. kdhama@rediffmail.com.

The recent Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) outbreak 
has resulted in coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic worldwide, affecting
millions of lives. Although vaccines are presently made available, and
vaccination drive is in progress to immunize a larger population; still the risk 
of SARS-CoV-2 infection and related mortality is persistent amid threats of the
third wave of the ongoing pandemic. In the scenario of unavailability of robust
and efficient treatment modalities, it becomes essential to understand the
mechanism of action of the virus and deeply study the molecular mechanisms (both 
at the virus level and the host level) underlying the infection processes. Recent
studies have shown that coronaviruses (CoVs) cause-specific epigenetic changes in
the host cells to create a conducive microenvironment for replicating,
assembling, and spreading. Epigenetic mechanisms can contribute to various
aspects of the SARS-CoV-2 multiplication cycle, like expressing cytokine genes,
viral receptor ACE2, and implicating different histone modifications. For
SARS-CoV-2 infection, viral proteins are physically associated with various host 
proteins resulting in numerous interactions between epigenetic enzymes (i.e.,
histone deacetylases, bromodomain-containing proteins). The involvement of
epigenetic mechanisms in the virus life cycle and the host immune responses to
control infection result in epigenetic factors recognized as emerging prognostic 
COVID-19 biomarkers and epigenetic modulators as robust therapeutic targets to
curb COVID-19. Therefore, this narrative review aimed to summarize and discuss
the various epigenetic mechanisms that control gene expression and how these
mechanisms are altered in the host cells during coronavirus infection. We also
discuss the opportunities to exploit these epigenetic changes as therapeutic
targets for SARS-CoV-2 infection. Epigenetic alterations and regulation play a
pivotal role at various levels of coronavirus infection: entry,
replication/transcription, and the process of maturation of viral proteins.
Coronaviruses modulate the host epigenome to escape the host immune mechanisms.
Therefore, host epigenetic alterations induced by CoVs can be considered to
develop targeted therapies for COVID-19.

DOI: 10.26355/eurrev_202110_26872 
PMID: 34661254  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

