
1. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2021 Oct;55(4):656-664. doi: 10.5578/mb.20219717.

[CARD9 Mutation in a Patient with Candida albicans Meningoencephalitis; A Case
Report].

[Article in Turkish]

Kuruoğlu T(1), Çelik M(1), Çelmeli F(2), Tanyel E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ondokuz Mayıs University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Infectious
Diseases and Clinical Microbiology, Samsun, Turkey.
(2)University of Health Sciences, Antalya Training and Research Hospital, Clinic 
of Pediatric Allergy-Immunology, Antalya, Turkey.

Primary immunodeficiencies are disorders that cause clinical findings ranging
from mild diseases to life-threatening diseases in a wide age range. Infections
are the most common complications of primary immunodeficiencies. Caspase
associated recruitment domain-9 (CARD9) is a protein that plays a role in fungal 
immune response. CARD9 deficiency is one of the primary immunodeficiency
disorders that show autosomal recessive inheritance and can cause different
clinical pictures. It has been associated with various fungal infections such as 
superficial or deep dermatophytosis, invasive pheohifomycosis, cutaneous
mucormycosis, extrapulmonary aspergillosis, mucocutaneous or invasive
candidiasis. The most common infections in CARD9 deficiency are caused by Candida
spp. In this report, a case of Candida albicans meningoencephalitis due to CARD9 
deficiency was presented. It was learned from the medical story that a 37 years
old male patient had no known disease or drug use, but had recurrent oral
candidiasis and cutaneous fungal infections since childhood, and received
liposomal amphotericin B treatment with the diagnosis of C.albicans
meningoencephalitis two months ago. It was learned that he was discharged with
voriconazole treatment after clinical improvement, and he stopped the
voriconazole treatment after discharge and did not go for follow-up. The patient,
who reapplied 1.5 months after discharge with complaints of headache, vomiting
and altered consciousness, did not have fever and neck stiffness, and Kerning and
Bruzinski sign was negative. An external ventricular drainage (EVD) catheter was 
inserted after hydrocephalus was detected in the brain computerized tomography
(CT). In the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination, erythrocyte count was
detected as 340/mm3, and no leukocytes were seen. CSF protein level was 28 mg/dl,
CSF glucose level was 59 mg/dl (simultaneous blood glucose level was 104 mg/dl). 
There was no yeast or bacteria in CSF Gram staining and no acidfast bacteria in
Ziehl-Neelsen staining. It was learned that there was no growth in the
Mycobacterium tuberculosis culture made from CSF sample taken at the first
admission of the patient. Serum human immunodeficiency virus antibody was
negative. Upon learning of fluconazole-susceptible C.albicans growth in the
control CSF culture of the patient, the EVD catheter was changed, and liposomal
amphotericin B treatment was started. CSF culture was repeated.
Fluconazole-susceptible C.albicans continued to grow in CSF cultures repeated in 
the follow-ups. No pathology in favor of abscess was detected in the brain
magnetic resonance imaging. Fluconazole was added to the current liposomal
amphotericin B treatment. Having a history of recurrent mucocutaneous fungal
infection in the patient and his siblings, whose parents were third-degree
relatives, suggested CARD9 deficiency. In the molecular test studied from blood
samples, homozygous p.Q295X mutation due to CARD9 deficiency was detected in the 
patient and his sister. However, the patient died on the 62nd day of
hospitalization due to delayed diagnosis, cerebral complications due to recurrent
C.albicans meningoencephalitis, and insufficient treatment as a result of failure
to receive the granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) treatment.
Persistent fungal infections that develop in CARD9 deficiency cause serious
complications and mortality. Considering the frequency of CARD9 deficiency in the
Turkish population and the lack of diagnostic testing in our country, it is
thought that there may be many patients who cannot be diagnosed and who progress 
with mortality or morbidity. In conclusion, this case was presented to emphasize 
the consideration of CARD9 deficiency in case of persistent invasive fungal
infection or recurrent invasive fungal infection after treatment despite
effective antifungal treatment in children and adults who do not have known risk 
factors for invasive fungal infections.

DOI: 10.5578/mb.20219717 
PMID: 34666665  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

