
1. BMJ Open. 2021 Oct 18;11(10):e050296. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-050296.

Role and utility of COVID-19 laboratory testing in low-income and middle-income
countries: protocol for rapid evidence synthesis.

Ouma OK(1)(2), Ephraim K(2)(3), Loyce N(2)(4), Namisango E(2)(5), Nalugoda
F(2)(6), Ndagire R(2)(3), Wangi RN(2)(3), Kawala BA(2)(7), Katairo T(2)(8),
Okullo AE(2)(9), Apunyo R(2), Semakula D(2)(10), Luwambo A(2)(11), Kinengyere
AA(2)(12), Sewankambo N(2)(13), Balinda SN(14), Ocan M(15)(16), Obuku EA(2)(17).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Clinical Epidemiology Unit, Makerere University
College of Health Sciences, Kampala, Uganda.
(2)Africa Centre for Systematic Reviews and Knowledge Translation, Makerere
University College of Health Sciences, Kampala, Uganda.
(3)Department of General Medicine, Kairos Hospital, Kampala, Uganda.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, King
Ceasor University, Kampala, Uganda.
(5)Cicely Saunders Institute of Palliative Care, Policy & Rehabilitation, King's 
College Hospital, London, UK.
(6)School of Public Health, Rakai Health Sciences Program, Makerere University
College of Health Sciences, Kampala, Uganda.
(7)Department of Public Health, Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy at
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(8)Laboratory, Infectious Diseases Research Collaboration, Kampala, Uganda.
(9)Department of Medicine, Makerere University, Kampala, Uganda.
(10)Department of Medicine, Regional East African Community Health (REACH) Policy
Initiative, Makerere University College of Health Sciences, Kampala, Uganda.
(11)Directorate for ICT Support, Makerere University College of Health Sciences, 
Kampala, Uganda.
(12)Albert Cook Library, Makerere University College of Health Sciences, Kampala,
Uganda.
(13)Department of Medicine, Makerere University College of Health Sciences,
Kampala, Uganda.
(14)Pathogen Genomics, Phenotype and Immunity, Uganda Virus Research Institute,
Entebbe, Uganda.
(15)Africa Centre for Systematic Reviews and Knowledge Translation, Makerere
University College of Health Sciences, Kampala, Uganda ocanmoses@gmail.com.
(16)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Makerere University College of
Health Sciences, Kampala, Uganda.
(17)Faculty of Epidemiology and Population Health, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Accurate and affordable laboratory testing is key to timely
diagnosis and appropriate management of patients with COVID-19. New laboratory
test protocols are released into the market under emergency use authorisation
with limited evidence on diagnostic test accuracy. As such, robust evidence on
the diagnostic accuracy and the costs of available tests is urgently needed to
inform policy and practice especially in resource-limited settings. We aim to
determine the diagnostic test accuracy, cost-effectiveness and utility of
laboratory test strategies for COVID-19 in low-income and middle-income
countries.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: This will be a multistaged, protocol-driven systematic
review conducted in line with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic
Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines for diagnostic test accuracy
studies. We will search for relevant literature in at least six public health
databases, including PubMed, Google Scholar, MEDLINE, Scopus, Web of Science and 
the WHO Global Index Medicus. In addition, we will search Cochrane Library,
COVID-END and grey literature databases to identify additional relevant articles 
before double-screening and abstraction of data. We will conduct a structured
narrative and quantitative synthesis of the results guided by the Fryback and
Thornbury framework for assessing a diagnostic test. The primary outcome is
COVID-19 diagnostic test accuracy. Using the GRADE approach specific to
diagnostic accuracy tests, we will appraise the overall quality of evidence and
report the results following the original PRISMA statement. The protocol is
registered with the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews
(PROSPERO; https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/).
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: Ethical review was done by the School of Biomedical
Sciences Research Ethics Committee and the Uganda National Council for Science
and Technology. The published article will be accessible to policy and decision
makers. The findings of this review will guide clinical practice and policy
decisions and highlight areas for future research.PROSPERO registration number
CRD42020209528.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-050296 
PMCID: PMC8523956
PMID: 34663660  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

