
1. Environ Sci Technol. 2021 Nov 2;55(21):14480-14493. doi: 10.1021/acs.est.1c03977.
Epub 2021 Oct 19.

Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of the Persistence of Enveloped Viruses in
Environmental Waters and Wastewater in the Absence of Disinfectants.

Silverman AI(1), Boehm AB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil and Urban Engineering, New York University Tandon School
of Engineering, Brooklyn, New York 11201, United States.
(2)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Stanford University,
Stanford, California 94305, United States.

Enveloped viruses are characterized by a lipid-containing envelope that
encapsulates the virion, and they have been the cause of major outbreaks and
pandemics. Some enveloped viruses are excreted in feces and other bodily fluids
of infected people and animals, raising the question of their fate in the aquatic
environment. Consequently, we conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of 
the decay rate constants (k) of enveloped viruses from 12 families (i.e.,
Coronaviridae, Cystoviridae (specifically Phi6), Filoviridae, Hepadnaviridae,
Herpesviridae, Orthomyxoviridae, Paramyxoviridae, Pneumoviridae, Poxviridae,
Retroviridae, Rhabdoviridae, Togaviridae) in environmental waters and wastewater 
to evaluate their decay kinetics and identify the environmental and virus
characteristics that influence k. A total of 812 k that met inclusion criteria
were identified in the literature, with the number of k for each family ranging
from 0 to 560, and the virus family averaged values of k ranging from 0.11 d-1
and 1.85 d-1. Virus type (i.e., genus, species, subspecies, or subtype), method
of virus enumeration (i.e., culture-based or (RT-)QPCR), and experimental water
matrix type, temperature and sterility were found to have significant effects on 
k. Additionally, enveloped viruses were found to have statistically significantly
greater k than nonenveloped viruses. Multiple linear regression models that allow
prediction of log10k as a function of virus type, enumeration method, water
temperature, and water type are provided for six virus families that had
sufficient data available for model fitting (i.e., Coronaviridae, Phi6,
Herpesviridae, Orthomyxoviridae, Rhabdoviridae, Togaviridae). Compiled log10k and
multiple regression models can be used to inform management of human and animal
waste, operation of water and wastewater facilities, and exposure risks to
treatment plant workers and communities living in regions that lack treatment
facilities. Given limited data available for some enveloped virus families with a
potential water-related transmission route, there is need for additional data
collection to aid academic researchers, public health agencies, and water and
wastewater professionals involved in outbreak response.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.est.1c03977 
PMID: 34665598  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

