
1. J Virol. 2021 Oct 20:JVI0155221. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01552-21. [Epub ahead of print]

The glycan hole area of HIV-1 envelope trimers contributes prominently to the
induction of autologous neutralization.

Schorcht A(1), Cottrell CA(2), Pugach P(3), Ringe RP(3), Han AX(4), Allen JD(5), 
van den Kerkhof TLGM(1)(6), Seabright GE(5), Schermer EE(1), Ketas TJ(3), Burger 
JA(1), van Schooten J(1), LaBranche CC(7), Ozorowski G(2), de Val N(2)(3), Bader 
DLV(2), Schuitemaker H(6), Russell CA(4), Montefiori DC(7), van Gils MJ(1),
Crispin M(5), Klasse PJ(3), Ward AB(2), Moore JP(3), Sanders RW(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infection Prevention, Amsterdam
Infection & Immunity Institute (AI&AII), Amsterdam UMC, Location Meibergdreef,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, The Scripps
Research Institute, La Jolla, California, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New 
York, New York, USA.
(4)Laboratory of Applied Evolutionary Biology, Department of Medical Microbiology
and Infection Prevention, Amsterdam Infection & Immunity Institute (AI&AII),
Amsterdam UMC, Location Meibergdreef, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(5)Centre for Biological Sciences and Institute for Life Sciences, University of 
Southampton, Southampton, England, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Experimental Immunology, Amsterdam Infection & Immunity
Institute (AI&AII), Amsterdam UMC, Location Meibergdreef, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina,
USA.

The HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein trimer (Env) is heavily glycosylated, creating a 
dense glycan shield that protects the underlying peptidic surface from antibody
recognition. The absence of conserved glycans, due to missing potential N-linked 
glycosylation sites (PNGS), can result in strain-specific, autologous
neutralizing antibody (NAb) responses. Here we sought to gain a deeper
understanding of the autologous neutralization by introducing holes in the
otherwise dense glycan shields of the AMC011 and AMC016 SOSIP trimers.
Specifically, when we knocked out the N130 and N289 glycans, which are absent
from the well-characterized B41 SOSIP trimer, we observed stronger autologous NAb
responses. We also analyzed the highly variable NAb responses induced in rabbits 
by diverse SOSIP trimers from subtypes A, B and C. Statistical analysis, using a 
linear regression analysis, revealed that the cumulative area exposed on a trimer
by glycan holes correlates with the magnitude of the autologous NAb response.
Importance 40 years after the first description of HIV-1 the search for a
protective vaccine is still ongoing. The sole target for antibodies that can
neutralize the virus are the trimeric envelope glycoproteins (Env) located on the
viral surface. The glycoprotein surface is covered with glycans that shield off
the underlying protein components from recognition by the immune system. However,
the Env trimers of some viral strains have holes in the glycan shield. Immunized 
animals developed antibodies against such glycan holes. These antibodies are
generally strain-specific. Here we sought to gain a deeper understanding of what 
drives these specific immune responses. First, we show that strain-specific
neutralizing antibody responses can be increased by creating artificial holes in 
the glycan shield. Second, when studying a diverse set of Env trimers with
different characteristics, we found that the surface area of the glycan holes
contributes prominently to the induction of strain-specific neutralizing
antibodies.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01552-21 
PMID: 34669426 

