
1. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis. 2021 Oct 18. doi: 10.1089/vbz.2021.0069. [Epub ahead
of print]

Host Associations of Culex pipiens: A Two-Year Analysis of Bloodmeal Sources and 
Implications for Arboviral Transmission in Southeastern Virginia.

Khalil N(1)(2), Little EAH(2)(3), Akaratovic KI(4), Kiser JP(4), Abadam CF(4),
Yuan KJ(5), Misencik MJ(1)(2), Armstrong PM(1)(2)(5), Molaei G(1)(2)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Sciences, The Connecticut Agricultural Experiment 
Station, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(2)Center for Vector Biology & Zoonotic Diseases, The Connecticut Agricultural
Experiment Station, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(3)Department of Entomology, The Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station, New
Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(4)Suffolk Mosquito Control, Department of Public Works, Suffolk, Virginia, USA.
(5)Department of Epidemiology of Microbial Diseases, Yale School of Public
Health, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.

Understanding vector-host interactions is crucial for evaluating the role of
mosquito species in enzootic cycling and epidemic/epizootic transmission of
arboviruses, as well as assessing vertebrate host contributions to maintenance
and amplification in different virus foci. To investigate blood-feeding pattern
of Culex pipiens, engorged mosquitoes were collected on a weekly basis at 50
sites throughout Suffolk, Virginia, using Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention miniature light traps, BG-Sentinel traps, and modified Reiter gravid
traps. Vertebrate hosts of mosquitoes were identified by amplifying and
sequencing portions of the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene. Of 281 Cx. pipiens
bloodmeals successfully identified to species, 255 (90.7%) contained solely avian
blood, 13 (4.6%) mammalian, 1 (0.4%) reptilian, and 12 (4.3%) both avian and
mammalian blood. Nineteen avian species were identified as hosts for Cx. pipiens 
with American robin (n = 141, 55.3% of avian hosts) and northern cardinal
(n = 57, 22.4%) as the most common hosts. More American robin feedings took place
in areas of higher development. Three mammalian species were also identified as
hosts for Cx. pipiens with Virginia opossum and domestic cat as the most common
hosts in this class (each n = 6, 46.2% of mammalian hosts). There was no
significant seasonal difference in the proportion of bloodmeals obtained from
avian hosts, but there was a decrease in the proportion of bloodmeals from
mammalian hosts from spring to fall. One engorged specimen of Cx. pipiens with
Virginia opossum-derived bloodmeal tested positive for West Nile virus (WNV), and
another with black-and-white warbler-derived bloodmeal tested positive for
eastern equine encephalitis virus. Our findings, in conjunction with the results 
of vector competence studies and virus isolation from field-collected mosquitoes,
lend additional support that Cx. pipiens serves as the principal enzootic vector 
and potential epizootic/epidemic vector of WNV in southeastern Virginia.

DOI: 10.1089/vbz.2021.0069 
PMID: 34665047 

