
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2021 Dec 3;581:96-102. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2021.10.024. Epub 2021 Oct 12.

Silencing Nogo-B improves the integrity of blood-retinal barrier in diabetic
retinopathy via regulating Src, PI3K/Akt and ERK pathways.

Yang Q(1), Zhang C(2), Xie H(1), Tang L(1), Liu D(1), Qiu Q(3), Luo D(2), Liu
K(2), Xu JY(1), Tian H(1), Lu L(1), Xu GT(4), Zhang J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology of Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji Eye
Institute, Department of Regenerative Medicine, and Department of Pharmacology,
Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Shanghai General Hospital (Shanghai First
People's Hospital), Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China; National
Clinical Research Center for Eye Diseases, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Ocular
Fundus Diseases, Shanghai Engineering Center for Visual Science and
Photomedicine, Shanghai Engineering Center for Precise Diagnosis and Treatment of
Eye Diseases, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Shanghai General Hospital (Shanghai First
People's Hospital), Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China; National
Clinical Research Center for Eye Diseases, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Ocular
Fundus Diseases, Shanghai Engineering Center for Visual Science and
Photomedicine, Shanghai Engineering Center for Precise Diagnosis and Treatment of
Eye Diseases, Shanghai, China; Department of Ophthalmology, Shigatse People's
Hospital, Xizang, China.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology of Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji Eye
Institute, Department of Regenerative Medicine, and Department of Pharmacology,
Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. Electronic address:
gtxu@tongji.edu.cn.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Shanghai General Hospital (Shanghai First
People's Hospital), Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China; National
Clinical Research Center for Eye Diseases, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Ocular
Fundus Diseases, Shanghai Engineering Center for Visual Science and
Photomedicine, Shanghai Engineering Center for Precise Diagnosis and Treatment of
Eye Diseases, Shanghai, China. Electronic address: 13917311571@139.com.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the mechanisms of Nogo-B (RTN4B) in the protection of
blood-retinal barrier in experimental diabetic retinopathy.
METHODS: The level of Nogo-B in vitreous and plasma samples was detected with
ELISA. Diabetes was induced in Sprague-Dawley rats with intraperitoneal injection
of streptozotocin. The rats were injected intravitreally with adeno-associated
virus (AAV) for knockdown the expression of Nogo-B in retina or/and as AAV
negative control. The permeability of blood-retinal barrier was detected with
Rhodamine-B-dextran leakage assay. The expressions of Nogo-B, junctional
proteins, inflammatory factors and signaling pathways were examined with Western 
blot and quantitative real-time PCR.
RESULTS: Nogo-B expression was significantly upregulated in clinical samples and 
experimental diabetic rat models. Under normal condition, Nogo-B knockdown
resulted in the increased permeability of retinal blood vessels. In diabetic rat 
retinas, the vascular leakage was increased significantly, which was partially
decreased by Nogo-B knockdown through increasing p/t-Src (Tyr529) and p/t-Akt
(Ser473), and decreasing p/t-ERK1/2.
CONCLUSION: Nogo-B was increased in diabetic retinopathy and silencing Nogo-B is 
a promising therapy for diabetic retinopathy.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2021.10.024 
PMID: 34662809 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

