
1. Microbiome. 2021 Oct 18;9(1):208. doi: 10.1186/s40168-021-01154-2.

Active virus-host interactions at sub-freezing temperatures in Arctic peat soil.

Trubl G(1), Kimbrel JA(2), Liquet-Gonzalez J(2), Nuccio EE(2), Weber PK(2),
Pett-Ridge J(2)(3), Jansson JK(4), Waldrop MP(5), Blazewicz SJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Physical and Life Sciences Directorate, Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory, Livermore, CA, USA. Trubl1@llnl.gov.
(2)Physical and Life Sciences Directorate, Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory, Livermore, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of California,
Merced, CA, 95343, USA.
(4)Biological Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland,
WA, USA.
(5)U.S. Geological Survey, Geology, Minerals, Energy, and Geophysics Science
Center, Menlo Park, CA, USA.
(6)Physical and Life Sciences Directorate, Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory, Livermore, CA, USA. blazewicz1@llnl.gov.

BACKGROUND: Winter carbon loss in northern ecosystems is estimated to be greater 
than the average growing season carbon uptake and is primarily driven by
microbial decomposers. Viruses modulate microbial carbon cycling via induced
mortality and metabolic controls, but it is unknown whether viruses are active
under winter conditions (anoxic and sub-freezing temperatures).
RESULTS: We used stable isotope probing (SIP) targeted metagenomics to reveal the
genomic potential of active soil microbial populations under simulated winter
conditions, with an emphasis on viruses and virus-host dynamics. Arctic peat
soils from the Bonanza Creek Long-Term Ecological Research site in Alaska were
incubated under sub-freezing anoxic conditions with H218O or natural abundance
water for 184 and 370 days. We sequenced 23 SIP-metagenomes and measured carbon
dioxide (CO2) efflux throughout the experiment. We identified 46 bacterial
populations (spanning 9 phyla) and 243 viral populations that actively took up
18O in soil and respired CO2 throughout the incubation. Active bacterial
populations represented only a small portion of the detected microbial community 
and were capable of fermentation and organic matter degradation. In
contrast, active viral populations represented a large portion of the detected
viral community and one third were linked to active bacterial populations. We
identified 86 auxiliary metabolic genes and other environmentally relevant genes.
The majority of these genes were carried by active viral populations and had
diverse functions such as carbon utilization and scavenging that could provide
their host with a fitness advantage for utilizing much-needed carbon sources or
acquiring essential nutrients.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, there was a stark difference in the identity and function
of the active bacterial and viral community compared to the unlabeled community
that would have been overlooked with a non-targeted standard metagenomic
analysis. Our results illustrate that substantial active virus-host interactions 
occur in sub-freezing anoxic conditions and highlight viruses as a major
community-structuring agent that likely modulates carbon loss in peat soils
during winter, which may be pivotal for understanding the future fate of arctic
soils' vast carbon stocks. Video abstract.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-021-01154-2 
PMCID: PMC8522061
PMID: 34663463  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

