
1. Swiss Med Wkly. 2021 Oct 19;151:w30087. doi: 10.4414/smw.2021.w30087. eCollection
2021 Oct 11.

The very low risk of myocarditis and pericarditis after mRNA COVID-19 vaccination
should not discourage vaccination.

Haaf P(1)(2), Kuster GM(1)(3), Mueller C(1), Berger CT(4), Monney P(2)(5), Burger
P(2), Stämpfli SF(2)(6), Attenhofer Jost CH(2)(7), Zellweger MJ(1), Osswald S(1),
Donner BC(8), Koestner SC(2)(9), Tanner FC(3)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology and Cardiovascular Research Institute Basel (CRIB),
University Hospital Basel, University of Basel, Switzerland.
(2)on behalf of the Working Group for Echocardiography and Cardiac Imaging of the
Swiss Society of Cardiology.
(3)on behalf of the Swiss Society of Cardiology.
(4)Immunisation Clinic and University Centre for Immunology, University Hospital 
Base, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois (CHUV) and 
University of Lausanne, Switzerland.
(6)Cardiology Division, Heart Centre, Luzerner Kantonsspital, Lucerne,
Switzerland.
(7)Cardiovascular Centre, Klinik Im Park, Zurich, Switzerland.
(8)Paediatric Cardiology, University Children's Hospital Basel, Basel,
Switzerland and on behalf of the Swiss Society of Paediatric Cardiology.
(9)Department of Cardiology, Ensemble Hospitalier de la Côte, Morges,
Switzerland.
(10)Department of Cardiology, University Heart Centre Zurich, Switzerland.

The benefits of vaccination - regarding COVID-19 infection and transmission, as
well as COVID-associated complications - clearly outweigh the potential risk of
vaccine-associated inflammation of the heart and other adverse events. Given the 
current state of knowledge, the outcome of myocarditis and pericarditis following
vaccination is generally good. This review aims to guide physicians in the early 
diagnosis and management of suspected myocarditis following mRNA COVID
vaccination. The initial work-up should include detailed history, a 12-lead
electrocardiogram and serological biomarkers (high-sensitivity cardiac troponin
T/I, natriuretic peptides and markers of inflammation) in accordance with the
assessments recommended in current clinical practice guidelines for patients
presenting with acute chest pain. In patients with suspected myocarditis, further
assessment with transthoracic echocardiography and cardiovascular magnetic
resonance imaging should be undertaken to confirm peri-/myocarditis and to
distinguish the findings from other diseases with similar presentation. Patients 
with mRNA vaccine-associated myocarditis should be followed-up at least once to
exclude chronic myocardial inflammation and deterioration of left ventricular
ejection fraction. Consultation with an expert such as an immunologist with
experience in vaccination regarding further mRNA vaccinations is advised in all
patients with mRNA vaccine-associated perimyocarditis. Reporting of mRNA
vaccine-associated myocarditis to Swissmedic is mandatory. Cohort studies
prospectively follow-up on young adult and paediatric populations following
immunisation with an mRNA COVID vaccine to monitor cardiac and immune parameters 
would generate valuable knowledge to better understand pathogenesis and risk
factors for vaccine-associated perimyocarditis.

DOI: 10.4414/smw.2021.w30087 
PMID: 34668687  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

