
1. J Virol. 2021 Oct 20:JVI0167721. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01677-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Sialic acid binding sites in VP2 of bluetongue virus and their use during virus
entry.

Wu W(1), Roy P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogen Molecular Biology, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical
Diseases, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, United Kingdom.

Bluetongue virus (BTV), a member of Orbivirus genus, is transmitted by biting
midges (gnats, Culicoides sp) and is one of the most widespread animal pathogens,
causing serious outbreaks in domestic animals, particularly in sheep, with high
economic impact. The non-enveloped BTV particle is a double-capsid structure of
seven proteins and a genome of ten double-stranded RNA segments. Although the
outermost spike-like VP2 acts as the attachment protein during BTV entry, no
specific host receptor has been identified for BTV. Recent high-resolution
cryo-electron (cryoEM) structures and biological data have suggested that VP2 may
interact with sialic acids (SAs). To confirm this, we have generated
protein-based nanoparticles displaying multivalent VP2 and used them to probe
glycan arrays. The data show that VP2 binds α2,3-linked SA with high affinity but
also binds α2,6-linked SA. Further, Maackia Amurensis Lectin II (MAL II) and
Sambucus Nigra Lectin (SNA), which specifically bind α2,3-linked and α2,6-linked 
SAs respectively, inhibited BTV infection and virus growth in susceptible sheep
cells while SNA alone inhibited virus growth in Culicoides-derived cells. A
combination of hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry and site-directed
mutagenesis allowed the identification of the specific SA binding residues of
VP2. This study provides direct evidence that sialic acids act as key receptor
for BTV and that the outer capsid protein VP2 specifically binds SA during BTV
entry in both mammalian and insect cells. Importance To date no receptor has been
assigned for non-enveloped bluetongue virus. To determine if the outermost
spike-like VP2 protein is responsible for host cell attachment via interaction
with sialic acids, we first generated a protein-based VP2-nanoparticle, for the
multivalent presentation of recombinant VP2 protein. Using
nanoparticles-displaying VP2 to probe a glycan array, we identified that VP2
binds both α2,3-linked and α2,6-linked sialic acids. Lectin inhibitors targeting 
both linkages of sialic acids showed strong inhibition to BTV infection and
progeny virus production in mammalian cells, however the inhibition was only seen
with the lectin targeting α2,6-linked sialic acid in insect vector cells. In
addition, we identified the VP2 sialic acid binding sites in the exposed tip
domain. Our data provides direct evidence that sialic acids act as key receptors 
for BTV attachment and entry in to both mammalian and insect cells.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01677-21 
PMID: 34669428 

