
1. J Virol. 2021 Oct 20:JVI0106321. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01063-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Functional Effects of Cardiomyocyte Injury in COVID-19.

Siddiq MM(1), Chan AT(1)(2), Miorin L(3), Yadaw AS(1), Beaumont KG(4)(5), Kehrer 
T(3)(6), Cupic A(3), White KM(3), Tolentino RE(1), Hu B(1), Stern AD(1),
Tavassoly I(1), Hansen J(1), Sebra R(4)(5)(7), Martinez P(1), Prabha S(1), Dubois
N(8), Schaniel C(9), Iyengar-Kapuganti R(10), Kukar N(10), Giustino G(9), Sud
K(10), Nirenberg S(11), Kovatch P(4)(11), Albrecht RA(3), Goldfarb J(1), Croft
L(10), McLaughlin MA(10), Argulian E(10), Lerakis S(10), Narula J(10),
García-Sastre A(3)(12)(13), Iyengar R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacological Sciences, and Institute for Systems Biomedicine,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(2)Departments of Medicine and Radiology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, New York, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Global Health and Emerging Pathogens Institute,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(4)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(5)Icahn Institute for Data Science and Genomic Technology, Black Family Stem
Cell Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(6)Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(7)Sema4, a Mount Sinai Venture, Stamford, Connecticut, USA.
(8)Department of Cell Developmental and Regenerative Biology and Black Family
Stem Cell Center, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York,
USA.
(9)Division of Hematology & Oncology Department of Medicine and Black Family Stem
Cell Center, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(10)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(11)Department of Scientific Computing and Data Science, Icahn School of Medicine
at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(12)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(13)Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York, USA.

COVID-19 affects multiple organs. Clinical data from the Mount Sinai Health
System shows that substantial numbers of COVID-19 patients without prior heart
disease develop cardiac dysfunction. How COVID-19 patients develop cardiac
disease is not known. We integrated cell biological and physiological analyses of
human cardiomyocytes differentiated from human induced pluripotent stem cells
(hiPSCs) infected with SARS-CoV-2 in the presence of interleukins, with clinical 
findings related to laboratory values in COVID-19 patients, to identify plausible
mechanisms of cardiac disease in COVID-19 patients. We infected hiPSC-derived
cardiomyocytes, from healthy human subjects, with SARS-CoV-2 in the absence and
presence of IL-6 and IL-1β. Infection resulted in increased numbers of
multinucleated cells. Interleukin treatment and infection resulted in
disorganization of myofibrils, extracellular release of troponin-I, and reduced
and erratic beating. Infection resulted in decreased expression of mRNA encoding 
key proteins of the cardiomyocyte contractile apparatus. Although interleukins
did not increase the extent of infection, they increased the contractile
dysfunction associated with viral infection of cardiomyocytes resulting in
cessation of beating. Clinical data from hospitalized patients from the Mount
Sinai Health System show that a significant portion of COVID-19 patients without 
prior history of heart disease, have elevated troponin and interleukin levels. A 
substantial subset of these patients showed reduced left ventricular function by 
echocardiography. Our laboratory observations, combined with the clinical data,
indicate that direct effects on cardiomyocytes by interleukins and SARS-CoV-2
infection might underlie heart disease in COVID-19 patients. Importance
SARS-CoV-2 infects multiple organs including the heart. Analyses of hospitalized 
patients show that a substantial number without prior indication of heart disease
or comorbidities show significant injury to heart tissue assessed by increased
levels of troponin in blood. We studied the cell biological and physiological
effects of virus infection of healthy human iPSC cardiomyocytes in culture. Virus
infection with interleukins disorganizes myofibrils, increases cell size and the 
numbers of multinucleated cells, suppresses the expression of proteins of the
contractile apparatus. Viral infection of cardiomyocytes in culture triggers
release of troponin similar to elevation in levels of COVID-19 patients with
heart disease. Viral infection in the presence of interleukins slows down and
desynchronizes the beating of cardiomyocytes in culture. The cell level
physiological changes are similar to decreases in left ventricular ejection seen 
in imaging of patients' hearts. These observations suggest that direct injury to 
heart tissue by virus can be one underlying cause of heart disease in COVID-19.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01063-21 
PMID: 34669512 

