
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 19;16(10):e0258858. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258858.
eCollection 2021.

Increasing Black, Indigenous and People of Color participation in clinical trials
through community engagement and recruitment goal establishment.

Andrasik MP(1), Broder GB(1), Wallace SE(1), Chaturvedi R(2), Michael NL(3), Bock
S(4), Beyrer C(5), Oseso L(1), Aina J(1), Lucas J(6), Wilson DR(7), Kublin JG(1),
Mensah GA(8).

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center, Seattle, WA, United States of America.
(2)Statistical Center for HIV/AIDS Research and Prevention, Fred Hutchinson
Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, United States of America.
(3)Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver Spring, MD, United States of
America.
(4)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, United States of America.
(5)John's Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, United States
of America.
(6)HIV Prevention Trials Network, FHI360, Research Triangle, NC, United States of
America.
(7)Tribal Health Research Office, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD,
United States of America.
(8)National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, United States of America.

Longstanding social and economic inequities elevate health risks and
vulnerabilities for Black, Indigenous and People of Color (BIPOC) communities.
Engagement of BIPOC communities in infectious disease research is a critical
component in efforts to increase vaccine confidence, acceptability, and uptake of
future approved products. Recent data highlight the relative absence of BIPOC
communities in vaccine clinical trials. Intentional and effective community
engagement methods are needed to improve BIPOC inclusion. We describe the methods
utilized for the successful enrollment of BIPOC participants in the U.S.
Government (USG)-funded COVID-19 Prevention Network (CoVPN)-sponsored vaccine
efficacy trials and analyze the demographic and enrollment data across the
efficacy trials to inform future efforts to ensure inclusive participation.
Across the four USG-funded COVID-19 vaccine clinical trials for which data are
available, 47% of participants enrolled at CoVPN sites in the US were BIPOC.
White enrollment outpaced enrollment of BIPOC participants throughout the accrual
period, requiring the implementation of strategies to increase diverse and
inclusive enrollment. Trials opening later benefitted considerably from
strengthened community engagement efforts, and greater and more diverse volunteer
registry records. Despite robust fiscal resources and a longstanding
collaborative and collective effort, enrollment of White persons outpaced that of
BIPOC communities. With appropriate resources, commitment and community
engagement expertise, the equitable enrollment of BIPOC individuals can be
achieved. To ensure this goal, intentional efforts are needed, including an
emphasis on diversity of enrollment in clinical trials, establishment of
enrollment goals, ongoing robust community engagement, conducting
population-specific trials, and research to inform best practices.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258858 
PMCID: PMC8525736
PMID: 34665829  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

