
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Sep 29;11:735191. doi:
10.3389/fcimb.2021.735191. eCollection 2021.

Mucosal Administration of Recombinant Baculovirus Displaying Toxoplasma gondii
ROP4 Confers Protection Against T. gondii Challenge Infection in Mice.

Yoon KW(1), Chu KB(1), Kang HJ(1), Kim MJ(1), Eom GD(1), Lee SH(2), Moon EK(2),
Quan FS(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, Graduate School, Kyung Hee University,
Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Department of Medical Zoology, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University,
Seoul, South Korea.
(3)Medical Research Center for Bioreaction to Reactive Oxygen Species and
Biomedical Science Institute, School of Medicine, Graduate School, Kyung Hee
University, Seoul, South Korea.

Pathogens require physical contact with the mucosal surface of the host organism 
to initiate infection and as such, vaccines eliciting both mucosal and systemic
immune responses would be promising. Studies involving the use of recombinant
baculoviruses (rBVs) as mucosal vaccines are severely lacking despite their
inherently safe nature, especially against pathogens of global importance such as
Toxoplasma gondii. Here, we generated rBVs displaying T. gondii rhoptry protein 4
(ROP4) and evaluated their protective efficacy in BALB/c mice following
immunization via intranasal (IN) and oral routes. IN immunization with the
ROP4-expressing rBVs elicited higher levels of parasite-specific IgA antibody
responses compared to oral immunization. Upon challenge infection with a lethal
dose of T. gondii ME49, IN immunization elicited significantly higher
parasite-specific antibody responses in the mucosal tissues such as intestines,
feces, vaginal samples, and brain than oral immunization. Marked increases in IgG
and IgA antibody-secreting cell (ASC) responses were observed from intranasally
immunized mice. IN immunization elicited significantly enhanced induction of
CD4+, CD8+ T cells, and germinal center B (GC B) cell responses from secondary
lymphoid organs while limiting the production of the inflammatory cytokines IFN-γ
and IL-6 in the brain, all of which contributed to protecting mice against T.
gondii lethal challenge infection. Our findings suggest that IN delivery of ROP4 
rBVs induced better mucosal and systemic immunity against the lethal T. gondii
challenge infection compared to oral immunization.

Copyright © 2021 Yoon, Chu, Kang, Kim, Eom, Lee, Moon and Quan.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.735191 
PMCID: PMC8512701
PMID: 34660343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

