
1. Front Pediatr. 2021 Sep 30;9:721918. doi: 10.3389/fped.2021.721918. eCollection
2021.

Current Paradigm of Hepatitis E Virus Among Pediatric and Adult Patients.

Belei O(1), Ancusa O(2), Mara A(3), Olariu L(4), Amaricai E(5), Folescu R(6),
Zamfir CL(7), Gurgus D(6), Motoc AG(8), Stânga LC(9), Strat L(10), Marginean
O(1).

Author information: 
(1)First Pediatric Clinic, Disturbance of Growth and Development on Children
Research Center, "Victor Babes" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara,
Romania.
(2)Fifth Department of Internal Medicine, "Victor Babes" University of Medicine
and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Emergency City Hospital, Timisoara, Romania.
(4)First Pediatric Clinic, "Victor Babes" University of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Timisoara, Romania.
(5)Department of Rehabilitation Physical Medicine and Rheumatology, "Victor
Babes" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
(6)Department of Balneology, Medical Recovery and Rheumatology, Family
Discipline, Center for Preventive Medicine, "Victor Babes" University of Medicine
and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
(7)Department of Morpho-Functional Sciences I, "Grigore T. Popa" University of
Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania.
(8)Department of Anatomy and Embriology, "Victor Babes" University of Medicine
and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
(9)Department of Microbiology, "Victor Babes" University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
(10)Department of Mother and Child Medicine, "Grigore T. Popa" University of
Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania.

Hepatitis E virus (HEV) infection is a polymorphic condition, present throughout 
the world and involving children and adults. Multiple studies over the last
decade have contributed to a better understanding of the natural evolution of
this infection in various population groups, several reservoirs and transmission 
routes being identified. To date, acute or chronic HEV-induced hepatitis has in
some cases remained underdiagnosed due to the lower accuracy of serological tests
and due to the evolutionary possibility with extrahepatic manifestations.
Implementation of diagnostic tests based on nucleic acid analysis has increased
the detection rate of this disease. The epidemiological and clinical features of 
HEV hepatitis differ depending on the geographical areas studied. HEV infection
is usually a self-limiting condition in immunocompetent patients, but in certain 
categories of vulnerable patients it can induce a sudden evolution toward acute
liver failure (pregnant women) or chronicity (immunosuppressed patients,
post-transplant, hematological, or malignant diseases). In acute HEV infections
in most cases supportive treatment is sufficient. In patients who develop chronic
hepatitis with HEV, dose reduction of immunosuppressive medication should be the 
first therapeutic step, especially in patients with transplant. In case of
unfavorable response, the initiation of antiviral therapy is recommended. In this
review, the authors summarized the essential published data related to the
epidemiological, clinical, paraclinical, and therapeutic aspects of HEV infection
in adult and pediatric patients.

Copyright © 2021 Belei, Ancusa, Mara, Olariu, Amaricai, Folescu, Zamfir, Gurgus, 
Motoc, Stânga, Strat and Marginean.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2021.721918 
PMCID: PMC8515027
PMID: 34660485 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

