
1. J Virol. 2021 Oct 20:JVI0122221. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01222-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Opposite effects of apoptotic and necroptotic cellular pathways on rotavirus
replication.

Soliman M(1)(2), Seo JY(1)(3), Baek YB(1), Park JG(1), Kang MI(1), Cho KO(1),
Park SI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Pathology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju, 61186, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Pathology & Clinical Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, 
Assiut University, Assiut, 71526, Egypt.
(3)Jeonnam Bioindustry Foundation Biopharmaceutical Research Center, Hwasun-gun, 
Jeollanamdo, 58141, Republic of Korea.

Group A rotavirus (RVA), one of the leading pathogens causing severe acute
gastroenteritis in children and a wide variety of young animals worldwide,
induces apoptosis upon infecting cells. Though RVA-induced apoptosis mediated via
the dual modulation of its NSP4 and NSP1 proteins is relatively well studied, the
nature and signaling pathway(s) involved in RVA-induced necroptosis are yet to be
fully elucidated. Here, we demonstrate the nature of RVA-induced necroptosis, the
signaling cascade involved, and correlation with RVA-induced apoptosis. Infection
with the bovine NCDV and human DS-1 RV strains was shown to activate
receptor-interacting protein kinase 1 (RIPK1)/RIPK3/mixed lineage kinase
domain-like protein (MLKL), the key necroptosis molecules in virus-infected
cells. Using immunoprecipitation assay, RIPK1 was found to bind phosphorylated
RIPK3 (pRIPK3) and pMLKL. pMLKL, the major executioner molecule in the
necroptotic pathway, was translocated to the plasma membrane of RVA-infected
cells to puncture the cell membrane. Interestingly, transfection of RVA NSP4 also
induced necroptosis through the RIPK1/RIPK3/MLKL necroptosis pathway. Blockage of
each key necroptosis molecule in the RVA-infected or NSP4-transfected cells
resulted in decreased necroptosis but increased cell viability and apoptosis,
thereby resulting in decreased viral yields in the RVA-infected cells. In
contrast, suppression of RVA-induced apoptosis increased necroptosis and virus
yields. Our findings suggest that RVA NSP4 also induces necroptosis via the
RIPK1/RIPK3/MLKL necroptosis pathway. Moreover, necroptosis and apoptosis-which
have proviral and antiviral effects, respectively-exhibited a crosstalk in
RVA-infected cells. These findings significantly increase our understanding of
the nature of RVA-induced necroptosis and the crosstalk between RVA-induced
necroptosis and apoptosis. IMPORTANCE Viral infection usually culminates in cell 
death through apoptosis, necroptosis, and rarely, pyroptosis. Necroptosis is a
form of programmed necrosis that is mediated by signaling complexes of the
receptor-interacting protein kinase 1 (RIPK1), RIPK3, and mixed lineage kinase
domain-like protein (MLKL). Although apoptosis induction by rotavirus and its
NSP4 protein is well known, rotavirus-induced necroptosis is not fully
understood. Here, we demonstrate that rotavirus and also its NSP4 protein can
induce necroptosis in cultured cells through the activation of the
RIPK1/RIPK3/MLKL necroptosis pathway. Moreover, rotavirus-induced necroptosis and
apoptosis have opposite effects on viral yield, i.e., they function as proviral
and antiviral processes, respectively, and counterbalance each other in
rotavirus-infected cells. Our findings provide important insights for
understanding the nature of rotavirus-induced necroptosis and the development of 
novel therapeutic strategies against infection with rotavirus and other RNA
viruses.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01222-21 
PMID: 34668777 

