
1. Providing Access To Monoclonal Antibody Treatment Of Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Patients In Rural And Underserved Areas.

Wood DA(1), Aleem A(2), Davis D(1).
In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2021-.
2021 Oct 26.

Author information: 
(1)Orange Park Medical Center
(2)Lehigh Valley Health Network, Allentown, USA

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has impacted the world tremendously 
since the first cases were identified in 2019. COVID-19 was rapidly disseminated 
globally, with infections identified in most world societies within the first few
months of 2020. COVID-19, the illness caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), has had devastating effects on public health and the 
world economy. In the United States, the earliest and most well-documented areas 
impacted were large cities and urban communities. Initial efforts to curb the
transmission of COVID-19 were largely successful in helping stem continued
widespread transmission. As vaccinations for COVID-19 began rollout, authorities 
eased some of the initial transmission mitigation strategies, and coupled with
the increased prominence of COVID-19 variant strains, transmission and infection 
rates saw an increase throughout the spring and summer of 2021. Despite their
lower population density, rural and underserved areas continue to be especially
vulnerable to poor outcomes from SARS-CoV-2. The disparity in healthcare outcomes
in these areas is multifactorial. In general, rural and underserved healthcare
infrastructure is less developed than its urban counterparts.[1] These residents 
often have significantly increased distances to travel to access advanced health 
care facilities. The travel gap often leads to residents not seeking care until
the disease has reached advanced stages. Concerning rural and underserved
patients, this distance affects all diseases, with cancer often being found after
metastasis, diabetes after end-organ dysfunction, hypertension after a stroke or 
heart attack, and COVID-19 after pneumonia and subsequent hypoxia develop.
Additionally, in rural and underserved areas, patient demographics (i.e., tobacco
use, hypertension, diabetes, obesity, and older age) often fall in categories
associated with a higher risk of mortality and morbidity from SARS-CoV-2
infection. From a resource standpoint, rural areas have limited availability of
intensive care unit (ICU) beds, ventilators, and access to novel medications
through clinical trials. Furthermore, rural communities have always been
especially vulnerable to supply chain disruptions, and the COVID-19 pandemic
exposed some fragilities in our national supply chain. A nationwide shortage of
personal protective equipment (PPE), testing devices (e.g., nasopharyngeal swabs,
reagents, and test kits), and respiratory ventilators plagued initial efforts to 
combat COVID-19.[2] The acute shortage of testing devices made it neither
practical nor beneficial to promote universal screening for COVID-19 in rural
areas. Perhaps even more disparate, as a country, the USA is experiencing a
shortage of trained nurses, allied health providers, and physicians, and rural
communities are often the most challenged in providing adequate numbers of health
care professionals and, in particular, sub-specialist physicians to care for
their residents.[3] SARS-CoV-2 primarily affects the respiratory system, with
most transmission occurring from close contact with pre-symptomatic,
asymptomatic, or symptomatic carriers. Since the declaration of COVID-19 as a
global pandemic by the World Health Organization (WHO), considerable progress has
been made in managing COVID-19 with the development of novel therapeutics and
efficacious vaccines that have led to favorable patient outcomes and has helped
limit the spread of the virus. A variety of therapeutic options are currently
available in the management of COVID-19, including antiviral medications,
monoclonal antibodies, and immunomodulatory agents. However, the therapeutic
potential and clinical use of these drugs are limited and are specific to the
stage of the illness. Further, rural areas have limited resources to provide
access to monoclonal antibody therapy. Some strategies to provide options for
rural healthcare systems will be discussed here. The pathogenesis of COVID-19
illness occurs in two distinct phases, an early stage characterized by profound
SARS-CoV-2 viral replication followed by a late phase characterized by a
hyperinflammatory state induced by the release of cytokines such as tumor
necrosis factor-α (TNF α), granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(GM-CSF), Interleukin-1 (IL-1), IL-6, interferon (IFN)-γ, and activation of the
coagulation system resulting in a prothrombotic state. Antiviral therapy and
antibody-based treatments are likely to be more effective if used during the
early phase of the illness. Immunomodulating therapies, either alone or in
combination with antiviral and antibody-based therapies, may be more effective
when used in the later stage to combat the cytokine-mediated hyperinflammatory
state that causes severe illness.[4] Individuals of all ages are at risk for
infection and severe disease. However, as noted previously, high-risk individuals
are those aged ≥60 years and with underlying medical comorbidities (obesity,
cardiovascular disease, chronic kidney disease, diabetes, chronic lung disease,
smoking, cancer, solid organ or hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients)
are at increased risk of developing severe COVID-19 infection. The percentage of 
COVID-19 patients requiring hospitalization was six times higher in those with
preexisting medical conditions than those without medical conditions (45.4% vs.
7.6%) based on an analysis by Stokes et al. of confirmed cases reported to the
CDC during January 22 to May 30, 2020.[5]  An encouraging approach to address the
COVID-19 associated mortality and preventing the increased utilization of
healthcare resources is by terminating the progression of viral replication
preventing the progression to the hyperinflammatory stage of COVID-19, which
causes severe illness in high-risk non-hospitalized patients. Initially, the
focus of treatment was directed mainly towards hospitalized patients with
COVID-19 illness. However, the clinical focus over the course of the pandemic
expanded towards combatting the illness early on by reducing the viral load in
patients with early disease, thus attempting to halt the disease progression.
Monoclonal antibodies targeting the spike protein of the SARS-CoV-2 have yielded 
positive in vitro results.[6][7] They are considered a promising approach in
managing non-hospitalized patients with mild to moderate COVID-19 who are at high
risk of developing severe illness. Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) are immune system
proteins developed from a single cell lineage that demonstrate a high affinity
for their target cell. Monoclonal antibodies were first developed by Köhler and
Milstein in 1975 using hybridoma technology.[8] Since then, research has made
significant progress in the molecular engineering world that has enabled the
establishment of monoclonal antibodies as targeted therapies in various
neoplastic conditions, autoimmune, post-transplant immunosuppression, and
infectious diseases.[9] When used as antiviral therapies, neutralizing antibodies
play an indispensable part in achieving passive antiviral immunity and are also
instrumental in preventing or regulating many viral illnesses. Over the years,
passive immunization against many viral diseases was achieved by administering
polyclonal sera obtained from convalescent human donors or animals. However,
polyclonal antibody preparations are increasingly being replaced by monoclonal
antibodies by virtue of their favorable safety profile and target specificity
when used in different viral diseases.[10] Palivizumab was the first antiviral
monoclonal antibody approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for
prophylaxis of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) in high-risk infants.[11]  Over 
the years, significant developments in antibody engineering, improved
understanding of the biology of viruses, and the direct and indirect effect of
monoclonal antibodies on viral infections have resulted in the development of
many novel monoclonal antibodies. Like other antiviral drugs, monoclonal
antibodies, when used as antiviral agents, are also susceptible to developing
resistance as a result of alterations in the viral genome which can alter the
pathogenic potential of the virus resulting in the emergence of viral escape
mutants, which may render the virus-resistant to a specific monoclonal antibody. 
To counter this viral escape phenomenon, a combination of monoclonal antibodies, 
commonly referred to as antibody cocktails, have been proposed with the rationale
that combining two specific monoclonal antibodies that complement each other can 
prevent neutralization escape by targeting multiple viral epitopes. Various
monoclonal antibodies are currently in development or clinical trials to treat
COVID-19. The FDA has currently granted emergency use authorization (EUA) for
clinical use of casirivimab plus imdevimab, bamlanivimab plus etesevimab, both
as combination therapy, or sotrovimab as monotherapy in patients with mild to
moderate COVID-19 who are at high risk of developing severe illness.
Additionally, the FDA has granted EUAs authorizing the use of casirivimab plus
imdevimab and bamlanivimab plus etesevimab for post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) of
COVID-19 in certain adult and pediatric individuals.

PMID: 34662052 

