
1. Hawaii J Health Soc Welf. 2021 Sep;80(9 Suppl 1):78-87.

A Report on the Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on the Health and Social Welfare 
of the Pacific Islander Population in Hawai'i.

Palafox NA(1), Alik K(2)(3), Howard J(4), Silk I(5), Tom B(6), Tau F(7), Alik
WC(2)(3), Nakamoto D(2)(3), Buenconsejo-Lum LE(2)(3), Qureshi K(8).

Author information: 
(1)John A Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, Honolulu, HI 
(NAP).
(2)Kaiser Permanente, Honolulu HI (WCA).
(3)Micronesian Health Advisory Council (WCA).
(4)We Are Oceania, Honolulu, HI (JH).
(5)Consul General, Consulate General of the Republic of the Marshall Islands
(IS).
(6)Nations of Micronesia (BT).
(7)Office of the Lieutenant Governor, State of Hawai'i, Honolulu, HI (FT).
(8)School of Nursing and Dental Hygiene, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa,
Honolulu, HI (KQ).

Hawai'i's Pacific Islander (PI) population has suffered a higher burden of
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) infections, hospitalizations, and deaths
compared to other groups in the state. The Hawai'i Emergency Management Agency
Community Care Outreach Unit conducted an assessment across the state to gain an 
understanding of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the health and social
welfare of households. Survey data was collected from individuals across the
state during a period of 3 weeks (August 12-September 5, 2020). The following are
resulting recommendations from the Pacific Island community to mitigate the
impact and disparities of the pandemic as immediate and medium-term structural
requests: (1) ensure that Pacific Island communities are proactively represented 
in state and county committees that develop health interventions to ensure that
relevant language and culturally tailored communications and strategies are
included, (2) provide consistent funding and community centered support to ensure
consistent COVID-19 impact services for the Pacific Island families, (3) enhance 
the capacity of PI health care navigators and interpreters through increased
funding and program support, and (4) engage state policy makers immediately to
understand and address the systemic structural barriers to health care and social
services for Pacific Islanders in Hawai'i. These recommendations were developed
to address the generational inequities and disparities that exist for Pacific
islanders in Hawai'i which were exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic.

©Copyright 2021 by University Health Partners of Hawai‘i (UHP Hawai‘i).


PMCID: PMC8504319
PMID: 34661131  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

