
1. J Educ Health Promot. 2021 Aug 31;10:286. doi: 10.4103/jehp.jehp_956_20.
eCollection 2021.

Investigating the effect of social support, social capital, and coping on the
positive state of mind of Iranian older people with human immunodeficiency
virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.

SoleimanvandiAzar N(1), Zanjari N(2), Karimi SE(3), Irandoost SF(4), Gharehghani 
MAM(5), Ziapour A(6), Ahmadi S(7), Moshtagh M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Preventive Medicine and Public Health Research Center, Psycho social Health
Research Institute, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Iranian Research Center on Aging, University of Social Welfare and
Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Social Determinants of Health Research Center, Health Management and Safety
Promotion Research Institute, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz,
Iran.
(4)Department of Public Health, Urmia University of Medical Sciences, Urmia,
Iran.
(5)Social Welfare Management Research Center, University of Social Welfare, and
Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Research Center for Environmental Determinants of Health (RCEDH), Health
Institute, Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran.
(7)Department of Social Welfare Management, Social Welfare Management Research
Centre, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(8)Social Determinants of Health Research Center, Faculty of Health, Birjand
University of Medical Sciences, Birjand, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Social resources help to adapt to stress and might positively affect 
the well-being of individuals with severe conditions like human immunodeficiency 
virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS). The present study
investigates the effect of social support, social capital, and coping in a
positive state of mind of Iranian older people with HIV/AIDS.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This cross-sectional study was conducted on 160 older
people with HIV referred to AIDS clinics in Tehran in 2019. Samples were randomly
selected from patients aged 50 years and older. Data were collected using a
questionnaire, a positive state of mind, social capital, coping, social support, 
and a checklist of demographical variables. Data analysis was performed using
SPSS software version 21.
RESULTS: A significant positive correlation was found between social support,
social capital, coping, education, and a positive state of mind. A significant
negative correlation was also found between age, several chronic diseases of the 
patient, and a positive state of mind. The linear regression results showed that 
social support, social capital, coping, and education improved the positive state
of mind.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on our findings, we believe that social and psychological
interventions effectively enhance patients' positive state of mind with HIV and
ultimately, improve their quality of life.

Copyright: © 2021 Journal of Education and Health Promotion.

DOI: 10.4103/jehp.jehp_956_20 
PMCID: PMC8459841
PMID: 34667786 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.

