
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Sep 29;9:590335. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.590335.
eCollection 2021.

Public Policy Responses to Address the Mental Health Consequences of the COVID-19
Pandemic: Evidence From Chile.

Irarrazaval M(1)(2), Norambuena P(1)(3), Montenegro C(2)(4), Toro-Devia O(3),
Vargas B(1), Caqueo-Urízar A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mental Health, Ministry of Health, Santiago, Chile.
(2)Millenium Institute for Research in Depression and Personality, Santiago,
Chile.
(3)School of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, 
Chile.
(4)Wellcome Centre for Cultures and Environments of Health, University of Exeter,
Exeter, United Kingdom.
(5)Instituto de Alta Investigación, Universidad de Tarapacá, Arica, Chile.

Objectives: This paper reviews the mental health policies that have been
implemented in Chile in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the international
context of countries' responses. Even before the start of the pandemic, there
were significant barriers to access mental health services in Chile, coupled with
a scenario of nationwide social unrest and protests that questioned the
legitimacy of public institutions; now the rapidly worsening outbreaks of
COVID-19 are exacerbating the pre-existing mental health crisis. Methods: We
conducted a bibliometric and content analysis of the Chilean mental health public
policies implemented during the COVID-19 pandemic and then compared these
policies with international experiences and emerging scientific evidence on the
mental health impact of pandemics. Results: Our analysis of the policies
identifies five crucial points of action developed in Chile: (i) an established
framework to address mental health in emergency and disaster situations; (ii) a
timely COVID-19 Mental Health Action Plan; (iii) inclusion of mental health in
the public health agenda; (iv) development of a presidential strategy during the 
pandemic for comprehensive mental health and well-being; and (v) emerging
research assessing the mental health implications of COVID-19. Conclusions: In
Chile, the public policy responses to address the mental health consequences of
the COVID-19 pandemic has been characterized by the coordinated implementation of
mental health plans, ranging from a health sectoral initiative to inter-agency
and intersectoral efforts. However, it is imperative that increased funding is
allocated to mental health, and efforts should be made to promote the
participation of people with lived experiences and communities in the design and 
implementation of the proposed actions. This aspect could be of key importance to
social peace and community recovery after the pandemic.

Copyright © 2021 Irarrazaval, Norambuena, Montenegro, Toro-Devia, Vargas and
Caqueo-Urízar.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.590335 
PMCID: PMC8511669
PMID: 34660500  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

