
1. Can Commun Dis Rep. 2021 Jul 8;47(7-8):329-338. doi: 10.14745/ccdr.v47i78a06.
eCollection 2021 Jul 8.

A window of opportunity for intensifying testing and tracing efforts to prevent
new COVID-19 outbreaks due to more transmissible variants.

Wu J(1)(2), Scarabel F(1)(2), McCarthy Z(1)(2), Xiao Y(3), Ogden NH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Department of Mathematics
and Statistics, York University, Toronto, ON.
(2)Fields-CQAM Laboratory of Mathematics for Public Health, York University,
Toronto, ON.
(3)Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH,
United States.
(4)Public Health Risk Sciences Division, National Microbiology Laboratory, Public
Health Agency of Canada, St-Hyacinthe, QC.

Background: When public health interventions are being loosened after several
days of decline in the number of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) cases, it is
of critical importance to identify potential strategies to ease restrictions
while mitigating a new wave of more transmissible variants of concern (VOCs). We 
estimated the necessary enhancements to public health interventions for a partial
reopening of the economy while avoiding the worst consequences of a new outbreak,
associated with more transmissible VOCs.
Methods: We used a transmission dynamics model to quantify conditions that
combined public health interventions must meet to reopen the economy without a
large outbreak. These conditions are those that maintain the control reproduction
number below unity, while accounting for an increase in transmissibility due to
VOC.
Results: We identified combinations of the proportion of individuals exposed to
the virus who are traced and quarantined before becoming infectious, the
proportion of symptomatic individuals confirmed and isolated, and individual
daily contact rates needed to ensure the control reproduction number remains
below unity.
Conclusion: Our analysis indicates that the success of restrictive measures
including lockdown and stay-at-home orders, as reflected by a reduction in number
of cases, provides a narrow window of opportunity to intensify case detection and
contact tracing efforts to prevent a new wave associated with circulation of more
transmissible VOCs.

DOI: 10.14745/ccdr.v47i78a06 
PMCID: PMC8454019
PMID: 34667443 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests None.

