
1. Hawaii J Health Soc Welf. 2021 Sep;80(9 Suppl 1):71-77.

A Report on the Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on the Health and Social Welfare 
of the Filipino Population in Hawai'i.

Dela Cruz MRI(1), Glauberman GHR(2), Buenconsejo-Lum LE(3), Pingul A(4),
Matias-Schwartz C(5), Talana AL(1), Zhi Q(1)(2), Qureshi K(2), Sentell T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Office of Public Health Studies, Thompson School of Social Work and Public
Health, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, Honolulu, HI (MRIDC, ALT, TS).
(2)School of Nursing and Dental Hygiene, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa,
Honolulu, HI (GHRG, KQ).
(3)John A Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, Honolulu, HI 
(LEB).
(4)Office of Health Care Assurance, Hawai'i State Department of Health, Honolulu,
HI (AP).
(5)Philippine Nurses Association of Hawai'i, Honolulu, HI (CM).

Hawai'i's Filipino community has been deeply impacted by coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19). This article reports the findings for the Filipino population from
the Hawai'i Emergency Management Agency (HI-EMA) Community Care Outreach Unit
(CCO) Unit evaluation assessment of the impact of COVID-19 on the health and
social welfare of individuals across the state. The survey was conducted from
August-September 2020. We propose recommendations to mitigate the impact of the
pandemic on this community, including the following actions: (1) developing
linguistically and culturally appropriate support for all COVID-19 related
services, especially for the high number of older Filipinos with limited English 
proficiency, (2) providing support and resource information in locations that are
accessible to Filipino communities, and (3) supporting those already doing work
to address the deep and diverse needs in the Filipino community with funding.
Building partnerships between existing Filipino organizations, health and social 
service providers, and state agencies will contribute to sustainability over
time.

©Copyright 2021 by University Health Partners of Hawai‘i (UHP Hawai‘i).


PMCID: PMC8504323
PMID: 34661130  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

