
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 1;9:745310. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.745310.
eCollection 2021.

The Emergence of the New P.4 Lineage of SARS-CoV-2 With Spike L452R Mutation in
Brazil.

Bittar C(1), Possebon FS(2), Ullmann LS(2), Geraldini DB(1), da Costa VG(1), de
Almeida LGP(3), da S Sanches PR(4), Nascimento-Júnior NM(5), Cilli EM(4), Artico 
Banho C(6), Campos GRF(6), Ferreira HL(7), Sacchetto L(6), da Silva GCD(6), Parra
MCP(6), Moraes MM(6), da Costa PI(8), Vasconcelos ATR(3), Spilki FR(9), Nogueira 
ML(6), Rahal P(1), Araujo JP Jr(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Estudos Genômicos, Departamento de Biologia, Instituto de
Biociências Letras e Ciências Exatas (IBILCE), Universidade Estadual Paulista
(Unesp), São José do Rio Preto, Brazil.
(2)Instituto de Biotecnologia, Universidade Estadual Paulista (Unesp), Botucatu, 
Brazil.
(3)Laboratório de Bioinformática, Laboratório Nacional de Computação Científica
(LNCC), Petrópolis, Brazil.
(4)Laboratório de Síntese e Estudos de Biomoléculas (LaSEBio), Departamento de
Bioquímica e Química Orgânica, Instituto de Química, Universidade Estadual
Paulista (Unesp), Araraquara, Brazil.
(5)Laboratório de Química Medicinal, Síntese Orgânica e Modelagem Molecular
(LaQMedSOMM), Departamento de Bioquímica e Química Orgânica, Instituto de
Química, Universidade Estadual Paulista (Unesp), Araraquara, Brazil.
(6)Laboratório de Pesquisas em Virologia (LPV), Departamento de Doenças
Dermatológicas, Infecciosas e Parasitárias, Faculdade de Medicina de São José do 
Rio Preto (FAMERP), São José do Rio Preto, Brazil.
(7)Laboratório de Medicina Veterinária Preventiva Aplicada, Departamento de
Medicina Veterinária, Faculdade de Zootecnia e Engenharia de Alimentos (FZEA),
Universidade de São Paulo (USP), Pirassununga, Brazil.
(8)Departamento de Análises Clínicas, Faculdade de Ciências Farmacêuticas
(FCFAR), Universidade Estadual Paulista (Unesp), Araraquara, Brazil.
(9)Laboratório de Microbiologia Molecular, Instituto de Ciências da Saúde,
Universidade Feevale, Novo Hamburgo, Brazil.

The emergence of several SARS-CoV-2 lineages presenting adaptive mutations is a
matter of concern worldwide due to their potential ability to increase
transmission and/or evade the immune response. While performing epidemiological
and genomic surveillance of SARS-CoV-2 in samples from Porto Ferreira-São
Paulo-Brazil, we identified sequences classified by pangolin as B.1.1.28
harboring Spike L452R mutation, in the RBD region. Phylogenetic analysis revealed
that these sequences grouped into a monophyletic branch, with others from Brazil,
mainly from the state of São Paulo. The sequences had a set of 15 clade defining 
amino acid mutations, of which six were in the Spike protein. A new lineage was
proposed to Pango and it was accepted and designated P.4. In samples from the
city of Porto Ferreira, P.4 lineage has been increasing in frequency since it was
first detected in March 2021, corresponding to 34.7% of the samples sequenced in 
June, the second in prevalence after P.1. Also, it is circulating in 30 cities
from the state of São Paulo, and it was also detected in one sample from the
state of Sergipe and two from the state of Rio de Janeiro. Further studies are
needed to understand whether P.4 should be considered a new threat.

Copyright © 2021 Bittar, Possebon, Ullmann, Geraldini, da Costa, de Almeida, da
S. Sanches, Nascimento-Júnior, Cilli, Artico Banho, Campos, Ferreira, Sacchetto, 
da Silva, Parra, Moraes, da Costa, Vasconcelos, Spilki, Nogueira, Rahal and
Araujo Jr.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.745310 
PMCID: PMC8517261
PMID: 34660520  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

