
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Oct 31;9(2):e0068321. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.00683-21. Epub
2021 Oct 20.

Generation of False-Positive SARS-CoV-2 Antigen Results with Testing Conditions
outside Manufacturer Recommendations: A Scientific Approach to Pandemic
Misinformation.

Patriquin G(1)(2), Davidson RJ(1)(2)(3)(4), Hatchette TF(1)(2)(3)(4), Head BM(5),
Mejia E(5), Becker MG(5), Meyers A(5), Sandstrom P(5), Hatchette J(6), Block
A(6), Smith N(6), Ross J(6), LeBlanc JJ(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
Nova Scotia Health (NSH), Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(2)Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(3)Department of Medicine (Infectious Diseases), Dalhousie University, Halifax,
Nova Scotia, Canada.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada.
(5)National Microbiology Laboratory (NML), Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC),
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
(6)Praxes Medical Group, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.

Antigen-based rapid diagnostics tests (Ag-RDTs) are useful tools for severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) detection. However, misleading
demonstrations of the Abbott Panbio coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) Ag-RDT on
social media claimed that SARS-CoV-2 antigen could be detected in municipal water
and food products. To offer a scientific rebuttal to pandemic misinformation and 
disinformation, this study explored the impact of using the Panbio SARS-CoV-2
assay with conditions falling outside manufacturer recommendations. Using Panbio,
various water and food products, laboratory buffers, and SARS-CoV-2-negative
clinical specimens were tested with and without manufacturer buffer. Additional
experiments were conducted to assess the role of each Panbio buffer component
(tricine, NaCl, pH, and Tween 20) as well as the impact of temperature (4°C,
20°C, and 45°C) and humidity (90%) on assay performance. Direct sample testing
(without the kit buffer) resulted in false-positive signals resembling those
obtained with SARS-CoV-2 positive controls tested under proper conditions. The
likely explanation of these artifacts is nonspecific interactions between the
SARS-CoV-2-specific conjugated and capture antibodies, as proteinase K treatment 
abrogated this phenomenon, and thermal shift assays showed pH-induced
conformational changes under conditions promoting artifact formation. Omitting,
altering, and reverse engineering the kit buffer all supported the importance of 
maintaining buffering capacity, ionic strength, and pH for accurate kit function.
Interestingly, the Panbio assay could tolerate some extremes of temperature and
humidity outside manufacturer claims. Our data support strict adherence to
manufacturer instructions to avoid false-positive SARS-CoV-2 Ag-RDT reactions,
otherwise resulting in anxiety, overuse of public health resources, and
dissemination of misinformation. IMPORTANCE With the Panbio severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) antigen test being deployed in
over 120 countries worldwide, understanding conditions required for its ideal
performance is critical. Recently on social media, this kit was shown to generate
false positives when manufacturer recommendations were not followed. While
erroneous results from improper use of a test may not be surprising to some
health care professionals, understanding why false positives occur can help
reduce the propagation of misinformation and provide a scientific rebuttal for
these aberrant findings. This study demonstrated that the kit buffer's pH, ionic 
strength, and buffering capacity were critical components to ensure proper kit
function and avoid generation of false-positive results. Typically, false
positives arise from cross-reacting or interfering substances; however, this
study demonstrated a mechanism where false positives were generated under
conditions favoring nonspecific interactions between the two antibodies designed 
for SARS-CoV-2 antigen detection. Following the manufacturer instructions is
critical for accurate test results.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.00683-21 
PMCID: PMC8528119
PMID: 34668722  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

