
1. Evaluating And Referring Patients For Outpatient Monoclonal Antibody Therapy For 
Coronavirus (COVID-19) In The Emergency Department.

Aleem A(1), Olarewaju O(2), Pozun A(3).
In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2021-.
2021 Oct 26.

Author information: 
(1)Lehigh Valley Health Network, Allentown, USA
(2)Jefferson Northeast
(3)Conemaugh Memorial Medical Center

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), the illness caused by severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), has had a devastating effect on 
public health and the world economy. SARS-CoV-2 primarily affects the respiratory
system, with the majority of transmission occurring from close contact with
presymptomatic, asymptomatic, or symptomatic carriers. Since the declaration of
COVID-19 as a global pandemic by the World Health Organization (WHO), there has
been considerable progress in the management of COVID-19 with the development of 
novel therapeutics and highly efficacious vaccines that have led to favorable
patient outcomes and has limited the spread of the virus. A variety of
therapeutic options are currently available in the management of COVID-19,
including antiviral medications, monoclonal antibodies, and immunomodulatory
agents. However, the therapeutic potential and clinical use of these drugs are
limited and are specific to the stage of the illness. The pathogenesis of
COVID-19 illness occurs in two distinct phases, an early stage characterized by
profound SARS-CoV-2 viral replication followed by a late phase characterized by a
hyperinflammatory state induced by the release of cytokines such as tumor
necrosis factor-α (TNF α), granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(GM-CSF), Interleukin (IL) 1, IL-6, interferon (IFN)-γ, and activation of the
coagulation system resulting in a prothrombotic state. Antiviral therapy and
antibody-based treatments are likely to be more effective if used during the
early phase of the illness. Immunomodulating therapies, either alone or in
combination with antiviral and antibody-based therapies, may be more effective
when used in the later stage to combat the cytokine-mediated hyperinflammatory
state that causes severe illness.[1] Individuals of all ages are at risk for
infection and severe disease. However, individuals aged ≥60 years and with
underlying medical comorbidities (obesity, cardiovascular disease, chronic kidney
disease, diabetes, chronic lung disease, cancer, solid organ or hematopoietic
stem cell transplant recipients) are at increased risk of developing severe
COVID-19 infection. The percentage of COVID-19 patients requiring hospitalization
was six times higher in those with preexisting medical conditions than those
without medical conditions (45.4% vs. 7.6%) based on an analysis by Stokes et al.
of confirmed cases reported to the CDC during January 22 to May 30, 2020.[2]  A
promising approach to address the COVID-19 associated mortality and preventing
the increased utilization of healthcare resources is by terminating the
progression of viral replication preventing the progression to the
hyperinflammatory stage of COVID-19, which causes severe illness in high-risk
nonhospitalized patients. Initially, the focus of treatment was directed mainly
towards hospitalized patients with COVID-19 illness. However, the clinical focus 
throughout the pandemic expanded towards combatting the illness early on by
reducing the viral load in patients with early disease, thus attempting to halt
the disease progression. Monoclonal antibodies targeting the spike protein of the
SARS-CoV-2 have yielded positive in vitro results.[3][4] They are considered a
promising approach in managing nonhospitalized patients with mild to moderate
COVID-19 who are at high risk of developing severe illness. Monoclonal antibodies
(mAbs) are immune system proteins developed from a single cell lineage that
demonstrate a high affinity for their target cell. Monoclonal antibodies were
first developed by Köhler and Milstein in 1975 using hybridoma technology.[5]
Since then, significant progress has been made in the molecular engineering world
that has enabled the establishment of monoclonal antibodies as targeted therapies
in various neoplastic conditions, autoimmune, post-transplant immunosuppression, 
and infectious diseases.[6] When used as antiviral therapies, neutralizing
antibodies play an indispensable part in achieving passive antiviral immunity and
are also instrumental in preventing or regulating many viral illnesses. Over the 
years, passive immunization against many viral diseases was achieved by
administering polyclonal sera obtained from convalescent human donors or animals.
However, polyclonal antibody preparations are increasingly being replaced by
monoclonal antibodies because they demonstrate a favorable safety profile and
target specificity when used in different viral diseases.[7] Palivizumab was the 
first antiviral monoclonal antibody approved by the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) for prophylaxis of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) in
high-risk infants.[8]  Over the years, significant developments in antibody
engineering, improved understanding of the biology of viruses, and the direct and
indirect effect of monoclonal antibodies on viral infections has resulted in many
novel monoclonal antibodies. Like other antiviral drugs, monoclonal antibodies,
when used as antiviral agents, are also susceptible to developing resistance as a
result of alterations in the viral genome which can alter the pathogenic
potential of the virus resulting in the emergence of viral escape mutants, which 
may render the virus-resistant to a specific monoclonal antibody. To counter this
viral escape phenomenon, a combination of monoclonal antibodies, commonly
referred to as antibody cocktails, have been proposed with the rationale that
combining two specific monoclonal antibodies that complement each other can
prevent neutralization escape by targeting multiple viral epitopes. Various
monoclonal antibodies are currently in development or clinical trials to treat
COVID-19. Currently, the FDA has granted emergency use authorization (EUA) for
clinical use of casirivimab plus imdevimab as combination therapy, bamlanivimab
plus etesivimab as combination therapy, or sotrovimab monotherapy in patients
with mild to moderate COVID-19 illness who are at high risk of developing severe 
disease. Additionally, the FDA has granted EUAs authorizing the use of
casirivimab plus imdevimab and bamlanivimab plus etesivimab for post-exposure
prophylaxis (PEP) of COVID-19 in specific adult and pediatric individuals. This
review article briefly discusses the mechanism of action of monoclonal antibodies
against SARS-CoV-2, indications for the use of monoclonal antibody therapy, and
evaluating and referring patients for monoclonal antibody therapy in the
emergency department if they present with mild to moderate COVID-19 illness and
are at high risk of developing severe illness.

PMID: 34662075 

