
1. Braz J Biol. 2021 Oct 11;83:e248717. doi: 10.1590/1519-6984.248717. eCollection
2021.

Effects of neutrophil extracellular traps during human respiratory syncytial
virus infection in vitro.

Diniz LFA(1)(2), Matsuba BK(1), Souza PSS(1)(2), Lopes BRP(1)(2), Kubo LH(1),
Oliveira J(1)(3), Toledo KA(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Estadual Paulista - UNESP, Departmento de Ciências Biológicas,
Assis, SP, Brasil.
(2)Universidade Estadual Paulista - UNESP, Programa de Pós-Graduação em
Microbiologia, São José do Rio Preto, SP, Brasil.
(3)Universidade Estadual Paulista de Londrina - UEL, Programa de Pós-Graduação em
Matemática Aplicada e Computacional - PGMAC, Londrina, PR, Brasil.

The human respiratory syncytial virus (hRSV) is the most common cause of severe
lower respiratory tract diseases in young children worldwide, leading to a high
number of hospitalizations and significant expenditures for health systems.
Neutrophils are massively recruited to the lung tissue of patients with acute
respiratory diseases. At the infection site, they release neutrophil
extracellular traps (NETs) that can capture and/or inactivate different types of 
microorganisms, including viruses. Evidence has shown that the accumulation of
NETs results in direct cytotoxic effects on endothelial and epithelial cells.
Neutrophils stimulated by the hRSV-F protein generate NETs that are able to
capture hRSV particles, thus reducing their transmission. However, the massive
production of NETs obstructs the airways and increases disease severity.
Therefore, further knowledge about the effects of NETs during hRSV infections is 
essential for the development of new specific and effective treatments. This
study evaluated the effects of NETs on the previous or posterior contact with
hRSV-infected Hep-2 cells. Hep-2 cells were infected with different hRSV
multiplicity of infection (MOI 0.5 or 1.0), either before or after incubation
with NETs (0.5-16 μg/mL). Infected and untreated cells showed decreased cellular 
viability and intense staining with trypan blue, which was accompanied by the
formation of many large syncytia. Previous contact between NETs and cells did not
result in a protective effect. Cells in monolayers showed a reduced number and
area of syncytia, but cell death was similar in infected and non-treated cells.
The addition of NETs to infected tissues maintained a similar virus-induced cell 
death rate and an increased syncytial area, indicating cytotoxic and deleterious 
damages. Our results corroborate previously reported findings that NETs
contribute to the immunopathology developed by patients infected with hRSV.

DOI: 10.1590/1519-6984.248717 
PMID: 34669797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

