
1. Oncogene. 2021 Oct 19. doi: 10.1038/s41388-021-02064-1. [Epub ahead of print]

DNA-methylation patterns imply a common cellular origin of virus- and
UV-associated Merkel cell carcinoma.

Gravemeyer J(1)(2), Spassova I(1)(3), Verhaegen ME(4), Dlugosz AA(4)(5), Hoffmann
D(6), Lange A(6), Becker JC(7)(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Skin Cancer Research (TSCR), University Duisburg-Essen, Essen,
Germany.
(2)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) & German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany.
(4)Department of Dermatology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(5)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA.
(6)Bioinformatics & Computational Biophysics, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen,
Germany.
(7)Translational Skin Cancer Research (TSCR), University Duisburg-Essen, Essen,
Germany. j.becker@dkfz.de.
(8)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) & German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany. j.becker@dkfz.de.
(9)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany.
j.becker@dkfz.de.

Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is a neuroendocrine tumor either induced by
integration of the Merkel cell polyomavirus into the cell genome or by
accumulation of UV-light-associated mutations (VP-MCC and UV-MCC). Whether VP-
and UV-MCC have the same or different cellular origins is unclear; with
mesenchymal or epidermal origins discussed. DNA-methylation patterns have a
proven utility in determining cellular origins of cancers. Therefore, we used
this approach to uncover evidence regarding the cell of origin of classical VP-
and UV-MCC cell lines, i.e., cell lines with a neuroendocrine growth pattern
(n = 9 and n = 4, respectively). Surprisingly, we observed high global
similarities in the DNA-methylation of UV- and VP-MCC cell lines. CpGs of lower
methylation in VP-MCC cell lines were associated with neuroendocrine marker genes
such as SOX2 and INSM1, or linked to binding sites of EZH2 and SUZ12 of the
polycomb repressive complex 2, i.e., genes with an impact on carcinogenesis and
differentiation of neuroendocrine cancers. Thus, the observed differences appear 
to be rooted in viral compared to mutation-driven carcinogenesis rather than
distinct cells of origin. To test this hypothesis, we used principal component
analysis, to compare DNA-methylation data from different epithelial and
non-epithelial neuroendocrine cancers and established a scoring model for
epithelial and neuroendocrine characteristics. Subsequently, we applied this
scoring model to the DNA-methylation data of the VP- and UV-MCC cell lines,
revealing that both clearly scored as epithelial cancers. In summary, our
comprehensive analysis of DNA-methylation suggests a common epithelial origin of 
UV- and VP-MCC cell lines.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41388-021-02064-1 
PMID: 34667274 

