
1. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2021 Oct;55(4):648-655. doi: 10.5578/mb.20219716.

[First Case of COVID-19 Positive Candida auris Fungemia in Turkey].

[Article in Turkish]

Bölükbaşı Y(1), Erköse Genç G(1), Orhun G(2), Kuşkucu MA(3), Çağatay A(4), Önel
M(1), Öngen B(1), Ağaçfidan A(1), Esen F(2), Erturan Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istanbul University Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical
Microbiology, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)İstanbul University Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Department of Anesthesiology
and Reanimation, Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Istanbul University-Cerrahpasa Cerrahpasa Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Medical Microbiology, İstanbul, Turkey.
(4)İstanbul University Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Department of Infectious
Diseases and Clinical Microbiology, İstanbul, Turkey.

Candida auris is a species of fungus that has gained importance in recent years
owing to its ability to cause hospital infections and epidemics, resistant to
antifungal agents and disinfection processes and frequently misidentified by
commercial systems. Hospital outbreaks caused by C.auris have been reported from 
some countries. It has been determined that C.auris has lower virulence than
Candida albicans; however, it is associated with high mortality rates in
immunocompromised individuals. An increase in the incidence of invasive fungal
infections which can lead to serious complications and death, has been identified
in severe coronavirus-2019 (COVID-19) patients or immunocompromised individuals
with underlying disease. Studies demonstrated an increase in the frequency of
C.auris isolation in COVID-19 patients with candidemia. In this report, the first
case of COVID-19 positive C.auris fungemia detected in Turkey was presented. A
71-year-old male patient with a history of myocardial infarction, diabetes
mellitus, donation of a single kidney and lobectomy surgery due to lung cancer
was hospitalized in the pandemic thoracic surgery service due to the findings
consistent with viral pneumonia on thoracic computed tomography. Favipiravir 2 x 
600 mg and intravenous dexamethasone 1 x 6 mg therapy was administered. The
patient tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 polymerase chain reaction, and severe
involvement of the left lung was detected in the following days. Antibiotics were
administered, followed by insertion of a right jugular vein catheter and
initation of tocilizumab. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit 
due to increased respiratory distress. Yeast growth was detected in the patient's
hemoculture. The yeast strain could not be identified using API ID 32C
(bioMerieux, France) (Sacchromyces kluyveri, Candida sake, unacceptable profile),
but was identified as C.auris using the VITEK MALDI TOF MS (bioMerieux, France)
(99.9%) system and confirmed by sequencing. The minimum inhibitor concentration
values were detected as 3 µg/ml for amphotericin B; > 256 µg/ml for fluconazole; 
0.19 µg/ml for voriconazole; 0.19 µg/ml for itraconazole; 0.016 µg/ml for
posaconazole; 1 µg/ml for caspofungin and 0.094 µg/ml for anidulafungin by using 
the antibiotic gradient method. The patient's initial treatment comprised
meropenem 3 x 1 g, vancomycin 2 x 1 g, caspofungin 1 x 70 mg, and continued as
caspofungine 1 x 50 mg after the loading dose, and vancomycin 1 x 1 g/48 hours
from the third day of treatment. The patient died on the ninth day after
developing candidemia. The present case is the first case of fungemia caused by
C.auris in a COVID-19 positive patient in Turkey, and it emphasizes the need of
caution for fungemia due to C.auris in intensive care units in our country which 
has a high COVID-19 incidence.

DOI: 10.5578/mb.20219716 
PMID: 34666664  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

