
1. Iran J Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2021 Sep 28;20(5):550-562. doi:
10.18502/ijaai.v20i5.7405.

Immunomodulatory Effects of Adipose-derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells on Epithelial 
Cells Function in Response to Vibrio cholera in a Co-culture Model.

Moulazadeh A(1), Soudi S(2), Bakhshi B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, Tehran, Iran AND Noncommunicable Disease Research Center, Fasa
University of Medical Sciences, Fasa, Iran. immunomoula@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, Tehran, Iran. soudi@modares.ac.ir.
(3)Department of Bacteriology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, Tehran, Iran. b.bakhshi@modares.ac.ir.

Inflammation-induced by the interaction of the Vibrio cholerae with the
epithelial cells is considered as a main cause of bacteria spreading through the 
gastrointestinal tract and its consequences. Because of the immunomodulatory and 
antibacterial properties of adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells (AD-MSCs),
this study aimed to investigate the effect of AD-MSCs on the interaction of the
bacterial-epithelial cell. Caco-2 differentiated to intestinal epithelial cells
co-cultured with AD-MSCs in a 1:1 ratio of the surface area of six-well plates,
for 48 hours. After exposure to Vibrio cholerae, bacterial attachment and
internalization were evaluated. Secretions of interleukin (IL) -6, prostaglandin 
E2 (PGE2), and nitric oxide (NO) were also measured using ELISA, and Griess
assay, respectively. In addition, the expression of chloratoxin (Ctx-β) and
inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-8 were evaluated by real-time
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The rate of apoptosis was also evaluated by
Annexin V-PI flow cytometry. Bacterial attachment and Ctx-β expression were
significantly reduced in the co-culture group compared to the Vibrio
cholerae-exposed Caco-2. IL-6 and PGE2 secretion increased in the co-culture
group. NO, was also slightly reduced in exposure to Vibrio cholerae. An elevated 
level of bacterial internalization was observed in the co-culture group compared 
to the Caco-2 cells leading to an increase in the expression of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines. The rate of apoptosis was also increased significantly. Cell-to-cell
contact of AD-MSCs and Caco-2 promoted inflammatory responses and disruption of
the epithelium barrier by enhancing bacterial invasion. This may be due to the
high expression of surface matrix metalloproteinases on MSCs.

DOI: 10.18502/ijaai.v20i5.7405 
PMID: 34664814 

