
1. J Med Internet Res. 2021 Oct 19;23(10):e30491. doi: 10.2196/30491.

Learning About the Current State of Digital Mental Health Interventions for
Canadian Youth to Inform Future Decision-Making: Mixed Methods Study.

Kemp J(1)(2), Chorney J(3)(4), Kassam I(1), MacDonald J(5), MacDonald T(6),
Wozney L(7), Strudwick G(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Campbell Family Mental Health Research Institute, Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Institute of Health Policy, Management and Evaluation, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Mental Health and Addictions, IWK Health, Halifax, NS, Canada.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.
(5)Mental Health and Addictions, Nova Scotia Health, Sydney, NS, Canada.
(6)Mental Health and Addictions, Nova Scotia Health, Port Hawkesbury, NS, Canada.
(7)Mental Health and Addictions, Policy and Planning, Nova Scotia Health,
Dartmouth, NS, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The COVID-19 pandemic has increased the demand for youth mental
health services in Canada as disruptions to clinical care continue to persist due
to the risk of transmission and exposure to the virus. Digital mental health
interventions, including web-based resources and mobile apps, have provided
opportunities to support youth mental health remotely across Canada. There is a
need to better understand how these digital interventions are being selected,
recommended, and used in various regions across Canada.
OBJECTIVE: A national jurisdictional scan was completed to (1) determine what
web-based programs, apps, and websites are promoted and licensed in Canada for
youth mental health; (2) identify criteria and decision-making processes that
Canadian jurisdictions use to select web-based programs, apps, and websites for
youth mental health; and (3) identify upcoming trends, innovations, and digital
mental health possibilities that are emerging in the youth sector.
METHODS: The aims of the jurisdictional scan were addressed through a review of
related academic and grey literature; stakeholder interviews, including
individuals involved in various areas of the youth mental health sector; and a
social media review of pertinent Twitter content.
RESULTS: A total of 66 web-based resources and apps were identified for use by
youth in Canada. 16 stakeholder interviews were completed and included
discussions with researchers, clinicians, youth organizations, and others
involved in digital interventions for youth mental health. These discussions
identified a limited use of frameworks used to guide decision-making processes
when selecting digital interventions. Many clinicians agreed on a similar set of 
eligibility requirements for youth mental health apps and digital resources, such
as the evidence base and cultural relevance of the intervention. Stakeholders
also identified upcoming trends and innovations in the youth digital mental
health space, including artificial intelligence, digital phenotyping, and
personalized therapy. Over 4 weeks, 2184 tweets were reviewed to identify and
compare global and national trends and innovations involving digital mental
health and youth. Key trends included the promotion of regional chat services as 
well as the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on youth mental health and access to
care.
CONCLUSIONS: As organizations begin to plan for the delivery of mental health
care following the pandemic, there are concerns about the sustainability of these
digital mental health interventions as well as a need for services to be more
informed by the experiences and preferences of youth.

©Jessica Kemp, Jill Chorney, Iman Kassam, Julie MacDonald, Tara MacDonald, Lori
Wozney, Gillian Strudwick. Originally published in the Journal of Medical
Internet Research (https://www.jmir.org), 19.10.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/30491 
PMCID: PMC8564667
PMID: 34665141  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

