
1. Strahlenther Onkol. 2021 Oct 19. doi: 10.1007/s00066-021-01856-4. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Head and neck tumor cells treated with hypofractionated irradiation die via
apoptosis and are better taken up by M1-like macrophages.

Wedekind H(1)(2), Walz K(1)(2), Buchbender M(3), Rieckmann T(4)(5), Strasser
E(6), Grottker F(1)(2), Fietkau R(2), Frey B(1)(2), Gaipl US(7)(8), Rückert
M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Radiobiology, Department of Radiation Oncology,
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen,
Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.
(3)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.
(4)Department of Radiotherapy and Radiation Oncology, University Medical Center
Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, University Medical
Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(6)Department of Transfusion Medicine and Hemostaseology,
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen,
Erlangen, Germany.
(7)Translational Radiobiology, Department of Radiation Oncology,
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen,
Erlangen, Germany. Udo.Gaipl@uk-erlangen.de.
(8)Department of Radiation Oncology, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.
Udo.Gaipl@uk-erlangen.de.

PURPOSE: The incidence of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) is
increasing worldwide, especially when triggered by the human papilloma virus
(HPV). Radiotherapy has immune-modulatory properties, but the role of macrophages
present in HNSCC and having contact with irradiated tumor cells remains unclear. 
The influence of irradiated (2 × 5Gy) HNSCC cells on the (re-)polarization and
phagocytosis of human macrophages, either non-polarized or with a more M1 or M2
phenotype, was therefore investigated.
METHODS: Human monocytes were differentiated with the hematopoietic growth
factors M‑CSF (m) or GM-CSF (g) and additionally pre-polarized with either
interleukin (IL)-4 and IL-10 or interferon (IFN)-γ and lipopolysaccharides (LPS),
respectively. Subsequently, they were added to previously irradiated (2 × 5Gy)
and mock-treated HPV-positive (UD-SCC-2) and HPV-negative (Cal33) HNSCC cells
including their supernatants.
RESULTS: The HNSCC cells treated with hypofractionated irradiation died via
apoptosis and were strongly phagocytosed by M0m and M2 macrophages. M0g and M1
macrophages phagocytosed the tumor cells to a lesser extent. Irradiated HNSCC
cells were better phagocytosed by M1 macrophages compared to mock-treated
controls. The polarization status of the macrophages was not significantly
changed, except for the expression of CD206 on M2 macrophages, which was reduced 
after phagocytosis of irradiated HPV-negative cells. Further, a significant
increase in the uptake of irradiated HPV-positive cells by M0g macrophages when
compared to HPV-negative cells was observed.
CONCLUSION: HNSCC cells treated with hypofractionated irradiation foster
phagocytosis by anti-tumorigenic M1 macrophages. The data provide the first
evidence on the impact of the HPV status of HNSCC cells on the modulation of the 
macrophage response to irradiated tumor cells.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00066-021-01856-4 
PMID: 34665291 

