
1. Global Health. 2021 Oct 18;17(1):121. doi: 10.1186/s12992-021-00775-4.

Analysis of the management of the tenth Ebola virus disease outbreak in the
Democratic Republic of Congo: developing a multidisciplinary response model to
strengthen the healthcare system during disease outbreaks.

Vivalya BM(1)(2), Ayodeji OA(3), Bafwa YT(4), Muyisa LK(5), Piripiri AL(6), Mbeva
JK(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Kampala International University Western campus,
Bushenyi, Uganda. nzanzumutume@kiu.ac.ug.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Masereka Referral General Hospital, North-
Kivu, Democratic Republic of the Congo. nzanzumutume@kiu.ac.ug.
(3)Department of Human Anatomy, Kampala International University Western Campus, 
Kampala, Uganda.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Bunia, Ituri, Bunia, Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Musienene Referral General Hospital, North-Kivu,
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(6)Kinshasa School of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of Kinshasa,
Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(7)Department of Public Health, Official University of Ruwenzori, North-Kivu,
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The declaration of any public health emergency in the Democratic Republic of
Congo (DRC) is usually followed by the provision of technical and organizational 
support from international organizations, which build a parallel and short-time
healthcare emergency response centered on preventing the extension of health
emergencies across the countries and over the world. Previous Ebola virus disease
(EVD) outbreaks have highlighted the need to reinforce the healthcare sector in
different countries.Based on the difficulty to implement the International Health
Regulations (2005) to the local level of affected countries including the DRC,
this paper proposes a multidisciplinary model based on the health zones through
the strengthening of preparedness and response structures to public health
emergencies vis-à-vis the existing weak health systems existing in DRC. A
commitment to integrating the emergency response in the existing health system
should work to reduce the tension that exists between local recruitment and its
impact on the quality of daily healthcare in the region affected by EVD outbreak 
on one hand, and the involvement of international recruitment and its impact on
the trust of the population on the emergency response on the other. This paper
highlights the provision of a local healthcare workforce skilled to treat
infectious diseases, the compulsory implementation of training programs focused
on the emergency response in countries commonly affected by EVD outbreaks
including the DRC. These innovations should reduce the burden of health problems 
prior to and in the aftermath of any public health emergency in DRC hence
increasing the wellbeing of the community, especially the vulnerable people as
well as the availability of trained healthcare providers able to early recognize 
and treat EVD.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12992-021-00775-4 
PMCID: PMC8521269
PMID: 34663370 

