
1. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2021 Oct;155 Suppl 1:94-101. doi: 10.1002/ijgo.13868.

COVID-19 and the impact on gynecologic cancer care.

Manchanda R(1)(2)(3), Oxley S(1), Ghaem-Maghami S(4), Sundar S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Wolfson Institute of Preventive Medicine, Cancer Research UK Barts Centre,
Queen Mary University of London, London, UK.
(2)Department of Gynecological Oncology, St Bartholomew's Hospital, Barts Health 
NHS Trust, London, UK.
(3)Faculty of Public Health and Policy, Department of Health Services Research,
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College
London, London, UK.
(5)Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, UK.

The COVID-19 pandemic resulted in significant reconfiguration of gynecologic
cancer services and care pathways across the globe, with a transformation of
working practices. Services had to adapt to protect their vulnerable patients
from infection, whilst providing care despite reduced resources/capacity and
staffing. The international gynecologic cancer community introduced modified
clinical care guidelines. Remote working, reduced hospital visiting, routine
COVID-testing, and use of COVID-free surgical areas/hubs enabled the ongoing and 
safe delivery of complex cancer care, with priority levels for cancer treatments 
established to guide decision-making by multidisciplinary tumor boards. Some 2.3 
million cancer surgeries were delayed or cancelled during the first peak, with
many patients reporting significant anxiety/concern for cancer progression and
COVID infection. Although COVID trials were prioritized, recruitment to other
cancer trials/research activity was significantly reduced. The impact of
resultant protocol deviations on outcomes remains to be established. During the
recovery healthcare services must maintain capacity and flexibility to manage
future surges of infection, address the large backlog of patients with altered or
delayed treatments, along with salvaging screening and prevention services.
Training needs/mental well-being of trainees need addressing and staff burnout
prevented. Future research needs to fully evaluate the impact of COVID-19 on
long-term patient outcomes.

International Journal of Gynecology & Obstetrics© 2021 The Authors. International
Journal of Gynecology & Obstetrics published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf
of International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics.

DOI: 10.1002/ijgo.13868 
PMID: 34669200  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

