
1. Hawaii J Health Soc Welf. 2021 Sep;80(9 Suppl 1):44-52.

A Report on the Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on the Health and Social Welfare 
in the County of Kaua'i, Hawai'i.

Qureshi K(1), Berreman J(2), Arndt RG(3), Zhi Q(1), Buenconsejo-Lum LE(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing and Dental Hygiene, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa,
Honolulu, HI (KQ, QZ).
(2)Kaua'i District Health Office, Hawai'i State Department of Health, Lihue, HI
(JB).
(3)Thompson School of Social Work and Public Health, University of Hawai'i at
Mānoa, Honolulu, HI (RGA).
(4)John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, Honolulu, HI
(LEB).

The Hawai'i Emergency Management Agency Community Care Outreach Unit (CCO)
conducted a survey to gauge the impact of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) on 
the health and social welfare of individuals and their families across the state 
of Hawai'i. A mixed-methods framework was utilized for survey distribution. This 
article presents a descriptive analysis of the data to provide a basic overview
of the impact of COVID-19 in Kaua'i County (KC), as assessed in August/September 
2020. A total of 420 participants in KC responded to the statewide survey.
Approximately one-third reported that they or their family members experienced
reduced work hours or lost their job because of COVID-19. Many reported
difficulties paying for many types of living essentials and expected these
difficulties to increase in the near future. Prevalent challenges for the fall
school semester included access to funds for school supplies and face-coverings. 
About one-third reported feeling nervous more than half the time or nearly every 
day in the past 2 weeks, and one-fourth reported feeling worried more than half
the time or nearly every day in the past 2 weeks. The majority perceived the
severity of COVID-19 to be moderate/very high and most had at least a moderate
level of knowledge about risks for contracting severe COVID-19. Less than half
said they would know how to provide care for someone in their family with
COVID-19. Half of the respondents in KC reported maintaining social distancing
usually/all of the time, the majority reported wearing a face-covering
usually/always when needed. The results provide a baseline for understanding the 
impact, needs, and threats to the health and social welfare of households and
their families in KC as a result of COVID-19. Local stakeholders can utilize this
information for developing priorities, strategies, and programs to address the
pandemic where needed and also to assess progress in areas of need.

©Copyright 2021 by University Health Partners of Hawai‘i (UHP Hawai‘i).


PMCID: PMC8504315
PMID: 34661127  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

