
1. BMJ Glob Health. 2021 Oct;6(10). pii: e006305. doi: 10.1136/bmjgh-2021-006305.

Vaccine nationalism and internationalism: perspectives of COVID-19 vaccine trial 
participants in the United Kingdom.

Vanderslott S(1)(2), Emary K(3)(2), Te Water Naude R(4), English M(4), Thomas
T(3)(2), Patrick-Smith M(4), Henry J(4), Douglas N(3)(2), Moore M(3)(2), Stuart
A(3)(2), Hodgson SH(5), Pollard AJ(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Vaccine Group, Department of Paediatrics, University of Oxford, Oxford,
Oxfordshire, UK samantha.vanderslott@paediatrics.ox.ac.uk.
(2)NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford, Oxfordshire, UK.
(3)Oxford Vaccine Group, Department of Paediatrics, University of Oxford, Oxford,
Oxfordshire, UK.
(4)Medical School, Medical Sciences Division, University of Oxford, Oxford,
Oxfordshire, UK.
(5)Jenner Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford,
Oxford, Oxfordshire, UK.

BACKGROUND: Vaccine nationalism has become a key topic of discussion during the
development, testing, and rollout of COVID-19 vaccines. Media attention has
highlighted the ways that global, coordinated access to vaccines has been limited
during the pandemic. It has also exposed how some countries have secured vaccine 
supply, through bilateral purchase agreements and the way pharmaceutical
companies have priced, negotiated, and delivered these supplies. Much of the
focus of this debate has been on the vaccine supply 'winners' and 'losers', but
the voices of public opinion have been more limited.
METHODS: We explore the concepts of vaccine nationalism and internationalism from
the perspective of vaccine trial participants, using an empirical perspectives
study that involved interviews with phase I/II COVID-19 vaccine trial
participants in Oxford, UK. We surveyed and interviewed participants between
September and October 2020 about their views, motivations and experiences in
taking part in the trial.
RESULTS: First, we show how trial participants describe national and
international ideas about vaccination as intertwined and challenge claims that
these positions are mutually exclusive or oppositional. Second, we analyse these 
viewpoints further to show that vaccine nationalism is closely connected with
national pride and metaphors of a country's scientific achievements. Participants
held a global outlook and were highly supportive of the prioritisation of
vaccines by global need, but many were also pessimistic that such a solution
could be possible.
CONCLUSION: Trial participants constitute an informed public group, with situated
public expertise that the global community could draw on as an expert opinion. We
argue that vaccine nationalism is strongly attached to national character and,
therefore, it is more difficult for ownership of a vaccine to be though of as
international.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjgh-2021-006305 
PMCID: PMC8526520
PMID: 34666989  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: All authors except SV have
worked or are currently working on the UK clinical trials of the SARS-COV-2
candidate vaccine; ChAdOx1 nCoV-19. AJP is the chief investigator of these
clinical trials.

