
1. J Vis Exp. 2021 Sep 30;(175). doi: 10.3791/62989.

Dissection and Immunostaining of Larval Salivary Glands from Anopheles gambiae
Mosquitoes.

Chiu MZ(1), Lannon S(2), Luchetti M(2), Wells MB(3), Andrew DJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine;
Tufts School of Medicine.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Idaho College of Osteopathic Medicine.
(4)Department of Cell Biology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine;
dandrew@jhmi.edu.

Mosquito salivary glands (SGs) are a requisite gateway organ for the transmission
of insect-borne pathogens. Disease-causing agents, including viruses and the
Plasmodium parasites that cause malaria, accumulate in the secretory cavities of 
SG cells. Here, they are poised for transmission to their vertebrate hosts during
a subsequent blood meal. As adult glands form as an elaboration of larval SG duct
bud remnants that persist beyond early pupal SG histolysis, the larval SG is an
ideal target for interventions that limit disease transmission. Understanding
larval SG development can help develop a better understanding of its morphology
and functional adaptations and aid in the assessment of new interventions that
target this organ. This video protocol demonstrates an efficient technique for
isolating, fixing, and staining larval SGs from Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes.
Glands dissected from larvae in a 25% ethanol solution are fixed in a
methanol-glacial acetic acid mixture, followed by a cold acetone wash. After a
few rinses in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), SGs can be stained with a broad
array of marker dyes and/or antisera against SG-expressed proteins. This method
for larval SG isolation could also be used to collect tissue for in situ
hybridization analysis, other transcriptomic applications, and proteomic studies.

DOI: 10.3791/62989 
PMID: 34661579  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

