
1. J Virol. 2021 Oct 20:JVI0136721. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01367-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Functional genomic analyses reveal an open pan-genome for the chloroviruses and a
potential for genetic innovation in new isolates.

Rodrigues RAL(1), Queiroz VF(1), Ghosh J(2), Dunigan DD(2)(3), Van Etten
JL(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Virus Laboratory, Department of Microbiology, Federal University of Minas
Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(2)Nebraska Center for Virology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE,
USA. 68583-0900.
(3)Department of Plant Pathology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE,
USA. 68583-0722.

Chloroviruses (family Phycodnaviridae) are large dsDNA viruses that infect
unicellular green algae present in inland waters. These viruses have been
isolated using three main chlorella-like green algal host cells, traditionally
called NC64A, SAG and Pbi, revealing extensive genetic diversity. In this study, 
we performed a functional genomic analysis on 36 chloroviruses that infected the 
three different hosts. Phylogenetic reconstruction based on the DNA polymerase B 
family gene clustered the chloroviruses into three distinct clades. The viral
pan-genome consists of 1,345 clusters of orthologous groups of genes (COGs), with
126 COGs conserved in all viruses. 368, 268 and 265 COGs are found exclusively in
viruses that infect NC64A, SAG, and Pbi algal hosts, respectively. Two-thirds of 
the COGs have no known function, constituting the "dark pan-genome" of
chloroviruses, and further studies focusing on these genes may identify important
novelties. The proportion of functionally characterized COGs composing the pan-
and the core-genome are similar, but those related to transcription and RNA
processing, protein metabolism, and virion morphogenesis are at least 4-fold more
represented in the core-genome. Bipartite network construction evidencing the
COG-sharing among host-specific viruses identified 270 COGs shared by at least
one virus from each of the different host groups. Finally, our results reveal an 
open pan-genome for chloroviruses and a well-established core-genome, indicating 
that the isolation of new chloroviruses can be a valuable source of genetic
discovery. Importance Chloroviruses are large dsDNA viruses that infect
unicellular green algae distributed worldwide in freshwater environments. They
comprise a genetically diverse group of viruses; however, a comprehensive
investigation of the genomic evolution of these viruses is still missing. Here we
performed a functional pan-genome analysis comprising 36 chloroviruses associated
with three different algal hosts in the family Chlorellaceae, referred to as
zoochlorellae because of their endosymbiotic lifestyle. We identified a set of
126 highly conserved genes, most of which are related to essential functions in
the viral replicative cycle. Several genes are unique to distinct isolates,
resulting in an open pan-genome for chloroviruses. This profile is associated
with generalist organisms, and new insights into the evolution and ecology of
chloroviruses are presented. Ultimately, our results highlight the potential for 
genetic diversity in new isolates.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01367-21 
PMID: 34669449 

