
1. J Virol. 2021 Oct 20:JVI0109821. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01098-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Evolution and diversity of bat and rodent Paramyxoviruses from North America.

Larsen BB(1), Gryseels S(1)(2), Otto HW(1), Worobey M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Arizona, Tucson,
Arizona, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Clinical and Evolutionary Virology, Department of Microbiology, 
Immunology and Transplantation, Rega Institute, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Paramyxoviruses are a diverse group of negative-sense, single-stranded RNA
viruses of which several species cause significant mortality and morbidity. In
recent years the collection of paramyxoviruses sequences detected in wild mammals
has substantially grown, however little is known about paramyxovirus diversity in
North American mammals. To better understand natural paramyxovirus diversity,
host range, and host specificity, we sought to comprehensively characterize
paramyxoviruses across a range of diverse co-occurring wild small mammals in
Southern Arizona. We used highly degenerate primers to screen fecal and urine
samples and obtained a total of 55 paramyxovirus sequences from 12 rodent species
and 6 bat species. We also performed illumina RNA-seq and de novo assembly on 14 
of the positive samples to recover a total of five near full-length viral
genomes. We show there are at least two clades of rodent-borne paramyxoviruses in
Arizona, while bat-associated paramyxoviruses formed a putative single clade.
Using structural homology modeling of the viral attachment protein, we infer that
three of the five novel viruses likely bind sialic acid in a manner similar to
other Respiroviruses, while the other two viruses from Heteromyid rodents likely 
bind a novel host receptor. We find no evidence for cross-species transmission,
even among closely related sympatric host species. Taken together, these data
suggest paramyxoviruses are a common viral infection in some bat and rodent
species present in North America, and illuminate the evolution of these viruses. 
Importance There are a number of viral lineages that are potential zoonotic
threats to humans. One of these, paramyxoviruses, have jumped into humans
multiple times from wild and domestic animals. We conducted one of the largest
viral surveys of wild mammals in the United States to better understand
paramyxovirus diversity and evolution.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01098-21 
PMID: 34668771 

