
1. Acc Chem Res. 2021 Nov 2;54(21):4001-4011. doi: 10.1021/acs.accounts.1c00500.
Epub 2021 Oct 20.

Developing Biodegradable Lipid Nanoparticles for Intracellular mRNA Delivery and 
Genome Editing.

Qiu M(1), Li Y(1), Bloomer H(1)(2), Xu Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tufts University, 4 Colby Street,
Medford, Massachusetts 02155, United States.
(2)School of Medicine & Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Tufts University,
Boston, Massachusetts 02111, United States.

Since the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) granted emergency use
authorization for two mRNA vaccines against SARS-CoV-2, mRNA-based technology has
attracted broad attention from the scientific community to investors. When
delivered intracellularly, mRNA has the ability to produce various therapeutic
proteins, enabling the treatment of a variety of illnesses, including but not
limited to infectious diseases, cancers, and genetic diseases. Accordingly, mRNA 
holds significant therapeutic potential and provides a promising means to target 
historically hard-to-treat diseases. Current clinical efforts harnessing
mRNA-based technology are focused on vaccination, cancer immunotherapy, protein
replacement therapy, and genome editing. The clinical translation of mRNA-based
technology has been made possible by leveraging nanoparticle delivery methods.
However, the application of mRNA for therapeutic purposes is still challenged by 
the need for specific, efficient, and safe delivery systems.This Account
highlights key advances in designing and developing combinatorial synthetic lipid
nanoparticles (LNPs) with distinct chemical structures and properties for in
vitro and in vivo intracellular mRNA delivery. LNPs represent the most advanced
nonviral nanoparticle delivery systems that have been extensively investigated
for nucleic acid delivery. The aforementioned COVID-19 mRNA vaccines and one
LNP-based small interfering RNA (siRNA) drug (ONPATTRO) have received clinical
approval from the FDA, highlighting the success of synthetic ionizable lipids for
in vivo nucleic acid delivery. In this Account, we first summarize the research
efforts from our group on the development of bioreducible and biodegradable LNPs 
by leveraging the combinatorial chemistry strategy, such as the Michael addition 
reaction, which allows us to easily generate a large set of lipidoids with
diverse chemical structures. Next, we discuss the utilization of a library
screening strategy to identify optimal LNPs for targeted mRNA delivery and
showcase the applications of the optimized LNPs in cell engineering and genome
editing. Finally, we outline key challenges to the clinical translation of
mRNA-based therapies and propose an outlook for future directions of the chemical
design and optimization of LNPs to improve the safety and specificity of mRNA
drugs. We hope this Account provides insight into the rational design of LNPs for
facilitating the development of mRNA therapeutics, a transformative technology
that promises to revolutionize future medicine.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.accounts.1c00500 
PMID: 34668716  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

