
1. Tuberc Respir Dis (Seoul). 2021 Oct 20. doi: 10.4046/trd.2021.0080. [Epub ahead
of print]

A multicenter study to identify the respiratory pathogens associated with
exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in Korea.

Lee HW(1), Sim YS(2), Jung JY(3), Seo H(4), Park JW(5), Min KH(6), Lee JH(7), Kim
BK(8), Lee MG(9), Oh YM(10), Ra SW(11), Kim TH(12), Hwang YI(13), Rhee CK(14),
Joo H(15), Lee EG(16), Lee JH(17), Park HY(18), Kim WJ(19), Um SJ(20), Choi
JY(21), Lee CH(22), An TJ(23), Park Y(24), Yoon YS(25), Park JH(26), Yoo KH(27), 
Kim DK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Seoul Metropolitan Government-Seoul National University Boramae Medical
Center, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Kangnam Sacred
Heart Hospital, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Division of Pulmonology and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Severance Hospital, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National
University Hospital, Daegu, Korea.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Gachon University Gil Medical Center,
Incheon, Korea.
(6)Division of Pulmonology, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Internal Medicine, Korea University Guro Hospital, Korea University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(7)Division of Pulmonology and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Inje University Haeundae Paik Hospital, Inje University College of
Medicine, Busan, Korea.
(8)Division of Pulmonology, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Internal Medicine, Korea University Anam Hospital, Korea University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(9)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Internal Medicine, Hallym University Chuncheon Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym
University College of Medicine, Chuncheon, Korea.
(10)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Asan Medical Center,
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(11)Department of Internal Medicine, Ulsan University Hospital, University of
Ulsan College of Medicine, Ulsan, Korea.
(12)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Hanyang University Guri
Hospital, Hanyang University College of Medicine, Guri, Korea.
(13)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym University College of
Medicine, Anyang, Korea.
(14)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, College of
Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.
(15)Department of Internal Medicine, Uijeongbu St. Mary's Hospital, College of
Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.
(16)Bucheon St. Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of 
Korea, Bucheon, Korea.
(17)Department of Internal Medicine, Ewha Womans University Seoul Hospital, Ewha 
Womans University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(18)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(19)Department of Internal Medicine and Environmental Health Center, Kangwon
National University College of Medicine, Chuncheon, Korea.
(20)Department of Internal Medicine, Dong-A University College of Medicine,
Busan, Korea.
(21)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Incheon St. Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(22)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea.
(23)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Yeouido St. Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.
(24)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Daejeon St. Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic
University of Korea.
(25)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Dongguk University Ilsan Hospital, Goyang, South Korea.
(26)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Ajou University School of
Medicine, Suwon, Korea.
(27)Department of Internal Medicine, Konkuk University School of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea.

Background: Although respiratory tract infection is one of the most important
trigger factors for acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(AE-COPD), there are limited data on the epidemiologic patterns of microbiology
in South Korea.
Methods: A multicenter observational study was conducted in 28 hospitals in South
Korea between January 2015 and December 2018. Adult COPD patients with moderate
to severe acute exacerbations were eligible for the present study. They underwent
all conventional tests to identify etiologic microbiologic pathogens. The primary
outcome was the percentage of different microbiological pathogens that caused
AE-COPD. Comparative microbiological analysis was performed between the patients 
with asthma-COPD overlap (ACO) and pure COPD.
Results: We included 1,186 patients with AE-COPD. Pure COPD patients were 87.9%
and ACO patients were 12.1%. Nearly half of the patients used an ICS-containing
regimen and one-fifth used systemic corticosteroids. Among them, respiratory
pathogens were found in 55.3%. Bacteria and viruses were found in 33% and 33.2%, 
respectively. Bacterial and viral coinfections were found in 10.9%. The most
frequently detected bacteria were Pseudomonas aeruginosa (9.8%), and the most
frequently detected virus was influenza A (10.4%). Multiple bacterial infections 
were more likely found in ACO compared to pure COPD (8.3% vs 3.6%,
p-value=0.016).
Conclusion: Distinct microbiological patterns were identified in patients with
moderate to severe AE-COPD in South Korea. These findings may improve
evidence-based management for AE-COPD and become the basis for further research
related with infectious pathogens in COPD patients.

DOI: 10.4046/trd.2021.0080 
PMID: 34666427 

