
1. Hawaii J Health Soc Welf. 2021 Sep;80(9 Suppl 1):5-11.

Impact of COVID-19 on Hawai'i Community Agencies, Service Organizations, and the 
Individuals They Serve: A Snapshot from a Spring 2020 HI-EMA Survey.

Sentell T(1), Choi SY(2), Maldonado FA(3), Oyama K(4), Talana AL(1), Unciano
S(1), Arndt RG(3), Buenconsejo-Lum LE(2), Burrage RL(3), Qureshi K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Office of Public Health Studies, Thompson School of Social Work and Public
Health, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, Honolulu, HI (TS, ALT, SU).
(2)John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, Honolulu, HI
(SYC, LEB).
(3)Department of Social Work, Thompson School of Social Work and Public Health,
University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, Honolulu, HI (FAM, RGA, RLB).
(4)School of Nursing and Dental Hygiene at University of Hawai'i at Mānoa,
Honolulu, HI (KO, KQ).

Health and social service organizations across Hawai'i were surveyed between
April 29 and May 11, 2020 by the Community Care Outreach Unit of the Hawai'i
Emergency Management Agency. This article contextualizes and describes some of
the major findings of that survey that reveal the impact of coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) on Hawai'i community agencies, service organizations, and the
individuals they serve. Major issues for individuals served by the responding
organizations included securing basic needs such as food and housing as well as
access to health services, mental health needs, and COVID-19 concerns (such as
inadequate personal protective equipment, cleaning supplies, quarantine, and
testing issues). Respondents reported that job loss and the resulting financial
problems were a root cause of personal strain among clients served.
Community-level stress was related to the distressed economy and store closures. 
Fulfilling immediate and future needs of health and social service agencies and
the individuals they serve, as articulated in this report, could dampen the
effect of COVID-19, promote population wellbeing, and support community
resilience.

©Copyright 2021 by University Health Partners of Hawai‘i (UHP Hawai‘i).


PMCID: PMC8504321
PMID: 34661123  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

