
1. J Clin Transl Res. 2021 Aug 4;7(4):479-484. eCollection 2021 Aug 26.

Coronavirus disease 2019 morbid pulmonary pathology: What did we learn from
autopsy examinations?

Zulfu A(1), Hamid ST(1), Elseed KA(1), Elmadhoun WM(2), Ahmed M(3), Ahmed MH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Omdurman Islamic University,
Khartoum, Sudan.
(2)Department of Pathology - University of Medical Sciences and Technology,
Khartoum, Sudan.
(3)College of Medicine, Ajman University, Ajman, United Arab Emirates.
(4)Department of Medicine and HIV Metabolic Clinic, Milton Keynes University
Hospital NHS, Foundation Trust, Eagelstone, Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire, UK.

Background: Despite the rapidly expanding data on clinical, epidemiological and
radiological aspects of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), little is known
about the disease's pathological aspects. The scarcity of pathological data on
COVID-19 can be explained by the limited autopsy procedures performed on deceased
patients.
Aim: This work aims to review and summarize the pulmonary pathological findings
observed in COIVD-19 deceased individuals based on recent case series reports
published in English up to September 2020.
Methods: A search in Google Scholar, PubMedÒ, MEDLINEÒ, and Scopus was performed 
using the keywords "autopsy and COVID-19," "postmortem and COVID-19," and
"pulmonary/lung pathology and COVID-19."
Results: Pulmonary autopsy hallmark findings of COVID-19 cases demonstrate the
presence of diffuse alveolar damage. The presence of pulmonary thrombi was
reported in the majority of patients. Cellular alterations included type 2
pneumocyte hyperplasia, inflammatory cell infiltrates predominantly by
lymphocytes, other mononuclear cells, and neutrophils as evident by their
specific immunohistochemical markers. Electron microscopy confirmed the presence 
of virus particles in different cell types, including types 1 and 2 pneumocytes.
Conclusion: The few emerging autopsy reports have substantially contributed
towards our understanding of COVID-19 pulmonary histopathological aspects.
COVID-19 caused acute severe respiratory manifestations that are the leading
cause of morbidity and mortality in infected patients. More studies and research 
are needed to understand the inflammatory processes and histopathological changes
associated with COVID-19 in African populations.
Relevance for Patients: Postmortem investigations advance important mechanistic
knowledge on COVID-19 pathophysiology and clinical outcomes and could facilitate 
provisions for targeted therapies.

Copyright: © Whioce Publishing Pte. Ltd.


PMCID: PMC8520706
PMID: 34667895 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

