
1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2021 Oct 13. [Epub ahead of print]

SARS-CoV-2 in the knee joint: a cadaver study.

Grassi M(1), Giorgi V(2), Nebuloni M(3), Zerbi P(3), Gismondo MR(4), Salaffi
F(5), Sarzi-Puttini P(6), Rimoldi SG(4), Manzotti A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Orthopaedic and Traumatology Unit, ASST-Fatebenefratelli Luigi Sacco
University Hospital, Milan, Italy.
(2)Rheumatology Unit, ASST-Fatebenefratelli Luigi Sacco University Hospital,
Milan, Italy. vale.gio@fastwebnet.it.
(3)Pathology Unit, Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences,
ASST-Fatebenefratelli Luigi Sacco University Hospital, Milan, Italy.
(4)Microbiology Unit, ASST-Fatebenefratelli Luigi Sacco University Hospital,
Milan, Italy.
(5)Rheumatology Department, Università Politecnica delle Marche, Jesi, Italy.
(6)Rheumatology Unit, ASST-Fatebenefratelli Luigi Sacco University Hospital,
Milan, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: Despite the considerable research efforts being made to learn more
about COVID-19, little is known about the presence of SARS-CoV-2 genetic material
in biological fluids other than respiratory droplets, blood, and feces. The aim
of this post-mortem study was to assess the presence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in the
knee synovial fluid, synovial tissue, and bone tissue of COVID-19 patients in
order to discover whether the joint is a possible route of transmission during
orthopaedic surgical procedures, and clarify the possible role of SARS-CoV-2 as a
directly arthritogenic virus.
METHODS: Post-mortem synovial fluid, synovial tissue and bone tissue samples were
collected from the knees of five patients who died of COVID-19 in our hospital
between September and October 2020, and analysed for the presence of SARS-CoV-2
using a commercial real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) panel.
Quantitative RT-PCR was used to test post-mortem nasopharyngeal swabs of all of
the patients.
RESULTS: No SARS-CoV-2 RNA was detected in any of the knee samples, despite the
positivity of the throat swab.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that SARS-CoV-2 was not detected in knee
synovial fluid, synovial membrane or bone. This makes it unlikely that these are 
potential sources of contagion, and suggests that SARS-CoV-2 is not directly
arthritogenic.


PMID: 34665699 

