
1. Adv Virus Res. 2021;111:1-29. doi: 10.1016/bs.aivir.2021.07.001. Epub 2021 Aug
23.

Parainfluenza virus entry at the onset of infection.

Marcink TC(1), Porotto M(2), Moscona A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, NY, United States; Center for Host-Pathogen Interaction,
Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY,
United States.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, NY, United States; Center for Host-Pathogen Interaction,
Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY,
United States; Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Vagelos College of
Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY, United States.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, NY, United States; Center for Host-Pathogen Interaction,
Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY,
United States; Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Campania "Luigi
Vanvitelli", Caserta, Italy; Department of Physiology & Cellular Biophysics,
Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY,
United States. Electronic address: am939@cumc.columbia.edu.

Parainfluenza viruses, members of the enveloped, negative-sense, single stranded 
RNA Paramyxoviridae family, impact global child health as the cause of
significant lower respiratory tract infections. Parainfluenza viruses enter cells
by fusing directly at the cell surface membrane. How this fusion occurs via the
coordinated efforts of the two molecules that comprise the viral surface fusion
complex, and how these efforts may be blocked, are the subjects of this chapter. 
The receptor binding protein of parainfluenza forms a complex with the fusion
protein of the virus, remaining stably associated until a receptor is reached. At
that point, the receptor binding protein actively triggers the fusion protein to 
undergo a series of transitions that ultimately lead to membrane fusion and viral
entry. In recent years it has become possible to examine this remarkable process 
on the surface of viral particles and to begin to understand the steps in the
transition of this molecular machine, using a structural biology approach.
Understanding the steps in entry leads to several possible strategies to prevent 
fusion and inhibit infection.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.aivir.2021.07.001 
PMID: 34663496  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

