
1. J Virol. 2021 Oct 20:JVI0114321. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01143-21. [Epub ahead of print]

IFNα, but not IFNβ, acts early to control chronic chikungunya virus pathogenesis.

Locke MC(1), Fox LE(1), Dunlap BF(2), Young AR(2), Monte K(3), Lenschow
DJ(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis,
Missouri, USA.

Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) is an arthritogenic alphavirus that causes both
debilitating acute and chronic disease. Previous work has shown that type I IFNs 
play a critical role in limiting CHIKV pathogenesis and that IFNα and IFNβ
control acute CHIKV infection by distinct mechanisms. However, the role of type I
IFNs, especially specific subtypes, during chronic CHIKV disease is unclear. To
address this gap in knowledge, we evaluated chronic CHIKV pathogenesis in mice
lacking IFNα or IFNβ. We found that the IFNαs were the dominant subtype that
controls chronic disease. Despite detecting a varying type I IFN response
throughout the course of disease, IFNα acts within the first few days of
infection to control the levels of persistent CHIKV RNA. In addition, using a
novel CHIKV-3'-Cre tdTomato reporter system that fate maps CHIKV-infected cells, 
we showed that IFNα limits the number of cells that survive CHIKV at sites of
dissemination, particularly dermal fibroblasts and immune cells. Though myofibers
play a significant role in CHIKV disease, they were not impacted by the loss of
IFNα. Our studies highlight that IFNα and IFNβ play divergent roles during
chronic CHIKV disease through events that occur early in infection and that not
all cell types are equally dependent on type I IFNs for restricting viral
persistence. Importance Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) is a re-emerging global
pathogen with no effective vaccine or antiviral treatment for acute or chronic
disease, and the mechanisms underlying chronic disease manifestations remain
poorly defined. The significance of our research is in defining IFNα, but not
IFNβ, as an important host regulator of chronic CHIKV pathogenesis that acts
within the first 48 hours of infection to limit persistent viral RNA and the
number of cells that survive CHIKV infection one month post infection. Loss of
IFNα had a greater impact on immune cells and dermal fibroblasts than myofibers, 
highlighting the need to delineate cell-specific responses to type I IFNs.
Altogether, our work demonstrates that very early events of acute CHIKV infection
influence chronic disease. Continued efforts to delineate early host-pathogen
interactions may help stratify patients who are at risk for developing chronic
CHIKV symptoms and identify therapeutics that may prevent progression to chronic 
disease altogether.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01143-21 
PMID: 34668781 

