
1. Virol J. 2021 Oct 18;18(1):206. doi: 10.1186/s12985-021-01675-0.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus genetic variability a
management and diagnostic dilemma.

Risser J(1), Ackerman M(2), Evelsizer R(3), Wu S(3), Kwon B(3), Hammer JM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Elanco, Greenfield, IN, USA. jessica.risser@elancoah.com.
(2)Pork Vet Solutions, New Palestine, IN, USA.
(3)Elanco, Greenfield, IN, USA.

As genetic analysis becomes less expensive, more comprehensive diagnostics such
as whole genome sequencing (WGS) will become available to the veterinary
practitioner. The WGS elucidates more about porcine reproductive and respiratory 
syndrome virus (PRRSV) beyond the traditional analysis of open reading frame
(ORF) 5 Sanger sequencing. The veterinary practitioner will require a more
complete understanding of the mechanics and consequences of PRRSV genetic
variability to interpret the WGS results. More recently, PRRSV recombination
events have been described in the literature. The objective of this review is to 
provide a comprehensive outlook for swine practitioners that PRRSV mutates and
recombines naturally causing genetic variability, review the diagnostic cadence
when suspecting recombination has occurred, and present theory on how, why, and
where industry accepted management practices may influence recombination. As
practitioners, it is imperative to remember that PRRS viral recombination is
occurring continuously in swine populations. Finding a recombinant by diagnostic 
analysis does not ultimately declare its significance. The error prone
replication, mutation, and recombination of PRRSV means exact clones may exist;
but a quasispecies swarm of variable strains also exist adding to the genetic
diversity. PRRSV nonstructural proteins (nsps) are translated from ORF1a and
ORF1b. The arterivirus nsps modulate the hosts' immune response and are involved 
in viral pathogenesis. The strains that contribute the PRRSV replicase and
transcription complex is driving replication and possibly recombination in the
quasispecies swarm. Furthermore, mutations favoring the virus to evade the immune
system may result in the emergence of a more fit virus. More fit viruses tend to 
become the dominant strains in the quasispecies swarm. In theory, the swine
management practices that may exacerbate or mitigate recombination include
immunization strategies, swine movements, regional swine density, and topography.
Controlling PRRSV equates to managing the quasispecies swarm and its interaction 
with the host. Further research is warranted on the frequency of recombination
and the genome characteristics impacting the recombination rate. With a
well-defined understanding of these characteristics, the clinical implications
from recombination can be detected and potentially reduced; thus, minimizing
recombination and perhaps the emergence of epidemic strains.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12985-021-01675-0 
PMCID: PMC8522131
PMID: 34663367 

