
1. Epilepsia Open. 2021 Oct 20. doi: 10.1002/epi4.12550. [Epub ahead of print]

Screening of prototype antiseizure and anti-inflammatory compounds in the
Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus model of epilepsy.

Metcalf CS(1), Vanegas F(1), Underwood T(1), Johnson K(1), West PJ(1), Smith
MD(1)(2), Wilcox KS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Epilepsy Therapy Screening Program Contract Site, Department of Pharmacology
and Toxicology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(2)School of Dentistry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Infection with Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus (TMEV) in
C57Bl/6J mice results in handling-induced seizures and is useful for evaluating
compounds effective against infection-induced seizures. However, to date only a
few compounds have been evaluated in this model, and a comprehensive study of
antiseizure medications (ASMs) has not yet been performed. Furthermore, as the
TMEV infection produces marked neuroinflammation, an evaluation of prototype
anti-inflammatory compounds is needed as well.
METHODS: Male C57Bl/6J mice were inoculated with TMEV (day 0) followed by daily
administrations of test compounds (day 3-7) and subsequent handling sessions (day
3-7). Doses of ASMs, comprising several mechanistic classes, were selected based 
on previously published data demonstrating the effect of these compounds in
reducing seizures in the 6 Hz model of pharmacoresistant seizures. Doses of
anti-inflammatory compounds, comprising several mechanistic classes, were
selected based on published evidence of reduction of inflammation or
inflammation-related endpoints.
RESULTS: Several prototype ASMs reduced acute seizures following TMEV infection: 
lacosamide, phenytoin, ezogabine, phenobarbital, tiagabine, gabapentin,
levetiracetam, topiramate, and sodium valproate. Of these, phenobarbital and
sodium valproate had the greatest effect (>95% seizure burden reduction).
Prototype anti-inflammatory drugs celecoxib, dexamethasone, and prednisone also
moderately reduced seizure burden.
SIGNIFICANCE: The TMEV model is utilized by the Epilepsy Therapy Screening
Program (ETSP) as a tool for evaluation of novel compounds. Compounds reducing
seizures in the TMEV comprise distinct mechanistic classes, some with mechanisms 
of action that extend beyond traditional ASMs.

© 2021 The Authors. Epilepsia Open published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf
of International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1002/epi4.12550 
PMID: 34668659 

