
1. J Genet Couns. 2021 Oct;30(5):1325-1335. doi: 10.1002/jgc4.1501. Epub 2021 Oct
19.

Graduate training during the COVID-19 pandemic: North American genetic counseling
students' challenges, intolerance of uncertainty, and psychological well-being.

Kahn E(1), Sheldon JP(2), Carmichael A(3), Yashar BM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan,
USA.
(2)Department of Behavioral Sciences, University of Michigan-Dearborn, Dearborn, 
Michigan, USA.
(3)Research Center for Group Dynamics, Institute for Social Research, University 
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

The COVID-19 pandemic has upended genetic counseling (GC) graduate students'
lives, as they have been forced to transition, manage, and acclimate to life
during a pandemic. The current study is a first step in understanding their lived
experiences during this historic, global event. We investigated academic and
personal challenges, intolerance of uncertainty, and psychological well-being of 
GC students (n = 248) who trained during the pandemic (GC-COV cohort) and those
who did not (GC-NoCOV cohort). Participants completed an online survey
(July-September 2020) that used validated measures of Intolerance of Uncertainty 
and Psychological Well-Being. To assess the academic and personal challenges
students experienced during GC graduate training, we developed a 43-item measure.
Principal axis factoring of the items revealed categories of challenges related
to the following: Academic & Professional Development, Self-Regulation &
Resilience, Institutional & Program Leadership, and Financial Stability. There
was no cohort difference in Psychological Well-Being. Linear mixed-effects
modeling showed significant cohort differences in challenges. Multiple linear
regression analyses revealed that the GC-COV cohort's Psychological Well-Being
was statistically significantly predicted by Institutional & Program Leadership
challenges (p = .029), Self-Regulation & Resilience challenges (p = .013), and
Intolerance of Uncertainty (p = .010). For the GC-NoCOV cohort, the statistically
significant predictor of Psychological Well-Being was Self-Regulation &
Resilience challenges (p = .029). Our findings demonstrate that GC students
training during the COVID-19 pandemic have experienced various personal,
academic, and psychological disruptions and highlight a need to develop resources
and implement interventions supporting students' academic development and
psychological well-being.

© 2021 National Society of Genetic Counselors.

DOI: 10.1002/jgc4.1501 
PMID: 34665887  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

