
1. Immunol Cell Biol. 2021 Nov;99(10):1006-1010. doi: 10.1111/imcb.12505. Epub 2021 
Oct 18.

Vaccine-induced immune thrombosis and thrombocytopenia syndrome following
adenovirus-vectored severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 vaccination: 
a novel hypothesis regarding mechanisms and implications for future vaccine
development.

Monagle P(1)(2)(3)(4), Ng AP(5)(6)(7), Linden M(8), Ignjatovic V(1)(4), Farley
A(5)(6), Taoudi S(5)(6), Pasricha SR(5)(6)(7), Torresi J(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(2)Kids Cancer Centre, Sydney Children's Hospital, Randwick, NSW, Australia.
(3)Department of Clinical Haematology, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, VIC,
Australia.
(4)Haematology Research, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, VIC,
Australia.
(5)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, VIC,
Australia.
(6)Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC,
Australia.
(7)Department of Clinical Haematology, The Royal Melbourne Hospital and Peter
MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(8)School of Biomedical Science, University of Western Australia, Crawley, WA,
Australia.
(9)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Peter Doherty Institute, The
University of Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

We hypothesize that thrombosis with thrombocytopenia syndrome recently described 
after administration of adenovirus-vectored vaccines for severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) occurs as a result of the unique properties
of the adenovirus vectors, which can have widespread biodistribution throughout
the body. The antigen is delivered to megakaryocyte cells, which act as part of
the primary immune system and distribute the antigen within progeny platelets,
also a key component of the immune system. The interaction of the antigen induces
preformed antiplatelet factor 4 (PF4) antibodies to bind to PF4-heparan sulfate
complexes in the absence of exogenous heparin, at sites where the heparan sulfate
concentration in the vascular glycocalyx is optimal for complex formation,
causing thrombosis and thrombocytopenia as observed clinically. This hypothesis
is testable in cell culture and animal models, and potentially in vivo, and if
proven correct has significant implications for vaccine development and our
understanding of the links between the coagulation and immune systems.

© 2021 Australian and New Zealand Society for Immunology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/imcb.12505 
PMID: 34664303  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

