
1. Hawaii J Health Soc Welf. 2021 Sep;80(9 Suppl 1):34-43.

A Report on the Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on the Health and Social Welfare 
in the County of Hawai'i, Hawai'i.

Qureshi K(1), Buenconsejo-Lum LE(2), Palafox NA(2), Arndt RG(3), Zhi Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing and Dental Hygiene, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa,
Honolulu, HI (KQ, QZ).
(2)John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, Honolulu, HI
(LEB, NAP).
(3)Thompson School of Social Work and Public Health, University of Hawai'i at
Mānoa, Honolulu, HI (RGA).

The Community Care Outreach Unit (CCO) of the Hawai'i Emergency Management
Medical/Public Health Services Branch conducted a survey to gauge the impact of
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) on the health and social welfare of
individuals and families in the state of Hawai'i. A mixed-methods framework was
utilized for survey distribution; 7927 respondents participated in the survey.
This article presents key findings for the state's Hawai'i County (HC). It
presents a descriptive analysis of the data to provide a basic overview of the
impact of COVID-19 in HC, as assessed in August-September 2020. A total of 936
participants from HC responded to the survey. Approximately one-third reported
that they or their family members experienced reduced work hours, and one-fifth
lost their jobs because of COVID-19. Many reported difficulties paying for many
types of living essentials and expected these difficulties to increase in the
near future. Challenges for the fall school semester included lack of access to
funds for school supplies and face-coverings. The majority perceived the severity
of COVID-19 to be moderate/very high and most had at least a moderate level of
knowledge about risks for developing severe COVID-19. Approximately half reported
maintaining social distancing usually/all of the time, and about two-thirds
reported wearing a face-covering usually/always when needed. Other barriers for
COVID disease prevention and response included a lack of space for
quarantine/isolation of family members, not having enough cleaning supplies, low 
knowledge of how to care for a household member with COVID disease and not having
someone available to care for them if they contracted the virus. The results
provide a baseline for understanding the impact, needs, and threats to the health
and social welfare of individuals and their families as a result of COVID-19 in
HC. Local stakeholders can utilize this information when developing priorities,
strategies, and programs to address the pandemic where needed.

©Copyright 2021 by University Health Partners of Hawai‘i (UHP Hawai‘i).


PMCID: PMC8504316
PMID: 34661126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

