
1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2021;1313:1-14. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-67452-6_1.

Human Papillomavirus-Associated Cancers.

Alhamlan FS(1)(2), Alfageeh MB(3), Al Mushait MA(4), Al-Badawi IA(5), Al-Ahdal
MN(6)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection and Immunity, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and
Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. falhamlan@kfshrc.edu.sa.
(2)College of Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
falhamlan@kfshrc.edu.sa.
(3)Infectious Diseases Program, National Center for Biotechnology, King Abdulaziz
City for Science and Technology, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)College of Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and
Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Department of Infection and Immunity, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and
Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Human Papillomavirus (HPV) is the causative agent in the majority of anal, head
and neck, oral, oropharyngeal, penile, vaginal, vulvar, and cervical cancers.
Cervical cancer is the fourth most common cancer among women worldwide. Of all
diagnosed human malignant neoplasms, approximately 4.5% are attributable to HPV, 
including cervical, anal cancers, vaginal, vulvar, penile, and oropharyngeal
cancers. Over 182 HPV types have been identified and sequenced to date however,
only certain types of HPV are more frequent in malignant lesions and considered
to be a major risk factor in the development of some cancers. Because most HPV
infections are transient, and an individual's immunocompetent may clear the
infection, HPV infection has received little attention from clinicians, the
general public, or policy makers. This lack of attention may underpin a deadly
and increasing problem because each newly acquired infection has the potential to
persist and become an incurable, lifelong affliction. In addition, no successful 
treatment of HPV infection currently exists despite the great strides toward
understanding the mechanisms underlying HPV pathogenesis. Moreover, ample
research has proven that the use of prophylactic vaccines, such as Gardasil and
Cervarix, have led to documented progress in decreasing the burden of HPV
infection, however not all countries introduced a government-funded National HPV 
Vaccination Program to protect young men and women. This chapter summarizes the
HPV infection, detection and prevention. We also shed light on non-cervical
HPV-related cancers, which is rapidly increasing in more developed countries
toward cervical cancer.

© 2021. Springer Nature Switzerland AG.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-67452-6_1 
PMID: 34661888  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

