
1. Hawaii J Health Soc Welf. 2021 Sep;80(9 Suppl 1):102-109.

COVID-19 Containment Ship Model: A Case Study for Pacific Island Response.

Palafox NA(1), Garcia MT(2), Chutaro E(3), Alailima C(4), Hixon AL(1), Silk I(5),
Best B(6), Alik WC(6), Tufa AJ(4), Cash HL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Medicine and Community Health, John A. Burns School of
Medicine, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, Honolulu, HI (NAP, ALH).
(2)University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, Honolulu, HI (MR=TG).
(3)Pacific Island Health Officers Association, Honolulu, HI (EC, HLC).
(4)American Samoa Department of Health, Pago Pago, AS (CA, AJT).
(5)Republic of Marshall Islands Consulate, Honolulu, HI (IS).
(6)Kaiser Permanente, Honolulu, HI (BB, WCA).

The Republic of the Marshall Islands, American Samoa, the Federated States of
Micronesia, and the Republic of Palau have been without any COVID-19 community
transmission since the beginning of the global pandemic. The Commonwealth of the 
Northern Mariana Islands has experienced modest community transmission, and Guam 
has had significant COVID-19 community transmission and morbidity. Although
several of these United States Affiliated Pacific Island jurisdictions made
difficult strategic choices to prevent the spread of COVID-19 which have been
largely successful, the built environment and the population density in the urban
areas of the Pacific remain inherently conducive to rapid COVID-19 transmission. 
Rapid transmission could result in devastating health and economic consequences
in the absence of continued vigilance and long-term strategic measures. The
unique COVID-19 vulnerability of islands in the Pacific can be modeled through
examination of recent outbreaks onboard several United States Naval ships and
other marine vessels. The environmental characteristics that pose challenges to
infection control on an isolated naval ship are analogous to the environmental
characteristics of these Pacific island communities. Considering a collection of 
case studies of COVID-19 transmission on ships and applying to Pacific Island
environments, provides a heuristic, easily accessible epidemiologic framework to 
identify methods for interventions that are practical and reliable towards
COVID-19 containment, prevention, and control. Using accessible evidence based
public health policies, infection risk can be decreased with the objective of
maintaining in-country health and social stability. These case studies have also 
been examined for their relevance to current discussions of health care
infrastructure and policy in the Pacific Islands, especially that of vaccination 
and repatriation of citizens marooned in other countries. The need for aggressive
preparation on the parts of territories and nations not yet heavily exposed to
the virus is critical to avoid a rapid "burn-through" of disease across the
islands, which would likely result in catastrophic consequences.

©Copyright 2021 by University Health Partners of Hawai‘i (UHP Hawai‘i).


PMCID: PMC8504318
PMID: 34661133  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

