
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Oct 31;9(2):e0124621. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.01246-21. Epub
2021 Oct 20.

Characterization of Tonsil Microbiota and Their Effect on Adenovirus Reactivation
in Tonsillectomy Samples.

Wang L(1)(2)(3), Xu D(1)(2), Huang Q(4), Yang G(4), Zhang M(2)(5), Bi J(2), Shan 
J(6), Li E(1)(2)(5)(7), He S(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Medical School, Nanjing 
Universitygrid.41156.37, Nanjing, China.
(2)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Medical School, Nanjing
Universitygrid.41156.37, Nanjing, China.
(3)Yancheng Medical Research Center, Medical School, Nanjing
Universitygrid.41156.37, Yancheng, China.
(4)Nanjing Children's Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(5)Institute of Medical Virology, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, Medical School,
Nanjing Universitygrid.41156.37, Nanjing, China.
(6)The First Medical College, Nanjing Universitygrid.41156.37 of Chinese
Medicine, Nanjing, China.
(7)Shenzhen Research Institute of Nanjing University, Shenzhen, China.

The adenoviral DNA is prevalent in adenotonsillectomy specimens from pediatric
patients, though the virus seems to be in latent state. The tonsils are at the
forefront of airway entry point and are the first line of defense against airway 
viral and bacterial infections. We hypothesized that tonsil microbiota plays a
role in human adenovirus (HAdV) latency and reactivation. In this study, we
surveyed the presence of HAdV in tonsillectomy samples from 81 patients and found
that HAdV DNA was in 85.2% of the tonsil samples. We then determined the
microbiota of the samples. Taxonomic profiling showed that Proteobacteria,
Firmicutes, Fusobacteriota, and Bacteroidota accounted for approximately 70% of
the total phyla in tonsil samples. A correlation analysis showed that the
HAdV-positive samples had significantly higher abundance of Neisseria and
Bifidobacterium and lower abundance of Streptococcus, Ochrobactrum, and
Lactobacillus than that of the HAdV-negative samples. Culture-based isolation
followed by 16S rRNA sequencing identified Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus
pneumoniae, Veillonella, Prevotella, Capnocytophaga sputigena, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, Neisseria, and Moraxella catarrhalis from the samples. Gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) profiling of short-chain fatty acids in 
bacterial cultures of minced tonsillectomy tissues or representative isolates
showed the cultures contained various amounts of short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs).
Treatment of isolated tonsil lymphocytes with bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) 
or with SCFAs promoted HAdV reactivation. The compounds also promoted HAdV
reactivation in a xenograft model with implanted tonsil fragments. This study
shows a potential interplay between tonsil microbiota and HAdV reactivation that 
may lead to recurrent virus infection of respiratory tract disease. IMPORTANCE
Human adenovirus infection is common among pediatric patients and can be
life-threatening among organ transplant recipients. Adenovirus is transmitted by 
close contact, but it is believed that a majority of invasive events appear to
arise from viral reactivation. The human tonsil is a reservoir for virus latency 
and has a high prevalence of latently infected adenovirus. Also, tonsils are
located at the gateway of the respiratory tracts and are commonly exposed to
bacterial pathogens. Here, we uncovered adenoviral DNA-positive and -negative
samples that appeared to harbor distinct distribution patterns of microorganisms.
SCFAs, primary metabolites of microbiota on tonsils, could induce the adenovirus 
reactivation in tonsil lymphocytes, resulting in adenovirus replication and
production of infectious virions. The study suggests that viral-bacterial
interaction plays a role in virus reactivation from latency and could be a
contributing factor for recurrent viral infection in pediatric patients.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.01246-21 
PMCID: PMC8528100
PMID: 34668748 

