
1. Front Vet Sci. 2021 Sep 29;8:728271. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2021.728271. eCollection 
2021.

Investigating the Efficacy of a Canine Rabies Vaccine Following Storage Outside
of the Cold-Chain in a Passive Cooling Device.

Lugelo A(1)(2)(3), Hampson K(2), Czupryna A(2), Bigambo M(4), McElhinney LM(5),
Marston DA(5), Kazwala R(3), Lankester F(4)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health and Ecological Sciences Department, Ifakara Health
Institute, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(2)Boyd Orr Centre for Population and Ecosystem Health, Institute of
Biodiversity, Animal Health and Comparative Medicine, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Veterinary Medicine and Public Health, Sokoine University of
Agriculture, Morogoro, Tanzania.
(4)Global Animal Health Tanzania, Arusha, Tanzania.
(5)Animal and Plant Health Agency, Addlestone, United Kingdom.
(6)Paul G. Allen School for Global Health, Washington State University, Pullman, 
WA, United States.

Background: Thermostable vaccines greatly improved the reach and impact of
large-scale programmes to eliminate infectious diseases such as smallpox, polio, 
and rinderpest. A study from 2015 demonstrated that the potency of the Nobivac®
Rabies vaccine was not impacted following experimental storage at 30°C for 3
months. Whether the vaccine would remain efficacious following storage under more
natural, fluctuating temperature conditions remains unknown. We carried out a
randomised controlled non-inferiority trial to compare serological responses in
dogs following vaccination with doses stored under cold chain conditions with
those stored within a locally made Passive Cooling Device ("Zeepot") under
fluctuating temperature conditions. Materials and Methods: Nobivac® Rabies
vaccine was stored under either cold-chain conditions or within the Zeepot for 2 
months. Daily ambient temperatures and temperatures within the Zeepot were
recorded every 3 h. Following storage, 412 domestic dogs were randomly assigned
to receive either cold-chain or Zeepot stored Nobivac® Rabies vaccine. Baseline
and day 28-post vaccination blood samples were collected. Serological analysis
using the Fluorescent Antibody Virus Neutralisation assay was carried out with a 
threshold of 0.5 IU/ml to determine seroconversion. In addition, the impact of
dog Body Condition Score, sex, and age on seroconversion was examined. Results:
The serological response of dogs vaccinated using Nobivac® Rabies vaccine stored 
within the Zeepot was not inferior to the response of dogs vaccinated using
cold-chain stored vaccine (z = 1.1, df = 313, p-value = 0.25). Indeed, the 28-day
post-vaccination group geometric mean titre was 1.8 and 2.0 IU/ml for cold-chain 
vs. non-cold-chain storage, respectively. Moreover, the percentage of dogs that
seroconverted in each arm was almost identical (85%). There was a positive linear
trend between Body Condition Score (O.R. 2.2, 95% CI: 1.1-5.1) and
seroconversion, suggesting dogs of poor condition may not respond as expected to 
vaccination. Conclusions: Our study demonstrated the potency of Nobivac® Rabies
vaccine is not impacted following storage under elevated fluctuating temperatures
within a Zeepot. These results have potentially exciting applications for scaling
up mass dog vaccination programmes in low-and-middle income countries,
particularly for hard-to-reach populations with limited access to power and
cold-chain vaccine storage.

Copyright © 2021 Lugelo, Hampson, Czupryna, Bigambo, McElhinney, Marston, Kazwala
and Lankester.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2021.728271 
PMCID: PMC8511528
PMID: 34660765 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

