
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 20;16(10):e0257978. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0257978.
eCollection 2021.

Understanding an evolving pandemic: An analysis of the clinical time delay
distributions of COVID-19 in the United Kingdom.

Ward T(1)(2), Johnsen A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Public Health England, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Joint Biosecurity Centre, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Health and Social Care, London, United Kingdom.

Understanding and monitoring the epidemiological time delay dynamics of
SARS-CoV-2 infection provides insights that are key to discerning changes in the 
phenotype of the virus, the demographics impacted, the efficacy of treatment, and
the ability of the health service to manage large volumes of patients. This paper
analyses how the pandemic has evolved in the United Kingdom through the temporal 
changes to the epidemiological time delay distributions for clinical outcomes.
Using the most complete clinical data presently available, we have analysed,
through a doubly interval censored Bayesian modelling approach, the time from
infection to a clinical outcome. Across the pandemic, for the periods that were
defined as epidemiologically distinct, the modelled mean ranges from 8.0 to 9.7
days for infection to hospitalisation, 10.3 to 15.0 days for hospitalisation to
death, and 17.4 to 24.7 days for infection to death. The time delay from
infection to hospitalisation has increased since the first wave of the pandemic. 
A marked decrease was observed in the time from hospitalisation to death and
infection to death at times of high incidence when hospitals and ICUs were under 
the most pressure. There is a clear relationship between age groups that is
indicative of the youngest and oldest demographics having the shortest time delay
distributions before a clinical outcome. A statistically significant difference
was found between genders for the time delay from infection to hospitalisation,
which was not found for hospitalisation to death. The results by age group
indicate that younger demographics that require clinical intervention for
SARS-CoV-2 infection are more likely to require earlier hospitalisation that
leads to a shorter time to death, which is suggestive of the largely more
vulnerable nature of these individuals that succumb to infection. The distinction
found between genders for exposure to hospitalisation is revealing of gender
healthcare seeking behaviours.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0257978 
PMCID: PMC8528322
PMID: 34669712  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist. The authors were employed by the Department of Health and Social
Care but received no specific funding for this study.

