
1. BMJ Open. 2021 Oct 18;11(10):e051497. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-051497.

Impact of COVID-19 restrictions on preschool children's eating, activity and
sleep behaviours: a qualitative study.

Clarke J(1), Kipping R(2), Chambers S(3), Willis K(2), Taylor H(2), Brophy R(2), 
Hannam K(2), Simpson SA(3), Langford R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Applied Health Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham,
UK.
(2)Centre for Public Health, Population Health Sciences, Bristol Medical School, 
University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.
(3)School of Social and Political Sciences and MRC/CSO Social and Public Health
Sciences Unit, Institute of Health and Wellbeing, University of Glasgow, Glasgow,
UK.
(4)Centre for Public Health, Population Health Sciences, Bristol Medical School, 
University of Bristol, Bristol, UK Beki.langford@bristol.ac.uk.

OBJECTIVES: In spring 2020, the first COVID-19 national lockdown placed
unprecedented restrictions on the behaviour and movements of the UK population.
Citizens were ordered to 'stay at home', only allowed to leave their houses to
buy essential supplies, attend medical appointments or exercise once a day. We
explored how lockdown and its subsequent easing changed young children's everyday
activities, eating and sleep habits to gain insight into the impact for health
and well-being.
DESIGN: In-depth qualitative interviews; data analysed using thematic analysis.
SETTING: South West and West Midlands of England.
PARTICIPANTS: Twenty parents (16 mothers; 4 fathers) of preschool-age children
(3-5 years) due to start school in September 2020. Forty per cent of the sample
were from Black, Asian or minority ethnic backgrounds and half lived in the most 
deprived areas.
RESULTS: Children's activity, screen time, eating and sleep routines had been
disrupted. Parents reported children ate more snacks, but families also spent
more time preparing meals and eating together. Most parents reported a reduction 
in their children's physical activity and an increase in screen time, which some 
linked to difficulties in getting their child to sleep. Parents sometimes
expressed guilt about changes in activity, screen time and snacking over
lockdown. Most felt these changes would be temporary, though others worried about
re-establishing healthy routines.
CONCLUSIONS: Parents reported that lockdown negatively impacted on preschool
children's eating, activity and sleep routines. While some positive changes were 
identified, many participants described lack of routines, habits and boundaries
which may have been detrimental for child health and development. Guidance and
support for families during COVID-19 restrictions could be valuable to help
maintain healthy activity, eating, screen time and sleeping routines to protect
child health and ensure unhealthy habits are not adopted.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-051497 
PMCID: PMC8523958
PMID: 34663663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

