
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 20;16(10):e0257732. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0257732.
eCollection 2021.

What influences attitudes about artificial intelligence adoption: Evidence from
U.S. local officials.

Horowitz MC(1), Kahn L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Perry World House, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
United States of America.
(2)Council on Foreign Relations, Washington, D.C., United States of America.

Rapid advances in machine learning and related techniques have increased optimism
about self-driving cars, autonomous surgery, and other uses of artificial
intelligence (AI). But adoption of these technologies is not simply a matter of
breakthroughs in the design and training of algorithms. Regulators around the
world will have to make a litany of choices about law and policy surrounding AI. 
To advance knowledge of how they will make these choices, we draw on a unique
survey pool-690 local officials in the United States-a representative sample of
U.S. local officials. These officials will make many of the decisions about AI
adoption, from government use to regulation, given the decentralized structure of
the United States. The results show larger levels of support for autonomous
vehicles than autonomous surgery. Moreover, those that used ridesharing apps
prior to the COVID-19 pandemic are significantly more supportive of autonomous
vehicles. We also find that self-reported familiarity with AI is correlated with 
increased approval of AI uses in a variety of areas, including facial
recognition, natural disaster impact planning, and even military surveillance.
Related, those who expressed greater opposition to AI adoption also appear more
concerned about trade-offs between privacy and information and bias in
algorithms. Finally, the explanatory logic used by respondents varies based on
gender and prior experience with AI, which we demonstrate with quantitative text 
analysis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0257732 
PMCID: PMC8528275
PMID: 34669734  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

