
1. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2021 Oct;55(4):673-682. doi: 10.5578/mb.20219719.

[Two Case of Rhino-Orbito-Cerebral Mucormicosis Developed After COVID-19
Infection].

[Article in Turkish]

Demiroğu YZ(1), Ödemiş İ(1), Oruç E(1), Özer F(2), Ulaş B(3), Canpolat ET(4),
Yalçın Ç(5), Öğüç Şanlı Ö(6).

Author information: 
(1)Baskent University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Infectious Diseases and 
Clinical Microbiology, Adana, Turkey.
(2)Baskent University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Otolaryngology, Adana,
Turkey.
(3)Baskent University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Opthtalmology, Adana,
Turkey.
(4)Baskent University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Adana,
Turkey.
(5)Baskent University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Radiology, Adana,
Turkey.
(6)Baskent University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Microbiology,
Adana, Turkey.

Coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) infection causes excessive cytokine response and a
decrease in cellular immune response and this increases susceptibility to fungal 
co-infections. Mucormycosis is a rare, lifethreatening invasive fungal infection.
In this report, two cases who developed rhino-orbito-cerebral mucormycosis
shortly after having COVID-19 infection were presented. The first case was a
68-year old woman who admitted to our clinic with orbital cellulitis in her left 
eye and had a known diagnosis of asthma and rheumatoid arthritis. She was
diagnosed with COVID-19 pneumonia 40 days ago, stayed in the intensive care unit 
for a long time, and received pulse steroid (1000 mg methylprednisolone),
interleukin-1 (IL-1) inhibitor (anakinra) and broad-spectrum antibiotic
treatments together with antiviral therapy during this period. The second case
was a 63-year-old male patient with known diabetes mellitus, hypertension and
retinitis pigmentosa, with a history of hospitalization in the intensive care
unit due to COVID-19 pneumonia 20 days ago and received pulse steroid therapy
during this period. He admitted to our clinic with the complaints of droopy right
eyelid, swelling, nausea and vomiting. In both cases, paranasal sinus tomography 
findings were consistent with invasive sinusitis. Functional endoscopic sinus
surgery was performed immediately in less than 16 hours from the first admission 
in both cases. Histopathological examination of the both cases revealed results
consistent with mucormycosis. Mucorales spp. was isolated in sinus tissue culture
of the second case taken during the operation. Both of the patients received
liposomal amphotericin B. First case died on the 19th day of the treatment.
Second case was discharged with full recovery after nine weeks of treatment. The 
suppression of cellular immunity during the COVID-19 infection, and the use of
steroids and interleukin inhibitors in the treatment of severe cases may increase
secondary invasive fungal infections. Therefore, clinicians should more
frequently consider possible fungal infections in patients with COVID-19.

DOI: 10.5578/mb.20219719 
PMID: 34666667  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

