
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2021 Oct 20:AEM0183921. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01839-21. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Colibrimycins, novel halogenated hybrid PKS-NRPS compounds produced by
Streptomyces sp. CS147.

Prado-Alonso L(1)(2)(3), Pérez-Victoria I(4), Malmierca MG(1)(2)(3), Montero
I(1)(2)(3), Rioja-Blanco E(1), Martín J(4), Reyes F(4), Méndez C(1)(2)(3), Salas 
JA(1)(2)(3), Olano C(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Funcional, Universidad de Oviedo, Oviedo (Asturias), 
Spain.
(2)Instituto Universitario de Oncología del Principado de Asturias (I.U.O.P.A),
Universidad de Oviedo, Oviedo (Asturias), Spain.
(3)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Principado de Asturias (ISPA), Oviedo
(Asturias), Spain.
(4)Fundación MEDINA, Parque Tecnológico de Ciencias de la Salud, Granada, Spain.

The improvement on genome sequencing techniques has brought to light the
biosynthetic potential of actinomycetes due to the high number of gene clusters
they present compared to the number of known compounds. Genome mining is a recent
strategy in the search for novel bioactive compounds, which involves the analysis
of sequenced genomes to identify uncharacterized natural product biosynthetic
gene clusters, many of which are cryptic or silent under laboratory conditions,
and to develop experimental approaches to identify their products. Owing to the
importance of halogenation in terms of structural diversity, bioavailability and 
bioactivity, searching for new halogenated bioactive compounds has become an
interesting issue in the field of natural product discovery. Following this
purpose, a screening for halogenase coding genes was performed on twelve
Streptomyces strains isolated from fungus growing ants of the Attini tribe. Using
the bioinformatics tools antiSMASH and BLAST, six halogenase coding genes were
identified. Some of these genes were located within biosynthetic gene clusters
(BGCs), which were studied by construction of several mutants for the
identification of the putative halogenated compounds produced. The comparison of 
the metabolite production profile of wild type strains and their corresponding
mutants by UPLC-UV and HPLC-MS allowed us the identification of a novel family of
halogenated compounds in Streptomyces sp. CS147, designated as colibrimycins.
Importance Genome mining has proven its usefulness in the search for novel
bioactive compounds produced by microorganisms, and halogenases comprise an
interesting starting point. In this work, we have identified a new halogenase
coding gene, which led to the discovery of novel lipopetide NRPS/PKS-derived
natural products, the colibrimycins, produced by Streptomyces sp. CS147, isolated
from Attini ant niche. Some colibrimycins display an unusual α-ketoamide moiety
in the peptide structure. Although its biosynthetic origin remains unknown, its
presence might be related with a hypothetical inhibition of virus proteases and, 
together with the presence of the halogenase, it represents a feature to be
incorporated in the arsenal of structural modifications available for
combinatorial biosynthesis.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01839-21 
PMID: 34669429 

