
1. Hawaii J Health Soc Welf. 2021 Sep;80(9 Suppl 1):88-101.

A Historical and Contemporary Review of the Contextualization and Social
Determinants of Health of Micronesian Migrants in the United States.

Rehuher D(1), Hishinuma ES(1), Goebert DA(1), Palafox NA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of
Hawai'i at Mānoa, Honolulu, HI (DR, ESH, DAG).
(2)Department of Family Medicine and Community Health, John A. Burns School of
Medicine, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, Honolulu, HI (NAP).

Hawai'i's Pacific Islander (PI) population has suffered a higher burden of
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) infections, hospitalizations, and deaths
compared to other groups in the state. The Hawai'i Emergency Management Agency
Community Care Outreach Unit conducted an assessment across the state to gain an 
understanding of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the health and social
welfare of households. Survey data was collected from individuals across the
state during a period of 3 weeks (August 12-September 5, 2020). The following are
resulting recommendations from the Pacific Island community to mitigate the
impact and disparities of the pandemic as immediate and medium-term structural
requests: (1) ensure that Pacific Island communities are proactively represented 
in state and county committees that develop health interventions to ensure that
relevant language and culturally tailored communications and strategies are
included, (2) provide consistent funding and community centered support to ensure
consistent COVID-19 impact services for the Pacific Island families, (3) enhance 
the capacity of PI health care navigators and interpreters through increased
funding and program support, and (4) engage state policy makers immediately to
understand and address the systemic structural barriers to health care and social
services for Pacific Islanders in Hawai'i. These recommendations were developed
to address the generational inequities and disparities that exist for Pacific
islanders in Hawai'i which were exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic.

©Copyright 2021 by University Health Partners of Hawai‘i (UHP Hawai‘i).


PMCID: PMC8504325
PMID: 34661132  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

