
1. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2021 Oct 19. doi: 10.1007/s00262-021-03057-5. [Epub
ahead of print]

CD4 + T cells are found within endemic Burkitt lymphoma and modulate Burkitt
lymphoma precursor cell viability and expression of pathogenically relevant
Epstein-Barr virus genes.

Sidorov S(1), Fux L(2), Steiner K(2), Bounlom S(2), Traxel S(2), Azzi T(2),
Berisha A(3)(4), Berger C(2), Bernasconi M(2)(5)(6), Niggli FK(2), Perner Y(7),
Pather S(7), Kempf W(3)(4), Nadal D(2), Bürgler S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Infectious Diseases and Cancer Research, Children's Research
Center, University Children's Hospital of Zurich, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland. semjon.sidorov@uzh.ch.
(2)Experimental Infectious Diseases and Cancer Research, Children's Research
Center, University Children's Hospital of Zurich, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.
(3)Kempf Und Pfaltz, Histological Diagnostics, Zürich, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Inselspital, Bern University 
Hospital, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Biomedical Research, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(7)Division of Anatomical Pathology, National Health Laboratory Service, Chris
Hani Baragwanath Academic Hospital, School of Pathology, University of the
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(8)Experimental Infectious Diseases and Cancer Research, Children's Research
Center, University Children's Hospital of Zurich, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland. simone.buergler@uzh.ch.

Endemic Burkitt lymphoma (eBL) is an aggressive B cell cancer characterized by an
IgH/c-myc translocation and the harboring of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Evidence
accumulates that CD4 + T cells might contribute to eBL pathogenesis. Here, we
investigate the presence of CD4 + T cells in primary eBL tissue and their
potential dichotomous impact on an EBV-infected pre-eBL cell model using ex vivo 
material and in vitro co-cultures. In addition, we establish a novel method to
study the effect of IgH/c-myc translocation in primary B cells by employing a
CRISPR/Cas9 knock-in approach to introduce and tag de novo translocation. We
unprecedently document that CD4 + T cells are present in primary eBL tumor
tissue. Furthermore, we demonstrate that CD4 + T cells on the one hand suppress
eBL development by killing pre-eBL cells lacking IgH/c-myc translocation in vitro
and on the other hand indirectly promote eBL development by inducing crucial EBV 
Latency III to Latency I switching in pre-eBL cells. Finally, we show that while 
the mere presence of an IgH/c-myc translocation does not suffice to escape
CD4 + T-cell-mediated killing in vitro, the CD4 + T-cell-mediated suppression of 
EBV's Latency III program in vivo may allow cells harboring an IgH/c-myc
translocation and additional mutations to evade immune control and proliferate by
means of deregulated c-myc activity, resulting in neoplasia. Thus, our study
highlights the dichotomous effects of CD4 + T cells and the mechanisms involved
in eBL pathogenesis, suggests mechanisms of their impact on eBL progression, and 
provides a novel in vitro model for further investigation of IgH/c-myc
translocation.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00262-021-03057-5 
PMID: 34668039 

