
1. Neurol Sci. 2021 Oct 19. doi: 10.1007/s10072-021-05670-9. [Epub ahead of print]

The case of encephalitis in a COVID-19 pediatric patient.

Urso L(1), Distefano MG(1), Cambula G(2), Colomba AI(1), Nuzzo D(3)(4), Picone
P(5)(6), Giacomazza D(7), Sicurella L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Neurologia P.O. S. Antonio Abate, Azienda Sanitaria
Provinciale di Trapani, Trapani, Italy.
(2)Unità Operativa Complessa Radiologia P.O.S. Antonio Abate, Azienda Sanitaria
Provinciale di Trapani, Trapani, Italy. gaetanocambula@libero.it.
(3)Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Istituto per la Ricerca e l'Innovazione
Biomedica (CNR-IRIB), Palermo, Italy. domenico.nuzzo@cnr.it.
(4)Dipartimento of Scienze Biologiche, Chimiche, Farmaceutiche e Tecnologiche
(STEBICEF), University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy. domenico.nuzzo@cnr.it.
(5)Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Istituto per la Ricerca e l'Innovazione
Biomedica (CNR-IRIB), Palermo, Italy.
(6)Dipartimento of Scienze Biologiche, Chimiche, Farmaceutiche e Tecnologiche
(STEBICEF), University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(7)Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Istituto di Biofisica (CNR-IBF), Palermo, 
Italy.

BACKGROUND: The COVID-19 pandemic, induced by the worldwide spreading of the
SARS-CoV-2, is well known for its clinical picture consistent with respiratory
symptoms. If pulmonary complications are the most common manifestation of the
disease, neurological problems are also significantly present, with complications
including acute cerebrovascular events, encephalitis, Guillain-Barré and Miller
Fisher syndromes, acute necrotizing hemorrhagic encephalopathy and hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis. These medical signs can be considered direct effects of the 
virus on the nervous system, para-infectious or post-infectious immune-mediated
diseases, and neurological complications of the systemic effects of the
SARS-CoV-2.
CASE: In the present article, the encephalitis case in a 5-year-old girl positive
for COVID-19 admitted to the emergency department complaining of fever and
swelling in the neck is described. At this time, her neurological examination was
unremarkable. Over the next few days, the fever went down and she experienced
acute behavioral changes, mild confusion, and drowsiness. The brain MRI and
electroencephalography (EEG) showed CNS involvement, suggestive of encephalitis.
CONCLUSION: The dramatic improvement of the symptoms after immunotherapy with
corticosteroids reinforced the hypothesis of an immune-related mechanism.

© 2021. Fondazione Società Italiana di Neurologia.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-021-05670-9 
PMCID: PMC8525855
PMID: 34668122 

