
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Oct 31;9(2):e0093021. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.00930-21. Epub
2021 Oct 20.

Eptesicus fuscus Orthorubulavirus, a Close Relative of Human Parainfluenza Virus 
4, Discovered in a Bat in South Dakota.

Hause BM(1)(2), Nelson E(1)(2), Christopher-Hennings J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Disease Research and Diagnostic Laboratory, South Dakota State
Universitygrid.263791.8, Brookings, South Dakota, USA.
(2)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, South Dakota State
Universitygrid.263791.8, Brookings, South Dakota, USA.

Bats are a reservoir for many zoonotic viruses and host large numbers of
genetically diverse species in the families Rhabdoviridae, Coronaviridae, and
Paramyxoviridae. Viruses from these families have repeatedly spilled over to
humans in recent decades, causing significant clinical disease and deaths. Here, 
metagenomic sequencing of a big brown bat (Eptesicus fuscus) submitted for rabies
testing due to human exposure identified a novel paramyxovirus, Eptesicus fuscus 
orthorubulavirus (EfORV), in South Dakota, United States. The nearly complete
15,814-nucleotide genome shared 72% identity with that of human parainfluenza
virus 4 (HPIV4), a virus that causes significant clinical disease, typically
bronchiolitis and pneumonia, in children less than 2 years of age. Phylogenetic
analysis confirmed a close evolutionary history between EfORV and HPIV4,
reminiscent of other orthorubulaviruses with highly similar bat and mammalian
species, including conspecific human and bat mumps virus, mammalian parainfluenza
virus 5 and bat Alston virus, and porcine La Piedad Michoacán virus and bat
Mapuera virus. These results support the idea that bats are a reservoir for
diverse paramyxoviruses with closely shared evolutionary histories, compared with
a number of significant human pathogens, and expand the range of bat
paramyxoviruses to North America. Given the propensity of paramyxoviruses to
overcome species barriers, additional surveillance and characterization of EfORV 
are warranted. IMPORTANCE Bats are a reservoir of large numbers of viruses. Among
bat-borne zoonotic viruses, members of Coronaviridae and Paramyxoviridae have had
the largest impact on human health. The repeated spillover of bat viruses to
humans, often with devastating results, has led to increased surveillance and
virus discovery efforts in hot spots for virus emergence, largely Asia and
Africa. Apart from rabies virus, little surveillance of viruses in bats is
performed in North America. Here, viral metagenomic sequencing identified a close
relative to HPIV4 in a big brown bat found in a motel room in South Dakota. The
virus, EfORV, was 72% identical to HPIV4, which causes clinically significant
respiratory disease, mainly in children; it represents the first bat
paramyxovirus identified in North America. Close genetic relationships between
bat and mammalian orthorubulaviruses underscore the importance of bats as a
reservoir for zoonotic viruses.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.00930-21 
PMCID: PMC8528096
PMID: 34668744 

