
1. Hepatol Res. 2021 Oct 19. doi: 10.1111/hepr.13723. [Epub ahead of print]

Mortality of inactive hepatitis B virus carriers in Japan is similar to that of
the general population.

Kumada T(1), Toyoda H(2), Yasuda S(2), Ito T(3), Tanaka J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Faculty of Nursing, Gifu Kyoritsu University, Ogaki,
Gifu, Japan.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Ogaki Municipal Hospital,
Ogaki, Gifu, Japan.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Nagoya University Graduate
School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Infectious Disease Control, and Prevention,
Hiroshima University Institute of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima,
Japan.

AIMS: Data on the long-term outcomes of individuals with hepatitis B virus (HBV) 
infection who are hepatitis envelope antigen (HBeAg)-negative inactive carriers
(ICs) are limited due to small numbers. We compared the long-term prognosis of
well-defined ICs with that of age- and gender-matched general population
controls.
METHODS: A total of 526 HBeAg-negative patients who demonstrated alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) level ≤40 U/L and HBV DNA level ≤4.3 log IU/ml at least
three times within 1 year after the start of follow-up were enrolled as ICs.
Inactive carriers were divided into two groups: Group A (n = 332), whose ALT
level was ≤30 U/L and HBV DNA level was ≤3.3 log IU/ml, and Group B (remaining
patients, n = 194). We determined the long-term prognosis of ICs and compared it 
with that of general population controls. We also analyzed factors associated
with hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) clearance and phase transition in ICs.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences in hepatocellular carcinoma
development or all-cause, liver-related, or non-liver-related mortality between
Groups A and B. There was no significant difference in all-cause mortality
between ICs and the general population. Low HBsAg level (≤3.0 log IU/ml) and the 
presence of fatty liver were associated with HBsAg clearance and high
alpha-fetoprotein level was associated with phase transition.
CONCLUSIONS: The long-term prognosis of well-defined ICs was similar to that of
general population controls. In addition, the ICs had a high HBsAg clearance rate
and low phase transition rate.

© 2021 Japan Society of Hepatology.

DOI: 10.1111/hepr.13723 
PMID: 34665918 

