
1. Virus Res. 2022 Jan 2;307:198605. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198605. Epub 2021 
Oct 16.

Axl-/- neurons promote JEV infection by dampening the innate immunity.

Yang J(1), Li M(2), Yuan M(1), Bian P(2), Dong Y(3), Zhang H(4), Luo C(5), Xue
Z(5), Wang Y(3), Zhang F(3), Shen L(6), Lei Y(7).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Resources Biology and Biotechnology in Western China,
Ministry of Education, Provincial Key Laboratory of Biotechnology, College of
Life Science, Northwest University, Xi'an, China.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Tangdu Hospital, Air Force Medical
University, Xi'an, China.
(3)Department of Microbiology, School of Preclinical Medicine, Air Force Medical 
University, Xi'an, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Xijing Hospital, Air Force Medical University, Xi'an,
China.
(5)Pathogenic Biology, Medical College of Yan'an University, Yan'an, China.
(6)Key Laboratory of Resources Biology and Biotechnology in Western China,
Ministry of Education, Provincial Key Laboratory of Biotechnology, College of
Life Science, Northwest University, Xi'an, China. Electronic address:
shenlx@nwu.edu.cn.
(7)Department of Microbiology, School of Preclinical Medicine, Air Force Medical 
University, Xi'an, China. Electronic address: yflei@fmmu.edu.cn.

Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) causes the most commonly diagnosed viral
encephalitis in Asia. JEV is a highly neurotropic flavivirus that can replicate
efficiently in the brain. Axl belongs to the TAM (Tyro3, Axl, Mer) family, a
group of tyrosine kinase receptors involved in the viral entry, micked as
apoptotic bodies and regulation of innate immunity. However, the underlying
mechanisms on its regulation in the neurons for JEV are unclear. Here, we found
that Axl was upregulated in neurons after JEV infection. Unexpectedly, Axl
deficient (Axl-/-) mice were more susceptible to JEV infection with increased
viral loads in neurons. The RNA-sequencing analysis between the wild type neurons
and Axl-/- neurons infected with JEV showed that many interferon-stimulated genes
were downregulated in the Axl-/- neurons which innate immunity was attenuated
largely. The rescue experiment in Axl-/- neurons indicated that Axl may be
positively involved in the regulation of antiviral immunity. Taken together, our 
data demonstrated that Axl may play an antiviral role in JEV replication within
neurons by modulating neuronal innate immunity.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2021.198605 
PMID: 34662681 

