
1. Heliyon. 2021 Oct;7(10):e08143. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e08143. Epub 2021 Oct
11.

Application of machine learning in the prediction of COVID-19 daily new cases: A 
scoping review.

Ghafouri-Fard S(1), Mohammad-Rahimi H(2), Motie P(2), Minabi MAS(3), Taheri M(4),
Nateghinia S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Dental Research Center, Research Institute of Dental Science, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Sirjan University of Technology, Kerman, Iran.
(4)Urology and Nephrology Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Skull Base Research Center, Loghman Hakim Hospital, Shahid Beheshti University
of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

COVID-19 has produced a global pandemic affecting all over of the world.
Prediction of the rate of COVID-19 spread and modeling of its course have
critical impact on both health system and policy makers. Indeed, policy making
depends on judgments formed by the prediction models to propose new strategies
and to measure the efficiency of the imposed policies. Based on the nonlinear and
complex nature of this disorder and difficulties in estimation of virus
transmission features using traditional epidemic models, artificial intelligence 
methods have been applied for prediction of its spread. Based on the importance
of machine and deep learning approaches in the estimation of COVID-19 spreading
trend, in the present study, we review studies which used these strategies to
predict the number of new cases of COVID-19. Adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference
system, long short-term memory, recurrent neural network and multilayer
perceptron are among the mostly used strategies in this regard. We compared the
performance of several machine learning methods in prediction of COVID-19 spread.
Root means squared error (RMSE), mean absolute error (MAE), R2 coefficient of
determination (R2), and mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) parameters were
selected as performance measures for comparison of the accuracy of models. R2
values have ranged from 0.64 to 1 for artificial neural network (ANN) and
Bidirectional long short-term memory (LSTM), respectively. Adaptive neuro-fuzzy
inference system (ANFIS), Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) and
Multilayer perceptron (MLP) have also have R2 values near 1. ARIMA and LSTM had
the highest MAPE values. Collectively, these models are capable of identification
of learning parameters that affect dissimilarities in COVID-19 spread across
various regions or populations, combining numerous intervention methods and
implementing what-if scenarios by integrating data from diseases having analogous
trends with COVID-19. Therefore, application of these methods would help in
precise policy making to design the most appropriate interventions and avoid
non-efficient restrictions.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e08143 
PMCID: PMC8503968
PMID: 34660935 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

