
1. Hawaii J Health Soc Welf. 2021 Sep;80(9 Suppl 1):12-23.

A Report on the Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on the Health and Social Welfare 
in the State of Hawai'i.

Buenconsejo-Lum LE(1), Qureshi K(2), Palafox NA(1), Zhi Q(2), Wasserman GM(3),
Fernandez GK(3), Arndt RG(4).

Author information: 
(1)John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, Honolulu, HI
(LEB, NAP).
(2)School of Nursing and Dental Hygiene, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa,
Honolulu, HI (KQ, QZ).
(3)Hawai'i State Department of Health, Communicable Disease & Public Health
Nursing Division, Honolulu, HI (GMW, GKF).
(4)Myron B. Thompson School of Social Work and Public Health, University of
Hawai'i at Mānoa, Honolulu, HI (RGA).

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has had a profound impact on the
world. To address the impact of COVID-19 in the state of Hawai'i, the Hawai'i
Emergency Management Agency (HI-EMA) Community Care Outreach Unit conducted an
assessment survey to determine the impact of COVID-19 on the health and social
welfare of individuals and their families across the state. This article presents
key statewide findings from this assessment, including areas of need and
community-based recommendations to help mitigate the impact of the pandemic,
particularly for vulnerable groups. A total of 7927 participants responded to the
assessment survey from across the state's counties. In all questions related to
paying for essentials, the percentage of participants that expect to have
problems in the future, as compared to now, almost doubled. Slightly higher than 
one-third reported that they would know how to care for a family member in the
home with COVID-19, and half of the respondents reported a lack of space for
isolation in their home. About half reported that if they got COVID-19, they
would have someone available to care for them. Overall, Native Hawaiian, Pacific 
Islander, and Filipino groups reported greater burden in almost all areas
surveyed. The results presented provide a baseline in understanding the impact,
needs, and threats to the health and social welfare of individuals and their
families across the state of Hawai'i. Local stakeholders can utilize this
information when developing priorities, strategies, and programs to address
current and future pandemics in the state.

©Copyright 2021 by University Health Partners of Hawai‘i (UHP Hawai‘i).


PMCID: PMC8504317
PMID: 34661124  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

