
1. J Ethnopharmacol. 2022 Feb 10;284:114748. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2021.114748. Epub
2021 Oct 15.

A review of the ethnopharmacology, phytochemistry and pharmacology of
Cynanchumatratum.

Zhang Y(1), Yang Y(1), Yan C(1), Li J(2), Zhang P(1), Liu R(3), He J(4), Chang
YX(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Component-based Chinese Medicine, Tianjin University
of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tianjin, 301617, China; Tianjin Key Laboratories
of Phytochemistry and Pharmaceutical Analysis, Tianjin University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, Tianjin, 301617, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Component-based Chinese Medicine, Tianjin University
of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tianjin, 301617, China. Electronic address:
Lijin@tjutcm.edu.cn.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Component-based Chinese Medicine, Tianjin University
of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tianjin, 301617, China; College of
Pharmaceutical Engineering of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tianjin University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tianjin, 301617, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Component-based Chinese Medicine, Tianjin University
of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tianjin, 301617, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Component-based Chinese Medicine, Tianjin University
of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tianjin, 301617, China; Tianjin Key Laboratories
of Phytochemistry and Pharmaceutical Analysis, Tianjin University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, Tianjin, 301617, China. Electronic address:
Tcmcyx@tjutcm.edu.cn.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: The dried roots and rhizomes of Cynanchum atratum
Bunge is named 'Baiwei' according to traditional Chinese medicine theory. It is
also named Cynanchi atrati Radix in Chinese Pharmacopoeia. Cynanchi atrati Radix 
is famous for its medicinal value of clearing away heat, relieving drenching,
detoxifying and treating abscesses. It was commonly used in some Asian countries 
for the treatment of fever, vasoconstrictive syncope, lymphangitis and other
diseases, obviously due to the effect of C21 steroidal glycosides.
THE AIM OF THE REVIEW: The review concentrates on the botany, ethnopharmacology, 
phytochemistry, pharmacology and toxicology of Cynanchum atratum. We also discuss
expectations for prospective research and implementation of this herb.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Relevant information about C. atratum was gained from
ancient books and records, Doctoral and master's Theses, Science Direct, Pubmed, 
Wiley, CNKI, WanFang DATA, Google Scholar and other domestic and foreign
literature. Some electronic databases have been included.
RESULTS: As a member of the Apocynaceae family, C. atratum possesses its
up-and-coming biological characteristics. It is widely reported for treating of
postpartum fatigue, vomiting, urine drops, nephritis, urinary tract infection,
edema, bronchitis and rheumatic low back pain. By now, over 100 compounds have
been identified from C. atratum, including C21 steroidal glycosides,
acetophenones, alkaloids, volatile oil and other ingredients. Activities such as 
anti-inflammatory, anti-tumor, anti-virus, antibacterial, anti-forgetful and
others have been corroborated in vivo and in vitro. In addition, many of the
active ingredients, such as Cynatratoside A, Cynanversicoside A, B, D, G,
p-hydroxyacetophenone, 2,4-dihydroxyacetophenone and some volatile oils have been
used as quality markers.
CONCLUSION: All kinds of research conducted on C.atratum, especially in field of 
ethnopharmacological use, phytochemicals and pharmacology have been reviewed. The
herb has been used over the years in treating nephritis, urinary tract infection,
bronchitis and rheumatic lumbocrural pain. Many studies have been carried out to 
identify compounds that play a leading role in drug activity. However, the
mechanism of drug therapy remains unclear. The evidence used to prove the quality
standard of medicinal materials is obviously inadequate. Besides, safety
evaluation is necessary for clinical medication. Similarly, the separation of
steroidal saponins and the development of new drugs will also need further
discussion.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2021.114748 
PMID: 34662666 

