
1. BMJ Open. 2021 Oct 18;11(10):e048299. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2020-048299.

Behaviours of older adults and caregivers preparing for elective surgery: a
virtually conducted mixed-methods research protocol to improve surgical outcomes.

Norcott A(1)(2), Chan CL(2), Nyquist L(3), Bynum JP(2)(4), Min L(5)(2), Fetters
MD(6), DeJonckheere M(4)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center (GRECC), VA Ann Arbor
Healthcare System, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA norcotta@med.umich.edu.
(2)Division of Geriatric and Palliative Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Institute of Gerontology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(4)Institute for Healthcare Policy & Innovation, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA.
(5)Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center (GRECC), VA Ann Arbor
Healthcare System, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(6)Department of Family Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan,
USA.

INTRODUCTION: Older adults (age ≥65 years) are pursuing increasingly complex,
elective surgeries; and, are at higher risk for intraoperative and postoperative 
complications. Patients and their caregivers frequently struggle with the
postoperative recovery process at home, which may contribute to complications. We
aim to identify opportunities to intervene during the preoperative period to
improve postoperative outcomes by understanding the preparatory behaviours of
older adults and their caregivers before a complex, elective surgery.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we will conduct this 
study via telephone and videoconferencing. Using a multiphase mixed-methods
research design, we will collect data on 10-15 patient-caregiver dyads from a
pool of older adults (across a spectrum of cognitive abilities) scheduled for an 
elective colorectal surgery between 1 July 2020 and 30 May 2021. We will collect 
quantitative and qualitative data before (T1, T2) and after (T3, T4) surgery.
Preoperatively, participants will each complete a cognitive assessment and a
semi-structured qualitative interview that focuses on their preparatory
behaviours (T1). They will then answer questionnaires about mood, self-efficacy
and home environment (T2). Three weeks following hospital discharge, participants
will complete another qualitative interview focusing on a comparison of
preoperative and postoperative preparedness (T3). Researchers will also collect
information about the patient's medical conditions, the postoperative
complications and healthcare utilisation from the patient's chart 30 days
following discharge (T4). We will code and conduct thematic analysis of the
qualitative data to identify salient themes. Quantitative data will be analysed
using basic descriptive statistics to characterise the participants. We will
integrate the qualitative and quantitative findings using results from the
quantitative scales to group participants and with use of joint display analysis.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: Ethics approval was obtained from the University of
Michigan IRB. Study findings will be disseminated through peer-reviewed journals 
and presentations at conferences.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2020-048299 
PMCID: PMC8524274
PMID: 34663655  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

