
1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2021 Oct 18:1-17. doi: 10.1080/07391102.2021.1990131. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Exploring potential inhibitors against Kyasanur forest disease by utilizing
molecular dynamics simulations and ensemble docking.

Kandagalla S(1), Novak J(1), Shekarappa SB(2), Grishina MA(1), Potemkin VA(1),
Kumbar B(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Computational Modeling of Drugs, Higher Medical and Biological
School, South Ural State University, Chelyabinsk, Russia.
(2)Department of PG Studies and Research in Biotechnology and Bioinformatics,
Kuvempu University, Shivamogga, Karnataka, India.
(3)ICAR-National Institute of Veterinary Epidemiology and Disease Informatics,
Bengaluru, Karnataka, India.

Kyasanur forest disease (KFD) is a tick-borne, neglected tropical disease, caused
by KFD virus (KFDV) which belongs to Flavivirus (Flaviviridae family). This
emerging viral disease is a major threat to humans. Currently, vaccination is the
only controlling method against the KFDV, and its effectiveness is very low. An
effective control strategy is required to combat this emerging tropical disease
using the existing resources. In this regard, in silico drug repurposing method
offers an effective strategy to find suitable antiviral drugs against KFDV
proteins. Drug repurposing is an effective strategy to identify new use for
approved or investigational drugs that are outside the scope of their initial
usage and the repurposed drugs have lower risk and higher safety compared to de
novo developed drugs, because their toxicity and safety issues are profoundly
investigated during the preclinical trials in human/other models. In the present 
work, we evaluated the effectiveness of the FDA approved and natural compounds
against KFDV proteins using in silico molecular docking and molecular
simulations. At present, no experimentally solved 3D structures for the KFD viral
proteins are available in Protein Data Bank and hence their homology model was
developed and used for the analysis. The present analysis successfully developed 
the reliable homology model of NS3 of KFDV, in terms of geometry and energy
contour. Further, in silico molecular docking and molecular dynamics simulations 
successfully presented four FDA approved drugs and one natural compound against
the NS3 homology model of KFDV. Communicated by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2021.1990131 
PMID: 34662258 

