
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 19;16(10):e0258689. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258689.
eCollection 2021.

Characteristics of patients in platform C19, a COVID-19 research database
combining primary care electronic health record and patient reported information.

Stanley B(1)(2), Davis A(1)(2), Jones R(1)(2)(3), Julious S(4), Ryan D(5),
Jackson D(6), Halpin D(7), Pinnock H(8), Quint J(9), Khunti K(10), Heaney L(11), 
Oliver P(4), Siddiqui S(12), Kemppinen A(1)(2), Appiagyei F(1)(2), Roberts
EJ(1)(2), Hardjojo A(2), Carter V(1)(2), Melle MV(1)(2), Price D(1)(2)(13);
Platform C19 committee.

Author information: 
(1)Optimum Patient Care, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(2)Observational and Pragmatic Research Institute, Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Faculty of Health, University of Plymouth, Plymouth, United Kingdom.
(4)University of Sheffield, Sheffield, South Yorkshire, United Kingdom.
(5)Usher Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(6)UK Severe Asthma Network and National Registry, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Trust
and Division of Asthma, Allergy & Lung Biology, King's College London, London,
United Kingdom.
(7)University of Exeter Medical School, College of Medicine and Health,
University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom.
(8)Asthma UK Centre for Applied Research, Usher Institute, The University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(9)National Heart & Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, United
Kingdom.
(10)Diabetes Research Centre, Leicester General Hospital, University of
Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom.
(11)UK Severe Asthma Network and National Registry & Centre for Experimental
Medicine, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, Northern Ireland.
(12)Institute for Lung Health, Leicester National Institute for Health Research
Biomedical Research Centre, University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom.
(13)Centre of Academic Primary Care, Division of Applied Health Sciences,
University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Data to better understand and manage the COVID-19 pandemic is
urgently needed. However, there are gaps in information stored within even the
best routinely-collected electronic health records (EHR) including test results, 
remote consultations for suspected COVID-19, shielding, physical activity, mental
health, and undiagnosed or untested COVID-19 patients. Observational and
Pragmatic Research Institute (OPRI) Singapore and Optimum Patient Care (OPC) UK
established Platform C19, a research database combining EHR data and bespoke
patient questionnaire. We describe the demographics, clinical characteristics,
patient behavior, and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic using data within Platform 
C19.
METHODS: EHR data from Platform C19 were extracted from 14 practices across UK
participating in the OPC COVID-19 Quality Improvement program on a continuous,
monthly basis. Starting 7th August 2020, consenting patients aged 18-85 years
were invited in waves to fill an online questionnaire. Descriptive statistics
were summarized using all data available up to 22nd January 2021.
FINDINGS: From 129,978 invitees, 31,033 responded. Respondents were predominantly
female (59.6%), white (93.5%), and current or ex-smokers (52.6%). Testing for
COVID-19 was received by 23.8% of respondents, of which 7.9% received positive
results. COVID-19 symptoms lasted ≥4 weeks in 19.5% of COVID-19 positive
respondents. Up to 39% respondents reported a negative impact on questions
regarding their mental health. Most (67%-76%) respondents with asthma, Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD), diabetes, heart, or kidney disease reported
no change in the condition of their diseases.
INTERPRETATION: Platform C19 will enable research on key questions relating to
COVID-19 pandemic not possible using EHR data alone.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258689 
PMCID: PMC8525750
PMID: 34665843  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Brooklyn Stanley, Andrew Davis and Anu Kemppinen 
are employees of Observational and Pragmatic Research Institute, which conducted 
this study and conducted paid research in respiratory disease on behalf of the
following other organisations in the past 5 years: Aerocrine, AKL Research and
Development Ltd, Almirall, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi,
GlaxoSmithKline, Mylan, Mundipharma, Napp, Novartis, Orion, Takeda, Teva, Zentiva
(a Sanofi company). Rupert Jones reports grants, personal fees, and non-financial
support from AstraZeneca and OPRI, personal fees and non-financial support from
Boehringer Ingelheim, grants, personal fees, and non-financial support from GSK, 
grants and non-financial support from Novartis, non-financial support from
Nutricia, and personal fees from Pfizer outside the submitted work. Steven
Julious reports no conflict of interest. Dermot Ryan has (in the last 3 years)
lectured on behalf of, received sponsorship from, or acted as a paid advisor to
Mylan, AZ, Chiesi, Novartis, GSK, Boehringer Ingelheim and Regeneron. David
Jackson has received advisory board and speaker fees from AstraZeneca, GSK, BI,
Teva, Napp, Chiesi, Novartis and research grant funding from AstraZeneca. David
Halpin has received sponsorship to attend international meetings, and honoraria
for lecturing, attending advisory boards and preparing educational materials from
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GSK, Novartis and Pfizer. Jennifer
Quint reports grants from MRC, grants from The Health Foundation, grants and
personal fees from AZ, grants from Bayer, grants and personal fees from Chiesi,
grants and personal fees from GSK, grants and personal fees from BI, outside the 
submitted work. Kamlesh Khunti has been a consultant and speaker for Novartis,
Novo Nordisk, Sanofi-Aventis, Lilly, and Merck Sharp & Dohme; has received grants
in support of investigator-initiated trials from Novartis, Novo Nordisk,
Sanofi-Aventis, Lilly, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Pfizer, and Boehringer Ingelheim; has
served on advisory boards for Novo Nordisk, Sanofi Aventis, Lilly, and Merck
Sharp & Dohme; and is supported by the UK National Institute for Health Research 
(NIHR) Applied Research Collaboration East Midlands and the NIHR Leicester
Biomedical Research Centre. Liam Heaney is an Academic Lead for the UK MRC
Consortium for Stratified Medicine in Severe Asthma – Industrial Pharma partners 
Amgen, AstraZeneca, MedImmune, Janssen, Novartis, Roche/Genentech,
GlaxoSmithKline, and Boehringer Ingelheim; prior project grant funding from
MedImmune, Novartis UK, Roche/Genentech, and GlaxoSmithKline; has taken part in
Advisory Boards / Lectures supported by Novartis, Roche/Evelo Biosciences,
Genentech, GlaxoSmithKline, Teva, Theravance and Vectura; has travel funding
support to international respiratory meetings (AstraZeneca, Chiesi, Novartis,
Boehringer Ingelheim, Teva, and GlaxoSmithKline) and has taken part in asthma
clinical trials (GlaxoSmithKline, Schering Plough, Synairgen, Novartis, and Roche
/ Genentech) for which his institution was remunerated. Salman Siddiqui reports
advisory board/advisory services and speaker fees from AstraZeneca,
GlaxoSmithKline, Chiesi, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Mundipharma, ERT
medical, Owlstone Medical and received grants from UKRI PHOSP-COVID consortium.
Francis Appiagyei, Emma-Jane Roberts, Marije van Melle and Victoria Carter are
employees of Optimum Patient Care United Kingdom who funded this study. David
Price has advisory board membership with AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim,
Chiesi, Mylan, Novartis, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Sanofi Genzyme, Thermofisher;
consultancy agreements with Airway Vista Secretariat, AstraZeneca, Boehringer
Ingelheim, Chiesi, EPG Communication Holdings Ltd, FIECON Ltd, Fieldwork
International, GlaxoSmithKline, Mylan, Mundipharma, Novartis, OM Pharma SA,
PeerVoice, Phadia AB, Spirosure Inc, Strategic North Limited, Synapse Research
Management Partners S.L., Talos Health Solutions, Theravance and WebMD Global
LLC; grants and unrestricted funding for investigator-initiated studies
(conducted through Observational and Pragmatic Research Institute Pte Ltd) from
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Mylan, Novartis, Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals, Respiratory Effectiveness Group, Sanofi Genzyme, Theravance and 
UK National Health Service; payment for lectures/speaking engagements from
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Cipla, GlaxoSmithKline, Kyorin, Mylan,
Mundipharma, Novartis, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals and Sanofi Genzyme; payment for 
travel/accommodation/meeting expenses from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim,
Mundipharma, Mylan, Novartis, Thermofisher; stock/stock options from AKL Research
and Development Ltd which produces phytopharmaceuticals; owns 74% of the social
enterprise Optimum Patient Care Ltd (Australia and UK) and 92.61% of
Observational and Pragmatic Research Institute Pte Ltd (Singapore); 5%
shareholding in Timestamp which develops adherence monitoring technology; is a
peer reviewer for grant committees of the UK Efficacy and Mechanism Evaluation
programme, and Health Technology Assessment; and was an expert witness for
GlaxoSmithKline.

