
1. Pest Manag Sci. 2021 Oct 18. doi: 10.1002/ps.6682. [Epub ahead of print]

Bioallethrin activates specific olfactory sensory neurons and elicits spatial
repellency in Aedes aegypti.

Valbon W(1)(2)(3), Andreazza F(1)(2)(3), Oliveira EE(1)(2), Liu F(1), Feng
B(1)(4), Hall M(5), Klimavicz J(5), Coats JR(5), Dong K(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Entomology, Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Viçosa, Brazil.
(3)Department of Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(4)Institute of Health and Environment, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou,
China.
(5)Department of Entomology, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Use of pyrethroid insecticides is a pivotal strategy for mosquito
control globally. Commonly known for their insecticidal activity by acting on
voltage-gated sodium channels, pyrethroids, such as bioallethrin and
transfluthrin, are used in mosquito coils, emanators and other vaporizers to
repel mosquitoes and other biting arthropods. However, whether specific olfactory
receptor neurons are activated by pyrethroids to trigger spatial repellency
remains unknown.
RESULTS: We used behavioral and electrophysiological approaches to elucidate the 
mechanism of bioallethrin repellency in Aedes aegypti, a major vector of dengue, 
yellow fever, Zika and chikungunya viruses. We found that bioallethrin elicits
spatial (i.e. non-contact) repellency and activates a specific type of olfactory 
receptor neuron in mosquito antennae. Furthermore, bioallethrin repellency is
significantly reduced in a mosquito mutant of Orco, an obligate olfactory
co-receptor that is essential for the function of odorant receptors (Ors). These 
results indicate that activation of specific Or(s) by bioallethrin contributes to
bioallethrin repellency. In addition, bioallethrin repellency was reduced in a
pyrethroid-resistant strain that carries two mutations in the sodium channel gene
that are responsible for knockdown resistance (kdr) to pyrethroids, indicating a 
role of activation of sodium channels in bioallethrin repellency.
CONCLUSION: Results from this study show that bioallethrin repellency is likely
to be the result of co-activation of Or(s) and sodium channels. These findings
not only contribute to our understanding of the modes of action of volatile
pyrethroids in spatial repellency, but also provide a framework for developing
new repellents based on the dual-target mechanism revealed.

© 2021 Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/ps.6682 
PMID: 34661374 

