
1. Front Vet Sci. 2021 Sep 29;8:681423. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2021.681423. eCollection 
2021.

Serological Surveillance of Rabies in Free-Range and Captive Common Vampire Bats 
Desmodus rotundus.

Megid J(1), Benavides Tala JA(1)(2), Belaz Silva LD(1), Castro Castro FF(1)(3),
Ribeiro BLD(1), Appolinário CM(1), Katz ISS(4), Scheffer KC(4), Silva SR(4), Rosa
AR(4), Barone GT(5), Alves Martorelli LF(5), de Almeida MF(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Science, São Paulo State University
(Unesp), Botucatu, Brazil.
(2)Centro de Investigación para la sustestabilidad, Facultad de Ciencias de la
vida, Universidad Andrés Bello, Santiago, Chile.
(3)Animal Health Department, Universidad Antonio Narino Cauca Popayan, Popayán,
Colômbia.
(4)Diagnostics Sector, Immunology Laboratory Pasteur Institute of São Paulo, São 
Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Centro de Controle de Zoonoses, Coordenadoria de vigilância em saúde, São
Paulo, Brazil.

The control of vampire bat rabies (VBR) in Brazil is based on the culling of
Desmodus rotundus and the surveillance of outbreaks caused by D. rotundus in
cattle and humans in addition to vaccination of susceptible livestock. The
detection of anti-rabies antibodies in vampire bats indicates exposure to the
rabies virus, and several studies have reported an increase of these antibodies
following experimental infection. However, the dynamics of anti-rabies antibodies
in natural populations of D. rotundus remains poorly understood. In this study,
we took advantage of recent outbreaks of VBR among livestock in the Sao Paulo
region of Brazil to test whether seroprevalence in D. rotundus reflects the
incidence of rabies in nearby livestock populations. Sixty-four D. rotundus were 
captured during and after outbreaks from roost located in municipalities
belonging to three regions with different incidences of rabies in herbivores.
Sixteen seropositive bats were then kept in captivity for up to 120 days, and
their antibodies and virus levels were quantified at different time points using 
the rapid fluorescent focus inhibition test (RFFIT). Antibody titers were
associated with the occurrence of ongoing outbreak, with a higher proportion of
bats showing titer >0.5 IU/ml in the region with a recent outbreak. However, low 
titers were still detected in bats from regions reporting the last outbreak of
rabies at least 3 years prior to sampling. This study suggests that serological
surveillance of rabies in vampire bats can be used as a tool to evaluate risk of 
outbreaks in at risk populations of cattle and human.

Copyright © 2021 Megid, Benavides Tala, Belaz Silva, Castro Castro, Ribeiro,
Appolinário, Katz, Scheffer, Silva, Rosa, Barone, Alves Martorelli and de
Almeida.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2021.681423 
PMCID: PMC8511519
PMID: 34660750 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

