
1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2021 Oct 18;17(10):e1009474. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009474.
eCollection 2021 Oct.

Factors affecting aerosol SARS-CoV-2 transmission via HVAC systems; a modeling
study.

Cotman ZJ(1), Bowden MJ(1), Richter BP(1), Phelps JH(1), Dibble CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Battelle Memorial Institute, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.

The role of heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems in the
transmission of SARS-CoV-2 is unclear. To address this gap, we simulated the
release of SARS-CoV-2 in a multistory office building and three social gathering 
settings (bar/restaurant, nightclub, wedding venue) using a well-mixed,
multi-zone building model similar to those used by Wells, Riley, and others. We
varied key factors of HVAC systems, such as the Air Changes Per Hour rate (ACH), 
Fraction of Outside Air (FOA), and Minimum Efficiency Reporting Values (MERV) to 
examine their effect on viral transmission, and additionally simulated the
protective effects of in-unit ultraviolet light decontamination (UVC) and
separate in-room air filtration. In all building types, increasing the ACH
reduced simulated infections, and the effects were seen even with low aerosol
emission rates. However, the benefits of increasing the fraction of outside air
and filter efficiency rating were greatest when the aerosol emission rate was
high. UVC filtration improved the performance of typical HVAC systems. In-room
filtration in an office setting similarly reduced overall infections but worked
better when placed in every room. Overall, we found little evidence that HVAC
systems facilitate SARS-CoV-2 transmission; most infections in the simulated
office occurred near the emission source, with some infections in individuals
temporarily visiting the release zone. HVAC systems only increased infections in 
one scenario involving a marginal increase in airflow in a poorly ventilated
space, which slightly increased the likelihood of transmission outside the
release zone. We found that improving air circulation rates, increasing filter
MERV rating, increasing the fraction of outside air, and applying UVC radiation
and in-room filtration may reduce SARS-CoV-2 transmission indoors. However, these
mitigation measures are unlikely to provide a protective benefit unless
SARS-CoV-2 aerosol emission rates are high (>1,000 Plaque-forming units (PFU) /
min).

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009474 
PMCID: PMC8553169
PMID: 34662342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

