
1. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2021 Dec 1;131(6):1671-1678. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.00591.2021. Epub 2021 Oct 21.

Pathogenesis of obstructive sleep apnea in people living with HIV.

Orr JE(1), Edwards BA(2)(3), Schmickl CN(1), Karris M(4), DeYoung PN(1),
Darquenne C(1), Theilmann R(5), Jain S(6), Malhotra A(1), Hicks CB(4), Owens
RL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, University of
California San Diego, San Diego, California.
(2)Sleep and Circadian Medicine Laboratory, Department of Physiology, Biomedicine
Discovery Institute, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.
(3)Turner Institute for Brain and Mental Health, Monash University, Melbourne,
Australia.
(4)Division of Infectious Disease, University of California San Diego, San Diego,
California.
(5)Department of Radiology, University of California San Diego, San Diego,
California.
(6)Herbert Wertheim School of Public Health and Human Longevity Science,
University of California San Diego, San Diego, California.

Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is highly prevalent in people living with human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) (PLWH), and it might contribute to frequently
reported symptoms and comorbidities. Traditional risk factors for OSA are often
absent in PLWH, suggesting that HIV or HIV medications might predispose to OSA.
Therefore, we measured the anatomical and nonanatomical traits important for OSA 
pathogenesis in those with and without HIV. We recruited virally suppressed PLWH 
who had been previously diagnosed with OSA (PLWH + OSA) adherent to positive
airway pressure (PAP) therapy, along with age-, sex-, and body mass index
(BMI)-matched OSA controls. All participants underwent a baseline polysomnogram
to assess OSA severity and a second overnight research sleep study during which
the airway pressure was adjusted slowly or rapidly to measure the OSA traits.
Seventeen PLWH + OSA and 17 OSA control participants were studied [median age =
58 (IQR = 54-65) yr, BMI = 30.7 (28.4-31.8) kg/m2, apnea-hypopnea index = 46
(24-74)/h]. The groups were similar, although PLWH + OSA demonstrated greater
sleepiness (despite PAP) and worse sleep efficiency on baseline polysomnography. 
On physiological testing during sleep, there were no statistically significant
differences in OSA traits (including Veupnea, Varousal, Vpassive, Vactive, and
loop gain) between PLWH + OSA and OSA controls, using mixed-effects modeling to
account for age, sex, and BMI and incorporating each repeated measurement (range 
= 72-334 measures/trait). Our data suggest that well-treated HIV does not
substantially impact the pathogenesis of OSA. Given similar underlying
physiology, existing available therapeutic approaches are likely to be adequate
to manage OSA in PLWH, which might improve symptoms and comorbidities.NEW &
NOTEWORTHY Clinical data suggest an increased risk of obstructive sleep apnea
(OSA) in people living with HIV (PLWH), while OSA might account for chronic
health issues in this population. We characterized the anatomical and
nonanatomical OSA traits in PLWH + OSA compared with OSA controls, using detailed
physiological measurements obtained during sleep. Our data suggest against a
major impact of HIV on OSA pathogenesis. Available OSA management strategies
should be effective to address this potentially important comorbidity in PLWH.

DOI: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00591.2021 
PMID: 34672765 

