
1. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Oct 4;12:723363. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.723363. eCollection
2021.

The Major Peanut Allergen Ara h 2 Produced in Nicotiana benthamiana Contains
Hydroxyprolines and Is a Viable Alternative to the E. Coli Product in Allergy
Diagnosis.

Üzülmez Ö(1), Kalic T(1)(2), Mayr V(1), Lengger N(1), Tscheppe A(1), Radauer
C(1), Hafner C(2)(3), Hemmer W(4), Breiteneder H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathophysiology and Allergy Research, Medical University of
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital St. Pölten, Karl Landsteiner
University of Health Sciences, St. Pölten, Austria.
(3)Karl Landsteiner Institute for Dermatological Research, St. Pölten, Austria.
(4)FAZ - Floridsdorf Allergy Center, Vienna, Austria.

Peanut allergy is a potentially life-threatening disease that is mediated by
allergen-specific immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibodies. The major peanut allergen
Ara h 2, a 2S albumin seed storage protein, is one of the most dangerous and
potent plant allergens. Ara h 2 is posttranslationally modified to harbor four
disulfide bridges and three hydroxyprolines. These hydroxyproline residues are
required for optimal IgE-binding to the DPYSPOHS motifs representing an
immunodominant IgE epitope. So far, recombinant Ara h 2 has been produced in
Escherichia coli, Lactococcus lactis, Trichoplusia ni insect cell, and
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii chloroplast expression systems, which were all
incapable of proline hydroxylation. However, molecular diagnosis of peanut
allergy is performed using either natural or E. coli-produced major peanut
allergens. As IgE from the majority of patients is directed to Ara h 2, it is of 
great importance that the recombinant Ara h 2 harbors all of its eukaryotic
posttranslational modifications. We produced hydroxyproline-containing and
correctly folded Ara h 2 in the endoplasmic reticulum of leaf cells of Nicotiana 
benthamiana plants, using the plant virus-based magnICON® transient expression
system with a yield of 200 mg/kg fresh biomass. To compare prokaryotic with
eukaryotic expression methods, Ara h 2 was expressed in E. coli together with the
disulfide-bond isomerase DsbC and thus harbored disulfide bridges but no
hydroxyprolines. The recombinant allergens from N. benthamiana and E. coli were
characterized and compared to the natural Ara h 2 isolated from roasted peanuts. 
Natural Ara h 2 outperformed both recombinant proteins in IgE-binding and
activation of basophils via IgE cross-linking, the latter indicating the potency 
of the allergen. Interestingly, significantly more efficient IgE cross-linking by
the N. benthamiana-produced allergen was observed in comparison to the one
induced by the E. coli product. Ara h 2 from N. benthamiana plants displayed a
higher similarity to the natural allergen in terms of basophil activation due to 
the presence of hydroxyproline residues, supporting so far published data on
their contribution to the immunodominant IgE epitope. Our study advocates the use
of N. benthamiana plants instead of prokaryotic expression hosts for the
production of the major peanut allergen Ara h 2.

Copyright © 2021 Üzülmez, Kalic, Mayr, Lengger, Tscheppe, Radauer, Hafner, Hemmer
and Breiteneder.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.723363 
PMCID: PMC8522509
PMID: 34671372 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

