
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 21;16(10):e0252696. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0252696.
eCollection 2021.

Pursuit of chlorovirus genetic transformation and CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene
editing.

Noel EA(1)(2), Weeks DP(3), Van Etten JL(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Nebraska Center for Virology, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska,
United States of America.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska,
United States of America.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska, United 
States of America.
(4)Department of Plant Pathology, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska,
United States of America.

Genetic and molecular modifications of the large dsDNA chloroviruses, with
genomes of 290 to 370 kb, would expedite studies to elucidate the functions of
both identified and unidentified virus-encoded proteins. These plaque-forming
viruses replicate in certain unicellular, eukaryotic chlorella-like green algae. 
However, to date, only a few of these algal species and virtually none of their
viruses have been genetically manipulated due to lack of practical methods for
genetic transformation and genome editing. Attempts at using
Agrobacterium-mediated transfection of chlorovirus host Chlorella variabilis
NC64A with a specially-designed binary vector resulted in successful transgenic
cell selection based on expression of a hygromycin-resistance gene, initial
expression of a green fluorescence gene and demonstration of integration of
Agrobacterium T-DNA. However, expression of the integrated genes was soon lost.
To develop gene editing tools for modifying specific chlorovirus CA-4B genes
using preassembled Cas9 protein-sgRNA ribonucleoproteins (RNPs), we tested
multiple methods for delivery of Cas9/sgRNA RNP complexes into infected cells
including cell wall-degrading enzymes, electroporation, silicon carbide (SiC)
whiskers, and cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs). In one experiment two independent
virus mutants were isolated from macerozyme-treated NC64A cells incubated with
Cas9/sgRNA RNPs targeting virus CA-4B-encoded gene 034r, which encodes a
glycosyltransferase. Analysis of DNA sequences from the two mutant viruses showed
highly targeted nucleotide sequence modifications in the 034r gene of each virus 
that were fully consistent with Cas9/RNP-directed gene editing. However, in ten
subsequent experiments, we were unable to duplicate these results and therefore
unable to achieve a reliable system to genetically edit chloroviruses.
Nonetheless, these observations provide strong initial suggestions that Cas9/RNPs
may function to promote editing of the chlorovirus genome, and that further
experimentation is warranted and worthwhile.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0252696 
PMCID: PMC8530361
PMID: 34673785  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

