
1. Psychiatr Danub. 2021 Sep;33(Suppl 10):132-136.

Proximity to COVID-19 on Mental Health Symptoms among Hospital Medical Staff.

Wesemann U(1), Vogel J, Willmund GD, Kupusovic J, Pesch E, Hadjamu N, Holzner C, 
Wakili R, Rassaf T, Siebermair J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychotraumatology, Bundeswehr
Hospital Berlin, Scharnhorststr. 13, 10115 Berlin, Germany, uw@ptzbw.org.

BACKGROUND: Exposure to patients with COVID-19 can have a significant impact on
mental health of hospital medical staff. The aim of this study was to examine the
influence of proximity to patients with COVID-19 considering occupational
position and gender on the mental health of hospital staff.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: N=78 participants were included in the study, with n=40 of 
them with direct contact to patients with COVID-19 (51%); eight had contact with 
patients suspected of having COVID-19 (10%), and n=30 with no direct contact to
people with COVID-19 (39%).
RESULTS: Multinomial regression analyses showed that proximity had a negative
(inverse) influence on avoidance behaviour as part of PTSD, physical symptoms,
somatization, compulsiveness and anger expression-in as tendency to suppress
anger. In addition, there was a significant impact of the female gender on
increased physical symptoms, while age, work experience and occupation had no
further influence.
CONCLUSIONS: These results that hospital medical staff is less psychologically
stressed when closer to COVID-19 patients are inconsistent with previous studies.
Self-efficacy and locus of control in these situations are relevant for
processing the trauma. In summary, perception of personal risk is essential.
Proximity is believed to be a proxy variable for personal risk perception. As a
synopsis of these results, regular briefings of the hospital staff are
recommended to prevent psychological impairment. They should contain specific
information about conditions in the affected wards and the risk of infection,
which could help reduce risk perception of medical personnel.


PMID: 34672286  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

