
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 1;12:722259. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.722259.
eCollection 2021.

Deep (Meta)genomics and (Meta)transcriptome Analyses of Fungal and Bacteria
Consortia From Aircraft Tanks and Kerosene Identify Key Genes in Fuel and Tank
Corrosion.

Krohn I(1), Bergmann L(1), Qi M(2), Indenbirken D(3), Han Y(1), Perez-Garcia
P(4), Katzowitsch E(5), Hägele B(6), Lübcke T(6), Siry C(6), Riemann R(6), Alawi 
M(2), Streit WR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Biotechnology, Institute of Plant Science and
Microbiology, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Bioinformatics Core, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg,
Germany.
(3)Virus Genomics, Heinrich-Pette-Institute, Leibniz Institute for Experimental
Virology, Hamburg, Germany.
(4)Institute of General Microbiology, Molecular Microbiology, Kiel University,
Kiel, Germany.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, Core Unit Systems Medicine, University of Würzburg,
Würzburg, Germany.
(6)T/TQ-MN, Lufthansa Technik AG HAM, Hamburg, Germany.

Microbial contamination of fuels, associated with a wide variety of bacteria and 
fungi, leads to decreased product quality and can compromise equipment
performance by biofouling or microbiologically influenced corrosion. Detection
and quantification of microorganisms are critical in monitoring fuel systems for 
an early detection of microbial contaminations. To address these challenges, we
have analyzed six metagenomes, one transcriptome, and more than 1,200 fluid and
swab samples taken from fuel tanks or kerosene. Our deep metagenome sequencing
and binning approaches in combination with RNA-seq data and qPCR methods implied 
a metabolic symbiosis between fungi and bacteria. The most abundant bacteria were
affiliated with α-, β-, and γ-Proteobacteria and the filamentous fungi
Amorphotheca. We identified a high number of genes, which are related to kerosene
degradation and biofilm formation. Surprisingly, a large number of genes coded
enzymes involved in polymer degradation and potential bio-corrosion processes.
Thereby, the transcriptionally most active microorganisms were affiliated with
the genera Methylobacteria, Pseudomonas, Kocuria, Amorpotheka, Aspergillus,
Fusarium, and Penicillium. Many not yet cultured bacteria and fungi appeared to
contribute to the biofilm transcriptional activities. The largest numbers of
transcripts were observed for dehydrogenase, oxygenase, and exopolysaccharide
production, attachment and pili/flagella-associated proteins, efflux pumps, and
secretion systems as well as lipase and esterase activity.

Copyright © 2021 Krohn, Bergmann, Qi, Indenbirken, Han, Perez-Garcia,
Katzowitsch, Hägele, Lübcke, Siry, Riemann, Alawi and Streit.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.722259 
PMCID: PMC8525681
PMID: 34675897 

Conflict of interest statement: BH, TL, CS, and RR were employed by company
Lufthansa Technik AG HAM. The remaining authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

