
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 5;12:744164. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.744164.
eCollection 2021.

Overview on Chikungunya Virus Infection: From Epidemiology to State-of-the-Art
Experimental Models.

Constant LEC(1)(2), Rajsfus BF(1)(2), Carneiro PH(2), Sisnande T(2),
Mohana-Borges R(2), Allonso D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biotecnologia Farmacêutica, Faculdade de Farmácia,
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)Laboratório de Biotecnologia e Bioengenharia Estrutural, Instituto de
Biofísica Carlos Chagas Filho, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.

Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) is currently one of the most relevant arboviruses to
public health. It is a member of the Togaviridae family and alphavirus genus and 
causes an arthritogenic disease known as chikungunya fever (CHIKF). It is
characterized by a multifaceted disease, which is distinguished from other
arbovirus infections by the intense and debilitating arthralgia that can last for
months or years in some individuals. Despite the great social and economic burden
caused by CHIKV infection, there is no vaccine or specific antiviral drugs
currently available. Recent outbreaks have shown a change in the severity profile
of the disease in which atypical and severe manifestation lead to hundreds of
deaths, reinforcing the necessity to understand the replication and pathogenesis 
processes. CHIKF is a complex disease resultant from the infection of a plethora 
of cell types. Although there are several in vivo models for studying CHIKV
infection, none of them reproduces integrally the disease signature observed in
humans, which is a challenge for vaccine and drug development. Therefore,
understanding the potentials and limitations of the state-of-the-art experimental
models is imperative to advance in the field. In this context, the present review
outlines the present knowledge on CHIKV epidemiology, replication, pathogenesis, 
and immunity and also brings a critical perspective on the current in vitro and
in vivo state-of-the-art experimental models of CHIKF.

Copyright © 2021 Constant, Rajsfus, Carneiro, Sisnande, Mohana-Borges and
Allonso.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.744164 
PMCID: PMC8524093
PMID: 34675908 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

