
1. Eur Heart J Case Rep. 2021 Oct 12;5(10):ytab392. doi: 10.1093/ehjcr/ytab392.
eCollection 2021 Oct.

Acute pericarditis, Graves' disease, and thymic hyperplasia: a case report.

Acquaro M(1), Breviario F(1), Greco A(1), Ghio S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Cardiologia, Fondazione IRCCS San Matteo Hospital, Viale Golgi
19, 27100 Pavia, Italy.

Background: Acute pericarditis as a sign of mediastinal mass is rare and
aetiological diagnosis can be challenging without adequate imaging.
Case summary: An 18-year-old woman came to our attention describing acute sharp
chest pain radiated to the left arm, exacerbated with supine positioning and
attenuated while sitting or leaning forward. The electrocardiogram showed diffuse
ST elevation and PR depression, with sinus tachycardia. Cardiac biomarkers and
D-dimer were negative; echocardiography showed no abnormalities and the absence
of pericardial effusion. Her blood work revealed no sign of inflammation or
bacterial infection (PCR and procalcitonin were normal); thyroid-stimulating
hormone plasma levels were suppressed, showing decompensated thyrotoxicosis.
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), Epstein-Barr virus,
human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis C virus, Enterovirus, Parvovirus B19, and
Adenovirus tests were normal. Her past medical history was silent, apart from
Grave's disease on treatment with methimazole. Chest computed tomography (CT) was
performed and showed the presence of slightly increased density pericardial
effusion, with a maximum thickness of 15 mm in the upper mediastinum. Finally,
cardiac magnetic resonance (MR) identified a mass of 73 × 51 mm located in the
upper mediastinum. The mass was subsequently biopsed with video-assisted
thoracoscopic surgery and the histological analysis showed thymic hyperplasia.
Discussion: This case shows the importance of an adequate clinical suspicion of
thymic hyperplasia in the context of acute pericarditis symptoms and known
Graves' disease. In this case, a negative chest CT finding may not be sufficient 
to rule out the diagnosis and cardiac MR imaging is necessary.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
European Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1093/ehjcr/ytab392 
PMCID: PMC8526917
PMID: 34676356 

