
1. Psychiatr Danub. 2021 Sep;33(Suppl 10):114-119.

Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic on Mental Health of Medical Students at the
University of Mostar.

Šimić Š(1), Černy Obrdalj E, Bevanda M, Bevanda D, Rizikalo A, Marijanović I.

Author information: 
(1)University Clinical Center Mostar, Mostar, Bosnia and Herzegovina.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have shown that medical students are more prone to
depression, more tired, and more prone to emotional exhaustion, depersonalization
and burnout syndrome than other students. In terms of mental health, they are a
"more vulnerable" than individuals of the same age in the general population. In 
December 2019 in Wuhan (China) the outbreak of pneumonia caused by the new
coronavirus captured worldwide attention. The implementation of strict quarantine
measures kept a large number of people in self-isolation which affected all
aspects of life. Objective of the study is to determine the direct impact of the 
COVID-19 pandemic on mental health and quality of life of medical students and
the differences in the impact between genders and years of study.
SUBJECT AND METHODS: This is a cross-sectional study conducted from May 25 to
June 5 2020. It includes medical students who resided in the country affected by 
the COVID-19 pandemic. Participants completed a modified anonymous online
questionnaire that assessed the Impact of Event Scale, indicators of negative
mental health impacts, social and family support, and lifestyle changes due to a 
pandemic.
RESULTS: The mean IES score in the participants showed a moderate stressful
impact, with the mean IES score of females being significantly higher than that
of males (29 vs. 19) with p<0.001. More than half of the participants had an IES 
score ≥26. With the onset of the pandemic, 71.5% of all medical students reported
feeling increased stress from commitments.
CONCLUSIONS: the pandemic had stressful impact on the mental health of medical
students and it was significantly more stressful for women and students in the
preclinical years of study. The COVID-19 pandemic had no impact on social and
family support, however a positive impact on the lifestyle of medical students
was found.


PMID: 34672283  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

