
1. Psychiatr Danub. 2021 Sep;33(Suppl 10):161-171.

Prevalence of Anxiety and Relationship of Anxiety with Coping Styles and Related 
Factors in Healthcare Workers During COVID-19 Pandemic.

Kılıç A(1), Gürcan MB, Aktura B, Şahin AR, Kökrek Z.

Author information: 
(1)Istanbul Medipol University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry,
TEM Avrupa Otoyolu Göztepe Çıkışı No: 1, 34214, Bağcılar, Istanbul, Turkey,
alperenkilic88@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The aim is to investigate anxiety prevalence among the healthcare
workers during COVID-19 pandemic and the also relationship of "significant
clinical anxiety" with coping styles and the related factors.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: An online questionnaire was performed to evaluate the
anxiety responses of 544 healthcare workers, the adopted coping styles and the
related factors during COVID-19 pandemic. The questionnaire included the
subsections of sociodemographic data, other clinical data and the items on
exposure to social media, Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7 (GAD-7) Scale and Coping
Styles Scale Brief Form.
RESULTS: Minimal, mild, moderate and severe anxiety were present in 214 (39.3%), 
191 (35.1%), 95 (17.5%) and 44 (8.1%) participants, respectively. GAD-7 score was
≥10 in 139 (25.6%) of the participants indicating "significant clinical anxiety".
Being female and a nurse were associated with significant clinical anxiety. In
addition, the parameters such as "concern about COVID-19, concern about infect
COVID-19 to relatives, unwillingness to work, frequency of social media use about
COVID-19, sleep disturbances and experiencing somatic symptoms" were observed to 
be extremely significantly more common in the healthcare workers with
"significant clinical anxiety" than those without that mental condition. The
regression analysis revealed that higher adoption of using emotional social
support, one of the emotional focused coping styles and behavioral disengagement,
one of the ineffektive focused coping styles are considered to be predictor of
significant clinical anxiety. Whereas, positive reinterpretation, one of the
emotional focused coping styles was a predictor in reduction of significant
clinical anxiety. Also more frequent exposure to social media and sleep
disturbances were the predictors of significant clinical anxiety in the
healthcare staff.
CONCLUSION: Our results have emphasized the factors that should be taken into
account and application of coping styles that may be functional in protecting
mental health of the healthcare workers in their struggle against a huge disaster
affecting worldwide societies.


PMID: 34672291  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

