
1. BMC Psychiatry. 2021 Oct 20;21(1):518. doi: 10.1186/s12888-021-03540-4.

Stigmatization and psychological impact of COVID-19 pandemic on frontline
healthcare Workers in Nigeria: a qualitative study.

Kwaghe AV(1)(2), Kwaghe VG(3), Habib ZG(3), Kwaghe GV(4), Ilesanmi OS(5), Ekele
BA(4), Umeokonkwo CD(6), Balogun MS(7).

Author information: 
(1)Nigeria Field Epidemiology and Laboratory Training Programme, Abuja, Nigeria. 
hyelni_vandi@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Veterinary and Pest Control Services, Federal Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural Development, Abuja, Nigeria. hyelni_vandi@yahoo.com.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Abuja Teaching Hospital,
Gwagwalada, Abuja, Nigeria.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Abuja Teaching
Hospital, Gwagwalada, Abuja, Nigeria.
(5)Department of Community Medicine, College of Medicine, University of Ibadan
and University College Hospital, Ibadan, Oyo State, Nigeria.
(6)Department of Community Medicine, Alex Ekwueme Federal University Teaching
Hospital Abakaliki, Abakaliki, Ebonyi State, Nigeria.
(7)Nigeria Field Epidemiology and Laboratory Training Programme, Abuja, Nigeria.

INTRODUCTION: The COVID-19 pandemic has had a great toll on global health.
Frontline healthcare workers (FHCW) directly involved in the treatment of
COVID-19 patients have faced some physical and psychological challenges. This
study explored the stigma and traumatic experiences of the FHCW during the
COVID-19 pandemic in Nigeria.
METHODS: We recruited twenty FHCW directly involved in the treatment of COVID-19 
patients through purposive and snowball sampling techniques. Face-to-face
in-depth interviews were conducted for all participants, and qualitative analysis
of data was done using Colaizzi's phenomenological method.
RESULTS: Five themes identified were: Early stage of the pandemic (fear, anxiety,
public fright, other countries repatriating their citizens, the socio-economic
impact of the pandemic and a call to duty for the FHCW); working with COVID-19
patients (excitement on patients recovery and duty stress); psychological, mental
and emotional trauma; stigmatization (stigmatized by colleagues, family, friends 
or their residential communities, reasons for stigmatization which were fear of
infection, limited knowledge of the virus and working at the isolation centre and
the effect of stigma); and recommendations (education and awareness creation,
government showing more care towards the FHCW and provision of health insurance
for FHCW to take care of those that get infected in the line of duty).
CONCLUSION: Stigmatization has proven to be a major challenge for FHCW in
conducting their duties. The psychological impact experienced by FHCW may affect 
the quality of the services rendered by these workers. The study reveals the need
of education and awareness creation in the ongoing pandemic. There is a need for 
the government and society to acknowledge and appreciate the efforts of FHCW.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12888-021-03540-4 
PMCID: PMC8528377
PMID: 34670530  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

