
1. Mol Plant Pathol. 2021 Oct 21. doi: 10.1111/mpp.13151. [Epub ahead of print]

A role of flowering genes in the tolerance of Arabidopsis thaliana to cucumber
mosaic virus.

Shukla A(1), Pagán I(1)(2), Crevillén P(1), Alonso-Blanco C(3), García-Arenal
F(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biotecnología y Genómica de Plantas, Universidad Politécnica de
Madrid, Instituto Nacional de Investigación y Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria,
Madrid, Spain.
(2)ETSI Agronómica, Alimentaria y de Biosistemas, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Departamento de Genética Molecular de Plantas, Centro Nacional de
Biotecnología, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Madrid, Spain.

The genetic basis of plant tolerance to parasites is poorly understood. We have
previously shown that tolerance of Arabidopsis thaliana to its pathogen cucumber 
mosaic virus is achieved through changes in host life-history traits on infection
that result in delaying flowering and reallocating resources from vegetative
growth to reproduction. In this system we analyse here genetic determinants of
tolerance using a recombinant inbred line family derived from a cross of two
accessions with extreme phenotypes. Three major quantitative trait loci for
tolerance were identified, which co-located with three flowering repressor genes,
FLC, FRI, and HUA2. The role of these genes in tolerance was further examined in 
genotypes carrying functional or nonfunctional alleles. Functional alleles of FLC
together with FRI and/or HUA2 were required for both tolerance and resource
reallocation from growth to reproduction. Analyses of FLC alleles from wild
accessions that differentially modulate flowering time showed that they ranked
differently for their effects on tolerance and flowering. These results pinpoint 
a role of FLC in A. thaliana tolerance to cucmber mosaic virus, which is a novel 
major finding, as FLC has not been recognized previously to be involved in plant 
defence. Although tolerance is associated with a delay in flowering that allows
resource reallocation, our results indicate that FLC regulates tolerance and
flowering initiation by different mechanisms. Thus, we open a new avenue of
research on the interplay between defence and development in plants.

© 2021 The Authors. Molecular Plant Pathology published by British Society for
Plant Pathology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mpp.13151 
PMID: 34672409 

