
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 5;12:721830. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.721830. eCollection 
2021.

Oncolytic Viro-Immunotherapy: An Emerging Option in the Treatment of Gliomas.

Zeng J(1), Li X(2), Sander M(3), Zhang H(4), Yan G(5), Lin Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Peking University Sixth Hospital, Peking University Institute of Mental
Health, NHC Key Laboratory of Mental Health (Peking University), National
Clinical Research Center for Mental Disorders (Peking University Sixth Hospital),
Peking University, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of International Cooperation, Guangzhou Virotech Pharmaceutical
Co., Ltd., Guangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Jinan University, Guangzhou,
China.
(5)Department of Pharmacology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China.

The prognosis of malignant gliomas remains poor, with median survival fewer than 
20 months and a 5-year survival rate merely 5%. Their primary location in the
central nervous system (CNS) and its immunosuppressive environment with little T 
cell infiltration has rendered cancer therapies mostly ineffective, and
breakthrough therapies such as immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) have shown
limited benefit. However, tumor immunotherapy is developing rapidly and can help 
overcome these obstacles. But for now, malignant gliomas remain fatal with short 
survival and limited therapeutic options. Oncolytic virotherapy (OVT) is a unique
antitumor immunotherapy wherein viruses selectively or preferentially kill tumor 
cells, replicate and spread through tumors while inducing antitumor immune
responses. OVTs can also recondition the tumor microenvironment and improve the
efficacy of other immunotherapies by escalating the infiltration of immune cells 
into tumors. Some OVTs can penetrate the blood-brain barrier (BBB) and possess
tropism for the CNS, enabling intravenous delivery. Despite the therapeutic
potential displayed by oncolytic viruses (OVs), optimizing OVT has proved
challenging in clinical development, and marketing approvals for OVTs have been
rare. In June 2021 however, as a genetically engineered OV based on herpes
simplex virus-1 (G47Δ), teserpaturev got conditional and time-limited approval
for the treatment of malignant gliomas in Japan. In this review, we summarize the
current state of OVT, the synergistic effect of OVT in combination with other
immunotherapies as well as the hurdles to successful clinical use. We also
provide some suggestions to overcome the challenges in treating of gliomas.

Copyright © 2021 Zeng, Li, Sander, Zhang, Yan and Lin.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.721830 
PMCID: PMC8524046
PMID: 34675919 

Conflict of interest statement: Author MS was employed by company Guangzhou
Virotech Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. The remaining authors declare that the research
was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that
could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

