
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 21;16(10):e0256642. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0256642.
eCollection 2021.

Parental acceptance and knowledge of varicella vaccination in relation to
socioeconomics in Sweden: A cross-sectional study.

Arnheim-Dahlström L(1), Zarabi N(2), Hagen K(2), Bencina G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Lisen Arnheim-Dahlström Consulting, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)MSD, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)MSD, Madrid, Spain.

Varicella infection is a highly contagious disease which, whilst mild in most
cases, can cause severe complications. Varicella vaccination is available
privately in Sweden and is currently being reviewed for inclusion in the Swedish 
Public Health Agency's national immunisation program (NIP). A cross-sectional
study of parents of Swedish children aged 1-8 years (n = 2212) was conducted to
understand parental acceptance, beliefs and knowledge around varicella infection 
and vaccination. Respondents generally viewed varicella infection as a mild
disease, with only a small proportion aware of potential severe complications.
While 65% of respondents were aware of the vaccine, only 15% had started the
course of vaccination as of February 2019. Further, 43% of parents did not intend
to vaccinate, most commonly due to lack of inclusion in the NIP, but also due to 
perception of mild disease. Nevertheless, if offered within the NIP, 85% of
parents would be highly likely to vaccinate their child. A number of
statistically significant differences in awareness and behaviours were observed
between sociodemographic subgroups. In general, women were more aware of
vaccination (72%) compared to men (58%). Among unemployed or respondents with
elementary school education, awareness was below 43%, and among respondents with 
high income the awareness was above 75%. Similarly, among unemployed or
respondents with a low income the vaccination rate was as low as 30% compared
with at least 57% among respondents with a high income. Respondents from
metropolitan areas, those with university degrees and respondents with a higher
income were more likely to be aware of the varicella vaccine and to have
vaccinated their child. Whilst inclusion in the NIP is clearly the main driver
for uptake, these identified knowledge gaps should inform educational efforts to 
ensure that all parents are informed of the availability and benefits of the
varicella vaccine independent of socioeconomic status.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0256642 
PMCID: PMC8530319
PMID: 34673809  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: This work was funded by Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp.
(MSD), a subsidiary of Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth, NJ, USA, which manufactures
vaccines for varicella (Varivax and ProQuad). Lisen Arnheim-Dahlström owns Lisen 
Arnheim-Dahlström Consulting and has received consulting fees from MSD Sweden.
Natalie Zarabi is an employee of MSD Sweden, and owns stock in Merck & Co., Inc.,
Kenilworth, NJ, USA. Karin Hagen is an employee of MSD Sweden, currently
appointed for Organon, and owns stock in Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth, NJ, USA. 
Goran Bencina is an employee of MSD Spain, and owns stock in Merck & Co., Inc.,
Kenilworth, NJ, USA. Employees of the funders participated in the study design,
in the analysis and interpretation of the data, in the preparation of the
manuscript, and in the decision to submit the manuscript for publication. This
does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.

