
1. Biomed Pharmacother. 2021 Dec;144:112346. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2021.112346. Epub
2021 Oct 15.

Role of myeloid-derived suppressor cells in viral respiratory infections; Hints
for discovering therapeutic targets for COVID-19.

Koushki K(1), Salemi M(2), Miri SM(3), Arjeini Y(4), Keshavarz M(5), Ghaemi A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Hepatitis Research Center, Lorestan University of Medical Sciences,
Khorramabad, Iran.
(2)Department of Medical Virology, The Persian Gulf Tropical Medicine Research
Center, The Persian Gulf Biomedical Sciences Research Institute, Bushehr
University of Medical Sciences, Bushehr, Iran.
(3)Department of Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses, Pasteur Institute of
Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Department of Research and Development, Production and Research Complex,
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Department of Medical Virology, The Persian Gulf Tropical Medicine Research
Center, The Persian Gulf Biomedical Sciences Research Institute, Bushehr
University of Medical Sciences, Bushehr, Iran. Electronic address:
Keshavarz.m@bpums.ac.ir.
(6)Department of Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses, Pasteur Institute of
Iran, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: ghaem_amir@yahoo.com.

The expansion of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), known as heterogeneous
population of immature myeloid cells, is enhanced during several pathological
conditions such as inflammatory or viral respiratory infections. It seems that
the way MDSCs behave in infection depends on the type and the virulence
mechanisms of the invader pathogen, the disease stage, and the infection-related 
pathology. Increasing evidence showing that in correlation with the severity of
the disease, MDSCs are accumulated in COVID-19 patients, in particular in those
at severe stages of the disease or ICU patients, contributing to pathogenesis of 
SARS-CoV2 infection. Based on the involved subsets, MDSCs delay the clearance of 
the virus through inhibiting T-cell proliferation and responses by employing
various mechanisms such as inducing the secretion of anti-inflammatory cytokines,
inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS)-mediated hampering of IFN-γ production, or
forcing arginine shortage. While the immunosuppressive characteristic of MDSCs
may help to preserve the tissue homeostasis and prevent hyperinflammation at
early stages of the infection, hampering of efficient immune responses proved to 
exert significant pathogenic effects on severe forms of COVID-19, suggesting the 
targeting of MDSCs as a potential intervention to reactivate T-cell immunity and 
thereby prevent the infection from developing into severe stages of the disease. 
This review tried to compile evidence on the roles of different subsets of MDSCs 
during viral respiratory infections, which is far from being totally understood, 
and introduce the promising potential of MDSCs for developing novel diagnostic
and therapeutic approaches, especially against COVID-19 disease.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2021.112346 
PMCID: PMC8516725
PMID: 34678727  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

