
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021 Oct 21. pii: gkab896. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab896. [Epub
ahead of print]

Adenovirus prevents dsRNA formation by promoting efficient splicing of viral RNA.

Price AM(1), Steinbock RT(1)(2), Di C(3), Hayer KE(3), Li Y(4), Herrmann C(1)(2),
Parenti NA(4), Whelan JN(4), Weiss SR(4), Weitzman MD(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Protective Immunity, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Cell & Molecular Biology Graduate Group, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical and Health Informatics, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Eukaryotic cells recognize intracellular pathogens through pattern recognition
receptors, including sensors of aberrant nucleic acid structures. Sensors of
double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) are known to detect replication intermediates of RNA 
viruses. It has long been suggested that annealing of mRNA from symmetrical
transcription of both top and bottom strands of DNA virus genomes can produce
dsRNA during infection. Supporting this hypothesis, nearly all DNA viruses encode
inhibitors of dsRNA-recognition pathways. However, direct evidence that DNA
viruses produce dsRNA is lacking. Contrary to dogma, we show that the
nuclear-replicating DNA virus adenovirus (AdV) does not produce detectable levels
of dsRNA during infection. In contrast, abundant dsRNA is detected within the
nucleus of cells infected with AdV mutants defective for viral RNA processing. In
the presence of nuclear dsRNA, the cytoplasmic dsRNA sensor PKR is relocalized
and activated within the nucleus. Accumulation of viral dsRNA occurs in the late 
phase of infection, when unspliced viral transcripts form intron/exon base pairs 
between top and bottom strand transcripts. We propose that DNA viruses actively
limit dsRNA formation by promoting efficient splicing and mRNA processing, thus
avoiding detection and restriction by host innate immune sensors of pathogenic
nucleic acids.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab896 
PMID: 34671803 

