
1. Med Gas Res. 2022 Apr-Jun;12(2):33-40. doi: 10.4103/2045-9912.325989.

Potential therapeutic effect of oxygen-ozone in controlling of COVID-19 disease.

Yousefi B(1), Banihashemian SZ(2), Feyzabadi ZK(2), Hasanpour S(3), Kokhaei P(4),
Abdolshahi A(5), Emadi A(6), Eslami M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Semnan University of Medical Sciences, Semnan, Iran.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Semnan University of Medical Sciences, Semnan, Iran.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Mycology, Science and Research Branch, Islamic 
Azad University, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Cancer Research Center, Semnan University of Medical Sciences, Semnan, Iran;
Department of Oncology-Pathology, BioClinicum, Karolinska University Hospital
Solna and Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Food Safety Research Center (Salt), Semnan University of Medical Sciences,
Semnan, Iran.
(6)Deputy of Research and Technology, Semnan University of Medical Sciences,
Semnan, Iran.
(7)Department of Bacteriology and Virology, School of Medicine, Semnan University
of Medical Sciences, Semnan, Iran.

Atmospheric ozone is produced when nitrogen oxides react with volatile organic
compounds. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) genome
contains a unique N-terminal fragment in the Spike protein, which allows it to
bind to air pollutants in the environment. 'Our approach in this review is to
study ozone and its effect on the SARS-CoV-2 virus and patients with coronavirus 
disease 2019 (COVID-19). Article data were collected from PubMed, Scopus, and
Google Scholar databases. Ozone therapy has antiviral properties, improves blood 
flow, facilitates the transfer of oxygen in hypoxemic tissues, and reduces blood 
coagulation phenomena in COVID-19 patients. Ozone has immunomodulatory effects by
modulating cytokines (reduction of interleukin-1, interleukin-6, tumor necrosis
factor-α, and interleukin-10), induction of interferon-γ, anti-inflammatory
properties by modulating NOD-, LRR- and pyrin domain-containing protein 3,
inhibition of cytokine storm (blocking nuclear factor-κB and stimulating nuclear 
factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 pathway), stimulates cellular/humoral
immunity/phagocytic function and blocks angiotensin-converting enzyme 2. In
direct oxygen-ozone injection, oxygen reacts with several biological molecules
such as thiol groups in albumin to form ozonoids. Intravenous injection of
ozonated saline significantly increases the length of time a person can remain
hypoxic. The rectal ozone protocol is rectal ozone insufflation, resulting in
clinical improvement in oxygen saturation and biochemical improvement
(fibrinogen, D-dimer, urea, ferritin, LDH, interleukin-6, and C-reactive
protein). In general, many studies have shown the positive effect of ozone
therapy as a complementary therapy in the recovery of COVID-19 patients. All the 
findings indicate that systemic ozone therapy is nontoxic and has no side effects
in these patients.

DOI: 10.4103/2045-9912.325989 
PMCID: PMC8562402
PMID: 34677149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

