
1. Front Oncol. 2021 Oct 5;11:717826. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.717826. eCollection
2021.

Development of Models to Predict Postoperative Complications for Hepatitis B
Virus-Related Hepatocellular Carcinoma.

Bao M(1), Zhu Q(2)(3), Aji T(4), Wei S(5), Tuergan T(4), Ha X(6), Tulahong A(4), 
Hu X(2), Hu Y(1)(7).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Biostatistics,
School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Division of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Department of Surgery, The
First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou,
China.
(3)Department of Surgery, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Hepatobiliary and Hydatid Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital
of Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, China.
(5)Clinical Laboratory Diagnostics, School of Public Health, Gansu University of 
Chinese Medicine, Lanzhou, China.
(6)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The 940th Hospital of Joint Logistics
Support Force of Chinese People's Liberation Army, Lanzhou, China.
(7)Shanghai Center for Mathematical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

Background: Surgical treatment remains the best option for patients with
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) caused by chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV)
infection. However, there is no optimal tool based on readily accessible clinical
parameters to predict postoperative complications. Herein, our study aimed to
develop models that permitted risk of severe complications to be assessed before 
and after liver resection based on conventional variables.
Methods: A total of 1,047 patients treated by hepatectomy for HCC with HBV
infection at three different centers were recruited retrospectively between July 
1, 2014, and July 1, 2018. All surgical complications were recorded and scored by
the Comprehensive Complication Index (CCI). A CCI ≥26.2 was used as a threshold
to define patients with severe complications. We built two models for the CCI,
one using preoperative and one using preoperative and postoperative data.
Besides, CCI and other potentially relevant factors were evaluated for their
ability to predict early recurrence and metastasis. All the findings were
internally validated in the Hangzhou cohort and then externally validated in the 
Lanzhou and Urumqi cohorts.
Results: Multivariable analysis identified National Nosocomial Infections
Surveillance (NNIS) index, tumor number, gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT), total
cholesterol (TC), potassium, and thrombin time as the key preoperative parameters
related to perioperative complications. The nomogram based on the preoperative
model [preoperative CCI After Surgery for Liver tumor (CCIASL-pre)] showed good
discriminatory performance internally and externally. A more accurate model
[postoperative CCI After Surgery for Liver tumor (CCIASL-post)] was established, 
combined with the other four postoperative predictors including leukocyte count, 
basophil count, erythrocyte count, and total bilirubin level. No significant
association was observed between CCI and long-term complications.
Conclusion: Based on the widely available clinical data, statistical models were 
established to predict the complications after hepatectomy in patients with HBV
infection. All the findings were extensively validated and shown to be applicable
nationwide. Such models could be used as guidelines for surveillance follow-up
and the design of post-resection adjuvant therapy.

Copyright © 2021 Bao, Zhu, Aji, Wei, Tuergan, Ha, Tulahong, Hu and Hu.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.717826 
PMCID: PMC8523990
PMID: 34676160 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

