
1. CPT Pharmacometrics Syst Pharmacol. 2021 Oct 22. doi: 10.1002/psp4.12732. [Epub
ahead of print]

Pharmacometric analysis of seasonal influenza epidemics and the effect of
vaccination using sentinel surveillance data.

Otani Y(1)(2), Kasai H(1), Tanigawara Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacometrics and Systems Pharmacology, Keio Frontier Research
and Education Collaboration Square at Tonomachi, Kanagawa, Japan.
(2)Keio University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

The identification of influenza epidemics and assessment of the efficacy of
vaccination against this infection are major challenges for the implementation of
effective public health strategies, such as vaccination programs. In this study, 
we developed a new pharmacometric model to evaluate the efficacy of vaccination
based on infection surveillance data from the 2010/2011 to 2018/2019 influenza
seasons in Japan. A novel susceptible-infected-removed plus vaccination model,
based on an indirect response structure with the effect of vaccination, was
applied to describe seasonal influenza epidemics using a preseasonal collection
of data regarding serological H1 antibody titer positivity and the fraction of
virus strains. Using this model, we evaluated Kin (a parameter describing the
transmission rate of symptomatic influenza infection) for different age groups.
Furthermore, we defined a new parameter (prevention factor) showing the efficacy 
of vaccination against each viral strain and in different age groups. We found
that the prevention factor of vaccination against influenza varied among age
groups. Notably, children aged 5-14 years showed the highest Kin value during the
10 influenza seasons and the greatest preventive effect of vaccination
(prevention factor = 70.8%). The propagation of influenza epidemics varies in
different age groups. Children aged 5-14 years most likely play a leading role in
the transmission of influenza. Prioritized vaccination in this age group may be
the most effective strategy for reducing the prevalence of influenza in the
community.

© 2021 The Authors. CPT: Pharmacometrics & Systems Pharmacology published by
Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Society for Clinical Pharmacology and
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1002/psp4.12732 
PMID: 34676676 

