
1. Cell Immunol. 2021 Dec;370:104450. doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2021.104450. Epub 2021 
Oct 14.

Modulating glutamine metabolism to control viral immuno-inflammatory lesions.

Sumbria D(1), Berber E(2), Miller L(3), Rouse BT(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and Diagnostic Sciences, College of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USA; Department of Silviculture
and Agro-forestry, Dr. Y.S. Parmar University of Horticulture and Forestry,
Nauni, Solan, Himachal Pradesh, India.
(2)Department of Biomedical and Diagnostic Sciences, College of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USA; Department of Virology,
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey.
(3)Department of Microbiology, University of Tennessee, TN, USA.
(4)Department of Biomedical and Diagnostic Sciences, College of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USA. Electronic address:
btr@utk.edu.

Infection of the cornea with HSV results in an immune-inflammatory reaction
orchestrated by proinflammatory T cells that is a major cause of human vision
impairment. The severity of lesions can be reduced if the representation of
inflammatory T cells is changed to increase the presence of T cells with
regulatory function. This report shows that inhibiting glutamine metabolism using
6-Diazo-5-oxo-l-norleucine (DON) administered via intraperitoneal (IP) starting
6 days after ocular infection and continued until day 15 significantly reduced
the severity of herpetic stromal keratitis lesions. The therapy resulted in
reduced neutrophils, macrophages as well proinflammatory CD4 Th1 and Th17 T cells
in the cornea, but had no effect on levels of regulatory T cells. A similar
change in the representation of inflammatory and regulatory T cells occurred in
the trigeminal ganglion (TG) the site where HSV infection establishes latency.
Glutamine metabolism was shown to be required for the in-vitro optimal induction 
of both Th1 and Th17 T cells but not for the induction of Treg that were
increased when glutamine metabolism was inhibited. Inhibiting glutamine
metabolism also changed the ability of latently infected TG cells from animals
previously infected with HSV to reactivate and produce infectious virus.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2021.104450 
PMID: 34678554 

