
1. Acc Chem Res. 2021 Nov 2;54(21):4012-4023. doi: 10.1021/acs.accounts.1c00521.
Epub 2021 Oct 22.

Immunogenicity of In Vitro-Transcribed RNA.

Mu X(1)(2), Hur S(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin
300072, China.
(2)Tianjin University and Health-Biotech United Group Joint Laboratory of
Innovative Drug Development and Translational Medicine, Tianjin University,
Tianjin 300072, China.
(3)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, United States.
(4)Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, United States.

In vitro-transcribed RNAs are emerging as new biologics for therapeutic
innovation, as exemplified by their application recently in SARS-CoV-2
vaccinations. RNAs prepared by in vitro transcription (IVT) allow transient
expression of proteins of interest, conferring safety over DNA- or virus-mediated
gene delivery systems. However, in vitro-transcribed RNAs should be used with
caution because of their immunogenicity, which is in part triggered by
double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) byproducts during IVT. Cellular innate immune
response to dsRNA byproducts can lead to undesirable consequences, including
suppression of protein synthesis and cell death, which in turn can detrimentally 
impact the efficacy of mRNA therapy. Thus, it is critical to understand the
nature of IVT byproducts and the mechanisms by which they trigger innate immune
responses.Our lab has been investigating the mechanisms by which the innate
immune system discriminates between "self" and "nonself" RNA, with the focus on
the cytoplasmic dsRNA receptors retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) and
melanoma differentiation-associated 5 (MDA5). We have biochemically and
structurally characterized critical events involving RNA discrimination and
signal transduction by RIG-I or MDA5. We have used in vitro-transcribed RNAs as
tools to investigate RNA specificity of RIG-I and MDA5, which required
optimization of the IVT reaction and purification processes to eliminate the
effect of IVT byproducts. In this Account, we summarize our current understanding
of RIG-I and MDA5 and IVT reactions and propose future directions for improving
IVT as a method to generate both research tools and therapeutics. Other critical 
proteins in cellular innate immune response to dsRNAs are also discussed. We
arrange the contents in the following order: (i) innate immunity sensors for
nonself RNA, including the RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs) in the cytosol and the
toll-like receptors (TLRs) in the endosome, as well as cytoplasmic
dsRNA-responding proteins, including protein kinase R (PKR) and
2',5'-oligoadenylate synthetases (OASes), illustrating the feature of protein-RNA
binding and its consequences; (ii) the immunogenicity of IVT byproducts,
specifically the generation of dsRNA molecules during IVT; and (iii) methods to
reduce IVT RNA immunogenicity, including optimizations of RNA polymerases,
reagents, and experimental conditions during IVT and subsequent purification.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.accounts.1c00521 
PMID: 34677064  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

