
1. Liver Int. 2021 Oct 22. doi: 10.1111/liv.15082. [Epub ahead of print]

Validation of the GALAD model for early diagnosis and monitoring of
hepatocellular carcinoma in Chinese multicenter study.

Huang C(1)(2), Fang M(1), Xiao X(2), Wang H(3), Gao Z(2), Ji J(1), Liu L(4), Gu
E(3), Li Y(5), Wang M(6), Gao C(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery
Hospital, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine Center, Yueyang Hospital of
Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, Shanghai University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Hepatology and Gastroenterology, Jing'an District Centre
Hospital, Fudan University, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Mengchao Hepatobiliary Hospital of Fujian
Medical University, Fuzhou, China.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Kunming
Medical University, Kunming, Yunnan, P.R. China.
(6)Department of Emergency Medicine, Jinling Hospital, Medical School of Nanjing 
University, Nanjing, P.R. China.

BACKGROUND: GALAD is an algorithm model estimating the presence of hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). However, the participants enrolled in the GALAD differ from
those of Chinese subjects whose HCCs are mainly hepatitis B virus infection
related. Therefore, the cross-sectional as well as longitudinal multicenter study
was designed to assess the clinical performances of GALAD in the Chinese
population.
METHODS: A case-control study of 602 patients with HCC (34.10% within Barcelona
Clinic Liver Cancer 0-A stage) and 923 subjects without HCC from five Chinese
medical centres was conducted. Longitudinally the performances of GALAD
identifying HCC were assessed using receiver operating characteristic curves
analyses. Furthermore, the surveillance performance of GALAD for 204 HCC patients
after radical surgery and for the early detection of HCC prospectively in an
independent cohort of chronic hepatitis B were analysed, respectively.
RESULTS: We found the GALAD identified early stage HCC at an area under the
receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) above 0.85 and outperformed
significantly than AFP, PIVKAII, AFP-L3 and BALAD-2 respectively. Meanwhile the
GALAD could stratify HCC into two distinct subgroups with high or low risks of
overall survival and recurrence. The GALAD could detection HCC 24 (AUC: 0.848) or
even 48 (AUC: 0.833) weeks before clinical diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study indicates that the GALAD exhibits outstanding performance 
in the early diagnosis, prognosis prediction as well as risk monitoring of HCC in
our cross-sectional and longitudinal multicenter study of 1561 patients. GALAD
should be implanted into clinical practice early so as to improve the clinical
efficacy of individual biomarkers in HCC early monitoring and prognosis
prediction.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/liv.15082 
PMID: 34679250 

