
1. J Immunother Cancer. 2021 Oct;9(10). pii: e002170. doi: 10.1136/jitc-2020-002170.

Leveraging immune memory against measles virus as an antitumor strategy in a
preclinical model of aggressive squamous cell carcinoma.

Leb-Reichl VM(#)(1), Kienzl M(#)(1), Kaufmann A(1), Stoecklinger A(2), Tockner
B(1), Kitzmueller S(1), Zaborsky N(3), Steiner M(3), Brachtl G(4), Trattner L(1),
Kreideweiss P(5), Reinsch C(5), Panzner S(5), Greil R(3), Strunk D(4), Bauer
JW(1), Gratz IK(1)(2), Guttmann-Gruber C(1), Piñón Hofbauer J(6).

Author information: 
(1)EB House Austria, Research Program for Molecular Therapy of Genodermatoses,
Department of Dermatology and Allergology, University Hospital of the Paracelsus 
Medical University Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.
(2)Department of Biosciences, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.
(3)Salzburg Cancer Research Institute-Laboratory for Immunological and Molecular 
Cancer Research, University Hospital of the Paracelsus Medical University
Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.
(4)Experimental and Clinical Cell Therapy Institute, Spinal Cord Injury & Tissue 
Regeneration Center, Paracelsus Medical University Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.
(5)Lipocalyx GmbH, Halle, Germany.
(6)EB House Austria, Research Program for Molecular Therapy of Genodermatoses,
Department of Dermatology and Allergology, University Hospital of the Paracelsus 
Medical University Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria j.d.pinon@salk.at.
(#)Contributed equally

Viral antigens are among the strongest elicitors of immune responses. A
significant proportion of the human population already carries pre-existing
immunity against several childhood viruses, which could potentially be leveraged 
to fight cancer. We sought to provide proof of concept in mouse models that a
pre-existing measles virus (MeV) immunity can be redirected to inhibit tumor
growth by directly forcing expression of cognate antigens in the tumor. To this
end, we designed DNA vaccines against known MeV cytotoxic and helper T epitopes, 
and administered these intradermally to mice that were subsequently challenged
with syngeneic squamous cancer cells engineered to either express the cognate
antigens or not. Alternatively, established wild-type tumors in vaccinated
animals were treated intratumorally with in vitro transcribed mRNA encoding the
cognate epitopes. Vaccination generated MeV cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) immunity
in mice as demonstrated by enhanced interferon gamma production, antigen-specific
T cell proliferation, and CTL-mediated specific killing of antigen-pulsed target 
cells. When challenged with syngeneic tumor cells engineered to express the
cognate antigens, 77% of MeV-vaccinated mice rejected the tumor versus 21% in
control cohorts. Antitumor responses were largely dependent on the presence of
CD8+ cells. Significant protection was observed even when only 25% of the tumor
bulk expressed cognate antigens. We therefore tested the strategy
therapeutically, allowing tumors to develop in vaccinated mice before
intratumoral injection with Viromer nanoparticles complexed with mRNA encoding
the cognate antigens. Treatment significantly enhanced overall survival compared 
with controls, including complete tumor regression in 25% of mice. Our results
indicate that redirecting pre-existing viral immunity to fight cancer is a viable
alternative that could meaningfully complement current cancer immune therapies
such as personalized cancer vaccines and checkpoint inhibitor blockade.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jitc-2020-002170 
PMCID: PMC8532558
PMID: 34675067 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: Viromer IN VIVO and all
Lipocalyx GmbH assets are now part of BioNTech Delivery Technologies GmbH, Halle,
Germany. PK, CR, and SP are employees of BioNTech Delivery Technologies GmbH.

