
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 4;12:745315. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.745315. eCollection 
2021.

Identification of Differential Responses of Goat PBMCs to PPRV Virulence Using a 
Multi-Omics Approach.

Eloiflin RJ(1)(2), Auray G(3)(4), Python S(3)(4), Rodrigues V(2)(5), Seveno M(6),
Urbach S(7), El Koulali K(6), Holzmuller P(1)(2), Totte P(1)(2), Libeau G(1)(2), 
Bataille A(1)(2), Summerfield A(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)CIRAD (Agricultural Research Centre for International Development), UMR (Unité
Mixte de Recherche), ASTRE (Animal, Health, Territories, Risks and Ecosystems),
Montpellier, France.
(2)ASTRE (Animal, Health, Territories, Risks and Ecosystems), University of
Montpellier, CIRAD (Agricultural Research Centre for International Development), 
INRAE (Institut National de Recherche pour l'Agriculture, l'Alimentation et
l'Environnement), Montpellier, France.
(3)Institute of Virology and Immunology, Mittelhäusern, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases and Pathobiology, Vetsuisse Faculty,
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(5)CIRAD (Agricultural Research Centre for International Development), UMR (Unité
Mixte de Recherche), ASTRE (Animal, Health, Territories, Risks and Ecosystems),
Petit-Bourg, France.
(6)BCM (BioCampus Montpellier), Univ. Montpellier, CNRS (Centre national de la
recherche scientifique), INSERM, Montpellier, France.
(7)IGF (Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle), Univ. Montpellier, CNRS (Centre
national de la recherche scientifique), INSERM, Montpellier, France.

Peste des petits ruminants (PPR) is an acute transboundary infectious viral
disease of small ruminants, mainly sheep and goats. Host susceptibility varies
considerably depending on the PPR virus (PPRV) strain, the host species and
breed. The effect of strains with different levels of virulence on the modulation
of the immune system has not been thoroughly compared in an experimental setting 
so far. In this study, we used a multi-omics approach to investigate the host
cellular factors involved in different infection phenotypes. Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from Saanen goats were activated with a T-cell mitogen 
and infected with PPRV strains of different virulence: Morocco 2008 (high
virulence), Ivory Coast 1989 (low virulence) and Nigeria 75/1 (live attenuated
vaccine strain). Our results showed that the highly virulent strain replicated
better than the other two in PBMCs and rapidly induced cell death and a stronger 
inhibition of lymphocyte proliferation. However, all the strains affected
lymphocyte proliferation and induced upregulation of key antiviral genes and
proteins, meaning a classical antiviral response is orchestrated regardless of
the virulence of the PPRV strain. On the other hand, the highly virulent strain
induced stronger inflammatory responses and activated more genes related to
lymphocyte migration and recruitment, and inflammatory processes. Both
transcriptomic and proteomic approaches were successful in detecting viral and
antiviral effectors under all conditions. The present work identified key
immunological factors related to PPRV virulence in vitro.

Copyright © 2021 Eloiflin, Auray, Python, Rodrigues, Seveno, Urbach, El Koulali, 
Holzmuller, Totte, Libeau, Bataille and Summerfield.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.745315 
PMCID: PMC8521192
PMID: 34671358 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

