
1. Mol Cancer Res. 2021 Oct 20. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-21-0567. [Epub ahead of
print]

Ecdysoneless Protein Regulates Viral and Cellular mRNA Splicing to Promote
Cervical Oncogenesis.

Mirza S(#)(1), Kalluchi A(#)(1), Raza M(1), Saleem I(2), Mohapatra B(1), Pal
D(1), Ouellette MM(2)(3), Qiu F(4)(5), Yu L(6), Lobanov A(7), Zheng ZM(6), Zhang 
Y(8), Alsaleem MA(9)(10), Rakha EA(9), Band H(11)(2)(4)(12)(13), Rowley MJ(11),
Band V(11)(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
Nebraska.
(4)Fred and Pamela Buffett Cancer Center, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 
Omaha, Nebraska.
(5)Department of Biostatistics, College of Public Health, University of Nebraska 
Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska.
(6)Tumor Virus RNA Biology Section, HIV Dynamics and Replication Program, Center 
for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, Maryland.
(7)CCR Collaborative Bioinformatics Resource (CCBR), National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland.
(8)Northshore University Health System, Chicago, Illinois.
(9)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Nottingham,
Nottingham, United Kingdom.
(10)Department of Applied Medical Sciences, Onizah Community College, Qassim
University, Qassim, Saudi Arabia.
(11)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska. vband@unmc.edu hband@unmc.edu
jordan.rowley@unmc.edu.
(12)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, Nebraska.
(13)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska.
(#)Contributed equally

High-risk human papillomaviruses (HPV), exemplified by HPV16/18, are causally
linked to human cancers of the anogenital tract, skin, and upper aerodigestive
tract. Previously, we identified Ecdysoneless (ECD) protein, the human homolog of
the Drosophila ecdysoneless gene, as a novel HPV16 E6-interacting protein. Here, 
we show that ECD, through its C-terminal region, selectively binds to high-risk
but not to low-risk HPV E6 proteins. We demonstrate that ECD is overexpressed in 
cervical and head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines as well as 
in tumor tissues. Using The Cancer Genome Atlas dataset, we show that ECD mRNA
overexpression predicts shorter survival in patients with cervical and HNSCC. We 
demonstrate that ECD knockdown in cervical cancer cell lines led to impaired
oncogenic behavior, and ECD co-overexpression with E7 immortalized primary human 
keratinocytes. RNA-sequencing analyses of SiHa cells upon ECD knockdown showed to
aberrations in E6/E7 RNA splicing, as well as RNA splicing of several HPV
oncogenesis-linked cellular genes, including splicing of components of mRNA
splicing machinery itself. Taken together, our results support a novel role of
ECD in viral and cellular mRNA splicing to support HPV-driven oncogenesis.
IMPLICATIONS: This study links ECD overexpression to poor prognosis and shorter
survival in HNSCC and cervical cancers and identifies a critical role of ECD in
cervical oncogenesis through regulation of viral and cellular mRNA splicing.

©2021 The Authors; Published by the American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-21-0567 
PMID: 34670863 

