
1. BMJ Open. 2021 Oct 21;11(10):e053394. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-053394.

Eliminating hepatitis C on the Balearic Islands, Spain: a protocol for an
intervention study to test and link people who use drugs to treatment and care.

Lazarus JV(1), Herranz A(2), Picchio CA(2), Villota-Rivas M(2), Rodríguez A(3),
Alonso JM(4), Moratinos A(5), Perrotta A(6), Tegeo E(6), Bibiloni F(7), Buti
M(#)(8)(9), Vilella À(#)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Barcelona Institute for Global Health (ISGlobal), Hospital Clínic, University 
of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain jeffrey.lazarus@isglobal.org.
(2)Barcelona Institute for Global Health (ISGlobal), Hospital Clínic, University 
of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Servicio médico, Centro Penitenciario de Mallorca, Palma de Mallorca, Spain.
(4)Unitat de Conductes Addictives 4 (IBSalut), Palma de Mallorca, Spain.
(5)Unitat de Conductes Addictives, Institut d'Afers Socials Mallorquí (IMAS),
Palma de Mallorca, Spain.
(6)Sector mèdic, Projecte Home Balears, Illes Balears, Spain.
(7)Pla d'addiccions i drogodependències de les Illes Balears (PADIB), Conselleria
de Salut i Consum, Govern de les Illes Balears, Spain.
(8)Liver Unit, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.
(9)CIBER-EHD, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(10)Department of Gastroenterology, Hospital Universitari Son Llàtzer, Palma de
Mallorca, Spain.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: The hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a highly infectious and deadly
disease, affecting some 58 million people worldwide. Of the 1.13 million people
living in the Balearic Islands, Spain, about 1350 individuals have untreated HCV.
Of these, about 1120 (83%) are estimated to be people who use drugs (PWUD), who
are one of the key at-risk groups for HCV infection globally. Carrying out
micro-elimination approaches focused on this population is crucial to achieve the
WHO goal of eliminating HCV by 2030. Thus, the primary objective of this study is
to validate a model of care that simplifies the screening and linkage to HCV care
pathways for PWUD on the Balearic Islands.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: This intervention study will be implemented across 17
sites, in 4 different settings: addiction service centres (n=12),
non-governmental organisation centres (n=3), a mobile methadone unit and a
prison, with an estimated 3725 participants. Together with the healthcare staff
at each centre, the intervention protocols will be adapted, focusing on four
phases: recruitment and testing; linkage to care; treatment for those who test
positive; and monitoring of sustained virological response 12 weeks after
treatment and reinfection. The primary outcomes will be the number of tested and 
treated individuals and the secondary outcomes will include individuals lost at
each step in the cascade of care. Descriptive analysis and multivariable logistic
regression of the data will be undertaken.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: The Hospital Clínic Barcelona, Spain, Ethics Committee 
approved this study on 18 February 2021 (HCB/2020/2018). Findings will be
disseminated through peer-reviewed publications, conference presentations and
social media. The results of this study could provide a model for targeting PWUD 
for HCV testing and treatment in the rest of Spain and in other settings, helping
to achieve the WHO HCV elimination goal.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-053394 
PMCID: PMC8532552
PMID: 34675021  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: JVL reports grants, personal
fees, and other from AbbVie and Gilead Sciences, personal fees from CEPHEID, GSK,
Intercept and Janssen, and grants and personal fees from MSD, outside the
submitted work. MB reports advisory fees from Gilead Sciences, Abbvie,
GlaxoSmithKline and Assembly Biosciences and speaker fees from Gilead Sciences
and Abbvie, outside of the submitted work. AV, AH, CAP, MV-R, AR, JMA, AM, AP, ET
and FB have no competing interest to declare.

