
1. BMJ Glob Health. 2021 Oct;6(10). pii: e007131. doi: 10.1136/bmjgh-2021-007131.

Engaging local health research communities to enhance long-term capacity building
in Brazil.

Madia Lourenço LH(1), Baker BL(2), Dias Junior AG(3), Jamieson NE(2), Pacheco de 
Almeida R(4), Queiroz Gurgel R(4), Campello Bresani Salvi C(5), de Souza CG(6),
Longo E(6), Gomes B(7), Rocha David M(7), Galvão Pavan M(7), Pereira de Castro
D(7), Lacerda Nogueira M(8), Lang T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Universidade de Brasília, Brasilia, Brazil
lhmlourenco@gmail.com.
(2)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK.
(3)School of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley, California, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Federal University of Sergipe, São Cristovão, Brazil.
(5)Aggeu Magalhães Institute, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Recife, Brazil.
(6)Faculty of Health Sciences - Trairi, Federal University of Rio Grande do
Norte, Santa Cruz, Brazil.
(7)Oswaldo Cruz Institute, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(8)Faculty of Medicine of São José do Rio Preto, São José do Rio Preto, Brazil.

The '2019 Research Capacity Network (REDe) workshop series' was an initiative led
by Brazil-based REDe coordinators and The Global Health Network (TGHN) in
partnership with Brazilian researchers interested in arboviruses. This workshop
initiative has provided crucial training to the local research community offering
transferable skills to effectively respond to health emergencies, with an impact 
beyond arboviral diseases, as evidenced by further activities undertaken during
the COVID-19 pandemic. The success of this approach resulted from several
factors, especially the workshops' local leadership and the combination of
in-person training with online sharing of the resources generated in the local
language. Analytics data from REDe online platform evidenced the wider reach of
the shared resources to a larger audience than the workshop attendees.
Importantly, the impact of this approach extends beyond the workshop series per
se, with workshop participants afforded access to wider training, career
development and collaborative opportunities through REDe and TGHN platforms. In
addition, this initiative design resulted in the development of new
collaborations between the workshop leaders and other local researchers, who have
been jointly writing research projects and applying for grants. As a result, REDe
has become a highly dynamic community of practice for health researchers in the
region, strengthening the research culture and improving connectivity. Here, we
describe the design and implementation of this initiative and demonstrate the
value of integrating local expertise, and a practical workshop series format with
digital dissemination of research resources and training materials to generate a 
vibrant and robust community of practice.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjgh-2021-007131 
PMCID: PMC8529619
PMID: 34670775  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

