
1. Eur Respir Rev. 2021 Oct 20;30(162). pii: 210138. doi:
10.1183/16000617.0138-2021. Print 2021 Dec 31.

COVID-19 pneumonia: pathophysiology and management.

Gattinoni L(1), Gattarello S(2), Steinberg I(2), Busana M(2), Palermo P(2),
Lazzari S(2), Romitti F(2), Quintel M(2)(3), Meissner K(2), Marini JJ(4),
Chiumello D(5), Camporota L(6).

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Anesthesiology, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen,
Germany gattinoniluciano@gmail.com.
(2)Dept of Anesthesiology, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen,
Germany.
(3)Dept of Anesthesiology, Intensive Care and Emergency Medicine
Donau-Isar-Klinikum Deggendorf, Deggendorf, Germany.
(4)Dept of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Minnesota and
Regions Hospital, St. Paul, MN, USA.
(5)Dept of Anesthesia and Intensive Care, San Paolo Hospital, University of
Milan, Milan, Italy.
(6)Dept of Adult Critical Care, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, Health
Centre for Human and Applied Physiological Sciences, London, UK.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pneumonia is an evolving disease. We will
focus on the development of its pathophysiologic characteristics over time, and
how these time-related changes determine modifications in treatment. In the
emergency department: the peculiar characteristic is the coexistence, in a
significant fraction of patients, of severe hypoxaemia, near-normal lung computed
tomography imaging, lung gas volume and respiratory mechanics. Despite high
respiratory drive, dyspnoea and respiratory rate are often normal. The underlying
mechanism is primarily altered lung perfusion. The anatomical prerequisites for
PEEP (positive end-expiratory pressure) to work (lung oedema, atelectasis, and
therefore recruitability) are lacking. In the high-dependency unit: the disease
starts to worsen either because of its natural evolution or additional patient
self-inflicted lung injury (P-SILI). Oedema and atelectasis may develop,
increasing recruitability. Noninvasive supports are indicated if they result in a
reversal of hypoxaemia and a decreased inspiratory effort. Otherwise, mechanical 
ventilation should be considered to avert P-SILI. In the intensive care unit: the
primary characteristic of the advance of unresolved COVID-19 disease is a
progressive shift from oedema or atelectasis to less reversible structural lung
alterations to lung fibrosis. These later characteristics are associated with
notable impairment of respiratory mechanics, increased arterial carbon dioxide
tension (P aCO2 ), decreased recruitability and lack of response to PEEP and
prone positioning.

Copyright ©The authors 2021.

DOI: 10.1183/16000617.0138-2021 
PMCID: PMC8527244
PMID: 34670808  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: L. Gattinoni reports
consultancy fee from General Electrics and SIDAM. He also received lecture fees
from Estor and Dimar. Conflicts of interest: S. Gattarello has nothing to
disclose. Conflicts of interest: I. Steinberg has nothing to disclose. Conflicts 
of interest: M. Busana has nothing to disclose. Conflicts of interest: P. Palermo
has nothing to disclose. Conflicts of interest: S. Lazzari has nothing to
disclose. Conflicts of interest: F. Romitti has nothing to disclose. Conflicts of
interest: M. Quintel has nothing to disclose. Conflicts of interest: K. Meissner 
has nothing to disclose. Conflicts of interest: J.J. Marini has nothing to
disclose. Conflicts of interest: D. Chiumello has nothing to disclose. Conflicts 
of interest: L. Camporota has nothing to disclose.

