
1. Psychiatr Danub. 2021 Sep;33(Suppl 10):109-113.

The Flight of Icarus: A Preliminary Study of the Emotional Correlates of Hubris
in Gerontological Nurses during the SARS-CoV-2 Pandemic.

Giannouli V(1), Syrmos N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurobiology, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Acad. G. Bonchev
str., bl. 23, 1113 Sofia, Bulgaria, giannouliv@hotmail.com.

Persons in leadership positions are more likely to manifest hubristic
symptomatology, the longer the person exercises power and the greater the power
they exercise. No data exists for healthcare staff, such as nurses and more
specifically for gerontological nurses who exercise power on their colleagues as 
well as older persons. This study aims to examine whether there are emotional
correlates of gerontological nurses' experienced hubris when serving in a
leadership position, and to investigate possible gender differences during
SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, a little investigated period regarding its emotional aspects
on healthcare professionals. Gerontological nurses in leadership positions
completed Job Affect Scale, Emotional Labour Scale, Emotion Regulation
Questionnaire, Generalized Immediacy Scale, General Index of Job Satisfaction,
Maslach Burnout Inventory, Wong-Law Emotional Intelligence Scale,
State-Anxiety-Inventory, Perceived Cohesion Scale, and a 5-point Likert scale
measuring hubristic attributes. No statistically significant differences were
found between male and female nurses regarding the abovementioned classic
administered emotional scales and hubris. The analyses yielded only a negative
correlation between negative affect and hubris. This research provides for the
first time data regarding gerontological nurses in leadership positions,
suggesting that various negative and positive emotional variables do no directly 
relate to hubristic symptoms for this group of healthcare professionals. As
hubristic behaviors and their dangerous consequences are found not to be related 
to abovementioned emotional variables, researchers and hospital managers should
consider and focus on other indices in their attempt to prevent such phenomena.


PMID: 34672282  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

