
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 4;12:745802. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.745802. eCollection 
2021.

Agonistic Activation of Cytosolic DNA Sensing Receptors in Woodchuck Hepatocyte
Cultures and Liver for Inducing Antiviral Effects.

Suresh M(1), Li B(1), Huang X(1), Korolowicz KE(1), Murreddu MG(1), Gudima SO(2),
Menne S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Georgetown University Medical Center,
Washington, DC, United States.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Molecular Genetics & Immunology, University of
Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, United States.

Immune modulation for the treatment of chronic hepatitis B (CHB) has gained more 
traction in recent years, with an increasing number of compounds designed for
targeting different host pattern recognition receptors (PRRs). These agonistic
molecules activate the receptor signaling pathway and trigger an innate immune
response that will eventually shape the adaptive immunity for control of chronic 
infection with hepatitis B virus (HBV). While definitive recognition of HBV
nucleic acids by PRRs during viral infection still needs to be elucidated,
several viral RNA sensing receptors, including toll-like receptors 7/8/9 and
retinoic acid inducible gene-I-like receptors, are explored preclinically and
clinically as possible anti-HBV targets. The antiviral potential of viral DNA
sensing receptors is less investigated. In the present study, treatment of
primary woodchuck hepatocytes generated from animals with CHB with HSV-60 or
poly(dA:dT) agonists resulted in increased expression of interferon-gamma
inducible protein 16 (IFI16) or Z-DNA-binding protein 1 (ZBP1/DAI) and absent in 
melanoma 2 (AIM2) receptors and their respective adaptor molecules and effector
cytokines. Cytosolic DNA sensing receptor pathway activation correlated with a
decline in woodchuck hepatitis virus (WHV) replication and secretion in these
cells. Combination treatment with HSV-60 and poly(dA:dT) achieved a superior
antiviral effect over monotreatment with either agonist that was associated with 
an increased expression of effector cytokines. The antiviral effect, however,
could not be enhanced further by providing additional type-I interferons (IFNs)
exogenously, indicating a saturated level of effector cytokines produced by these
receptors following agonism. In WHV-uninfected woodchucks, a single poly(dA:dT)
dose administered via liver-targeted delivery was well-tolerated and induced the 
intrahepatic expression of ZBP1/DAI and AIM2 receptors and their effector
cytokines, IFN-β and interleukins 1β and 18. Receptor agonism also resulted in
increased IFN-γ secretion of peripheral blood cells. Altogether, the effect on
WHV replication and secretion following in vitro activation of IFI16, ZBP1/DAI,
and AIM2 receptor pathways suggested an antiviral benefit of targeting more than 
one cytosolic DNA receptor. In addition, the in vivo activation of ZBP1/DAI and
AIM2 receptor pathways in liver indicated the feasibility of the agonist delivery
approach for future evaluation of therapeutic efficacy against HBV in woodchucks 
with CHB.

Copyright © 2021 Suresh, Li, Huang, Korolowicz, Murreddu, Gudima and Menne.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.745802 
PMCID: PMC8521114
PMID: 34671360 

Conflict of interest statement: SM serves occasionally as a paid scientific
consultant to Northeastern Wildlife, Inc. (Harris, ID, USA), the only commercial 
source for woodchucks within the United States, from which the animals of the
current study were purchased. The remaining authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

