
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 4;12:741502. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.741502. eCollection 
2021.

Defining the Innate Immune Responses for SARS-CoV-2-Human Macrophage
Interactions.

Abdelmoaty MM(1)(2), Yeapuri P(1), Machhi J(3), Olson KE(3), Shahjin F(3), Kumar 
V(4), Zhou Y(5), Liang J(6), Pandey K(3), Acharya A(3), Byrareddy SN(3), Mosley
RL(3), Gendelman HE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, United States.
(2)Therapeutic Chemistry Department, Pharmaceutical and Drug Industries Research 
Division, National Research Centre, Giza, Egypt.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, College of Medicine,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, United States.
(4)Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Core, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 
Omaha, NE, United States.
(5)Center for Biotechnology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, United 
States.
(6)Department of Population and Quantitative Health Sciences, School of Medicine,
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, United States.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2021 Jul 15;:.

Host innate immune response follows severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection, and it is the driver of the acute respiratory distress 
syndrome (ARDS) amongst other inflammatory end-organ morbidities. Such
life-threatening coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is heralded by virus-induced
activation of mononuclear phagocytes (MPs; monocytes, macrophages, and dendritic 
cells). MPs play substantial roles in aberrant immune secretory activities
affecting profound systemic inflammation and end-organ malfunctions. All follow
the presence of persistent viral components and virions without evidence of viral
replication. To elucidate SARS-CoV-2-MP interactions we investigated
transcriptomic and proteomic profiles of human monocyte-derived macrophages.
While expression of the SARS-CoV-2 receptor, the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2,
paralleled monocyte-macrophage differentiation, it failed to affect productive
viral infection. In contrast, simple macrophage viral exposure led to robust
pro-inflammatory cytokine and chemokine expression but attenuated type I
interferon (IFN) activity. Both paralleled dysregulation of innate immune
signaling pathways, specifically those linked to IFN. We conclude that the
SARS-CoV-2-infected host mounts a robust innate immune response characterized by 
a pro-inflammatory storm heralding end-organ tissue damage.

Copyright © 2021 Abdelmoaty, Yeapuri, Machhi, Olson, Shahjin, Kumar, Zhou, Liang,
Pandey, Acharya, Byrareddy, Mosley and Gendelman.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.741502 
PMCID: PMC8521106
PMID: 34671355  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author HEG is a co-founder of Exavir
Therapeutics, Inc. who is developing antiviral and elimination therapies for
HIV/AIDS and other viral infections. The remaining authors declare that the
research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

