
1. J Complement Integr Med. 2021 Oct 22. doi: 10.1515/jcim-2021-0241. [Epub ahead of
print]

Arq Ajīb - a wonder Unani formulation for inhibiting SARS-CoV-2 spike
glycoprotein and main protease - an in silico approach.

Ahmed NZ(1), John Davis GD(2), Khan AA(3), Prabhakar L(2), Ram Paratap M(3),
Afnaan Z(2), Devi Sri M(1), Anwar N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Regional Research Institute of Unani Medicine, Chennai, India.
(2)Sri Ramachandra Institute of Higher Education and Research (Deemed to be
University), Chennai, India.
(3)Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine, M/o AYUSH, Govt of India, New 
Delhi, India.

OBJECTIVES: The current pandemic caused by Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
Corona-Virus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has become a global health menace with significant
morbidity and mortality besides huge socioeconomic implications. Despite the
approval of few vaccines for the prevention of the disease, the discovery of safe
and effective countermeasures especially from natural sources is of paramount
importance, as the number of cases continues escalating. Arq Ajīb has long been
used for various diseases and its ingredients have been reported for antiviral,
antimicrobial, antipyretic, anti-inflammatory, antioxidant activities. The
present study investigates the inhibitory effect of phytocompound of Arq Ajīb on 
potential drug targets of SARS-CoV-2.
METHODS: The structures of phytocompounds present in Arq Ajīb were retrieved from
PubChem database and some were illustrated using Marvin Sketch. SARS-CoV-2 S
glycoprotein (PDB ID: 6LZG) and 3CLpro (PDB ID: 7BQY) were selected as the target
protein. Dock Prep module in UCSF Chimera software was used for receptor
structure processing. AutoDock Vina was used to calculate the binding affinities 
between the protein and ligands and to predict most promising compounds with best
scores.
RESULTS: Molecular docking results predicted that the phytocompounds of Arq Ajīb 
had good binding affinity and interaction with S glycoprotein and 3CLpro.
Quercetin and Isorhoifolin from Mentha arvensis were identified as promising
candidates with the potential to interact with 3CLpro and spike glycoprotein and 
inhibit the viral replication and its entry into the host.
CONCLUSIONS: Arq Ajīb may prove valuable for developing novel therapeutic
candidate for COVID-19; however, it has to be substantiated further with in-vitro
and in-vivo studies.

© 2021 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston.

DOI: 10.1515/jcim-2021-0241 
PMID: 34679263 

