
1. J Med Virol. 2021 Oct 21. doi: 10.1002/jmv.27409. [Epub ahead of print]

Better detection of Torque teno virus in children with leukemia by metagenomic
sequencing than by quantitative PCR.

Leijonhufvud G(1)(2), Bajalan A(3), Teixeira Soratto TA(3)(4), Gustafsson B(5),
Bogdanovic G(6), Bjerkner A(7), Allander T(6), Ljungman G(1), Andersson B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden.
(2)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Children's University Hospital,
Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Parasitology, Federal University
of Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, Santa Catarina, Brazil.
(5)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Tumor, and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Karolinska University Hospital,
Stockholm, Sweden.

Torque teno virus (TTV) is a group of chronically persisting viruses with a short
circular DNA genome. TTV demonstrates a wide sequence diversity and a large
majority of humans are chronically infected by one or more types of TTV. As TTV
is ubiquitous, and viral replication correlates with immune status, TTV has been 
studied as a marker to assess global functional immune competence in transplant
recipients. Most studies of the prevalence, amounts, and variation in TTV have
been performed using PCR assays. We here present a comparison of the most
frequently used quantitative PCR (qPCR) assay for TTV with shotgun metagenomic
sequencing for detection and characterization of TTV in a cohort of pediatric
cancer patients. The results show that TTV is more common than the qPCR assays
indicate, and analysis of the TTV genome sequences indicate that a qPCR with
primers and probe designed on a conserved region of the TTV genome may fail to
detect some of the TTV strains found in this study.

© 2021 The Authors. Journal of Medical Virology published by Wiley Periodicals
LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.27409 
PMID: 34672369 

