
1. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2021 Sep-Oct;55(4):796-828. doi: 10.31857/S002689842104008X.

[mRNA Targeting, Transport and Local Translation in Eukaryotic Cells: From the
Classical View to a Diversity of New Concepts].

[Article in Russian]

Lashkevich KA(1)(2), Dmitriev SE(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Belozersky Institute of Physico-Chemical Biology, Moscow State University,
Moscow, 119234 Russia.
(2)Faculty of Bioengineering and Bioinformatics, Moscow State University, Moscow,
119234 Russia.
(3)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Moscow, 119991 Russia.
(4)sergey.dmitriev@belozersky.msu.ru.

Spatial organization of protein biosynthesis in the eukaryotic cell has been
studied for more than fifty years, thus many facts have already been included in 
textbooks. According to the classical view, mRNA transcripts encoding secreted
and transmembrane proteins are translated by ribosomes associated with
endoplasmic reticulum membranes, while soluble cytoplasmic proteins are
synthesized on free polysomes. However, in the last few years, new data has
emerged, revealing selective translation of mRNA on mitochondria and plastids, in
proximity to peroxisomes and endosomes, in various granules and at the
cytoskeleton (actin network, vimentin intermediate filaments, microtubules and
centrosomes). There are also long-standing debates about the possibility of
protein synthesis in the nucleus. Localized translation can be determined by
targeting signals in the synthesized protein, nucleotide sequences in the mRNA
itself, or both. With RNA-binding proteins, many transcripts can be assembled
into specific RNA condensates and form RNP particles, which may be transported by
molecular motors to the sites of active translation, form granules and provoke
liquid-liquid phase separation in the cytoplasm, both under normal conditions and
during cell stress. The translation of some mRNAs occurs in specialized
"translation factories," assemblysomes, transperons and other structures
necessary for the correct folding of proteins, interaction with functional
partners and formation of oligomeric complexes. Intracellular localization of
mRNA has a significant impact on the efficiency of its translation and presumably
determines its response to cellular stress. Compartmentalization of mRNAs and the
translation machinery also plays an important role in viral infections. Many
viruses provoke the formation of specific intracellular structures, virus
factories, for the production of their proteins. Here we review the current
concepts of the molecular mechanisms of transport, selective localization and
local translation of cellular and viral mRNAs, their effects on protein targeting
and topogenesis, and on the regulation of protein biosynthesis in different
compartments of the eukaryotic cell. Special attention is paid to new systems
biology approaches, providing new cues to the study of localized translation.

DOI: 10.31857/S002689842104008X 
PMID: 34671009  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

