
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Oct 21;17(10):e1010006. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010006.
eCollection 2021 Oct.

Marek's disease virus prolongs survival of primary chicken B-cells by inducing a 
senescence-like phenotype.

Trapp-Fragnet L(1), Schermuly J(2), Kohn M(2), Bertzbach LD(3)(4), Pfaff F(5),
Denesvre C(1), Kaufer BB(3), Härtle S(2).

Author information: 
(1)INRAE, UMR1282 ISP, Equipe Biologie des Virus Aviaires, Nouzilly, France.
(2)Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Department of Veterinary Sciences,
München, Germany.
(3)Institut für Virologie, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology, Department of Viral
Transformation, Hamburg, Germany.
(5)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Federal Research Institute for Animal Health,
Institute of Diagnostic Virology, Greifswald-Insel Riems, Germany.

Marek's disease virus (MDV) is an alphaherpesvirus that causes immunosuppression 
and deadly lymphoma in chickens. Lymphoid organs play a central role in MDV
infection in animals. B-cells in the bursa of Fabricius facilitate high levels of
MDV replication and contribute to dissemination at early stages of infection.
Several studies investigated host responses in bursal tissue of MDV-infected
chickens; however, the cellular responses specifically in bursal B-cells has
never been investigated. We took advantage of our recently established in vitro
infection system to decipher the cellular responses of bursal B-cells to
infection with a very virulent MDV strain. Here, we demonstrate that MDV
infection extends the survival of bursal B-cells in culture. Microarray analyses 
revealed that most cytokine/cytokine-receptor-, cell cycle- and
apoptosis-associated genes are significantly down-regulated in these cells.
Further functional assays validated these strong effects of MDV infections on
cell cycle progression and thus, B-cell proliferation. In addition, we confirmed 
that MDV infections protect B-cells from apoptosis and trigger an accumulation of
the autophagy marker Lc3-II. Taken together, our data indicate that MDV-infected 
bursal B-cells show hallmarks of a senescence-like phenotype, leading to a
prolonged B-cell survival. This study provides an in-depth analysis of bursal
B-cell responses to MDV infection and important insights into how the virus
extends the survival of these cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010006 
PMCID: PMC8562793
PMID: 34673841  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

