
1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2021 Nov;193:114809. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2021.114809. Epub 2021
Oct 19.

Pathogenic mitochondrial dysfunction and metabolic abnormalities.

Moos WH(1), Faller DV(2), Glavas IP(3), Harpp DN(4), Kamperi N(5), Kanara I(6),
Kodukula K(7), Mavrakis AN(8), Pernokas J(9), Pernokas M(9), Pinkert CA(10),
Powers WR(11), Steliou K(12), Tamvakopoulos C(5), Vavvas DG(13), Zamboni RJ(4),
Sampani K(14).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address:
walter.moos@ucsf.edu.
(2)Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA;
Cancer Research Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, New York University School of Medicine, New York,
NY, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(5)Center for Clinical, Experimental Surgery and Translational Research
Pharmacology-Pharmacotechnology, Biomedical Research Foundation, Academy of
Athens, Athens, Greece.
(6)Embassy of Greece in London, London, United Kingdom.
(7)ShangPharma Innovation, South San Francisco, CA, USA.
(8)Department of Medicine, Tufts University School of Medicine, St. Elizabeth's
Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA.
(9)Advanced Dental Associates of New England, Woburn, MA, USA.
(10)Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn
University, Auburn, AL, USA.
(11)Department of Health Sciences, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA; Department
of Anatomy, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(12)Cancer Research Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA,
USA; PhenoMatriX, Inc., Natick, MA, USA.
(13)Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; Retina 
Service, Angiogenesis Laboratory, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Boston,
MA, USA.
(14)Beetham Eye Institute, Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, MA, USA; Department of
Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address:
konstantina.sampani@joslin.harvard.edu.

Herein we trace links between biochemical pathways, pathogenesis, and metabolic
diseases to set the stage for new therapeutic advances. Cellular and acellular
microorganisms including bacteria and viruses are primary pathogenic drivers that
cause disease. Missing from this statement are subcellular compartments,
importantly mitochondria, which can be pathogenic by themselves, also serving as 
key metabolic disease intermediaries. The breakdown of food molecules provides
chemical energy to power cellular processes, with mitochondria as powerhouses and
ATP as the principal energy carrying molecule. Most animal cell ATP is produced
by mitochondrial synthase; its central role in metabolism has been known
for >80 years. Metabolic disorders involving many organ systems are prevalent in 
all age groups. Progressive pathogenic mitochondrial dysfunction is a hallmark of
genetic mitochondrial diseases, the most common phenotypic expression of
inherited metabolic disorders. Confluent genetic, metabolic, and mitochondrial
axes surface in diabetes, heart failure, neurodegenerative disease, and even in
the ongoing coronavirus pandemic.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2021.114809 
PMID: 34673016  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

