
1. Front Pediatr. 2021 Oct 4;9:678937. doi: 10.3389/fped.2021.678937. eCollection
2021.

Symptoms, SARS-CoV-2 Antibodies, and Neutralization Capacity in a Cross
Sectional-Population of German Children.

Laub O(1), Leipold G(2), Toncheva AA(3), Peterhoff D(4)(5), Einhauser S(4),
Neckermann P(4), Borchers N(3), Santos-Valente E(3), Kheiroddin P(3),
Buntrock-Döpke H(3)(6), Laub S(1), Schöberl P(3)(6), Schweiger-Kabesch A(3),
Ewald D(7), Horn M(8), Niggel J(9), Ambrosch A(10), Überla K(11), Gerling S(3),
Brandstetter S(3)(6), Wagner R(4)(5), Kabesch M(3)(6); Corona Virus Antibodies in
Children from Bavaria (CoKiBa) Study Group.

Collaborators: Aichholzer B, Mair G, Wruk M, Reischl I, Antos D, von Koskull S,
Becker C, Beer E, Schirmer H, Birkinger G, Blueml A, Castrop M, Dieckerhoff J,
Eichhorn R, Ewald D, Fleck G, Heihoff A, Geuder J, Grombach J, Gutdeutsch P,
Segerer F, Habash T, Habash S, Harner S, Herbst C, Heuschmann D, Hofmann M, Horn 
M, Jork-Kaeferlein B, Schwarz M, Hopfner R, Judex G, Baumgartner B, Corbacioglu
M, Lindner S, Meinel B, Bauer A, Löw H, Szulagyi-Kovacs A, Kabesch M, Klein A,
Koering C, Landvogt N, Soehngen C, Rasp K, Schick-Niedermeier G, Laub M, Laub O, 
Leipold G, Schmid-Seibold P, Pawlak J, Reitz M, Puchner G, Razeghi C, Razeghi S, 
Rehe C, Rehe K, Scheffel M, Kaesbauer L, Schmid R, Strobelt M, Schoetzau N,
Senjor M, Sperlich M, Theuerer G, Steidle G, Tretter G, von Arnim V,
Volz-Fleckenstein M.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Office Laub, Rosenheim, Germany.
(2)Pediatric Office Dr. Leipold, Regensburg, Germany.
(3)University Children's Hospital Regensburg (KUNO) at the Hospital St. Hedwig of
the Order of St. John, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(4)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, Molecular Microbiology
(Virology), University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(5)Institute of Clinical Microbiology and Hygiene, University Hospital,
Regensburg, Germany.
(6)Member of the Research and Development Campus Regensburg (WECARE) at the
Hospital St. Hedwig of the Order of St. John, Regensburg, Germany.
(7)Pediatric Office Dr. Heuschmann & Dr. Ewald, Regenstauf, Germany.
(8)Pediatric Office Dr. Horn, Schönau, Germany.
(9)Maganamed Limited, Regensburg, Germany.
(10)Institute of Laboratory Medicine, Microbiology and Hygiene, Hospital of the
Order of St. John, Regensburg, Germany.
(11)Institute of Clinical and Molecular Virology, FAU Erlangen-Nuremberg and
Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.

Background: Children and youth are affected rather mildly in the acute phase of
COVID-19 and thus, SARS-CoV-2 infection infection may easily be overlooked. In
the light of current discussions on the vaccinations of children it seems
necessary to better identify children who are immune against SARS-CoV-2 due to a 
previous infection and to better understand COVID-19 related immune reactions in 
children. Methods: In a cross-sectional design, children aged 1-17 were recruited
through primary care pediatricians for the study (a) randomly, if they had an
appointment for a regular health check-up or (b) if parents and children
volunteered and actively wanted to participate in the study. Symptoms were
recorded and two antibody tests were performed in parallel directed against S (in
house test) and N (Roche Elecsys) viral proteins. In children with antibody
response in either test, neutralization activity was determined. Results: We
identified antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 in 162 of 2,832 eligible children (5.7%)
between end of May and end of July 2020 in three, in part strongly affected
regions of Bavaria in the first wave of the pandemic. Approximately 60% of
antibody positive children (n = 97) showed high levels (>97th percentile) of
antibodies against N-protein, and for the S-protein, similar results were found. 
Sufficient neutralizing activity was detected for only 135 antibody positive
children (86%), irrespective of age and sex. Initial COVID-19 symptoms were
unspecific in children except for the loss of smell and taste and unrelated to
antibody responses or neutralization capacity. Approximately 30% of PCR positive 
children did not show seroconversion in our small subsample in which PCR tests
were performed. Conclusions: Symptoms of SARS-CoV-2 infections are unspecific in 
children and antibody responses show a dichotomous structure with strong
responses in many and no detectable antibodies in PCR positive children and
missing neutralization activity in a relevant proportion of the young population.

Copyright © 2021 Laub, Leipold, Toncheva, Peterhoff, Einhauser, Neckermann,
Borchers, Santos-Valente, Kheiroddin, Buntrock-Döpke, Laub, Schöberl,
Schweiger-Kabesch, Ewald, Horn, Niggel, Ambrosch, Überla, Gerling, Brandstetter, 
Wagner, Kabesch and Corona Virus Antibodies in Children from Bavaria (CoKiBa)
Study Group.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2021.678937 
PMCID: PMC8522552
PMID: 34671582 

Conflict of interest statement: JN was employed by the company Maganamed Limited.
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.

