
1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2021 Oct 4;13:710683. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.710683.
eCollection 2021.

The Unifying Hypothesis of Alzheimer's Disease: Heparan Sulfate
Proteoglycans/Glycosaminoglycans Are Key as First Hypothesized Over 30 Years Ago.

Snow AD(1), Cummings JA(1), Lake T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cognitive Clarity Inc., Edmonds, WA, United States.

The updated "Unifying Hypothesis of Alzheimer's disease" (AD) is described that
links all the observed neuropathology in AD brain (i.e., plaques, tangles, and
cerebrovascular amyloid deposits), as well as inflammation, genetic factors
(involving ApoE), "AD-in-a-Dish" studies, beta-amyloid protein (Aβ) as a
microbial peptide; and theories that bacteria, gut microflora, gingivitis and
viruses all play a role in the cause of AD. The common link is the early
accumulation of heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) and heparan sulfate
glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). HS GAG accumulation and/or decreased HS GAG
degradation is postulated to be the key initiating event. HS GAGs and highly
sulfated macromolecules induce Aβ 1-40 (but not 1-42) to form spherical
congophilic maltese-cross star-like amyloid core deposits identical to those in
the AD brain. Heparin/HS also induces tau protein to form paired helical
filaments (PHFs). Increased sulfation and/or decreased degradation of HSPGs and
HS GAGs that occur due to brain aging leads to the formation of plaques and
tangles in AD brain. Knockout of HS genes markedly reduce the accumulation of Aβ 
fibrils in the brain demonstrating that HS GAGs are key. Bacteria and viruses all
use cell surface HS GAGs for entry into cells, including SARS-CoV-2. Bacteria and
viruses cause HS GAGs to rapidly increase to cause near-immediate aggregation of 
Aβ fibrils. "AD-in-a-dish" studies use "Matrigel" as the underlying scaffold that
spontaneously causes plaque, and then tangle formation in a dish. Matrigel mostly
contains large amounts of perlecan, the same specific HSPG implicated in AD and
amyloid disorders. Mucopolysaccharidoses caused by lack of specific HS GAG
enzymes lead to massive accumulation of HS in lysosomal compartments in neurons
and contribute to cognitive impairment in children. Neurons full of HS
demonstrate marked accumulation and fibrillization of Aβ, tau, α-synuclein, and
prion protein (PrP) in mucopolysaccharidosis animal models demonstrating that HS 
GAG accumulation is a precursor to Aβ accumulation in neurons. Brain aging leads 
to changes in HSPGs, including newly identified splice variants leading to
increased HS GAG sulfation in the AD brain. All of these events lead to the new
"Unifying Hypothesis of Alzheimer's disease" that further implicates HSPGs /HS
GAGs as key (as first hypothesized by Snow and Wight in 1989).

Copyright © 2021 Snow, Cummings and Lake.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.710683 
PMCID: PMC8521200
PMID: 34671250 

Conflict of interest statement: All authors were employed by company Cognitive
Clarity Inc.

