
1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2021 Oct 21;17(10):e1009428. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009428.
eCollection 2021 Oct.

Comprehensive discovery of CRISPR-targeted terminally redundant sequences in the 
human gut metagenome: Viruses, plasmids, and more.

Sugimoto R(1), Nishimura L(1)(2), Nguyen PT(1)(2), Ito J(3), Parrish NF(4), Mori 
H(5), Kurokawa K(6), Nakaoka H(7), Inoue I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Laboratory, National Institute of Genetics, Research
Organization of Information and Systems, Mishima, Shizuoka, Japan.
(2)The Graduate University for Advanced Studies, SOKENDAI, Mishima, Shizuoka,
Japan.
(3)Division of Systems Virology, Department of Infectious Disease Control,
International Research Center for Infectious Diseases, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Genome Immunobiology RIKEN Hakubi Research Team, Center for Integrative
Medical Sciences, RIKEN, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.
(5)Genome Diversity Laboratory, National Institute of Genetics, Research
Organization of Information and Systems, Mishima, Shizuoka, Japan.
(6)Genome Evolution Laboratory, National Institute of Genetics, Research
Organization of Information and Systems, Mishima, Shizuoka, Japan.
(7)Department of Cancer Genome Research, Sasaki Institute, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo,
Japan.

Viruses are the most numerous biological entity, existing in all environments and
infecting all cellular organisms. Compared with cellular life, the evolution and 
origin of viruses are poorly understood; viruses are enormously diverse, and most
lack sequence similarity to cellular genes. To uncover viral sequences without
relying on either reference viral sequences from databases or marker genes that
characterize specific viral taxa, we developed an analysis pipeline for virus
inference based on clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats
(CRISPR). CRISPR is a prokaryotic nucleic acid restriction system that stores the
memory of previous exposure. Our protocol can infer CRISPR-targeted sequences,
including viruses, plasmids, and previously uncharacterized elements, and predict
their hosts using unassembled short-read metagenomic sequencing data. By
analyzing human gut metagenomic data, we extracted 11,391 terminally redundant
CRISPR-targeted sequences, which are likely complete circular genomes. The
sequences included 2,154 tailed-phage genomes, together with 257 complete
crAssphage genomes, 11 genomes larger than 200 kilobases, 766 genomes of
Microviridae species, 56 genomes of Inoviridae species, and 95 previously
uncharacterized circular small genomes that have no reliably predicted
protein-coding gene. We predicted the host(s) of approximately 70% of the
discovered genomes at the taxonomic level of phylum by linking protospacers to
taxonomically assigned CRISPR direct repeats. These results demonstrate that our 
protocol is efficient for de novo inference of CRISPR-targeted sequences and
their host prediction.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009428 
PMCID: PMC8530359
PMID: 34673779 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

