
1. Br Dent J. 2021 Oct;231(8):503-511. doi: 10.1038/s41415-021-3535-5. Epub 2021 Oct
22.

Development, implementation and feedback for an online speciality membership
examination in orthodontics during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Eckhardt CE(1), Seehra J(2), Chadwick SM(3), Voerman K(4), Landau A(5), Ryan
FS(6), Fleming PS(7), Garrett M(8), Cobourne MT(9).

Author information: 
(1)Lead Cleft Lip and Palate Orthodontist, Consultant Orthodontist, Maxillofacial
Department, Morriston Hospital, Swansea Bay University Health Board, Swansea, UK.
(2)Senior Clinical Teacher and Consultant Orthodontist, Centre for Craniofacial
Development & Regeneration, Faculty of Dentistry, Oral & Craniofacial Sciences,
King´s College London, London, UK.
(3)Consultant Orthodontist, Orthodontic Department, Countess of Chester Hospital,
Chester, UK.
(4)Quality Assurance Manager, Royal College of Surgeons of England, London, UK.
(5)Director of Dental and Surgical Examinations, Royal College of Surgeons of
England, London, UK.
(6)Consultant Orthodontist, Department of Orthodontics, Royal National ENT and
Eastman Dental Hospitals, University College Hospitals London NHS Trust, London, 
UK.
(7)Professor of Orthodontics, Barts & The London School of Medicine and
Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK.
(8)Consultant in Restorative Dentistry, Royal National ENT and Eastman Dental
Hospitals, University College Hospitals London NHS Trust, London, UK; Dean,
Faculty of Dental Surgery, Royal College of Surgeons of England, London, UK.
(9)Professor of Orthodontics, Centre for Craniofacial Development & Regeneration,
Faculty of Dentistry, Oral & Craniofacial Sciences, King´s College London,
London, UK; Chair of Examinations, Faculty of Dental Surgery, Royal College of
Surgeons of England, London, UK. martyn.cobourne@kcl.ac.uk.

Introduction The Royal College of Surgeons of England (RCSEng) and the Royal
College of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow (RCPSG) offer the bi-collegiate
Membership in Orthodontics (MOrth) examination, a summative assessment of
specialist knowledge, skill and behaviour in orthodontics. The COVID-19 pandemic 
has had a profound global effect on almost every facet of normal life, including 
the conduct of face-to-face examinations. We highlight development,
implementation and feedback for the bi-collegiate MOrth Part 2 examination
delivered remotely to a cohort of candidates in September 2020 by
RCSEng/RCPSG.Methods Two anonymised online surveys (Google Forms) were
distributed via electronic mail following completion of the examination diet.
Forty-two candidates were sent a survey covering four domains and comprising a
total of 31 questions. The 20 examiners were sent a survey containing eight
questions. In both surveys, free-text responses were also collected. A rating
system was used to categorise responses. All survey responses were summarised in 
an online data collection sheet.Results The response rate was 78.5% (33/42) and
75% (15/20) for candidates and examiners, respectively. Overall, favourable
responses in relation to all sections of the assessment were elicited from
candidates with the majority (mean 79.8%; 75.8-81.9%) reporting that the online
examination format worked well. Equally, favourable responses were reported by
examiners. Notably, 80% of examiners felt that the online exam style did not
affect the mark a candidate would receive, and 100% were confident that the marks
the candidates received were a reflection of their ability and were not affected 
by the online delivery of the assessment.Conclusions The feedback from both
candidates and examiners relating to an online remote assessment of the
bi-collegiate MOrth Part 2 was generally positive. Based on the survey responses,
this format of a high-stakes examination was acceptable to all stakeholders, and 
demonstrated a high level of perceived validity and reliability in terms of
content.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to the British Dental Association.

DOI: 10.1038/s41415-021-3535-5 
PMCID: PMC8531912
PMID: 34686818  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

