
1. Pharmaceutics. 2021 Oct 11;13(10). pii: 1656. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13101656.

Activation of Tenofovir Alafenamide and Sofosbuvir in the Human Lung and Its
Implications in the Development of Nucleoside/Nucleotide Prodrugs for Treating
SARS-CoV-2 Pulmonary Infection.

Li J(1), Liu S(1), Shi J(1), Zhu HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

ProTide technology is a powerful tool for the design of nucleoside/nucleotide
analog prodrugs. ProTide prodrug design improves cell permeability and enhances
intracellular activation. The hydrolysis of the ester bond of a ProTide is a
determinant of the intracellular activation efficiency and final antiviral
efficacy of the prodrug. The hydrolysis is dictated by the catalytic activity and
abundance of activating enzymes. The antiviral agents tenofovir alafenamide (TAF)
and sofosbuvir (SBV) are typical ProTides. Both TAF and SBV have also been
proposed to treat patients with COVID-19. However, the mechanisms underlying the 
activation of the two prodrugs in the lung remain inconclusive. In the present
study, we profiled the catalytic activity of serine hydrolases in human lung S9
fractions using an activity-based protein profiling assay. We evaluated the
hydrolysis of TAF and SBV using human lung and liver S9 fractions and purified
enzymes. The results showed that CatA and CES1 were involved in the hydrolysis of
the two prodrugs in the human lung. More specifically, CatA exhibited a nearly
4-fold higher hydrolytic activity towards TAF than SBV, whereas the CES1 activity
on hydrolyzing TAF was slightly lower than that for SBV. Overall, TAF had a
nearly 4-fold higher hydrolysis rate in human lung S9 than SBV. We further
analyzed protein expression levels of CatA and CES1 in the human lung, liver, and
primary cells of the two tissues using proteomics data extracted from the
literature. The relative protein abundance of CatA to CES1 was considerably
higher in the human lung and primary human airway epithelial cells than in the
human liver and primary human hepatocytes. The findings demonstrated that the
high susceptivity of TAF to CatA-mediated hydrolysis resulted in efficient TAF
hydrolysis in the human lung, suggesting that CatA could be utilized as a target 
activating enzyme when designing antiviral ester prodrugs for the treatment of
respiratory virus infection.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13101656 
PMCID: PMC8540046
PMID: 34683949 

