
1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2021 Dec;177:143-155. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2021.10.026. Epub 2021 Oct 20.

Jejunal epithelial barrier disruption triggered by reactive oxygen species in
early SIV infected rhesus macaques.

Wang XH(1), Song TZ(2), Zheng HY(2), Li YH(3), Zheng YT(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei,
Anhui, 230026, China; Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease
Mechanisms of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, National Kunming High Level
Biosafety Research Center for Nonhuman Primate, KIZ-CUHK Joint Laboratory of
Bioresources and Molecular Research in Common Diseases, Kunming Institute of
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, 650223, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences, National Kunming High Level Biosafety Research Center for
Nonhuman Primate, KIZ-CUHK Joint Laboratory of Bioresources and Molecular
Research in Common Diseases, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, 650223, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences, National Kunming High Level Biosafety Research Center for
Nonhuman Primate, KIZ-CUHK Joint Laboratory of Bioresources and Molecular
Research in Common Diseases, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, 650223, China; Kunming College of Life Science,
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, 650204, China.
(4)School of Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei,
Anhui, 230026, China; Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease
Mechanisms of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, National Kunming High Level
Biosafety Research Center for Nonhuman Primate, KIZ-CUHK Joint Laboratory of
Bioresources and Molecular Research in Common Diseases, Kunming Institute of
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, 650223, China; Kunming
College of Life Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming,
Yunnan, 650204, China. Electronic address: zhengyt@mail.kiz.ac.cn.

Intestinal epithelial barrier destruction occurs earlier than mucosal immune
dysfunction in the acute stage of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and simian
immunodeficiency virus (SIV) infections. At present, however, the cause of
compromised gastrointestinal integrity in early SIV infection remains unknown. In
the current study, we investigated the effects of SIV infection on epithelial
barrier integrity and explored oxidative stress-mediated DNA damage and apoptosis
in epithelial cells from early acute SIVmac239-infected Chinese rhesus macaques
(Macaca mulatta). Results showed that the sensitive molecular marker of small
intestinal barrier dysfunction, i.e., intestinal fatty acid-binding protein
(IFABP), was significantly increased in plasma at 14 days post-SIV infection. SIV
infection induced a profound decrease in the expression of tight junction
proteins, including claudin-1, claudin-3, and zonula occludens (ZO)-1, as well as
a significant increase in the active form of caspase-3 level in epithelial cells.
RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis suggested that differentially expressed genes
between pre- and post-SIV-infected jejuna were enriched in pathways involved in
cell redox homeostasis, oxidoreductase activity, and mitochondria. Indeed, a
SIV-mediated increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the epithelium and
macrophages, as well as an increase in hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and decrease in
glutathione (GSH)/glutathione disulfide (GSSG) antioxidant defense, were observed
in SIV-infected jejuna. In addition, the accumulation of mitochondrial
dysfunction and DNA oxidative damage led to an increase in senescence-associated 
β-galactosidase (SA-β-gal) and early apoptosis in intestinal epithelial cells.
Furthermore, HIV-1 Tat protein-induced epithelial monolayer disruption in
HT-29 cells was rescued by antioxidant N-acetylcysteine (NAC). These results
indicate that mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress in jejunal
epithelial cells are primary contributors to gut epithelial barrier disruption in
early SIV-infected rhesus macaques.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2021.10.026 
PMID: 34687865 

