
1. Am J Prev Med. 2021 Nov;61(5 Suppl 1):S108-S117. doi:
10.1016/j.amepre.2021.05.040.

Bringing Iowa TelePrEP to Scale: A Qualitative Evaluation.

Chasco EE(1), Shafer C(2), Dillon DMB(3), Owens S(4), Ohl ME(5), Hoth AB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Carver College of Medicine, University of
Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa. Electronic address: emily-chasco@uiowa.edu.
(2)HIV Special Projects Division, NuCara Pharmacy, Pleasant Hill, Iowa.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Care, University of Iowa Hospitals & Clinics,
University of Iowa Health Care, Iowa City, Iowa.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Carver College of Medicine, University of
Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Carver College of Medicine, University of
Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa; Center for Comprehensive Access & Delivery Research and
Evaluation (CADRE), Iowa City VA Medical Center, Iowa City, Iowa.

INTRODUCTION: Regional partnerships between public health organizations and
telehealth programs have the potential to expand access to HIV pre-exposure
prophylaxis in rural and small urban areas. However, little is known about the
best practices for such partnerships. Iowa TelePrEP, a regional public
health‒partnered telehealth model created by the Iowa Department of Public Health
and the University of Iowa, expanded statewide between 2017 and 2019. This
qualitative evaluation assessed the barriers and facilitators to statewide
expansion and the lessons learned.
METHODS: Key informants from public health partners across Iowa participated in a
focus group and interviews between May 2019 and November 2020. Public health
partners included local health departments and disease intervention
specialist/partner services programs. Qualitative data were transcribed and
thematically coded. Program documents and routinely collected reporting data were
reviewed to provide the context for qualitative findings. Data were analyzed in
2020.
RESULTS: TelePrEP expanded in 4 phases through partnerships with 12 public health
partners. Public health partners referred 708 clients with pre-exposure
prophylaxis indications to telenavigation; of these, 258 were navigated to
TelePrEP, and 167 initiated pre-exposure prophylaxis. The facilitators of
expansion included early public health partner engagement, model acceptability
and inclusion of a navigator, and adaptability to local public health partner
settings. The barriers included the need to adapt communication and processes to 
varying public health partners, difficulty in engaging underserved populations,
the COVID-19 pandemic, and perceived gaps in understanding client outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Partnerships between regional telehealth programs and local health
departments can expand to the state level and increase the capacity to implement 
pre-exposure prophylaxis in rural and small urban settings. Partnerships should
consider how to balance program adaptability to local public health partners with
standardization and scalability.

Copyright © 2021 American Journal of Preventive Medicine. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amepre.2021.05.040 
PMID: 34686280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

