
1. Microorganisms. 2021 Sep 30;9(10). pii: 2064. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9102064.

Characterization of the Eukaryotic Virome of Mice from Different Sources.

Zhang C(1), Burch M(1), Wylie K(2)(3), Herter B(2), Franklin CL(1)(4)(5),
Ericsson AC(1)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO
65211, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(3)McDonnell Genome Institute, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(4)Metagenomics Center, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65201, USA.
(5)Mutant Mouse Resource and Research Center, University of Missouri, Columbia,
MO 65201, USA.

Accumulating studies show that the host microbiome influences the development or 
progression of many diseases. The eukaryotic virome, as a key component of the
microbiome, plays an important role in host health and disease in humans and
animals, including research animals designed to model human disease. To date, the
majority of research on the microbiome has focused on bacterial populations,
while less attention has been paid to the viral component. Members of the
eukaryotic virome interact with the commensal bacterial microbiome through
trans-kingdom interactions, and influence host immunity and disease phenotypes as
a collective microbial ecosystem. As such, differences in the virome may affect
the reproducibility of animal models, and supplementation of the virome may
enhance the translatability of animal models of human disease. However, there are
minimal empirical data regarding differences in the virome of mice from different
commercial sources. Our hypotheses were that the mice obtained from pet store
sources and lab mice differ in their eukaryotic virome, and that lab mice from
different sources would also have different viromes. To test this hypothesis, the
ViroCap platform was used to characterize the eukaryotic virome in multiple
tissues of mice from different sources including three sources of laboratory mice
and two pet stores. As expected, pet store mice harbored a much greater diversity
within the virome compared to lab mice. This included an ostensibly novel
norovirus strain identified in one source of these mice. Viruses found in both
laboratory and pet store populations included four strains of endogenous
retroviruses and murine astrovirus with the latter being restricted to one source
of lab mice. Considering the relatively high richness virome within different
samples from healthy humans, these data suggest that mouse models from
alternative sources may be more translational to the human condition. Moreover,
these data demonstrate that, by characterizing the eukaryotic murine virome from 
different sources, novel viruses may be identified for use as field strains in
biomedical research.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9102064 
PMCID: PMC8538372
PMID: 34683385 

