
1. Nutrition. 2022 Jan;93:111489. doi: 10.1016/j.nut.2021.111489. Epub 2021 Sep 12.

Association of phase angle with muscle strength and aerobic fitness in different 
populations: A systematic review.

Custódio Martins P(1), de Lima TR(2), Silva AM(3), Santos Silva DA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center in Kinanthropometry and Human Performance, Sports Center,
Federal University of Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, Brazil. Electronic address: 
priscilaamartinsc@gmail.com.
(2)Research Center in Kinanthropometry and Human Performance, Sports Center,
Federal University of Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, Brazil. Electronic address: 
tiagopersonaltrainer@gmail.com.
(3)Exercise and Health Laboratory, CIPER, Faculdade Motricidade Humana,
Universidade Lisboa, Cruz-Quebrada, Portugal. Electronic address:
analiza.monica@gmail.com.
(4)Research Center in Kinanthropometry and Human Performance, Sports Center,
Federal University of Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, Brazil. Electronic address: 
diegoaugustoss@yahoo.com.br.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to summarize the evidence on the
association of phase angle (PhA) with muscle strength and aerobic fitness in
different populations.
METHODS: A systematic search on this topic was performed in nine electronic
databases (CINAHL, LILACS, PubMed, SciELO, Scopus, SPORTDiscus, ScienceDirect,
MEDLINE, and Web of Science) in January 2021. Studies with different designs that
permitted extraction of information about the relationships between PhA and
muscle strength and between PhA and aerobic fitness were included. A total of
4446 studies were initially identified; 34 were included after reading of the
title, abstract, full text, and references. Four of the studies included had a
longitudinal design, with samples consisting of participants ages 6 to 92 years. 
Thirty-two of the 34 studies evaluated the relationship between PhA and muscle
strength, two cross-sectional studies investigated only PhA and aerobic fitness, 
and three cross-sectional studies evaluated both components (muscle strength and 
aerobic fitness).
RESULTS: PhA was directly associated with muscle strength in 30 cross-sectional
studies and two longitudinal studies; the two studies that did not find a direct 
relationship had a cross-sectional design. For aerobic fitness, the five studies 
identified reported a direct relationship with PhA.
CONCLUSIONS: PhA is directly associated with muscle strength and aerobic fitness 
in different age groups (children, adolescents, adults, and older adults) and in 
people with different health conditions (human immunodeficiency virus, Crohn's
disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, bariatric surgery, kidney
transplant, cancer, hemodialysis, and sarcopenia).

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nut.2021.111489 
PMID: 34688022 

