
1. Harefuah. 2021 Oct;160(10):638-644.

[INFODEMIOLOGY OF DIABETES DURING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC: ANALYSIS OF DISCOURSE IN
SOCIAL MEDIA AND ONLINE FORUMS].

[Article in Hebrew]

Kolobov T(1), Horowitz E(2), Tamir O(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Pesach Segal Israeli Center for Diabetes Research and Policy, Sheba
Medical Center.
(2)Division of NLHS Technology Assessment, Ministry of Health.

INTRODUCTION: Coping with COVID-19, as well as with measures taken to prevent its
spread, poses many challenges for people with diabetes, who seek information and 
support on the web. Understanding the issues and needs expressed in online
discussions can be valuable for improving the support provided in times of
crisis.
AIMS: To map and characterize online Hebrew discourse about diabetes during the
first period of the COVID-19 outbreak and the preceding period.
METHODS: Data about frequency and distribution of posts in social-networks and
online-forums were gathered, analysed and compared with respect to these two
periods of time. Qualitative text analysis was manually performed on a sample of 
the posts.
RESULTS: Our findings show a growth in the extent of discourse during the first
wave of the pandemic. A substantial difference was found between the two periods 
in informative discourse about the association between COVID-19 and diabetes
(rose from 6% to 39%). A decrease had occurred in the perception of
unhealthy-diet and lack of physical-activity as causes of diabetes (from 27% to
17% and from 6% to none, respectively). A new theme, concerns about coping with
diabetes during the epidemic, has emerged.
CONCLUSIONS: There is room for an elaborative explication on social-media about
the causes of diabetes, recommended conduct, and possible means to communicate
with health professionals, all in times of routine and crisis.
DISCUSSION: Social-media plays an important role in coping with the coronavirus
pandemic. Internet may become a fertile ground for disinformation and
dissemination of anxieties, but, also, may be a platform for addressing
information needs and emotional support.


PMID: 34689432  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

