
1. Immunol Cell Biol. 2021 Oct 23. doi: 10.1111/imcb.12508. [Epub ahead of print]

Poor protective potential of influenza nucleoprotein antibodies despite wide
prevalence.

Vanderven HA(1)(2), Esterbauer R(2), Jegaskanda S(2), Tan HX(2), Wheatley AK(2), 
Kent SJ(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedicine, College of Public Health, Medical and Veterinary Sciences, James 
Cook University, Douglas, QLD, Australia.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Peter Doherty Institute for
Infection and Immunity, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(3)Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence in Convergent Bio-Nano
Science and Technology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(4)Melbourne Sexual Health Centre, Department of Infectious Diseases, Alfred
Health, Central Clinical School, Monash University, Carlton, VIC, Australia.

Humans are exposed to influenza virus through periodic infections. Due to these
repeated exposures, human populations commonly have elevated antibody titers
targeting the conserved internal influenza virus nucleoprotein (NP). Despite the 
presence of anti-NP antibodies, humans are acutely susceptible to drifted
influenza viruses with antigenically different surface proteins and the
protective potential of human NP antibodies is unclear. In this study, high
levels of anti-NP antibody and NP-specific B cells were detected in both adult
humans and influenza-infected mice, confirming that NP is a major target of
humoral immunity. Through sorting single B cells from influenza-exposed human
adults, we generated a panel of 11 anti-NP monoclonal antibodies (mAbs). The
majority of anti-NP human mAbs generated were capable of engaging cellular Fc
receptors and bound NP on the surface of influenza-infected cell lines in vitro, 
suggesting that anti-NP mAbs have the potential to mediate downstream Fc effector
functions such as antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity and antibody-dependent
phagocytosis. However, human anti-NP mAbs were not protective in vivo when
passively transferred into a murine influenza challenge model. Future in vivo
studies examining the synergistic effect of anti-NP mAbs infused with other
influenza-specific mAbs are warranted.

© 2021 Australian and New Zealand Society for Immunology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/imcb.12508 
PMID: 34687553 

