
1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Oct 21:101245. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101245. [Epub ahead of
print]

Universal and strain specific structure features of segment 8 genomic RNA of
influenza A virus - application of 4-thiouridine photocrosslinking.

Soszynska-Jozwiak M(1), Pszczola M(1), Piasecka J(1), Peterson JM(2), Moss WN(2),
Taras-Goslinska K(3), Kierzek R(4), Kierzek E(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
(2)Roy J. Carver Department of Biophysics, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Iowa State University, Ames, United States of America.
(3)Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznan, Poland.
(4)Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
Electronic address: rkierzek@ibch.poznan.pl.
(5)Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
Electronic address: elzbieta.kierzek@ibch.poznan.pl.

RNA structure in the influenza A virus (IAV) has been the focus of several
studies that have shown connections between conserved secondary structure motifs 
and their biological function in the virus replication cycle. Questions have
arisen on how to best recognize and understand the pandemic properties of IAV
strains from an RNA perspective, but determination of the RNA secondary structure
has been challenging. Herein, we used chemical mapping to determine the secondary
structure of segment 8 viral RNA (vRNA) of the pandemic A/California/04/2009
(H1N1) strain of IAV. Additionally, this long, naturally occurring RNA served as 
a model to evaluate RNA mapping with 4-thiouridine (4sU) crosslinking. We
explored 4-thiouridine as a probe of nucleotides in close proximity, through its 
incorporation into newly transcribed RNA and subsequent photoactivation. RNA
secondary structural features both universal to type A strains and unique to the 
A/California/04/2009 (H1N1) strain were recognized. 4sU mapping confirmed and
facilitated RNA structure prediction, according to several rules: 4sU
photocrosslinking forms efficiently in the double-stranded region of RNA with
some flexibility, in the ends of helices, and across bulges and loops when their 
structural mobility is permitted. This method highlighted three-dimensional
properties of segment 8 vRNA secondary structure motifs and allowed to propose
several long-range three-dimensional interactions. 4sU mapping combined with
chemical mapping and bioinformatic analysis could be used to enhance the RNA
structure determination as well as recognition of target regions for antisense
strategies or viral RNA detection.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101245 
PMID: 34688660 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no
conflict of interest with the contents of this article.

