
1. Microorganisms. 2021 Sep 29;9(10). pii: 2060. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9102060.

Coinfection and Interference Phenomena Are the Results of Multiple Thermodynamic 
Competitive Interactions.

Popovic M(1), Minceva M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biothermodynamics, TUM School of Life Sciences, Technical University of
Munich, Maximus-von-Imhof-Forum 2, 85354 Freising, Germany.

Biological, physical and chemical interaction between one (or more)
microorganisms and a host organism, causing host cell damage, represents an
infection. Infection of a plant, animal or microorganism with a virus can prevent
infection with another virus. This phenomenon is known as viral interference.
Viral interference is shown to result from two types of interactions, one taking 
place at the cell surface and the other intracellularly. Various viruses use
different receptors to enter the same host cell, but various strains of one virus
use the same receptor. The rate of virus-receptor binding can vary between
different viruses attacking the same host, allowing interference or coinfection. 
The outcome of the virus-virus-host competition is determined by the Gibbs
energies of binding and growth of the competing viruses and host. The virus with 
a more negative Gibbs energy of binding to the host cell receptor will enter the 
host first, while the virus characterized by a more negative Gibbs energy of
growth will overtake the host metabolic machine and dominate. Once in the host
cell, the multiplication machinery is shared by the competing viruses. Their
potential to utilize it depends on the Gibbs energy of growth. Thus, the virus
with a more negative Gibbs energy of growth will dominate. Therefore, the outcome
can be interference or coinfection, depending on both the attachment kinetics
(susceptibility) and the intracellular multiplication machinery (permittivity).
The ratios of the Gibbs energies of binding and growth of the competing viruses
determine the outcome of the competition. Based on this, a predictive model of
virus-virus competition is proposed.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9102060 
PMCID: PMC8538544
PMID: 34683381 

