
1. Harefuah. 2021 Oct;160(10):645-650.

[HEMOGLOBIN A1C AND MORTALITY FROM COVID-19].

[Article in Hebrew]

Merzon E(1)(2), Green I(1), Shpigelman M(3), Vinker S(1)(2), Raz I(4)(5),
Golan-Cohen A(1)(2), Eldor R(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Leumit HMO, Medical Division, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
(2)Department of Family Medicine, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University.
(3)Leumit HMO, Central District Headquarter, Netanya, Israel.
(4)The Pesach Segal Israeli Center for Diabetes Research and Policy, Sheba
Medical Center, Ramat Gan, Israel.
(5)Diabetes Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(6)Diabetes Unit, Institute of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Hypertension, Tel
Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
(7)The Sackler Faculty of Medicine Tel-Aviv University, Israel.

INTRODUCTION: People with diabetes mellitus are at increased risk of developing a
more severe disease or death when contracting coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19 
) but the effect of pre-COVID-19 infection glycemic control on disease outcomes
is still unclear. In a previous study that we published from Leumit Health
Services (LHS) including 183 patients with diabetes, pre-COVID-19 infection
HbA1c>9% was associated with the need for hospitalization during the disease. In 
the current study we present the clinical characteristics of patients who died
from COVID-19 in LHS and demonstrate a significant link to pre-infection HbA1c.
METHODS: We collected demographic, clinical and laboratory information regarding 
all patients insured in LHS who contracted COVID-19 between 1st February and 31st
May 2020 and had diabetes or pre-diabetes. To better understand the contribution 
of pre-infection glycemic control on COVID-19 mortality we conducted a case
control study at a 1:5 ratio between patients who had died and survivors,
adjusting for age, sex and socioeconomic status.
RESULTS: We identified 888 patients of whom 24 (2.7%) died from COVID-19 .
Patients who died were older, had more chronic disease, higher HbA1c and
creatinine and lower hemoglobin, iron and vitamins B12 and D. In the case control
study, patients who died had more obesity, dementia, cerebrovascular disease,
congestive heart failure, use of SGLT-2 inhibitors and fewer smokers. In a
multivariate logistic regression analysis we found that HbA1c and prior
cerebrovascular disease significantly increased the risk of death and normal
levels of vitamin D, iron and an estimated glomerular filtration rate >60ml/min
were associated with a protective effect.
CONCLUSIONS: Pre- COVID-19 HbA1c levels and prior cerebrovascular disease are
associated with an increased risk of mortality. Identifying pre-infection
clinical parameters which predict COVID-19 mortality may improve risk
stratification and vaccine prioritization for at-risk populations. Further study 
is needed to understand the potential mechanism and causality of poor glycemic
control on COVID-19 death.


PMID: 34689433  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

