
1. Biomedicines. 2021 Oct 10;9(10). pii: 1437. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines9101437.

Dysfunction in the Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Regulator in Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease as a Potential Target for Personalised Medicine.

Carrasco-Hernández L(1)(2), Quintana-Gallego E(1)(2), Calero C(1)(2),
Reinoso-Arija R(1), Ruiz-Duque B(1), López-Campos JL(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad Médico-Quirúrgica de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de
Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS), Hospital Universitario Virgen del
Rocío/Universidad de Sevilla, 41013 Sevilla, Spain.
(2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias
(CIBERES), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 28029 Madrid, Spain.

In recent years, numerous pathways were explored in the pathogenesis of COPD in
the quest for new potential therapeutic targets for more personalised medical
care. In this context, the study of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance
regulator (CFTR) began to gain importance, especially since the advent of the new
CFTR modulators which had the potential to correct this protein's dysfunction in 
COPD. The CFTR is an ion transporter that regulates the hydration and viscosity
of mucous secretions in the airway. Therefore, its abnormal function favours the 
accumulation of thicker and more viscous secretions, reduces the periciliary
layer and mucociliary clearance, and produces inflammation in the airway, as a
consequence of a bronchial infection by both bacteria and viruses. Identifying
CFTR dysfunction in the context of COPD pathogenesis is key to fully
understanding its role in the complex pathophysiology of COPD and the potential
of the different therapeutic approaches proposed to overcome this dysfunction. In
particular, the potential of the rehydration of mucus and the role of
antioxidants and phosphodiesterase inhibitors should be discussed. Additionally, 
the modulatory drugs which enhance or restore decreased levels of the protein
CFTR were recently described. In particular, two CFTR potentiators, ivacaftor and
icenticaftor, were explored in COPD. The present review updated the
pathophysiology of the complex role of CFTR in COPD and the therapeutic options
which could be explored.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines9101437 
PMCID: PMC8533244
PMID: 34680554 

