
1. Antibiotics (Basel). 2021 Oct 9;10(10). pii: 1231. doi:
10.3390/antibiotics10101231.

Ethnobotany, Ethnopharmacology, and Phytochemistry of Medicinal Plants Used for
Treating Human Diarrheal Cases in Rwanda: A Review.

Gahamanyi N(1)(2), Munyaneza E(3), Dukuzimana E(4), Tuyiringire N(5), Pan CH(2), 
Komba EVG(1).

Author information: 
(1)SACIDS Foundation for One Health, College of Veterinary Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences, Sokoine University of Agriculture, Chuo Kikuu, Morogoro P.O.
Box 3015, Tanzania.
(2)Natural Product Informatics Research Center, KIST Gangneung Institute of
Natural Products, Gangneung 25451, Korea.
(3)Rwanda Cultural Heritage Academy/Museum of Environment, Kigali P.O. Box 6397, 
Rwanda.
(4)School of Medicine and Pharmacy, College of Medicine and Health Sciences,
University of Rwanda, Kigali P.O. Box 3286, Rwanda.
(5)School of Nursing and Midwifery, College of Medicine and Health Sciences,
University of Rwanda, University Avenue, Butare P.O. Box 56, Rwanda.

Diarrhea, often caused by microorganisms, has been associated with high morbidity
and mortality in Africa. Increased rates of antimicrobial-resistant pathogens
have reignited the quest for alternative therapies. This review aimed at
identifying medicinal plants used in the treatment of human diarrheal cases in
Rwanda and analyzing their ethnobotany, ethnopharmacology, and phytochemistry. We
searched PubMed/Medline, Google Scholar, ScienceDirect, and the Web of Science
for published articles on medicinal plants used to treat diarrhea in Rwanda.
Additionally, specialized herbarium documents of different institutes were
reviewed. Articles were assessed for relevance, quality, and taxonomical accuracy
before being included in this review. Overall, 63 species of medicinal plants
belonging to 35 families were recorded. Asteraceae was the predominant family
with six species, followed by Fabaceae and Lamiaceae, with five species each. The
most reported species with anti-diarrheal properties were Vernonia amygdalina
Delile, Tetradenia riparia (Hochst.) Codd, Clerodendrum myricoides R. Br. and
Chenopodium ugandae (Aellen) Aellen. Leaves (66.7%) and roots (17.5%) were the
commonly used plant parts in the preparation of medicine. Phytochemicals from
medicinal plants with antidiarrheic activities were sesquiterpene lactones (V.
amygdalina); terpene, sterols, saponosides, and flavonoids (C. ugandae); saponins
and tannins (T. riparia); and tannins, flavonoids, and alkaloids (C. myricoides).
Six studies tested the antimicrobial activities of the plants against bacteria
and viruses known to cause diarrhea. Erythrina abyssinica, Euphorbia tirucalli,
Dracaena afromontana, and Ficus thonningii are socio-culturally important.
Further research on toxicity and posology is needed to ensure the safety of
medicinal plants.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics10101231 
PMCID: PMC8532704
PMID: 34680811 

