
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 14;18(20). pii: 10796. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010796.

Exploring People's Reaction and Perceived Issues of the COVID-19 Pandemic at Its 
Onset.

Heanoy EZ(1), Nadler EH(2), Lorrain D(1), Brown NR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2E9, Canada.
(2)Arts and Science Program, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8S 4K1, Canada.

The experience of the COVID-19 Pandemic has varied considerably from
individual-to-individual. Little is known about the changes in the level of
experience general people went through during the first few months after the
coronavirus (COVID-19) was declared as a Pandemic. This longitudinal qualitative 
study explores the general public's reports of their experience with the COVID-19
Pandemic during its early stage. An online survey was conducted using a
convenience/snowball sampling technique in March and again in May 2020, where
North American adults with at least a college-degree, and female majority, shared
their experiences with the COVID-19 Pandemic in response to an open-ended
question, apart from completing questionnaires assessing transitional impact and 
psychological well-being. Open responses were first content analyzed to identify 
themes most commonly reported, and then, the quantitative analysis examined the
reliability of the changes of themes between the two-time points. Text-analysis
of the open-responses from the two waves identified seven themes, namely
emotional response, social contact, virus-infected, financial impact, impact on
plans, disease, and non-disease related concern, as well as social-distance.
These themes indicated that, (a) people were distressed and having negative
affective thoughts; (b) they spoke more about their plans-and-goals that were
affected by the Pandemic than their financial condition; (c) people mostly used
digital platforms to maintain contact with their social network, although they
preferred face-to-face interactions; (d) they spoke more about the infection
experienced by people in general than infection experienced by themselves and
individuals they know. Surprisingly, (e) people mentioned more about the way the 
Pandemic had disrupted their day-to-day activities than the disease-related
health concern. Finally, (f) most of the respondents approved of the practice of 
social distancing while some expressed its negative or neutral effect on their
social lives. The quantitative measure determined that as time passed, people's
experience with the Pandemic became quite different as people talked more about
getting infected, and their affected goals-and-plans. We concluded with a remark 
that this Pandemic would most likely leave an impression on people's lives and
that these online comment-style responses might provide us with insights into
people's perspectives as the Pandemic unfolds, helping us in understanding the
uniqueness of the Pandemic experience of individuals for an effective tailored
intervention to protect their well-being during a health-crisis.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010796 
PMCID: PMC8535849
PMID: 34682542  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

