
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 18;22(20). pii: 11243. doi: 10.3390/ijms222011243.

Mining the Microbiome and Microbiota-Derived Molecules in Inflammatory Bowel
Disease.

Bekkers M(1)(2), Stojkovic B(1)(2), Kaiko GE(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, College of Health, Medicine and
Wellbeing, University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW 2308, Australia.
(2)Hunter Medical Research Institute, Newcastle, NSW 2305, Australia.

The intestinal microbiota is a complex community that consists of an ecosystem
with a dynamic interplay between bacteria, fungi, archaea, and viruses. Recent
advances in model systems have revealed that the gut microbiome is critical for
maintaining homeostasis through metabolic digestive function, immune regulation, 
and intestinal barrier integrity. Taxonomic shifts in the intestinal microbiota
are strongly correlated with a multitude of human diseases, including
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). However, many of these studies have been
descriptive, and thus the understanding of the cause and effect relationship
often remains unclear. Using non-human experimental model systems such as
gnotobiotic mice, probiotic mono-colonization, or prebiotic supplementation,
researchers have defined numerous species-level functions of the intestinal
microbiota that have produced therapeutic candidates for IBD. Despite these
advances, the molecular mechanisms responsible for the function of much of the
microbiota and the interplay with host cellular processes remain areas of
tremendous research potential. In particular, future research will need to unlock
the functional molecular units of the microbiota in order to utilize this
untapped resource of bioactive molecules for therapy. This review will highlight 
the advances and remaining challenges of microbiota-based functional studies and 
therapeutic discovery, specifically in IBD. One of the limiting factors for
reviewing this topic is the nascent development of this area with information on 
some drug candidates still under early commercial development. We will also
highlight the current and evolving strategies, including in the biotech industry,
used for the discovery of microbiota-derived bioactive molecules in health and
disease.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222011243 
PMCID: PMC8540913
PMID: 34681902 

