
1. Vaccine. 2021 Nov 16;39(47):6876-6882. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.025. Epub
2021 Oct 18.

Resource allocation for different types of vaccines against COVID-19: Tradeoffs
and synergies between efficacy and reach.

Kim D(1), Pekgün P(2), Yildirim İ(3), Keskinocak P(4).

Author information: 
(1)H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA. Electronic address:
dkim608@gatech.edu.
(2)Moore School of Business, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208,
USA. Electronic address: pelin.pekgun@moore.sc.edu.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Infectious Diseases and Global Health,
Yale School of Medicine and Yale Institute of Global Health, 1 Church Street, New
Haven, CT 06510, USA. Electronic address: inci.yildirim@yale.edu.
(4)H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA. Electronic address:
pinar@isye.gatech.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Vaccine shortage and supply-chain challenges have caused limited
access by many resource-limited countries during the COVID-19 pandemic. One of
the primary decisions for a vaccine-ordering decision-maker is how to allocate
the limited resources between different types of vaccines effectively. We studied
the tradeoff between efficacy and reach of the two vaccine types that become
available at different times.
METHODS: We extended a Susceptible-Infected-Recovered-Deceased (SIR-D) model with
vaccination, ran extensive simulations with different settings, and compared the 
level of infection attack rate (IAR) under different reach ratios between two
vaccine types under different resource allocation decisions.
RESULTS: We found that when there were limited resources, allocating resources to
a vaccine with high efficacy that became available earlier than a vaccine with
lower efficacy did not always lead to a lower IAR, particularly if the former
could vaccinate less than 42.5% of the population (with the selected study
parameters) who could have received the latter. Sensitivity analyses showed that 
this result stayed robust under different study parameters.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results showed that a vaccine with lower resource requirements
(wider reach) can significantly contribute to reducing IAR, even if it becomes
available later in the pandemic, compared to a higher efficacy vaccine that
becomes available earlier but requires more resources. Limited resource in
vaccine distribution is significant challenge in many parts of the world that
needs to be addressed to improve the global access to life-saving vaccines.
Understanding the tradeoffs between efficacy and reach is critical for resource
allocation decisions between different vaccine types for improving health
outcomes.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.025 
PMCID: PMC8520874
PMID: 34688498  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be
considered as potential competing interests: [Dr İnci Yildirim reported being a
member of the mRNA-1273 Study Group. Dr. Yildirim has received funding to her
institution to conduct clinical research from BioFire, MedImmune, Regeneron,
PaxVax, Pfizer, GSK, Merck, Novavax, Sanofi-Pasteur, and Micron. Dr. Pinar
Keskinocak received funding to her institution from Merck to conduct non-clinical
research. The funders played no role in the study design, data collection,
analysis, interpretation, or in writing the manuscript.].

