
1. Transplant Rev (Orlando). 2021 Oct 16;36(1):100669. doi:
10.1016/j.trre.2021.100669. [Epub ahead of print]

Human genetic polymorphisms and risk of viral infection after solid organ
transplantation.

Redondo N(1), Navarro D(2), Aguado JM(3), Fernández-Ruiz M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Infectious Diseases, Hospital Universitario "12 de Octubre", Instituto
de Investigación Sanitaria Hospital "12 de Octubre" (imas12), Madrid, Spain.
Electronic address: natalia.redondo.imas12@h12o.es.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Hospital Clínico Universitario, Instituto de
Investigación Sanitaria INCLIVA, Valencia, Spain; Department of Microbiology,
School of Medicine, Universidad de Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
(3)Unit of Infectious Diseases, Hospital Universitario "12 de Octubre", Instituto
de Investigación Sanitaria Hospital "12 de Octubre" (imas12), Madrid, Spain;
Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, Universidad Complutense, Madrid,
Spain.

The immune system plays a key role in the host defense against viral pathogens. A
signaling cascade is activated upon infection involving a variety of molecules
such as pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs), interleukins or antiviral
interferons. Long-term immunosuppression after solid organ transplantation (SOT) 
mainly abrogates adaptive T-cell-mediated responses, thus highlighting the
relative contribution of innate immunity. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
within genes coding for PRRs or soluble mediators have been associated with
differential susceptibility to viral infections among SOT recipients. A
protective effect against cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection or disease has been
attributed to certain SNPs in TLR9 or IFNL3 genes, whereas the opposite effect
has been attributed to genetic polymorphisms in TLR2, MBL2, DC-SIGN, IL10 or
IFNG. The presence of SNPs in other molecules not directly involved in innate or 
adaptive immune responses such as aquaporins or pregnane X appear to modulate the
risk of CMV or BK polyomavirus infection, respectively. Little information is
available on the genetic determinants of the post-transplant susceptibility to
herpesviruses causing clinical infection (herpes simplex virus or varicella
zoster virus) or the replication kinetics of components of the human blood virome
used as immune surrogates (Torque teno virus). The present review critically
summarizes the current knowledge on how SNP genotyping would be useful to
stratify SOT recipients according to the individual risk of viral infection and
proposes next research steps. Genetic susceptibility testing may improve
personalized medicine and contribute to minimize the risk of viral infection
after SOT.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.trre.2021.100669 
PMID: 34688126 

