
1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021 Sep 25;57(10). pii: 1012. doi: 10.3390/medicina57101012.

Turning a Corner in ME/CFS Research.

Pheby DFH(1), Friedman KJ(2), Murovska M(3), Zalewski P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Society and Health, Buckinghamshire New University, High Wycombe HP11 2JZ, UK.
(2)School of Osteopathic Medicine, Rowan University, Stratford, NJ 08080, USA.
(3)Institute of Microbiology and Virology, Riga Stradiņš University, LV-1067
Riga, Latvia.
(4)Department of Exercise Physiology and Functional Anatomy, Ludwik Rydygier
Collegium Medicum in Bydgoszcz, Nicolaus Copernicus University in Torun,
Swietojanska 20, 85-077 Bydgoszcz, Poland.

This collection of research papers addresses fundamental questions concerning the
nature of myalgic encephalomyelitis/ chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS), the
problem of disbelief and lack of knowledge and understanding of the condition
among many doctors and the origins of this problem, and its impact on patients
and their families. We report briefly the growing knowledge of the underlying
pathological processes in ME/CFS, and the development of new organizations,
including Doctors with ME, the US ME/CFS Clinical Coalition and EUROMENE, to
address aspects of the challenges posed by the illness. We discuss the
implications of COVID-19, which has much in common with ME/CFS, with much overlap
of symptoms, and propose a new taxonomic category, which we are terming
post-active phase of infection syndromes (PAPIS) to include both. This collection
of papers includes a number of papers reporting similar serious impacts on the
quality of life of patients and their families in various European countries. The
advice of EUROMENE experts on diagnosis and management is included in the
collection. We report this in light of guidance from other parts of the world,
including the USA and Australia, and in the context of current difficulties in
the UK over the promulgation of a revised guideline from the National Institute
for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). We also consider evidence on the
cost-effectiveness of interventions for ME/CFS, and on the difficulties of
determining the costs of care when a high proportion of people with ME/CFS are
never diagnosed as such. The Special Issue includes a paper which is a reminder
of the importance of a person-centred approach to care by reviewing mind-body
interventions. Finally, another paper reviews the scope for prevention in
minimizing the population burden of ME/CFS, and concludes that secondary
prevention, through early detection and diagnosis, could be of value.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina57101012 
PMCID: PMC8541042
PMID: 34684049  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

