
1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2021 Oct 22. pii: annrheumdis-2021-221571. doi:
10.1136/annrheumdis-2021-221571. [Epub ahead of print]

Two-dose COVID-19 vaccination and possible arthritis flare among patients with
rheumatoid arthritis in Hong Kong.

Li X(1)(2)(3), Tong X(1), Yeung WWY(1), Kuan P(2), Yum SHH(4), Chui CSL(3)(5)(6),
Lai FTT(2)(3), Wan EYF(2)(3)(7), Wong CKH(2)(3)(7), Chan EWY(2)(3)(8), Lau CS(1),
Wong ICK(9)(3)(10)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(2)Centre for Safe Medication Practice and Research, Department of Pharmacology
and Pharmacy, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong, China.
(3)Hong Kong Science and Technology Park, Laboratory of Data Discovery for
Health, Hong Kong, China.
(4)Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong,
China.
(5)School of Nursing, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(6)School of Public Health, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(7)Department of Family Medicine and Primary Care, Li Ka Shing Faculty of
Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(8)Shenzhen Institute of Research and Innovation, The University of Hong Kong,
Shenzhen, China.
(9)Centre for Safe Medication Practice and Research, Department of Pharmacology
and Pharmacy, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong, China wongick@hku.hk.
(10)Research Department of Practice and Policy, School of Pharmacy, University
College London, London, UK.
(11)Expert Committee on Clinical Events Assessment Following COVID-19
Immunization, Department of Health, The Government of the Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region, Hong Kong, China.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the relationship between COVID-19 full vaccination
(two completed doses) and possible arthritis flare.
METHODS: Patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) were identified from
population-based electronic medical records with vaccination linkage and
categorised into BNT162b2 (mRNA vaccine), CoronaVac (inactive virus vaccine) and 
non-vaccinated groups. The risk of possible arthritis flare after vaccination was
compared using a propensity-weighted cohort study design. We defined possible
arthritis flare as hospitalisation and outpatient consultation related to RA or
reactive arthritis, based on diagnosis records during the episode. Weekly
prescriptions of rheumatic drugs since the launch of COVID-19 vaccination
programme were compared to complement the findings from a diagnosis-based
analysis.
RESULTS: Among 5493 patients with RA (BNT162b2: 653; CoronaVac: 671;
non-vaccinated: 4169), propensity-scored weighted Poisson regression showed no
significant association between arthritis flare and COVID-19 vaccination
((BNT162b2: adjusted incidence rate ratio 0.86, 95% Confidence Interval 0.73 to
1.01); CoronaVac: 0.87 (0.74 to 1.02)). The distribution of weekly rheumatic drug
prescriptions showed no significant differences among the three groups since the 
launch of the mass vaccination programme (all p values >0.1 from Kruskal-Wallis
test).
CONCLUSIONS: Current evidence does not support that full vaccination of mRNA or
inactivated virus COVID-19 vaccines is associated with possible arthritis flare.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2021-221571 
PMCID: PMC8550868
PMID: 34686479 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: XL received research grants 
from Research Fund Secretariat of the Food and Health Bureau (HMRF, HKSAR),
Research Grants Council Early Career Scheme RGC/ECS, HKSAR, Janssen and Pfizer;
internal funding from the University of Hong Kong; consultancy fee from Merck
Sharp & Dohme, unrelated to this work. CSLC has received grants from the Food and
Health Bureau of the Hong Kong Government, Hong Kong Research Grant Council, Hong
Kong Innovation and Technology Commission, Pfizer, IQVIA and Amgen; personal fee 
from Primevigilance Ltd.; outside the submitted work. FTTL has been supported by 
the RGC Postdoctoral Fellowship under the Hong Kong Research Grants Council,
outside the submitted work. EYFW has received research grants from the Food and
Health Bureau of the Government of the Hong Kong SAR, and the Hong Kong Research 
Grant Council, outside the submitted work. CKHW reports the receipt of General
Research Fund, Research Grant Council, Government of Hong Kong SAR; EuroQol
Research Foundation, all outside the submitted work. EWYC reports honorarium from
Hospital Authority, supports from the Health and Medical Research Fund (HMRF),
grants from Research Grants Council (RGC, Hong Kong), grants from National
Natural Science Fund of China, grants from Wellcome Trust, grants from Bayer,
grants from Bristol-Myers Squibb, grants from Pfizer, grants from Janssen, grants
from Amgen, grants from Takeda, grants from Narcotics Division of the Security
Bureau of HKSAR, grants from Innovation and Technology Commission of the
Government of the HKSAR, all outside the submitted work. ICKW reports research
funding outside the submitted work from Amgen, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Pfizer,
Janssen, Bayer, GSK Novartis, the Hong Kong RGC, and the Hong Kong Health and
Medical Research Fund, National Institute for Health Research in England,
European Commission, National Health and Medical Research Council in Australia,
and also received speaker fees from Janssen and Medice in the previous 3 years.
He is also independent non-executive director of Jacobson Medical in Hong Kong.

