
1. Cell Host Microbe. 2021 Nov 10;29(11):1611-1619.e5. doi:
10.1016/j.chom.2021.10.003. Epub 2021 Oct 13.

Prior infection with SARS-CoV-2 boosts and broadens Ad26.COV2.S immunogenicity in
a variant-dependent manner.

Keeton R(1), Richardson SI(2), Moyo-Gwete T(2), Hermanus T(2), Tincho MB(1),
Benede N(1), Manamela NP(2), Baguma R(3), Makhado Z(2), Ngomti A(1), Motlou T(2),
Mennen M(4), Chinhoyi L(4), Skelem S(4), Maboreke H(5), Doolabh D(1), Iranzadeh
A(1), Otter AD(6), Brooks T(6), Noursadeghi M(7), Moon JC(8), Grifoni A(9),
Weiskopf D(9), Sette A(10), Blackburn J(5), Hsiao NY(11), Williamson C(12), Riou 
C(12), Goga A(13), Garrett N(14), Bekker LG(15), Gray G(13), Ntusi NAB(16), Moore
PL(17), Burgers WA(18).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular Medicine, University of Cape
Town, Cape Town, South Africa; Division of Medical Virology, Department of
Pathology, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(2)National Institute for Communicable Diseases of the National Health Laboratory
Services, Johannesburg, South Africa; MRC Antibody Immunity Research Unit, School
of Pathology, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(3)Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular Medicine, University of Cape
Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town and Groote Schuur Hospital,
South Africa.
(5)Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular Medicine, University of Cape
Town, Cape Town, South Africa; Division of Chemical and Systems Biology,
Department of Integrative Biomedical Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape
Town, South Africa.
(6)National Infection Service, Public Health England, Porton Down, UK.
(7)Division of Infection and Immunity, University College London, London, UK.
(8)Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences, University College London, London, UK;
Barts Heart Centre, St Bartholomew's Hospital, Barts Health NHS Trust, London,
UK.
(9)Center for Infectious Disease and Vaccine Research, La Jolla Institute for
Immunology, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(10)Center for Infectious Disease and Vaccine Research, La Jolla Institute for
Immunology, La Jolla, CA, USA; Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious
Diseases and Global Public Health, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA.
(11)Division of Medical Virology, Department of Pathology, University of Cape
Town, Cape Town, South Africa; NHLS Groote Schuur Hospital, University of Cape
Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(12)Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular Medicine, University of Cape
Town, Cape Town, South Africa; Division of Medical Virology, Department of
Pathology, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa; Wellcome Centre for 
Infectious Diseases Research in Africa, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South
Africa.
(13)South African Medical Research Council, Cape Town, South Africa.
(14)Centre for the AIDS Programme of Research in South Africa, Durban, South
Africa; Discipline of Public Health Medicine, University of KwaZulu-Natal,
Durban, South Africa.
(15)Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular Medicine, University of Cape
Town, Cape Town, South Africa; Desmond Tutu HIV Centre, Cape Town, South Africa.
(16)Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular Medicine, University of Cape
Town, Cape Town, South Africa; Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town
and Groote Schuur Hospital, South Africa; Hatter Institute for Cardiovascular
Research in Africa, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape
Town, South Africa. Electronic address: ntobeko.ntusi@uct.ac.za.
(17)National Institute for Communicable Diseases of the National Health
Laboratory Services, Johannesburg, South Africa; MRC Antibody Immunity Research
Unit, School of Pathology, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South
Africa. Electronic address: pennym@nicd.ac.za.
(18)Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular Medicine, University of Cape
Town, Cape Town, South Africa; Division of Medical Virology, Department of
Pathology, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa; Wellcome Centre for 
Infectious Diseases Research in Africa, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South
Africa. Electronic address: wendy.burgers@uct.ac.za.

The Johnson and Johnson Ad26.COV2.S single-dose vaccine represents an attractive 
option for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) vaccination in countries with
limited resources. We examined the effect of prior infection with different
SARS-CoV-2 variants on Ad26.COV2.S immunogenicity. We compared participants who
were SARS-CoV-2 naive with those either infected with the ancestral D614G virus
or infected in the second wave when Beta predominated. Prior infection
significantly boosts spike-binding antibodies, antibody-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity, and neutralizing antibodies against D614G, Beta, and Delta;
however, neutralization cross-reactivity varied by wave. Robust CD4 and CD8
T cell responses are induced after vaccination, regardless of prior infection.
T cell recognition of variants is largely preserved, apart from some reduction in
CD8 recognition of Delta. Thus, Ad26.COV2.S vaccination after infection could
result in enhanced protection against COVID-19. The impact of the infecting
variant on neutralization breadth after vaccination has implications for the
design of second-generation vaccines based on variants of concern.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2021.10.003 
PMCID: PMC8511649
PMID: 34688376  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests A.S. is a consultant for
Gritstone, Flow Pharma, CellCarta, Arcturus, Oxford Immunotech, and Avalia. All
of the other authors declare no competing interests. LJI has filed for patent
protection for various aspects of vaccine design and identification of specific
epitopes.

