
1. Travel Med Infect Dis. 2021 Nov-Dec;44:102179. doi: 10.1016/j.tmaid.2021.102179. 
Epub 2021 Oct 24.

Efficacy and safety of repellents marketed in Brazil against bites from Aedes
aegypti and Aedes albopictus: A systematic review.

Gomes Fernandes MR(1), Cruz Lopes L(2), Suguimoto Iwami R(3), Del Grossi Paglia
M(4), Mateus de Castilho B(5), Maicon de Oliveira A(6), Fulone I(7), Silveira
Leite R(8), de Cássia Bergamaschi C(9).

Author information: 
(1)São Paulo State University (UNESP), School of Agricultural Sciences,
Department of Bioprocesses and Biotechnology, Multiuser Central Laboratory,
Botucatu, Brazil. Electronic address: ma_ra_fernandes@hotmail.com.
(2)University of Sorocaba (UNISO), Graduate Program in Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Sorocaba, Brazil. Electronic address: luciane.lopes@prof.uniso.br.
(3)University of Sorocaba (UNISO), Graduate Program in Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Sorocaba, Brazil. Electronic address: rodrigo.iwami@gmail.com.
(4)University of Sorocaba (UNISO), Graduate Program in Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Sorocaba, Brazil. Electronic address: maridelgrossi@gmail.com.
(5)São Paulo State University (UNESP), School of Pharmaceutical Science,
Department of Clinical Analysis, Araraquara, Brazil. Electronic address:
brunamcastilho@hotmail.com.
(6)University of São Paulo (USP), School of Pharmaceutical Sciences of Ribeirão
Preto, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil. Electronic 
address: alanoliveira@usp.br.
(7)University of Sorocaba (UNISO), Graduate Program in Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Sorocaba, Brazil. Electronic address: mbfulone@terra.com.br.
(8)University of Sorocaba (UNISO), Graduate Program in Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Sorocaba, Brazil. Electronic address: rsilveira.ricardo@gmail.com.
(9)University of Sorocaba (UNISO), Graduate Program in Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Sorocaba, Brazil. Electronic address: cristiane.motta@prof.uniso.br.

BACKGROUND: Dengue, Zika and Chikungunya viruses represent a serious public
health problem. No evidence is available on the efficacy of repellents
commercially available in Brazil. This systematic review assessed the efficacy
and safety of products containing repellents commercially available in Brazil for
protection against bites from Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus.
METHODS: We performed a systematic review using the CENTRAL, MEDLINE, EMBASE,
CINAHL, Web of Science, AMED, LILACS and Scopus databases. Randomized clinical
trials and non-randomized clinical trials comparing topical repellent products
registered with the Brazilian Health Surveillance Agency were included. Main
outcomes of interest investigated were adverse effects, percentage repellency and
protection time against bites. Pairs of reviewers selected the studies, extracted
the data and evaluated the risk of bias.
RESULTS: Sixteen studies were included. No adverse effects were reported by the
studies. Against Ae. aegypti: protection time using DEET (10% and 20%-spray) was 
similar to IR3535 (10% and 20%-spray) and longer than citronella (5%-spray). DEET
(25%-solution) had longer protection time than eucalyptus (25%-solution), while
DEET (20%-lotion) had longer protection time than citronella (10%-lotion). There 
was no difference in protection time between herbal repellents. DEET (7% and 15%-
spray) had higher percentage repellency compared to both icaridin (7%-spray) and 
IR3535 (20%-spray). Against Ae. albopictus: DEET (15%-spray) had a similar
protection time to icaridin (20%-spray), but longer than citronella (10%-spray).
CONCLUSION: DEET proved more effective than the other synthetic and natural
repellents marketed in Brazil for protecting against bites from the mosquito
species investigated. All repellents studied exhibited satisfactory safety
profile.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tmaid.2021.102179 
PMID: 34687870 

