
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021 Oct 23. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14358. [Epub ahead of print]

Rethinking the uncertainty of African swine fever virus contamination in feed
ingredients and risk of introduction into the United States.

Schambow RA(1)(2), Sampedro F(2)(3), Urriola PE(2)(4), van de Ligt JLG(2), Perez 
A(1)(2), Shurson GC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Health and Food Safety, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Minnesota, St. Paul, Minnesota, USA.
(2)Department of Veterinary Population Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Minnesota, St. Paul, Minnesota, USA.
(3)Environmental Health Sciences Division, School of Public Health, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(4)Department of Animal Science, College of Agricultural and Natural Resource
Sciences, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, Minnesota, USA.

Economically relevant pathogens, such as African swine fever virus (ASFV), have
been shown to survive when experimentally inoculated in some feed ingredients
under the environmental conditions in transoceanic transport models. However,
these models did not characterize the likelihood of virus survival under various 
time and temperature processes that feed ingredients undergo before they are
added to swine diets. Here, we developed a quantitative risk assessment model to 
estimate the probability that one or more corn or soybean meal ocean vessels
(25,000 tonnes) contaminated with ASFV would be imported into the United States
annually. This final probability estimate was conditionally based on five
likelihoods: the probability of initial ASFV contamination (p0), ASFV
inactivation during processing (p1) and transport (p2), recontamination (pR), and
ASFV inactivation while awaiting customs clearance at United States entry (p3).
The probability of ASFV inactivation was modelled using corn and soybean
(extruded or solvent extracted) processing conditions (times and temperatures),
D-values (time to reduce 90% or 1-log) estimated from studies of ASFV thermal
inactivation in pork serum (p1), and survival in feed ingredients during
transoceanic transport (p2 and p3). 'What-if' scenarios using deterministic
values for p0 and pR (1%, 10%, 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100%) were used to explore
their impact on risk. The model estimated complete inactivation of ASFV after
extrusion or solvent extraction processes regardless of the initial ASFV
contamination probability assumed. The value of recontamination (ranging from 1% 
to 75%) was highly influential on the risk of one ASFV-contaminated soybean meal 
vessel entering the United States. Median risk estimates ranged from 0.064%
[0.006%-0.60%; 95% probability interval (PI)], assuming a pR of 1.0%, up to 4.67%
(0.45%-36.50% 95% PI) assuming a pR of 75.0%. This means that at least one vessel
with ASFV-contaminated soybean meal would be imported once every 1563-21 years,
respectively. When all raw corn was assumed to be contaminated (p0 = 100%), and
no recontamination was assumed to occur (pR = 0%), the median probability of one 
vessel with ASFV-contaminated corn entering the United States was 2.02%
(0.28%-9.43% 95% PI) or once every 50 years. Values of recontamination between 1%
and 75% did not substantially change the risk of corn. Days of transport, virus
survival during transport (D-value), and number of vessels shipped were the
parameters most influential for increased likelihood of a vessel with
ASFV-contaminated soybean meal or corn entering the United States. The model
helped to identify knowledge gaps that are most influential on output values and 
serves as a framework that could be updated and parameterized as new scientific
information becomes available. We propose that the quantitative risk assessment
model developed in this study can be used as a framework for estimating the risk 
of ASFV entry into the United States and other ASFV-free countries through other 
types of imported feed ingredients that may potentially become contaminated.
Ultimately, this model can be used to develop risk mitigation strategies and
critical control points for inactivating ASFV during feed ingredient processing, 
storage, and transport, and contribute to the design and implementation of
biosecurity measures to prevent the introduction of ASFV into the United States
and other ASFV-free countries.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14358 
PMID: 34689419 

