
1. BMC Geriatr. 2021 Oct 22;21(1):588. doi: 10.1186/s12877-021-02530-1.

From wave to wave: a Dutch national study on the long-term impact of COVID-19 on 
well-being and family visitation in nursing homes.

Backhaus R(1)(2), Verbeek H(3)(4), de Boer B(3)(4), Urlings JHJ(3)(4), Gerritsen 
DL(5), Koopmans RTCM(6), Hamers JPH(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Services Research, Care and Public Health Research
Institute, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands.
r.backhaus@maastrichtuniversity.nl.
(2)Living Lab in Ageing and Long-Term Care, Maastricht, Netherlands.
r.backhaus@maastrichtuniversity.nl.
(3)Department of Health Services Research, Care and Public Health Research
Institute, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands.
(4)Living Lab in Ageing and Long-Term Care, Maastricht, Netherlands.
(5)Department of Primary and Community Care, Radboud University Nijmegen, Medical
Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
(6)Department of Primary and Community Care, Radboud University Nijmegen, Medical
Center, Nijmegen & De Waalboog "Joachim en Anna," Center for Specialized
Geriatric Care, Nijmegen, Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: To protect nursing home residents, many governments around the world 
implemented blanket visitor bans in March and April 2020. As a consequence,
family caregivers, friends, and volunteers were not allowed to enter nursing
homes, while residents were not allowed to go out. Up until now, little is known 
on the long-term consequences and effects of visiting bans and re-opening of
nursing homes. The aim of the study was to assess the long-term effects of the
pandemic on residents, family members, and staff, and their preparedness for the 
next coronavirus wave.
METHODS: A mixed-methods approach was used, consisting of a questionnaire and
analyses of documentation (local visiting protocols). Of the 76 nursing home
locations that participated in a Dutch national pilot on welcoming visitors back 
into nursing homes, 64 participated in this follow-up study. Data were collected 
in September/October 2020. For each nursing home, one contact person completed
the questionnaire. Descriptive statistics were calculated for quantitative
questionnaire data. Data on open-ended questions, as well as data from the
documentation, were analyzed thematically.
RESULTS: The study demonstrated that the consequences of strict visiting bans do 
not disappear at the moment the visiting ban is lifted. Although in October 2020,
daily life in nursing homes was more "back to normal," more than one-third of the
respondents indicated that they still applied restrictions. Compared to the
situation before the pandemic, fewer volunteers were working in the nursing
homes, grandchildren visited their relative less often, and visits differed.
CONCLUSIONS: Five months after the visiting ban in Dutch nursing homes had been
lifted, it still had an impact on residents, family members, and staff. It is
questionable whether nursing homes feel prepared for welcoming visitors in the
case of new COVID-19 infections. Nursing homes indicated that they felt prepared 
for the next wave, while at the same time, they were particularly concerned about
staff well-being and vitality. It seems wise to invest in staff well-being. In
addition, it seems desirable to think about how to support nursing homes in
seeking a balance between infection prevention and well-being of residents,
family members, and staff.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12877-021-02530-1 
PMCID: PMC8532102
PMID: 34686141  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

