
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 19;18(20). pii: 10979. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182010979.

How Does Food Addiction Relate to Obesity? Patterns of Psychological Distress,
Eating Behaviors and Physical Activity in a Sample of Lebanese Adults: The MATEO 
Study.

Brytek-Matera A(1), Obeid S(2), Akel M(3), Hallit S(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Psychology, University of Wroclaw, 50-527 Wroclaw, Poland.
(2)Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Holy Spirit University of Kaslik (USEK),
Jounieh, Lebanon.
(3)School of Pharmacy, Lebanese International University, Beirut, Lebanon.
(4)Faculty of Medicine and Medical Sciences, Holy Spirit University of Kaslik
(USEK), Jounieh, Lebanon.
(5)Research Department, Psychiatric Hospital of the Cross, Jal Eddib, Lebanon.

Food addiction is currently not an official diagnosis (as a standalone disorder
substance-related and addictive disorder) in the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition (DSM-5). To best of our knowledge, there 
is no previous research on differences between addictive-like eating behavior
regarding its associations with psychological distress, eating behaviors and
physical activity among individuals with obesity. The objective of the present
study was to distinguish psychological and behavioral patterns of individuals
with obesity concerning food addiction using a cluster analysis. We determined
the profiles of the participants in terms of psychological distress, eating
behaviors and physical activity and evaluated their association with food
addiction. A cross-sectional study was conducted between September and November
2020, during the lockdown period imposed by the government for the COVID-19
pandemic. A sample of 507 individuals with obesity aged between 18 and 65 years
participated in the present study by filling in the online questionnaire,
including the validated Arabic version of the modified version of the Yale Food
Addiction Scale, the Arabic version of the Depression, Anxiety and Stress Scale, 
the Three-Factor Eating Questionnaire, and the short version of the International
Physical Activity Questionnaire. A cluster analysis was performed using the
K-mean method to identify and group participants according to their
patterns/profiles. A stepwise linear regression was conducted, taking the food
addiction score as the dependent variable. Higher levels of uncontrolled eating, 
emotional eating and stress were significantly associated with higher food
addiction score. Belonging to cluster 2 (psychological well-being and cognitive
restraint) (B = 14.49) or cluster 3 (moderate psychological distress and
cognitive restraint) (B = 6.67) compared to cluster 1 (psychological well-being, 
appropriate physical activity levels and eating behaviors) was significantly
associated with higher food addiction score. The present research revealed that
food addiction is significantly associated with higher psychological distress and
maladaptive eating behaviors. Higher levels of uncontrolled eating, emotional
eating and stress as well as belonging to clusters 2 and 3 were found to be
predictors of food addiction in individuals with obesity in the present study.
This knowledge could be useful in regard to psychological treatment of obesity
and addictive-like eating behavior.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182010979 
PMCID: PMC8535988
PMID: 34682724  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

