
1. Ethics Hum Res. 2021 Nov;43(6):19-27. doi: 10.1002/eahr.500107. Epub 2021 Oct 26.

Physician Perspectives on Including Pregnant Women in Covid-19 Clinical Trials:
Time for a Paradigm Change.

Trahan MJ(1), Cumyn A(2), Cheng MP(3), McDonald EG(4), Lapinsky SE(5), Daneman
N(6), Abenhaim HA(7), Malhamé I(8).

Author information: 
(1)Obstetrics and gynecology resident at McGill University.
(2)Professor of medicine and an obstetric medicine specialist in the Department
of Medicine in the Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Sherbrooke.
(3)Assistant professor of medicine and an infectious diseases and medical
microbiology specialist in the Department of Medicine at McGill University Health
Centre and the Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre.
(4)Associate professor of medicine and an internist in the Department of Medicine
at McGill University Health Centre and the Research Institute of the McGill
University Health Centre.
(5)Professor of medicine and critical care specialist in the Department of
Medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto.
(6)Clinician scientist and infectious disease specialist in the Department of
Medicine at Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Toronto.
(7)Associate professor and maternal-fetal medicine specialist in the Department
of Obstetrics and Gynecology at McGill University and in the Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology and Lady David Research Institute at Jewish General
Hospital in Montreal.
(8)Assistant professor of medicine and an obstetric medicine specialist in the
Department of Medicine at McGill University Health Centre and the Research
Institute of the McGill University Health Centre.

Excluding pregnant people from Covid-19 clinical trials may lead to unintended
harmful consequences. For this study, an online questionnaire was sent to
physicians belonging to Canadian professional medical associations in order to
evaluate their perspectives on the participation of pregnant women in Covid-19
clinical trials. The majority of respondents expressed support for including
pregnant women in Covid-19 trials (119/165; 72%), especially those investigating 
therapies with a prior safety record in pregnancy (139/164; 85%). The main
perceived barriers to inclusion identified were unwillingness of pregnant
patients to participate and of treating teams to offer participation, the burden 
of regulatory approval, and a general "culture of exclusion" of pregnant women
from trials. We describe why some physicians may be reluctant to include pregnant
individuals in trials, and we identify barriers to the appropriate participation 
of pregnant people in clinical research.

© 2021 by The Hastings Center. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1002/eahr.500107 
PMID: 34699138  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

