
1. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Oct 8;12:741050. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.741050. eCollection
2021.

The Effects of Turnip Mosaic Virus Infections on the Deposition of Secondary Cell
Walls and Developmental Defects in Arabidopsis Plants Are Virus-Strain Specific.

López-González S(1), Gómez-Mena C(2), Sánchez F(1), Schuetz M(3), Samuels AL(3), 
Ponz F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biotecnología y Genómica de Plantas, Universidad Politécnica de
Madrid-Centro Nacional Instituto Nacional de Investigación y Tecnología Agraria y
Alimentaria, CSIC, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Plantas, Universitat Politècnica 
de València-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Valencia, Spain.
(3)Department of Botany, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Two isolates of Turnip mosaic virus (UK 1 and JPN 1), representative of two
different viral strains, induced differential alterations on secondary cell wall 
(SCW) development in Arabidopsis thaliana, suggesting cell-type specific effects 
of these viral infections. These potential effects were analyzed in inflorescence
stems and flowers of infected plants, together with other possible cellular
effects of the infections. Results obtained from macroscopic and histochemical
analyses showed that infection with either virus significantly narrowed stem
area, but defects in SCW were only found in JPN 1 infections. In flowers, reduced
endothecium lignification was also found for JPN 1, while UK 1 infections induced
severe floral cell and organ development alterations. A transcriptomic analysis
focused on genes controlling and regulating SCW formation also showed notable
differences between both viral isolates. UK 1 infections induced a general
transcriptional decrease of most regulatory genes, whereas a more complex pattern
of alterations was found in JPN 1 infections. The role of the previously
identified viral determinant of most developmental alterations, the P3 protein,
was also studied through the use of viral chimeras. No SCW alterations or
creeping habit growth were found in infections by the chimeras, indicating that
if the P3 viral protein is involved in the determination of these symptoms, it is
not the only determinant. Finally, considerations as to the possibility of a
taxonomical reappraisal of these TuMV viral strains are provided.

Copyright © 2021 López-González, Gómez-Mena, Sánchez, Schuetz, Samuels and Ponz.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.741050 
PMCID: PMC8531753
PMID: 34691118 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

