
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 18;13(10). pii: 2092. doi: 10.3390/v13102092.

The Biogenesis of Dengue Virus Replication Organelles Requires the ATPase
Activity of Valosin-Containing Protein.

Mazeaud C(1), Anton A(1), Pahmeier F(2), Sow AA(1), Cerikan B(2), Freppel W(1),
Cortese M(2), Bartenschlager R(2)(3), Chatel-Chaix L(1)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Centre Armand-Frappier Santé Biotechnologie, Institut National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Laval, QC H7V 1B7, Canada.
(2)Center for Integrative Infectious Disease Research (CIID), Department of
Infectious Diseases, Molecular Virology, Heidelberg University, D-69120
Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Heidelberg Partner Site, D-69120 
Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Center of Excellence in Research on Orphan Diseases-Fondation Courtois,
Montreal, QC H7V 1B7, Canada.
(5)Réseau Intersectoriel de Recherche en Santé de l'Université du Québec, Québec,
QC H7V 1B7, Canada.

The dengue virus (DENV) causes the most prevalent arthropod-borne viral disease
worldwide. While its incidence is increasing in many countries, there is no
approved antiviral therapy currently available. In infected cells, the DENV
induces extensive morphological alterations of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to 
generate viral replication organelles (vRO), which include convoluted membranes
(CM) and vesicle packets (VP) hosting viral RNA replication. The viral
non-structural protein NS4B localizes to vROs and is absolutely required for
viral replication through poorly defined mechanisms, which might involve cellular
protein partners. Previous interactomic studies identified the ATPase
valosin-containing protein (VCP) as a DENV NS4B-interacting host factor in
infected cells. Using both pharmacological and dominant-negative inhibition
approaches, we show, in this study, that VCP ATPase activity is required for
efficient DENV replication. VCP associates with NS4B when expressed in the
absence of other viral proteins while in infected cells, both proteins colocalize
within large DENV-induced cytoplasmic structures previously demonstrated to be
CMs. Consistently, VCP inhibition dramatically reduces the abundance of DENV CMs 
in infected cells. Most importantly, using a recently reported
replication-independent plasmid-based vRO induction system, we show that de novo 
VP biogenesis is dependent on VCP ATPase activity. Overall, our data demonstrate 
that VCP ATPase activity is required for vRO morphogenesis and/or stability.
Considering that VCP was shown to be required for the replication of other
flaviviruses, our results argue that VCP is a pan-flaviviral host dependency
factor. Given that new generation VCP-targeting drugs are currently evaluated in 
clinical trials for cancer treatment, VCP may constitute an attractive
broad-spectrum antiviral target in drug repurposing approaches.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102092 
PMCID: PMC8540793
PMID: 34696522 

