
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021 Oct 26. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14353. [Epub ahead of print]

Monoglyceride reduces viability of porcine epidemic diarrhoea virus in feed and
prevents disease transmission to post-weaned piglets.

Phillips FC(1), Rubach JK(1), Poss MJ(1), Anam S(2)(3), Goyal SM(2), Dee SA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Kemin Industries, Inc., Des Moines, Iowa.
(2)Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory, College of Veterinary Medicine, University
of Minnesota, St. Paul, Minnesota.
(3)Department of Microbiology, University of Agriculture, Faisalabad, Pakistan.
(4)Pipestone Applied Research, Pipestone, Minnesota.

Outbreaks of African swine fever virus (ASFv) and porcine epidemic diarrhoea
virus (PEDv) have revealed the susceptibility of livestock to disease transmitted
through feed. Several viruses, including PEDv, survive in feed and may introduce 
disease that causes significant morbidity and mortality. In 2013, PEDv, which
causes severe diarrhoea and vomiting, reached North America after spreading for
decades across Eurasia. The global exchange of ingredients has created demand for
products that prevent disease transmission from feed. Formaldehyde-based products
are highly effective at inactivating enveloped viruses when applied at 3.25 kg/t.
Alternative products to formaldehyde, including carboxylic acids, essential oils 
and medium chain fatty acids (MCFAs), have exhibited mixed efficacy against PEDv 
and require application rates higher than formaldehyde. Amphiphilic molecules
like MCFAs disrupt the bilayer-lipid membranes that protect viral nucleic acids
through the formation of micelles. Monoglycerides form micelles at lower
concentrations than MCFAs, which suggests they may be more potent against
enveloped viruses. The potential efficacy of monoglycerides against enveloped
viruses in feed led to the development and examination of an experimental
monoglyceride blend. The proprietary monoglyceride blend significantly
(p < .0001) reduced PEDv viability in vitro after application to feed at 1.5, 2.5
and 3.5 kg/t. The monoglyceride was tested in a natural feeding behaviour
challenge model in piglets. The feed was contaminated with ice-blocks containing 
viable PEDv, and the piglets were exposed to PEDv through the feed bin for 20
days. At the end of the 20-day challenge period, all pigs were rectally swabbed
and tested for PEDv by qPCR. In the untreated control group 54.8% of the piglets 
tested positive for PEDv, whereas none of the MCFA-treated feed (10 kg/t
inclusion) transmitted PEDv. Strikingly, the monoglyceride-treated groups (1.5,
2.5 and 3.5 kg/t) all exhibited 100% protection from PEDv. These data support the
use of this proprietary monoglyceride blend in mitigation and prevention of viral
disease transmission to piglets from contaminated feed.

© 2021 Kemin Industries, Inc. Transboundary and Emerging Diseases published by
Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14353 
PMID: 34698444 

