
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2021 Oct 25. pii: tpmd210188. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.21-0188.
[Epub ahead of print]

Experimental Infection of Domestic Piglets (Sus Scrofa) with Rift Valley Fever
Virus.

Clarke LL(1), Mead DG(2), Ruder MG(2), Carter DL(2), Bloodgood J(2), Howerth
E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Georgia, Athens, Georgia.
(2)Southeastern Cooperative Wildlife Disease Study, College of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia.

Rift Valley fever phlebovirus (RVFV) is a mosquito-transmitted phlebovirus
(Family: Phenuiviridae, Order: Bunyavirales) causing severe neonatal mortality
and abortion primarily in domestic ruminants. The susceptibility of young
domestic swine to RVFV and this species' role in geographic expansion and
establishment of viral endemicity is unclear. Six commercially bred
Landrace-cross piglets were inoculated subcutaneously with 105 plaque-forming
units of RVFV ZH501 strain and two piglets received a sham inoculum. All animals 
were monitored for clinical signs, viremia, viral shedding, and antibody response
for 14 days. Piglets did not develop evidence of clinical disease, become
febrile, or experience decreased weight gain during the study period. A brief
lymphopenia followed by progressive lymphocytosis was observed following
inoculation in all piglets. Four piglets developed a brief viremia for 2 days
post-inoculation and three of these had detectable virus in oronasal secretions
three days post-inoculation. Primary inoculated piglets seroconverted and those
that developed detectable viremias had the highest titers assessed by serum
neutralization (1:64-1:256). Two viremic piglets had a lymphoplasmacytic
encephalitis with glial nodules; RVFV was not detected by immunohistochemistry in
these sections. While young piglets do not appear to readily develop clinical
disease following RVFV infection, results suggest swine could be subclinically
infected with RVFV.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.21-0188 
PMID: 34695799 

