
1. Nature. 2021 Oct 25. doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-04142-6. [Epub ahead of print]

Untimely TGFβ responses in COVID-19 limit antiviral functions of NK cells.

Witkowski M(#)(1)(2)(3), Tizian C(#)(4)(5), Ferreira-Gomes M(#)(6), Niemeyer
D(7)(8), Jones TC(7)(8)(9), Heinrich F(6), Frischbutter S(10)(11), Angermair
S(12), Hohnstein T(4)(5), Mattiola I(4)(5), Nawrath P(4)(5), McEwen S(4)(5),
Zocche S(13), Viviano E(14), Heinz GA(6), Maurer M(10)(11), Kölsch U(15), Chua
RL(16), Aschman T(17), Meisel C(15)(18), Radke J(17), Sawitzki B(18), Roehmel
J(19), Allers K(20), Moos V(20), Schneider T(20), Hanitsch L(18), Mall
MA(19)(21), Conrad C(16), Radbruch H(17), Duerr CU(22), Trapani JA(23), Marcenaro
E(24), Kallinich T(19)(25), Corman VM(7)(8), Kurth F(26)(27), Sander LE(26),
Drosten C(7)(8), Treskatsch S(12), Durek P(6), Kruglov A(28)(29)(30), Radbruch
A(31), Mashreghi MF(6)(32), Diefenbach A(33)(34)(35).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Innate Immunity, Institute of Microbiology, Infectious Diseases 
and Immunology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie
Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin, 
Berlin, Germany. mario.witkowski@charite.de.
(2)Mucosal and Developmental Immunology, Deutsches Rheuma-Forschungszentrum
(DRFZ), an Institute of the Leibniz Association, Berlin, Germany.
mario.witkowski@charite.de.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Hygiene, Labor Berlin, Charité-Vivantes,
Berlin, Germany. mario.witkowski@charite.de.
(4)Laboratory of Innate Immunity, Institute of Microbiology, Infectious Diseases 
and Immunology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie
Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin, 
Berlin, Germany.
(5)Mucosal and Developmental Immunology, Deutsches Rheuma-Forschungszentrum
(DRFZ), an Institute of the Leibniz Association, Berlin, Germany.
(6)Therapeutic Gene Regulation, Deutsches Rheuma-Forschungszentrum (DRFZ), an
Institute of the Leibniz Association, Berlin, Germany.
(7)Institute of Virology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member 
of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Campus Charité
Mitte, Berlin, Germany.
(8)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner Site Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.
(9)Centre for Pathogen Evolution, Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK.
(10)Dermatological Allergology, Allergie-Centrum-Charité, Department of
Dermatology and Allergy, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of 
Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Campus Charité
Mitte, Berlin, Germany.
(11)Fraunhofer Institute for Translational Medicine and Pharmacology (ITMP)
Allergology and Immunology, Berlin, Germany.
(12)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, Charité -
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin and
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Berlin, Germany.
(13)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Nephrology and Metabolic Diseases, 
Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität
Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Campus Virchow-Klinikum, Berlin,
Germany.
(14)Institute of Physiology, Center for Space Medicine and Extreme Environments
Berlin, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität
Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(15)Department of Immunology, Labor Berlin, Charité-Vivantes, Berlin, Germany.
(16)Center for Digital Health, Berlin Institute of Health (BIH) and
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin 
and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(17)Department of Neuropathology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate
Member of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.
(18)Institute of Medical Immunology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 
Campus Virchow-Klinikum, Berlin, Germany.
(19)Department of Pediatric Respiratory Medicine, Immunology and Critical Care
Medicine, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie
Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(20)Department of Medicine (Gastroenterology, Infectious Diseases, Rheumatology),
Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität
Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin and Berlin Institute of Health, Campus
Benjamin Franklin, Berlin, Germany.
(21)German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Associated Partner Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.
(22)Laboratory of Mucosal Immunity, Institute of Microbiology, Infectious
Diseases and Immunology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member
of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Campus Benjamin
Franklin, Berlin, Germany.
(23)Cancer Immunology Program, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia.
(24)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy.
(25)Chronic inflammation in Childhood, Deutsches Rheuma-Forschungszentrum (DRFZ),
an Institute of the Leibniz Association, Berlin, Germany.
(26)Department of Infectious Diseases and Respiratory Medicine, Charité -
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin and
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(27)Department of Tropical Medicine, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical
Medicine, and Department of Medicine I, University Medical Centre
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(28)Chronic Inflammation, Deutsches Rheuma-Forschungszentrum (DRFZ), an Institute
of the Leibniz Association, Berlin, Germany.
(29)Belozersky Institute of Physico-Chemical Biology and Biological Faculty, M.V.
Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia.
(30)Center for Precision Genome Editing and Genetic Technologies for Biomedicine,
Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow,
Russia.
(31)Cell Biology, Deutsches Rheuma-Forschungszentrum (DRFZ), an Institute of the 
Leibniz Association, Berlin, Germany.
(32)BIH Center for Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), Charité Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(33)Laboratory of Innate Immunity, Institute of Microbiology, Infectious Diseases
and Immunology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie
Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin, 
Berlin, Germany. andreas.diefenbach@charite.de.
(34)Mucosal and Developmental Immunology, Deutsches Rheuma-Forschungszentrum
(DRFZ), an Institute of the Leibniz Association, Berlin, Germany.
andreas.diefenbach@charite.de.
(35)Department of Microbiology and Hygiene, Labor Berlin, Charité-Vivantes,
Berlin, Germany. andreas.diefenbach@charite.de.
(#)Contributed equally

SARS-CoV-2 is a single-stranded RNA virus that causes COVID-19. Given its acute
and often self-limiting course, it is likely that components of the innate immune
system play a central part in controlling virus replication and determining
clinical outcome. Natural killer (NK) cells are innate lymphocytes with notable
activity against a broad range of viruses, including RNA viruses1,2. NK cell
function may be altered during COVID-19 despite increased representation of NK
cells with an activated and adaptive phenotype3,4. Here we show that a decline in
viral load in COVID-19 correlates with NK cell status and that NK cells can
control SARS-CoV-2 replication by recognizing infected target cells. In severe
COVID-19, NK cells show defects in virus control, cytokine production and
cell-mediated cytotoxicity despite high expression of cytotoxic effector
molecules. Single-cell RNA sequencing of NK cells over the time course of the
COVID-19 disease spectrum reveals a distinct gene expression signature.
Transcriptional networks of interferon-driven NK cell activation are superimposed
by a dominant transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ) response signature, with
reduced expression of genes related to cell-cell adhesion, granule exocytosis and
cell-mediated cytotoxicity. In severe COVID-19, serum levels of TGFβ peak during 
the first two weeks of infection, and serum obtained from these patients severely
inhibits NK cell function in a TGFβ-dependent manner. Our data reveal that an
untimely production of TGFβ is a hallmark of severe COVID-19 and may inhibit NK
cell function and early control of the virus.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-021-04142-6 
PMID: 34695836 

