
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 7;12:747143. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.747143. eCollection 
2021.

Crosstalk of Microorganisms and Immune Responses in Autoimmune Neuroinflammation:
A Focus on Regulatory T Cells.

Schroeter CB(1), Huntemann N(1), Bock S(2), Nelke C(1), Kremer D(1), Pfeffer
K(3), Meuth SG(1), Ruck T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University
Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(2)Department of Neurology With Institute of Translational Neurology, University 
of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(3)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hospital Hygiene,
Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.

Regulatory T cells (Tregs) are the major determinant of peripheral immune
tolerance. Many Treg subsets have been described, however thymus-derived and
peripherally induced Tregs remain the most important subpopulations. In multiple 
sclerosis, a prototypical autoimmune disorder of the central nervous system, Treg
dysfunction is a pathogenic hallmark. In contrast, induction of Treg
proliferation and enhancement of their function are central immune evasion
mechanisms of infectious pathogens. In accordance, Treg expansion is
compartmentalized to tissues with high viral replication and prolonged in chronic
infections. In friend retrovirus infection, Treg expansion is mainly based on
excessive interleukin-2 production by infected effector T cells. Moreover,
pathogens seem also to enhance Treg functions as shown in human immunodeficiency 
virus infection, where Tregs express higher levels of effector molecules such as 
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4, CD39 and cAMP and show increased
suppressive capacity. Thus, insights into the molecular mechanisms by which
intracellular pathogens alter Treg functions might aid to find new therapeutic
approaches to target central nervous system autoimmunity. In this review, we
summarize the current knowledge of the role of pathogens for Treg function in the
context of autoimmune neuroinflammation. We discuss the mechanistic implications 
for future therapies and provide an outlook for new research directions.

Copyright © 2021 Schroeter, Huntemann, Bock, Nelke, Kremer, Pfeffer, Meuth and
Ruck.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.747143 
PMCID: PMC8529161
PMID: 34691057 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

