
1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2021 Oct 25:1-16. doi: 10.1080/07391102.2021.1993338. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Designing of cytotoxic T lymphocyte-based multi-epitope vaccine against
SARS-CoV2: a reverse vaccinology approach.

Vivekanandam R(1), Rajagopalan K(2), Jeevanandam M(3), Ganesan H(4), Jagannathan 
V(5), Selvan Christyraj JD(2), Kalimuthu K(6), Selvan Christyraj JRS(2), Mohan
M(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Bharathiyar University, Coimbatore, Tamilnadu,
India.
(2)Regeneration and Stem Cell Biology Lab, Centre for Molecular and Nanomedical
Sciences, International Research Centre, Sathyabama Institute of Science and
Technology, Chennai, Tamilnadu, India.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, PSG college of Arts and Science, Coimbatore,
Tamilnadu, India.
(4)Chettinad Academy of Research and Education (CARE), Chettinad Hospital and
Research Institute (CHRI), Chennai, Tamilnadu, India.
(5)Institute of Forest Genetics and Tree Breeding (IFGTB), Coimbatore, Tamilnadu,
India.
(6)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(7)Vaxigen International Research Center Private Limited, Coimbatore, Tamilnadu, 
India.
(8)Department of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Sciences, College of Pharmacy,
University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA.

SARS-CoV2 is a single-stranded RNA virus, gaining much attention after it out
broke in China in December 2019. The virus rapidly spread to several countries
around the world and caused severe respiratory illness to humans. Since the
outbreak, researchers around the world have devoted maximum resources and effort 
to develop a potent vaccine that would offer protection to uninfected individuals
against SARS-CoV2. Reverse vaccinology is a relatively new approach that thrives 
faster in vaccine research. In this study, we constructed Cytotoxic T Lymphocytes
(CTL)-based multi-epitope vaccine using hybrid epitope prediction methods. A
total of 121 immunogenic CTL epitopes were screened by various sequence-based
prediction methods and docked with their respective HLA alleles using the
AutoDock Vina v1.1.2. In all, 17 epitopes were selected based on their binding
affinity, followed by the construction of multi-epitope vaccine by placing the
appropriate linkers between the epitopes and tuberculosis heparin-binding
hemagglutinin (HBHA) adjuvant. The final vaccine construct was modeled by the
I-TASSER server and the best model was further validated by ERRAT, ProSA, and
PROCHECK servers. Furthermore, the molecular interaction of the constructed
vaccine with TLR4 was assessed by ClusPro 2.0 and PROtein binDIng enerGY
prediction (PRODIGY) server. The immune simulation analysis confirms that the
constructed vaccine was capable of inducing long-lasting memory T helper (Th) and
CTL responses. Finally, the nucleotide sequence was codon-optimized by the JCAT
tool and cloned into the pET21a (+) vector. The current results reveal that the
candidate vaccine is capable of provoking robust CTL response against the
SARS-CoV2.Communicated by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2021.1993338 
PMID: 34696708 

