
1. In Vivo. 2021 Nov-Dec;35(6):3377-3383. doi: 10.21873/invivo.12636.

COVID-19 Mid-term Impact on Hepatocellular Carcinoma in Patients With Hepatitis C
Chronic Infection.

Guler-Margaritis S(1)(2), Mercan-Stanciu A(1)(3), Toma L(1)(3), Rusie D(4), Isac 
T(1)(3), Dodot M(1)(3), Zgura A(1)(5), Bacalbasa N(1), Haineala B(1)(2), Badiu
DC(6)(7), Serban D(1)(8), Iliescu EL(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
(2)Department of Urology, Fundeni Clinical Institute, Bucharest, Romania.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine II, Fundeni Clinical Institute, Bucharest,
Romania.
(4)Department of General Surgery, Clinical Emergency Hospital, Bucharest,
Romania.
(5)Department of Oncology-Radiotherapy, "Prof Dr Alexandru Trestioreanu"
Institute of Oncology, Bucharest, Romania.
(6)Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania;
doctorcristianbadiu@yahoo.com.
(7)General Surgery Department, Bagdasar Arseni Clinical Emergency Hospital,
Bucharest, Romania.
(8)Department of Surgery, University Emergency Hospital, Bucharest, Romania.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Liver injury has been frequently reported in association with
SARS-CoV-2 infection, but data are still lacking regarding the impact of
pre-existing liver damage and neoplasia on SARS-CoV-2 infection outcome and
vice-versa. This study aimed to assess the effects of SARS-CoV-2 infection on
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infected
patients, both in therapeutic-naïve and patients treated with direct acting
antivirals.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We conducted a retrospective cohort study on 21 patients
with a personal history of HCV infection, that have been diagnosed with different
forms of HCC and who were subsequently infected with SARS-CoV-2. Patients were
monitored by liver function tests, tumoral markers, blood cell count, and
coagulation profile periodically.
RESULTS: Solitary HCC nodules were predominant among the subjects who achieved
sustained virologic response, while multinodular and infiltrative patterns were
mostly prevalent among the treatment-naïve group. Most patients had mild and
moderate COVID-19 infections.
CONCLUSION: Within the current global pandemic crisis, cancer patients are highly
vulnerable and in need of constant monitoring. Among patients with HCC, the ones 
with cured HCV infection may be at a lower risk of fatality than those with
active HCV infection, when diagnosed with SARS-CoV-2 infection.

Copyright © 2021 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. George J.
Delinasios), All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21873/invivo.12636 
PMID: 34697172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

