
1. J Glob Antimicrob Resist. 2021 Oct 22;27:236-238. doi:
10.1016/j.jgar.2021.10.007. [Epub ahead of print]

India's National Action Plan on Antimicrobial Resistance: a critical perspective.

Nair M(1), Zeegers MP(2), Varghese GM(3), Burza S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Complex Genetics, Care and Public Health Research Institute,
Maastricht University, Maastricht, the Netherlands. Electronic address:
m.nair@maastrichtuniversity.nl.
(2)Department of Complex Genetics, Care and Public Health Research Institute,
Maastricht University, Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(3)Christian Medical College, Vellore, India.
(4)Médecins Sans Frontières, New Delhi, India; London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, UK.

Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is widely recognised as a global health threat,
which is projected to account for more deaths than cancer by 2050. The Government
of India has formulated a National Action Plan to tackle AMR (NAP-AMR), largely
modelled on the World Health Organization's Global Action Plan on AMR. While the 
NAP-AMR successfully mirrors the Global Action Plan and lays out ambitious goals,
we find that the lack of financial allocation across states, poor enforcement and
inadequate multisectoral co-ordination have hampered progress. A broader focus on
improving infrastructure for water and sanitation, linking the issue of AMR to
existing vertical health programmes for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and
tuberculosis (TB), prioritising infection prevention and control, strengthening
the frontline healthcare workforce in rural and peri-urban settings to reduce
reliance on antibiotics, leveraging point-of-care testing and mobile app-based
health interventions for diagnosis and surveillance, and adopting a
socioecological approach to health and development would help to create an
enabling environment for concrete action on AMR in India.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jgar.2021.10.007 
PMID: 34695609 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interests None declared.

