
1. Clin Infect Dis. 2021 Oct 25. pii: ciab902. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciab902. [Epub ahead
of print]

Severe dysbiosis and specific Haemophilus and Neisseria signatures as hallmarks
of the oropharyngeal microbiome in critically ill COVID-19 patients.

de Castilhos J(1)(2), Zamir E(1), Hippchen T(3), Rohrbach R(1), Schmidt S(1),
Hengler S(1), Schumacher H(1), Neubauer M(4), Kunz S(5), Müller-Esch T(5),
Hiergeist A(6), Gessner A(6), Khalid D(7), Gaiser R(1), Cullin N(1),
Papagiannarou SM(1), Beuthien-Baumann B(8), Krämer A(9), Bartenschlager
R(10)(11), Jäger D(12), Müller M(13), Herth F(13), Duerschmied D(14), Schneider
J(15), Schmid RM(15), Eberhardt JF(16), Khodamoradi Y(16), Vehreschild
MJGT(16)(17), Teufel A(18), Ebert MP(18), Hau P(19), Salzberger B(20), Schnitzler
P(7), Poeck H(5)(21), Elinav E(1)(22), Merle U(3), Stein-Thoeringer CK(1)(12).

Author information: 
(1)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Research Division Microbiome and Cancer,
Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Vale do Rio dos Sinos University (UNISINOS), Sao Leopoldo, Brazil.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Infectious Diseases, University Clinic
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Department of Medicine II, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg,
Mannheim, Germany.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine III, University Clinic Regensburg, Regensburg,
Germany.
(6)Institute of Clinical Microbiology and Hygiene, University Clinic Regensburg, 
Regensburg, Germany.
(7)Department of Virology, University Clinic Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(8)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Research Division Radiology, Heidelberg,
Germany.
(9)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Research Division Molecular
Hematology/Oncology, Heidelberg, Germany.
(10)Department of Infectious Diseases, Molecular Virology, Heidelberg University,
Heidelberg, Germany.
(11)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Research Division Virus-associated
Carcinogenesis, Heidelberg.
(12)National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT) Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(13)Thoraxklinik and Translational Lung Research Center, Heidelberg University,
Heidelberg, Germany.
(14)Department of Internal Medicine III, Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(15)Department of Internal Medicine II, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technical
University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(16)Department of Internal Medicine, Infectious Diseases, University Hospital
Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany.
(17)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner Site Bonn-Cologne,
Cologne, Germany.
(18)Department of Medicine II, Section of Hepatology, University Medical Center
Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, and Center for Preventive Medicine 
and Digital Health Baden-Württemberg, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg
University, Mannheim, Germany.
(19)Wilhelm Sander-NeuroOncology Unit and Department of Neurology, University
Clinic Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(20)Department of Infectious Disease, University Clinic Regensburg, Regensburg,
Germany.
(21)National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT) WERA.
(22)Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.

BACKGROUND: At the entry site of respiratory virus infections, the oropharyngeal 
microbiome has been proposed as a major hub integrating viral and host immune
signals. Early studies suggested that infections with Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) 
are associated with changes of the upper and lower airway microbiome, and that
specific microbial signatures may predict COVID-19 illness. However, the results 
are not conclusive, as critical illness can drastically alter a patient's
microbiome through multiple confounders.
METHODS: To study oropharyngeal microbiome profiles in SARS-CoV-2 infection,
clinical confounders, and prediction models in COVID-19, we performed a
multi-center, cross-sectional clinical study analyzing oropharyngeal microbial
metagenomes in healthy adults, patients with non-SARS-CoV-2 infections, or with
mild, moderate and severe COVID-19 (n=322 participants).
RESULTS: In contrast to mild infections, patients admitted to a hospital with
moderate or severe COVID-19 showed dysbiotic microbial configurations, which were
significantly pronounced in patients treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics,
receiving invasive mechanical ventilation, or when sampling was performed during 
prolonged hospitalization. In contrast, specimens collected early after admission
allowed us to segregate microbiome features predictive of hospital COVID-19
mortality utilizing machine learning models. Taxonomic signatures were found to
perform better than models utilizing clinical variables with Neisseria and
Haemophilus species abundances as most important features.
CONCLUSION: In addition to the infection per se, several factors shape the
oropharyngeal microbiome of severely affected COVID-19 patients and deserve
consideration in the interpretation of the role of the microbiome in severe
COVID-19. Nevertheless, we were able to extract microbial features that can help 
to predict clinical outcomes.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciab902 
PMCID: PMC8586732
PMID: 34694375 

