
1. mSystems. 2021 Oct 26;6(5):e0009521. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.00095-21. Epub 2021
Oct 26.

Pathogenesis, Symptomatology, and Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 through Analysis of 
Viral Genomics and Structure.

Rando HM(1)(2)(3), MacLean AL(4), Lee AJ(1), Lordan R(5), Ray S(6), Bansal V(7), 
Skelly AN(8)(9), Sell E(8), Dziak JJ(10), Shinholster L(11), D'Agostino McGowan
L(12), Ben Guebila M(13), Wellhausen N(1), Knyazev S(14), Boca SM(15)(16), Capone
S(17), Qi Y(18), Park Y(1), Mai D(19), Sun Y(18), Boerckel JD(19)(20), Brueffer
C(21), Byrd JB(22), Kamil JP(23), Wang J(8), Velazquez R(24), Szeto GL(25),
Barton JP(26), Goel RR(9), Mangul S(27), Lubiana T(28); COVID-19 Review
Consortium Vikas Bansal, John P. Barton, Simina M. Boca, Joel D. Boerckel,
Christian Brueffer, James Brian Byrd, Stephen Capone, Shikta Das, Anna Ada
Dattoli, John J. Dziak, Jeffrey M. Field, Soumita Ghosh, Anthony Gitter, Rishi
Raj Goel, Casey S. Greene, Marouen Ben Guebila, Daniel S. Himmelstein, Fengling
Hu, Nafisa M. Jadavji, Jeremy P. Kamil, Sergey Knyazev, Likhitha Kolla, Alexandra
J. Lee, Ronan Lordan, Tiago Lubiana, Temitayo Lukan, Adam L. MacLean, David Mai, 
Serghei Mangul, David Manheim, Lucy D’Agostino McGowan, Amruta Naik, YoSon Park, 
Dimitri Perrin, Yanjun Qi, Diane N. Rafizadeh, Bharath Ramsundar, Halie M. Rando,
Sandipan Ray, Michael P. Robson, Vincent Rubinetti, Elizabeth Sell, Lamonica
Shinholster, Ashwin N. Skelly, Yuchen Sun, Yusha Sun, Gregory L. Szeto, Ryan
Velazquez, Jinhui Wang, Nils Wellhausen,, Gitter A(29)(30), Greene
CS(1)(2)(3)(31).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado
School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(3)Center for Health AI, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
Colorado, USA.
(4)Department of Quantitative and Computational Biology, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(5)Institute for Translational Medicine and Therapeutics, Perelman School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(6)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad,
Sangareddy, Telangana, India.
(7)Biomedical Data Science and Machine Learning Group, German Center for
Neurodegenerative Diseases, Tübingen, Germany.
(8)Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA.
(9)Institute for Immunology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(10)Edna Bennett Pierce Prevention Research Center, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(11)Mercer University, Macon, Georgia, USA.
(12)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Wake Forest
Universitygrid.241167.7, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA.
(13)Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.
(14)Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(15)Innovation Center for Biomedical Informatics, Georgetown University Medical
Center, Washington, DC, USA.
(16)Early Biometrics & Statistical Innovation, Data Science & Artificial
Intelligence, R & D, AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA.
(17)St. George's University School of Medicine, St. George's, Grenada.
(18)Department of Computer Science, University of Virginiagrid.27755.32,
Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.
(19)Department of Bioengineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA.
(20)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(21)Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(22)University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(23)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Louisiana State University Health 
Sciences Center Shreveport, Shreveport, Louisiana, USA.
(24)Azimuth1, McLean, Virginia, USA.
(25)Allen Institute for Immunology, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(26)Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California-Riverside,
Riverside, California, USA.
(27)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(28)Department of Clinical and Toxicological Analyses, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(29)Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(30)Morgridge Institute for Research, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(31)Childhood Cancer Data Lab, Alex's Lemonade Stand Foundation, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA.

Update of
    ArXiv. 2021 Feb 1;:.

The novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, which emerged in late 2019, has since spread
around the world and infected hundreds of millions of people with coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19). While this viral species was unknown prior to January
2020, its similarity to other coronaviruses that infect humans has allowed for
rapid insight into the mechanisms that it uses to infect human hosts, as well as 
the ways in which the human immune system can respond. Here, we contextualize
SARS-CoV-2 among other coronaviruses and identify what is known and what can be
inferred about its behavior once inside a human host. Because the genomic content
of coronaviruses, which specifies the virus's structure, is highly conserved,
early genomic analysis provided a significant head start in predicting viral
pathogenesis and in understanding potential differences among variants. The
pathogenesis of the virus offers insights into symptomatology, transmission, and 
individual susceptibility. Additionally, prior research into interactions between
the human immune system and coronaviruses has identified how these viruses can
evade the immune system's protective mechanisms. We also explore systems-level
research into the regulatory and proteomic effects of SARS-CoV-2 infection and
the immune response. Understanding the structure and behavior of the virus serves
to contextualize the many facets of the COVID-19 pandemic and can influence
efforts to control the virus and treat the disease. IMPORTANCE COVID-19 involves 
a number of organ systems and can present with a wide range of symptoms. From how
the virus infects cells to how it spreads between people, the available research 
suggests that these patterns are very similar to those seen in the closely
related viruses SARS-CoV-1 and possibly Middle East respiratory syndrome-related 
CoV (MERS-CoV). Understanding the pathogenesis of the SARS-CoV-2 virus also
contextualizes how the different biological systems affected by COVID-19 connect.
Exploring the structure, phylogeny, and pathogenesis of the virus therefore helps
to guide interpretation of the broader impacts of the virus on the human body and
on human populations. For this reason, an in-depth exploration of viral
mechanisms is critical to a robust understanding of SARS-CoV-2 and, potentially, 
future emergent human CoVs (HCoVs).

DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.00095-21 
PMCID: PMC8547481
PMID: 34698547 

