
1. BMJ Open. 2021 Oct 25;11(10):e053971. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-053971.

Clinical efficacy of COMPASS, a digital cognitive-behavioural therapy programme
for treating anxiety and depression in patients with long-term physical health
conditions: a protocol for randomised controlled trial.

Hulme K(1), Hudson JL(1), Picariello F(1), Seaton N(1), Norton S(1), Wroe A(1),
Moss-Morris R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Health Psychology Section, Psychology Department, King's College London,
London, UK.
(2)Health Psychology Section, Psychology Department, King's College London,
London, UK rona.moss-morris@kcl.ac.uk.

INTRODUCTION: Approximately 30% of people with long-term physical health
conditions (LTCs) experience mental health problems, with negative consequences
and costs for individuals and healthcare services. Access to psychological
treatment is scarce and, when available, often focuses on treating primary mental
health problems rather than illness-related anxiety/depression. The aim of this
study is to evaluate the clinical efficacy of a newly developed,
therapist-supported, digital cognitive-behavioural treatment (COMPASS) for
reducing LTC-related psychological distress (anxiety/depression), compared with
standard charity support (SCS).
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: A two-arm, parallel-group randomised controlled trial (1:1 
ratio) with nested qualitative study will be conducted. Two-hundred adults with
LTC-related anxiety and depression will be recruited through national LTC
charities. They will be randomly allocated to receive COMPASS or SCS only. An
independent administrator will use Qualtrics randomiser for treatment allocation,
to ensure allocation concealment. Participants will access treatment from home
over 10 weeks. The COMPASS group will have access to the digital programme and
six therapist contacts: one welcome message and five fortnightly phone calls.
Data will be collected online at baseline, 6 weeks and 12 weeks
post-randomisation for primary outcome (Patient Health Questionnaire Anxiety and 
Depression Scale) and secondary outcomes (anxiety, depression, daily functioning,
COVID-19-related distress, illness-related distress, quality of life, knowledge
and confidence for illness self-management, symptom severity and improvement).
Analyses will be conducted following the intention-to-treat principle by a data
analyst blinded to treatment allocation. A purposively sampled group of COMPASS
participants and therapists will be interviewed. Interviews will be thematically 
analysed.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: The study is approved by King's College London's
Psychiatry, Nursing and Midwifery Research Ethics Subcommittee (reference:
LRS-19/20-20347). All participants will provide informed consent to take part if 
eligible. Findings will be published in peer-reviewed journals and presented at
conferences.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT04535778.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-053971 
PMCID: PMC8557248
PMID: 34697123  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

