
1. Qatar Med J. 2021 Oct 7;2021(3):51. doi: 10.5339/qmj.2021.51. eCollection 2021.

Intravesical alprostadil as a promising agent in BK virus-associated hemorrhagic 
cystitis: A report of a refractory case.

Shamsian S(1), Saffaei A(2), Malek F(1), Khafafpour Z(1), Latifi A(1), Karamat
M(2), Mirrahimi B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Congenital Hematologic Disorders Research Center, Mofid Children's
Hospital, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran E-mail:
bahador.p.d@gmail.com.
(2)Student Research Committee, Department of Clinical Pharmacy, School of
Pharmacy, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, Shahid Beheshti
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Allogeneic stem cell transplant recipients are at risk of BK virus-associated
hemorrhagic cystitis. This condition causes a significant morbidity and worsens
clinical outcomes. The standard cares for BK virus-associated hemorrhagic
cystitis are saline irrigation and forced diuresis. Notably, several beneficial
roles are proposed for antiviral and anti-inflammatory agents against BK
virus-associated hemorrhagic cystitis. However, cases who are at risk of
cystectomy remain refractory. Herein, we present a 13-year-old boy with severe
hematuria by passing two months from his allogeneic stem cell transplantation.
The laboratory work up showed high BK viremia >1.1 ×  108 copies/ml in this
case's urine sample. The patient was treated with antiviral agents in combination
with supportive care. Moreover, intravesical alum was administered, but no
clinical benefits were achieved. Finally, intravesical alprostadil was prepared
under the supervision of a pediatric clinical pharmacist. In this regard, an
alprostadil solution was prepared by constitution of 250 μg alprostadil in 50 mL 
saline. After administrating the first dose of intravesical alprostadil, an
acceptable clinical response was observed, and hematuria stopped. Of note,
alprostadil induces platelet aggregation and vasoconstriction. Thus, bleeding can
be controlled after the administration of intravesical alprostadil. This strategy
may be associated with several side effects including bladder spasm. This study
is the first report describing the special role of intravesical alprostadil in
refractory cases of BK virus-associated hemorrhagic cystitis. In such refractory 
cases, clinicians can use intravesical alprostadil rather than invasive therapies
in the treatment of BK virus-hemorrhagic cystitis.

© 2021 Shamsian, Saffaei, Malek, Khafafpour, Latifi, Karamat, Mirrahimi, licensee
HBKU Press.

DOI: 10.5339/qmj.2021.51 
PMCID: PMC8502552
PMID: 34692434 

