
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 8;12:737486. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.737486.
eCollection 2021.

The Unmet Needs of Hepatitis E Virus Diagnosis in Suspected Drug-Induced Liver
Injury in Limited Resource Setting.

El-Mokhtar MA(1)(2), Ramadan HK(3), Thabet MM(4), Abd-Elkader AS(4), Fouad M(5), 
Sallam MM(6), Elgohary EA(6), Abd El-Hafeez AA(7)(8), Mohamed ME(1), Sayed IM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Assiut
University, Asyut, Egypt.
(2)Microbiology and Immunology Department, Faculty of Pharmacy, Sphinx
University, Asyut, Egypt.
(3)Department of Tropical Medicine and Gastroenterology, Faculty of Medicine,
Assiut University, Asyut, Egypt.
(4)Department of Clinical pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Assiut University,
Asyut, Egypt.
(5)Hepato-Gastroenterology Unit, Tropical Medicine Department, Faculty of
Medicine, El-Minia University, Minya, Egypt.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Zagazig University,
Zagazig, Egypt.
(7)Pharmacology and Experimental Oncology Unit, Cancer Biology Department,
National Cancer Institute, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.
(8)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San
Diego, San Diego, CA, United States.

Background: Currently, there are no specific biomarkers for drug-induced liver
injury (DILI), and the diagnosis of DILI is based mainly on the exclusion of
other causes of liver dysfunction and the recognition of potential causative
drugs. Hepatitis E virus (HEV) diagnosis is not routinely enrolled in many
countries, and HEV infection could be misdiagnosed as DILI. Methodology: We
retrospectively analyzed plasma samples (n = 80) collected from suspected DILI
for HEV markers such as anti-HEV IgM, anti-HEV IgG, and HEV RNA. Anti-HEV
antibodies were assessed using commercial ELISA kits. HEV RNA was tested by
RT-qPCR targeting HEV ORF2/3, the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve
was plotted, and a putative threshold for liver function parameters was
determined. Results: Out of 80 samples, 12 samples were positive for anti-HEV IgM
and anti-HEV IgG, and HEV RNA was detected in seven samples. The median viral
load was 3.46 × 103 IU/ml, and the isolated viruses belonged to HEV genotype 1.
The level of liver enzymes such as alanine transaminase (ALT) and aspartate
transaminase (AST), but not alkaline phosphatase (ALP), was significantly higher 
in HEV confirmed cases than in non-HEV confirmed cases. We identified a plasma
ALT level of at least 415.5 U/L and AST level of at least 332 U/L; ALT/ALP ratio 
of at least 5.08 could be used as a guide for the patients diagnosed as DILI to
be tested for HEV infection. The previous liver function parameters showed high
sensitivity and good specificity. Conclusion: Hepatitis E virus was detected in
suspected DILI cases. The diagnosis of DILI is not secure until HEV testing is
done. Liver function parameters can be used as a guide for HEV testing in
suspected DILI cases in countries with limited resources.

Copyright © 2021 El-Mokhtar, Ramadan, Thabet, Abd-Elkader, Fouad, Sallam,
Elgohary, Abd El-Hafeez, Mohamed and Sayed.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.737486 
PMCID: PMC8533821
PMID: 34690979 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

