
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021 Oct 25. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14356. [Epub ahead of print]

Transmission dynamics and susceptibility patterns of SARS-CoV-2 in domestic,
farmed and wild animals: Sustainable One Health surveillance for conservation and
public health to prevent future epidemics and pandemics.

Islam A(1)(2)(3), Ferdous J(1)(3), Islam S(1)(3), Sayeed MA(1)(3), Rahman
MK(1)(3), Saha O(1)(3)(4), Hassan MM(5), Shirin T(3).

Author information: 
(1)EcoHealth Alliance, New York, United States.
(2)Centre for Integrative Ecology, School of Life and Environmental Science,
Deakin University, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Institute of Epidemiology, Disease Control and Research (IEDCR), Dhaka,
Bangladesh.
(4)Department of Microbiology, University of Dhaka, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(5)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Chattogram Veterinary and Animal Sciences
University, Chattogram, Bangladesh.

The exact origin of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) 
and source of introduction into humans has not been established yet, though it
might be originated from animals. Therefore, we conducted a study to understand
the putative reservoirs, transmission dynamics, and susceptibility patterns of
SARS-CoV-2 in animals. Rhinolophus bats are presumed to be natural progenitors of
SARS-CoV-2-related viruses. Initially, pangolin was thought to be the source of
spillover to humans, but they might be infected by human or other animal species.
So, the virus spillover pathways to humans remain unknown. Human-to-animal
transmission has been testified in pet, farmed, zoo and free-ranging wild
animals. Infected animals can transmit the virus to other animals in natural
settings like mink-to-mink and mink-to-cat transmission. Animal-to-human
transmission is not a persistent pathway, while mink-to-human transmission
continues to be illuminated. Multiple companions and captive wild animals were
infected by an emerging alpha variant of concern (B.1.1.7 lineage) whereas
Asiatic lions were infected by delta variant, (B.1.617.2). To date, multiple
animal species - cat, ferrets, non-human primates, hamsters and bats - showed
high susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2 in the experimental condition, while swine,
poultry, cattle showed no susceptibility. The founding of SARS-CoV-2 in wild
animal reservoirs can confront the control of the virus in humans and might carry
a risk to the welfare and conservation of wildlife as well. We suggest
vaccinating pets and captive animals to stop spillovers and spillback events. We 
recommend sustainable One Health surveillance at the animal-human-environmental
interface to detect and prevent future epidemics and pandemics by Disease X.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14356 
PMID: 34694705 

