
1. Am J Case Rep. 2021 Oct 25;22:e933267. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.933267.

Advanced Leiomyosarcoma of the Retroperitoneal Space in a Kidney Transplant
Recipient with a History of Peritoneal Dialysis: A Case Report.

Kaźmierczak O(1), Kozaczka A(1), Kolonko A(2), Kajor M(3), Pająk J(3), Chudek
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Oncological Chemotherapy, Medical
University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Transplantation and Internal Medicine, Medical
University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland.
(3)Department of Pathomorphology and Molecular Diagnostics, Medical University of
Silesia, Katowice, Poland.

BACKGROUND Leiomyosarcoma frequently occurs in patients who are on
immunosuppressive therapy. It is the second most common sarcoma in this
population and is often associated with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection. We
present a case of advanced leiomyosarcoma of the retroperitoneal space in a
kidney transplant recipient and discuss additional risk factors for oncogenesis. 
CASE REPORT A 44-year-old woman with a history of peritoneal dialysis and kidney 
transplantation was diagnosed with multiple liver lesions. PET-CT scanning showed
a metabolically active tumor in the left lumbar region with numerous liver focal 
lesions. The histological examination of the liver lesion biopsy identified
advanced retroperitoneal leiomyosarcoma with a high proliferative index and liver
involvement. Unexpectedly, the relation with EBV infection was not proven. The
patient was treated with first-line doxorubicin, with the simultaneous reduction 
of immunosuppression. Owing to disease progression after 6 cycles, the patient
received second-line chemotherapy based on gemcitabine and docetaxel, which was
terminated owing to unacceptable toxicity, despite an observed response.
Third-line trabectedin-based therapy with good tolerance and stabilization of
disease after 20 months was being maintained at the time of this report.
CONCLUSIONS The increased cancer mortality in solid-organ transplant recipients
requires an individualized approach and increased post-transplantation screening 
according to additional specific cancer risk factors. A further consideration is 
the hypothetical relevance of long-term peritoneal membrane irritation in
peritoneal dialysis patients.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.933267 
PMCID: PMC8557855
PMID: 34695070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

