
1. Vaccine. 2021 Nov 16;39(47):6866-6875. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.026. Epub
2021 Oct 22.

Comparative study on antigen persistence and immunoprotective efficacy of
intramuscular and intraperitoneal injections of squalene - aluminium hydroxide
(Sq + Al) adjuvanted viral hemorrhagic septicaemia virus vaccine in olive
flounder (Paralichthys olivaceus).

Dar SA(1), Kole S(1), Shin SM(1), Jeong HJ(1), Jung SJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aqualife Medicine, Chonnam National University, Republic of
Korea.
(2)Department of Aqualife Medicine, Chonnam National University, Republic of
Korea. Electronic address: sungju@chonnam.ac.kr.

The profitability of the olive flounder (Paralichthys olivaceus) aquaculture
industry in Korea depends on high production and maintenance of flesh quality, as
consumers prefer to eat raw flounders from aquaria and relish the raw muscles as 
'sashimi'. For sustaining high production, easy-to-deliver and efficient
vaccination strategies against serious pathogens, such as viral hemorrhagic
septicemia virus (VHSV), is very important as it cause considerable losses to the
industry. Whereas, a safe and non-invasive vaccine formulation that is free from 
unacceptable side-effects and does not devalue the fish is needed to maintain
flesh quality. We previously developed a squalene-aluminium hydroxide (Sq + Al)
adjuvanted VHSV vaccine that conferred moderate to high protection in flounder,
without causing any side effects when administered through the intraperitoneal
(IP) injection route. However, farmers often demand intramuscular (IM) injection 
vaccines as they are relatively easy to administer in small fishes. Therefore, we
administered the developed vaccine via IP and IM routes and investigated the
safety and persistency of the vaccine at the injection site. In addition, we
conducted a comparative analysis of vaccine efficacy and serum antibody response.
The clinical and histological observation of the IM and IP groups showed that our
vaccine remained persistence at the injection sites for 10-17 weeks post
vaccination (wpv), without causing any adverse effects to the fish. The relative 
percentage of survival were 100% and 71.4% for the IP group and 88.9% and 92.3%
for the IM group at 3 and 17 wpv, respectively. Thus, considering the persistency
period (24 wpv) and both short and long-term efficacy of our vaccine, the present
study offers an option to flounder farmers in selecting either IM or IP delivery 
strategy according to their cultured fish size and harvesting schedule - IM
vaccination for small-sized fish and IP vaccination for table-sized fish.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.026 
PMID: 34696933 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

