
1. Genome Biol Evol. 2021 Nov 5;13(11). pii: evab240. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evab240.

ADAR Editing in Viruses: An Evolutionary Force to Reckon with.

Piontkivska H(1)(2)(3), Wales-McGrath B(1), Miyamoto M(4), Wayne ML(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Kent State University, Ohio, USA.
(2)School of Biomedical Sciences, Kent State University, Ohio, USA.
(3)Brain Health Research Institute, Kent State University, Ohio, USA.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.

Adenosine Deaminases that Act on RNA (ADARs) are RNA editing enzymes that play a 
dynamic and nuanced role in regulating transcriptome and proteome diversity. This
editing can be highly selective, affecting a specific site within a transcript,
or nonselective, resulting in hyperediting. ADAR editing is important for
regulating neural functions and autoimmunity, and has a key role in the innate
immune response to viral infections, where editing can have a range of pro- or
antiviral effects and can contribute to viral evolution. Here we examine the role
of ADAR editing across a broad range of viral groups. We propose that the effect 
of ADAR editing on viral replication, whether pro- or antiviral, is better viewed
as an axis rather than a binary, and that the specific position of a given virus 
on this axis is highly dependent on virus- and host-specific factors, and can
change over the course of infection. However, more research needs to be devoted
to understanding these dynamic factors and how they affect virus-ADAR
interactions and viral evolution. Another area that warrants significant
attention is the effect of virus-ADAR interactions on host-ADAR interactions,
particularly in light of the crucial role of ADAR in regulating neural functions.
Answering these questions will be essential to developing our understanding of
the relationship between ADAR editing and viral infection. In turn, this will
further our understanding of the effects of viruses such as SARS-CoV-2, as well
as many others, and thereby influence our approach to treating these deadly
diseases.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evab240 
PMCID: PMC8586724
PMID: 34694399  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

