
1. J Med Virol. 2021 Oct 26. doi: 10.1002/jmv.27419. [Epub ahead of print]

Differential expression of circulating microRNAs in serum: Potential biomarkers
to track Japanese encephalitis virus infection.

Baluni M(1), Ghildiyal S(1), Fatima T(1), Tiwari R(1), Upadhyay S(2), Dhole
TN(1), Reddy DH(3), Singh D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Medical
Sciences, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, ERA's Medical College and Hospital, Sarfarazganj, 
Uttar Pradesh, India.
(3)Department of Medicine, King George's Medical University, Lucknow, Uttar
Pradesh, India.
(4)Department of Microbiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Patna,
Bihar, India.

Japanese encephalitis is one of the serious vector-borne viral encephalitis
diseases found worldwide and poses a major threat to public health. Most Japanese
encephalitis virus (JEV) infections are subclinical; only 1: 250 to 1:1000
infected persons develop clinical presentations. Delay in proper diagnosis of JE 
affects the timeliness of treatment initiation and increases the mortality rate
in patients. Therefore, there is an extreme need to develop potential
biomarkers, which might improve the diagnosis and can become the basis for
development of new therapeutics. The microRNAs (miRNAs/or miRs) are small
noncoding RNAs of 17-24 nucleotides that are known to regulate about 60% of human
genes. Although miRNAs have been found to regulate various aspects of innate and 
adaptive immune responses, less information on circulating miRNAs in JE is known.
The study of JEV infected human serum miRNAs will provide novel information for
the diagnosis of JE as well as for the improvement of disease outcome. Total RNA,
including miRNA, was extracted from serum followed by the complementary DNA
(cDNA) synthesis by using sequence-specific primers. cDNA was amplified using
target-specific TaqMan MicroRNA Assay. Real-time polymerase chain reaction data
was normalized using both exogenous (cel-miR-39) and endogenous (hsa-miR-93)
controls. We have found significantly altered expression of miR-155 and miR-21 in
serum of JEV infected patients as compared to healthy controls, revealing their
role as a a noninvasive biomarker in JE. A significant correlation between miRNAs
and JE was observed that offers the basis for miRNAs to serve as a new component 
to develop possible therapeutic strategies for JE in near future.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.27419 
PMID: 34698413 

