
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021 Oct 24. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14351. [Epub ahead of print]

Analysis of the movement of live broilers in Guangxi, China and implications for 
avian influenza control.

Tang H(1)(2), Fournié G(3), Li J(1), Zou L(4), Shen C(1), Wang Y(1), Cai C(5),
Edwards J(1)(2), Robertson ID(2)(6), Huang B(1), Bruce M(2)(7).

Author information: 
(1)China Animal Health and Epidemiology Centre, Qingdao, China.
(2)School of Veterinary Medicine, Murdoch University, Perth, Australia.
(3)Royal Veterinary College, University of London, Hatfield, UK.
(4)Guangxi Centre of Animal Disease Prevention and Control, Nanning, China.
(5)China Australia Joint Laboratory for Animal Health Big Data Analytics, College
of Animal Science and Technology, Zhejiang Agricultural and Forestry University, 
Hangzhou, China.
(6)Hubei International Scientific and Technological Cooperation Base of
Veterinary Epidemiology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China.
(7)Centre for Biosecurity and One Health, Harry Butler Institute, Murdoch
University, Perth, Australia.

Most Chinese provinces have a daily-updated database of live animal movements;
however, the data are not efficiently utilized to support interventions to
control H7N9 and other avian influenzas. Based on official records, this study
assessed the spatio-temporal patterns of live broilers moved out of and within
Guangxi in 2017. The yearly and monthly networks were analyzed for inter- and
intra-provincial movements, respectively. Approximately 200,000 movements
occurred in 2017, involving the transport of 200 million live broilers from
Guangxi. Although Guangxi exported to 24 out of 32 provinces of China, 95% of
inter-provincial movements occurred with three bordering provinces. Within
Guangxi, counties were highly connected through the live broiler movements,
creating conditions for rapid virus spreading throughout the province.
Interestingly, a peak in movements during the Chinese Lunar New Year
celebrations, late January in 2017, was not observed in this study, likely due to
H7N9-related control measures constraining live bird trading. Both intra- and
inter-provincial movements in March 2017 were significantly higher than in other 
months of that year, suggesting that dramatic price changes may influence the
movement's network and reshape the risk pathways. However, despite these
variations, the same small proportion of counties (less than 20%)
exporting/importing more than 90% of inter- and intra-provincial movements
remains the same throughout the year. Interventions, particularly surveillance
and improving biosecurity, targeted to those counties are thus likely to be more 
effective for avian influenza risk mitigation than implemented indiscriminately. 
Additionally, simulations further demonstrated that targeting counties according 
to their degree or betweenness in the movement network would be the most
efficient way to limit disease transmission via broiler movements. The study
findings provide evidence to support the design of risk-based control
interventions for H7N9 and all other avian influenza viruses in broiler value
chains in Guangxi.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14351 
PMID: 34693647 

