
1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2021 Oct 6;14:695937. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2021.695937.
eCollection 2021.

Current and Future Prospects for Gene Therapy for Rare Genetic Diseases Affecting
the Brain and Spinal Cord.

Jensen TL(1), Gøtzsche CR(2), Woldbye DPD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Rigshospitalet University Hospital, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, University of Copenhagen,Copenhagen, Denmark.

In recent years, gene therapy has been raising hopes toward viable treatment
strategies for rare genetic diseases for which there has been almost exclusively 
supportive treatment. We here review this progress at the pre-clinical and
clinical trial levels as well as market approvals within diseases that
specifically affect the brain and spinal cord, including degenerative,
developmental, lysosomal storage, and metabolic disorders. The field reached an
unprecedented milestone when Zolgensma® (onasemnogene abeparvovec) was approved
by the FDA and EMA for in vivo adeno-associated virus-mediated gene replacement
therapy for spinal muscular atrophy. Shortly after EMA approved Libmeldy®, an ex 
vivo gene therapy with lentivirus vector-transduced autologous CD34-positive stem
cells, for treatment of metachromatic leukodystrophy. These successes could be
the first of many more new gene therapies in development that mostly target
loss-of-function mutation diseases with gene replacement (e.g., Batten disease,
mucopolysaccharidoses, gangliosidoses) or, less frequently,
gain-of-toxic-function mutation diseases by gene therapeutic silencing of
pathologic genes (e.g., amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Huntington's disease). In 
addition, the use of genome editing as a gene therapy is being explored for some 
diseases, but this has so far only reached clinical testing in the treatment of
mucopolysaccharidoses. Based on the large number of planned, ongoing, and
completed clinical trials for rare genetic central nervous system diseases, it
can be expected that several novel gene therapies will be approved and become
available within the near future. Essential for this to happen is the in depth
characterization of short- and long-term effects, safety aspects, and
pharmacodynamics of the applied gene therapy platforms.

Copyright © 2021 Jensen, Gøtzsche and Woldbye.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2021.695937 
PMCID: PMC8527017
PMID: 34690692 

Conflict of interest statement: DW is co-founder and consultant of CombiGene AB
(Lund, Sweden) and CG is employed by UCB Nordic A/S (Copenhagen, Denmark). The
remaining author declares that the research was conducted in the absence of any
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conflict of interest.

