
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2021 Oct 25. doi: 10.1111/jam.15339. [Epub ahead of print]

Virucidal efficacy of antimicrobial surface coatings against the enveloped
bacteriophage Φ6.

Calfee MW(1), Ryan SP(1), Abdel-Hady A(2), Monge M(3), Aslett D(2), Touati A(2), 
Stewart M(1), Lawrence S(4), Willis K(5).

Author information: 
(1)U.S. EPA, Office of Research and Development, Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina, USA.
(2)Jacobs Technology, Inc., Tullahoma, Tennessee, USA.
(3)CSS, Inc., Fairfax, Virginia, USA.
(4)U.S. EPA, Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution Prevention, Ft. Meade,
Maryland, USA.
(5)U.S. EPA, Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution Prevention, Washington,
District of Columbia, USA.

AIMS: Antimicrobial coatings, for use in combination with routine cleaning and
disinfection, were evaluated for their effectiveness in reducing virus
concentration on stainless steel surfaces.
METHODS: Twenty antimicrobial coating products, predominantly composed of
organosilane quaternary ammonium compounds, were applied to stainless steel
coupons, dried overnight and evaluated for efficacy against Φ6, an enveloped
bacteriophage. Additionally, two peel and stick polymer-based films, a
copper-based film and three copper alloys were evaluated. Efficacy was determined
by comparison of recoveries from uncoated (positive control) and coated (test)
surfaces.
RESULTS: The results indicated that some of the coating products initially
demonstrated >3-log reduction of Φ6; no direct correlation of efficacy was
observed with an active ingredient or its concentration. The peel and stick films
and copper alloys each demonstrated efficacy in initial testing. However, none of
the spray-based products retained efficacy after subjecting the coating to
abrasion with either a hypochlorite or quaternary ammonium-based solution applied
in accordance with EPA Interim Guidance for Evaluating the Efficacy of
Antimicrobial Surface Coatings. Of the products tested for this durability, only 
one peel and stick polymeric film retained efficacy; the copper alloys were not
tested for their durability in this study.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that while some organosilane quaternary
ammonium compound-based products demonstrate antiviral efficacy, more research
and development is needed to understand effective formulations with sufficient
durability to perform as supplements to routine cleaning and disinfection.

© 2021 Society for Applied Microbiology. This article has been contributed to by 
US Government employees and their work is in the public domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1111/jam.15339 
PMID: 34695284 

