
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 13;13(10). pii: 2054. doi: 10.3390/v13102054.

Transcriptome Analysis for Genes Associated with Small Ruminant Lentiviruses
Infection in Goats of Carpathian Breed.

Olech M(1), Ropka-Molik K(2), Szmatoła T(2)(3), Piórkowska K(2), Kuźmak J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, National Veterinary Research Institute, 24-100
Pulawy, Poland.
(2)Department of Animal Molecular Biology, National Research Institute of Animal 
Production, Krakowska 1, 32-083 Kraków, Poland.
(3)Center for Experimental and Innovative Medicine, University of Agriculture in 
Krakow, Rędzina 1c, 30-248 Kraków, Poland.

Small ruminant lentiviruses (SRLV) are economically important viral pathogens of 
sheep and goats. SRLV infection may interfere in the innate and adaptive immunity
of the host, and genes associated with resistance or susceptibility to infection 
with SRLV have not been fully recognized. The presence of animals with relatively
high and low proviral load suggests that some host factors are involved in the
control of virus replication. To better understand the role of the genes involved
in the host response to SRLV infection, RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) method was used 
to compare whole gene expression profiles in goats carrying both a high (HPL) and
low (LPL) proviral load of SRLV and uninfected animals. Data enabled the
identification of 1130 significant differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between 
control and LPL groups: 411 between control and HPL groups and 1434 DEGs between 
HPL and LPL groups. DEGs detected between the control group and groups with a
proviral load were found to be significantly enriched in several gene ontology
(GO) terms, including an integral component of membrane, extracellular region,
response to growth factor, inflammatory and innate immune response, transmembrane
signaling receptor activity, myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88
(MyD88)-dependent toll-like receptor signaling pathway as well as regulation of
cytokine secretion. Our results also demonstrated significant deregulation of
selected pathways in response to viral infection. The presence of SRLV proviral
load in blood resulted in the modification of gene expression belonging to the
toll-like receptor signaling pathway, the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) signaling
pathway, the cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, the phagosome, the Ras
signaling pathway, the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/protein kinase B
(AKT) (PI3K-Akt) signaling pathway and rheumatoid arthritis. It is worth
mentioning that the most predominant in all pathways were genes represented by
toll-like receptors, tubulins, growth factors as well as interferon gamma
receptors. DEGs detected between LPL and HPL groups were found to have
significantly enriched regulation of signaling receptor activity, the response to
toxic substances, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) dehydrogenase complex 
assembly, cytokine production, vesicle, and vacuole organization. In turn, the
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway tool classified DEGs that 
enrich molecular processes such as B and T-cell receptor signaling pathways,
natural killer cell-mediated cytotoxicity, Fc gamma R-mediated phagocytosis,
toll-like receptor signaling pathways, TNF, mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) 
signaling and forkhead box O (Foxo) signaling pathways, etc. Our data indicate
that changes in SRLV proviral load induced altered expression of genes related to
different biological processes such as immune response, inflammation, cell
locomotion, and cytokine production. These findings provide significant insights 
into defense mechanisms against SRLV infection. Furthermore, these data can be
useful to develop strategies against SRLV infection by selection of animals with 
reduced SRLV proviral concentration that may lead to a reduction in the spread of
the virus.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102054 
PMCID: PMC8538975
PMID: 34696484 

