
1. BMJ Open. 2021 Oct 25;11(10):e050584. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-050584.

Impact of COVID-19 pandemic on ethnic minority communities: a qualitative study
on the perspectives of ethnic minority community leaders.

Mahmood F(1), Acharya D(2), Kumar K(3), Paudyal V(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Institute of Clinical Sciences, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, UK.
(2)Faculty of Education, Health & Wellbeing, University of Wolverhampton,
Wolverhampton, UK.
(3)Institute of Clinical Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(4)School of Pharmacy, Institute of Clinical Sciences, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, UK V.Paudyal@bham.ac.uk.

OBJECTIVES: To explore the perspectives of ethnic minority community leaders in
relation to: the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on their communities; and their 
community's perception, understanding and adherence to government guidelines on
COVID-19 public health measures.
DESIGN: A phenomenological approach was adopted using qualitative semistructured 
interviews.
SETTINGS: Community organisations and places of worships in the West Midlands,
England.
PARTICIPANTS: Community leaders recruited through organisations representing
ethnic minority communities and religious places of worship.
RESULTS: A total of 19 participants took part. Participants alluded to historical
and structural differences for the observed disparities in COVID-19 morbidity and
mortality. Many struggled with lockdown measures which impeded cultural and
religious gatherings that were deemed to be integral to the community. Cultural
and social practices led to many suffering on their own as discussion of mental
health was still deemed a taboo within many communities. Many expressed their
community's reluctance to report symptoms for the fear of financial and physical 
health implications. They reported increase in hate crime which was deemed to be 
exacerbated due to perceived insensitive messaging from authority officials and
historical racism in the society. Access and adherence to government guidelines
was an issue for many due to language and digital barriers. Reinforcement from
trusted community and religious leaders encouraged adherence. Points of support
such as food banks were vital in ensuring essential supplies during the pandemic.
Many could not afford or have access to masks and sanitisers.
CONCLUSION: The study highlights the perceived impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on
ethnic minority communities. Government agencies and public health agencies need 
to integrate with the community, and community leaders can enable dissemination
of key messages to deliver targeted yet sensitive public health advice which
incorporates cultural and religious practices. Addressing the root causes of
disparities is imperative to mitigate current and future pandemics.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-050584 
PMCID: PMC8557242
PMID: 34697114  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

