
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2021 Oct 25;15(10):e0009837. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0009837. eCollection 2021 Oct.

Susceptibility and barriers to infection of Colorado mosquitoes with Rift Valley 
fever virus.

Hartman DA(1), Bergren NA(1), Kondash T(2), Schlatmann W(3), Webb CT(4), Kading
RC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Pathology, Colorado State
University, Fort Collins, Colorado, United States of America.
(2)Department of Environmental and Radiological Health Sciences, Colorado State
University, Fort Collins, Colorado, United States of America.
(3)Vector Disease Control International, Loveland, Colorado, United States of
America.
(4)Department of Biology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado,
United States of America.

Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV) causes morbidity and mortality in humans and
domestic ungulates in sub-Saharan Africa, Egypt, and the Arabian Peninsula.
Mosquito vectors transmit RVFV between vertebrates by bite, and also vertically
to produce infectious progeny. Arrival of RVFV into the United States by infected
mosquitoes or humans could result in significant impacts on food security, human 
health, and wildlife health. Elucidation of the vectors involved in the
post-introduction RVFV ecology is paramount to rapid implementation of vector
control. We performed vector competence experiments in which field-collected
mosquitoes were orally exposed to an epidemic strain of RVFV via infectious blood
meals. We targeted floodwater Aedes species known to feed on cattle, and/or deer 
species (Aedes melanimon Dyar, Aedes increpitus Dyar, Aedes vexans [Meigen]). Two
permanent-water-breeding species were targeted as well: Culiseta inornata
(Williston) of unknown competence considering United States populations, and
Culex tarsalis Coquillett as a control species for which transmission efficiency 
is known. We tested the potential for midgut infection, midgut escape
(dissemination), ovarian infection (vertical transmission), and transmission by
bite (infectious saliva). Tissues were assayed by plaque assay and RT-qPCR, to
quantify infectious virus and confirm virus identity. Tissue infection data were 
analyzed using a within-host model under a Bayesian framework to determine the
probabilities of infection outcomes (midgut-limited infection, disseminated
infection, etc.) while estimating barriers to infection between tissues.
Permanent-water-breeding mosquitoes (Cx. tarsalis and Cs. inornata) exhibited
more efficient horizontal transmission, as well as potential for vertical
transmission, which is contrary to the current assumptions of RVFV ecology.
Barrier estimates trended higher for Aedes spp., suggesting systemic factors in
the differences between these species and Cx. tarsalis and Cs. inornata. These
data indicate higher potential for vertical transmission than previously
appreciated, and support the consensus of RVFV transmission including a broad
range of potential vectors.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0009837 
PMCID: PMC8568276
PMID: 34695125 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

