
1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2021 Oct 4;62(13):22. doi: 10.1167/iovs.62.13.22.

Establishing an Animal Model of Cytomegalovirus Keratouveitis in Rats: Broad
Infection of Anterior Segment Tissue by Cytomegalovirus.

Zhang S(1), Zang Y(1), Lu Q(1), Ma J(1), Jiang X(2), Qu J(1), Zhang J(1), Peng
R(1), Luo M(2), Hong J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing Key
Laboratory of Restoration of Damaged Ocular Nerve, Peking University Third
Hospital, Haidian District, Beijing, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Virology, CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science
and Intelligence Technology, Center for Biosafety Mega-Science, Wuhan Institute
of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.

Purpose: Considering the difficulty of obtaining adequate biological tissue in
clinical practice, we established an animal model of cytomegalovirus (CMV)
keratouveitis in rats and investigated the viral infection sites and
corresponding imaging and histopathological features.
Methods: Subconjunctival injection and topical use of dexamethasone were used to 
induce ocular immunosuppression in rats followed by intracameral inoculation of
murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV). The clinical manifestations, intraocular pressure 
(IOP) and imaging changes were observed. Infected eyes were further examined by
immunofluorescence, light microscopy, and electron microscopy. MCMV RNA was
detected by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
Results: Typical keratouveitis occurred in the experimental rats and was
characterized by corneal edema, keratic precipitates, and iridocyclitis with
increased IOP. Corneal endothelial lesions displayed as "black holes," enlarged
intercellular gaps, and high-intensity cellular infiltration by confocal
microscopy, consistent with the pathological changes of "ballooning
degeneration," endothelial cell detachment, and inflammatory cell infiltration.
Mitochondrial edema was the most prominent organelle lesion in endothelial cells.
Trabeculitis, mechanical obstruction of Schlemm's canal, and anterior chamber
angle stenosis accounted for elevated IOP. Inflammation of the iris and ciliary
body tended to transform into a chronic form. Immunofluorescence revealed that
corneal endothelial cells, iris cells, trabecular meshwork cells, and monocytes
could be infected by MCMV. MCMV RNA was found in the anterior segments after
infection.
Conclusions: CMV can widely infect anterior segment tissue, including the corneal
endothelium, iris, and trabecular meshwork, in vivo, inducing the corresponding
clinical manifestations. Corneal endotheliitis and hypertensive anterior uveitis 
could be the specific stage of anterior segment infection of CMV.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.62.13.22 
PMCID: PMC8556561
PMID: 34698772  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

