
1. Phytopathology. 2021 Oct 26. doi: 10.1094/PHYTO-08-21-0341-R. [Epub ahead of
print]

Co-infection of tomato plants with Tomato yellow leaf curl virus and Tomato
chlorosis virus affects the interaction with host and whiteflies.

Ontiveros I(1), Lopez-Moya JJ(2), Díaz-Pendón JA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Hortofruticultura Subtropical y Mediterranea, 518806,
Plant-Microorganism-Insect Interaction, Málaga, Spain; irene.ontiveros@csic.es.
(2)Centre de Recerca en Agrigenomica, 203371, CRAG, campus UAB, Cerdanyola del
Valles, Spain, 08193; juanjose.lopez@cragenomica.es.
(3)Instituto de Hortofruticultura Subtropical y Mediterranea, 518806,
Plant-Microorganism-Insect Interaction, Málaga, Spain; diazpendon@eelm.csic.es.

Susceptible plants infected by single or multiple viruses can differ in symptoms 
and other alterations influencing virus dissemination. Furthermore, behavior of
viruliferous vectors may be altered in certain cases to favor acquisition and
inoculation processes conductive to virus transmission. We explored single and
mixed infections frequently occurring in tomato crops, caused by two viruses
transmitted by the whitefly Bemisia tabaci: Tomato yellow leaf curl virus (TYLCV,
Begomovirus, Geminiviridae) and Tomato chlorosis virus (ToCV, Crinivirus,
Closteroviridae). Co-infection of both viruses in tomato plants showed more
severe symptoms at late stages compared to single infections, although at earlier
stages the interaction began with attenuation. This asymmetric synergism
correlated with the dynamics of ToCV accumulation and expression of the salicylic
acid (SA) responsive gene PR-P6. Visual and olfactory cues in whitefly preference
were evaluated under controlled conditions in choice assays, testing viruliferous
and non-viruliferous adult whiteflies. In experiments allowing both visual and
olfactory cues, whiteflies preferred symptomatic leaflets from plants infected
either with TYLCV alone or with TYLCV andToCV, over those infected with ToCV
alone or non-infected leaflets, suggesting that TYLCV drove host selection. Odor 
cues tested in Y-tube olfactometer assays showed neutral effects on whiteflies'
preference, while bioassays comparing the attractiveness of colored sticky cards 
confirmed preference towards sectors colored to mimic TYLCV symptomatic leaves
compared with asymptomatic leaves. Our results show that the presence of
co-infecting viruses affect the host and could potentially alter the behavior of 
insect vectors.

DOI: 10.1094/PHYTO-08-21-0341-R 
PMID: 34698541 

