
1. BMJ Open. 2021 Oct 25;11(10):e049267. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-049267.

Cross-sectional examination of 24-hour movement behaviours among 3- and
4-year-old children in urban and rural settings in low-income, middle-income and 
high-income countries: the SUNRISE study protocol.

Okely T(1), Reilly JJ(2), Tremblay MS(3), Kariippanon KE(4), Draper CE(5), El
Hamdouchi A(6), Florindo AA(7), Green JP(8), Guan H(9), Katzmarzyk PT(10), Lubree
H(11), Pham BN(12), Suesse T(13), Willumsen J(14), Basheer M(15), Calleia R(15), 
Chong KH(15), Cross PL(15), Nacher M(15), Smeets L(15), Taylor E(15), Abdeta
C(16), Aguilar-Farias N(17), Baig A(18), Bayasgalan J(19), Chan CHS(20),
Chathurangana PWP(21), Chia M(22), Ghofranipour F(23), Ha AS(24), Hossain MS(25),
Janssen X(26), Jáuregui A(27), Katewongsa P(28), Kim DH(29), Kim TV(30), Koh
D(31), Kontsevaya A(32), Leyna GH(33), Löf M(34)(35), Munambah N(36), Mwase-Vuma 
T(37), Nusurupia J(33), Oluwayomi A(38), Del Pozo-Cruz B(39), Del Pozo-Cruz
J(40), Roos E(41)(42), Shirazi A(43), Singh P(44), Staiano A(10), Suherman A(45),
Tanaka C(46), Tang HK(47), Teo WP(22), Tiongco MM(48), Tladi D(49), Turab A(18), 
Veldman SLC(50), Webster EK(51), Wickramasinghe P(52), Widyastari DA(28).

Author information: 
(1)Early Start, School of Health and Society, Faculty of the Arts, Social
Sciences and Humanities, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, New South Wales,
Australia tokely@uow.edu.au.
(2)Physical Activity for Health, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, UK.
(3)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada.
(4)Early Start, School of Health and Society, Faculty of the Arts, Social
Sciences and Humanities, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, New South Wales,
Australia.
(5)MRC-Wits DPHRU, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg-Braamfontein,
South Africa.
(6)Unité Mixte de Recherche Nutrition et Alimentation, Regional Designated Center
of Nutrition Associated with AFRA/IAEA, CNESTEN-Université Ibn Tofail URAC39,
Rabat, Morocco.
(7)Universidade de Sao Paulo Escola de Artes Ciencias e Humanidades, Sao Paulo,
Brazil.
(8)Faculty of Business and Law, Australian Health Services Research Institute,
University of Wollongong, Wollongong, New South Wales, Australia.
(9)Department of Early Childhood Development, Beijing Municipal Key Laboratory of
Child Development and Nutriomics, Capital Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing,
China.
(10)Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, USA.
(11)Vadu Rural Health Program, KEM Hospital Pune Research Centre, Pune, India.
(12)Population Health and Demography Unit, PNG Institute of Medical Research,
Goroka, Papua New Guinea.
(13)National Institute for Applied Statistics Research Australia, School of
Mathematics and Applied Statistics, Faculty of Engineering and Information
Sciences, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, New South Wales, Australia.
(14)Department for Prevention of Non-Communicable Diseases, WHO, Geneve,
Switzerland.
(15)Early Start, Faculty of the Arts, Social Sciences and Humanities, University 
of Wollongong, Wollongong, New South Wales, Australia.
(16)Hiwot Fana Specialized University Hospital, Harar, Ethiopia.
(17)Department of Physical Education, Sports and Recreation, Universidad de La
Frontera, Temuco, Chile.
(18)Precision Health Consultants (PHC Global), Karachi, Pakistan.
(19)National Centre for Public Health, Mongolia Ministry of Health, Ulaanbaatar, 
Mongolia.
(20)Department of Sports Science and Physical Education, Faculty of Education,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(21)Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Colombo,
Colombo, Sri Lanka.
(22)National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
(23)Health Education, School of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University,
Tehran, Iran.
(24)Department of Sports Science and Physical Education, The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(25)Biomedical Research Foundation, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(26)School of Psychological Sciences and Health, University of Strathclyde,
Glasgow, UK.
(27)Department of Physical Activity and Healthy Lifestyles, Center for Nutrition 
and Health Research, National Institute of Public Health, Cuernavaca, Mexico.
(28)Thailand Physical Activity Knowledge Development Centre, Institute for
Population and Social Research, Mahidol University, Salaya, Thailand.
(29)Korea Institute of Child Care and Education, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(30)Department of Epidemiology, Faculty of Public Health, Pham Ngoc Thach
University of Medicine, Ho Chi Minh City, Viet Nam.
(31)Centre of Community Education and Well-being, Faculty of Education,
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Bangi, Malaysia.
(32)National Medical Research Centre for Therapy and Preventive Medicine, Moscow,
Russia.
(33)Tanzania Food and Nutrition Centre, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(34)Department of Health, Medicine och Caring Sciences, Linköping University,
Linkoping, Sweden.
(35)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
Sweden.
(36)Rehabilitation Sciences Unit, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
University of Zimbabwe, Harare, Zimbabwe.
(37)Centre for Social Research, University of Malawi, Zomba, Malawi.
(38)Human Kinetics and Health Education, University of Lagos, Akoka, Nigeria.
(39)Department of Sport Science and Clinical Biomechanics, University of Southern
Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
(40)Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla, Spain.
(41)Folkhalsen Research Centre, Helsinki, Finland.
(42)Department of Food and Environmental Sciences, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland.
(43)Faculty of Business, University of Wollongong, Dubai, UAE.
(44)School of Public Health and Primary Care, CMNHS, Fiji National University,
Nasinu, Fiji.
(45)Faculty of Sport and Health Education, Universitas Pendidikan Indonesia,
Bandung, Indonesia.
(46)College of Health and Welfare, J F Oberlin University, Machida, Japan.
(47)Pham Ngoc Thach University of Medicine, Ho Chi Minh City, Viet Nam.
(48)School of Economics, De la Salle University, Manila, Philippines.
(49)Department of Sport Science, Faculty of Education, University of Botswana,
Gaborone, Botswana.
(50)Department of Public and Occupational Health, Amsterdam Public Health
Research Institute, Amsterdam University Medical Center, Vrije Universiteit
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(51)Institute of Public and Preventive Health, Augusta University, Augusta,
Georgia, USA.
(52)Faculty of Medicine, University of Colombo, Colombo, Sri Lanka.

INTRODUCTION: 24-hour movement behaviours (physical activity, sedentary behaviour
and sleep) during the early years are associated with health and developmental
outcomes, prompting the WHO to develop Global guidelines for physical activity,
sedentary behaviour and sleep for children under 5 years of age. Prevalence data 
on 24-hour movement behaviours is lacking, particularly in low-income and
middle-income countries (LMICs). This paper describes the development of the
SUNRISE International Study of Movement Behaviours in the Early Years protocol,
designed to address this gap.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: SUNRISE is the first international cross-sectional study
that aims to determine the proportion of 3- and 4-year-old children who meet the 
WHO Global guidelines. The study will assess if proportions differ by gender,
urban/rural location and/or socioeconomic status. Executive function, motor
skills and adiposity will be assessed and potential correlates of 24-hour
movement behaviours examined. Pilot research from 24 countries (14 LMICs)
informed the study design and protocol. Data are collected locally by research
staff from partnering institutions who are trained throughout the research
process. Piloting of all measures to determine protocol acceptability and
feasibility was interrupted by COVID-19 but is nearing completion. At the time of
publication 41 countries are participating in the SUNRISE study.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: The SUNRISE protocol has received ethics approved from 
the University of Wollongong, Australia, and in each country by the applicable
ethics committees. Approval is also sought from any relevant government
departments or organisations. The results will inform global efforts to prevent
childhood obesity and ensure young children reach their health and developmental 
potential. Findings on the correlates of movement behaviours can guide future
interventions to improve the movement behaviours in culturally specific ways.
Study findings will be disseminated via publications, conference presentations
and may contribute to the development of local guidelines and public health
interventions.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-049267 
PMCID: PMC8547512
PMID: 34697112  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

