
1. Adv Parasitol. 2021;114:1-26. doi: 10.1016/bs.apar.2021.08.007. Epub 2021 Oct 11.

Towards global control of parasitic diseases in the Covid-19 era: One Health and 
the future of multisectoral global health governance.

Ung L(1), Stothard JR(2), Phalkey R(3), Azman AS(4), Chodosh J(5), Hanage WP(6), 
Standley CJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Institute, Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, United States; Department of Ophthalmology, Massachusetts Eye
and Ear, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States; Department of
Epidemiology and Center for Communicable Disease Dynamics, Harvard T. H. Chan
School of Public Health, Boston, MA, United States.
(2)Department of Tropical Disease Biology, Center for Neglected Tropical
Diseases, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(3)Division of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Nottingham,
Nottingham, United Kingdom; Heidelberg Institute of Global Health, University of 
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Baltimore, MD, United States; Institute of Global Health, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(5)Infectious Disease Institute, Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, United States; Department of Ophthalmology, Massachusetts Eye
and Ear, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.
(6)Department of Epidemiology and Center for Communicable Disease Dynamics,
Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, United States. Electronic
address: whanage@hsph.harvard.edu.
(7)Heidelberg Institute of Global Health, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg,
Germany; Center for Global Health Science and Security, Georgetown University,
Washington, DC, United States. Electronic address:
claire.standley@georgetown.edu.

Human parasitic infections-including malaria, and many neglected tropical
diseases (NTDs)-have long represented a Gordian knot in global public health:
ancient, persistent, and exceedingly difficult to control. With the coronavirus
disease (Covid-19) pandemic substantially interrupting control programmes
worldwide, there are now mounting fears that decades of progress in controlling
global parasitic infections will be undone. With Covid-19 moreover exposing deep 
vulnerabilities in the global health system, the current moment presents a
watershed opportunity to plan future efforts to reduce the global morbidity and
mortality associated with human parasitic infections. In this chapter, we first
provide a brief epidemiologic overview of the progress that has been made towards
the control of parasitic diseases between 1990 and 2019, contrasting these
fragile gains with the anticipated losses as a result of Covid-19. We then argue 
that the complementary aspirations of the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs) and the World Health Organization (WHO)'s 2030 targets for parasitic
disease control may be achieved by aligning programme objectives within the One
Health paradigm, recognizing the interdependence between humans, animals, and the
environment. In so doing, we note that while the WHO remains the preeminent
international institution to address some of these transdisciplinary concerns,
its underlying challenges with funding, authority, and capacity are likely to
reverberate if left unaddressed. To this end, we conclude by reimagining how
models of multisectoral global health governance-combining the WHO's normative
and technical leadership with greater support in allied policy-making areas-can
help sustain future malaria and NTD elimination efforts.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.apar.2021.08.007 
PMCID: PMC8503781
PMID: 34696842  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures The authors have no disclosures or
financial conflicts of interest to declare.

