
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Oct 25;17(10):e1009726. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009726.
eCollection 2021 Oct.

S-farnesylation is essential for antiviral activity of the long ZAP isoform
against RNA viruses with diverse replication strategies.

Kmiec D(1), Lista MJ(1), Ficarelli M(1), Swanson CM(1), Neil SJD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, King's College London, London, United
Kingdom.

The zinc finger antiviral protein (ZAP) is a broad inhibitor of virus
replication. Its best-characterized function is to bind CpG dinucleotides present
in viral RNAs and, through the recruitment of TRIM25, KHNYN and other cofactors, 
target them for degradation or prevent their translation. The long and short
isoforms of ZAP (ZAP-L and ZAP-S) have different intracellular localization and
it is unclear how this regulates their antiviral activity against viruses with
different sites of replication. Using ZAP-sensitive and ZAP-insensitive human
immunodeficiency virus type I (HIV-1), which transcribe the viral RNA in the
nucleus and assemble virions at the plasma membrane, we show that the
catalytically inactive poly-ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP) domain in ZAP-L is
essential for CpG-specific viral restriction. Mutation of a crucial cysteine in
the C-terminal CaaX box that mediates S-farnesylation and, to a lesser extent,
the residues in place of the catalytic site triad within the PARP domain,
disrupted the activity of ZAP-L. Addition of the CaaX box to ZAP-S partly
restored antiviral activity, explaining why ZAP-S lacks antiviral activity for
CpG-enriched HIV-1 despite conservation of the RNA-binding domain. Confocal
microscopy confirmed the CaaX motif mediated localization of ZAP-L to vesicular
structures and enhanced physical association with intracellular membranes.
Importantly, the PARP domain and CaaX box together jointly modulate the
interaction between ZAP-L and its cofactors TRIM25 and KHNYN, implying that its
proper subcellular localisation is required to establish an antiviral complex.
The essential contribution of the PARP domain and CaaX box to ZAP-L antiviral
activity was further confirmed by inhibition of severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) replication, which replicates in double-membrane
vesicles derived from the endoplasmic reticulum. Thus, compartmentalization of
ZAP-L on intracellular membranes provides an essential effector function in
ZAP-L-mediated antiviral activity against divergent viruses with different
subcellular replication sites.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009726 
PMCID: PMC8568172
PMID: 34695163  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

