
1. Int Nurs Rev. 2021 Dec;68(4):557-562. doi: 10.1111/inr.12725. Epub 2021 Oct 25.

Virtual learning experiences in population health nursing course during the
COVID-19 pandemic.

Manakatt BM(1), Carson ZW(1), Penton RL(1), Demello AS(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, The University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas,
USA.

AIM: To discuss the virtual learning strategies used in population health nursing
course during the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic.
BACKGROUND: The School of Nursing faculty in a South Central University in the
United States quickly combined innovation with digital resources and transitioned
a course in population health during the COVID-19 pandemic. Nursing faculty were 
challenged to develop student nursing objectives in assessment, planning,
intervention and evaluation of vulnerable populations in the community through a 
virtual environment.
REFLECTIONS OF POPULATION HEALTH NURSING CLINICAL EDUCATION: The experiences of
five clinical groups are described, covering adults with disabilities, older
people, patients with COVID-19 and youth populations.
DISCUSSION: The course objectives were met through use of a digital environment. 
Collaborative interventions were designed and implemented with community
stakeholders while maintaining social distancing policies. Successes included
increased frequency of communication and learning opportunities for students and 
the community, and student satisfaction. Barriers to student learning were not
related to the digital learning environment, although the older adults required
modifications to use electronic devices.
CONCLUSION: Virtual classrooms are a viable platform to teach population health
nursing and to benefit vulnerable populations.
IMPLICATIONS FOR NURSING PRACTICE: Virtual learning offers benefits within
academia and the community. Technology offers the possibility to improve mental
health among older people and enhance knowledge among the general population.
Students are better able to connect with clinical faculty and stakeholders
through digital platforms.
IMPLICATIONS FOR NURSING POLICY: Nurses play a vital role in improving population
health and can collaborate with community stakeholders to implement innovative
and sustainable solutions to nursing education, practices and policy. Digital
platforms can enhance the involvement of students through these collaborations
during and after the pandemic.

© 2021 International Council of Nurses.

DOI: 10.1111/inr.12725 
PMID: 34697806  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

