
1. J Mol Biol. 2021 Oct 22:167327. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.167327. [Epub ahead of
print]

Viral Modulation of the DNA Damage Response and Innate Immunity: Two Sides of the
Same Coin.

Lopez A(1), Nichols Doyle R(2), Sandoval C(1), Nisson K(1), Yang V(1), Fregoso
OI(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Molecular Biology Institute, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Molecular Biology Institute, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic address: ofregoso@mednet.ucla.edu.

The DDR consists of multiple pathways that sense, signal, and respond to
anomalous DNA. To promote efficient replication, viruses have evolved to engage
and even modulate the DDR. In this review, we will discuss a select set of
diverse viruses and the range of mechanisms they evolved to interact with the DDR
and some of the subsequent cellular consequences. There is a dichotomy in that
the DDR can be both beneficial for viruses yet antiviral. We will also review the
connection between the DDR and innate immunity. Previously believed to be
disparate cellular functions, more recent research is emerging that links these
processes. Furthermore, we will discuss some discrepancies in the literature that
we propose can be remedied by utilizing more consistent DDR-focused assays. By
doing so, we hope to obtain a much clearer understanding of how broadly these
mechanisms and phenotypes are conserved among all viruses. This is crucial for
human health since understanding how viruses manipulate the DDR presents an
important and tractable target for antiviral therapies.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.167327 
PMID: 34695379 

