
1. Int J Radiat Biol. 2021 Nov 12:1-18. doi: 10.1080/09553002.2021.1998709. [Epub
ahead of print]

Improved radiation expression profiling in blood by sequential application of
sensitive and specific gene signatures.

Mucaki EJ(1), Shirley BC(2), Rogan PK(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada.
(2)CytoGnomix Inc., London, Canada.

PURPOSE: Combinations of expressed genes can discriminate radiation-exposed from 
normal control blood samples by machine learning (ML) based signatures (with
8-20% misclassification rates). These signatures can quantify therapeutically
relevant as well as accidental radiation exposures. The prodromal symptoms of
acute radiation syndrome (ARS) overlap those present in influenza and dengue
fever infections. Surprisingly, these human radiation signatures misclassified
gene expression profiles of virally infected samples as false positive exposures.
The present study investigates these and other confounders, and then mitigates
their impact on signature accuracy.
METHODS: This study investigated recall by previous and novel radiation
signatures independently derived from multiple Gene Expression Omnibus datasets
on common and rare non-neoplastic blood disorders and blood-borne infections
(thromboembolism, S. aureus bacteremia, malaria, sickle cell disease,
polycythemia vera, and aplastic anemia). Normalized expression levels of
signature genes are used as input to ML-based classifiers to predict radiation
exposure in other hematological conditions.
RESULTS: Except for aplastic anemia, these blood-borne disorders modify the
normal baseline expression values of genes present in radiation signatures,
leading to false-positive misclassification of radiation exposures in 8-54% of
individuals. Shared changes, predominantly in DNA damage response and
apoptosis-related gene transcripts in radiation and confounding hematological
conditions, compromise the utility of these signatures for radiation assessment. 
These confounding conditions (sickle cell disease, thrombosis, S. aureus
bacteremia, malaria) induce neutrophil extracellular traps, initiated by
chromatin decondensation, DNA damage response and fragmentation followed by
programmed cell death or extrusion of DNA fragments. Riboviral infections (e.g.
influenza or dengue fever) have been proposed to bind and deplete host RNA
binding proteins, inducing R-loops in chromatin. R-loops that collide with
incoming replication forks can result in incompletely repaired DNA damage,
inducing apoptosis and releasing mature virus. To mitigate the effects of
confounders, we evaluated predicted radiation-positive samples with novel gene
expression signatures derived from radiation-responsive transcripts encoding
secreted blood plasma proteins whose expression levels are unperturbed by these
conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: This approach identifies and eliminates misclassified samples with
underlying hematological or infectious conditions, leaving only samples with true
radiation exposures. Diagnostic accuracy is significantly improved by selecting
genes that maximize both sensitivity and specificity in the appropriate tissue
using combinations of the best signatures for each of these classes of
signatures.

DOI: 10.1080/09553002.2021.1998709 
PMID: 34699300 

