
1. Ann Hepatol. 2021 Oct 23:100568. doi: 10.1016/j.aohep.2021.100568. [Epub ahead of
print]

Direct-acting antiviral agents and risk of Hepatocellular carcinoma: Critical
appraisal of the evidence.

Celsa C(1), Stornello C(2), Giuffrida P(2), Giacchetto CM(2), Grova M(2),
Rancatore G(2), Pitrone C(3), Di Marco V(2), Cammà C(4), Cabibbo G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Health Promotion,
Mother and Child Care, Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties, PROMISE,
University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy; Department of Surgical, Oncological and
Oral Sciences (Di.Chir.On.S.), University of Palermo, Palermo, Sicilia, Italy.
(2)Section of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Health Promotion,
Mother and Child Care, Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties, PROMISE,
University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(3)Section of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Health Promotion,
Mother and Child Care, Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties, PROMISE,
University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy; Division of Medicine and Hepatology,
University Hospital of Messina, Messina, Italy.
(4)Section of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Health Promotion,
Mother and Child Care, Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties, PROMISE,
University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy. Electronic address:
calogero.camma@unipa.it.

Direct-acting antivirals (DAAs) revolutionized the treatment of chronic
HCV-related disease achieving high rates of sustained virological response (SVR),
even in advanced cirrhosis, with modest contraindications and a low rate of
adverse events. However, the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) persists due 
to the underlying chronic liver disease, both in patients with and without
history of HCC. Although some initial studies reported a presumptive high risk of
HCC development after DAA therapy, more recent observational studies denied this 
hypothesis. The residual risk for HCC occurrence after HCV eradication seems
being progressively reduced with time after SVR. Data on recurrence of HCC after 
DAA exposure in patients with previously treated carcinoma initially reported
conflicting results too, this being also due to methodological issues in analysis
of retrospective multicenter studies. Anyway, current evidence support the use of
DAAs in HCV-HCC treated patients, without any higher risk of tumor recurrence
linked to antiviral therapy. Less effort has been made to evaluate the efficacy
of DAA therapy in patients with untreated active HCC and it has been questioned
whether a lower rate of SVR would be obtained among patients with active HCC.
Studies conducted in this perspective concluded that HCC status does not
influence the likelihood to obtain SVR with DAAs, making DAAs appropriate in
HCC-active patients. As far as survival is concerned, recent studies conducted in
cirrhotic HCV-related early-stage HCC found that DAAs improved overall survival, 
a benefit probably due to the reduction of hepatic decompensation.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier España, S.L.U.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aohep.2021.100568 
PMID: 34699987 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest Authors have nothing to
disclose.

