
1. ALTEX. 2021;38(4):535-549. doi: 10.14573/altex.2110131.

COVID-19 - prime time for microphysiological systems, as illustrated for the
brain.

Kang I(1), Smirnova L(1), Kuhn JH(2), Hogberg HT(1), Kleinstreuer NC(3), Hartung 
T(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Alternatives to Animal Testing (CAAT), Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Integrated Research Facility at Fort Detrick (IRF-Frederick), National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of
Health (NIH), Fort Detrick, Frederick, MD, USA.
(3)National Toxicology Program Interagency Center for the Evaluation of
Alternative Toxicological Methods (NICEATM), National Institute of Environmental 
Health Sciences (NIEHS), National Institutes of Health, RTP, NC, USA.
(4)CAAT-Europe, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany.

The development of therapies for and preventions against infectious diseases
depends on the availability of disease models. Bioengineering of human organoids 
and organs-on-chips is one extremely promising avenue of research. These
miniature, laboratory-grown organ systems have been broadly used during the
ongoing, unprecedented coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic to show the many
effects of the etiologic agent, severe acute respiratory coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) on human organs. In contrast, exposure of most animals either did
not result in infection or caused mild clinical signs - not the severe course of 
the infection suffered by many humans. This article illuminates the opportunities
of microphysiological systems (MPS) to study COVID-19 in vitro, with a focus on
brain cell infection and its translational rel-evance to COVID-19 effects on the 
human brain. Neurovirulence of SARS-CoV-2 has been reproduced in different types 
of human brain organoids by 10 groups, consistently showing infection of a small 
portion of brain cells accompanied by limited viral replication. This mirrors
increasingly recognized neurological manifestations in COVID-19 patients
(evidence of virus infection and brain-specific antibody formation in brain
tissue and cerebrospinal fluid). The pathogenesis of neuro-logical signs, their
long-term consequences, and possible interventions remain unclear, but future MPS
technologies offer prospects to address these open questions.

DOI: 10.14573/altex.2110131 
PMID: 34698363  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

