
1. ACS Nano. 2021 Oct 25. doi: 10.1021/acsnano.1c06813. [Epub ahead of print]

Functional Infectious Nanoparticle Detector: Finding Viruses by Detecting Their
Host Entry Functions Using Organic Bioelectronic Devices.

Tang T(1), Savva A(2), Traberg WC(2), Xu C(1), Thiburce Q(3), Liu HY(1), Pappa
AM(2), Martinelli E(2), Withers A(2), Cornelius M(2), Salleo A(3), Owens RM(2),
Daniel S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Robert F. Smith School of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Cornell
University, Olin Hall, Ithaca, New York 14853, United States.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, University of Cambridge,
Philippa Fawcett Drive, CB30AS Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Stanford University, 496
Lomita Mall, Stanford, California 94305, United States.

Emerging viruses will continue to be a threat to human health and wellbeing into 
the foreseeable future. The COVID-19 pandemic revealed the necessity for rapid
viral sensing and inhibitor screening in mitigating viral spread and impact.
Here, we present a platform that uses a label-free electronic readout as well as 
a dual capability of optical (fluorescence) readout to sense the ability of a
virus to bind and fuse with a host cell membrane, thereby sensing viral entry.
This approach introduces a hitherto unseen level of specificity by distinguishing
fusion-competent viruses from fusion-incompetent viruses. The ability to discern 
between competent and incompetent viruses means that this device could also be
used for applications beyond detection, such as screening antiviral compounds for
their ability to block virus entry mechanisms. Using optical means, we first
demonstrate the ability to recapitulate the entry processes of influenza virus
using a biomembrane containing the viral receptor that has been functionalized on
a transparent organic bioelectronic device. Next, we detect virus membrane
fusion, using the same, label-free devices. Using both reconstituted and native
cell membranes as materials to functionalize organic bioelectronic devices,
configured as electrodes and transistors, we measure changes in membrane
properties when virus fusion is triggered by a pH drop, inducing hemagglutinin to
undergo a conformational change that leads to membrane fusion.

DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.1c06813 
PMID: 34694775 

