
1. Cell Microbiol. 2021 Oct 25:e13398. doi: 10.1111/cmi.13398. [Epub ahead of print]

Entry of the Varicellovirus Canid herpesvirus 1 into Madin-Darby canine kidney
epithelial cells is pH-independent and occurs via a macropinocytosis-like
mechanism but without increase in fluid uptake.

Eisa M(1), Loucif H(1), van Grevenynghe J(1), Pearson A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre Armand-Frappier Santé Biotechnologie, Institut National de la Recherche
Scientifique (INRS), Laval, Québec, Canada.

Canid herpesvirus 1 (CHV-1) is a Varicellovirus that causes self-limiting
infections in adult dogs but morbidity and mortality in puppies. Using a
multipronged approach, we discovered the CHV-1 entry pathway into Madin-Darby
canine kidney (MDCK) epithelial cells. We found that CHV-1 triggered extensive
host cell membrane lamellipodial ruffling and rapid internalisation of virions in
large, uncoated vacuoles, suggestive of macropinocytosis. Treatment with
inhibitors targeting key macropinocytosis factors, including inhibitors of Na+
/H+ exchangers, F-actin, myosin light-chain kinase, protein kinase C,
p21-activated kinase, phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase and focal adhesion kinase,
significantly reduced viral replication. Moreover, the effect was restricted to
exposure to the inhibitors early in infection, confirming a role for the
macropinocytic machinery during entry. The profile of inhibitors also suggested a
role for signalling via integrins and receptor tyrosine kinases in viral entry.
In contrast, inhibitors of clathrin, caveolin, microtubules and endosomal
acidification did not affect CHV-1 entry into MDCK cells. We found that the virus
colocalised with the fluid-phase uptake marker dextran; however, surprisingly,
CHV-1 infection did not enhance the uptake of dextran. Thus, our results indicate
that CHV-1 uses a macropinocytosis-like, pH-independent entry pathway into MDCK
cells, which nevertheless is not based on stimulation of fluid uptake. TAKE
AWAYS: CHV-1 enters epithelial cells via a macropinocytosis-like mechanism. CHV-1
induces extensive lamellipodial ruffling. CHV-1 entry into MDCK cells is
pH-independent.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.13398 
PMID: 34697890 

