
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 25;16(10):e0259070. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259070.
eCollection 2021.

SARS-CoV-2 infection in central North Carolina: Protocol for a population-based
longitudinal cohort study and preliminary participant results.

Miller EM(1), Law EA(1), Ajeen R(1), Karasik J(1), Mendoza C(1), Abernathy H(2), 
Garrett H(1), King E(2), Wallace J(3), Zelek M(4), Edwards JK(1), Xiong K(1),
Beatty C(1), Fleischauer AT(5)(6), Ciccone EJ(7), Shook-Sa BE(8), Aiello
AE(1)(9), Boyce RM(1)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States of
America.
(2)Institute of Global Health and Infectious Diseases, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States of America.
(3)North Carolina Institute of Public Health, Gillings School of Global Public
Health, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United
States of America.
(4)Chatham County Public Health Department, Pittsboro, NC, United States of
America.
(5)Division of State and Local Readiness, United States Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, United States of America.
(6)Epidemiology Branch, North Carolina Department of Health and Human Services,
Raleigh, NC, United States of America.
(7)Division of Infectious Diseases, School of Medicine, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States of America.
(8)Department of Biostatistics, Gillings School of Global Public Health,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States of
America.
(9)Carolina Population Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, NC, United States of America.

Public health surveillance systems likely underestimate the true prevalence and
incidence of SARS-CoV-2 infection due to limited access to testing and the high
proportion of subclinical infections in community-based settings. This ongoing
prospective, observational study aimed to generate accurate estimates of the
prevalence and incidence of, and risk factors for, SARS-CoV-2 infection among
residents of a central North Carolina county. From this cohort, we collected
survey data and nasal swabs every two weeks and venous blood specimens every
month. Nasal swabs were tested for the presence of SARS-CoV-2 virus (evidence of 
active infection), and serum specimens for SARS-CoV-2-specific antibodies
(evidence of prior infection). As of June 23, 2021, we have enrolled a total of
153 participants from a county with an estimated 76,285 total residents. The
anticipated study duration is at least 24 months, pending the evolution of the
pandemic. Study data are being shared on a monthly basis with North Carolina
state health authorities and future analyses aim to compare study data to
state-wide metrics over time. Overall, the use of a probability-based sampling
design and a well-characterized cohort will enable collection of critical data
that can be used in planning and policy decisions for North Carolina and may be
informative for other states with similar demographic characteristics.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259070 
PMCID: PMC8544868
PMID: 34695156  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

