
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 6;12:734246. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.734246. eCollection 
2021.

Depletion of T cells via Inducible Caspase 9 Increases Safety of Adoptive T-Cell 
Therapy Against Chronic Hepatitis B.

Klopp A(1)(2)(3), Schreiber S(1)(2), Kosinska AD(1)(2)(3), Pulé M(4), Protzer
U(1)(2)(3), Wisskirchen K(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Institute of Virology, Technical University of Munich,
Munich, Germany.
(2)Institute of Virology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany.
(3)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Munich Partner Site, Munich,
Germany.
(4)Department of Haematology, Cancer Institute, University College London,
London, United Kingdom.

T-cell therapy with T cells that are re-directed to hepatitis B virus
(HBV)-infected cells by virus-specific receptors is a promising therapeutic
approach for treatment of chronic hepatitis B and HBV-associated cancer. Due to
the high number of target cells, however, side effects such as cytokine release
syndrome or hepatotoxicity may limit safety. A safeguard mechanism, which allows 
depletion of transferred T cells on demand, would thus be an interesting means to
increase confidence in this approach. In this study, T cells were generated by
retroviral transduction to express either an HBV-specific chimeric antigen
receptor (S-CAR) or T-cell receptor (TCR), and in addition either inducible
caspase 9 (iC9) or herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase (HSV-TK) as a safety
switch. Real-time cytotoxicity assays using HBV-replicating hepatoma cells as
targets revealed that activation of both safety switches stopped cytotoxicity of 
S-CAR- or TCR-transduced T cells within less than one hour. In vivo, induction of
iC9 led to a strong and rapid reduction of transferred S-CAR T cells adoptively
transferred into AAV-HBV-infected immune incompetent mice. One to six hours after
injection of the iC9 dimerizer, over 90% reduction of S-CAR T cells in the blood 
and the spleen and of over 99% in the liver was observed, thereby limiting
hepatotoxicity and stopping cytokine secretion. Simultaneously, however, the
antiviral effect of S-CAR T cells was diminished because remaining S-CAR T cells 
were mostly non-functional and could not be restimulated with HBsAg. A second
induction of iC9 was only able to deplete T cells in the liver. In conclusion, T 
cells co-expressing iC9 and HBV-specific receptors efficiently recognize and kill
HBV-replicating cells. Induction of T-cell death via iC9 proved to be an
efficient means to deplete transferred T cells in vitro and in vivo containing
unwanted hepatotoxicity.

Copyright © 2021 Klopp, Schreiber, Kosinska, Pulé, Protzer and Wisskirchen.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.734246 
PMCID: PMC8527178
PMID: 34691041 

Conflict of interest statement: KW and UP are co-founders and shareholders of SCG
Cell Therapy Pte. Ltd. KW is partially employed by SCG Cell Therapy GmbH. The
remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conflict of interest.

