
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Oct 15;9(10). pii: 1189. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9101189.

Novel Recombinant Newcastle Disease Virus-Based In Ovo Vaccines Bypass Maternal
Immunity to Provide Full Protection from Early Virulent Challenge.

Dimitrov KM(1)(2), Taylor TL(1), Marcano VC(1), Williams-Coplin D(1), Olivier
TL(1), Yu Q(3), Gogal RM Jr(4), Suarez DL(1), Afonso CL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Exotic and Emerging Avian Viral Disease Research Unit, Southeast Poultry
Research Laboratory, US National Poultry Research Center, ARS, USDA, 934 College 
Station Road, Athens, GA 30605, USA.
(2)Texas A&M Veterinary Medical Diagnostic Laboratory, 483 Agronomy Road, College
Station, TX 77843, USA.
(3)Endemic Poultry Viral Diseases Research Unit, Southeast Poultry Research
Laboratory, US National Poultry Research Center, ARS, USDA, 934 College Station
Road, Athens, GA 30605, USA.
(4)Department of Veterinary Biosciences & Diagnostic Imaging, College of
Veterinary Medicine, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.

Newcastle disease (ND) is one of the most economically important poultry
diseases. Despite intensive efforts with current vaccination programs, this
disease still occurs worldwide, causing significant mortality even in vaccinated 
flocks. This has been partially attributed to a gap in immunity during the
post-hatch period due to the presence of maternal antibodies that negatively
impact the replication of the commonly used live vaccines. In ovo vaccines have
multiple advantages and present an opportunity to address this problem. Currently
employed in ovo ND vaccines are recombinant herpesvirus of turkeys (HVT)-vectored
vaccines expressing Newcastle disease virus (NDV) antigens. Although proven
efficient, these vaccines have some limitations, such as delayed immunogenicity
and the inability to administer a second HVT vaccine post-hatch. The use of live 
ND vaccines for in ovo vaccination is currently not applicable, as these are
associated with high embryo mortality. In this study, recombinant NDV-vectored
experimental vaccines containing an antisense sequence of avian interleukin 4
(IL4R) and their backbones were administered in ovo at different doses in
18-day-old commercial eggs possessing high maternal antibodies titers. The
hatched birds were challenged with virulent NDV at 2 weeks-of-age. Post-hatch
vaccine shedding, post-challenge survival, challenge virus shedding, and humoral 
immune responses were evaluated at multiple timepoints. Recombinant NDV (rNDV)
vaccinated birds had significantly reduced post-hatch mortality compared with the
wild-type LaSota vaccine. All rNDV vaccines were able to penetrate maternal
immunity and induce a strong early humoral immune response. Further, the rNDV
vaccines provided protection from clinical disease and significantly decreased
virus shedding after early virulent NDV challenge at two weeks post-hatch. The
post-challenge hemagglutination-inhibition antibody titers in the vaccinated
groups remained comparable with the pre-challenge titers, suggesting the capacity
of the studied vaccines to prevent efficient replication of the challenge virus. 
Post-hatch survival after vaccination with the rNDV-IL4R vaccines was
dose-dependent, with an increase in survival as the dose decreased. This improved
survival and the dose-dependency data suggest that novel attenuated in ovo
rNDV-based vaccines that are able to penetrate maternal immunity to elicit a
strong immune response as early as 14 days post-hatch, resulting in high or full 
protection from virulent challenge, show promise as a contributor to the control 
of Newcastle disease.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9101189 
PMCID: PMC8538074
PMID: 34696297 

