
1. Stat Med. 2021 Oct 25. doi: 10.1002/sim.9238. [Epub ahead of print]

Optimal diagnostic test allocation strategy during the COVID-19 pandemic and
beyond.

Du J(1), J Beesley L(1), Lee S(2), Zhou X(1), Dempsey W(1), Mukherjee B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(2)Graduate School of Data Science, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of
Korea.

Timely diagnostic testing for active SARS-CoV-2 viral infections is key to
controlling the spread of the virus and preventing severe disease. A central
public health challenge is defining test allocation strategies with limited
resources. In this paper, we provide a mathematical framework for defining an
optimal strategy for allocating viral diagnostic tests. The framework accounts
for imperfect test results, selective testing in certain high-risk patient
populations, practical constraints in terms of budget and/or total number of
available tests, and the purpose of testing. Our method is not only useful for
detecting infections, but can also be used for long-time surveillance to detect
new outbreaks. In our proposed approach, tests can be allocated across population
strata defined by symptom severity and other patient characteristics, allowing
the test allocation plan to prioritize higher risk patient populations. We
illustrate our framework using historical data from the initial wave of the
COVID-19 outbreak in New York City. We extend our proposed method to address the 
challenge of allocating two different types of diagnostic tests with different
costs and accuracy, for example, the RT-PCR and the rapid antigen test (RAT),
under budget constraints. We show how this latter framework can be useful to
reopening of college campuses where university administrators are challenged with
finite resources for community surveillance. We provide a R Shiny web application
allowing users to explore test allocation strategies across a variety of pandemic
scenarios. This work can serve as a useful tool for guiding public health
decision-making at a community level and adapting testing plans to different
stages of an epidemic. The conceptual framework has broader relevance beyond the 
current COVID-19 pandemic.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/sim.9238 
PMID: 34697824 

