
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 26;16(10):e0258774. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258774.
eCollection 2021.

A bioinformatics pipeline for Mycobacterium tuberculosis sequencing that cleans
contaminant reads from sputum samples.

Cuevas-Córdoba B(1)(2), Fresno C(3), Haase-Hernández JI(3), Barbosa-Amezcua M(1),
Mata-Rocha M(1), Muñoz-Torrico M(4), Salazar-Lezama MA(4), Martínez-Orozco JA(4),
Narváez-Díaz LA(4), Salas-Hernández J(4), González-Covarrubias V(1), Soberón
X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Farmacogenómica, Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genómica
(INMEGEN), Ciudad de México, México.
(2)Instituto de Investigaciones Biológicas, Universidad Veracruzana, Xalapa,
Veracruz, México.
(3)Departamento de Desarrollo Tecnológico, Instituto Nacional de Medicina
Genómica (INMEGEN), Ciudad de México, México.
(4)Clínica de Tuberculosis y Enfermedades Pleurales, Instituto Nacional de
Enfermedades Respiratorias (INER), Ciudad de México, México.

Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) is widely used to investigate genomic variation.
In several studies, the genetic variation of Mycobacterium tuberculosis has been 
analyzed in sputum samples without previous culture, using target enrichment
methodologies for NGS. Alignments obtained by different programs generally map
the sequences under default parameters, and from these results, it is assumed
that only Mycobacterium reads will be obtained. However, variants of interest
microorganism in clinical samples can be confused with a vast collection of reads
from other bacteria, viruses, and human DNA. Currently, there are no standardized
pipelines, and the cleaning success is never verified since there is a lack of
rigorous controls to identify and remove reads from other sputum-microorganisms
genetically similar to M. tuberculosis. Therefore, we designed a bioinformatic
pipeline to process NGS data from sputum samples, including several filters and
quality control points to identify and eliminate non-M. tuberculosis reads to
obtain a reliable genetic variant report. Our proposal uses the SURPI software as
a taxonomic classifier to filter input sequences and perform a mapping that
provides the highest percentage of Mycobacterium reads, minimizing the reads from
other microorganisms. We then use the filtered sequences to perform variant
calling with the GATK software, ensuring the mapping quality, realignment,
recalibration, hard-filtering, and post-filter to increase the reliability of the
reported variants. Using default mapping parameters, we identified reads of
contaminant bacteria, such as Streptococcus, Rhotia, Actinomyces, and
Veillonella. Our final mapping strategy allowed a sequence identity of 97.8%
between the input reads and the whole M. tuberculosis reference genome H37Rv
using a genomic edit distance of three, thus removing 98.8% of the off-target
sequences with a Mycobacterium reads loss of 1.7%. Finally, more than 200
unreliable genetic variants were removed during the variant calling, increasing
the report's reliability.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258774 
PMCID: PMC8547644
PMID: 34699523  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

