
1. Przegl Epidemiol. 2021;75(2):159-174. doi: 10.32394/pe.75.15.

The clinical picture of influenza against other respiratory tract infections in a
general practitioner practice.

Rzepka A(1), Mania A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medicus Primary Health Care Centre, Magdalena Kurnatowska, ul. Starogostyńska 
9, 63-800 Gostyń.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases and Child Neurology, Poznan University of
Medical Sciences.

INTRODUCTION: Influenza is an acute infectious disease caused by an RNA virus. In
Poland, influenza occurs seasonally during the epidemic period lasting from
October to April. The peak of influenza incidence in Poland falls in the first
quarter of the year, with a comparable number of cases in January, February and
March. Influenza can be severe in some patients, requiring hospitalization, or
even fatal, especially in high-risk patients.
OBJECTIVE: Analysis of the frequency and course of influenza in primary care
patients compared to other respiratory tract infections.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The study included a group of 631 adult patients with
symptoms of respiratory infection who saw their GP (general practitioner) in the 
period from December 2018 to April 2020. Patients reporting symptoms of
respiratory tract infection were included in the study. Special attention was
paid to influenza-like symptoms, i.e. sudden onset fever and ≥ 1 respiratory
clinical symptom such as cough, sore throat, rhinitis or feeling of stuffy nose
and ≥ 1 systemic symptom such as headache, muscle pain, sweating or chills,
fatigue persisting < 72 h. Rapid antigen tests were performed in case of
influenza-like symptoms. Influenza was diagnosed in patients with the above
symptoms and a positive antigen test. In the study group, 356 rapid flu tests
were performed. Age, comorbidities, nicotinism, vaccination status, clinical
symptoms, ordered x-rays, laboratory tests, the result of the Actim Influenza A&B
rapid antigen test (Medix Biochemica) for influenza virus infection, and the
final diagnosis were taken into account.
RESULTS: Influenza was diagnosed in 91 patients (in one person on the basis of
clinical symptoms, without confirmation with a rapid antigen test), including 50 
women and 41 men. The mean age of the patients was 47 years, the age range was
22-89 years. In 90 patients the infection with the influenza virus was confirmed 
with the Actim Influenza A&B test (Medix Biochemica). One patient was diagnosed
with influenza on the basis of typical clinical symptoms, despite a negative
antigen test, and prior contact with a person with confirmed influenza. Fever,
cough, myalgia, tachypnoea, chest pain and reported respiratory disturbances,
confirmed by abnormal results of physical examination, were more frequent in
patients with symptoms of influenza and a positive antigen test than in other
infections. Influenza was significantly more often observed in patients with
impaired glucose tolerance, atherosclerosis, and muscle diseases. Influenza was
mainly diagnosed in unvaccinated patients.

© National Institute of Public Health NIH – National Research Institute.

DOI: 10.32394/pe.75.15 
PMID: 34696548  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

