
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Sep 22;9(10). pii: 1052. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9101052.

Shooting at a Moving Target-Effectiveness and Emerging Challenges for SARS-CoV-2 
Vaccine Development.

Günl F(1), Mecate-Zambrano A(1)(2), Rehländer S(1), Hinse S(1), Ludwig S(1)(2),
Brunotte L(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology (IVM), University of Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany.
(2)Interdisciplinary Centre for Clinical Research (IZKF), Medical Faculty,
University of Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany.

Since late 2019 the newly emerged pandemic SARS-CoV-2, the causative agent of
COVID-19, has hit the world with recurring waves of infections necessitating the 
global implementation of non-pharmaceutical interventions, including strict
social distancing rules, the wearing of masks and the isolation of infected
individuals in order to restrict virus transmissions and prevent the breakdown of
our healthcare systems. These measures are not only challenging on an economic
level but also have a strong impact on social lifestyles. Using traditional and
novel technologies, highly efficient vaccines against SARS-CoV-2 were developed
and underwent rapid clinical evaluation and approval to accelerate the
immunization of the world population, aiming to end the pandemic and return to
normality. However, the emergence of virus variants with improved transmission,
enhanced fitness and partial immune escape from the first generation of vaccines 
poses new challenges, which are currently being addressed by scientists and
pharmaceutical companies all over the world. In this ongoing pandemic, the
evaluation of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines underlies diverse unpredictable dynamics, posed
by the first broad application of the mRNA vaccine technology and their
compliance, the occurrence of unexpected side effects and the rapid emergence of 
variations in the viral antigen. However, despite these hurdles, we conclude that
the available SARS-CoV-2 vaccines are very safe and efficiently protect from
severe COVID-19 and are thereby the most powerful tools to prevent further harm
to our healthcare systems, economics and individual lives. This review summarizes
the unprecedented pathways of vaccine development and approval during the ongoing
SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. We focus on the real-world effectiveness and unexpected
positive and negative side effects of the available vaccines and summarize the
timeline of the applied adaptations to the recommended vaccination strategies in 
the light of emerging virus variants. Finally, we highlight upcoming strategies
to improve the next generations of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9101052 
PMCID: PMC8540924
PMID: 34696160 

