
1. Indoor Air. 2021 Oct 24. doi: 10.1111/ina.12938. [Epub ahead of print]

Modeling fomite-mediated SARS-CoV-2 exposure through personal protective
equipment doffing in a hospital environment.

King MF(1), Wilson AM(2), Weir MH(3), López-García M(4), Proctor J(1), Hiwar
W(1), Khan A(1), Fletcher LA(1), Sleigh PA(1), Clifton I(5), Dancer SJ(6)(7),
Wilcox M(8), Reynolds KA(2), Noakes CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Civil Engineering, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
(2)Department of Community, Environment, and Policy, Mel and Enid Zuckerman
College of Public Health, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, USA.
(3)Division of Environmental Health Sciences, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(4)School of Mathematics, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, St. James's Hospital, University of Leeds,
Leeds, UK.
(6)School of Applied Sciences, Edinburgh Napier University, Edinburgh, UK.
(7)Department of Microbiology, Hairmyres Hospital, NHS Lanarkshire, Glasgow, G75 
8RG, UK.
(8)Healthcare Associated Infections Research Group, Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS 
Trust and University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.

Self-contamination during doffing of personal protective equipment (PPE) is a
concern for healthcare workers (HCW) following SARS-CoV-2-positive patient care. 
Staff may subconsciously become contaminated through improper glove removal; so, 
quantifying this exposure is critical for safe working procedures. HCW surface
contact sequences on a respiratory ward were modeled using a discrete-time Markov
chain for: IV-drip care, blood pressure monitoring, and doctors' rounds.
Accretion of viral RNA on gloves during care was modeled using a stochastic
recurrence relation. In the simulation, the HCW then doffed PPE and contaminated 
themselves in a fraction of cases based on increasing caseload. A parametric
study was conducted to analyze the effect of: (1a) increasing patient numbers on 
the ward, (1b) the proportion of COVID-19 cases, (2) the length of a shift, and
(3) the probability of touching contaminated PPE. The driving factors for the
exposure were surface contamination and the number of surface contacts. The
results simulate generally low viral exposures in most of the scenarios
considered including on 100% COVID-19 positive wards, although this is where the 
highest self-inoculated dose is likely to occur with median 0.0305 viruses (95%
CI =0-0.6 viruses). Dose correlates highly with surface contamination showing
that this can be a determining factor for the exposure. The infection risk
resulting from the exposure is challenging to estimate, as it will be influenced 
by the factors such as virus variant and vaccination rates.

© 2021 The Authors. Indoor Air published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ina.12938 
PMID: 34693567 

