
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2021 Oct 25:AAC0161721. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01617-21.
[Epub ahead of print]

Effects of troponoids on mitochondrial function and cytotoxicity.

Bradley DP(1)(2), O'Dea AT(1), Woodson ME(1)(2), Li Q(1)(2), Ponzar NL(1)(2),
Knier A(1), Rogers BL(3), Murelli RP(4)(5), Tavis JE(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Saint Louis University School of Medicine, St. Louis MO USA.
(2)Saint Louis University Institute for Drug and Biotherapeutic Innovation.
(3)Casterbridge pharmaceuticals, Woburn MA USA.
(4)Brooklyn College, City University of New York, New York NY USA.
(5)Ph.D. Program in Chemistry, The Graduate Center of The City University of New 
York, New York NY USA.

The α-hydroxytropolones (αHT) are troponoid inhibitors of hepatitis B virus (HBV)
replication that can target the HBV ribonuclease H (RNase H) with sub-micromolar 
efficacies. αHTs and related troponoids (tropones and tropolones) can be
cytotoxic in cell lines as measured by MTS assays that assesses mitochondrial
function. Earlier studies suggest that tropolones induce cytotoxicity through
inhibition of mitochondrial respiration. Therefore, we screened 35 diverse
troponoids for effects on mitochondrial function, mitochondrial:nuclear genome
ratio, cytotoxicity, and reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. Troponoids as 
a class did not inhibit respiration or glycolysis, although the α-ketotropolone
subclass did interfere with these processes. The troponoids had no impact on the 
mitochondrial DNA to nuclear DNA ratio after three days of compound exposure.
Patterns of troponoid-induced cytotoxicity among three hepatic cell lines were
similar for all compounds, but three potent HBV RNase H inhibitors were not
cytotoxic in primary human hepatocytes. Tropolones and αHTs increased ROS
production in cells at cytotoxic concentrations but had no effect at lower
concentrations that efficiently inhibit HBV replication. Troponoid-mediated
cytotoxicity was significantly decreased upon addition of the ROS scavenger
N-acetylcysteine. These studies show that troponoids can increase ROS production 
at high concentrations within cell lines leading to cytotoxicity, but are not be 
cytotoxic in primary hepatocytes. Future development of αHTs as potential
therapeutics against HBV may need to mitigate ROS production by altering compound
design and/or by co-administration with ROS antagonists to ameliorate increased
ROS levels.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01617-21 
PMID: 34694883 

