
1. Compr Psychiatry. 2021 Oct 20;112:152279. doi: 10.1016/j.comppsych.2021.152279.
[Epub ahead of print]

Problematic use of the internet during the COVID-19 pandemic: Good practices and 
mental health recommendations.

Gjoneska B(1), Potenza MN(2), Jones J(3), Corazza O(4), Hall N(5), Sales CMD(6), 
Grünblatt E(7), Martinotti G(8), Burkauskas J(9), Werling AM(10), Walitza S(11), 
Zohar J(12), Menchón JM(13), Király O(14), Chamberlain SR(15), Fineberg NA(16),
Demetrovics Z(17).

Author information: 
(1)Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia. Electronic
address: biljanagjoneska@manu.edu.mk.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Child Study Centre, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA; Department of Neuroscience, Yale University, New
Haven, CT, USA; Connecticut Mental Health Centre, New Haven, CT, USA; Connecticut
Council on Problem Gambling, Wethersfield, CT, USA. Electronic address:
marc.potenza@yale.edu.
(3)Centre for Research in Public Health and Community Care, University of
Hertfordshire, UK. Electronic address: j.jones26@herts.ac.uk.
(4)Department of Clinical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of
Hertfordshire, UK; Department of Medico-Surgical Sciences and Biotechnologies,
Sapienza University of Rome, Italy. Electronic address: o.corazza@herts.ac.uk.
(5)Centre for Health Services and Clinical Research, University of Hertfordshire,
Hatfield, UK. Electronic address: n.hall4@herts.ac.uk.
(6)Centre for Psychology, University of Porto, Portugal; Faculty of Psychology
and Education Sciences, University of Porto, Portugal. Electronic address:
celiasales@soutodacasa.org.
(7)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Psychiatric
University Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland;
Neuroscience Center Zurich, University of Zurich and the ETH Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland; Zurich Center for Integrative Human Physiology, University of
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. Electronic address: edna.gruenblatt@kjpd.uzh.ch.
(8)Department of Clinical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of
Hertfordshire, UK; Department of Neuroscience, Imaging, Clinical Sciences,
University "Gabriele d'Annunzio", Chieti-Pescara, Italy. Electronic address:
giovanni.martinotti@gmail.com.
(9)Laboratory of Behavioral Medicine, Neuroscience Institute, Lithuanian
University of Health Sciences, Palanga, Lithuania. Electronic address:
julius.burkauskas@lsmuni.lt.
(10)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Psychiatric 
University Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. Electronic
address: anna.werling@pukzh.ch.
(11)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Psychiatric 
University Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland;
Neuroscience Center Zurich, University of Zurich and the ETH Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland; Zurich Center for Integrative Human Physiology, University of
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. Electronic address: susanne.walitza@pukzh.ch.
(12)Sackler Medical School, Tel Aviv University, Chaim Sheba Medical Center Tel
Hashomer, Tel Aviv, Israel. Electronic address: joseph.zohar@sheba.health.gov.il.
(13)Department of Psychiatry, Bellvitge University Hospital-IDIBELL, University
of Barcelona, Cibersam, Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address:
jmenchon@bellvitgehospital.cat.
(14)Institute of Psychology, ELTE Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary.
Electronic address: kiraly.orsolya@ppk.elte.hu.
(15)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton,
Southampton, UK; Southern Health NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton, UK.
Electronic address: srchamb@gmail.com.
(16)University of Hertfordshire, Hatfield, UK; Hertfordshire Partnership
University NHS Foundation Trust, Welwyn Garden City, Hertfordshire, UK;
University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, Cambridge, UK.
(17)Institute of Psychology, ELTE Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary;
Centre of Excellence in Responsible Gaming, University of Gibraltar, Gibraltar.
Electronic address: zsolt.demetrovics@unigib.edu.gi.

With the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and the accelerated spread of the
SARS-CoV-2 virus came jurisdictional limitations on mobility of citizens and
distinct alterations in their daily routines. Confined to their homes, many
people increased their overall internet use, with problematic use of the internet
(PUI) becoming a potential reason for increased mental health concerns. Our
narrative review summarizes information on the extent of PUI during the pandemic,
by focusing on three types: online gaming, gambling and pornography viewing. We
conclude by providing guidance for mental health professionals and those affected
by PUI (with an outline of immediate research priorities and best therapeutic
approaches), as well as for the general public (with an overview of safe and
preventative practices).

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.comppsych.2021.152279 
PMCID: PMC8529894
PMID: 34700188 

