
1. Clin Transl Med. 2021 Oct;11(10):e541. doi: 10.1002/ctm2.541.

Combined rs-fMRI study on brain functional imaging and mechanism of RAGE-DAMPs of
depression: Evidence from MDD patients to chronic stress-induced depression
models in cynomolgus monkeys and mice.

Yan W(1)(2), Xie L(1), Bi Y(3), Zeng T(1), Zhao D(1), Lai Y(1), Gao T(4), Sun
X(1), Shi Y(5), Dong Z(6), Wen G(7), Gao L(1)(8), Lv Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(2)The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(3)College of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, Jining Medical
University, Jining, Shandong, China.
(4)Department of General practice, The First Affiliated Hospital/School of
Clinical Medicine of Guangdong Pharmaceutical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong,
China.
(5)School of Fundamental Medical Science, Guangzhou University of Chinese
Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(6)School of Nursing, Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, China.
(7)Department of Medical Imaging, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(8)Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

More and more evidence show that major depressive disorder (MDD) is closely
related to inflammation caused by chronic stress, which seriously affects human
physical and mental health. However, the inflammatory mechanism of depression and
its effect on brain function have not been clarified. Based on resting-state
functional magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fMRI), we investigated change of brain 
functional imaging and the inflammatory mechanism of damage-related molecular
patterns (DAMPs)-receptor of advanced glycation protein end product (RAGE) in MDD
patients and depressive-like cynomolgus monkeys and mice models induced by
chronic stress. The regional homogeneity (ReHo) and functional connectivity (FC) 
were analyzed using MATLAB and SPM12 software. We detected the expression of
DAMPs-RAGE pathway-related proteins and mRNA in MDD peripheral blood and in serum
and brain tissue of cynomolgus monkeys and mice. Meanwhile, RAGE gene knockout
mice, RAGE inhibitor, and overexpression of AVV9RAGE adeno-associated virus were 
used to verify that RAGE is a reliable potential biomarker of depression. The
results showed that the ReHo value of prefrontal cortex (PFC) in MDD patients and
depressive-like cynomolgus monkeys was decreased. Then, the PFC was used as a
seed point, the FC of ipsilateral and contralateral PFC were weakened in
depressive-like mice. At the same time, qPCR showed that RAGE and HMGB1 mRNA were
upregulated and S100β mRNA was downregulated. The expression of RAGE-related
inflammatory protein in PFC of depressive-like monkeys and mice were consistent
with that in peripheral blood of MDD patients. Moreover, the results were
confirmed in RAGE-/- mice, injection of FPS-ZM1, and overexpression of AAV9RAGE
in mice. To sum up, our findings enhance the evidence that chronic
stress-PFC-RAGE are associated with depression. These results attempt to
establish the links between brain functional imaging, and molecular targets among
different species will help to reveal the pathophysiological mechanism of
depression from multiple perspectives.

© 2021 The Authors. Clinical and Translational Medicine published by John Wiley &
Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Shanghai Institute of Clinical Bioinformatics.

DOI: 10.1002/ctm2.541 
PMCID: PMC8506644
PMID: 34709765 

