
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Oct 31;9(2):e0047021. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.00470-21. Epub
2021 Oct 27.

Deciphering the Role of Mucosal Immune Responses and the Cervicovaginal
Microbiome in Resistance to HIV Infection in HIV-Exposed Seronegative (HESN)
Women.

Munusamy Ponnan S(1)(2), Thiruvengadam K(1), Tellapragada C(3), Ambikan AT(3),
Narayanan A(3), Kathirvel S(1), Mathayan M(1), Shankar J(1), Rajaraman A(1),
Afshan Amanulla M(1), Dinesha TR(4), Poongulali S(5), Saravanan S(4), Murugavel
KG(4), Swaminathan S(1), Velu V(6)(7), Shacklett B(8), Neogi U(3)(9), Hanna
LE(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Research in Tuberculosis (Indian Council of Medical
Research), Chennai, India.
(2)Centre for Infectious Disease Research, Indian Institute of Science (IISc),
Bangalore, India.
(3)Division of Clinical Microbiology, Karolinska Institutegrid.4714.6, Stockholm,
Sweden.
(4)YRG Center for AIDS Research and Education, Chennai, India.
(5)CART CRS, Infectious Diseases Medical Center, VHS, Chennai, India.
(6)Division of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory Vaccine Center, Yerkes National
Primate Research Center, Emory Universitygrid.189967.8, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(7)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory School of Medicine,
Emory Universitygrid.189967.8, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(8)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine,
University of California, Davisgrid.27860.3b, California, USA.
(9)Manipal Institute of Virology (MIV), Manipal Academy of Higher Education,
Manipal, Karnataka, India.

The female genital tract (FGT) is an important site of human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) infection. Discerning the nature of HIV-specific local immune
responses is crucial for identifying correlates of protection in HIV-exposed
seronegative (HESN) individuals. The present study involved a comprehensive
analysis of soluble immune mediators, secretory immunoglobulins (sIg), natural
killer (NK) cells, CXCR5+ CD8+ T cells, T follicular helper (Tfh) cells, and T
regulatory cells (Tregs) in the vaginal mucosa as well as the nature and
composition of the cervicovaginal microbiome in HESN women. We found
significantly elevated antiviral cytokines, soluble immunoglobulins, and
increased frequencies of activated NK cells, CXCR5+ CD8+ T cells, and Tfh cells
in HESN females compared to HIV-unexposed healthy (UH) women. Analysis of the
genital microbiome of HESN women revealed a greater bacterial diversity and
increased abundance of Gardnerella spp. in the mucosa. The findings suggest that 
the female genital tract of HESN females represents a microenvironment equipped
with innate immune factors, antiviral mediators, and critical T cell subsets that
protect against HIV infection. IMPORTANCE The vast majority of human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infections across the world occur via the sexual
route. The genital tract mucosa is thus the primary site of HIV replication, and 
discerning the nature of HIV-specific immune responses in this compartment is
crucial. The role of the innate immune system at the mucosal level in exposed
seronegative individuals and other HIV controllers remains largely unexplored.
This understanding can provide valuable insights to improve vaccine design. We
investigated mucosal T follicular helper (Tfh) cells, CXCR5+ CD8+ T cells,
natural killer (NK) cells subsets, soluble immune markers, and microbiome
diversity in HIV-exposed seronegative (HESN) women. We found a significantly
higher level of mucosal CXCR5+ CD8+ T cells, CD4+ Tfh cells, activated NK cell
subsets, and antiviral immune cell mediators in HESN women. We also found a
higher abundance of Gardnerella spp., microbiome dysbiosis, and decreased levels 
of inflammatory markers to be associated with reduced susceptibility to HIV
infection. Our findings indicate that increased distribution of mucosal NK cells,
CXCR5+ CD8+ T cells, Tfh cells, and soluble markers in HIV controllers with a
highly diverse cervicovaginal microbiome could contribute effectively to
protection against HIV infection. Overall, our findings imply that future vaccine
design should emphasize inducing these highly functional cell types at the
mucosal sites.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.00470-21 
PMCID: PMC8549735
PMID: 34704803 

