
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021 Oct 27. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14355. [Epub ahead of print]

Detection and localization of atypical porcine pestivirus in the testicles of
naturally infected, congenital tremor affected piglets.

Dénes L(1), Ruedas-Torres I(2), Szilasi A(1), Balka G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Veterinary Medicine, Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Comparative Pathology and Toxicology, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Córdoba, Córdoba, Spain.

Atypical porcine pestivirus (APPV) belongs to the genus Pestivirus within the
family Flaviviridae. Recently, APPV has been identified as the causative agent of
congenital tremor (CT) type AII. The disease is a neurological disorder that
affects newborn piglets and is characterized by generalized trembling of the
animals and often splay legs. CT is well known worldwide, and the virus seems to 
be highly prevalent in major swine producing areas. However, little is known
about the epidemiology of the infection, transmission and spread of the virus
between herds. Here, we show the high prevalence of APPV in processing fluid
samples collected from Hungarian pig herds which led us to investigate the
cellular targets of the virus in the testicles of newborn piglets affected by CT.
By the development of an RNA in situ hybridization assay and the use of
immunohistochemistry on consecutive slides, we identified the target cells of
APPV in the testicle: interstitial Leydig cells, peritubular myoid cells and
smooth muscle cells of medium-sized arteries. Previous studies have shown that
APPV can be found in the semen of sexually mature boars suggesting the role of
infected boars and their semen in the transmission of the virus similar to many
other members of the Flaviviridae family. As in our case, the virus has not been 
identified in cells beyond the Sertoli cell barrier, further studies on infected 
adult boars' testicles and other reproductive glands are needed to analyze the
possible changes in the cell tropism of APPV that might contribute to its
prolonged extraction by the semen beyond the period of viraemia.

© 2021 The Authors. Transboundary and Emerging Diseases published by Wiley-VCH
GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14355 
PMID: 34705340 

