
1. J Gen Virol. 2021 Oct;102(10). doi: 10.1099/jgv.0.001639.

RNA virome diversity and Wolbachia infection in individual Drosophila simulans
flies.

Ortiz-Baez AS(1), Shi M(1), Hoffmann AA(2), Holmes EC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Marie Bashir Institute for Infectious Diseases and Biosecurity, School of Life
and Environmental Sciences and School of Medical Sciences, The University of
Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 2006, Australia.
(2)School of BioSciences, Bio21 Institute, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Victoria 3010, Australia.

The endosymbiont bacteria of the genus Wolbachia are associated with multiple
mutualistic effects on insect biology, including nutritional and antiviral
properties. Members of the genus Wolbachia naturally occur in fly species of the 
genus Drosophila, providing an operational model host for studying how virome
composition may be affected by its presence. Drosophila simulans populations can 
carry a variety of strains of members of the genus Wolbachia, with the wAu strain
associated with strong antiviral protection under experimental conditions. We
used D. simulans sampled from the Perth Hills, Western Australia, to investigate 
the potential virus protective effect of the wAu strain of Wolbachia on
individual wild-caught flies. Our data revealed no appreciable variation in virus
composition and abundance between individuals infected or uninfected with
Wolbachia associated with the presence or absence of wAu. However, it remains
unclear whether wAu might affect viral infection and host survival by increasing 
tolerance rather than inducing complete resistance. These data also provide new
insights into the natural virome diversity of D. simulans. Despite the small
number of individuals sampled, we identified a repertoire of RNA viruses,
including nora virus, galbut virus, thika virus and La Jolla virus, that have
been identified in other species of the genus Drosophila. Chaq virus-like
sequences associated with galbut virus were also detected. In addition, we
identified five novel viruses from the families Reoviridae, Tombusviridae,
Mitoviridae and Bunyaviridae. Overall, this study highlights the complex
interaction between Wolbachia and RNA virus infections and provides a baseline
description of the natural virome of D. simulans.

DOI: 10.1099/jgv.0.001639 
PMCID: PMC8604192
PMID: 34704919  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

