
1. J Virol. 2021 Oct 27:JVI0163521. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01635-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Accurate quantification of overlapping herpesvirus transcripts from RNA-seq data.

Casco A(1), Gupta A(1), Hayes M(1), Djavadian R(1), Ohashi M(1), Johannsen
E(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of 
Wisconsin, Madison WI, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA.

Herpesviruses employ extensive bidirectional transcription of overlapping genes
to overcome length constraints on their gene product repertoire. As a
consequence, many lytic transcripts cannot be measured individually by RT-qPCR or
conventional RNA-seq analysis. Bruce et al. (Pathogens 2017, 6, 11;
doi:10.3390/pathogens6010011) proposed an approximation method using Unique
CoDing Sequences (UCDS) to estimate lytic gene abundance from KSHV RNA-seq data. 
Although UCDS has been widely employed, its accuracy, to our knowledge, has never
been rigorously validated for any herpesvirus. In this study, we use CAGE-seq as 
a gold-standard to determine the accuracy of UCDS for estimating EBV lytic gene
expression levels from RNA-seq data. We also introduce the Unique TranScript
(UTS) method that, like UCDS, estimates transcript abundance from changes in mean
RNA-seq read-depth. UTS is distinguished by its use of empirically determined 5' 
and 3' transcript ends, rather than coding sequence annotations. Compared to
conventional read assignment, both UCDS and UTS improved quantitation accuracy of
overlapping genes, with UTS giving the most accurate results. The UTS method
discards fewer reads and may be advantageous for experiments with less sequencing
depth. UTS is compatible with any aligner and, unlike isoform-aware alignment
methods, can be implemented on a laptop computer. Our findings demonstrate that
accuracy achieved by complex and expensive techniques such as CAGE-seq can be
approximated using conventional short-read RNA-seq data when read assignment
methods address transcript overlap. Although our study focuses on EBV
transcription, the UTS method should be applicable across all herpesviruses and
other genomes with extensively overlapping transcriptomes. IMPORTANCE Many
viruses employ extensively overlapping transcript structures. This complexity
makes it difficult to quantify gene expression using conventional methods
including RNA-seq. Although high-throughput techniques that overcome these
limitations exist, they are complex, expensive, and scarce in herpesvirus
literature relative to short-read RNA-seq. Here, using Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
as a model, we demonstrate that conventional RNA-seq analysis methods fail to
accurately quantify abundance of many overlapping transcripts. We further show
that the previously described Unique CoDing Sequence (UCDS) and our Unique
TranScript (UTS) methods greatly improve the accuracy of EBV lytic gene
measurements obtained from RNA-seq data. The UTS method has the advantages of
discarding fewer reads and being implementable on a laptop computer. Although
this study focuses on EBV, the UCDS and UTS methods should be applicable across
herpesviruses and for other viruses that make extensive use of overlapping
transcription.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01635-21 
PMID: 34705568 

