
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2022;2409:99-117. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1879-0_8.

Dengue Virus Capsid-Protein Dynamics in Live Infected Cells Studied by Pair
Correlation Analysis.

Gabriel MV(1), Sallaberry I(1), Costa Navarro GS(2), Gratton E(3), Gamarnik
AV(2), Estrada LC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Física, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad 
de Buenos Aires and IFIBA-National Research Council for Science and Technology
(CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Fundación Instituto Leloir-National Research Council for Science and
Technology (CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Laboratory for Fluorescence Dynamics, University of California Irvine, Irvine,
CA, USA.
(4)Departamento de Física, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad 
de Buenos Aires and IFIBA-National Research Council for Science and Technology
(CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina. lestrada@df.uba.ar.

It has become increasingly evident that unveiling the mechanisms of virus entry, 
assembly, and virion release is fundamental for identifying means for preventing 
viral spread and controlling viral disease. Due to virus mobility and structural 
and/or functional heterogeneity among viral particles, high spatiotemporal
resolution single-virus/single-particle techniques are required to capture the
behavior of viral particles inside infected cells.In this chapter, we present
fluorescence imaging analysis methods for studying the mobility of fluorescently 
labeled dengue virus (DENV) proteins in live infected cells. Some of the most
recent Fluorescence Fluctuation Spectroscopy (FFS) methods will be presented and,
in particular, the pair Correlation Functions (pCF) approach will be discussed.
The pCF method does not require individual molecule isolation, as in a
particle-tracking experiment, to capture single viral protein behavior. In this
regard, image acquisition is followed by the spatiotemporal cross-correlation
function at increasing time delays, yielding a quantitative view of
single-particle mobility in intact live infected cells.We provide a general
overview and a practical guidance for the implementation of advanced FFS
techniques, and the pair Correlation Functions analysis, as quantitative tools to
reveal insights into previously unreported DENV mechanisms. We expect this
protocol report will serve as an incentive for further applying correlation
imaging studies in virology research.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1879-0_8 
PMID: 34709638 

