
1. BMJ Open. 2021 Oct 27;11(10):e053194. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-053194.

Experience of the COVID-19 pandemic as lived by patients with hip and knee
osteoarthritis: an Italian qualitative study.

Battista S(1)(2), Dell'Isola A(2), Manoni M(3), Englund M(2), Palese A(4), Testa 
M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal
and Child Health, University of Genova, Campus of Savona, Savona, Italy
simone.battista@edu.unige.it.
(2)Clinical Epidemiology Unit, Orthopaedics, Department of Clinical Sciences,
Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(3)Department of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal
and Child Health, University of Genova, Campus of Savona, Savona, Italy.
(4)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Udine, Udine, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the experience of the COVID-19 pandemic as lived by people 
with hip and knee osteoarthritis (OA), in Italy.
DESIGN: A qualitative study based on semi-structured interviews.
SETTING: Urban and suburban areas in northern Italy.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 11 people with OA were enrolled through a purposeful
sampling and completed the study.
PRIMARY OUTCOME MEASURE: The experience of Italian people with OA during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
RESULTS: Four themes were brought to the forefront from the analysis of the
interviews. (1) Being Stressed for the Limited Social Interactions and for the
Family Members at High Risk of Infection, as the interviewees were frustrated
because they could not see their loved ones or felt a sense of apprehension for
their relatives. (2) Recurring Strategies to Cope with the Pandemic such as an
active acceptance towards the situation. (3) Being Limited in the Possibility of 
Undergoing OA Complementary Treatments and Other Routine Medical Visits. (4)
Being Unaware of the Importance of Physical Activity as First-Line Interventions 
which was an attitude already present before the pandemic.
CONCLUSION: The COVID-19 pandemic and related restrictions impacted the quality
of life and the care of individuals with hip and knee OA. The social sphere
seemed to be the most hindered. However, the interviewees developed a good level 
of acceptance to deal with the pandemic. When it came to their care, they faced a
delay of routine medical visits not related to OA and of other complementary
treatments (eg, physical therapies) to manage OA. Finally, a controversial result
that emerged from these interviews was that first-line interventions for OA (ie, 
therapeutic exercise) was not sought by the interviewees, regardless of the
restrictions dictated by the pandemic. Policy-making strategies are thus
necessary to support the awareness of the importance of such interventions.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-053194 
PMCID: PMC8551748
PMID: 34706962  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

