
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Oct 27:e0123821. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.01238-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

Microbial Community Composition during a Bloom of Purple Bacteria in Intertidal
Sediments in Vigo (Northwest Spain).

Froján M(1), Arbones B(1), Garrido JL(1), Rodríguez F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oceanography, Instituto de Investigaciones Marinasgrid.419099.c 
(IIM, CSIC), Vigo, Spain.
(2)Department of Harmful Algae and Red Tides, Instituto Español de Oceanografia
(IEO, CSIC), Vigo, Spain.

In summer 2019, a large, bright pink microbial mat was visible on top of
macroalgal deposits in muddy sediments of an urban beach (Playa do Adro, Vigo).
In order to characterize the dominant organisms in these colored mats, results
from microscopic observations, photosynthetic pigments, and molecular analysis
were gathered. Light microscopy examination revealed pinkish microbial aggregates
with minor contributions of larger protists and cyanobacteria. High-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC) pigment analysis documented the dominance of
bacteriochlorophyll a and carotenoids whose spectra were compatible with those
described in photosynthetic purple bacteria. 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing
confirmed that the vast majority of reads belonged to Proteobacteria (73.5%), and
among them, nearly 88% of those reads belonged to purple sulfur bacteria
(Gammaproteobacteria). A single family, Chromatiaceae, constituted the bulk of
this assemblage, including the genera Thiohalocapsa (32%), Marichromatium
(12.5%), Phaeochromatium (5%), and Halocromatium (2%) as main contributors.
Nonetheless, a considerable number of sequences could not be assigned to a
particular genus, stressing the large biological diversity in these microbial
mats and the potential presence of novel taxa of purple sulfur bacteria.
IMPORTANCE Urban beaches are valuable recreational areas particularly vulnerable 
to human disturbance. In these areas, the intertidal sediments harbor a diverse
community of microorganisms, including virus, bacteria, fungi, and protozoa. In
this sense, pollution events can introduce pathogenic allochthonous microbes
which may constitute a human health risk. Visual and sensory observations, such
as a weird color or bad smell, are usually appreciated as a warning by beachgoers
and authorities, as indeed was the case at do Adro beach in 2019. The observed
proliferation seems to be common in summertime, but its dimension alerted
beachgoers and media. The obtained results allowed for the identification of
purple sulfur bacteria as responsible for the pink-violet top layer staining the 
intertidal zone. These blooms have never been associated with public health
risks. Beyond solving the sanitary concern, other important findings were its
diversity and large proportion of novel taxa, illustrating the complexity of
these ecosystems.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.01238-21 
PMCID: PMC8549741
PMID: 34704815 

