
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Oct 31;9(2):e0105921. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.01059-21. Epub
2021 Oct 27.

An Assessment of Serological Assays for SARS-CoV-2 as Surrogates for Authentic
Virus Neutralization.

Wohlgemuth N(1), Whitt K(2), Cherry S(1), Kirkpatrick Roubidoux E(1), Lin CY(3), 
Allison KJ(1), Gowen A(1), Freiden P(1), Allen EK(3); St. Jude Investigative
Team,, Gaur AH(1), Estepp JH(4)(5), Tang L(6), Mori T(6), Hijano DR(1), Hakim
H(1), McGargill MA(3), Krammer F(7), Whitt MA(2), Wolf J(1), Thomas PG(3),
Schultz-Cherry S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Biochemistry, University of
Tennessee Health Science Centergrid.267301.1, Memphis, Tennessee, USA.
(3)Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee, USA.
(4)Department of Hematology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee, USA.
(5)Department of Global Pediatric Medicine, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, USA.
(6)Department of Biostatistics, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee, USA.
(7)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York, USA.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) emerged in late 2019
and has since caused a global pandemic resulting in millions of cases and deaths.
Diagnostic tools and serological assays are critical for controlling the
outbreak, especially assays designed to quantitate neutralizing antibody levels, 
considered the best correlate of protection. As vaccines become increasingly
available, it is important to identify reliable methods for measuring
neutralizing antibody responses that correlate with authentic virus
neutralization but can be performed outside biosafety level 3 (BSL3)
laboratories. While many neutralizing assays using pseudotyped virus have been
developed, there have been few studies comparing the different assays to each
other as surrogates for authentic virus neutralization. Here, we characterized
three enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) and three pseudotyped vesicular
stomatitis virus (VSV) neutralization assays and assessed their concordance with 
authentic virus neutralization. The most accurate assays for predicting authentic
virus neutralization were luciferase- and secreted embryonic alkaline phosphatase
(SEAP)-expressing pseudotyped virus neutralizations, followed by green
fluorescent protein (GFP)-expressing pseudotyped virus neutralization, and then
the ELISAs. IMPORTANCE The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic is caused by infection with 
severe acute respiratory syndrome virus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Prior infection or
vaccination can be detected by the presence of antibodies in the blood.
Antibodies in the blood are also considered to be protective against future
infections from the same virus. The "gold standard" assay for detecting
protective antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 is neutralization of authentic
SARS-CoV-2 virus. However, this assay can only be performed under highly
restrictive biocontainment conditions. We therefore characterized six
antibody-detecting assays for their correlation with authentic virus
neutralization. The significance of our research is in outlining the advantages
and disadvantages of the different assays and identifying the optimal surrogate
assay for authentic virus neutralization. This will allow for more accurate
assessments of protective immunity against SARS-CoV-2 following infection and
vaccination.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.01059-21 
PMCID: PMC8549747
PMID: 34704832  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

