
1. Acad Med. 2021 Nov 1;96(11):1546-1552. doi: 10.1097/ACM.0000000000003999.

Approaching the COVID-19 Pandemic Response With a Health Equity Lens: A Framework
for Academic Health Systems.

Golden SH(1), Galiatsatos P(2), Wilson C(3), Page KR(4), Jones V(5), Tolson T(6),
Lugo A(7), McCann N(8), Wilson A(9), Hill-Briggs F(10).

Author information: 
(1)S.H. Golden is professor of medicine, Department of Medicine, Division of
Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, professor of epidemiology, Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of
Public Health, and vice president and chief diversity officer, Office of
Diversity, Inclusion, and Health Equity, Johns Hopkins Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland.
(2)P. Galiatsatos is assistant professor of medicine, Department of Medicine,
Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine, and health equity colead, Office of Diversity, Inclusion, and Health
Equity, Johns Hopkins Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(3)C. Wilson is diversity and inclusion education and training program manager,
Office of Diversity, Inclusion, and Health Equity, Johns Hopkins Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland.
(4)K.R. Page is associate professor of medicine, Division of Infectious Disease
Center for Clinical Global Health Education, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(5)V. Jones is associate professor, Department of Health, Behavior, and Society, 
Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland.
(6)T. Tolson is senior director, Office of Language Services, Johns Hopkins
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(7)A. Lugo is diversity, inclusion, and health equity program coordinator, Office
of Diversity, Inclusion, and Health Equity, Johns Hopkins Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland.
(8)N. McCann is vice president for payer/provider transformation, Presidents
Office Administration, Johns Hopkins Health System, Baltimore, Maryland.
(9)A. Wilson is vice president for economic development, Presidents Office
Administration for Johns Hopkins University and Johns Hopkins Health System,
Baltimore, Maryland.
(10)F. Hill-Briggs is professor, Department of Medicine, Division of General
Internal Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Department of
Health, Behavior and Society, Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public
Health, Department of Acute and Chronic Care, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Nursing, and health equity senior lead, Office of Diversity, Inclusion, and
Health Equity, Johns Hopkins Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.

Racially and ethnically diverse and socioeconomically disadvantaged communities
have historically been disproportionately affected by disasters and public health
emergencies in the United States. The U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services' Office of Minority Health established the National Consensus Panel on
Emergency Preparedness and Cultural Diversity to provide guidance to agencies and
organizations on developing effective strategies to advance emergency
preparedness and eliminate disparities among racially and ethnically diverse
communities during these crises. Adopting the National Consensus Panel
recommendations, the Johns Hopkins Medicine Office of Diversity, Inclusion, and
Health Equity; Language Services; and academic-community partnerships used
existing health equity resources and expertise to develop an operational
framework to support the organization's COVID-19 response and to provide a
framework of health equity initiatives for other academic medical centers. This
operational framework addressed policies to support health equity patient care
and clinical operations, accessible COVID-19 communication, and staff and
community support and engagement, which also supported the National Standards for
Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate Services in Health and Health Care.
Johns Hopkins Medicine identified expanded recommendations for addressing
institutional policy making and capacity building, including unconscious bias
training for resource allocation teams and staff training in accurate race,
ethnicity, and language data collection, that should be considered in future
updates to the National Consensus Panel's recommendations.

Copyright © 2021 by the Association of American Medical Colleges.

DOI: 10.1097/ACM.0000000000003999 
PMCID: PMC8541896
PMID: 34705750  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

