
1. Am J Case Rep. 2021 Oct 27;22:e933177. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.933177.

A Unique Triad of Invasive Sinusitis, Brain Abscess with Focal Cerebritis, and
COVID-19.

Shahab A(1), Arora A(2), Chhina SS(3), Dhillon S(1), Nazir U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hospital Medicine, Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, RI, USA.
(2)Department of Hospital Medicine, Aurora Medical Center Bay Area, Marinette,
WI, USA.
(3)Department of Hospital Medicine, Baptist Health System, Conway, AR, USA.

BACKGROUND We present a case of invasive sinusitis with rhinocerebral infection
in a patient who had mild symptoms of COVID-19 infection and did not receive any 
immunosuppressive therapies. CASE REPORT A 49-year-old man with a history of
uncontrolled diabetes presented to the hospital with multiple generalized tonic
clonic seizures. He had recently been diagnosed with mild COVID-19 and was
treated at home with supportive care only. He was found to have cerebritis in the
right frontal lobe along with right fronto-ethmoid sinusitis. He underwent
extensive testing with nasal endoscopy with gram stain and culture, cryptococcal 
studies, 1-3-Beta-D glucan, blood cultures, fungal CSF studies, Lyme disease,
HIV, Fungitell assay, and galactomannan studies, which were all negative. He was 
started on i.v. antibacterial therapy with cefepime, vancomycin, and
metronidazole along with amphotericin B. After 2 weeks, his repeat imaging
revealed progression of cerebritis along with new early abscess. Given these
findings, his antibiotics were changed to meropenem and the amphotericin B dose
was increased. He was recommended debridement and sinus surgery but refused.
During the course of treatment, he developed acute kidney injury and was switched
to Posaconazole. Unfortunately, the patient decided to leave against medical
advice 6 weeks into admission. He was advised to continue Posaconazole and
levofloxacin but he could only afford levofloxacin. He was then recommended
long-term levofloxacin. He has since recovered, with resolution of cerebritis
noted in follow-up imaging 1 year later. CONCLUSIONS Our patient had mild
COVID-19 infection and presented with secondary infective complications, which
are usually associated with an immunocompromised state, despite receiving no
immunosuppressives. It is imperative that all clinicians treating COVID-19 be
watchful for fungal or bacterial co-infections in patients with active SARS-CoV-2
infection, even if the presenting symptoms are mild, particularly if other risk
factors are present.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.933177 
PMCID: PMC8557857
PMID: 34702794  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

