
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 27;16(10):e0258443. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258443.
eCollection 2021.

Rational design of chimeric Multiepitope Based Vaccine (MEBV) against human
T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1: An integrated vaccine informatics and molecular
docking based approach.

Tariq MH(1), Bhatti R(2), Ali NF(1), Ashfaq UA(3), Shahid F(3), Almatroudi A(4), 
Khurshid M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Atta ur Rehman School of Applied Bioscience, National University of Science
and Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(2)Center of Excellence in Molecular Biology, University of the Punjab, Lahore,
Pakistan.
(3)Department of Bioinformatics and Biotechnology, Government College University 
Faisalabad, Faisalabad, Pakistan.
(4)Department of Medical Laboratories, College of Applied Medical Sciences,
Qassim University, Buraydah, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Government College University Faisalabad,
Faisalabad, Pakistan.

Human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is an infectious virus that has
been linked to adult T cell leukemia /lymphoma, aggressive CD4-T cell malignancy 
and many other immune-related medical illnesses. So far, no effective vaccine is 
known to combat HTLV-1, hence, the current research work was performed to design 
a potential multi-epitope-based subunit vaccine (MEBV) by adopting the latest
methodology of reverse vaccinology. Briefly, three highly antigenic proteins
(Glycoprotein, Accessory protein, and Tax protein) with no or minimal (<37%)
similarity with human proteome were sorted out and potential B- and T-cell
epitopes were forecasted from them. Highly antigenic, immunogenic, non-toxic,
non-allergenic and overlapping epitopes were short-listed for vaccine
development. The chosen T-cell epitopes displayed a strong binding affinity with 
their corresponding Human Leukocyte Antigen alleles and demonstrated 95.8%
coverage of the world's population. Finally, nine Cytotoxic T Lymphocytes, six
Helper T Lymphocytes and five Linear B Lymphocytes epitopes, joint through
linkers and adjuvant, were exploited to design the final MEBV construct,
comprising of 382 amino acids. The developed MEBV structure showed highly
antigenic properties while being non-toxic, soluble, non-allergenic, and stable
in nature. Moreover, disulphide engineering further enhanced the stability of the
final vaccine protein. Additionally, Molecular docking analysis and Molecular
Dynamics (MD) simulations confirmed the strong association between MEBV construct
and human pathogenic immune receptor TLR-3. Repeated-exposure simulations and
Immune simulations ensured the rapid antigen clearance and higher levels of
cell-mediated immunity, respectively. Furthermore, MEBV codon optimization and
in-silico cloning was carried out to confirm its augmented expression. Results of
our experiments suggested that the proposed MEBV could be a potential immunogenic
against HTLV-1; nevertheless, additional wet lab experiments are needed to
elucidate our conclusion.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258443 
PMCID: PMC8550388
PMID: 34705829  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

