
1. BMJ Open. 2021 Oct 27;11(10):e053124. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-053124.

Palliative care for people who use substances during communicable disease
epidemics and pandemics: a scoping review protocol.

Buchman DZ(1)(2)(3), Ding P(4), Lo S(4), Dosani N(5)(6), Fazelzad R(7), Furlan
AD(8)(9)(10), Isenberg SR(11)(12), Spithoff S(13)(14), Tedesco A(6)(15),
Zimmermann C(4)(9)(16)(17), Lau J(4)(14)(16).

Author information: 
(1)Bioethics, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
daniel.buchman@utoronto.ca.
(2)Clinical Public Health, Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Joint Centre for Bioethics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Supportive Care, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(5)Department of Medicine, Unity Health Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Inner City Health Associates, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(7)Library and Information Services, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University 
Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(8)Toronto Rehab, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(9)Department of Medicine, Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(10)Institute for Work & Health, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(11)Bruyere Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(12)Department of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(13)Women's College Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(14)Department of Family and Community Medicine, Temerty Faculty of Medicine,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(15)Sinai Health System, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(16)Division of Palliative Care, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(17)Division of Palliative Medicine, Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: Communicable disease epidemics and pandemics magnify the health
inequities experienced by marginalised populations. People who use substances
suffer from high rates of morbidity and mortality and should be a priority to
receive palliative care, yet they encounter many barriers to palliative care
access. Given the pre-existing inequities to palliative care access for people
with life-limiting illnesses who use substances, it is important to understand
the impact of communicable disease epidemics and pandemics such as COVID-19 on
this population.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: We will conduct a scoping review and report according to
the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses extension 
for Scoping Reviews reporting guidelines. We conducted a comprehensive literature
search in seven bibliographical databases from the inception of each database to 
August 2020. We also performed a grey literature search to identify the
publications not indexed in the bibliographical databases. All the searches will 
be rerun in April 2021 to retrieve recently published information because the
COVID-19 pandemic is ongoing at the time of this writing. We will extract the
quantitative data using a standardised data extraction form and summarise it
using descriptive statistics. Additionally, we will conduct thematic qualitative 
analyses and present our findings as narrative summaries.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: Ethics approval is not required for a scoping review.
We will disseminate our findings to healthcare providers and policymakers through
professional networks, digital communications through social media platforms,
conference presentations and publication in a scientific journal.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-053124 
PMCID: PMC8551744
PMID: 34706961  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: AF receives an unrestricted 
educational grant to maintain the online opioid self-assessment programme from
the Canadian Generic Pharmaceutical Association (CGPA). AF is the inventor of the
App Opioid Manager, which is sold in iTunes. The app is owned by UHN, the
hospital where AF works and AF does not receive any profits from the app sales.
AF has a YouTube monetised channel and receives payment for advertisements on the
channel. There are some videos related to opioids in her channel. All other
authors report no competing interests.

