
1. Reprod Health. 2021 Oct 26;18(1):213. doi: 10.1186/s12978-021-01264-y.

Adaptation of patients diagnosed with human papillomavirus: a grounded theory
study.

Nick N(1), Torabizadeh C(1), Ghahartars M(2), Janghorban R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, School of Nursing and Midwifery, Community Based
Psychiatric Care Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, 
Iran.
(2)Molecular Dermatology Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, 
Shiraz, Iran.
(3)Department of Midwifery, School of Nursing and Midwifery, Community Based
Psychiatric Care Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, 
Iran. janghorban@sums.ac.ir.

Erratum in
    Reprod Health. 2021 Nov 26;18(1):236.

BACKGROUND: Human papillomavirus is the most common cause of sexually transmitted
diseases. Various studies report that positive human papillomavirus diagnosis
results in psychosexual issues for the infected and reduces their quality of
life. However, the adaptation of the infected has not been addressed yet. The
present study aims to identify the process by which individuals infected with
human papillomavirus adapt to their disease.
METHOD: This is a qualitative work of research with a grounded theory design. The
setting of the study was the skin clinic of Shahid Faghihi Hospital in Shiraz.
The participants consisted of 27 individuals: 18 patients, 3 doctors, 2
counselors, and 4 spouses of patients. The subjects were selected via purposeful 
and theoretical sampling method until data saturation was reached. Data were
collected through face-to-face, in-depth, semi-structured interviews from April
2019 to December 2020. The collected data were analyzed using Corbin and
Strauss's method (2015) and MAXQDA 2018.
RESULTS: The theory which emerged from the data was "trying to maintain
resilience in the absence of psychological security." Analysis of data showed the
main concern of participants in adapting to their diagnosis with human
papillomavirus was "life stress". "Stigma and ignorance" was found to be a
contextual condition and "paradox in support" was an intervening condition in the
patients' adaptation. The patients' action/interaction responses to their main
concern in the context in question were "emotional confrontation" and
"maintaining resilience." The outcome was "oscillation between tension and
tranquility."
CONCLUSION: The present study explains the process by which patients with human
papillomavirus adapt to their condition. Identification of the concerns of
patients with human papillomavirus and the factors which affect their adaptation 
can help healthcare policy-makers and providers develop effective support plans
in order to increase patients' quality of life. Early interventions, e.g.
counseling care providers to modify their behaviors toward alleviating the
psychosexual tension of the infected, can facilitate the adaptation of the
infected and decrease the consequences of the infection for them.

plain-language-summary: Human papillomavirus (HPV) is the most common cause of
sexually transmitted diseases. Almost all men and women get the infection at
least once throughout their lives. The high-risk types of HPV account for about
5% of cancer cases globally. HPV can cause anogenital cancers and warts in both
genders. In this grounded theory study, we conducted 27 in-depth interviews with 
Iranian patients, their spouses, and health care providers from April 2019 to
December 2020. The collected data were analyzed using Corbin and Strauss’s method
(2015) and MAXQDA 2018. The participants were concerned about tension in family
relationships, being stigmatized, getting cancer, recurrence of warts,
transferring their disease to others, and changes in the appearance of their
genitalia. They stated that HPV is regarded as a shameful disease in society.
Most of the participants said they had never heard anything about HPV. The
patients’ action/interaction responses to their concerns were “emotional
confrontation” and “maintaining resilience.” These strategies helped the patients
recover some of their tranquility. However, some of patients’ concerns were
persistent and kept them oscillating between tension and tranquility. An
understanding of the patients’ perception of their disease is essential to
development of effective educational interventions to change patients’
perspective on their situation and improve their recovery. Furthermore, because
of the low level of public awareness about HPV and sexual health and the flow of 
misinformation to the infected, it is recommended that educational interventions 
focus on the patients’ concerns.
© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12978-021-01264-y 
PMCID: PMC8547285
PMID: 34702304  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

