
1. Hawaii J Health Soc Welf. 2021 Oct;80(10 Suppl 2):64-68.

Sugar-Sweetened Beverage Fee: A Model to Address Health Disparities in Hawai'i.

McGurk MD(1), Takeda CR(2), Murakami J(3), La Chica T(4), Yamauchi J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Office of Public Health Studies, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, Honolulu, HI.
(2)Blue Zones Project - Hawai'i, Honolulu, HI.
(3)Hawai'i Public Health Institute, Honolulu, HI.
(4)AlohaCare, Honolulu, HI.

Sugar-sweetened beverage (SSB) consumption is associated with increased risk of
obesity, diabetes, and other chronic diseases. SSB consumption is also a health
equity issue, as rates of consumption and related chronic diseases vary by race, 
ethnicity, and income in Hawai'i. The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the need 
for greater investment in public health and the well-being of communities
experiencing health disparities because individuals with chronic diseases are
more likely to develop complications from the virus. It has also created economic
hardships for the people of Hawai'i, especially the state's most vulnerable
populations. Amid this health and economic crisis, an opportunity exists to
implement an SSB fee in Hawai'i. An SSB fee would impose a fee on SSB
distributors that would be passed on to consumers in the form of price increases 
that influence purchasing behavior. Jurisdictions with SSB taxes or fees have
seen reductions in SSB purchases and consumption and have generated millions of
dollars in revenues to support health initiatives and reduce socioeconomic
disparities. Models predict that a $0.02 SSB fee in Hawai'i could generate $60.5 
million and significantly reduce healthcare costs and chronic diseases. This
commentary will present an SSB fee policy as a viable model for Hawai'i to reduce
SSB consumption, lower chronic disease risks, and generate needed revenues to
support health, reduce inequities, and rebuild the state's economy.

©Copyright 2021 by University Health Partners of Hawai‘i (UHP Hawai‘i).


PMCID: PMC8538112
PMID: 34704071  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

