
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2022;2409:207-222. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1879-0_14.

Evaluation of DENV-Induced Endothelial Cell Permeability by Measurements of
Transendothelial Electrical Resistance (TEER) and Extravasation of Proteins and
Virus.

Meuren LM(#)(1), Coelho SVA(#)(1), de Arruda LB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Virologia, Instituto de Microbiologia Paulo de Góes,
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Virologia, Instituto de Microbiologia Paulo de Góes,
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
arruda@micro.ufrj.br.
(#)Contributed equally

This chapter will discuss reliable and relatively easy and fast strategies to
evaluate the integrity of endothelial cell monolayers when infected by dengue
virus (DENV). Human brain microvascular endothelial cells (HBMEC) were exploited 
here as general model of vessel wall core, but it may also be used as an in vitro
simplified model of blood brain barrier (BBB). The integrity of endothelial cells
monolayer can be inferred using a transwell culture system by: (1) measuring
transendothelial electrical resistance (TEER) using a Voltohmmeter; (2) analyzing
the monolayer permeability to fluorescent-conjugated proteins and fluorimetric
assay; (3) investigating virus extravasation by quantitative RT-PCR and plaque
conventional assay. The rational to use those strategies is that vascular
alterations are often observed during dengue infection, being associated to
disease severity. The vasculature core consists of a barrier of endothelial
cells, which are tightly adhered by the expression of adhesion molecules and
tight junctions. This structure must be preserved in order to control the flux of
cells and metabolites from the circulation to the tissues and to maintain
vascular homeostasis. Therefore, experimental assays that allow evaluation of
endothelial integrity can be useful platforms to further understand disease
pathogenesis and screen pharmaceutical interventions to control vascular
disturbance.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1879-0_14 
PMID: 34709644 

