
1. J Virol. 2021 Oct 27:JVI0162921. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01629-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Ubiquitination on Lysine 247 of Newcastle Disease Virus Matrix Protein Enhances
Viral Replication and Virulence by Driving Nuclear-Cytoplasmic Trafficking.

Peng T(1), Qiu X(1)(2), Tan L(1)(2), Yu S(1), Yang B(1), Dai J(1), Liu X(3)(4),
Sun Y(1), Song C(1), Liu W(1), Meng C(1), Liao Y(1), Yuan W(5), Ren T(6), Liu
X(3)(4), Ding C(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Shanghai, People's
Republic of China.
(3)Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal
Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, People's
Republic of China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Animal Infectious Diseases, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou,
People's Republic of China.
(5)Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(6)College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou
People's Republic of China.

The Newcastle disease virus (NDV) matrix (M) protein is the pivotal element for
viral assembly, budding and proliferation. It traffics through the cellular
nucleus but performs its primary function in the cytoplasm. To investigate the
biological importance of M's nuclear-cytoplasmic trafficking and the mechanism
involved, the regulatory motif nuclear export signal (NES) and nuclear
localization signal (NLS) were deeply analyzed. Here, two types of combined NLS
and NES signals were identified within NDV-M. The Herts/33-type M was found to
mediate efficient nuclear export and stable virus-like particle (VLP) release,
while the LaSota-type M was mostly retained in the nuclei and showed retarded VLP
production. Two critical residues, 247 and 263, within the motif were identified 
and associated with nuclear export efficiency. We identified, for the first time,
residue 247 as an important monoubiquitination site, the modification of which
regulates the nuclear-cytoplasmic trafficking of NDV-M. Subsequently, mutant
LaSota strains were rescued via reverse genetics, which contained either single
or double amino acid substitutions that were similar to the M of Herts/33. The
rescued rLaSota strains rLaSota-R247K, -S263R, and -DM (double mutation) showed
about twofold higher HA titers and 10-fold higher EID50 titers than wild-type
(wt) rLaSota. Further, the MDT and ICPI values of those recombinant viruses were 
slightly higher than that of wt rLaSota probably due to their higher
proliferation rates. Our findings contribute to a better understanding of the
molecular mechanism of the replication and pathogenicity of NDV, and even those
of all other paramyxoviruses. It is beneficial for the development of vaccines
and therapies for paramyxoviruses. Importance Newcastle disease virus (NDV) is a 
pathogen that is lethal to birds and causes heavy losses in the poultry industry 
worldwide. The World Organization for Animal Health (OIE) ranked ND as the third 
most significant poultry disease and the eighth most important wildlife disease
in the World Livestock Disease Atlas in 2011. The matrix (M) protein of NDV is
very important for viral assembly and maturation. It is interesting that M
proteins enter the cellular nucleus before performing their primary function in
the cytoplasm. We found that NDV-M has a combined nuclear import and export
signal. The ubiquitin modification of a lysine residue within this signal is
critical for quick, efficient nuclear export and subsequent viral production. Our
findings shed new light on viral replication and opens up new possibilities for
therapeutics against NDV and other paramyxoviruses; furthermore, we demonstrate a
novel approach to improving paramyxovirus vaccines.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01629-21 
PMID: 34705566 

