
1. Front Vet Sci. 2021 Oct 11;8:679049. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2021.679049. eCollection 
2021.

A Preliminary Assessment of the Potential Health and Genetic Impacts of Releasing
Confiscated Passerines Into the Wild: A Reduced-Risk Approach.

Cruz CEF(1)(2), Funkler GR(2)(3), Zani ALS(4), Wagner PGC(5), Andretta I(6),
Segura LN(7), Fagundes NJR(4)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Estudos em Manejo de Aves Silvestres, Faculdade de Veterinária,
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(2)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências Veterinárias, Faculdade de Veterinária, 
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(3)Laboratório Porto Belo, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(4)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Genética e Biologia Molecular, Instituto de
Biociências, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(5)Centro de Triagem de Animais Silvestres, Instituto Brasileiro do Meio Ambiente
e dos Recursos Naturais Renováveis, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(6)Laboratório de Ensino Zootécnico, Faculdade de Agronomia, Universidade Federal
do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(7)Museo de La Plata, Sección Ornitología, Universidad Nacional de La Plata, La
Plata, Argentina.
(8)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Biologia Animal, Instituto de Biociências,
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.

The illegal capture and trade of wild birds have long been threats to
biodiversity. The rehabilitation and release of confiscated animals may be a
useful conservation tool in species management. However, differences between
populations regarding health (e.g., different pathogens) and adaptation (e.g.,
local adaptation) must be taken into account, since both can negatively impact
the recipient population. In this pilot study, we used two of the most illegally 
trafficked Brazilian wild passerine species, namely the red-crested cardinal
(Paroaria coronata) and green-winged saltator (Saltator similis) as case studies 
and assessed some of the health threats that the release of confiscated
passerines may pose to free-living birds. We also investigated the level of
difference in mitochondrial genetic structure among populations living in
different ecoregions. Blood, feces, and oropharyngeal swabs from confiscated (n =
115) and free-living (n = 120) passerines from the release sites were tested for 
the Newcastle disease virus, Salmonella spp., and Mycoplasma gallisepticum. These
are considered major avian diseases by the Brazilian National Avian Health
Program. We analyzed mtDNA to study the difference in genetic structure between
populations using samples from 127 free-living passerines. We found no evidence
of the Newcastle disease virus or Salmonella spp. in confiscated or free-living
passerines from either species. However, the levels of infection with M.
galissepticum detected in our study for red-crested cardinals and green-winged
saltators calls for a high degree of caution in captive release programs. The
difference in genetic structure between populations occurring in different
regions was low, and was not significant between those from the Pampa/Subtropical
Grasslands region. These results suggest that it may be possible to establish a
cost-effective and sensitive protocol for releasing confiscated songbirds,
provided that further genome-wide studies indicate that the functional genetic
diversity among (at least some of the) populations is also low.

Copyright © 2021 Cruz, Funkler, Zani, Wagner, Andretta, Segura and Fagundes.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2021.679049 
PMCID: PMC8542797
PMID: 34708099 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

