
1. J Virol. 2021 Oct 27:JVI0134821. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01348-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Domain Organization of Lentiviral and Betaretroviral Surface Envelope
Glycoproteins Modeled with AlphaFold.

Hötzel I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Antibody Engineering, Genentech, South San Francisco, CA 94080.

The surface envelope glycoproteins of non-primate lentiviruses and
betaretroviruses share sequence similarity with the inner proximal domain
β-sandwich of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) gp120 glycoprotein 
that faces the transmembrane glycoprotein as well as patterns of cysteine and
glycosylation site distribution that points to a similar two-domain organization 
in at least some lentiviruses. Here, high reliability models of the surface
glycoproteins obtained with the AlphaFold algorithm are presented for the gp135
glycoprotein of the small ruminant caprine arthritis-encephalitis (CAEV) and
visna lentiviruses and the betaretroviruses jaagsiekte sheep retrovirus (JSRV),
mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) and consensus human endogenous retrovirus type K
(HERV-K). The models confirm and extend the inner domain structural conservation 
in these viruses and identify two outer domains with a putative receptor binding 
site in the CAEV and visna virus gp135. The location of that site is consistent
with patterns of sequence conservation and glycosylation site distribution in
gp135. In contrast, a single domain is modeled for the JSRV, MMTV and HERV-K
betaretrovirus envelope proteins that is highly conserved structurally in the
proximal region and structurally diverse in apical regions likely to interact
with cell receptors. The models presented here identify sites in small ruminant
lentivirus and betaretrovirus envelope glycoproteins likely to be critical for
virus entry and virus neutralization by antibodies and will facilitate their
functional and structural characterization. Importance Structural information on 
the surface envelope proteins of lentiviruses and related betaretroviruses is
critical to understand mechanisms of virus-host interactions. However,
experimental determination of these structures has been challenging and only the 
structure of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 gp120 has been determined.
The advent of the AlphaFold artificial intelligence method for structure
prediction allows high-quality modeling of the structures of small ruminant
lentiviral and betaretroviral surface envelope proteins. The models are
consistent with much of previously described experimental data, show regions
likely to interact with receptors and identify domains that may be involved in
mechanisms of antibody neutralization resistance in the small ruminant
lentiviruses. The models will allow more precise design of mutants to further
determine mechanisms of viral entry and immune evasion in this group of viruses
and constructs for structure of these surface envelope proteins.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01348-21 
PMID: 34705555 

