
1. Clin Transl Immunology. 2021 Oct 19;10(10):e1348. doi: 10.1002/cti2.1348.
eCollection 2021.

TIGIT blockade enhances NK cell activity against autologous HIV-1-infected CD4+ T
cells.

Holder KA(1), Burt K(2), Grant MD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology and Infectious Diseases Program Division of BioMedical Sciences
Faculty of Medicine Memorial University of Newfoundland St. John's NL Canada.
(2)Eastern Health St. John's NL Canada.

Objectives: During chronic human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 infection,
inhibitory molecules upregulated on lymphocytes contribute to effector cell
dysfunction and immune exhaustion. People living with HIV (PLWH) are at greater
risk for age-related morbidities, an issue magnified by human cytomegalovirus
(CMV) coinfection. As CMV infection modifies natural killer (NK) cell properties 
and NK cells contribute to protection against HIV-1 infection, we considered the 
role of T-cell immunoreceptor with immunoglobulin and intracellular tyrosine
inhibitory motif domains (TIGIT) in NK cell-based HIV-1 immunotherapy and
elimination strategies.
Methods: We measured TIGIT expression on immune cell subsets of 95 PLWH and
assessed its impact on NK cell function, including elimination of autologous CD4+
T cells infected through reactivation of endogenous HIV-1.
Results: TIGIT was expressed on CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells and NK cells from
PLWH. Although TIGIT levels on T cells correlated with HIV-1 disease progression,
the extent of TIGIT expression on NK cells more closely paralleled adaptation to 
CMV. TIGIT interacts with its predominant ligand, poliovirus receptor (PVR), to
inhibit effector cell functions. Circulating CD4+ T cells from PLWH more
frequently expressed PVR than HIV-seronegative controls, and PVR expression was
enriched in CD4+ T cells replicating HIV-1 ex vivo. Treatment with anti-TIGIT
monoclonal antibodies increased NK cell HIV-1-specific antibody-dependent
cytotoxicity in vitro and ex vivo.
Conclusion: Blocking TIGIT may be an effective strategy to invigorate
antibody-dependent NK cell activity against HIV-1 activated in cellular
reservoirs for cure or treatment strategies.

© 2021 The Authors. Clinical & Translational Immunology published by John Wiley &
Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Australian and New Zealand Society for
Immunology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/cti2.1348 
PMCID: PMC8527024
PMID: 34707863 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

