
1. J Virol. 2021 Oct 27:JVI0134421. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01344-21. [Epub ahead of print]

CCCH-zinc finger antiviral protein relieves immunosuppression of T cell induced
by avian leukosis virus subgroup J via NLP-PKC-δ-NFAT pathway.

Zhu M(1)(2), Zhou J(1), Zhou D(1), Yang K(1), Li B(2), Cheng Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Shandong Agricultural University, 61 Daizong
Street, Taian City, Shandong Province, 271018, China.
(2)Institute of Veterinary Medicine, Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biological Engineering and Technology, Ministry of
Agriculture, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210014, China.

CCCH-zinc finger antiviral protein (ZAP) can recognize and induce the degradation
of mRNAs and proteins of certain viruses, as well as exert its antiviral activity
by activating T cell. However, the mechanism of ZAP mediating T cell activation
during virus infection remains unclear. Here, we found a potential function of
ZAP that relieves immunosuppression of T cell induced by avian leukosis virus
subgroup J (ALV-J) via a novel signaling pathway that involves norbin like
protein (NLP), protein kinase C delta (PKC-δ) and nuclear factor of activated T
cell (NFAT). Specifically, ZAP expression activated T cells by promoting the
dephosphorylation and nuclear translocation of NFAT. Furthermore, knockdown of
ZAP weakened the reactivity and antiviral response of T cells. Mechanistically,
ZAP reduced PKC-δ activity by up-regulating and reactivating NLP through
competitively binding with viral protein. Knockdown of NLP decreased the
dephosphorylation of PKC-δ by ZAP expression. Moreover, we showed that knockdown 
of PKC-δ reduced the phosphorylation levels of NFAT and enhanced its nuclear
translocation. Taken together, these data revealed that ZAP relieves
immunosuppression caused by ALV-J and mediates T cell activation through
NLP-PKC-δ-NFAT pathway. Importance The evolution of host defense system is driven
synchronously in the process of resisting virus invasion. Accordingly, host
innate defense factors exert effectively work in suppressing virus replication.
However, it remains unclear that whether the host innate defense factors are
involved in antiviral immune response against the invasion of immunosuppressive
viruses. Here, we found that CCCH-type zinc finger antiviral protein (ZAP)
effectively worked in resistance on immunosuppression caused by avian leukosis
virus subgroup J (ALV-J), a classic immunosuppressive virus. Evidence showed that
ZAP released the phosphatase activity of NLP inhibited by ALV-J and further
activated NFAT by inactivating PKC-δ. This novel molecular mechanism that ZAP
regulates antiviral immune response by mediating NLP-PKC-δ-NFAT pathway has
greatly enriched the understanding of the functions of host innate defense
factors and provided important scientific ideas and theoretical basis for the
research of immunosuppressive virus and antiviral immunity.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01344-21 
PMID: 34705559 

