
1. Hawaii J Health Soc Welf. 2021 Oct;80(10 Suppl 2):36-45.

Addressing Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander Data Deficiencies Through a
Community-based Collaborative Response to the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Kamaka ML(1), Watkins-Victorino L(2), Lee A(3), Freitas SM(2), Ramsey
KW(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Quint J(4), Ku TL(5), Nishizaki K(6), Kaholokula JK(1).

Author information: 
(1)John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, Honolulu,
HI.
(2)Office of Hawaiian Affairs, Honolulu, HI.
(3)Thompson School of Social Work & Public Health, University of Hawai'i at
Mānoa, Honolulu, HI.
(4)Hawai'i State Department of Health, Honolulu, HI.
(5)Papa Ola Lōkahi, Honolulu, HI.
(6)The Queen's Health Systems, Honolulu, HI.

Early evidence of disproportionate COVID-19 infection and death rates in Native
Hawaiian and Pacific Islander communities in the continental US raised concerns
for similar disparities in Hawai'i, where these communities make up 25% of the
state's population. Representatives from more than 40 different government,
academic, institutional and community-based organizations partnered to form the
Hawai'i Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander COVID-19 Response, Recovery, and
Resilience Team. The team consists of 5 committees including the Data & Research 
Committee. This committee is tasked with examining issues regarding the
acquisition, quality, public reporting, and utilization of race/ethnicity-related
health data used to inform priorities and guide resource allocation. Problems
addressed by this committee include: inconsistency across agencies in the use of 
race identifiers, defaulting to the Office of Management and Budget standards
which aggregated Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islanders, and methods of data
collection and reporting by the Department of Health. Outcomes include: 2 forms
with race categories that reflect the population of Hawai'i; the reporting of
disaggregated data by the Department of Health; and conversations with testing
sites, laboratories, and health institutions urging a standardized form for
race/ethnicity data collection. The collection and reporting of disaggregated
race/ethnicity data is critical to guiding organizations in addressing underlying
inequities in chronic disease and social determinants of health that can
exacerbate the adverse effects of COVID-19. The Data and Research Committee's
network offers a community-based model for collaborative work that honors culture
and ensures Native Hawaiian, Pacific Islander, and other minority populations are
recognized and counted.

©Copyright 2021 by University Health Partners of Hawai‘i (UHP Hawai‘i).


PMCID: PMC8538117
PMID: 34704067  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

