
1. Clin Sci (Lond). 2021 Oct 29;135(20):2423-2428. doi: 10.1042/CS20210846.

Accelerating the transition of clinical science to translational medicine.

Holgate ST(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Clinical Professor of Immunopharmacology, Clinical and Experimental
Sciences, Facuty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton SO16 6YD,
U.K.

The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has shown the importance of medical research in
responding to the urgent prevention and health needs to combat the devastating
disease, COVID-19, that this β-coronavirus unleashed. Equally, it has
demonstrated the importance of interdisciplinary working to translate scientific 
discovery into public and patient benefit. As we come to adjust to live with this
new virus, it is important to look back and see what lessons we have learnt in
the way scientific medical discoveries can be more effectively and rapidly moved 
into public benefit. Clinical Science has had a long and distinguished history
with this Journal bearing the same name and being an important contributor to the
rapidly increasing use of human pathobiological data to gain mechanistic
understanding of disease mechanisms leading to new diagnostic tests and
treatments. The recognition that many complex diseases engage multiple causal
pathways that may vary from patient to patient, and at different times across the
lifecourse, has led to the emergence of stratified or precision medicine in which
the right treatment is given to the right patient at the right time and, in doing
so, minimise 'non-responders' and off-target side effects. Applications of omics 
technologies, the digitalisation of biology and the applications of machine
learning and artificial intelligence (AI) are accelerating disease insights at
pace with translation of discoveries into new diagnostic tests and treatments.
The future of clinical science, as it morphs into translational medicine, is now 
creating unique possibilities where even the most intractable diseases are now
open to being conquered.

© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Portland Press Limited on behalf of the
Biochemical Society.

DOI: 10.1042/CS20210846 
PMID: 34709405  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

