
1. Brain Pathol. 2021 Oct 28:e13031. doi: 10.1111/bpa.13031. [Epub ahead of print]

Clinical, neuropathological, and immunological short- and long-term feature of a 
mouse model mimicking human herpes virus encephalitis.

Sehl-Ewert J(1), Schwaiger T(2)(3), Schäfer A(2), Hölper JE(2)(4), Klupp BG(4),
Teifke JP(1), Blohm U(2), Mettenleiter TC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Animal Facilities and Biorisk Management,
Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Greifswald-Insel Riems, Germany.
(2)Institute of Immunology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Greifswald-Insel Riems, 
Germany.
(3)ViraTherapeutics GmbH, Rum, Austria.
(4)Institute of Molecular Virology and Cell Biology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut,
Greifswald-Insel Riems, Germany.

Herpes simplex encephalitis (HSE) is one of the most serious diseases of the
nervous system in humans. However, its pathogenesis is still only poorly
understood. Although several mouse models of predominantly herpes simplex virus 1
(HSV-1) infections mimic different crucial aspects of HSE, central questions
remain unanswered. They comprise the specific temporofrontal tropism, viral
spread within the central nervous system (CNS), as well as potential molecular
and immunological barriers that drive virus into latency while only rarely
resulting in severe HSE. We have recently proposed an alternative mouse model by 
using a pseudorabies virus (PrV) mutant that more faithfully represents the
striking features of human HSE: temporofrontal meningoencephalitis with few
severely, but generally only moderately to subclinically affected mice as well as
characteristic behavioral abnormalities. Here, we characterized this animal model
using 6- to 8-week-old female CD-1 mice in more detail. Long-term investigation
over 6 months consistently revealed a biphasic course of infection accompanied by
recurring clinical signs including behavioral alterations and mainly mild
meningoencephalitis restricted to the temporal and frontal lobes. By
histopathological and immunological analyses, we followed the kinetics and
spatial distribution of inflammatory lesions as well as the underlying cytokine
expression in the CNS over 21 days within the acute phase of infection. Affecting
the temporal lobes, the inflammatory infiltrate was composed of lymphocytes and
macrophages showing a predominantly lymphocytic shift 15 days after infection. A 
strong increase was observed in cytokines CXCL10, CCL2, CCL5, and CXCL1
recruiting inflammatory cells to the CNS. Unlike the majority of infected mice,
strongly affected animals demonstrated extensive temporal lobe edema, which is
typically present in severe human HSE cases. In summary, these results support
the validity of our animal model for in-depth investigation of HSE pathogenesis.

© 2021 The Authors. Brain Pathology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf 
of International Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/bpa.13031 
PMID: 34709694 

