
1. Hawaii J Health Soc Welf. 2021 Oct;80(10 Suppl 2):30-35.

Micronesians Building Healthier Communities During the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Shek DM(1), Delafield R(2), Viernes JP(3), Pangelinan J(4), Sound-Kikku I(5),
Paul J(6), Day TT(7), Asher SS(8).

Author information: 
(1)William S. Richardson School of Law, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, Honolulu,
HI.
(2)Department of Native Hawaiian Health, John A. Burns School of Medicine,
University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, Honolulu, HI.
(3)Center for Pacific Islands Studies, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, Honolulu, 
HI.
(4)John T. Milliken Department of Medicine, Washington University School of
Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO.
(5)Kōkua Kalihi Valley Comprehensive Family Services, Honolulu, HI.
(6)Marshallese Community Organization of Hawai'i, Honolulu, HI.
(7)Micronesians United - Big Island, Hilo, HI.
(8)Office of Economic Revitalization, City & County of Honolulu, Honolulu, HI.

Micronesian communities in Hawai'i have a long history of mobilizing to address
challenges they encounter as the most recent and fastest growing Pacific Islander
immigrant population in the state. In particular, community leaders navigate a
slew of obstacles specific to systemic racism and health care access. These
hurdles have become exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic, prompting a range of
Micronesian-led responses to the health crisis including strategic adaptations to
existing networks and roles to address essential public health functions. These
community responses have filled many critical gaps left by the state's delayed
response to addressing the disparate impact of COVID-19 on Micronesian
communities. This article highlights and encourages engagement with diverse
models of collaboration and elevation of Micronesian leadership that has resulted
in more productive cooperation with government leaders, agencies, and
policymakers. This work offers insight into pathways forward toward healthier
Micronesian families and communities.

©Copyright 2021 by University Health Partners of Hawai‘i (UHP Hawai‘i).


PMCID: PMC8538110
PMID: 34704066  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

