
1. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2021 Oct 27. doi: 10.1152/ajplung.00013.2021.
[Epub ahead of print]

Respiratory syncytial virus infection induces the release of transglutaminase 2
from human airway epithelial cells.

Rayavara K(1), Kurosky A(2), Hosakote YM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Texas Medical Branch at
Galveston, Galveston, Texas, United States.
(2)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas Medical Branch at 
Galveston, Galveston, Texas, United States.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is an important human pathogen that causes
severe lower respiratory tract infections in young children, the elderly, and the
immunocompromised, yet no effective treatments or vaccines are available. The
precise mechanism underlying RSV-induced acute airway disease and associated
sequelae are not fully understood; however, early lung inflammatory and immune
events are thought to play a major role in the outcome of the disease. Moreover, 
oxidative stress responses in the airways plays a key role in the pathogenesis of
RSV. Oxidative stress has been shown to elevate cytosolic calcium (Ca2+) levels, 
which in turn activate Ca2+-dependent enzymes, including transglutaminase 2
(TG2). Transglutaminase 2 is a multifunctional cross-linking enzyme implicated in
various physiological and pathological conditions; however, its involvement in
respiratory virus-induced airway inflammation is largely unknown. In this study, 
we demonstrated that RSV-induced oxidative stress promotes enhanced activation
and release of TG2 from human lung epithelial cells as a result of its
translocation from the cytoplasm and subsequent release into the extracellular
space, which was mediated by Toll-like receptor (TLR)-4 and NF-κB pathways.
Antioxidant treatment significantly inhibited RSV-induced TG2 extracellular
release and activation via blocking viral replication. Also, treatment of
RSV-infected lung epithelial cells with TG2 inhibitor significantly reduced
RSV-induced matrix metalloprotease activities. These results suggested that
RSV-induced oxidative stress activates innate immune receptors in the airways,
such as TLRs, that can activate TG2 via the NF-κB pathway to promote
cross-linking of extracellular matrix proteins, resulting in enhanced
inflammation.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00013.2021 
PMID: 34704843 

