
1. Comput Math Methods Med. 2021 Oct 18;2021:4348910. doi: 10.1155/2021/4348910.
eCollection 2021.

Optimal Allocation of Vaccine and Antiviral Drugs for Influenza Containment over 
Delayed Multiscale Epidemic Model considering Time-Dependent Transmission Rate.

Abbasi Z(1), Zamani I(2), Amiri Mehra AH(1)(2), Ibeas A(3)(4), Shafieirad M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Kashan, Iran.
(2)Electrical and Electronic Engineering Department, Shahed University, Tehran,
Iran.
(3)Departament de Telecomunicació i Enginyeria de Sistemes, Escolad'Enginyeria,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Universidad de Bogotá Jorge Tadeo Lozano, Bogotá D.C., Colombia.

In this study, two types of epidemiological models called "within host" and
"between hosts" have been studied. The within-host model represents the innate
immune response, and the between-hosts model signifies the SEIR (susceptible,
exposed, infected, and recovered) epidemic model. The major contribution of this 
paper is to break the chain of infectious disease transmission by reducing the
number of susceptible and infected people via transferring them to the recovered 
people group with vaccination and antiviral treatment, respectively. Both
transfers are considered with time delay. In the first step, optimal control
theory is applied to calculate the optimal final time to control the disease
within a host's body with a cost function. To this end, the vaccination that
represents the effort that converts healthy cells into resistant-to-infection
cells in the susceptible individual's body is used as the first control input to 
vaccinate the susceptible individual against the disease. Moreover, the next
control input (antiviral treatment) is applied to eradicate the concentrations of
the virus and convert healthy cells into resistant-to-infection cells
simultaneously in the infected person's body to treat the infected individual.
The calculated optimal time in the first step is considered as the delay of
vaccination and antiviral treatment in the SEIR dynamic model. Using Pontryagin's
maximum principle in the second step, an optimal control strategy is also applied
to an SEIR mathematical model with a nonlinear transmission rate and time delay, 
which is computed as optimal time in the first step. Numerical results are
consistent with the analytical ones and corroborate our theoretical results.

Copyright © 2021 Zohreh Abbasi et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/4348910 
PMCID: PMC8545521
PMID: 34707682 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest.

