
1. Prim Health Care Res Dev. 2021 Oct 27;22:e57. doi: 10.1017/S1463423621000621.

How does English national end-of-life care policy impact on the experience of
older people at the end of life? Findings from a realist evaluation.

Barker R(1), Wilson P(2), Butler C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Fellow, Department of Health Services Research and Policy, Faculty of
Public Health and Policy, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London,
UK.
(2)Professor of Primary and Community Care, Centre for Health Services Studies,
University of Kent, Canterbury, UK.
(3)Clinical Professor of Palliative Medicine, Centre for Health Services Studies,
University of Kent, Canterbury, UK.

AIM: To explore the extent to which national policy in end-of-life care (EOLC) in
England influences and guides local practice, helping to ensure that care for
older people at the EOL is of a consistently good quality.
BACKGROUND: Whilst policy is recognised as an important component in determining 
the effectiveness of EOLC, there is scant literature which attempts to
interrogate how this happens or to hypothesise the mechanisms linking policy to
better outcomes.
METHOD: This article reports on the second phase of a realist evaluation
comprising three case studies of clinical commissioning groups, including 98
in-depth interviews with stakeholders, meeting observation and documentary
analysis.
FINDINGS: This study reveals the key contextual factors which need to be in place
at micro, meso and macro levels if good quality EOLC for older people is to be
achieved. The findings provide insight into rising local inequalities and reveal 
areas of dissonance between stakeholder priorities. Whilst patients privilege the
importance of receiving care and compassion in familiar surroundings at EOL,
there remains a clear tension between this and the medical drive to cure disease 
and extend life. The apparent devaluing of social care and subsequent lack of
resource has impacted significantly on the way in which dying is
experienced.Patient experience at EOL, shaped by the care received both formally 
and informally, is driven by a fragmented health and social care system. Whilst
the importance of system integration appears to have been recognised, significant
challenges remain in terms of shaping policy to adequately reflect this. This
study highlights the priority attached by patients and their families to the
social and relational aspect of death and dying and shines a light on the stark
disparities between the health and social care systems which became even more
evident at the height of the Covid-19 pandemic.

DOI: 10.1017/S1463423621000621 
PMCID: PMC8569907
PMID: 34702423  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

