
1. Vaccine. 2021 Nov 16;39(47):6817-6828. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.042. Epub
2021 Oct 23.

Coexpression of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) fusion (F) protein and
attachment glycoprotein (G) in a vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) vector system
provides synergistic effects against RSV infection in a cotton rat model.

Brakel KA(1), Binjawadagi B(2), French-Kim K(3), Watts M(4), Harder O(3), Ma
Y(3), Li J(3), Niewiesk S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH, United States. Electronic address:
brakel.6@osu.edu.
(2)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH, United States; Ceva Sante Animale, Lenexa, KS,
United States.
(3)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH, United States.
(4)Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, United States.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is one of the most important causes of
respiratory disease in infants, immunocompromised individuals, and the elderly.
Natural infection does not result in long-term immunity, and there is no licensed
vaccine. Vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) is a commonly used vaccine vector
platform against infectious diseases, and has been used as a vector for a
licensed Ebola vaccine. In this study, we expressed the RSV fusion (F) protein,
the RSV F protein stabilized in either a pre-fusion or a post-fusion
configuration, the attachment glycoprotein (G), or the G and F proteins of RSV in
combination in a VSV vector. Cotton rats were immunized with these recombinants
intranasally or subcutaneously to test immunogenicity. RSV F stabilized in either
a pre-fusion or a post-fusion configuration proved to be poorly immunogenic and
protective when compared to unmodified F. RSV G provided partial protection and
moderate levels of neutralizing antibody production, both of which improved with 
intranasal administration compared to subcutaneous inoculation. The most
successful vaccine vector was VSV expressing both the G and F proteins after
intranasal inoculation. Immunization with this recombinant induced neutralizing
antibodies and provided protection from RSV challenge in the upper and lower
respiratory tract for at least 80 days. Our results demonstrate that
co-expression of F and G proteins in a VSV vector provides synergistic effects in
inducing RSV-specific neutralizing antibodies and protection against RSV
infection.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.042 
PMCID: PMC8595748 [Available on 2022-11-16]
PMID: 34702618 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

