
1. J Clin Exp Hematop. 2021 Oct 26. doi: 10.3960/jslrt.21023. [Epub ahead of print]

Intratumoral cancer immunotherapy exploiting anti-viral immunity.

Kadowaki N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology, Rheumatology and
Respiratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Kagawa University, Kagawa, Japan.

After a long period of endeavor, immunotherapy has become the mainstream of
cancer therapies. This success is mostly ascribed to immune checkpoint blockade, 
chimeric antigen receptor-transduced T cell therapies, and bispecific antibodies.
However, these methods have been effective or applicable to only a limited
proportion of patients so far. Thus, further development of broadly applicable
and effective immunotherapies is eagerly anticipated. Given that innate immunity 
is key to the induction of robust adaptive immunity and that the
immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment is a major hurdle to overcome,
intratumoral immunotherapy in which delivery of immunostimulatory microbial
agents to the tumor site triggers innate immunity in situ is a rational strategy.
There has been a plethora of preclinical and clinical trials conducted involving 
the delivery of either mimetics of viral nucleic acids or oncolytic viruses
intratumorally to trigger innate immunity via various nucleic acid sensors in the
tumor site. Many of these have shown significant antitumor effects in mice,
particularly in combination with immune checkpoint blockade. Oncolytic herpes
simplex virus type 1 has been approved for the treatment of advanced melanoma in 
the United States and Europe and of glioblastoma in Japan. Whereas direct
intratumoral administration has mainly been chosen as a delivery route, several
promising compounds amenable to systemic administration have been developed.
Intratumoral delivery of immunostimulatory agents will become an important option
for cancer immunotherapy as an off-the-shelf, broadly applicable, and rational
strategy that exploits the physiology of immunity, namely anti-microbial
immunity.

DOI: 10.3960/jslrt.21023 
PMID: 34707035 

