
1. mBio. 2021 Oct 26;12(5):e0177621. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01776-21. Epub 2021 Oct 26.

Influenza A Virus (H1N1) Infection Induces Microglial Activation and Temporal
Dysbalance in Glutamatergic Synaptic Transmission.

Düsedau HP(1), Steffen J(1), Figueiredo CA(1), Boehme JD(2)(3), Schultz K(3),
Erck C(4), Korte M(5)(6), Faber-Zuschratter H(7), Smalla KH(7)(8), Dieterich
D(8), Kröger A(9)(10), Bruder D(2)(3), Dunay IR(1)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Inflammation and Neurodegeneration, Health Campus Immunology,
Infectiology and Inflammation (GC-I3), Otto-von-Guericke-University, Magdeburg,
Germany.
(2)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hospital Hygiene, Infection Immunology
Group, Health Campus Immunology, Infectiology and Inflammation (GC-I3),
Otto-von-Guericke-University, Magdeburg, Germany.
(3)Helmholtz Centre for Infection Researchgrid.7490.a, Immune Regulation Group,
Braunschweig, Germany.
(4)Helmholtz Centre for Infection Researchgrid.7490.a, Cellular Proteome Research
Group, Braunschweig, Germany.
(5)Department of Cellular Neurobiology, Zoological Institute, TU-Braunschweig,
Braunschweig, Germany.
(6)Helmholtz Centre for Infection Researchgrid.7490.a, Neuroinflammation and
Neurodegeneration Group, Braunschweig, Germany.
(7)Leibniz Institute of Neurobiology, Magdeburg, Germany.
(8)Institute for Pharmacology and Toxicology, Health Campus Immunology,
Infectiology and Inflammation (GC-I3), Otto-von-Guericke-University, Magdeburg,
Germany.
(9)Helmholtz Centre for Infection Researchgrid.7490.a, Innate Immunity and
Infection Group, Braunschweig, Germany.
(10)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hospital Hygiene, Molecular
Microbiology Group, Health Campus Immunology, Infectiology and Inflammation
(GC-I3), Otto-von-Guericke-University, Magdeburg, Germany.
(11)Center for Behavioral Brain Sciences (CBBS), Magdeburg, Germany.

Influenza A virus (IAV) causes respiratory tract disease and is responsible for
seasonal and reoccurring epidemics affecting all age groups. Next to typical
disease symptoms, such as fever and fatigue, IAV infection has been associated
with behavioral alterations presumably contributing to the development of major
depression. Previous experiments using IAV/H1N1 infection models have shown
impaired hippocampal neuronal morphology and cognitive abilities, but the
underlying pathways have not been fully described. In this study, we demonstrate 
that infection with a low-dose non-neurotrophic H1N1 strain of IAV causes ample
peripheral immune response followed by a temporary blood-brain barrier
disturbance. Although histological examination did not reveal obvious
pathological processes in the brains of IAV-infected mice, detailed
multidimensional flow cytometric characterization of immune cells uncovered
subtle alterations in the activation status of microglial cells. More
specifically, we detected an altered expression pattern of major
histocompatibility complex classes I and II, CD80, and F4/80 accompanied by
elevated mRNA levels of CD36, CD68, C1QA, and C3, suggesting evolved synaptic
pruning. To closer evaluate how these profound changes affect synaptic balance,
we established a highly sensitive multiplex flow cytometry-based approach called 
flow synaptometry. The introduction of this novel technique enabled us to
simultaneously quantify the abundance of pre- and postsynapses from distinct
brain regions. Our data reveal a significant reduction of VGLUT1 in excitatory
presynaptic terminals in the cortex and hippocampus, identifying a subtle
dysbalance in glutamatergic synapse transmission upon H1N1 infection in mice. In 
conclusion, our results highlight the consequences of systemic IAV-triggered
inflammation on the central nervous system and the induction and progression of
neuronal alterations. IMPORTANCE Influenza A virus (IAV) causes mainly
respiratory tract disease with fever and fatigue but is also associated with
behavioral alterations in humans. Here, we demonstrate that infection with a
low-dose non-neurotrophic H1N1 strain of IAV causes peripheral immune response
followed by a temporary blood-brain barrier disturbance. Characterization of
immune cells uncovered subtle alterations in the activation status of microglia
cells that might reshape neuronal synapses. We established a highly sensitive
multiplex flow cytometry-based approach called flow synaptometry to more closely 
study the synapses. Thus, we detected a specific dysbalance in glutamatergic
synapse transmission upon H1N1 infection in mice. In conclusion, our results
highlight the consequences of systemic IAV-triggered inflammation on the central 
nervous system and the induction and progression of neuronal alterations.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01776-21 
PMCID: PMC8546584
PMID: 34700379 

