
1. J Virol. 2021 Oct 27:JVI0139521. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01395-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Core Protein-Directed Antivirals and Importin β Can Synergistically Disrupt HBV
Capsids.

Kim C(1), Barnes LF(2), Schlicksup CJ(1), Patterson AJ(3), Bothner BB(3), Jarrold
MF(2), Wang CJ(4), Zlotnick A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular & Cellular Biochemistry, Indiana University,
Bloomington, Indiana, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, Montana State University, Bozeman,
Montana, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Pennsylvania State University College
of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania, USA.

Viral structural proteins can have multiple activities. Antivirals that target
structural proteins have potential to exhibit multiple antiviral mechanisms.
Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) core protein (Cp) is involved in most stages of the viral
lifecycle: it assembles into capsids, packages viral RNA, is a metabolic
compartment for reverse transcription, interacts with nuclear trafficking
machinery, and disassembles to release the viral genome into the nucleus. During 
nuclear localization, HBV capsids bind to host importins (e.g. Impβ) via Cp's
C-terminal domain (CTD); the CTD is localized to the interior of the capsid and
is transiently exposed on the exterior. We used HAP12 as a representative Cp
Allosteric Modulators (CpAMs), a class of antivirals that inappropriately
stimulates and misdirects HBV assembly and deforms capsids. CpAM impact on other 
aspects of the HBV lifecycle is poorly understood. We investigated how HAP12
influenced the interactions between empty or RNA-filled capsids with Impβ and
trypsin in vitro. We showed that HAP12 can modulate CTD accessibility and capsid 
stability, depending on the saturation of HAP12-binding sites. We demonstrated
that Impβ synergistically contributes to capsid disruption at high levels of
HAP12 saturation, using electron microscopy to visualize disruption and
rearrangement of Cp dimers into aberrant complexes. However, RNA-filled capsids
resisted the destabilizing effects of HAP12 and Impβ. In summary, we show host
protein-induced catalysis of capsid disruption, an unexpected additional
mechanism of action for CpAMs. Potentially, untimely capsid disassembly can
hamper the HBV lifecycle and also cause the virus to become vulnerable to host
innate immune responses. IMPORTANCE The HBV core, an icosahedral complex of 120
copies of the homodimeric core (capsid) protein with or without packaged nucleic 
acid, is transported to the host nucleus by its interaction with host importin
proteins. Importin-core interaction requires the core protein C-terminal domain, 
which is inside the capsid, to "flip" to the capsid exterior. Core-protein
directed drugs that affect capsid assembly and stability have been developed
recently. We show that these molecules can, synergistically with importins,
disrupt capsids. This mechanism of action, synergism with host protein, has
potential to disrupt the virus lifecycle and activate the innate immune system.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01395-21 
PMID: 34705562 

