
1. Clin Exp Vaccine Res. 2021 Sep;10(3):229-239. doi: 10.7774/cevr.2021.10.3.229.
Epub 2021 Sep 30.

Staphylococcus aureus derived hyaluronic acid and bacillus Calmette-Guérin
purified proteins as immune enhancers to rabies vaccine and related
immuno-histopathological alterations.

Shebl RI(1), Amer ME(2), Abuamara TMM(3), Matar ER(4), Ahmed HF(3), Gomah TA(2), 
El Moselhy LE(2), Abu-Elghait M(5), Mohamed AF(6).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Immunology Department, Faculty of Pharmacy, Ahram Canadian
University (ACU), Cairo, Egypt.
(2)Histology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Al-Azhar University, Damietta,
Egypt.
(3)Histology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Al-Azhar University, Cairo, Egypt.
(4)Pathology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Al-Azhar University, Cairo, Egypt.
(5)Botany and Microbiology Department, Faculty of Science, Al-Azhar University,
Cairo, Egypt.
(6)International Center for Training and Advanced Researches (ICTAR-Egypt),
Cairo, Egypt.

Purpose: One of the essential goals regarding the successful control of rabies
infection is the development of a safe, effective, and inexpensive vaccine. the
current study aimed to evaluate the inactivation potential of β-propiolactone
(βPL), binary ethyleneimine (BEI), and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2).
Materials and Methods: Estimating the inactivation kinetics of βPL, BEI, and H2O2
revealed that the tested inactivants could completely and irreversibly inactivate
rabies virus within 2, 12, and 4 hours, respectively while maintaining its viral 
immunogenicity. The potency of βPL, BEI, and H2O2 inactivated vaccines was higher
than the World Health Organization acceptance limit and were in the order of
3.75, 4.21, and 3.64 IU/mL, respectively. Monitoring the humoral and cellular
immunity elicited post-immunization using Staphylococcus aureus derived
hyaluronic acid (HA) and bacillus Calmette-Guérin purified protein derivative
(PPD) adjuvanted rabies vaccine candidates were carried out using enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay.
Results: Results demonstrated that both adjuvants could progressively enhance the
release of anti-rabies total immunoglobulin G as well as the pro-inflammatory
mediators (interferon-gamma and interleukin-5) relative to time. However, a
higher immune response was developed in the case of HA adjuvanted rabies vaccine 
compared to PPD adjuvanted one. The harmful consequences of the tested adjuvants 
were considered via investigating the histopathological changes in the tissues of
the immunized rats using hematoxylin and eosin stain. Lower adverse effects were 
observed post-vaccination with HA and PPD adjuvanted vaccines compared to that
detected following administration of the currently used alum as standard
adjuvant.
Conclusion: Our findings suggested that HA and PPD could serve as a promising
platform for the development of newly adjuvanted rabies vaccines with elevated
immune enhancing potentials and lower risk of health hazards.

© Korean Vaccine Society.

DOI: 10.7774/cevr.2021.10.3.229 
PMCID: PMC8511591
PMID: 34703805 

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest relevant to
this article was reported.

