
1. Indian J Ophthalmol. 2021 Nov;69(11):2944-2950. doi: 10.4103/ijo.IJO_1242_21.

Situational analysis of diabetic retinopathy screening in India: How has it
changed in the last three years?

Murthy GVS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Indian Institute of Public Health, Public Health Foundation of India,
Hyderabad, Telangana, India.

Of all the eye conditions in the contemporary Indian context, diabetic
retinopathy (DR) attracts the maximum attention not just of the eye care
fraternity but the entire medical fraternity. Countries are at different stages
of evolution in structured DR screening services. In most low and middle income
countries, screening is opportunistic, while in most of the high income countries
structured population-based DR screening is the established norm. To reduce
inequities in access, it is important that all persons with diabetes are provided
equal access to DR screening and management services. Such programs have been
proven to reverse the magnitude of vision-threatening diabetic retinopathy in
countries like England and Scotland. DR screening should not be considered an
endpoint in itself but the starting point in a continuum of services for
effective management of DR services so that the risk of vision loss can be
mitigated. Till recently all DR screening programs in India were opportunistic
models where persons with diabetes visiting an eye care facility were screened.
Since 2016, with support from International funders, demonstration models
integrating DR screening services in the public health system were initiated.
These pilots showed that a systematic integrated structured DR screening program 
is possible in India and need to be scaled up across the country. Many DR
screening and referral initiatives have been adversely impacted by the COVID-19
pandemic and advocacy with the government is critical to facilitate continuous
sustainable services.

DOI: 10.4103/ijo.IJO_1242_21 
PMID: 34708728  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None

