
1. Cancer. 2021 Oct 27. doi: 10.1002/cncr.33976. [Epub ahead of print]

COVID-19 and patients with cancer: Investigating treatment impact, information
sources, and COVID-19-related knowledge, attitudes, and practices.

Ugas MA(1), Samoil D(1), Avery L(2), Berlin A(3)(4)(5), Giuliani ME(1)(3)(4),
Papadakos TJ(1)(6), Quartey NKL(1), Papadakos JK(1)(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Health Literacy Research Centre, Cancer Education, Princess Margaret
Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Biostatistics Department, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(4)Radiation Medicine Program, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(5)Techna Institute, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Patient Education, Ontario Health (Cancer Care Ontario), Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(7)Institute of Health Policy, Management and Evaluation, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has caused enormous 
strain on public health. Patients with cancer are particularly susceptible to the
disease, and their treatment plans have been threatened by public health
restrictions designed to contain the spread.
METHODS: This study examined the effects of the pandemic on cancer patients'
psychology, knowledge, attitudes, and practices concerning COVID-19 as well as
their perceptions of the impact of COVID-19 on their cancer health care services.
A survey was sent to 5800 patients at a cancer center in Toronto, Canada.
Descriptive results were summarized. Qualitative feedback was coded and
summarized. To examine for potential associations, regression models were tested 
for the outcomes of patient psychological well-being, knowledge, attitudes, and
practices, and they accounted for several demographic, health literacy, and
disease variables.
RESULTS: A total of 1631 surveys were completed. Most patients saw their
appointments shifted to virtual visits, and for a substantial minority, there was
no change. A majority of the patients (62%) expressed fears about contracting the
virus. There were no independent predictors of COVID-19-related knowledge. Fears 
were more pronounced among patients who did not speak English and those who used 
social media more often. Female participants, those who scored higher on
knowledge questions, and those who used cancer center materials were more likely 
to take preventative measures against infection.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides a snapshot of the state of cancer patient
treatment and the knowledge, attitudes, and practices of patients between the
first 2 waves of the pandemic. The study's results can inform our understanding
of adaptation to conditions during and after the outbreak.

© 2021 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.33976 
PMID: 34705287 

