
1. J Virol. 2021 Oct 27:JVI0169021. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01690-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Reply to Grigoriev et al., "Sequences of SARS-CoV-2 "Hybrids" with the Human
Genome: Signs 1 of Non-coding RNA?"

Yan B(1), Chakravorty S(1), Mirabelli C(2), Wang L(3), Trujillo-Ochoa JL(4),
Chauss D(4), Kumar D(1)(4), Lionakis MS(5), Olson MR(6), Wobus CE(2), Afzali
B(4), Kazemian M(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA.
(3)Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana,
USA.
(4)Immunoregulation Section, Kidney Diseases Branch, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(5)Fungal Pathogenesis Section, Laboratory of Clinical Immunology and
Microbiology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), NIH,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(6)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana,
USA.

High throughput sequencing reads from virally infected cells provide detailed
information about both the infected host cells and invading viruses (1). For
example, RNA-sequencing techniques from infected cells contains reads that
unequivocally align to either the host or the viral transcriptomes, enabling
quantification of host and viral gene expressions (2). Occasionally, there are
reads with split characteristics, having one part (e.g., the 5' end)
unambiguously matching the host and another part (e.g., the 3' end) clearly
matching the viral genomes. The split characteristic with unambiguous matching on
either part is the key here, typically requiring convincing stretches of sequence
matches such as >30bp that we used in our analysis (3). Such reads are termed
host-virus chimeric reads (HVCRs). Indeed, HVCRs that surpass statistical
reproducibility and signal-to-noise standards might carry novel insights into the
biology of host-virus interactions (4, 5). Thus, it is important to unambiguously
detect statistically rigorous and biologically relevant HVCRs. We and others have
shown that detection of relevant HVCRs is complicated by unfaithful
reverse-transcriptase and polymerase enzymes that template-switch during typical 
high throughput sequencing library preparation protocols (6-9).

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01690-21 
PMID: 34705544 

