
1. Proteomics Clin Appl. 2021 Oct 26:e2100042. doi: 10.1002/prca.202100042. [Epub
ahead of print]

Proteomic profiles of Zika virus-infected placentas bearing fetuses with
microcephaly.

Quiñones-Vega M(1), Velásquez E(1), Sosa-Acosta P(1), Melo A(2), Garcez PP(3),
Nogueira FCS(1)(4), Domont GB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Proteomic Unit, Institute of Chemistry, Federal
University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro - RJ, Brazil.
(2)Instituto Pesquisa Professor Joaquim Amorim Neto (IPESQ), Campina Grande,
Paraíba, Brazil.
(3)Institute of Biomedical Science, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de 
Janeiro - RJ, Brazil.
(4)Laboratory of Proteomics (LabProt), LADETEC, Institute of Chemistry, Federal
University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro - RJ, Brazil.

PURPOSE: Zika virus (ZIKV) transmission to the fetus during pregnancy could
enable a collection of severe fetal malformations like microcephaly (MC), termed 
Congenital Zika Syndrome (CZS). The mechanisms involved in ZIKV transplacental
transmission are not fully understood.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Here we aim to identify in placental tissues the deregulated
proteins associated with ZIKV-induced MC using label-free proteomics.
RESULTS: We found proteins associated with DNA damage and gene expression
inhibition up-regulated in infected placentas with no MC fetuses (Z+) compared to
the control group (Ctr). Actin filament organization and the immune response were
also found deregulated in the Z+ group. In ZIKV-positive placentas bearing
fetuses with MC (MC+) was detected an increase in T cell activation, indicating
an elevated immune response. A comparison between MC+ and Z+ groups showed a
higher abundance of proteins related to endocytosis and autophagy in MC+,
suggesting a higher transcytosis of vesicles with ZIKV particles across the
maternal-fetal interface.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Our results suggest that higher expression of
integrins in MC+ might be associated with high internalization of the virus since
these proteins are known as virus receptors. Similarly, an increased immune
response in the placenta and higher infiltration of the virus to the fetus could 
contribute to the neurological malformation of the CZS.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/prca.202100042 
PMID: 34704388 

