
1. JMIR Form Res. 2021 Oct 28;5(10):e20970. doi: 10.2196/20970.

WhatsApp-Based Focus Groups Among Mexican-Origin Women in Zika Risk Area:
Feasibility, Acceptability, and Data Quality.

Anderson E(1)(2), Koss M(1), Castro Luque AL(3), Garcia D(1), Lopez E(1), Ernst
K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Promotion Sciences, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ,
United States.
(2)International Center for Research on Women, Washington, DC, United States.
(3)El Colegio de Sonora, Hermosillo, Mexico.
(4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Arizona, Tucson,
AZ, United States.

BACKGROUND: Despite unprecedented advances in worldwide access to the internet
via smartphones, barriers to engaging hard-to-reach populations remain in many
methods of health research. A potential avenue for conducting qualitative
research is via participatory web-based media, including the free, popular social
platform WhatsApp. However, despite the clear advantages of engaging with
participants over a well-established web-based platform, logistical challenges
remain.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to report evidence on the feasibility and
acceptability of WhatsApp as a method to conduct focus groups.
METHODS: A pilot focus group was conducted with Spanish-speaking women near the
US-Mexico border. The content focus was knowledge and perceived risks for
exposure to the Zika virus during pregnancy.
RESULTS: Evidence was obtained regarding WhatsApp as a low-cost, logistically
feasible methodology that resulted in rich qualitative data from a population
that is often reticent to engage in traditional research. A total of 5
participants participated in a focus group, of whom all 5 consistently
contributed to the focus group chat in WhatsApp, which was conducted over 3
consecutive days.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings are noteworthy at a time when face-to-face focus
groups, the gold standard, are risky or precluded by safe COVID-19 guidelines.
Other implications include more applications and evaluations of WhatsApp for
delivering one-on-one or group health education interventions on sensitive
topics. This paper outlines the key steps and considerations for the replication 
or adaptation of methods.

©Elizabeth Anderson, Mary Koss, Ana Lucía Castro Luque, David Garcia, Elise
Lopez, Kacey Ernst. Originally published in JMIR Formative Research
(https://formative.jmir.org), 28.10.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/20970 
PMCID: PMC8587330
PMID: 34709185 

