
1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Oct 11;12:760682. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.760682.
eCollection 2021.

Development of a Mosquito Repellent Formulation Based on Nanostructured Lipid
Carriers.

Abrantes DC(1), Rogerio CB(1), de Oliveira JL(2), Campos EVR(3), de Araújo DR(3),
Pampana LC(4), Duarte MJ(4), Valadares GF(4), Fraceto LF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Science and Technology, São Paulo State University (UNESP), São
Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Faculty of Agronomy and Veterinary Sciences, São Paulo State University
(UNESP), São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Federal University of ABC, São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Veterinary Products Institute, Araçoiaba da Serra, Brazil.

Arboviral diseases are a threat to global public health systems, with recent data
suggesting that around 40% of the world's population is at risk of contracting
arboviruses. The use of mosquito repellents is an appropriate strategy to avoid
humans coming into contact with vectors transmitting these viruses. However, the 
cost associated with daily applications of repellents can make their use
unfeasible for the low-income populations that most need protection. Therefore,
the development of effective formulations offers a way to expand access to this
means of individual protection. Consequently, research efforts have focused on
formulations with smaller quantities of active agents and sustained release
technology, aiming to reduce re-applications, toxicity, and cost. The present
study investigates the development of nanostructured lipid carriers (NLCs) loaded
with a mixture of the compounds icaridin (synthetic) and geraniol (natural),
incorporated in cellulose hydrogel. The NLCs were prepared by the
emulsion/solvent evaporation method and were submitted to physicochemical
characterization as a function of time (at 0, 15, 30, and 60 days). The prepared 
system presented an average particle size of 252 ± 5 nm, with encapsulation
efficiency of 99% for both of the active compounds. The stability profile
revealed that the change of particle size was not significant (p > 0.05),
indicating high stability of the system. Rheological characterization of the gels
containing NLCs showed that all formulations presented pseudoplastic and
thixotropic behavior, providing satisfactory spreadability and long shelf life.
Morphological analysis using atomic force microscopy (AFM) revealed the presence 
of spherical nanoparticles (252 ± 5 nm) in the cellulose gel matrix. Permeation
assays showed low fluxes of the active agents through a Strat-M® membrane, with
low permeability coefficients, indicating that the repellents would be retained
on the surface to which they are applied, rather than permeating the tissue.
These findings open perspectives for the use of hybrid formulations consisting of
gels containing nanoparticles that incorporate repellents effective against
arthropod-borne virus. These systems could potentially provide improvements
considering the issues of effectiveness, toxicity, and safety.

Copyright © 2021 Abrantes, Rogerio, de Oliveira, Campos, de Araújo, Pampana,
Duarte, Valadares and Fraceto.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.760682 
PMCID: PMC8542870
PMID: 34707504 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

