
1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Oct 11;8:746644. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.746644.
eCollection 2021.

SARS-CoV-2 Infection in Fully Vaccinated Individuals of Old Age Strongly Boosts
the Humoral Immune Response.

Müller L(1), Andrée M(1), Ostermann PN(1), Jazmati N(2), Flüh G(2), Fischer
JC(3), Bölke E(4), Heger E(5), Vanshylla K(5), Klein F(5), Wisplinghoff H(2),
Schaal H(1), Drexler I(1), Walker A(1), Adams O(1), Timm J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Faculty, Institute of Virology, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf,
Germany.
(2)Institute of Virology, Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf,
Germany.
(3)Institute for Transplant Diagnostics and Cell Therapeutics, Medical Faculty,
University Hospital Düsseldorf, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Medical Faculty, University of Düsseldorf,
Düsseldorf, Germany.
(5)Institute of Virology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne,
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

Prophylactic vaccination against SARS-CoV-2 is one of the most important measures
to contain the COVID-19 pandemic. Recently, break-through infections following
vaccination against this virus have been reported. Here, we describe the humoral 
immune response of break-through infections in fully vaccinated individuals of
old age from an outbreak in a nursing home. In cooperation with the local health 
authority, blood samples from fully vaccinated and infected as well as fully
vaccinated and uninfected residents of the nursing home were collected 4 weeks
after the onset of the outbreak. The humoral immune response was determined in a 
neutralisation assay with replication-competent virus isolates and by a
quantitative ELISA. In this outbreak a total of 23 residents and four health care
workers were tested positive for SARS-CoV-2. Four residents were unvaccinated,
including one with a severe course of disease who later severe disease course who
later succumbed to infection. Despite their old age, all vaccinated residents
showed no or only mild disease. Comparison of the humoral immune response
revealed significantly higher antibody levels in fully vaccinated infected
individuals compared to fully vaccinated uninfected individuals (p < 0.001).
Notably, although only a minority of the vaccinated uninfected group showed
neutralisation capacity against SARS-CoV-2, all vaccinated and infected
individuals showed high-titre neutralisation of SARS-CoV-2 including the alpha
and beta variant. Large SARS-CoV-2 outbreaks can occur in fully vaccinated
populations, but seem to associate with mild disease. SARS-CoV-2 infection in
fully vaccinated individuals is a strong booster of the humoral immune response
providing enhanced neutralisation capacity against immune evasion variants.

Copyright © 2021 Müller, Andrée, Ostermann, Jazmati, Flüh, Fischer, Bölke, Heger,
Vanshylla, Klein, Wisplinghoff, Schaal, Drexler, Walker, Adams and Timm.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.746644 
PMCID: PMC8544807
PMID: 34708057 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

