
1. BMJ Open. 2021 Oct 27;11(10):e052135. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-052135.

Challenges and solutions: surveying researchers on what type of community
engagement and involvement activities are feasible in low and middle income
countries during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Kroese K(#)(1), Porter K(#)(2), Surridge H(#)(3), Tembo D(#)(3).

Author information: 
(1)NIHR Global Health Research Unit on Global Surgery, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, UK.
(2)Wessex Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton,
UK katie.porter@nihr.ac.uk.
(3)Wessex Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton,
UK.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVES: Measures to limit the spread of infection during the COVID-19 global 
pandemic have made engaging and involving members of the community in global
health research more challenging. This research aimed to explore how global
health researchers adapted to the imposed pandemic measures in low and middle
income countries (LMICs) and how they overcame challenges to effective community 
engagement and involvement (CEI).
DESIGN: A qualitative two-stage mixed-methods study involving an online survey
and a virtual round table.
SETTING: The survey and round table were completed online.
PARTICIPANTS: Of 53 participants, 43 were LMIC-based or UK-based global health
researchers and/or CEI professionals, and 10 worked for the National Institute
for Health Research or UK Government's Department of Health and Social Care.
OUTCOME MEASURES: This study aimed to capture data on: the number of CEI
activities halted and adapted because of the COVID-19 pandemic; where CEI is
possible; how it has been adapted; what the challenges and successes were; and
the potential impact of adapted or halted CEI on global health research.
RESULTS: Pandemic control measures forced the majority of researchers to stop or 
amend their planned CEI activities. Most face-to-face CEI activities were
replaced with remote methods, such as online communication. Virtual engagement
enabled researchers to maintain already established relationships with community 
members, but was less effective when developing new relationships or addressing
challenges around the inclusion of marginalised community groups.
CONCLUSIONS: COVID-19 has highlighted the need for contingency planning and
flexibility in CEI. The redesigning and adopting of remote methods has come with 
both advantages and disadvantages, and required new skills, access to technology,
funding, reliable services and enthusiasm from stakeholders. The methods
suggested have the potential to augment or substitute previously preferred CEI
activities. The effectiveness and impact of these remote CEI activities need to
be assessed.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-052135 
PMCID: PMC8551745
PMID: 34706957  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

