
1. Hawaii J Health Soc Welf. 2021 Oct;80(10 Suppl 2):50-56.

He 'A'ali'i Kū Makani Mai Au: Developing a Cultural Framework for Advancing
COVID-19 Related, Community-informed Health Policies.

Kamaka ML(1), Freitas SM(2), Marshall SM(3), Walsh ME Jr(4), Kamakawiwo'ole S(5),
Miller JM(6), Balaz K(7), Vakalahi H(3).

Author information: 
(1)John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, Honolulu,
HI.
(2)Office of Hawaiian Affairs, Honolulu, HI.
(3)Hawai'i Pacific University, Honolulu, HI.
(4)Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH.
(5)Papa Ola Lōkahi, Honolulu, HI.
(6)Kamehameha Schools, Honolulu, HI.
(7)Lunalilo Home, Honolulu, HI.

The Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander community found itself on the front
pages of national news when the COVID-19 pandemic struck the United States. By
April 2020, the small, frequently overlooked community experienced the highest
COVID-19 case rates in 5 states including Hawai'i. In response, Native Hawaiian
and Pacific Islander networks across the US were mobilized to address the crisis.
In Hawai'i, the Native Hawaiian Pacific Islander COVID-19 Response, Recovery, and
Resilience Team was created. Framed by Indigenous Pacific based cultural values, 
protocols, and practices, the team consists of multiple committees that examine
policy; testing, contract tracing, and isolation; communications; social supports
and resources; and data and research. Inherent in this work are the shared core
values of pono (righteousness, goodness), aloha (love, compassion), laulima
(cooperation), and imua (moving forward with strength) as well as an 'ohana/aiga 
(family)-based, kuleana (responsibility)-centric approach that acknowledges,
honors, and values 'ike kūpuna (ancestral knowledge). With the burden of not only
COVID-19 disparities, but also chronic diseases and socioeconomic disparities
that place Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander communities at increased risk for
adverse impacts from COVID-19, an effective response is critical. This article,
authored by members of the Team's Policy Committee, discusses the development of 
a cultural framework that guides its advocacy efforts. The Policy Committee's
work presents a cultural framework that grounds and guides their efforts for
effectively promoting a strong voice in governmental and agency policies which
would ultimately contribute to a healthy and thriving Native Hawaiian and Pacific
Islander community.

©Copyright 2021 by University Health Partners of Hawai‘i (UHP Hawai‘i).


PMCID: PMC8538107
PMID: 34704069  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

