
1. BMC Psychiatry. 2021 Oct 27;21(1):530. doi: 10.1186/s12888-021-03546-y.

The impacts of coping style and perceived social support on the mental health of 
undergraduate students during the early phases of the COVID-19 pandemic in China:
a multicenter survey.

Huang Y(1), Su X(2), Si M(1), Xiao W(1), Wang H(1), Wang W(3), Gu X(4), Ma L(5), 
Li J(6), Zhang S(7), Ren Z(8), Qiao Y(9).

Author information: 
(1)School of Population Medicine and Public Health, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(2)School of Population Medicine and Public Health, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China. suxiaoyou@hotmail.com.
(3)School of Nursing, Jining Medical University, Jining, Shandong, China.
(4)Affiliated Tumor Hospital, Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, China.
(5)Public Health School, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China.
(6)West China School of Public Health, Sichuan University/West China Forth
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
(7)Henan Cancer Hospital, Affiliate Cancer Hospital of Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, China.
(8)School of Public Health, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(9)Department of Cancer Epidemiology, National Cancer Center/National Clinical
Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
and Peking Union Medical College, 17 South Panjiayuan, Chaoyang District,
Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: An increasing number of undergraduate students in China have been
reported to have psychological problems. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, a 
series of preventive and control measures were implemented, which undoubtedly
worsened their psychological health. Coping style and social support were
probably important factors that affected the psychological well-being of
undergraduate students during the pandemic. This study aimed to explore the
effects of coping style and perceived social support on the psychological
well-being of college students and relevant risk factors.
METHODS: This cross-sectional study was performed in February and March of 2020
by distributing an online questionnaire among undergraduate students from seven
geographical regions across China. The questionnaire included sociodemographic
information; the 21-item Depression, Anxiety and Stress Scale (DASS-21); the
Perceived Social Support Scale (PSSS); and the Simplified Coping Style
Questionnaire (SCSQ). For the analyses, t-tests, one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA), the Kruskal-Wallis test and multiple linear regression were utilized.
The level of significance was set at P < 0.05.
RESULTS: Among 3113 college students, the rates of anxiety, depression and stress
symptoms were 13.3, 15.4 and 6.8%, respectively. Increased rates of current
smoking and drinking (5.5 and 25.2%, respectively) among undergraduates were
identified. The results indicated that the PSSS subscales and SCSQ subscales were
significantly associated with DASS-21 scores (P < 0.001). Multiple linear
regression analysis showed that active coping style and family support were
protective factors while passive coping style could aggravate psychological
problems among participants (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: A remarkable number of college students adopted passive coping
strategies to cope with negative feelings, such as smoking and drinking, which
were detrimental to their mental health. In contrast, active coping strategies
helped improve their psychological well-being. Moreover, family support was
particularly important for maintaining their mental health and ameliorating
mental health challenges in this major health crisis. Consequently, suitable
psychointervention, routine screening for risk behaviors, and provision of
further social support are needed for undergraduate students in the COVID-19
pandemic or other emergency public health events.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12888-021-03546-y 
PMCID: PMC8549419
PMID: 34706690  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

