
1. Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM. 2021 Oct 24;4(1):100523. doi:
10.1016/j.ajogmf.2021.100523. [Epub ahead of print]

Stillbirth and fetal capillary infection by SARS-CoV-2.

di Gioia C(1), Zullo F(2), Bruno Vecchio RC(3), Pajno C(3), Perrone G(3), Galoppi
P(3), Pecorini F(3), Di Mascio D(3), Carletti R(4), Prezioso C(5), Pietropaolo
V(6), Masuelli L(7), Bei R(8), Ciallella C(9), Della Rocca C(10), Giancotti A(3),
Brunelli R(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Departments of Radiological, Oncological, and Pathological Sciences,
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(2)Maternal and Child Health and Urological Sciences, Sapienza University of
Rome, Rome, Italy. Electronic address: f.zullo@hotmail.it.
(3)Maternal and Child Health and Urological Sciences, Sapienza University of
Rome, Rome, Italy.
(4)Translational and Precision Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome,
Italy.
(5)Public Health and Infectious Diseases, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome,
Italy; L'Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico San Raffaele Roma,
Rome, Italy.
(6)Public Health and Infectious Diseases, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome,
Italy.
(7)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(8)Department of Clinical Sciences and Translational Medicine, University of Rome
Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(9)Department of Anatomical, Histological, Forensic Medicine, and Orthopedic
Sciences, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(10)Department of Medico-Surgical Sciences and Biotechnologies, Sapienza
University of Rome, Latina, Italy.

We presented the case of stillbirth in a paucisymptomatic mother affected by
SARS-CoV-2. At gross examination, the placenta showed a diffuse marble appearance
and a focal hemorrhagic area. Multiple areas of hemorrhagic or ischemic necrosis 
with central and peripheral villous infarctions and thrombosis of several
maternal and fetal vessels with luminal fibrin and platelet deposition were
observed. All lesions seemed to be synchronous. Virus particles were identified
within the cytoplasm of endothelial cells using electron microscopy, whereas
SARS-CoV-2 RNA was detected in the placental tissue using real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Here, fetal vascular malperfusion was
associated with infection; in fact, electron microscopy images showed that marked
SARS-CoV-2 endotheliotropism involved the intravillous fetal capillaries.
Furthermore, we confirmed that syncytiotrophoblast is the major target cell type 
for SARS-CoV-2 infection of the placenta. In conclusion, the possible
consequences of the action of the placentotropic SARS-CoV-2 included the
occurrence of vertical transmission, as reported in the literature, and/or
stillbirth: the latter possibility may be triggered by a hampered maternal and/or
fetal perfusion of the placenta. The diffuse thrombosis and subsequent ischemia
of fetal capillaries induced by COVID-19 cannot be predicted by standard clinical
surveillance.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajogmf.2021.100523 
PMCID: PMC8541829
PMID: 34700024 

