
1. J Glob Infect Dis. 2021 Aug 31;13(3):126-132. doi: 10.4103/jgid.jgid_394_20.
eCollection 2021 Jul-Sep.

Economic Evaluation of Implementing a Rapid Point-of-Care Screening Test for the 
Identification of Hepatitis C Virus under National Viral Hepatitis Control
Programme in Tamil Nadu, South India.

Malaisamy M(1), Nagarajan K(1), Kirti T(2), Malkeet S(2), Venkatesan P(3),
Senthilkumar S(1), Sananthya K(1), Rajendran K(4), Kavitha R(2), Vivekanandan
S(5), Selvavinayagam TS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Economics, ICMR-National Institute for Research in
Tuberculosis, New Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Health Research, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, New
Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Directorate of Medical
and Rural Health Services, Government of Tamil Nadu, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.
(4)Department of Statistics, ICMR-National Institute for Research in
Tuberculosis, New Delhi, India.
(5)Chennai Liver Foundation, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.

Introduction: Viral hepatitis is a crucial public health problem in India.
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) elimination is a national priority and a key strategy has
been adopted to strengthen the HCV diagnostics services to ensure early and
accurate diagnosis.
Methods: To conduct an economic evaluation of implementing a rapid point-of-care 
screening test for the identification of HCV among the selected key population
under the National Viral Hepatitis Control Programme in Tamil Nadu, South India. 
Economic evaluation of a point-of-care screening test for HCV diagnosis among the
key population attending the primary health care centers. A combination of
decision tree and Markov model was developed to estimate cost-effectiveness of
point-of-care screening test for HCV diagnosis at the primary health care
centers. Total costs, quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) of the intervention and
comparator, and incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) were calculated. The 
model parameter uncertainties which would influence the cost-effectiveness
outcome has been evaluated by one-way sensitivity analysis and probabilistic
sensitivity analysis.
Results: When compared to the tertiary level diagnostic strategy for HCV, the
point-of-care screening for selected key population at primary health care level 
results in a gain of 57 undiscounted QALYs and 38 discounted QALYs, four
undiscounted life years and two discounted life years. The negative ICER of the
new strategy indicates that it is less expensive and more effective compared with
the current HCV diagnosis strategy.
Conclusions: The proposed strategy for HCV diagnosis in the selected key
population in Tamil Nadu is dominant and cost-saving compared to the current
strategy.

Copyright: © 2021 Journal of Global Infectious Diseases.

DOI: 10.4103/jgid.jgid_394_20 
PMCID: PMC8491813
PMID: 34703152 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.

