
1. J Prosthodont Res. 2021 Oct 26. doi: 10.2186/jpr.JPR_D_21_00064. [Epub ahead of
print]

Implications for clinical dental practice during the coronavirus disease
pandemic: A scoping review.

Yonenaga K(1)(2), Itai S(1)(2), Hoshi K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Eat-Loss Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, The University
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Oral-maxillofacial Surgery, Dentistry and Orthodontics, Graduate
School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

PURPOSE: It is over a year since the first case of coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
was confirmed in China. This paper reviews and summarizes the characteristics of 
COVID-19, as understood of December 2020, from a dental perspective.
STUDY SELECTION: The PubMed and Scopus online databases were searched using a
combination of free words and Medical Subject Headings terms: "dentist" OR "oral 
care" AND "COVID-19" OR "SARS-CoV-2."
RESULTS: Older people and those with underlying medical conditions have an
increased risk of serious illness due to COVID-19. The virus enters the body by
binding to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor. It is common for 
people with COVID-19 to have mild or no symptoms. Moreover, the disease is not
contagious in most infected people; it is only highly contagious in some infected
people, thereby forming clusters. Due to the large number of virus particles that
are shed prior to the onset of symptoms of the disease, retrospective surveys are
important. Appropriate personal protective equipment against corona vortices is
also important in clinical practice. Although polymerase chain reaction tests are
useful for confirming infection in suspected individuals, their reliability is
questionable. In addition, concerns regarding long-term sequelae have been
reported.
CONCLUSIONS: There are few high-quality reports on the implications of COVID-19
in dental practice. However, reports suggest that insufficient oral hygiene may
be a risk factor for infection. Reports that ACE2 receptors are abundant in the
oral cavity also suggest the importance of oral care.

DOI: 10.2186/jpr.JPR_D_21_00064 
PMID: 34707074 

