
1. Int Dent J. 2021 Sep 21. pii: S0020-6539(21)00228-8. doi:
10.1016/j.identj.2021.09.003. [Epub ahead of print]

Impact of the Coronavirus on Providing Oral Health Care in the Netherlands.

Persoon IF(1), Volgenant CMC(2), van der Veen MH(3), Opdam NJM(4), Manton DJ(5), 
Bruers JJM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Dentistry, Academic Centre for Dentistry Amsterdam
(ACTA), University of Amsterdam and Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands. Electronic address: i.persoon@acta.nl.
(2)Department of Preventive Dentistry, Academic Centre for Dentistry Amsterdam
(ACTA), University of Amsterdam and Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Preventive Dentistry, Academic Centre for Dentistry Amsterdam
(ACTA), University of Amsterdam and Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands; Department of Oral Hygiene, InHolland University of Applied
Sciences, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Dentistry, Radboud UMC, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(5)Cariology and Paediatric Dentistry, University Medical Centre Groningen
(UMCG), Groningen, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Oral Public Health, Academic Centre for Dentistry Amsterdam
(ACTA), University of Amsterdam and Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands; Royal Dutch Dental Association (KNMT), Utrecht, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 during oral health care is potentially
increased compared to regular social activities. Specific amendments to the Dutch
national infection control guidelines were promulgated. This study aimed to map
the impact of the coronavirus pandemic on providing oral health care during the
first wave of the coronavirus pandemic in 2020 in the Netherlands.
METHODS: A cross-sectional web-based survey was sent via email to a
representative sample of dental hygienists and dentists in the Netherlands.
RESULTS: Of the 1700 oral health care practitioners approached, 440 (25.9%)
responded to the survey. Patient access to oral health care was severely
restricted during the lockdown in the spring of 2020. A total of 1.6% of the oral
health care practitioners had laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 during the study
period, although this is likely to be an underrepresentation due to limited
access to testing at that time. Over half of the participants perceived an
increased risk of virus transmission during aerosol-generating treatments in
their practices. A large majority (65.0%-87.1%) of the oral health care
practitioners followed the COVID-19-specific amendments to the national infection
control guidelines. Compared to the pre-pandemic period, additional personal
protective equipment and protocols were applied. Factors related with compliance 
with the additional recommendations were age, employment status, and occupation.
CONCLUSIONS: The pandemic had a profound impact on both the accessibility and
practice of oral health care. This survey study found that most Dutch oral health
care practitioners paid extra attention to hygiene and infection control. Also, a
low number of COVID-19 infections detected amongst Dutch oral health care
practitioners was reported in the Netherlands. These overall outcomes suggest
that safe oral health care can be provided when following the current infection
control recommendations.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.identj.2021.09.003 
PMCID: PMC8452527
PMID: 34706826 

