
1. Vaccine. 2021 Nov 16;39(47):6852-6859. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.033. Epub
2021 Oct 24.

Evaluation of the intranasal route for porcine reproductive and respiratory
disease modified-live virus vaccination.

Opriessnig T(1), Rawal G(2), McKeen L(3), Filippsen Favaro P(4), Halbur PG(2),
Gauger PC(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Roslin Institute and The Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies,
University of Edinburgh, Midlothian, UK; Department of Veterinary Diagnostic and 
Production Animal Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State
University, Ames, IA, USA. Electronic address: Tanja.Opriessnig@roslin.ed.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Veterinary Diagnostic and Production Animal Medicine, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA.
(3)Department of Statistics, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA.
(4)School of Medicine & Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
WI, USA.

BACKGROUND: In pigs, modified live virus (MLV) vaccines against porcine
reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) are commonly used and
administered by intramuscular (IM) injection. In contrast, PRRSV, as a primary
respiratory pathogen, is mainly transmitted via the intranasal (IN) route. The
objective of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of a commonly used
commercial PRRSV MLV delivered IN compared to the IM route.
METHODS: Fifty-four pigs were divided into five treatment groups. All vaccinated 
groups received the same MLV vaccine but administered via different routes. Group
IN-JET-VAC was vaccinated with an automated high pressure prototype nasal jet
device (IN-JET-VAC, n = 12), group IN-MAD-VAC was vaccinated with a mucosal
atomization device (IN-MAD-VAC, n = 12), group IM-VAC was vaccinated
intramuscularly (IM-VAC; n = 12) according to label instructions, while the
NEG-CONTROL (n = 6) and the POS-CONTROL (n = 12) groups were both unvaccinated.
At 28 days post vaccination all vaccinated groups and the POS-CONTROL pigs were
challenged with a pathogenic US PRRSV isolate. Blood and nasal swabs were
collected at regular intervals, and all pigs were necropsied at day 10 post
challenge (dpc) when gross and microscopic lung lesions were assessed.
RESULTS: Prior to challenge most vaccinated pigs had seroconverted to PRRSV.
Clinical signs (fever, inappetence) were most obvious in the POS-CONTROL group
from dpc 7 onwards. The vaccinated groups were not different for PRRSV viremia,
seroconversion, or average daily weight gain. However, IN-JET-VAC and IN-MAD-VAC 
had significantly higher neutralizing antibody levels against the vaccine virus
at challenge.
CONCLUSIONS: Comparable vaccine responses were obtained in IN and IM vaccinated
pigs, suggesting the intranasal administration route as an alternative option for
PRRSV vaccination.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.033 
PMID: 34706840 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

