
1. Virus Evol. 2021 Sep 25;7(2):veab085. doi: 10.1093/ve/veab085. eCollection 2021.

In action-an early warning system for the detection of unexpected or novel
pathogens.

Santos PD(1), Ziegler U(2), Szillat KP(1), Szentiks CA(3), Strobel B(4), Skuballa
J(4), Merbach S(5), Grothmann P(6), Tews BA(7), Beer M(1), Höper D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Federal Research Institute for Animal Health,
Institute of Diagnostic Virology, Südufer 10, Greifswald, Insel Riems 17493,
Germany.
(2)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Federal Research Institute for Animal Health,
Institute of Novel and Emerging Infectious Diseases, Südufer 10, Greifswald,
Insel Riems 17493, Germany.
(3)4Department of Wildlife Diseases, Leibniz-Institute for Zoo- and Wildlife
Research (IZW), Alfred-Kowalke-Straße 17, Berlin 10315, Germany.
(4)Chemical and Veterinary Investigations Office Karlsruhe (CVUA Karlsruhe),
Weissenburgerstrasse 3, Karlsruhe 76187, Germany.
(5)State Institute for Chemical and Veterinary Analysis (CVUA) Westfalen, Zur
Taubeneiche 10-12, Arnsberg 59821, Germany.
(6)Practice for Zoo, Game and Wild Animals, Lintiger Str. 74, Geestland 27624,
Germany.
(7)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Federal Research Institute for Animal Health,
Institute of Infectology, Südufer 10, Greifswald, Insel Riems 17493, Germany.

Proactive approaches in preventing future epidemics include pathogen discovery
prior to their emergence in human and/or animal populations. Playing an important
role in pathogen discovery, high-throughput sequencing (HTS) enables the
characterization of microbial and viral genetic diversity within a given sample. 
In particular, metagenomic HTS allows the unbiased taxonomic profiling of
sequences; hence, it can identify novel and highly divergent pathogens such as
viruses. Newly discovered viral sequences must be further investigated using
genomic characterization, molecular and serological screening, and/or in vitro
and in vivo characterization. Several outbreak and surveillance studies apply
unbiased generic HTS to characterize the whole genome sequences of suspected
pathogens. In contrast, this study aimed to screen for novel and unexpected
pathogens in previously generated HTS datasets and use this information as a
starting point for the establishment of an early warning system (EWS). As a proof
of concept, the EWS was applied to HTS datasets and archived samples from the
2018-9 West Nile virus (WNV) epidemic in Germany. A metagenomics read classifier 
detected sequences related to genome sequences of various members of Riboviria.
We focused the further EWS investigation on viruses belonging to the families
Peribunyaviridae and Reoviridae, under suspicion of causing co-infections in
WNV-infected birds. Phylogenetic analyses revealed that the reovirus genome
sequences clustered with sequences assigned to the species Umatilla virus (UMAV),
whereas a new peribunyavirid, tentatively named 'Hedwig virus' (HEDV), belonged
to a putative novel genus of the family Peribunyaviridae. In follow-up studies,
newly developed molecular diagnostic assays detected fourteen UMAV-positive wild 
birds from different German cities and eight HEDV-positive captive birds from two
zoological gardens. UMAV was successfully cultivated in mosquito C6/36 cells
inoculated with a blackbird liver. In conclusion, this study demonstrates the
power of the applied EWS for the discovery and characterization of unexpected
viruses in repurposed sequence datasets, followed by virus screening and
cultivation using archived sample material. The EWS enhances the strategies for
pathogen recognition before causing sporadic cases and massive outbreaks and
proves to be a reliable tool for modern outbreak preparedness.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/ve/veab085 
PMCID: PMC8542707
PMID: 34703624 

