
1. Am J Health Behav. 2021 Sep 30;45(5):810-827. doi: 10.5993/AJHB.45.5.2.

Examining Associations between Knowledge and Vaccine Uptake Using the Human
Papillomavirus Knowledge Questionnaire (HPV-KQ).

Harrison SE(1), Yelverton V(2), Wang Y(3), Ostermann J(4), Fish LJ(5), Williams
CL(6), Vasudevan L(7), Walter EB(8).

Author information: 
(1)Sayward E Harrison, Department of Psychology, University of South Carolina,
Columbia, SC, and South Carolina Smart State Center for Healthcare Quality,
University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, United States;, Email:
harri764@mailbox.sc.edu.
(2)Valerie Yelverton, Department of Health Services Policy & Management,
University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, United States.
(3)Yunfei Wang, Duke Vaccine and Trials Unit, Duke Human Vaccine Institute,
Durham, NC, United States.
(4)Jan Ostermann, Department of Health Services Policy & Management, University
of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, United States.
(5)Laura J Fish, Department of Family Medicine and Community Health, Duke
University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, and Duke Cancer Institute, Durham, NC,
United States.
(6)Charnetta L Williams, Immunization Services Division, National Center for
Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, US Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, GA, United States.
(7)Lavanya Vasudevan, Department of Family Medicine and Community Health, Duke
University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, and Duke Global Health Institute,
Durham, NC, United States.
(8)Emmanuel B Walter, Duke Vaccine and Trials Unit, Duke Human Vaccine Institute,
Durham, NC, Duke Global Health Institute, Durham, NC, and Department of
Pediatrics, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, United States.

Objectives: Understanding the relationship between human papillomavirus (HPV)
knowledge and vaccination behavior is important to inform public health
interventions, yet few validated HPV knowledge scales exist. This study describes
development of the Human Papillomavirus Knowledge Questionnaire (HPV-KQ) and its 
validation with parents residing in the southern United States (US). Methods:
Drawing on previously published measures, we developed the 13-item HPV-KQ and
administered the scale via Web-based survey to parents (N=1105) of adolescents
ages 9 to 17 years. Dimensionality, internal consistency, model fit, and
predictive validity were assessed. Results: The scale was bidimensional. One
factor captured general HPV knowledge, and the second factor captured perceptions
of gender differences in HPV infection and vaccine recommendations. The 13-item
scale and 2-factor solution displayed strong internal consistency and good model 
fit. Parents of vaccinated adolescents scored higher on the 13-item HPV-KQ (Mean 
= 8.56) than parents of unvaccinated adolescents (Mean = 6.43) (p < .001). In
regression models, controlling for key covariates, parents' performance on the
HPV-KQ predicted adolescent HPV vaccination (p < .001). Conclusions: Evaluation
indicates the HPV-KQ is a reliable and valid tool for measuring knowledge of HPV 
and the HPV vaccine among parents residing in the southern US. We recommend
further efforts to validate the scale with other populations.

DOI: 10.5993/AJHB.45.5.2 
PMID: 34702429  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

