
1. Wellcome Open Res. 2021 Sep 23;6:245. doi: 10.12688/wellcomeopenres.17078.1.
eCollection 2021.

Design, development, and validation of a strand-specific RT-qPCR assay for GI and
GII human Noroviruses.

König KMK(1)(2), Jahun AS(1), Nayak K(3), Drumright LN(4)(5), Zibauer M(3),
Goodfellow I(1), Hosmillo M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge,
Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0QQ, UK.
(2)Insitute of Chemistry and Metabolomics, Center for Structural and Cell Biology
in Medicine (CSCM), University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital,
Cambridge, CB2 0QQ, UK.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.

Human noroviruses (HuNoV) are the major cause of viral gastroenteritis worldwide.
Similar to other positive-sense single-stranded RNA viruses, norovirus RNA
replication requires the formation of a negative strand RNA intermediate. Methods
for detecting and quantifying the viral positive or negative sense RNA in
infected cells and tissues can be used as important tools in dissecting virus
replication. In this study, we have established a sensitive and
strand-specific Taqman-based quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) assay 
for both genogroups GI and GII HuNoV. This assay shows good reproducibility, has 
a broad dynamic range and is able to detect a diverse range of isolates. We used 
tagged primers containing a non-viral sequence for the reverse transcription (RT)
reaction and targeted this tag in the succeeding qPCR reaction to achieve strand 
specificity. The specificity of the assay was confirmed by the detection of
specific viral RNA strands in the presence of high levels of the opposing
strands, in both RT and qPCR reactions. Finally, we further validated the assay
in norovirus replicon-bearing cell lines and norovirus-infected human small
intestinal organoids, in the presence or absence of small-molecule inhibitors.
Overall, we have established a strand-specific qPCR assay that can be used as a
reliable method to understand the molecular details of the human norovirus life
cycle.

Copyright: © 2021 König KMK et al.

DOI: 10.12688/wellcomeopenres.17078.1 
PMCID: PMC8506223
PMID: 34708158 

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.

