
1. J Med Case Rep. 2021 Oct 26;15(1):539. doi: 10.1186/s13256-021-03079-8.

Chemorefractory extranodal nasal-type natural-killer/T-cell lymphoma with great
response to pembrolizumab in a young patient: a case report.

Adabifirouzjaei F(1), Khazai B(2), Azami G(3), Shoja-E-Razavi G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Sulpizio Cardiovascular Center, University of California San Diego, San Diego,
California, USA.
(2)Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, University of California Los Angeles, Torrance,
CA, USA.
(3)Internal Medicine Department, School of Medicine, Mashhad University of
Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.
(4)Hematology and oncology Section, Division of Hematology and Oncology, Internal
Medicine Department, School of Medicine, The University of Calgary, Alberta,
Canada. ghazaleh.shojaerazavi@ucalgary.ca.

INTRODUCTION: Extranodal, natural-killer/T-cell lymphoma of nasal type is a rare 
but aggressive disease usually presenting as progressive necrotic lesions in the 
nasal cavity that responds poorly to chemotherapy. In this paper, we report a
relapsing, chemorefractory case of extranodal natural-killer/T-cell lymphoma
responding to checkpoint inhibitor immunotherapy with pembrolizumab.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 32-year-old Hispanic woman with a history of recurrent
sinusitis and preseptal abscess presented with a hoarse voice, swelling around
the right eye, and diplopia. Laryngoscopy showed infiltrating tissue extending to
bilateral laryngeal ventricles and false vocal cords. On immunohistochemical
examination of laryngeal biopsy, the neoplastic cells showed positivity for CD3
(cytoplasmic), CD7, CD56, granzyme B, CD30, and Epstein-Barr virus-encoded
ribonucleic acid (RNA). Extranodal natural-killer/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type,
was confirmed. In the absence of distant organ involvement, the decision was to
perform chemotherapy with etoposide, ifosfamide, mesna, cisplatin, and
dexamethasone (VIPD protocol) followed by concurrent chemoradiation with weekly
doses of cisplatin and two cycles of VIPD as adjuvant treatment. However, 1 month
after completion of the treatment; disease recurrence was demonstrated. The
patient was scheduled to receive salvage chemotherapy with steroid, methotrexate,
ifosfamide, L- asparaginase, and etoposide (SMILE) protocol and CD30-targeting
monoclonal antibodies. However, the mass was chemorefractory without response to 
either L-asparaginase-based salvage chemotherapy in combination with high-dose
methotrexate or brentuximab vedotin. However, this case of chemorefractory
extranodal natural-killer/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type, responded well to the
novel drug pembrolizumab, which was able to control the disease.
CONCLUSION: Checkpoint inhibitors are potential treatment option in selected
chemorefractory extranodal natural-killer/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type, cases.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13256-021-03079-8 
PMCID: PMC8549221
PMID: 34702349  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

