
1. mBio. 2021 Oct 26;12(5):e0234221. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02342-21. Epub 2021 Oct 26.

Identification of ZDHHC17 as a Potential Drug Target for Swine Acute Diarrhea
Syndrome Coronavirus Infection.

Luo Y(#)(1)(2), Tan CW(#)(3), Xie SZ(#)(1)(2), Chen Y(1)(2), Yao YL(1), Zhao
K(1), Zhu Y(1), Wang Q(1)(2), Liu MQ(1)(2), Yang XL(1), Wang LF(3), Shi ZL(1).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Special Pathogens and Biosafety, Wuhan Institute of
Virologygrid.439104.b, Center for Biosafety Mega-Science, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Wuhan, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Programme in Emerging Infectious Diseases, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore,
Singapore.
(#)Contributed equally

The recent emergence and spread of zoonotic viruses highlights that
animal-sourced viruses are the biggest threat to global public health. Swine
acute diarrhea syndrome coronavirus (SADS-CoV) is an HKU2-related bat coronavirus
that was spilled over from Rhinolophus bats to swine, causing large-scale
outbreaks of severe diarrhea disease in piglets in China. Unlike other porcine
coronaviruses, SADS-CoV possesses broad species tissue tropism, including primary
human cells, implying a significant risk of cross-species spillover. To explore
host dependency factors for SADS-CoV as therapeutic targets, we employed
genome-wide CRISPR knockout library screening in HeLa cells. Consistent with two 
independent screens, we identified the zinc finger DHHC-type palmitoyltransferase
17 (ZDHHC17 or ZD17) as an important host factor for SADS-CoV infection. Through 
truncation mutagenesis, we demonstrated that the DHHC domain of ZD17 that is
involved in palmitoylation is important for SADS-CoV infection. Mechanistic
studies revealed that ZD17 is required for SADS-CoV genomic RNA replication.
Treatment of infected cells with the palmitoylation inhibitor 2-bromopalmitate
(2-BP) significantly suppressed SADS-CoV infection. Our findings provide insight 
on SADS-CoV-host interactions and a potential therapeutic application. IMPORTANCE
The recent emergence of deadly zoonotic viral diseases, including Ebola virus and
SARS-CoV-2, emphasizes the importance of pandemic preparedness for the
animal-sourced viruses with potential risk of animal-to-human spillover. Over the
last 2 decades, three significant coronaviruses of bat origin, SARS-CoV,
MERS-CoV, and SARS-CoV-2, have caused millions of deaths with significant economy
and public health impacts. Lack of effective therapeutics against these
coronaviruses was one of the contributing factors to such losses. Although
SADS-CoV, another coronavirus of bat origin, was only known to cause fatal
diarrhea disease in piglets, the ability to infect cells derived from multiple
species, including human, highlights the potential risk of animal-to-human
spillover. As part of our effort in pandemic preparedness, we explore SADS-CoV
host dependency factors as targets for host-directed therapeutic development and 
found zinc finger DHHC-type palmitoyltransferase 17 is a promising drug target
against SADS-CoV replication. We also demonstrated that a palmitoylation
inhibitor, 2-bromopalmitate (2-BP), can be used as an inhibitor for SADS-CoV
treatment.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02342-21 
PMCID: PMC8546599
PMID: 34700373  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

