
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2021 Oct 27:JCM0159721. doi: 10.1128/JCM.01597-21. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Evaluation of diagnostic accuracy of eight commercial assays for the detection of
rubella virus specific IgM antibodies.

Hiebert J(1), Zubach V(1), Charlton CL(2)(3)(4), Fenton J(2), Tipples
GA(2)(4)(5), Fonseca K(2)(6), Severini A(1)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Viral Exanthemata and STD section, National Microbiology Laboratory, Public
Health Agency of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
(2)Public Health Laboratory, Alberta Precision Laboratories, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(4)Li Ka Shing Institute of Virology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada.
(5)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Infectious Disease, University of
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(7)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

Rubella and congenital rubella syndrome are caused by the rubella virus and are
preventable through vaccination, making disease eradication possible. Monitoring 
of progress towards global eradication and local elimination requires high
quality, sensitive disease surveillance that includes laboratory confirmation of 
cases. Previous evaluations of anti-rubella IgM detection methods resulted in the
broad adoption of Enzygnost (most recently manufactured by Siemens) enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA or EIA) kits within WHO's global measles and rubella
laboratory network but they have been discontinued. This study evaluates seven
comparable ELISA methods from six manufacturers (Trinity Biotech, Euroimmun,
Clin-Tech, NovaTec and Virion\Serion) as well as one automated chemiluminescent
assay (CLIA) from Diasorin. These methods consisted of three IgM capture methods 
and five indirect ELISA methods. A panel of 238 sera was used for the evaluation 
that included 38 archival rubella IgM positive sera and 200 sera collected from
symptomatically similar cases, such as measles, dengue, parvovirus B19 and
roseola. With this panel of sera, the sensitivity of the methods ranged from
63.2% to 100% and the specificity from 80.0% to 99.5%. No single method had both 
sensitivity and specificity >90%, unless sera with equivocal results were
considered to be presumptive positive. Some methods, particularly the Serion
ELISA, had a large number of false positives with parvovirus B19 IgM positive
sera as well as sera from confirmed measles cases. The performance
characteristics identified in this evaluation serve as a reminder to not rely
solely on rubella IgM results for case confirmation in elimination settings.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.01597-21 
PMID: 34705533 

