
1. mBio. 2021 Oct 26;12(5):e0262521. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02625-21. Epub 2021 Oct 26.

Cryo-Electron Microscopy Structure and Interactions of the Human Cytomegalovirus 
gHgLgO Trimer with Platelet-Derived Growth Factor Receptor Alpha.

Liu J(1), Vanarsdall A(2), Chen DH(1), Chin A(2), Johnson D(2), Jardetzky TS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Stanford
Universitygrid.168010.egrid.471392.a School of Medicine, Stanford, California,
USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon, USA.

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a herpesvirus that produces disease in transplant
patients and newborn children. Entry of HCMV into cells relies on gH/gL trimer
(gHgLgO) and pentamer (gHgLUL128-131) complexes that bind cellular receptors.
Here, we studied the structure and interactions of the HCMV trimer, formed by
AD169 strain gH and gL and TR strain gO proteins, with the human platelet-derived
growth factor receptor alpha (PDGFRα). Three trimer surfaces make extensive
contacts with three PDGFRα N-terminal domains, causing PDGFRα to wrap around gO
in a structure similar to a human hand, explaining the high-affinity interaction.
gO is among the least conserved HCMV proteins, with 8 distinct genotypes. We
observed high conservation of residues mediating gO-gL interactions but more
extensive gO variability in the PDGFRα interface. Comparisons between our trimer 
structure and a previously determined structure composed of different subunit
genotypes indicate that gO variability is accommodated by adjustments in the
gO-PDGFRα interface. We identified two loops within gO that were disordered and
apparently glycosylated, which could be deleted without disrupting PDGFRα
binding. We also identified four gO residues that contact PDGFRα, which when
mutated produced markedly reduced receptor binding. These residues fall within
conserved contact sites of gO with PDGFRα and may represent key targets for
anti-trimer neutralizing antibodies and HCMV vaccines. Finally, we observe that
gO mutations distant from the gL interaction site impact trimer expression,
suggesting that the intrinsic folding or stability of gO can impact the
efficiency of trimer assembly. IMPORTANCE HCMV is a herpesvirus that infects a
large percentage of the adult population and causes significant levels of disease
in immunocompromised individuals and birth defects in the developing fetus. The
virus encodes a complex protein machinery that coordinates infection of different
cell types in the body, including a trimer formed of gH, gL, and gO subunits.
Here, we studied the interactions of the HCMV trimer with its receptor on cells, 
the platelet derived growth factor receptor α (PDGFRα), to better understand how 
HCMV coordinates virus entry into cells. Our results add to our understanding of 
HCMV strain-specific differences and identify sites on the trimer that represent 
potential targets for therapeutic antibodies or vaccine development.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02625-21 
PMCID: PMC8546573
PMID: 34700375 

