
1. Clin Exp Vaccine Res. 2021 Sep;10(3):245-251. doi: 10.7774/cevr.2021.10.3.245.
Epub 2021 Sep 30.

Transient expression of fusion and hemagglutinin-neuraminidase epitopes of
Newcastle disease virus in maize as a potent candidate vaccine.

Shahriari AG(1), Niazi A(2), Habibi-Pirkoohi M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Higher Education Center of
Eghlid, Eghlid, Iran.
(2)Institute, Biotechnology Institute, Shiraz University, Shiraz, Iran.
(3)Research and Technology Institute of Plant Production, Shahid Bahonar
University of Kerman, Kerman, Iran.

Purpose: Newcastle disease (ND) represents a major viral disease across the world
which imposes high costs to poultry producers for vaccination.
Hemagglutinin-neuraminidase (HN) and fusion (F) proteins are the major
immunogenic epitopes of Newcastle disease virus and hence, have been the main
targets for development of anti-ND vaccines. This paper reports transient
expression of a synthetic gene composing of four tandem repeats of HN and three
tandem repeats of F epitopes in maize leaves as initial step toward production of
recombinant vaccine against ND.
Materials and Methods: The synthetic gene was cloned in pBI121 plasmid to yield
an expression vector. The vector was sophisticated by the addition of AUG codon, 
polyhistidine-tag, tobacco mosaic virus omega sequence, stop codon, and
restriction sites. Leaf transformation was conducted by the agroinfiltration
method. Molecular detection assays including polymerase chain reaction, reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) were carried out to evaluate transgene expression in infiltrated leaves
of the corn plant.
Results: The result obtained in this research revealed that the transgene was
transcribed and translated in maize leaves only 48 hours after infiltration. In
the second phase of the experiment, the expressed protein was injected into
rabbits. The result of the ELISA assay indicated induction of immune response in 
the rabbits after injection with the heterologous protein.
Conclusion: These results confirm the feasibility of agroinfiltration for
transient gene expression of viral epitopes in monocot plants which naturally
resist stable transformation by Agrobacterium tumefaciens. Practical implications
of this finding are discussed in detail and some recommendations for future
studies are proposed.

© Korean Vaccine Society.

DOI: 10.7774/cevr.2021.10.3.245 
PMCID: PMC8511594
PMID: 34703807 

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest relevant to
this article was reported.

