
1. J Immunother Cancer. 2021 Oct;9(10). pii: e003428. doi: 10.1136/jitc-2021-003428.

Humoral immunogenicity of the seasonal influenza vaccine before and after
CAR-T-cell therapy: a prospective observational study.

Walti CS(1), Loes AN(2)(3), Shuey K(4), Krantz EM(1), Boonyaratanakornkit
J(1)(4), Keane-Candib J(1), Loeffelholz T(1), Wolf CR(4), Taylor JJ(1), Gardner
RA(5)(6), Green DJ(4)(7), Cowan AJ(4)(7), Maloney DG(4)(7), Turtle CJ(4)(7),
Pergam SA(4)(8), Chu HY(4), Bloom JD(3)(9), Hill JA(10)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(2)Basic Sciences Division and Computational Biology Program, Fred Hutchinson
Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(5)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle,
Washington, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(7)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington, USA.
(8)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Division, and Clinical Research Division, Fred 
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(9)Basic Sciences Division, Computational Biology Program, and Public Health
Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington,
USA.
(10)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
jahill3@fredhutch.org.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2021 May 11;:.

Recipients of chimeric antigen receptor-modified T (CAR-T) cell therapies for B
cell malignancies have profound and prolonged immunodeficiencies and are at risk 
for serious infections, including respiratory virus infections. Vaccination may
be important for infection prevention, but there are limited data on vaccine
immunogenicity in this population. We conducted a prospective observational study
of the humoral immunogenicity of commercially available 2019-2020 inactivated
influenza vaccines in adults immediately prior to or while in durable remission
after CD19-, CD20-, or B cell maturation antigen-targeted CAR-T-cell therapy, as 
well as controls. We tested for antibodies to all four vaccine strains using
neutralization and hemagglutination inhibition (HAI) assays. Antibody responses
were defined as at least fourfold titer increases from baseline. Seroprotection
was defined as a HAI titer ≥40. Enrolled CAR-T-cell recipients were vaccinated
14-29 days prior to (n=5) or 13-57 months following therapy (n=13), and the
majority had hypogammaglobulinemia and cellular immunodeficiencies
prevaccination. Eight non-immunocompromised adults served as controls. Antibody
responses to ≥1 vaccine strain occurred in 2 (40%) individuals before CAR-T-cell 
therapy and in 4 (31%) individuals vaccinated after CAR-T-cell therapy. An
additional 1 (20%) and 6 (46%) individuals had at least twofold increases,
respectively. One individual vaccinated prior to CAR-T-cell therapy maintained a 
response for >3 months following therapy. Across all tested vaccine strains,
seroprotection was less frequent in CAR-T-cell recipients than in controls. There
was evidence of immunogenicity even among individuals with low immunoglobulin,
CD19+ B cell, and CD4+ T-cell counts. These data support consideration for
vaccination before and after CAR-T-cell therapy for influenza and other relevant 
pathogens such as SARS-CoV-2, irrespective of hypogammaglobulinemia or B cell
aplasia. However, relatively impaired humoral vaccine immunogenicity indicates
the need for additional infection-prevention strategies. Larger studies are
needed to refine our understanding of potential correlates of vaccine
immunogenicity, and durability of immune responses, in CAR-T-cell therapy
recipients.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jitc-2021-003428 
PMCID: PMC8549667
PMID: 34702753  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: JJT received research
funding from Vir Biotechnology for research unrelated to this study. RAG received
consulting fees from Novartis, served on ad hoc advisory boards for Janssen and
Pfizer and has patents licensed to Juno Therapeutics. DJG has received research
funding, has served as an advisor and has received royalties from Juno
Therapeutics, a Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS) company; has served as an advisor and 
received research funding from Seattle Genetics; has served as an advisor to
GlaxoSmithKline, Celgene, Janssen Biotech, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Neoleukin
Therapeutics and Legend Biotech; and has received research funding from
SpringWorks Therapeutics, Sanofi and Cellectar Biosciences. AJC received research
funding from Janssen, Sanofi, BMS, Harpoon, Nektar; and received consulting fees 
from Janssen, Cellectar, Sanofi, GlaxoSmithKline, and Abbvie. DGM has served as a
consultant for A2 Biotherapeutics, Amgen, Bioline Rx, BMS, Celgene a BMS company,
Genentech, Gilead, Janssen, Juno Therapeutics a BMS company, Kite Pharma, Legend 
Biotech, MorphoSys, Novartis, and Pharmacyclics; has received research funding
paid directly to the institution, including salary support, from Kite Pharma,
Juno Therapeutics/BMS, and Celgene/BMS and has patents with Juno Therapeutics/BMS
(pending, not issued, licensed, no royalties, no licenses); and has stock options
in A2 Biotherapeutics. CJT received research funding from Juno Therapeutics,
Nektar Therapeutics, AstraZeneca, TCR2 Therapeutics; is a member of scientific
advisory boards for Precision Biosciences, Eureka Therapeutics, Caribou
Biosciences, T-CURX, Myeloid Therapeutics, ArsenalBio, and Century Therapeutics; 
has served on ad hoc advisory boards for Nektar Therapeutics, Allogene, Asher
Biotherapeutics, PACT Pharma, Astra Zeneca; has stock options for Precision
Biosciences, Eureka Therapeutics, Caribou Biosciences, Myeloid Therapeutics,
ArsenalBio; and has patents licensed or optioned to Juno Therapeutics. SAP
received research support from Global Life Technologies, Inc., and participated
in research trials with Chimerix, Inc and Merck & Co. He also participated in a
clinical trial sponsored by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases (U01-AI132004); influenza vaccines for this trial are provided by
Sanofi-Aventis. HYC reported consulting with Ellume, Pfizer, The Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundation, Glaxo Smith Kline, and Merck. She has received research funding
from Gates Ventures, Sanofi Pasteur, and support and reagents from Ellume and
Cepheid outside of the submitted work. JDB is on the scientific advisory board of
Oncorus and has performed consulting for Moderna. JAH received consulting fees or
honoraria from Gilead Sciences, Amplyx, Allovir, Allogene therapeutics, CRISPR
therapeutics, CSL Behring, OptumHealth, Octapharma, and Takeda and research
funding from Takeda, Allovir, Karius, and Gilead Sciences.

