
1. J Virol. 2021 Oct 27:JVI0136021. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01360-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Proteomic Analysis of Nuclear HBV rcDNA Associated Proteins Identifies UV-DDB as 
a Host Factor Involved in cccDNA Formation.

Marchetti AL(1)(2), Zhang H(1)(2)(3), Kim ES(1)(2)(3), Yu X(1)(2)(3), Jang
S(4)(5), Wang M(6), Guo H(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(2)Cancer Virology Program, UPMC Hillman Cancer Center, University of Pittsburgh 
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(5)Genome Stability Program, UPMC Hillman Cancer Center, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) utilizes host DNA repair mechanisms to convert viral
relaxed circular DNA (rcDNA) into a persistent viral genome, the covalently
closed circular DNA (cccDNA). To identify said host factors involved in cccDNA
formation, we developed an unbiased approach to discover proteins involved in
cccDNA formation by precipitating nuclear rcDNA from induced HepAD38 cells and
identifying the co-precipitated proteins by mass spectrometry. The DNA damage
binding protein 1 (DDB1) surfaced as a hit, coinciding with our previously
reported shRNA screen in which shRNA-DDB1 in HepDES19 cells reduced cccDNA
production. DDB1 binding to nuclear rcDNA was confirmed in HepAD38 cells via
ChIP-qPCR. DDB1 and DNA damage binding protein 2 (DDB2) form the UV-DDB complex
and the latter senses DNA damage to initiate the global genome nucleotide
excision repair (GG-NER) pathway. To investigate the role of DDB complex in
cccDNA formation, DDB2 was knocked out in HepAD38 and HepG2-NTCP cells. In both
knockout cell lines, cccDNA formation was stunted significantly, and in
HepG2-NTCP-DDB2 knockout cells, downstream indicators of cccDNA such as HBV RNA, 
HBcAg, and HBeAg were similarly reduced. Knockdown of DDB2 in HBV-infected
HepG2-NTCP cells and primary human hepatocytes (PHH) also resulted in cccDNA
reduction. Trans-complementation of wild type DDB2 in HepG2-NTCP-DDB2 knockout
cells rescued cccDNA formation and its downstream indicators. However, ectopic
expression of DDB2 mutants deficient in DNA-binding, DDB1-binding, or
ubiquitination failed to rescue cccDNA formation. Our study thus suggests an
integral role of UV-DDB, specifically DDB2, in the formation of HBV cccDNA.
IMPORTANCE Serving as a key viral factor for chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV)
infection, HBV covalently closed circular DNA (cccDNA) is formed in the cell
nucleus from viral relaxed circular DNA (rcDNA) by hijacking host DNA repair
machinery. Previous studies have identified a handful of host DNA repair factors 
involved in cccDNA formation through hypothesis-driven research with some help
from RNAi screening and/or biochemistry approaches. To enrich the landscape of
tools for discovering host factors responsible for rcDNA-to-cccDNA conversion, we
developed an rcDNA immunoprecipitation paired mass spectrometry assay, which
allowed us to pull down nuclear rcDNA in its transitional state to cccDNA and
observe the associated host factors. From this assay we discovered a novel
relationship between the UV-DDB complex and cccDNA formation, hence, providing a 
proof-of-concept for a more direct discovery of novel HBV DNA-host interactions
that can be exploited to develop new cccDNA-targeting antivirals.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01360-21 
PMID: 34705558 

