
1. Psychiatr Danub. 2021 Spring-Summer;33(Suppl 4):427-431.

Immunosenescence, Inflammaging and Resilience: An Evolutionary Perspective of
Adaptation in the Light of COVID-19 Pandemic.

Banić M(1), Pleško S, Urek M, Babić Ž, Kardum D.

Author information: 
(1)Unit for Inflammatory Bowel Disease and Clinical Nutrition, University
Hospital Dubrava, Avenija Gojka Šuška 6, Zagreb, Croatia, mbanic@kbd.hr.

The evolution of immunology enabled the study of role of innate and adaptive
immunity in systems biology network of immunosenescence and inflammaging. Due to 
global reduction in birth rates and reduced mortality, in year 2025 there will be
about 1.2 billion of people over age of sixty, worldwide. The notion that the
real age is not chronological, but the biological one led to the concept of
"bioage", defining the biologic reactivity and resilience, including the immune
competence of an individual. A competent immune network, systemic and mucosal is 
intrinsic to resilience and homeostasis of the human holobiont as the unit of
evolution. In elderly, the immunosenescence could be associated with higher
levels of proinflammatory mediators (such as IL-6), frialty and mortality.
Proi-inflammatory state in elderly is denoted as inflammaging, characterized with
low-grade (sterile) inflammation, as a physiologic response to life-long
antigenic stimuli. When under control, inflammaging could be regarded as an
efficient defense mechanism, oposed and regulated by anti-inflammatory pathways
and molecules. Immunosensecence. The emerging concepts of "individual
immunobiography" and "trained immunity" speak in favour that the immunological
experience during the life would shape the ability of each individual to respond 
to various stimuli, strongly influencing the elements of innate and adaptive
immunity, including macrophages and innate lymphoid cells. Older age is one of
the main risk factors for the severe clinical picture and adverse outcome of
COVID-19 infection, due to immunosenscence and chronic low-grade inflammation
(inflammaging), both characterizing the immune reactioin in elderly. The
senescent immune system, along with the advanced process of inflammaging is prone
to react with uncontrolled activation of innate immune response that leads to
cytokine release syndrome, tissue damage and adverse outcome of infection.
Further research is aimed to nutritional and pharmacologic (immunomodulatory)
interventions to influence the process of bioaging and immunosenscence, and to
modulate the reaction of elderly to infection, including the COVID-19.


PMID: 34718260  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

