
1. BMC Infect Dis. 2021 Oct 30;21(1):1119. doi: 10.1186/s12879-021-06810-4.

Creating symptom-based criteria for diagnostic testing: a case study based on a
multivariate analysis of data collected during the first wave of the COVID-19
pandemic in New Zealand.

French N(1), Jones G(2), Heuer C(3), Hope V(4), Jefferies S(4), Muellner P(3)(5),
McNeill A(4), Haslett S(2), Priest P(6).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Research Centre, Massey University, Palmerston North, New
Zealand. n.p.french@massey.ac.nz.
(2)School of Fundamental Science, Massey University, PO Box 11222, Palmerston
North, New Zealand.
(3)Infectious Disease Research Centre, Massey University, Palmerston North, New
Zealand.
(4)Institute of Environmental Sciences and Research Ltd, Porirua, New Zealand.
(5)Epi-Interactive Ltd, Wellington, New Zealand.
(6)Department of Preventive & Social Medicine, University of Otago, Dunedin, New 
Zealand.

BACKGROUND: Diagnostic testing using PCR is a fundamental component of COVID-19
pandemic control. Criteria for determining who should be tested by PCR vary
between countries, and ultimately depend on resource constraints and public
health objectives. Decisions are often based on sets of symptoms in individuals
presenting to health services, as well as demographic variables, such as age, and
travel history. The objective of this study was to determine the sensitivity and 
specificity of sets of symptoms used for triaging individuals for confirmatory
testing, with the aim of optimising public health decision making under different
scenarios.
METHODS: Data from the first wave of COVID-19 in New Zealand were analysed;
comprising 1153 PCR-confirmed and 4750 symptomatic PCR negative individuals. Data
were analysed using Multiple Correspondence Analysis (MCA), automated search
algorithms, Bayesian Latent Class Analysis, Decision Tree Analysis and Random
Forest (RF) machine learning.
RESULTS: Clinical criteria used to guide who should be tested by PCR were based
on a set of mostly respiratory symptoms: a new or worsening cough, sore throat,
shortness of breath, coryza, anosmia, with or without fever. This set has
relatively high sensitivity (> 90%) but low specificity (< 10%), using PCR as a
quasi-gold standard. In contrast, a group of mostly non-respiratory symptoms,
including weakness, muscle pain, joint pain, headache, anosmia and ageusia,
explained more variance in the MCA and were associated with higher specificity,
at the cost of reduced sensitivity. Using RF models, the incorporation of 15
common symptoms, age, sex and prioritised ethnicity provided algorithms that were
both sensitive and specific (> 85% for both) for predicting PCR outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS:  If predominantly respiratory symptoms are used for test-triaging,  
a large proportion of the individuals being tested may not have COVID-19. This
could overwhelm testing capacity and hinder attempts to trace and eliminate
infection. Specificity can be increased using alternative rules based on sets of 
symptoms informed by multivariate analysis and automated search algorithms,
albeit at the cost of sensitivity. Both sensitivity and specificity can be
improved through machine learning algorithms, incorporating symptom and
demographic data, and hence may provide an alternative approach to test-triaging 
that can be optimised according to prevailing conditions.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-021-06810-4 
PMCID: PMC8556148
PMID: 34715802  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

