
1. Int Nurs Rev. 2021 Oct 29. doi: 10.1111/inr.12724. [Epub ahead of print]

Evaluating Polish nurses' working conditions and patient safety during the
COVID-19 pandemic.

Malinowska-Lipień I(1)(2), Wadas T(2), Gabryś T(1), Kózka M(1), Gniadek A(1),
Brzostek T(1), Squires A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, Institute of Nursing and Midwifery, Jagiellonian
University Medical College, Krakow, Poland.
(2)Małopolska District Chamber of Nurses and Midwives in Krakow, Kraków, Poland.
(3)Rory Meyers College of Nursing, New York University, New York, USA.

AIM: To study the relationship between Polish nurses' working conditions and
their attitudes towards patient safety during the COVID-19 pandemic.
BACKGROUND: Facing the COVID-19 pandemic, caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus,
healthcare worldwide has been reorganised. How these changes affected patient
safety for hospitalised persons is not well understood.
INTRODUCTION: Difficult working conditions related to the outbreak of the
COVID-19 pandemic may affect the provision of safe and effective care by
healthcare staff.
METHODS: This observational research was performed on the group of 577 nurses
working during the COVID-19 pandemic in isolation infection wards (n = 201) and
non-infectious diseases wards (n = 376) in Polish hospitals. The evaluation of
working conditions was performed with an author's questionnaire, while the
evaluation of factors influencing attitudes towards safety of the hospitalised
patients was performed using Safety Attitudes Questionnaire. The STROBE checklist
was used to report this study.
RESULTS: The procedures developed by management in advance for COVID-19 patient
treatment had a statistically significant influence on nurses' 'evaluation of
teamwork climate, safety climate, job satisfaction, perception of management and 
work conditions'. Providing management with the ability to perform a swab
polymerase chain reaction SARS-CoV-2 test for hospital staff in the workplace,
and psychological support from professionals and employers were statistically
significant for higher ratings of 'teamwork climate, safety climate, job
satisfaction, stress recognition, perception of management and work conditions'
by the Polish nurses. Hospital workload during the COVID-19 pandemic was
significantly correlated with lower evaluation of work conditions.
DISCUSSION: Our study reinforces the existing literature on many fronts and
demonstrates how even when operating under the COVID-19 pandemic conditions, some
factors remain critical for fostering a culture of patient safety. Reinforcing
patient safety practices is a imperative under these conditions.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS FOR NURSING: Working conditions influence nurses'
attitudes towards safety of the hospitalised patients. These are largely
modifiable factors related to the workplace and include prior preparation of
procedures, restrictions to extending daily work hours and psychological
counselling for the staff.

© 2021 The Authors. International Nursing Review published by John Wiley & Sons
Ltd on behalf of International Council of Nurses.

DOI: 10.1111/inr.12724 
PMID: 34716590 

