
1. Hepatol Commun. 2021 Oct 31. doi: 10.1002/hep4.1842. [Epub ahead of print]

An RNA Interference/Adeno-Associated Virus Vector-Based Combinatorial Gene
Therapy Approach Against Hepatitis E Virus.

Zhang C(1)(2)(3), Freistaedter A(2), Schmelas C(1), Gunkel M(4), Dao Thi
VL(#)(2)(3), Grimm D(#)(1)(3)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases/Virology, Medical Faculty, Heidelberg
University, Cluster of Excellence CellNetworks, BioQuant, Center for Integrative 
Infectious Diseases Research, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Schaller Research group at Department of Infectious Diseases/Virology, Medical
Faculty, Heidelberg University, Center for Integrative Infectious Diseases
Research, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)German Center for Infection Research, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)High-Content Analysis of the Cell and Advanced Biological Screening Facility, 
BioQuant, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)German Center for Cardiovascular Research, Heidelberg, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

Hepatitis E virus (HEV) is a major public health problem with limited therapeutic
options. Here, we engineered adeno-associated viral vectors of serotype 6 (AAV6) 
to express short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) against HEV transcripts with the prospect 
of down-regulating HEV replication in vivo. We designed 20 different shRNAs,
targeting the genome of the HEV genotype 3 (GT3) Kernow-C1 p6 strain, for
delivery upon AAV6 transduction. Using an original selectable HEV GT3 reporter
replicon, we identified three shRNAs that efficiently down-regulated HEV
replication. We further confirmed their inhibitory potency with full-length HEV
infection. Seventy-two hours following transduction, HEV replication in both
systems decreased by up to 95%. The three most potent inhibitory shRNAs
identified were directed against the methyltransferase domain, the junction
region between the open reading frames (ORFs), and the 3´ end of ORF2. Targeting 
all three regions by multiplexing the shRNAs further enhanced their inhibitory
potency over a prolonged period of up to 21 days following transduction.
Conclusion: Combining RNA interference and AAV vector-based gene therapy has
great potential for suppressing HEV replication. Our strategy to target the viral
RNA with multiplexed shRNAs should help to counteract viral escape through
mutations. Considering the widely documented safety of AAV vector-based gene
therapies, our approach is, in principle, amenable to clinical translation.

© 2021 The Authors. Hepatology Communications published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep4.1842 
PMID: 34719133 

