
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 28;16(10):e0259037. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259037.
eCollection 2021.

Predicting the effects of COVID-19 related interventions in urban settings by
combining activity-based modelling, agent-based simulation, and mobile phone
data.

Müller SA(1), Balmer M(2), Charlton W(1), Ewert R(1), Neumann A(3), Rakow C(1),
Schlenther T(1), Nagel K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Transport Systems Planning and Transport Telematics, TU Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.
(2)Senozon AG, Zürich, Switzerland.
(3)Senozon GmbH, Berlin, Germany.

Epidemiological simulations as a method are used to better understand and predict
the spreading of infectious diseases, for example of COVID-19. This paper
presents an approach that combines a well-established approach from
transportation modelling that uses person-centric data-driven human mobility
modelling with a mechanistic infection model and a person-centric disease
progression model. The model includes the consequences of different room sizes,
air exchange rates, disease import, changed activity participation rates over
time (coming from mobility data), masks, indoors vs. outdoors leisure activities,
and of contact tracing. It is validated against the infection dynamics in Berlin 
(Germany). The model can be used to understand the contributions of different
activity types to the infection dynamics over time. It predicts the effects of
contact reductions, school closures/vacations, masks, or the effect of moving
leisure activities from outdoors to indoors in fall, and is thus able to
quantitatively predict the consequences of interventions. It is shown that these 
effects are best given as additive changes of the reproduction number R. The
model also explains why contact reductions have decreasing marginal returns, i.e.
the first 50% of contact reductions have considerably more effect than the second
50%. Our work shows that is is possible to build detailed epidemiological
simulations from microscopic mobility models relatively quickly. They can be used
to investigate mechanical aspects of the dynamics, such as the transmission from 
political decisions via human behavior to infections, consequences of different
lockdown measures, or consequences of wearing masks in certain situations. The
results can be used to inform political decisions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259037 
PMCID: PMC8553173
PMID: 34710158  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MB and KN own shares of the commercial company
senozon. MB and AN are employees of senozon. None of this alters our adherence to
PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.

