
1. Clin Infect Dis. 2021 Oct 27. pii: ciab920. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciab920. [Epub ahead
of print]

Neutralizing anti-GM-CSF autoantibodies in patients with CNS and localized
cryptococcosis: a longitudinal follow-up and literature review.

Kuo PH(1)(2), Wu UI(1)(3), Pan YH(1), Wang JT(1), Wang YC(4), Sun HY(1), Sheng
WH(1), Chen YC(1), Chang SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital and
National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital Hsin-Chu 
Branch, Hsin-Chu, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Medicine, National Taiwan University Cancer Center, Taipei,
Taiwan.
(4)Department of Medical Imaging, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Neutralizing anti-GM-CSF autoantibodies (AAbs) have been increasingly
recognized to predispose healthy individuals to disseminated cryptococcosis.
However, studies have only considered patients with central nervous system (CNS) 
infection. No longitudinal study has captured the disease spectrum and clinical
course.
METHODS: We prospectively enrolled adults without human immunodeficiency virus
infection who had disseminated or unusual cryptococcosis. We compared the
demographics, clinical features, kinetics of serum cryptococcal antigen (CrAg)
titers, anti-GM-CSF AAb concentrations, and treatment outcomes between patients
with (case patients) and without (control patients) anti-GM-CSF AAbs. Additional 
reports from the literature were also reviewed.
RESULTS: Twenty-three patients were enrolled, of whom 6 tested positive for
anti-GM-CSF AAbs. All case patients with positive fungal cultures (5/5, 100%)
were infected with Cryptococcus gattii VGII. Among them, 3 had exclusively
pulmonary involvement, and 1 had only musculoskeletal lesions. Patients with CNS 
cryptococcosis exhibited a higher serum concentration of anti-GM-CSF AAb than
those with extraneural cryptococcosis. Case patients had higher initial and peak 
levels of serum CrAg and longer duration of antigenemia compared with the control
patients. All case patients who had completed antifungal therapy had favorable
outcomes without recurrence.
CONCLUSIONS: Testing for anti-GM-CSF AAbs should be considered for not only
previously healthy patients with disseminated cryptococcosis but also those with 
unexplained, localized cryptococcosis. Recurrence after completion of antifungal 
therapy was rare despite the persistence of anti-GM-CSF AAbs.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciab920 
PMID: 34718451 

