
1. J Parkinsons Dis. 2021 Oct 25. doi: 10.3233/JPD-212640. [Epub ahead of print]

Induction of Parkinsonian-Like Changes via Targeted Downregulation of Astrocytic 
Glutamate Transporter GLT-1 in the Striatum.

Ren C(1)(2)(3), He KJ(2), Hu H(1), Zhang JB(1)(2), Dong LG(1)(2), Li D(4), Chen
J(1), Mao CJ(1), Wang F(1)(2)(5), Liu CF(2)(4)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Clinical Research Center of Neurological Disease, 
the Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, China.
(2)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Neuropsychiatric Diseases and Institute of
Neuroscience, Soochow University, Suzhou, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, The Affiliated Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital of Qingdao
University, Yantai, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Suqian First Hospital, Suqian, China.
(5)Department of Neurology, The Affiliated Lianyungang Oriental Hospital of
Xuzhou Medical University, Lianyungang, China.
(6)Department of Neurology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical
University, Urumqi, China.

BACKGROUND: Previous investigations have suggested that decreased expression of
glutamate transporter-1 (GLT-1) is involved in glutamate excitotoxicity and
contribute to the development of Parkinson's disease (PD), GLT-1 is decreased in 
animal models of PD. GLT-1 is mainly expressed in astrocytes, and the striatum is
a GLT-1-rich brain area.
OBJECTIVE: The aim was to explore the function and mechanism of astrocytic GLT-1 
in PD-like changes.
METHODS: In the study, PD-like changes and their molecular mechanism in rodents
were tested by a behavioral assessment, micro-positron emission
tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT), western blotting, immunohistochemical
and immunofluorescence staining, and high performance liquid chromatography
pre-column derivatization with O-pthaldialdehida after downregulating astrocytic 
GLT-1 in vivo and in vitro.
RESULTS: In vivo, after 6 weeks of brain stereotactic injection of
adeno-associated virus into the striatum, rats in the astrocytic GLT-1 knockdown 
group showed poorer motor performance, abnormal gait, and depression-like
feature; but no olfactory disorders. The results of micro-PET/CT and western
blotting indicated that the dopaminergic system was impaired in astrocytic GLT-1 
knockdown rats. Similarly, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) positive immune-staining in 
neurons of astrocytic GLT-1 knockdown rats showed deficit in cell count. In
vitro, knockdown of astrocytic GLT-1 via RNA interference led to morphological
injury of TH-positive neurons, which may be related to the abnormal calcium
signal induced by glutamate accumulation after GLT-1 knockdown. Furthermore, the 
GLT-1 agonist ceftriaxone showed a protective effect on TH-positive neuron
impairment.
CONCLUSION: The present findings may shed new light on the future prevention and 
treatment of PD based on blocking glutamate excitotoxicity.

DOI: 10.3233/JPD-212640 
PMID: 34719508 

