
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Oct 29;11(1):21297. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00851-0.

Dysbiosis and structural disruption of the respiratory microbiota in COVID-19
patients with severe and fatal outcomes.

Hernández-Terán A(1), Mejía-Nepomuceno F(1), Herrera MT(2), Barreto O(3), García 
E(3), Castillejos M(4), Boukadida C(5), Matias-Florentino M(5), Rincón-Rubio
A(5), Avila-Rios S(5), Mújica-Sánchez M(6), Serna-Muñoz R(1), Becerril-Vargas
E(6), Guadarrama-Pérez C(7), Ahumada-Topete VH(4), Rodríguez-Llamazares S(1),
Martínez-Orozco JA(6), Salas-Hernández J(8), Pérez-Padilla R(1), Vázquez-Pérez
JA(9).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Investigación en Tabaquismo y EPOC, Instituto Nacional de
Enfermedades Respiratorias Ismael Cosío Villegas, INER, Mexico, Mexico.
(2)Departamento de Investigación en Microbiología, Instituto Nacional de
Enfermedades Respiratorias Ismael Cosío Villegas, INER, Mexico, Mexico.
(3)Coordinación de Atención Médica, Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades
Respiratorias Ismael Cosío Villegas, INER, Mexico, Mexico.
(4)Departamento de Unidad de Epidemiología Hospitalaria e Infectología, Instituto
Nacional de Enfermedades Respiratorias Ismael Cosío Villegas, INER, Mexico,
Mexico.
(5)Centro de Investigación en Enfermedades Infecciosas, CIENI, Instituto Nacional
de Enfermedades Respiratorias Ismael Cosío Villegas, INER, Mexico, Mexico.
(6)Laboratorio de Microbiología, Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Respiratorias
Ismael Cosío Villegas, INER, Mexico, Mexico.
(7)Servicio de Urgencias Médicas, Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades
Respiratorias Ismael Cosío Villegas, INER, Mexico, Mexico.
(8)Dirección General INER, Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Respiratorias
Ismael Cosío Villegas, INER, Mexico, Mexico.
(9)Departamento de Investigación en Tabaquismo y EPOC, Instituto Nacional de
Enfermedades Respiratorias Ismael Cosío Villegas, INER, Mexico, Mexico.
joevazpe@gmail.com.

The COVID-19 outbreak has caused over three million deaths worldwide.
Understanding the pathology of the disease and the factors that drive severe and 
fatal clinical outcomes is of special relevance. Studying the role of the
respiratory microbiota in COVID-19 is especially important as the respiratory
microbiota is known to interact with the host immune system, contributing to
clinical outcomes in chronic and acute respiratory diseases. Here, we
characterized the microbiota in the respiratory tract of patients with mild,
severe, or fatal COVID-19, and compared it to healthy controls and patients with 
non-COVID-19-pneumonia. We comparatively studied the microbial composition,
diversity, and microbiota structure between the study groups and correlated the
results with clinical data. We found differences in the microbial composition for
COVID-19 patients, healthy controls, and non-COVID-19 pneumonia controls. In
particular, we detected a high number of potentially opportunistic pathogens
associated with severe and fatal levels of the disease. Also, we found higher
levels of dysbiosis in the respiratory microbiota of patients with COVID-19
compared to the healthy controls. In addition, we detected differences in
diversity structure between the microbiota of patients with mild, severe, and
fatal COVID-19, as well as the presence of specific bacteria that correlated with
clinical variables associated with increased risk of mortality. In summary, our
results demonstrate that increased dysbiosis of the respiratory tract microbiota 
in patients with COVID-19 along with a continuous loss of microbial complexity
structure found in mild to fatal COVID-19 cases may potentially alter clinical
outcomes in patients. Taken together, our findings identify the respiratory
microbiota as a factor potentially associated with the severity of COVID-19.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-00851-0 
PMCID: PMC8556282
PMID: 34716394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

