
1. Semin Immunol. 2021 Oct 25:101507. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2021.101507. [Epub ahead
of print]

Heterologous humoral immunity to human and zoonotic coronaviruses: Aiming for the
achilles heel.

Ng KW(1), Faulkner N(2), Wrobel AG(3), Gamblin SJ(3), Kassiotis G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Retroviral Immunology Laboratory, London, NW1 1AT, UK.
(2)Retroviral Immunology Laboratory, London, NW1 1AT, UK; National Heart and Lung
Institute, Imperial College London, London, SW3 6LY, UK.
(3)Structural Biology of Disease Processes Laboratory, The Francis Crick
Institute, 1 Midland Road, London, NW1 1AT, UK.
(4)Retroviral Immunology Laboratory, London, NW1 1AT, UK; Department of
Infectious Disease, St Mary's Hospital, Imperial College London, London W2 1PG,
UK. Electronic address: george.kassiotis@crick.ac.uk.

Coronaviruses are evolutionarily successful RNA viruses, common to multiple
avian, amphibian and mammalian hosts. Despite their ubiquity and potential
impact, knowledge of host immunity to coronaviruses remains incomplete, partly
owing to the lack of overt pathogenicity of endemic human coronaviruses (HCoVs), 
which typically cause common colds. However, the need for deeper understanding
became pressing with the zoonotic introduction of three novel coronaviruses in
the past two decades, causing severe acute respiratory syndromes in humans, and
the unfolding pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). This renewed interest not 
only triggered the discovery of two of the four HCoVs, but also uncovered
substantial cellular and humoral cross-reactivity with shared or related
coronaviral antigens. Here, we review the evidence for cross-reactive B cell
memory elicited by HCoVs and its potential impact on the puzzlingly variable
outcome of SARS-CoV-2 infection. The available data indicate targeting of highly 
conserved regions primarily in the S2 subunits of the spike glycoproteins of
HCoVs and SARS-CoV-2 by cross-reactive B cells and antibodies. Rare monoclonal
antibodies reactive with conserved S2 epitopes and with potent virus neutralising
activity have been cloned, underscoring the potential functional relevance of
cross-reactivity. We discuss B cell and antibody cross-reactivity in the broader 
context of heterologous humoral immunity to coronaviruses, as well as the limits 
of protective immune memory against homologous re-infection. Given the
bidirectional nature of cross-reactivity, the unprecedented current vaccination
campaign against SARS-CoV-2 is expected to impact HCoVs, as well as future
zoonotic coronaviruses attempting to cross the species barrier. However, emerging
SARS-CoV-2 variants with resistance to neutralisation by vaccine-induced
antibodies highlight a need for targeting more constrained, less mutable parts of
the spike. The delineation of such cross-reactive areas, which humoral immunity
can be trained to attack, may offer the key to permanently shifting the balance
of our interaction with current and future coronaviruses in our favour.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.smim.2021.101507 
PMCID: PMC8542444
PMID: 34716096 

