
1. Chem Biol Drug Des. 2021 Oct 29. doi: 10.1111/cbdd.13978. [Epub ahead of print]

Specific delivering of RNAi using Spike's aptamer-functionalized lipid
nanoparticles for targeting SARS-CoV-2: A strong anti-Covid drug in a clinical
case study.

Saify Nabiabad H(1), Amini M(1), Demirdas S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Bu-Ali Sina University, Hamadan, Iran.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, the
Netherlands.

Coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) as a global pandemic has attracted the attention of many
scientific centers to find the right treatment. We expressed and purified the
recombinant receptor-binding domain (RBD) of the SARS-CoV-2 spike (S) protein,
and specific RBD aptamers were designed using SELEX method. RNAi targeting
nucleocapsid phosphoprotein was synthesized and human lung cells were inoculated 
with aptamer-functionalized lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) containing RNAi. The
results demonstrated that RBD aptamer having KD values of 0.290 nm possessed good
affinity. Based on molecular docking and efficacy prediction analysis, siRNA
molecule was showed the best action. LNPs were appropriately functionalized by
aptamer and contained RNAi molecules. Antiviral assay using q-PCR and ELISA
demonstrated that LNP functionalized with 35 µm Apt and containing 30 nm RNAi/ml 
of cell culture had the best antiviral activity compared to other concentrations.
Applied aptamer in the nanocarrier has two important functions. First, it can
deliver the drug (RNAi) to the surface of epithelial cells. Second, by binding to
the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein, it inhibits the virus entrance into cells. Our data
reveal an interaction between the aptamer and the virus, and RNAi targeted the
virus RNA. CT scan and the clinical laboratory tests in a clinical case study, a 
36-year old man who presented with severe SARS-CoV-2, demonstrated that
inhalation of 10 mg Apt-LNPs-RNAi nebulized/day for six days resulted in an
improvement in consolidation and ground-glass opacity in lungs on the sixth day
of treatment. Our findings suggest the treatment of SARS-CoV-2 infection through 
inhalation of Aptamer-LNPs-RNAi.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cbdd.13978 
PMID: 34714580 

