
1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Aug 3;9:661272. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.661272.
eCollection 2021.

Low-Coverage Whole Genome Sequencing of Cell-Free DNA From Immunosuppressed
Cancer Patients Enables Tumor Fraction Determination and Reveals Relevant Copy
Number Alterations.

Bouzidi A(1), Labreche K(2), Baron M(3), Veyri M(4), Denis JA(5), Touat M(6),
Sanson M(6), Davi F(7), Guillerm E(8), Jouannet S(9), Charlotte F(10), Bielle
F(11), Choquet S(3), Boëlle PY(2), Cadranel J(12), Leblond V(3), Autran B(13),
Lacorte JM(1), Spano JP(1), Coulet F(1); IDEATION study group.

Collaborators: Idbaih A, Balegroune N, Guihot A, Theodorou I, Alentorn A,
Brocheriou I, Anne-Geneviève, Weil DR, Picca A.

Author information: 
(1)Sorbonne University, INSERM, Research Unit on Cardiovascular and Metabolic
Disease UMR ICAN, Department of Endocrine Biochemistry and Oncology, AP-HP,
Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(2)Sorbonne University, INSERM, Pierre Louis Institute of Epidemiology and Public
Health, Paris, France.
(3)Sorbonne University, Center for Immunology and Infectious Diseases
(CIMI-Paris), Department of Hematology, APHP, Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris,
France.
(4)Sorbonne University, INSERM, Pierre Louis Institute of Epidemiology and Public
Health, Theravir Team, Medical Oncology, AP-HP, Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris,
France.
(5)Sorbonne University, INSERM, Saint-Antoine Research Center, Cancer Biology and
Therapeutics, CRSA, Department of Endocrine Biochemistry and Oncology, AP-HP,
Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(6)Sorbonne University, INSERM, CNRS, Brain and Spine Institute, ICM, Department 
of Neurology 2-Mazarin, AP-HP, Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(7)Sorbonne University, INSERM, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Department of
Biological Hematology, AP-HP, Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(8)Sorbonne University, INSERM, Saint-Antoine Research Center, Microsatellites
Instability and Cancer, CRSA, Genetics Department, AP-HP, Hôpital Pitié
Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(9)Sorbonne University, Neurosurgery Department, AP-HP, Hôpital Pitié
Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(10)Sorbonne University, Anatomy and Pathologic Cytology, AP-HP, Hôpital Pitié
Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(11)Sorbonne University, Neuropathology Department, AP-HP, Hôpital Pitié
Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(12)Sorbonne University, Chest Department and Thoracic Oncology, GRC 04,
Theranoscan, AP-HP, Hôpital Tenon, Paris, France.
(13)Sorbonne University, INSERM, CNRS, Center for Immunology and Infectious
Diseases (CIMI-Paris), AP-HP, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France.

Cell-free DNA (cfDNA) analysis is a minimally invasive method that can be used to
detect genomic abnormalities by directly testing a blood sample. This method is
particularly useful for immunosuppressed patients, who are at high risk of
complications from tissue biopsy. The cfDNA tumor fraction (TF) varies greatly
across cancer type and between patients. Thus, the detection of molecular
alterations is highly dependent on the circulating TF. In our study, we aimed to 
calculate the TF and characterize the copy number aberration (CNA) profile of
cfDNA from patients with rare malignancies occurring in immunosuppressed
environments or immune-privileged sites. To accomplish this, we recruited 36
patients: 19 patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) who were either human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-positive or organ transplant recipients, 5
HIV-positive lung cancer patients, and 12 patients with glioma. cfDNA was
extracted from the patients' plasma and sequenced using low-coverage whole genome
sequencing (LC-WGS). The cfDNA TF was then calculated using the ichorCNA
bioinformatic algorithm, based on the CNA profile. In parallel, we performed
whole exome sequencing of patient tumor tissue and cfDNA samples with detectable 
TFs. We detected a cfDNA TF in 29% of immune-suppressed patients (one patient
with lung cancer and six with systemic NHL), with a TF range from 8 to 70%. In
these patients, the events detected in the CNA profile of cfDNA are well-known
events associated with NHL and lung cancer. Moreover, cfDNA CNA profile
correlated with the CNA profile of matched tumor tissue. No tumor-derived cfDNA
was detected in the glioma patients. Our study shows that tumor genetic content
is detectable in cfDNA from immunosuppressed patients with advanced NHL or lung
cancer. LC-WGS is a time- and cost-effective method that can help select an
appropriate strategy for performing extensive molecular analysis of cfDNA. This
technique also enables characterization of CNAs in cfDNA when sufficient tumor
content is available. Hence, this approach can be used to collect useful
molecular information that is relevant to patient care.

Copyright © 2021 Bouzidi, Labreche, Baron, Veyri, Denis, Touat, Sanson, Davi,
Guillerm, Jouannet, Charlotte, Bielle, Choquet, Boëlle, Cadranel, Leblond,
Autran, Lacorte, Spano, Coulet and the IDEATION study group.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.661272 
PMCID: PMC8369887
PMID: 34710202 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

