
1. Lancet. 2021 Nov 13;398(10313):1825-1835. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)02276-5.
Epub 2021 Oct 28.

Non-pharmaceutical interventions, vaccination, and the SARS-CoV-2 delta variant
in England: a mathematical modelling study.

Sonabend R(1), Whittles LK(2), Imai N(1), Perez-Guzman PN(1), Knock ES(3), Rawson
T(1), Gaythorpe KAM(1), Djaafara BA(1), Hinsley W(1), FitzJohn RG(1), Lees JA(1),
Kanapram DT(1), Volz EM(1), Ghani AC(1), Ferguson NM(4), Baguelin M(5), Cori
A(6).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis, Jameel Institute, School of
Public Health, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(2)MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis, Jameel Institute, School of
Public Health, Imperial College London, London, UK; National Institute for Health
Research Health Protection Research Unit in Modelling Methodology, Imperial
College London, Public Health England, London School of Hygiene & Tropical
Medicine, London, UK; Modelling and Economics Unit, National Infection Service,
Public Health England, London, UK.
(3)MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis, Jameel Institute, School of
Public Health, Imperial College London, London, UK; National Institute for Health
Research Health Protection Research Unit in Modelling Methodology, Imperial
College London, Public Health England, London School of Hygiene & Tropical
Medicine, London, UK.
(4)MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis, Jameel Institute, School of
Public Health, Imperial College London, London, UK; National Institute for Health
Research Health Protection Research Unit in Modelling Methodology, Imperial
College London, Public Health England, London School of Hygiene & Tropical
Medicine, London, UK. Electronic address: neil.ferguson@imperial.ac.uk.
(5)MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis, Jameel Institute, School of
Public Health, Imperial College London, London, UK; National Institute for Health
Research Health Protection Research Unit in Modelling Methodology, Imperial
College London, Public Health England, London School of Hygiene & Tropical
Medicine, London, UK; Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Faculty of
Epidemiology and Population Health, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine,
London, UK.
(6)MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis, Jameel Institute, School of
Public Health, Imperial College London, London, UK; National Institute for Health
Research Health Protection Research Unit in Modelling Methodology, Imperial
College London, Public Health England, London School of Hygiene & Tropical
Medicine, London, UK. Electronic address: a.cori@imperial.ac.uk.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2021 Nov 13;398(10313):1781-1783.

BACKGROUND: England's COVID-19 roadmap out of lockdown policy set out the
timeline and conditions for the stepwise lifting of non-pharmaceutical
interventions (NPIs) as vaccination roll-out continued, with step one starting on
March 8, 2021. In this study, we assess the roadmap, the impact of the delta
(B.1.617.2) variant of SARS-CoV-2, and potential future epidemic trajectories.
METHODS: This mathematical modelling study was done to assess the UK Government's
four-step process to easing lockdown restrictions in England, UK. We extended a
previously described model of SARS-CoV-2 transmission to incorporate vaccination 
and multi-strain dynamics to explicitly capture the emergence of the delta
variant. We calibrated the model to English surveillance data, including hospital
admissions, hospital occupancy, seroprevalence data, and population-level PCR
testing data using a Bayesian evidence synthesis framework, then modelled the
potential trajectory of the epidemic for a range of different schedules for
relaxing NPIs. We estimated the resulting number of daily infections and hospital
admissions, and daily and cumulative deaths. Three scenarios spanning a range of 
optimistic to pessimistic vaccine effectiveness, waning natural immunity, and
cross-protection from previous infections were investigated. We also considered
three levels of mixing after the lifting of restrictions.
FINDINGS: The roadmap policy was successful in offsetting the increased
transmission resulting from lifting NPIs starting on March 8, 2021, with
increasing population immunity through vaccination. However, because of the
emergence of the delta variant, with an estimated transmission advantage of 76%
(95% credible interval [95% CrI] 69-83) over alpha, fully lifting NPIs on June
21, 2021, as originally planned might have led to 3900 (95% CrI 1500-5700) peak
daily hospital admissions under our central parameter scenario. Delaying until
July 19, 2021, reduced peak hospital admissions by three fold to 1400 (95% CrI
700-1700) per day. There was substantial uncertainty in the epidemic trajectory, 
with particular sensitivity to the transmissibility of delta, level of mixing,
and estimates of vaccine effectiveness.
INTERPRETATION: Our findings show that the risk of a large wave of COVID-19
hospital admissions resulting from lifting NPIs can be substantially mitigated if
the timing of NPI relaxation is carefully balanced against vaccination coverage. 
However, with the delta variant, it might not be possible to fully lift NPIs
without a third wave of hospital admissions and deaths, even if vaccination
coverage is high. Variants of concern, their transmissibility, vaccine uptake,
and vaccine effectiveness must be carefully monitored as countries relax pandemic
control measures.
FUNDING: National Institute for Health Research, UK Medical Research Council,
Wellcome Trust, and UK Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open Access
article under the CC BY 4.0 license. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)02276-5 
PMCID: PMC8550916
PMID: 34717829  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests AC has received payment 
from Pfizer for teaching of mathematical modelling of infectious diseases. KAMG
has received honoraria from Wellcome Genome Campus for lectures and salary
support from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, 
through Imperial College London for work outside this study. All other authors
declare no competing interests.

