
1. Front Genome Ed. 2020 Dec 22;2:594984. doi: 10.3389/fgeed.2020.594984.
eCollection 2020.

CRISPR Technology for Ocular Angiogenesis.

Chung SH(1), Sin TN(1), Ngo T(1), Yiu G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Science, University of California,
Davis, Sacramento, CA, United States.

Among genome engineering tools, Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic
Repeats (CRISPR)-based approaches have been widely adopted for translational
studies due to their robustness, precision, and ease of use. When delivered to
diseased tissues with a viral vector such as adeno-associated virus, direct
genome editing can be efficiently achieved in vivo to treat different ophthalmic 
conditions. While CRISPR has been actively explored as a strategy for treating
inherited retinal diseases, with the first human trial recently initiated, its
applications for complex, multifactorial conditions such as ocular angiogenesis
has been relatively limited. Currently, neovascular retinal diseases such as
retinopathy of prematurity, proliferative diabetic retinopathy, and neovascular
age-related macular degeneration, which together constitute the majority of
blindness in developed countries, are managed with frequent and costly injections
of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) agents that are
short-lived and burdensome for patients. By contrast, CRISPR technology has the
potential to suppress angiogenesis permanently, with the added benefit of
targeting intracellular signals or regulatory elements, cell-specific delivery,
and multiplexing to disrupt different pro-angiogenic factors simultaneously.
However, the prospect of permanently suppressing physiologic pathways, the
unpredictability of gene editing efficacy, and concerns for off-target effects
have limited enthusiasm for these approaches. Here, we review the evolution of
gene therapy and advances in adapting CRISPR platforms to suppress retinal
angiogenesis. We discuss different Cas9 orthologs, delivery strategies, and
different genomic targets including VEGF, VEGF receptor, and HIF-1α, as well as
the advantages and disadvantages of genome editing vs. conventional gene
therapies for multifactorial disease processes as compared to inherited monogenic
retinal disorders. Lastly, we describe barriers that must be overcome to enable
effective adoption of CRISPR-based strategies for the management of ocular
angiogenesis.

Copyright © 2020 Chung, Sin, Ngo and Yiu.

DOI: 10.3389/fgeed.2020.594984 
PMCID: PMC8525361
PMID: 34713223 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

