
1. BMC Med Educ. 2021 Oct 30;21(1):554. doi: 10.1186/s12909-021-02962-8.

Challenges of students and residents of human medicine in the first four months
of the fight against the Covid-19 pandemic - Implications for future waves and
scenarios.

Wohlfarth B(1), Gloor B(2), Hautz WE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Visceral Surgery and Medicine, lnselspital, Bern University
Hospital, University of Bern, Freiburgstrasse 18, 3010, Bern, Switzerland.
benny.wohlfarth@insel.ch.
(2)Department of Visceral Surgery and Medicine, lnselspital, Bern University
Hospital, University of Bern, Freiburgstrasse 18, 3010, Bern, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Emergency Medicine, lnselspital, Bern University Hospital,
University of Bern, Freiburgstrasse 18, 3010, Bern, Switzerland.

INTRODUCTION: In the fight against the Covid-19 pandemic, medical students and
residents are expected to adapt and contribute in a healthcare environment
characterized by ever-changing measures and policies. The aim of this narrative
review is to provide a summary of the literature that addresses the challenges of
students and residents of human medicine in the first 4 months of the fight
against the Covid-19 pandemic in order to identify gaps and find implications for
improvement within the current situation and for potential future scenarios.
METHODS: We performed a systematic literature search and content analysis (CA) of
articles available in English language that address the challenges of students
and residents of human medicine in the first 4 months of the fight against the
Covid-19 pandemic.
RESULTS: We retrieved 82 articles from a wide range of journals, professional
backgrounds and countries. CA identified five recurring subgroup topics: "faculty
preparation", «uncertainties and mental health», «clinical knowledge», «rights
and obligations» and «(self-) support and supply». Within these subgroups the
main concerns of (re-)deployment, interruption of training and career, safety
issues, transmission of disease, and restricted social interaction were
identified as potential stressors that hold a risk for fatigue, loss of morale
and burnout.
DISCUSSION: Students and residents are willing and able to participate in the
fight against Covid-19 when provided with appropriate deployment, legal guidance,
safety measures, clinical knowledge, thorough supervision, social integration and
mental health support. Preceding interviews to decide on reasonable voluntary
deployment, the use of new technology and frequent feedback communication with
faculties, educators and policymakers can further help with a successful and
sustainable integration of students and residents in the fight against the
pandemic.
CONCLUSION: It is critical that faculties, educators and policymakers have a
thorough understanding of the needs and concerns of medical trainees during
pandemic times. Leaders should facilitate close communication with students and
residents, value their intrinsic creativeness and regularly evaluate their needs 
in regards to deployment, knowledge aspects, safety measures, legal concerns and 
overall well-being.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12909-021-02962-8 
PMCID: PMC8556795
PMID: 34717600  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

