
1. J Glob Antimicrob Resist. 2021 Oct 28;27:303-308. doi:
10.1016/j.jgar.2021.10.015. [Epub ahead of print]

Unnecessary antibiotic treatment of children hospitalised with respiratory
syncytial virus (RSV) bronchiolitis: risk factors and prescription patterns.

Obolski U(1), Kassem E(2), Na'amnih W(3), Tannous S(3), Kagan V(2), Muhsen K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, School of Public Health,
Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel; Porter School
of Environmental and Earth Sciences, Raymond and Beverly Sackler Faculty of Exact
Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. Electronic address:
uriobols@tauex.tau.ac.il.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Hillel Yaffe Medical Center, Hadera, Israel.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, School of Public Health,
Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

OBJECTIVES: Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a leading cause of respiratory
tract infections, especially in young children. Antibiotics are often
unnecessarily prescribed for the treatment of RSV. Such treatments affect
antibiotic resistance in future bacterial infections of treated patients and the 
general population. This study aimed to understand risk factors for and patterns 
of unnecessary antibiotic prescription in children with RSV.
METHODS: In a single-centre, retrospective study in Israel, we obtained data for 
children aged ≤2 years (n = 1016) hospitalised for RSV bronchiolitis during
2008-2018 and ascertained not to have bacterial co-infections. Antibiotic misuse 
was defined as prescription of antibiotics during hospitalisation of the study
population. Demographic and clinical variables were assessed as predictors of
unnecessary antibiotic treatment in a multivariable logistic regression model.
RESULTS: The unnecessary antibiotic treatment rate of children infected with RSV 
and ascertained not to have a bacterial co-infection was estimated at 33.4% (95% 
CI 30.5-36.4%). An increased likelihood of antibiotic misuse was associated with 
drawing bacterial cultures and with variables indicative of a severe patient
status such as lower oxygen saturation, higher body temperature, tachypnoea and
prior recent emergency room visit. Older age and female sex were also associated 
with an increased likelihood of unnecessary antibiotic treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Unnecessary antibiotic treatment in RSV patients was very common and
may be largely attributed to physicians' perception of patients' severity.
Improving prescription guidelines, implementing antibiotic stewardship programmes
and utilising decision support systems may help achieve a better balance between 
prescribing and withholding antibiotic treatment.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jgar.2021.10.015 
PMID: 34718202 

