
1. Middle East J Dig Dis. 2021 Jan;13(1):5-14. doi: 10.34172/mejdd.2021.197. Epub
2021 Mar 2.

An Overview of the Current Hepatitis B Treatment Strategies after Liver
Transplantation.

Dooghaie Moghadam A(1), Eslami P(1), Dowlati Beirami A(1), Iravani S(2), Farokhi 
E(3), Mansour-Ghanaei A(4), Hashemi MR(5), Aghajanpoor Pasha M(5), Mehrvar A(2), 
Nassiri-Toosi M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Shahid Beheshti
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Research Center for Cancer Screening and Epidemiology, AJA University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Liver Transplantation Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.
(4)Gastrointestinal and Liver Diseases Research Center (GLDRC), Guilan University
of Medical Sciences, Guilan, Iran.
(5)Gastroenterology and Hepatobiliary Research Center, AJA University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Currently, liver transplantation (LT) is considered as the only option for the
treatment of patients with various causes of liver failure, including patients
with chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infections. Overall, patients with HBV who
undergo LT are at increased risk of hepatitis B infection recurrence. Although
the current knowledge regarding the pathophysiology of this infection has been
dramatically increased over the past few decades, it is still considered a
complex disease process with varying degrees of clinical characteristics and
changing patterns over time. There are various treatment strategies for
preventing HBV recurrence in the LT setting. Generally, these regimens include
oral nucleoside/ nucleotide analogues (NAs), hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG), 
and vaccines or the combination of these drugs. The treatment strategy of choice 
should be based on cost-effectiveness, along with other patients underlying
conditions. In this case, studies indicate that potent NAs are more
cost-effective than HBIG in most case scenarios. In this article, we aimed to
review the general medications used in the prophylaxis of the recurrence of HBV
infection after LT.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.34172/mejdd.2021.197 
PMCID: PMC8531931
PMID: 34712432 

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare no
conflict of interest related to this work.

