
1. J Virol Methods. 2022 Jan;299:114328. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114328. Epub
2021 Oct 25.

Use of multivariate analysis to evaluate antigenic relationships between US BVDV 
vaccine strains and non-US genetically divergent isolates.

Mosena ACS(1), Falkenberg SM(2), Ma H(1), Casas E(1), Dassanayake RP(1), Booth
R(3), De Mia GM(4), Schweizer M(5), Canal CW(6), Neill JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ruminant Disease and Immunology Research Unit, National Animal Disease Center,
USDA, Agricultural Research Service, Ames, IA, United States.
(2)Ruminant Disease and Immunology Research Unit, National Animal Disease Center,
USDA, Agricultural Research Service, Ames, IA, United States. Electronic address:
shollie.falkenberg@usda.gov.
(3)Pathobiology and Population Sciences, Royal Veterinary College, Hawkshead
Lane, Hatfield, Hertfordshire, AL9 7TA, United Kingdom.
(4)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale dell'Umbria e delle Marche "Togo
Rosati", Perugia, Italy.
(5)Institute of Virology and Immunology, Department of Infectious Diseases and
Pathobiology, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(6)Laboratório de Virologia Veterinária, Faculdade de Veterinária, Universidade
Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Porto Alegre, Brazil.

Bovine viral diarrhea virus (BVDV) comprises two species, BVDV-1 and BVDV-2. But 
given the genetic diversity among pestiviruses, at least 22 subgenotypes are
described for BVDV-1 and 3-4 for BVDV-2. Genetic characterization is generally
accomplished through complete or partial sequencing and phylogeny, but it is not 
a reliable method to define antigenic relationships. The traditional method for
evaluating antigenic relationships between pestivirus isolates is the virus
neutralization (VN) assay, but interpretation of the data to define antigenic
relatedness can be difficult to discern for BVDV isolates within the same BVDV
species. Data from this study utilized a multivariate analysis for visualization 
of VN results to analyze the antigenic relationships between US vaccine strains
and field isolates from Switzerland, Italy, Brazil, and the UK. Polyclonal sera
were generated against six BVDV strains currently contained in vaccine
formulations, and each serum was used in VNs to measure the titers against seven 
vaccine strains (including the six homologous strains) and 23 BVDV field
isolates. Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed using VN titers, and
results were interpreted from PCA clustering within the PCA dendrogram and
scatter plot. The results demonstrated clustering patterns among various isolates
suggesting antigenic relatedness. As expected, the BVDV-1 and BVDV-2 isolates did
not cluster together and had the greatest spatial distribution. Notably, a number
of clusters representing antigenically related BVDV-1 subgroups contain isolates 
of different subgenotypes. The multivariate analysis may be a method to better
characterize antigenic relationships among BVDV isolates that belong to the same 
BVDV species and do not have distinct antigenic differences. This might be an
invaluable tool to ameliorate the composition of current vaccines, which might
well be important for the success of any BVDV control program that includes
vaccination in its scheme.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114328 
PMID: 34710497 

