
1. J Infect Public Health. 2021 Nov;14(11):1727-1732. doi:
10.1016/j.jiph.2021.09.026. Epub 2021 Oct 5.

Promoting precautionary behavior during the COVID-19 pandemic: Development and
validation of a behavior-change messaging campaign.

Alrige M(1), Bitar H(2), Meccawy M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Information Systems Department, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi
Arabia. Electronic address: malraegi@kau.edu.sa.
(2)Information Systems Department, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi
Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Designing a health promotion campaign is never an easy task,
especially during a pandemic of a highly infectious disease such as COVID-19. In 
Saudi Arabia, many attempts have been made to raise public awareness about
COVID-19 infection and precautionary health measures. However, most of the health
information delivered through the national dashboard and the COVID-19 awareness
campaigns are generic and do not necessarily make the impact needed to be seen on
individuals' behavior. Health messages need to be applicable and reverent to the 
individual in the audience.
OBJECTIVE: In light of Fogg-Behavior model, this research aims to build and
validate a behavior-change-based messaging campaign to promote precautionary
health behavior in individuals during the COVID-19 pandemic. Intervention
messages can then be targeted appropriately during the pandemic.
METHODS: An initial library of 32 text-based and video-based messages were
developed and validated based on Fogg behavior model for behavior change. Based
on this model, three groups of messages were created to reflect the model's three
theoretical concepts of motivation, ability and triggers. Each group of messages 
is designed to target different segment of the audience. The content of the
messages was developed based on resources from the World Health Organization and 
the Ministry of Health in Saudi Arabia. The validity of this content was
evaluated by domain experts through the content validity index.
RESULTS: Fogg-Behavior Model was used to segment the audience into three
different groups based on their perceived ability and motivation. The three
groups of messages designed for those groups were found relevant to Fogg
theoretical concepts. Thirteen professional health care workers (n = 13)
evaluated the content of the message libraries in Arabic and English. Thirty-two 
messages were found to have acceptable content validity (I-CVI = 0.87).
CONCLUSIONS: This research introduced Fogg Behavior Model as a behavior change
model to develop targeted messages for three groups of the audience based on
their motivation and ability level toward maintaining precautionary behavior
during the pandemic. This targeted awareness messaging campaign can be utilized
by health authorities to raise individuals' awareness about the precautionary
measures that should be taken, maintain these measures and hence help in reducing
the number of positive cases in the city of Jeddah.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jiph.2021.09.026 
PMCID: PMC8491996
PMID: 34710783  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

