
1. J Int AIDS Soc. 2021 Oct;24 Suppl 6:e25800. doi: 10.1002/jia2.25800.

HIV service delivery in the time of COVID-19: focus group discussions with key
populations in India.

Pollard R(1), Gopinath U(2), Reddy YA(1), Kumar BR(2), Mugundu P(1), Vasudevan
CK(2), Srikrishnan AK(2), Singh A(1), McFall AM(3), Mayer KH(4)(5), Mehta SH(3), 
Solomon SS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)YR Gaitonde Center for AIDS Research and Education, Chennai, India.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, The Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public
Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center/Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Fenway Health, The Fenway Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

INTRODUCTION: There are limited data on the impact of COVID-19-associated
disruptions and novel HIV service delivery strategies among key populations (KPs)
in low- and middle-income countries. In March 2020, in response to COVID-19, the 
Government of India revised HIV service delivery policies to include community
antiretroviral therapy (ART) distribution and multi-month dispensing (MMD) of ART
for all people living with HIV (PLHIV).
METHODS: To assess the acceptability of these adaptations and impact of the
pandemic among KPs, we conducted focus groups in November-December 2020 with
purposively sampled men who have sex with men (MSM), female sex workers (FSWs)
and transgender women (TGW) in Telangana and Maharashtra. Seven discussions were 
conducted. Topics included HIV service access, risk behaviours, economic security
and feedback to ensure service continuity. Inductive coding identified themes
across topics.
RESULTS: Forty-four individuals aged 20-49 years participated in discussions (13 
MSM; 16 FSW; and 15 TGW). Twenty-four participants self-identified as living with
HIV. People not living with HIV reported challenges in accessing HIV antibody
testing at hospitals due to travel restrictions and fear of contracting COVID-19.
Participants accessed HIV antibody testing using transportation arranged by
community-based organizations after lockdowns eased. PLHIV reported uninterrupted
ART refills and generally consistent adherence; however, there were experiences
of delayed CD4 and HIV RNA testing. Participants shared appreciation for MMD as
it saved time, money, and reduced exposure to COVID-19. Participants expressed
gratitude for home deliveries which enabled ART access, yet shared concerns about
home-based services causing confidentiality breaches with family/neighbours.
Participants voiced preferences for community-based service provision due to
proximity, convenient hours, and welcoming environments compared to public
hospitals. Other requests included support for income, employment, nutrient-rich 
food and more accessible mental health, HIV, and other health services.
CONCLUSIONS: COVID-19 restrictions had a greater impact on access to HIV
antibody, CD4, and RNA testing services compared to ART access. High acceptance
of MMD and community-based services support the continued role of differentiated 
service delivery models to improve KP access to HIV antibody, CD4, RNA testing
services, convenient ART retrieval, and integrated services beyond HIV, which may
be critical for survival and wellbeing.

© 2021 The Authors. Journal of the International AIDS Society published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of the International AIDS Society.

DOI: 10.1002/jia2.25800 
PMCID: PMC8554214
PMID: 34713583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

