
1. Public Health. 2021 Nov;200:77-83. doi: 10.1016/j.puhe.2021.09.016. Epub 2021 Oct
25.

Differences in health literacy level of patients from public and private
hospitals: a cross-sectional study in Turkey.

Durmuş V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Health Sciences, Marmara University, Istanbul, Turkey. Electronic
address: velidurmus@marun.edu.tr.

OBJECTIVES: Policy-making based on a health literacy approach makes it a priority
to develop people-centered public health strategies and programs, particularly in
the time of COVID-19 across the world. This is the first study to assess health
literacy levels of patients visiting public and private hospitals in Turkey and
also compares these levels with sociodemographic and health-related variables by 
hospital type to suggest health policies aimed at improving the health literacy
skills for patients with different socio-economic backgrounds.
STUDY DESIGN: This is a cross-sectional study.
METHODS: The study was conducted on 948 outpatients from both hospital types in
2018. Health literacy was assessed using the validated Turkish version of the
European Health Literacy Survey Questionnaire with 47 items. The level of health 
literacy and sociodemographic factors influencing it were analyzed using
correlation and binary logistic regression tests. Patients from private hospital 
had better health literacy index score compared with the public hospital.
RESULTS: The health-related variables, such as self-reported health and the
presence of long-term illness, and sociodemographic characteristics, including
education, age, and gender, were associated with health literacy for both public 
and private hospitals. Age and education were important predictors, whereas
gender, long-term disease condition, self-reported health, and perceived income
status were statistically significant variables for adequate health literacy in
both hospital types.
CONCLUSIONS: Participants from private hospital had better health literacy than
that of public hospital. These findings could be used to help health policy
makers to improve the current health literacy policy for patients and develop
strategies by stakeholders for reducing barriers to obtaining health-related
information.

Copyright © 2021 The Royal Society for Public Health. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.puhe.2021.09.016 
PMCID: PMC8545461
PMID: 34710717  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

