
1. J Infect Dis. 2021 Dec 1;224(11):1861-1872. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiab535.

Germinal Center-Induced Immunity Is Correlated With Protection Against SARS-CoV-2
Reinfection But Not Lung Damage.

Kim G(1)(2), Kim DH(3), Oh H(1), Bae S(4), Kwon J(4), Kim MJ(4), Lee E(5), Hwang 
EH(1)(2), Jung H(1), Koo BS(1), Baek SH(1), Kang P(6), An YJ(1), Park JH(7), Park
JH(2), Lyoo KS(8), Ryu CM(9), Kim SH(4), Hong JJ(1)(10).

Author information: 
(1)National Primate Research Centre, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Cheongju, Chungcheongbuk, Republic of Korea.
(2)Laboratory Animal Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, Chonnam National
University, Gwangju, South Jeolla, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Korea Cancer Center Hospital, Seoul, Republic of
Korea.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan
College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Korea Cancer
Center Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(6)Futuristic Animal Resource Centre, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and 
Biotechnology, Cheongju, Chungcheongbuk, Republic of Korea.
(7)Department of Laboratory Animal Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(8)Korea Zoonosis Research Institute, Chonbuk National University, Iksan,
Republic of Korea.
(9)Infectious Disease Research Centre, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(10)Bioscience, Korea University of Science & Technology (UST), Daejeon, Republic
of Korea.

Germinal centers (GCs) elicit protective humoral immunity through a combination
of antibody-secreting cells and memory B cells, following pathogen invasion or
vaccination. However, the possibility of a GC response inducing protective
immunity against reinfection following severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection remains unknown. We found GC activity was
consistent with seroconversion observed in recovered macaques and humans.
Rechallenge with a different clade of virus resulted in significant reduction in 
replicating virus titers in respiratory tracts in macaques with high GC activity.
However, diffuse alveolar damage and increased fibrotic tissue were observed in
lungs of reinfected macaques. Our study highlights the importance of GCs
developed during natural SARS-CoV-2 infection in managing viral loads in
subsequent infections. However, their ability to alleviate lung damage remains to
be determined. These results may improve understanding of SARS-CoV-2-induced
immune responses, resulting in better coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
diagnosis, treatment, and vaccine development.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiab535 
PMCID: PMC8643412
PMID: 34718664 

