
1. Work. 2021;70(3):763-775. doi: 10.3233/WOR-205311.

Employee well-being in the COVID-19 pandemic: The moderating role of teleworking 
during the first lockdown in the province of Quebec, Canada.

Parent-Lamarche A(1), Boulet M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Resources Management, Université du Québec à
Trois-Rivières, Trois-Rivières, Quebec, Canada.
(2)École Nationale d'Administration Publique, Quebec, Quebec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The COVID-19 pandemic has had a profound effect on all aspects of
society, including mental health. Many employees have had to pivot suddenly to
teleworking to prevent the virus from spreading. While teleworking may have some 
negative consequences, it may also represent a human resources practice that may 
improve employee well-being.
OBJECTIVE: The study main objective was to determine if teleworking played a
moderating role in the relation between potential stressors and employee
well-being during the first months of the COVID-19 pandemic when working from
home. This was based on the theory of conservation of resources.
METHODS: Multivariate regression analyses were conducted with Stata 13 software
to determine the contribution of potential stressors on employee well-being, as
well as the moderating role of teleworking on a sample of 480 Canadian employees.
Data were collected once for white and blue collar from both public (67.08%) and 
private (32.92%) business sectors.
RESULTS: Results indicated that work-life imbalances, workload, and marital
tension were associated with lower levels of well-being. On the other hand,
teleworking and household income were associated with higher levels of
well-being. Teleworking also moderated the differences in well-being between the 
public and private sectors. Teleworking in the public sector seems to increase
employee well-being. Conversely, working on-site in the public sector seems to
decrease well-being.
CONCLUSIONS: Employers need to proactively address work-life imbalances,
workloads, and teleworking to maintain employee well-being. Specific
recommendations are offered to ensure that teleworking remains positive for
employee well-being both during a pandemic and afterward.

DOI: 10.3233/WOR-205311 
PMID: 34719454 

