
1. J Infect Dis. 2021 Oct 27. pii: jiab541. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiab541. [Epub ahead
of print]

Development of inapparent dengue associated with increased antibody levels to
Aedes aegypti salivary proteins: a longitudinal dengue cohort in Cambodia.

Manning JE(1)(2), Chea S(2)(3), Parker DM(4), Bohl JA(1), Lay S(2)(3), Mateja
A(5), Man S(2)(3), Nhek S(2)(3), Ponce A(1), Sreng S(2)(3), Kong D(2)(3), Kimsan 
S(3)(6), Meneses C(1), Fay MP(7), Suon S(2)(3), Huy R(3), Lon C(1)(2), Leang
R(3)(6), Oliveira F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)International Center of Excellence in Research, National Institute of Allergy 
and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
(3)National Center for Parasitology, Entomology, and Malaria Control, Ministry of
Health, Phnom Penh Cambodia.
(4)University of California, Irvine, California, USA.
(5)Clinical Monitoring Research Program Directorate, Frederick National
Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick, Maryland, USA.
(6)National Dengue Control Program, Ministry of Health, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
(7)Biostatistics Branch, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

BACKGROUND: We established the first prospective cohort to understand how
infection with dengue virus is influenced by vector-specific determinants like
humoral immunity to Aedes aegypti salivary proteins.
METHODS: Children aged two to nine years old enrolled in the PAGODAS (Pediatric
Assessment Group of Dengue and Aedes Saliva) cohort with informed consent by
their guardians. Children were followed semi-annually for antibodies to dengue
and to proteins in Ae. aegypti salivary gland homogenate using enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays and dengue-specific neutralization titers. Children
presented with fever at any time for dengue testing.
RESULTS: From July 13 to August 30, 2018, we enrolled 771 children. At baseline, 
22% (173/770) had evidence of neutralizing antibodies to one or more dengue
serotypes. By April 2020, 51 children had symptomatic dengue while 148
dengue-naïve children had inapparent dengue defined by neutralization assays. In 
a multivariate model, individuals with higher antibodies to Ae. aegypti salivary 
proteins were 1.5x more likely to have dengue infection (HR 1.47 95% CI
1.05-2.06; p=0.02), particularly individuals with inapparent dengue (HR 1.64 95% 
CI 1.12-2.41; p=0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: High levels of seropositivity to Ae. aegypti salivary proteins are
associated with future development of dengue infection, primarily inapparent, in 
dengue-naïve Cambodian children.

plain-language-summary: We followed 771 children in Cambodia to see if they
developed infection with dengue virus, a germ carried in Aedes aegypti mosquitos 
that can be transmitted to humans. Because people make antibodies to mosquito
saliva, we followed the levels of their antibodies to Aedes aegypti mosquito
saliva and the levels of their antibodies to the four different types of dengue
virus. If children got sick with a fever, they came to the hospital and we
performed special tests to confirm active dengue infection. Children were more
likely to get dengue if they had increased levels of antibodies to mosquito
saliva, which signifies that they were likely bitten more by mosquitos. However, 
interestingly, these children did not have any symptoms of dengue that caused
them to go to the hospital. We used mathematical models to adjust for other risk 
and environmental factors to make these conclusions. More questions need to be
asked about the role of these saliva antibodies in what type of symptoms people
get from dengue infection.
Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious Diseases Society of
America 2021. This work is written by (a) US Government employee(s) and is in the
public domain in the US.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiab541 
PMID: 34718636 

