
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021 Oct 30. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14372. [Epub ahead of print]

Experimental infection of dogs with severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome
virus: Pathogenicity and potential for intraspecies transmission.

Park SC(1), Park JY(2), Choi JY(1), Oh B(1), Yang MS(1), Lee SY(1), Kim JW(1), Eo
SK(1), Chae JS(3), Lim CW(1), Oem JK(1), Tark DS(2), Kim B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bio-Safety Research Institute and College of Veterinary Medicine, Jeonbuk
National University, Iksan, Republic of Korea.
(2)Korea Zoonosis Research Institute, Jeonbuk National University, Iksan,
Republic of Korea.
(3)Laboratory of Veterinary Internal Medicine, BK21 FOUR Future Veterinary
Medicine Leading Education and Research Centre, Research Institute for Veterinary
Science and College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.

Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome (SFTS) is caused by infection with
Dabie bandavirus [formerly SFTS virus (SFTSV)] and is an emerging zoonotic
disease. Dogs can be infected with SFTSV, but its pathogenicity and
transmissibility have not been fully elucidated. In experiment 1, immunocompetent
dogs were intramuscularly inoculated with SFTSV. In experiment 2,
immunosuppressed dogs (immunosuppressed group; oral azathioprine 5 mg/kg/day for 
30 days) were intramuscularly inoculated with SFTSV. Both immunosuppressed and
immunocompetent contact dogs were co-housed with the SFTSV-inoculated dogs that
had been immunosuppressed. Immunocompetent SFTSV-infected dogs did not show any
clinical symptom. However, immunosuppressed SFTSV-infected dogs showed high fever
and weight loss without lethality. In all SFTSV-infected dogs, viral RNA could be
measured in the serum only after 3 days post infection (DPI) and neutralizing
antibodies were detected in the serum beginning 9 DPI. SFTSV shedding in the
urine and faeces of some infected dogs occurred between 4 and 6 DPI. The
immunocompromised SFTSV-infected dogs showed thrombocytopenia beginning 3 DPI to 
the end of the experiment (24 DPI). We confirmed SFTSV transmission to one of
three immunocompetent co-housed dogs. This dog showed a high fever, weight loss, 
and shed viral RNA by urine. Viral RNA and neutralizing antibodies were also
detected in the serum. These results demonstrated that intramuscular inoculation 
with SFTSV induced minor clinical symptoms in dogs, and intraspecies SFTSV
transmission in dogs can occur by contact.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14372 
PMID: 34716981 

