
1. Thorax. 2021 Oct 29. pii: thoraxjnl-2021-217429. doi:
10.1136/thoraxjnl-2021-217429. [Epub ahead of print]

Effect of CRTH2 antagonism on the response to experimental rhinovirus infection
in asthma: a pilot randomised controlled trial.

Farne H(1), Glanville N(1), Johnson N(2), Kebadze T(1), Aniscenko J(1), Regis
E(1), Zhu J(1), Trujillo-Torralbo MB(1), Kon OM(1), Mallia P(1), Prevost AT(2),
Edwards MR(1), Johnston SL(3), Singanayagam A(1), Jackson DJ(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(2)Imperial Clinical Trials Unit, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(3)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK
s.johnston@imperial.ac.uk.
(4)Guy's Severe Asthma Centre, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London,
UK.
(5)MRC & Asthma UK Centre in Allergic Mechanisms of Asthma, King's College
London, London, UK.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The chemoattractant receptor-homologous molecule expressed
on T helper type 2 cells (CRTH2) antagonist timapiprant improved lung function
and asthma control in a phase 2 study, with evidence suggesting reduced
exacerbations. We aimed to assess whether timapiprant attenuated or prevented
asthma exacerbations induced by experimental rhinovirus (RV) infection. We
furthermore hypothesised that timapiprant would dampen RV-induced type 2
inflammation and consequently improve antiviral immune responses.
METHODS: Atopic patients with partially controlled asthma on maintenance inhaled 
corticosteroids were randomised to timapiprant (n=22) or placebo (n=22) and
challenged with RV-A16 3 weeks later. The primary endpoint was the cumulative
lower respiratory symptom score over the 14 days post infection. Upper
respiratory symptoms, spirometry, airway hyperresponsiveness, exhaled nitric
oxide, RV-A16 virus load and soluble mediators in upper and lower airways
samples, and CRTH2 staining in bronchial biopsies were additionally assessed
before and during RV-A16 infection.
RESULTS: Six subjects discontinued the study and eight were not infected;
outcomes were assessed in 16 timapiprant-treated and 14 placebo-treated,
successfully infected subjects. There were no differences between treatment
groups in clinical exacerbation severity including cumulative lower respiratory
symptom score day 0-14 (difference 3.0 (95% CI -29.0 to 17.0), p=0.78), virus
load, antiviral immune responses, or RV-A16-induced airway inflammation other
than in the bronchial biopsies, where CRTH2 staining was increased during RV-A16 
infection in the placebo-treated but not the timapiprant-treated group.
Timapiprant had a favourable safety profile, with no deaths, serious adverse
events or drug-related withdrawals.
CONCLUSION: Timapiprant treatment had little impact on the clinicopathological
changes induced by RV-A16 infection in partially controlled asthma.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2021-217429 
PMID: 34716281 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: HF, NJ, TK, JA, ER, JZ,
M-BT-T, OMK, PM, and ATP report no competing interests. NG and MRE are now
employees at Prokarium and Virtus Respiratory Research respectively. SLJ reports 
personal fees from Virtus Respiratory Research, Myelo Therapeutics GmbH, Bayer,
Synairgen, Novartis, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Gerson Lehrman Group,
resTORbio, Bioforce, Materia Medical Holdings, PrepBio Pharma, Pulmotect, Virion 
Health, Lallemand Pharma, and AstraZeneca outside the submitted work; in addition
SLJ is an author on patents relating to use of interferons in treatment of
exacerbations of airway disease and holds share options in Synairgen, a company
developing interferons for treatment of exacerbations of airway disease. AS
reports personal fees from AstraZeneca outside the submitted work. DJJ reports
personal fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline,
and Novartis outside the submitted work.

