
1. Int J Risk Saf Med. 2021 Oct 26. doi: 10.3233/JRS-200077. [Epub ahead of print]

Knowledge, attitude and practice towards hepatitis B infection among high school 
students in Asante Mampong, Ghana.

Otchere G(1), Dwomoh E(2), Kumah E(3), Ankomah SE(4), Fusheini A(4),
Agyei-Baffour P(5), Afriyie EK(6), Agyei SK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Humanities, Center for Medicine and Society, University of
Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Public Health, Faculty of Health Sciences, Catholic University
College of Ghana, Sunyani, Ghana.
(3)Department of Health Administration and Education, Faculty of Science
Education, University of Education, Winneba, Ghana.
(4)Department of Preventive and Social Medicine, Dunedin School of Medicine,
University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(5)Department of Health Policy, Management and Economics, School of Public
Health, Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (KNUST), Kumasi,
Ghana.
(6)Laboratory Services Directorate, Komfo Anokye Teaching Hospital, Kumasi,
Ghana.

BACKGROUND: Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a serious global public health
problem, with significant morbidity and mortality from acute and chronic
complications. Increasing awareness and improving knowledge of HBV helps reduce
the risk of the disease. Although many studies have been conducted on HBV in
Ghana, few have focused on examining knowledge, attitude and preventive practices
among adolescents towards the disease.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to assess HBV knowledge, attitude and 
practice (KAP) among adolescents in high schools in the Asante Mampong
Municipality in the Ashanti Region of Ghana.
METHODS: A descriptive cross-sectional study was conducted among 398 adolescents 
from six senior high schools within the Asante Mampong Municipality. Data was
collected using a 30-item structured questionnaire. Each item had two response
options: "Yes" and "No". A scoring system was generated and respondents were
given a score on each item answered. A positive response to an item was scored 1 
point and a negative response was scored 0. Scores were then summed up and
averaged to give the mean knowledge, attitude and practice scores.
RESULTS: The majority of the respondents were male (60%), between 15 and 17 years
(45%), Christian (93%) and in their first year of study. The adolescents had
basic knowledge, positive attitude, and poor practices towards HBV. There was no 
significant relationship between the demographic variables of the respondents and
KAP mean scores.
CONCLUSION: There is the need to introduce health education and awareness
programs in schools within the Asante Mampong Municipality to improve students'
level of knowledge of HBV. Countrywide studies examining KAP towards HBV
infection among adolescents are also warranted.

DOI: 10.3233/JRS-200077 
PMID: 34719436 

