
1. Biochim Biophys Acta Rev Cancer. 2021 Oct 27;1877(1):188643. doi:
10.1016/j.bbcan.2021.188643. [Epub ahead of print]

The evolution and ecology of benign tumors.

Boutry J(1), Tissot S(2), Ujvari B(3), Capp JP(4), Giraudeau M(5), Nedelcu AM(6),
Thomas F(2).

Author information: 
(1)CREEC/CANECEV, MIVEGEC (CREES), University of Montpellier, CNRS, IRD,
Montpellier, France. Electronic address: justine.boutry@gmail.com.
(2)CREEC/CANECEV, MIVEGEC (CREES), University of Montpellier, CNRS, IRD,
Montpellier, France.
(3)Centre for Integrative Ecology, School of Life and Environmental Sciences,
Deakin, University, Vic., Australia.
(4)Toulouse Biotechnology Institute, University of Toulouse, INSA, CNRS, INRAE,
Toulouse, France.
(5)CREEC/CANECEV, MIVEGEC (CREES), University of Montpellier, CNRS, IRD,
Montpellier, France; LIENSs, UMR 7266 CNRS-La Rochelle Université, 2 Rue Olympe
de Gouges, 17000 La Rochelle, France.
(6)Department of Biology, University of New Brunswick, Fredericton, New
Brunswick, E3B 5A3, Canada.

Tumors are usually classified into two main categories - benign or malignant,
with much more attention being devoted to the second category given that they are
usually associated with more severe health issues (i.e., metastatic cancers).
Here, we argue that the mechanistic distinction between benign and malignant
tumors has narrowed our understanding of neoplastic processes. This review
provides the first comprehensive discussion of benign tumors in the context of
their evolution and ecology as well as interactions with their hosts. We compare 
the genetic and epigenetic profiles, cellular activities, and the involvement of 
viruses in benign and malignant tumors. We also address the impact of
intra-tumoral cell composition and its relationship with the tumoral
microenvironment. Lastly, we explore the differences in the distribution of
benign and malignant neoplasia across the tree of life and provide examples on
how benign tumors can also affect individual fitness and consequently the
evolutionary trajectories of populations and species. Overall, our goal is to
bring attention to the non-cancerous manifestations of tumors, at different
scales, and to stimulate research on the evolutionary ecology of host-tumor
interactions on a broader scale. Ultimately, we suggest that a better
appreciation of the differences and similarities between benign and malignant
tumors is fundamental to our understanding of malignancy both at mechanistic and 
evolutionary levels.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2021.188643 
PMID: 34715267 

