
1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2021 Oct 28;17(10):e1009518. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009518.
eCollection 2021 Oct.

Synergistic interventions to control COVID-19: Mass testing and isolation
mitigates reliance on distancing.

Howerton E(1)(2), Ferrari MJ(1)(2), Bjørnstad ON(1)(2), Bogich TL(1)(2),
Borchering RK(1)(2), Jewell CP(3), Nichols JD(4), Probert WJM(5), Runge MC(4),
Tildesley MJ(6), Viboud C(7), Shea K(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Disease Dynamics, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(3)Lancaster Medical School, Lancaster University, Lancaster, United Kingdom.
(4)U.S. Geological Survey, Eastern Ecological Science Center at the Patuxent
Research Refuge, Laurel, Maryland, United States of America.
(5)Big Data Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre for Health Information and Discovery,
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(6)Zeeman Institute for Systems Biology and Infectious Disease Epidemiology
Research (SBIDER), Mathematics Institute and School of Life Sciences, University 
of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom.
(7)Fogarty International Center, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, United States of America.

Stay-at-home orders and shutdowns of non-essential businesses are powerful, but
socially costly, tools to control the pandemic spread of SARS-CoV-2. Mass testing
strategies, which rely on widely administered frequent and rapid diagnostics to
identify and isolate infected individuals, could be a potentially less disruptive
management strategy, particularly where vaccine access is limited. In this paper,
we assess the extent to which mass testing and isolation strategies can reduce
reliance on socially costly non-pharmaceutical interventions, such as distancing 
and shutdowns. We develop a multi-compartmental model of SARS-CoV-2 transmission 
incorporating both preventative non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) and
testing and isolation to evaluate their combined effect on public health
outcomes. Our model is designed to be a policy-guiding tool that captures
important realities of the testing system, including constraints on test
administration and non-random testing allocation. We show how strategic changes
in the characteristics of the testing system, including test administration, test
delays, and test sensitivity, can reduce reliance on preventative NPIs without
compromising public health outcomes in the future. The lowest NPI levels are
possible only when many tests are administered and test delays are short, given
limited immunity in the population. Reducing reliance on NPIs is highly dependent
on the ability of a testing program to identify and isolate unreported,
asymptomatic infections. Changes in NPIs, including the intensity of lockdowns
and stay at home orders, should be coordinated with increases in testing to
ensure epidemic control; otherwise small additional lifting of these NPIs can
lead to dramatic increases in infections, hospitalizations and deaths.
Importantly, our results can be used to guide ramp-up of testing capacity in
outbreak settings, allow for the flexible design of combined interventions based 
on social context, and inform future cost-benefit analyses to identify efficient 
pandemic management strategies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009518 
PMCID: PMC8553097
PMID: 34710096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

