
1. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Oct 12;12:726881. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.726881.
eCollection 2021.

Long-Term Efficacy and Safety of RNAi-Mediated Virus Resistance in 'HoneySweet'
Plum.

Singh K(1)(2), Callahan AM(1), Smith BJ(3), Malinowski T(1)(4), Scorza R(1),
Jarošová J(2), Beoni E(2), Polák J(2), Kundu JK(2), Dardick C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Innovative Fruit Production, Improvement and Protection, Appalachian Fruit
Research Station, Agricultural Research Service (USDA), Kearneysville, WV, United
States.
(2)Division of Crop Protection and Plant Health, Crop Research Institute, Prague,
Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Nutritional Sciences, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK,
United States.
(4)The National Research Institute of Horticulture, Skierniewice, Poland.

Interfering RNA technology has been established as an effective strategy to
protect plants against viral infection. Despite this success, interfering RNA
(RNAi) has rarely been applied due to the regulatory barriers that confront
genetically engineered plants and concerns over possible environmental and health
risks posed by non-endogenous small RNAs. 'HoneySweet' was developed as a
virus-resistant plum variety that is protected by an RNAi-mediated process
against Sharka disease caused by the plum pox virus. 'HoneySweet' has been
approved for cultivation in the United States but not in countries where the plum
pox virus is endemic. In this study, we evaluated the long-term efficacy of virus
resistance in 'HoneySweet,' the nature and stability of its sRNA profile, and the
potential health risks of consuming 'HoneySweet' plums. Graft-challenged
'HoneySweet' trees carrying large non-transgenic infected limbs remained
virus-free after more than 10 years in the field, and the viral sequences from
the non-transgenic infected limbs showed no evidence of adaptation to the
RNAi-based resistance. Small RNA profiling revealed that transgene-derived sRNA
levels were stable across different environments and, on average, were more than 
10 times lower than those present in symptom-less fruits from virus-infected
trees. Comprehensive 90-day mouse feeding studies showed no adverse health
impacts in mice, and there was no evidence for potential siRNA off-target
pathologies predicted by comparisons of the most abundant transgene-derived sRNAs
to the mouse genome. Collectively, the data confirmed that RNAi provides a highly
effective, stable, and safe strategy to combat virus diseases in crop plants.

Copyright © 2021 Singh, Callahan, Smith, Malinowski, Scorza, Jarošová, Beoni,
Polák, Kundu and Dardick.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.726881 
PMCID: PMC8546108
PMID: 34712254 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

