
1. World Neurosurg. 2021 Oct 27. pii: S1878-8750(21)01667-3. doi:
10.1016/j.wneu.2021.10.155. [Epub ahead of print]

Urgent Neurosurgical Interventions in the COVID-19-Positive Pediatric Population.

Lang SS(1), Gajjar AA(2), Tucker AM(3), Storm PB(4), Rahman RK(5), Madsen PJ(3), 
O'Brien A(2), Chiotos K(6), Kilbaugh TJ(7), Huh JW(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurosurgery, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA; Department of Neurosurgery, University of Pennsylvania,
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. Electronic address:
chens4@chop.edu.
(2)Division of Neurosurgery, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA; Department of Chemistry, Union College, Schenectady, New York,
USA.
(3)Division of Neurosurgery, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Division of Neurosurgery, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA; Department of Neurosurgery, University of Pennsylvania,
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(5)Division of Neurosurgery, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA; Rowan University School of Osteopathic Medicine, Stratford,
New Jersey, USA.
(6)Division of Infectious Disease, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
University of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
University of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA; Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine,
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania, Perelman School 
of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(7)Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Children's Hospital
of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

BACKGROUND: Urgent neurosurgical interventions for pediatric patients with severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) are rare. These cases pose 
additional stress on a potentially vulnerable dysregulated inflammatory response 
that can place the child at risk of further clinical deterioration. Our aim was
to describe the perioperative course of SARS-CoV-2-positive pediatric patients
who had required an urgent neurosurgical intervention.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed pediatric patients aged ≤18 years who had
been admitted to a quaternary children's hospital with a positive polymerase
chain reaction test result for SARS-CoV-2 virus from March 2020 to October 2021. 
The clinical characteristics, anesthetic and neurosurgical operative details,
surgical outcomes, and non-neurological symptoms were collected and analyzed.
RESULTS: We identified 8 SARS-CoV-2-positive patients with a mean age of 8.83
years (median, 8.5 years; range, 0.58-18 years). Of the 8 patients, 6 were male. 
All children had had mild or asymptomatic coronavirus disease 2109. The
anesthetic and surgical courses for these patients were, overall, uncomplicated. 
All the patients had been admitted to a specialized isolation unit in the
pediatric intensive care unit for cardiopulmonary and neurological monitoring.
The use of increased protective personal equipment during anesthesia and surgery 
did not impede a successful neurosurgical operation.
CONCLUSIONS: SARS-CoV-2-positive pediatric patients with minimal coronavirus
disease 2019-related symptoms who require urgent neurosurgical interventions face
unique challenges regarding their anesthetic status, operative delays due to
SARS-CoV-2 polymerase chain reaction testing, and requirements for additional
protective personal equipment. Despite these clinical challenges, the patients in
our study had not experienced adverse postoperative consequences, and no
healthcare professional involved in their care had contracted the virus.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2021.10.155 
PMCID: PMC8550883
PMID: 34718196 

