
1. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2021 Sep 22;41:100422. doi: 10.1016/j.dmpk.2021.100422.
[Epub ahead of print]

Pharmacokinetics and safety of rilpivirine in healthy Japanese subjects and
exploration of ethnic sensitivity of rilpivirine pharmacokinetics with
physiologically based pharmacokinetic model approach.

Ohta K(1), Matsushima N(2), Tanii H(2), Crauwels H(3), Kudo T(4), Ito K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Research and Development, Janssen Pharmaceutical K.K., Tokyo, Japan; Research 
Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Musashino University, Tokyo, Japan.
Electronic address: kohta@its.jnj.com.
(2)Research and Development, Janssen Pharmaceutical K.K., Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Janssen Research and Development, Janssen Pharmaceutica NV, Beerse, Belgium.
(4)Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Musashino University, Tokyo,
Japan.

Rilpivirine is a non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor, used for the
treatment of human immunodeficiency virus type-1 infection. An open label study
was conducted to investigate the pharmacokinetics (PK) and safety of a single
oral dose of rilpivirine 25 mg in Japanese healthy adult subjects. No adverse
events were reported. The mean Cmax (144.3 ng/mL) and AUCinf (4542 ng h/mL) in
Japanese subjects were approximately 30 % higher than those reported from a
similar study in Caucasian healthy subjects, whereas the median tmax and mean
t1/2 values were comparable between studies. A simple physiologically based PK
model was developed to characterize the rilpivirine PK profile. The model
adequately described rilpivirine PK profiles, and well-predicted drug-drug
interactions. With exploration using the model, body size and CYP3A4 abundance
were identified as factors which explained the observed inter-ethnic difference
in rilpivirine exposure. The inter-ethnic difference in rilpivirine exposure was 
however considered not clinically relevant, since inter-individual variabilities 
of those intrinsic factors are larger than inter-ethnic ones; and the observed
AUCinf in Japanese subjects was within the range of AUCtau associated with
efficacy and safety in Phase 3 studies. This study results support the use of
rilpivirine without dose modification specific to Japanese patients.

Copyright © 2021 The Japanese Society for the Study of Xenobiotics. Published by 
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dmpk.2021.100422 
PMID: 34717268 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest This study was 
sponsored by Janssen Pharmaceutical K.K, Japan. Kentaro Ohta, Nobuko Matsushima
and Hiromi Tanii are employees of Janssen Pharmaceutical K.K., Japan, and Herta
Crauwels is an employee of Janssen Pharmaceutica NV, Belgium.

