
1. BMC Infect Dis. 2021 Oct 28;21(1):1111. doi: 10.1186/s12879-021-06780-7.

COVID-19 underreporting and its impact on vaccination strategies.

Albani V(1), Loria J(2)(3), Massad E(4)(5), Zubelli J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics, Federal University of Santa Catarina,
Florianopolis, Brazil.
(2)Instituto de Matemática Pura e Aplicada, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Universidad de Costa Rica, San Jose, Costa Rica.
(4)School of Applied Mathematics, Fundação Getúlio Vargas, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil.
(5)School of Medicine, University of São Paulo and LIM01-HCFMUSP, São Paulo,
Brazil.
(6)Mathematics Department, Khalifa University, Abu Dhabi, UAE.
jorge.zubelli@ku.ac.ae.

BACKGROUND: Underreporting cases of infectious diseases poses a major challenge
in the analysis of their epidemiological characteristics and dynamical aspects.
Without accurate numerical estimates it is difficult to precisely quantify the
proportions of severe and critical cases, as well as the mortality rate. Such
estimates can be provided for instance by testing the presence of the virus.
However, during an ongoing epidemic, such tests' implementation is a daunting
task. This work addresses this issue by presenting a methodology to estimate
underreported infections based on approximations of the stable rates of
hospitalization and death.
METHODS: We present a novel methodology for the stable rate estimation of
hospitalization and death related to the Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
using publicly available reports from various distinct communities. These rates
are then used to estimate underreported infections on the corresponding areas by 
making use of reported daily hospitalizations and deaths. The impact of
underreporting infections on vaccination strategies is estimated under different 
disease-transmission scenarios using a Susceptible-Exposed-Infective-Removed-like
(SEIR) epidemiological model.
RESULTS: For the considered locations, during the period of study, the
estimations suggest that the number of infected individuals could reach 30% of
the population of these places, representing, in some cases, more than six times 
the observed numbers. These results are in close agreement with estimates from
independent seroprevalence studies, thus providing a strong validation of the
proposed methodology. Moreover, the presence of large numbers of underreported
infections can reduce the perceived impact of vaccination strategies in reducing 
rates of mortality and hospitalization.
CONCLUSIONS: pBy using the proposed methodology and employing a judiciously
chosen data analysis implementation, we estimate COVID-19 underreporting from
publicly available data. This leads to a powerful way of quantifying
underreporting impact on the efficacy of vaccination strategies. As a byproduct, 
we evaluate the impact of underreporting in the designing of vaccination
strategies.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-021-06780-7 
PMCID: PMC8552982
PMID: 34711190  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

