
1. Parasit Vectors. 2021 Oct 30;14(1):561. doi: 10.1186/s13071-021-05061-1.

The transmission ecology of Tahyna orthobunyavirus in Austria as revealed by
longitudinal mosquito sampling and blood meal analysis in floodplain habitats.

Camp JV(1)(2), Kniha E(3), Obwaller AG(4), Walochnik J(3), Nowotny N(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Viral Zoonoses, Emerging and Vector-Borne Infections Group, Institute of
Virology, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
Jeremy.Camp@meduniwien.ac.at.
(2)Center for Virology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
Jeremy.Camp@meduniwien.ac.at.
(3)Institute of Specific Prophylaxis and Tropical Medicine, Center for
Pathophysiology, Infectiology and Immunology, Medical University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria.
(4)Division of Science, Research and Development, Federal Ministry of Defense,
Vienna, Austria.
(5)Viral Zoonoses, Emerging and Vector-Borne Infections Group, Institute of
Virology, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(6)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Mohammed Bin Rashid
University of Medicine and Health Sciences, Dubai, UAE.

BACKGROUND: Tahyna orthobunyavirus (TAHV) is a mosquito-borne virus that may
cause mild flu-like symptoms or neurological symptoms in humans. It is
historically associated with floodplain habitats in Central Europe, and the
mammalophilic floodwater mosquito, Aedes vexans, is thought to be the principal
vector. There are few contemporary reports of TAHV transmission ecology within
mosquitoes or their vertebrate hosts, and virus infections are rarely reported
(and probably seldom diagnosed). The objectives of this study were to survey the 
mosquito population for TAHV in three floodwater habitats and describe host usage
by the predominant floodwater mosquito species to potentially define TAHV
transmission at these foci.
METHODS: We performed longitudinal mosquito sampling along three major rivers in 
eastern Austria to characterize the mosquito community in floodplain habitats,
and tested for the presence of TAHV in pools of mosquitoes. We characterized TAHV
rescued from mosquito pool homogenate by sequencing. We surveyed mosquito host
selection by analyzing mosquito blood meals.
RESULTS: We identified TAHV in two pools of Ae. vexans captured along the Leitha 
River. This mosquito, and other floodwater mosquitoes, used large mammals (red
deer, roe deer, wild boar) as their hosts. The sequence of the rescued virus was 
remarkably similar to other TAHV isolates from the region, dating back to the
first isolate of TAHV in 1958.
CONCLUSIONS: In general, we confirmed that TAHV is most likely being transmitted 
by Ae. vexans, although the precise contribution of vertebrate-amplifying hosts
to the ecological maintenance of the virus is unclear. The pattern of host
selection matches the estimated exposure of the same large mammal species in the 
region to TAHV based on a recent serosurvey, but hares were also hosts at the
site where TAHV was detected. We also confirm humans as hosts of two floodwater
mosquito species, providing a potential mechanism for spillover of TAHV or other 
mosquito-borne viruses.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-021-05061-1 
PMCID: PMC8556901
PMID: 34717742 

