
1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2021 Oct 28;17(10):e1009360. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009360.
eCollection 2021 Oct.

Operational response simulation tool for epidemics within refugee and IDP
settlements: A scenario-based case study of the Cox's Bazar settlement.

Aylett-Bullock J(1)(2), Cuesta-Lazaro C(2), Quera-Bofarull A(2), Katta A(1),
Hoffmann Pham K(1)(3), Hoover B(4), Strobelt H(4), Moreno Jimenez R(5), Sedgewick
A(2), Samir Evers E(6), Kennedy D(7), Harlass S(8), Gidraf Kahindo Maina A(9),
Hussien A(10), Luengo-Oroz M(1).

Author information: 
(1)United Nations Global Pulse, New York, New York, United States of America.
(2)Institute for Data Science, Durham University, Durham, United Kingdom.
(3)New York University Stern School of Business, New York, New York, United
States of America.
(4)MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(5)UNHCR Innovation, Geneva, Switzerland.
(6)WHO Emergency Sub-Office, Cox's Bazar, Bangladesh.
(7)UK Public Health Rapid Support Team, Public Health England/London School of
Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(8)UNHCR Public Health Unit, Geneva, Switzerland.
(9)UNHCR Public Health Unit, Cox's Bazar, Bangladesh.
(10)UNHCR Information Management Unit, Cox's Bazar, Bangladesh.

The spread of infectious diseases such as COVID-19 presents many challenges to
healthcare systems and infrastructures across the world, exacerbating
inequalities and leaving the world's most vulnerable populations most affected.
Given their density and available infrastructure, refugee and internally
displaced person (IDP) settlements can be particularly susceptible to disease
spread. In this paper we present an agent-based modeling approach to simulating
the spread of disease in refugee and IDP settlements under various
non-pharmaceutical intervention strategies. The model, based on the June
open-source framework, is informed by data on geography, demographics,
comorbidities, physical infrastructure and other parameters obtained from
real-world observations and previous literature. The development and testing of
this approach focuses on the Cox's Bazar refugee settlement in Bangladesh,
although our model is designed to be generalizable to other informal settings.
Our findings suggest the encouraging self-isolation at home of mild to severe
symptomatic patients, as opposed to the isolation of all positive cases in
purpose-built isolation and treatment centers, does not increase the risk of
secondary infection meaning the centers can be used to provide hospital support
to the most intense cases of COVID-19. Secondly we find that mask wearing in all 
indoor communal areas can be effective at dampening viral spread, even with low
mask efficacy and compliance rates. Finally, we model the effects of reopening
learning centers in the settlement under various mitigation strategies. For
example, a combination of mask wearing in the classroom, halving attendance
regularity to enable physical distancing, and better ventilation can almost
completely mitigate the increased risk of infection which keeping the learning
centers open may cause. These modeling efforts are being incorporated into
decision making processes to inform future planning, and further exercises should
be carried out in similar geographies to help protect those most vulnerable.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009360 
PMCID: PMC8553081
PMID: 34710090  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

