
1. Psychiatr Danub. 2021 Spring-Summer;33(Suppl 4):565-571.

Overview of Symptoms of Ongoing Symptomatic and Post-COVID-19 Patients Who Were
Reffered to Pulmonary Rehabilitation - First Single-Centre Experience in Croatia.

Jalušić Glunčić T(1), Muršić D, Basara L, Vranić L, Moćan A, Janković Makek M,
Samaržija M.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for Lung Diseases Jordanovac, University Hospital Centre Zagreb,
Jordanovac 104, 10000, Zagreb, Croatia, E-mail:
tajana.jalusic.gluncic@kbc-zagreb.hr.

BACKGROUND: Coronavirus-2 pandemic has changed the functioning of health systems 
worldwide. It is not yet fully known which symptoms of the disease are most
commonly presented in patients referred for pulmonary rehabilitation. Our aim was
to investigate the profile of patients referred for pulmonary rehabilitation;
what symptoms they had during the acute phase of the disease and what symptoms
were still present at the start of pulmonary rehabilitation.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Study included ongoing symptomatic and post-COVID patients 
who attended standard, in person pulmonary rehabilitation program. Patients had
COVID-19 disease at least four weeks before attending pulmonary rehabilitation.
Patients completed questionnaires of self-reported somatic deficits during acute 
and post-COVID-19 stage as well as questionnaires regarding their psychological
symptoms. Pulmonary function test, expiratory and inspiratory muscle strenght,
hand grip strenght and six-minute walk test was performed prior and after
pulmonary rehabilitation.
RESULTS: Study included 63 patients (32 male, 31 female), with mean age of 52.9
years. During acute COVID-19, majority of patients complained of fatigue, cough, 
dyspnea, myalgia and headache. More than 85% of patients reported pulmonary
deficits during ongoing symptomatic and post-COVID-19 stage. Emotional distress
and anxiety levels were significantly elevated in acute stage, while depression, 
anger and the need for help was not significantly elevated. All reported symptoms
were significantly reduced in post-COVID-19 stage. There was statistically
significant difference in six-minute walk distance, inspiratory and expiratory
muscle strenght and hand grip strenght between first and final testing.
CONCLUSIONS: Results of our study are similar with previous studies, the most
common symptoms during acute phase were fatigue, cough and dyspnea and fatigue
and respiratory problems during ongoing symptomatic and post-COVID stage.
Emotional distress diminishes signifiacantly in post-COVID stage. Further larger 
studies are needed to clarify which acute disease symptoms are predominant in
patients referred to pulmonary rehabilitation and cause prolongued discomfort.


PMID: 34718282  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

