
1. Am J Case Rep. 2021 Oct 30;22:e933847. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.933847.

Herpes Simplex Virus Meningoencephalitis Following Pulse-Dose Methylprednisolone:
A Case Report and Literature Review.

Horn J(1), Mullholand JB(1), Ashraf S(1), Shore D(1), Van de Louw A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Penn State Health Milton S. 
Hershey Medical Center, Hershey, PA, USA.

BACKGROUND Several cases of herpes simplex virus type 1 meningoencephalitis
(HSVE) have been reported in patients receiving steroids, but the exact
contribution of steroids to the disorder remains unclear because other risk
factors, such as chemotherapy, brain radiation, or surgery, were present in
almost all cases. CASE REPORT We report the case of a 76-year-old man who
developed HSVE following the administration of pulse-dose steroids. The patient
had occupational asbestos exposure and a chronic interstitial lung disease of
unclear etiology (sarcoidosis versus hypersensitivity pneumonitis) and was
admitted for acute-on-chronic respiratory failure requiring mechanical
ventilation. After a negative infectious workup and several days of antibiotics
without improvement, pulse-dose steroids were administered. In the following
days, the patient developed a fever and worsening encephalopathy. A lumbar
puncture showed elevated nucleated cells and positive polymerase chain reaction
for herpes simplex virus 1 in the cerebrospinal fluid, confirming the diagnosis
of HSVE. Acyclovir treatment was initiated, but the patient later died as a
result of persistent severe encephalopathy and respiratory failure with an
inability to wean mechanical ventilation. CONCLUSIONS Clinicians should keep in
mind that HSVE is a potential complication of steroids and carefully consider the
benefit/risk ratio of pulse-dose steroids, taking into account associated factors
of immunosuppression. A high level of awareness should be especially maintained
in critically ill patients because of associated risk factors (critical illness
immune paralysis) and because neurological signs of HSVE may be missed in
mechanically ventilated, sedated patients.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.933847 
PMCID: PMC8564782
PMID: 34716288  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

