
1. Patient. 2021 Oct 29. doi: 10.1007/s40271-021-00553-9. [Epub ahead of print]

Stated Preference Research in Reproductive and Maternal Healthcare Services in
Sub-Saharan Africa: A Systematic Review.

Erku D(1)(2)(3), Scuffham P(4)(5), Gething K(4)(5), Norman R(6), Mekonnen AB(7), 
Gebretekle GB(8)(9), Assefa Y(10), Tessema GA(6)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Health Economics, School of Medicine, Building G05 2.44A,
Gold Coast Campus, Griffith University, Gold Coast, QLD, 4222, Australia.
d.erku@griffith.edu.au.
(2)Menzies Health Institute Queensland, Griffith University, Gold Coast, QLD,
Australia. d.erku@griffith.edu.au.
(3)Centre for Research and Engagement in Assessment of Health Technology
(CREATE), Gold Coast, QLD, Australia. d.erku@griffith.edu.au.
(4)Centre for Applied Health Economics, School of Medicine, Building G05 2.44A,
Gold Coast Campus, Griffith University, Gold Coast, QLD, 4222, Australia.
(5)Menzies Health Institute Queensland, Griffith University, Gold Coast, QLD,
Australia.
(6)Curtin School of Population Health, Curtin University, Perth, WA, Australia.
(7)Centre for Quality and Patient Safety Research, School of Nursing and
Midwifery, Institute for Health Transformation, Deakin University, Melbourne,
VIC, Australia.
(8)Institute of Health Policy, Management, and Evaluation, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(9)Toronto Health Economics and Technology Assessment (THETA) Collaborative,
University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(10)School of Public Health, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD,
Australia.
(11)School of Public Health, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Understanding the preferred choice of healthcare
service attributes for women is important, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa
where resources are constrained and improving reproductive and maternal
healthcare services is of high importance. The aim of this systematic review was 
to identify attributes of reproductive and maternal healthcare services in
sub-Saharan Africa, and summarise the factors shaping women's preference to
access these services.
METHODS: PubMed/MEDLINE, EMBASE, PsycINFO and CINAHL were searched from the
inception of each database until March 2021 for published studies reporting
stated preferences for maternal and reproductive healthcare services in
sub-Saharan Africa. Data were extracted using a predefined extraction sheet, and 
the quality of reporting of included studies was assessed using PREFS and ISPOR
(International Society for Pharmacoeconomics and Outcomes Research) checklists.
The Donabedian's model for quality of healthcare was used to categorise
attributes into "structure", "process" and "outcome".
RESULTS: A total of 13 studies (12 discrete choice experiments and one best-worst
scaling study) were included. Attributes related to the structure of healthcare
services (e.g. availability of technical equipment, medications or diagnostic
facilities, having good system conditions) are often included within the studies,
and are considered the most important by women. Of the three dimensions of
quality of healthcare, the outcome dimension was the least frequently studied
across studies. All except one study explored women's preferences and the
participants were pregnant women, women aged 18-49 years who had recently given
birth and women living with human immunodeficiency virus. The included studies
came from five sub-Saharan Africa countries of which Ethiopia and South Africa
each contributed three studies. All of the included studies reported on the
purpose, findings and significance of the study. However, none of the studies
reported on the differences between responders vs non-responders. Nine of the 13 
studies employed the ISPOR checklist and reported each item including the
research question and the methods for identifying and selecting attributes, and
provided the findings in sufficient detail and clarity.
CONCLUSIONS: Aligning maternal healthcare service provision with women's
preferences may foster client-oriented services and thereby improve service
uptake and better patient outcomes.

© 2021. Crown.

DOI: 10.1007/s40271-021-00553-9 
PMID: 34713395 

