
1. J Int AIDS Soc. 2021 Oct;24 Suppl 6:e25809. doi: 10.1002/jia2.25809.

Tuberculosis treatment within differentiated service delivery models in global
HIV/TB programming.

Tran CH(1), Moore BK(1), Pathmanathan I(1), Lungu P(2), Shah NS(3), Oboho I(1),
Al-Samarrai T(4), Maloney SA(1), Date A(1), Boyd AT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division ofHIV & Global Tuberculosis, U.S. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(2)National TB and Leprosy Programme, Ministry of Health, Lusaka, Zambia.
(3)Department of Global Health, Emory University Rollins School of Public Health,
Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(4)Office of the Global AIDS Coordinator, U.S. State Department, Washington, DC, 
USA.

INTRODUCTION: Providing more convenient and patient-centred options for service
delivery is a priority within global HIV programmes. These efforts improve
patient satisfaction and retention and free up time for providers to focus on new
HIV diagnoses or severe illness. Recently, the coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) pandemic precipitated expanded eligibility criteria for these
differentiated service delivery (DSD) models to decongest clinics and protect
patients and healthcare workers. This has resulted in dramatic scale-up of DSD
for antiretroviral therapy, cotrimoxazole and tuberculosis (TB) preventive
treatment. While TB treatment among people living with HIV (PLHIV) has
traditionally involved frequent, facility-based management, TB treatment can also
be adapted within DSD models. Such adaptations could include electronic tools to 
ensure appropriate clinical management, treatment support, adherence counselling 
and adverse event (AE) monitoring. In this commentary, we outline considerations 
for DSD of TB treatment among PLHIV, building on best practices from global DSD
model implementation for HIV service delivery.
DISCUSSION: In operationalizing TB treatment in DSD models, we consider the
following: what activity is being done, when or how often it takes place, where
it takes place, by whom and for whom. We discuss considerations for various
programme elements including TB screening and diagnosis; medication dispensing;
patient education, counselling and support; clinical management and monitoring;
and reporting and recording. General approaches include multi-month dispensing
for TB medications during intensive and continuation phases of treatment and
standardized virtual adherence and AE monitoring. Lastly, we provide operational 
examples of TB treatment delivery through DSD models, including a conceptual
model and an early implementation experience from Zambia.
CONCLUSIONS: COVID-19 has catalysed the rapid expansion of differentiated
patient-centred service delivery for PLHIV. Expanding DSD models to include TB
treatment can capitalize on existing platforms, while providing high-quality,
routine treatment, follow-up and patient education and empowerment.

© 2021 The Authors. Journal of the International AIDS Society published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of the International AIDS Society.

DOI: 10.1002/jia2.25809 
PMCID: PMC8554213
PMID: 34713974  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

