
1. Korean J Radiol. 2021 Dec;22(12):1938-1945. doi: 10.3348/kjr.2021.0350. Epub 2021
Oct 26.

COVID-19 Vaccine-Related Axillary and Cervical Lymphadenopathy in Patients with
Current or Prior Breast Cancer and Other Malignancies: Cross-Sectional Imaging
Findings on MRI, CT, and PET-CT.

Lane DL(1), Neelapu SS(2), Xu G(3), Weaver O(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Imaging, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA. deanna.lane@mdanderson.org.
(2)Department of Lymphoma/Myeloma, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Department of Nuclear Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Breast Imaging, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Breast radiologists are increasingly seeing patients with axillary adenopathy
related to COVID-19 vaccination. Vaccination can cause levels I-III axillary as
well as cervical lymphadenopathy. Appropriate management of vaccine-related
adenopathy may vary depending on clinical context. In patients with current or
past history of malignancy, vaccine-related adenopathy can be indistinguishable
from nodal metastasis. This article presents imaging findings of oncology
patients with adenopathy seen in the axilla or neck on cross-sectional imaging
(breast MRI, CT, or PET-CT) after COVID-19 vaccination. Management approach and
rationale is discussed, along with consideration on strategies to minimize false 
positives in vaccinated cancer patients. Time interval between vaccination and
adenopathy seen on breast MRI, CT, or PET-CT is also reported.

Copyright © 2021 The Korean Society of Radiology.

DOI: 10.3348/kjr.2021.0350 
PMCID: PMC8628159
PMID: 34719892  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Neelapu received grants and personal fees
from Kite/Gilead, personal fees from Celgene/BMS, grants and personal fees from
Adicet Bio, grants and personal fees from Precision Biosciences, grants and
personal fees from Allogene, personal fees from Kuur Therapeutics, personal fees 
from Novartis, personal fees from Bluebird Bio, grants and personal fees from
Merck, grants from Poseida, grants from Cellectis, grants from Karus, personal
fees from Legend Biotech, personal fees from Incyte, personal fees from Calibr,
however all of these have no concerning conflicts of interest with the submitted 
work. Other authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.

