
1. BMC Health Serv Res. 2021 Oct 28;21(1):1170. doi: 10.1186/s12913-021-07202-9.

The impact of COVID-19 on supply decision-makers: the case of personal protective
equipment in Spanish hospitals.

Morales-Contreras MF(1)(2), Leporati M(3), Fratocchi L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Business Management and Economics, ICADE, Universidad Pontificia
Comillas, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Institute for Research in Technology (IIT), ICAI School of Engineering,
Universidad Pontificia Comillas, Madrid, Spain.
(3)EAE Business School, Madrid, Spain. mleporati@eae.es.
(4)University of L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The COVID-19 pandemic has been recognized as a trigger for redefining
supply chains at the global level, and has created an intense debate within the
academic community and among policy-makers and practitioners. Among other
industries, health care has been dramatically hit by the scarcity of "medical
products," specifically for personal protective equipment (PPE-like), due to
supply chain disruptions coupled with dramatically increased demand. We aimed to 
analyze how the scarcity of PPE-like during the COVID-19 pandemic has modified
the behavior of decision-makers in the PPE-like supply chain at the hospital
level, and to explore what changes could be implemented to cope with future
PPE-like shortages.
METHODS: We used an explorative approach based on semi-structured interviews with
key informants in the Spanish health care industry. More specifically, we held
interviews to industry experts at three hospitals in three Spanish regions to map
the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic onto the buying decision-making
process.
RESULTS: Different strategies were developed by decision-makers at hospitals
before, during, and after the first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic in Spain. Our
paper offers two main findings: a) decision-makers changed their purchasing
behavior from a cost main driver to guaranteeing the availability of supplies; b)
they supported the idea of giving more "strategic autonomy" to Spain or Europe
through back and nearshoring decisions.
CONCLUSIONS: This paper could be of interest to health care management at the
national, regional, and hospital levels, as well as for policy-makers, since it
could help to establish and configure policies to support the sourcing of medical
products (specifically PPE-like) to anticipate potential supply disruptions. Our 
paper contributes to the limited existing literature on how purchasing strategies
at the decision-maker level and supply vary in the health care industry when a
public health crisis appears, and what potential solutions might be for
policy-makers and practitioners involved in the health care industry.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12913-021-07202-9 
PMCID: PMC8552980
PMID: 34711231  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

