
1. J Neurosci. 2021 Oct 28. pii: JN-RM-0916-21. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0916-21.2021.
[Epub ahead of print]

Overexpressing histone deacetylase 5 in rat dorsal striatum alters reward-guided 
decision-making and associated neural encoding.

Pribut HJ(1)(2), Vázquez D(1)(2), Wei AD(1), Tennyson SS(1)(2), Davis IR(1),
Roesch MR(3)(2), Li X(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA.
(2)Program in Neuroscience and Cognitive Science, University of Maryland, College
Park, MD 20742, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA 
mroesch@umd.edu annali@umd.edu.

Accumulating evidence in the past decade implicates histone modifying enzymes,
such as class I histone deacetylases (HDACs), in learning and memory, and
recently habit formation. However, it is unclear whether HDACs play roles in
complex cognitive function. To address this issue, we examined the role of dorsal
striatal HDAC5, a class II HDAC, in reward-guided decision-making and associated 
neural encoding in rats. We first injected adeno-associated virus to overexpress 
a nuclear-localized HDAC5 in dorsal striatum (DS). We then recorded neural
correlates from dorsolateral striatum (DLS) as rats performed two reward-guided
choice tasks, in which we manipulated either the size of or delay to reward.
During these tasks, rats first learned which of two options led to the better
reward, and then reversed those contingencies in a second block of trials. We
found that rats with HDAC5 overexpression in DS responded faster and chose higher
value reward more often during the first block of trials, but were less able to
reverse those contingencies in the second block of trials. At the neural level,
HDAC5 overexpression in DS elevated and reduced the number of cells in DLS that
increased firing to stimuli and reward, respectively, and shifted encoding toward
cues that predicted more immediate reward. These results suggest that the HDAC5
overexpression in DS contributes to inflexible decision-making, demonstrating a
role of histone modifying enzymes in complex cognitive function.SIGNIFICANCE
STATEMENT Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are important for learning and habit
formation. Here, we expanded on these functions and found that overexpression of 
HDAC5 produced faster and more automatic behavior, and related changes in
dorsolateral striatal neural firing in rats performing a value-based
decision-making task. These results implicate HDAC5 as a potential therapeutic
target for psychiatric conditions that impair decision-making and executive
function.

Copyright © 2021 Pribut et al.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0916-21.2021 
PMID: 34716230 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they do not have any
conflicts of interest (financial or otherwise) related to the data presented in
this manuscript.

