
1. JMIR Public Health Surveill. 2021 Oct 25. doi: 10.2196/32203. [Epub ahead of
print]

Presenting characteristics, comorbidities, and outcomes among COVID-19 patients
hospitalized in twin cities of Pakistan.

Akhtar H(1), Khalid S(2), Ur Rahman F(3), Umar M(4), Ali S(5), Afridi M(6),
Hassan F(7), Saleh Khader Y(8), Akhtar N(9), Mujeeb Khan M(10), Ikram A(11).

Author information: 
(1)Yusra Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences (YIPs), Zaraj Housing Society,
Opposite DHA Phase 2 Gate III, Main G.T. Road, Islamabad, PK.
(2)School Of Chemical And Materials Engineering, National University Of Science
And Technology, Islamabad, PK.
(3)HEAD OF DEPARTMENT OF MEDICINE BENAZIR BHUTTO HOSPITAL, Rawalpindi, PK.
(4)Vice Chancellor, Rawalpindi Medical University (RMU), Rawalpindi, PK.
(5)Department Of Gynecology And Obstetrics, Paf Hospital, Islamabad, PK.
(6)Department Of Biotechnology, Quaid I Azam University, Islamabad, PK.
(7)CT Angio-Department, Armed Forces Institute of Cardiology (AFIC), Rawalpindi, 
PK.
(8)Medical Education And Biostatistics Department Of Community Medicine, Public
Health And Family Medicine/ Faculty Of Medicine.Jordan University Of Science &
Technology, Irbid, JO.
(9)Department of Infectious Diseases, Pakistan Institute Of Medical Sciences
(PIMS), Islamabad, PK.
(10)Department of Infectious Diseases, Rawalpindi Medical University (RMU),
Rawalpindi, PK.
(11)Executive Director, National Institute Of Health, Islamabad, PK.

BACKGROUND: COVID-19 converted into a pandemic rapidly after its emergence in
December of 2019. It belongs to the Corona family of viruses which have struck a 
few times before in history. Data based on previous research helped building
relationships, which played a vital role in preventions and precautions during
initial stages of this pandemic. Since, data related to COVID-19 in Pakistan has 
not been documented on a large scale initially and due to weak healthcare system 
and low economic conditions, Pakistan population in general already suffers from 
many comorbidities, which can affect the outcome of the COVID-19 infected
patients severely.
OBJECTIVE: COVID-19 infections are coupled by manifestation of various notable
outcomes that can be documented and characterized clinically. These clinical
manifestations can serve as indicators for early detection as well as severity
prognosis for COVID-19 infections especially in high-risk groups.
METHODS: A retrospective observational study involving abstraction of demographic
features, presenting symptoms and adverse clinical outcomes for 1,812 COVID-19
patients admitted to the four major hospitals in the Rawalpindi-Islamabad region 
of Pakistan was conducted in the period February-August 2020. Multivariate
regression analysis was carried out to identify significant indicators of
COVID-19 severity, ICU admission, ventilator-aid and mortality. The study not
only relate COVID-19 infection with comorbidities but also underlines other
related factors like age and gender.
RESULTS: The current study depicts fever (87.9%), cough (79.1%) and shortness of 
breath (55.1%) at the time of admission as the most prevalent symptoms for
COVID-19 patients. These symptoms were common but not conclusive of the outcome
of infection. Out of all the patients, 24% required ICU admission and 21.5%
required ventilator-aid at some point of disease progression during their stay at
the hospital and 25.9 % patients died. Further analysis revealed the relationship
of the symptoms presented, comorbidities and the progression of severity in these
patients. Elderly patients with comorbidities like hypertension, diabetes,
chronic kidney disease and asthma were significantly affected in higher
proportions, resulting in requirement of intensive care unit (ICU) and
ventilator-aid in some cases and even mortality in many cased.
CONCLUSIONS: Elderly patients with comorbidities such as hypertension, diabetes, 
asthma, COPD, and chronic kidney disease are at increased risk of developing
severity in COVID-19 infections with an increased likelihood of adverse clinical 
outcomes.
CLINICALTRIAL:

DOI: 10.2196/32203 
PMID: 34710053 

