
1. Psychiatr Danub. 2021 Spring-Summer;33(Suppl 4):402-413.

Comorbidities and Syndemics in the COVID-19 Age: Challenges and Opportunities for
Bringing Separated Branches of Medicine Closer to Each Other.

Jakovljevic M(1), Samarzija M, Milicic D, Reiner Z, Sartorius N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychological Medicine, University Hospital
Centre Zagreb, Kispaticeva 12, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia, jakovljevic.miro@yahoo.com.

The Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) as a unique disaster has stressed the
extreme importance of the three issues for medicine, society and humanity in
general: comorbidity, pandemic and syndemic. There are many reasons why the study
of comorbidities and syndemics of COVID-19 is of great importance for
researchers, clinicians and health policy makers who are responsible for health
care organization and funding in a bid to develop more effective and efficient
prevention and treatment. Thinking about COVID-19 through a syndemics concept and
taking biological, psychological, social and spiritual dimensions into account,
physicians could be more effective in clinical practice and community-based
interventions. The outcome of SARS-CoV-2 infection is determined by the
virus-host interaction, with pathogenicity of SARS-CoV-2 being related to the
presence of comorbid diseases. The risk for severe COVID-19 clinical
manifestations and death increases with age of patients and comorbidity. General 
mechanisms of multi-system dysfunction and multi-organ damage reported in
COVID-19 are probably related to ubiquitous expression of ACE2 in many tissues
and its important role in the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS)
functioning. Physicians all over the world should be aware of COVID-19 related
comorbidities, multisystem disorders and syndemics, as well as treatment and
preventive strategies. COVID-19 age is a right time to reconsider the state of
science and practice in comorbidity medicine field from the both epistemological 
and treatment perspective. Comorbidities and multimorbidities are indifferent to 
medical specializations, so the integrative and complementary medicine is an
imperative in the both education and practice. Shifting the paradigm from
vertical and mono-morbid interventions to comorbidity, multimorbidity and
multi-system disease approaches enhances effectiveness and efficiency of human
resources utilization. The aim of this review is to summarize the theoretical
concepts and clinical experience and research regarding comorbidity in general,
and specifically related to the COVID-19 pandemic, syndemics and infodemic.


PMID: 34718258  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

