
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 28;16(10):e0258781. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258781.
eCollection 2021.

Public perceptions of non-adherence to pandemic protection measures by self and
others: A study of COVID-19 in the United Kingdom.

Williams SN(1)(2), Armitage CJ(3)(4)(5), Tampe T(6), Dienes KA(3)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for People and Organisation, School of Management, Swansea University, 
Swansea, Wales, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Medical Social Sciences, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.
(3)Manchester Centre for Health Psychology, University of Manchester, Manchester,
United Kingdom.
(4)Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health Science
Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(5)NIHR Greater Manchester Patient Safety Translational Research Centre,
Manchester, United Kingdom.
(6)Independent Public Health Consultant, Kassel, Germany.
(7)Department of Psychology, School of Human and Health Sciences, Swansea
University, Swansea, Wales, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Novel viral pandemics present significant challenges to global public
health. Non-pharmaceutical interventions (e.g. social distancing) are an
important means through which to control the transmission of such viruses. One of
the key factors determining the effectiveness of such measures is the level of
public adherence to them. Research to date has focused on quantitative
exploration of adherence and non-adherence, with a relative lack of qualitative
exploration of the reasons for non-adherence.
OBJECTIVE: To explore participants' perceptions of non-adherence to COVID-19
policy measures by self and others in the UK, focusing on perceived reasons for
non-adherence.
METHODS: Qualitative study comprising 12 focus groups conducted via
video-conferencing between 25th September and 13th November 2020. Participants
were 51 UK residents aged 18 and above, reflecting a range of ages, genders and
race/ethnicities. Data were analysed using a thematic approach.
RESULTS: Participants reported seeing an increase in non-adherence in others over
the course of the pandemic. Reports of non-adherence in self were lower than
reports of non-adherence in others. Analysis revealed six main themes related to 
participants' reported reasons for non-adherence in self and others: (1) 'Alert
fatigue' (where people find it difficult to follow, or switch off from,
information about frequently changing rules or advice) (2) Inconsistent rules (3)
Lack of trust in government (4) Learned Helplessness (5) Resistance and
rebelliousness (6)The impact of vaccines on risk perception. Participants
perceived a number of systemic failures (e.g. unclear policy, untrustworthy
policymakers) to strongly contribute to two forms non-adherence-violations and
errors.
CONCLUSION: Findings suggest that latent and systemic failures-in the form of
policy decisions that are commonly experienced as too changeable, inconsistent
and confusing, and policy makers that are commonly perceived as untrustworthy-may
play a significant role in creating the conditions that enable or encourage
non-adherence.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258781 
PMCID: PMC8553167
PMID: 34710125  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CJA is supported by NIHR Manchester Biomedical
Research Centre and NIHR Greater Manchester Patient Safety Translational Research
Centre. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data
and materials.” (as detailed online in our guide for authors
http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests). The authors have no
other relationships or activities that could appear to have influenced the
submitted work.

