
1. Neuro Endocrinol Lett. 2021 Oct 29;42(6):375-382. [Epub ahead of print]

Neurotoxic side effects of acyclovir: two case reports.

Paluch Z(1), Trojánek M(2), Velíšková Z(3), Mlíchová J(1), Chrbolka P(1),
Gregorová J(4), Marques E(1), Kalatova D(5), Pícha D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University,
Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Second Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Infectious, Parasitic and Tropical Diseases, Bulovka Hospital,
Prague, Czech Republic.
(4)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Bulovka Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
(5)St. John Nepomucene Neumann Institute, Příbram, Czech Republic; St. Elisabeth 
University of Health Care and Social Work (a non-profit organization),
Bratislava, Slovakia.

Acyclovir is an antiviral drug frequently used in clinical practice. It is
indicated for the treatment of infections caused by herpes simplex virus and
varicella zoster virus. The drug has a good safety profile; however, severe side 
effects may rarely occur during therapy. These include renal failure as a major
risk factor for neurotoxic side effects potentially developing within 24-48 hours
of therapy initiation. The paper presents the cases of two patients developing
neurotoxic side effects while treated for herpes zoster. The aim of the authors
is to highlight the potential for developing neurotoxic side effects in high-risk
groups such as the elderly, patients with impaired renal function or multiple
comorbidities on polypharmacy, or those using nephrotoxic drugs. Acyclovir use
could lead to renal impairment and an increase in its plasma and CNS
concentrations with severe neuropsychiatric side effects. The neurotoxic side
effects are reversible after therapy withdrawal. Thus, in patients developing
mental impairment or showing other neurological symptoms during acyclovir
therapy, the patient should be promptly assessed for potential drug
neurotoxicity, their therapy should be discontinued and drug elimination with
forced diuresis or hemodialysis considered. Early recognition of acyclovir
neurotoxic side effects can significantly improve a patient's prognosis.


PMID: 34713692 

