
1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 29;16(10):e0248325. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0248325.
eCollection 2021.

Misinformation, perceptions towards COVID-19 and willingness to be vaccinated: A 
population-based survey in Yemen.

Bitar AN(1), Zawiah M(1)(2), Al-Ashwal FY(1)(3), Kubas M(3)(4), Saeed RM(5)(6),
Abduljabbar R(7), Jaber AAS(8), Sulaiman SAS(1), Khan AH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Clinical Pharmacy, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Universiti
Sains Malaysia, Penang, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Pharmacy Practice, College of Clinical Pharmacy, University of
Al Hodeida, Al Hodeida, Yemen.
(3)Clinical Pharmacy Department, University of Science and Technology Hospital,
Sana'a, Yemen.
(4)Pharmacy Practice Department, Kulliyyah of Pharmacy, International Islamic
University Malaysia, Kuantan, Pahang, Malaysia.
(5)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmacy Practice, University of Science
and Technology, Sana'a, Yemen.
(6)Department of Pharmaceutical sciences, School of Pharmacy, The University of
Jordan, Amman, Jordan.
(7)Department of Biopharmaceutics and Clinical Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, The 
University of Jordan, Amman, Jordan.
(8)Department of Clinical Pharmacy & Pharmacotherapeutics, Dubai Pharmacy College
for Girls, Dubai, United Arab Emirates.

BACKGROUND: Since the beginning of the COVID-19 outbreak, many pharmaceutical
companies have been racing to develop a safe and effective COVID-19 vaccine.
Simultaneously, rumors and misinformation about COVID-19 are still widely
spreading. Therefore, this study aimed to investigate the prevalence of COVID-19 
misinformation among the Yemeni population and its association with vaccine
acceptance and perceptions.
METHODS: A cross-sectional online survey was conducted in four major cities in
Yemen. The constructed questionnaire consisted of four main sections
(sociodemographic data, misinformation, perceptions (perceived susceptibility,
severity, and worry), and vaccination acceptance evaluation). Subject recruitment
and data collection were conducted online utilizing social websites and using the
snowball sampling technique. Descriptive and inferential analyses were performed 
using SPSS version 27.
RESULTS: The total number of respondents was 484. Over 60% of them were males and
had a university education. More than half had less than 100$ monthly income and 
were khat chewers, while only 18% were smokers. Misinformation prevalence ranged 
from 8.9% to 38.9%, depending on the statement being asked. Men, university
education, higher income, employment, and living in urban areas were associated
with a lower misinformation level (p <0.05). Statistically significant
association (p <0.05) between university education, living in urban areas, and
being employed with perceived susceptibility were observed. The acceptance rate
was 61.2% for free vaccines, but it decreased to 43% if they had to purchase it. 
Females, respondents with lower monthly income, and those who believed that
pharmaceutical companies made the virus for financial gains were more likely to
reject the vaccination (p <0.05).
CONCLUSION: The study revealed that the acceptance rate to take a vaccine was
suboptimal and significantly affected by gender, misinformation, cost, and
income. Furthermore, being female, non-university educated, low-income, and
living in rural areas were associated with higher susceptibility to
misinformation about COVID-19. These findings show a clear link between
misinformation susceptibility and willingness to vaccinate. Focused awareness
campaigns to decrease misinformation and emphasize the vaccination's safety and
efficacy might be fundamental before initiating any mass vaccination in Yemen.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0248325 
PMCID: PMC8555792
PMID: 34714827  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

