
1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2021 Oct 12;12:714909. doi:
10.3389/fendo.2021.714909. eCollection 2021.

Medical Significance of Uterine Corpus Endometrial Carcinoma Patients Infected
With SARS-CoV-2 and Pharmacological Characteristics of Plumbagin.

Li Y(1), Yu S(2), Li Y(3), Liang X(3), Su M(3)(4), Li R(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, Guigang Maternal and Child Health Care Hospital,
Guigang, China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Guigang City People's Hospital, The Eighth
Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University, Guigang, China.
(3)Laboratory of Environmental Pollution and Integrative Omics, Guilin Medical
University, Guilin, China.
(4)Guangxi Key Laboratory of Tumor Immunology and Microenvironmental Regulation, 
Guilin Medical University, Guilin, China.

Background: Clinically, evidence shows that uterine corpus endometrial carcinoma 
(UCEC) patients infected with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) may have a higher death-rate. However, current anti-UCEC/coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19) treatment is lacking. Plumbagin (PLB), a
pharmacologically active alkaloid, is an emerging anti-cancer inhibitor.
Accordingly, the current report was designed to identify and characterize the
anti-UCEC function and mechanism of PLB in the treatment of patients infected
with SARS-CoV-2 via integrated in silico analysis.
Methods: The clinical analyses of UCEC and COVID-19 in patients were conducted
using online-accessible tools. Meanwhile, in silico methods including network
pharmacology and biological molecular docking aimed to screen and characterize
the anti-UCEC/COVID-19 functions, bio targets, and mechanisms of the action of
PLB.
Results: The bioinformatics data uncovered the clinical characteristics of UCEC
patients infected with SARS-CoV-2, including specific genes, health risk,
survival rate, and prognostic index. Network pharmacology findings disclosed that
PLB-exerted anti-UCEC/COVID-19 effects were achieved through anti-proliferation, 
inducing cytotoxicity and apoptosis, anti-inflammation, immunomodulation, and
modulation of some of the key molecular pathways associated with
anti-inflammatory and immunomodulating actions. Following molecular docking
analysis, in silico investigation helped identify the anti-UCEC/COVID-19
pharmacological bio targets of PLB, including mitogen-activated protein kinase 3 
(MAPK3), tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and urokinase-type plasminogen activator
(PLAU).
Conclusions: Based on the present bioinformatic and in silico findings, the
clinical characterization of UCEC/COVID-19 patients was revealed. The candidate, 
core bio targets, and molecular pathways of PLB action in the potential treatment
of UCEC/COVID-19 were identified accordingly.

Copyright © 2021 Li, Yu, Li, Liang, Su and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2021.714909 
PMCID: PMC8547653
PMID: 34712201  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

