
1. BMJ Open. 2021 Oct 29;11(10):e053962. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-053962.

Digital technology and disease surveillance in the COVID-19 pandemic: a scoping
review protocol.

Donelle L(1), Hall J(2)(3), Hiebert B(2), Shelley JJ(4)(5), Smith MJ(5),
Gilliland J(5)(6)(7), Stranges S(7)(8)(9)(10), Kothari A(5), Burkell J(11), Cooke
T(12), Long J(6), Shelley JM(2), Befus D(2), Comer L(2), Ngole M(2), Stanley
M(13).

Author information: 
(1)Arthur Labatt Family School of Nursing, Faculty of Health Sciences, Western
University, London, Ontario, Canada ldonelle@uwo.ca.
(2)Arthur Labatt Family School of Nursing, Faculty of Health Sciences, Western
University, London, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Nursing, Fanshawe College, London, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Faculty of Western Law, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada.
(5)School of Health Studies, Facutly of Health Sciences, Western University,
London, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Geography and Environment, Faculty of Social Sciences, Western University,
London, Ontario, Canada.
(7)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Schulich School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada.
(8)Department of Medicine, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, Western
University, London, Ontario, Canada.
(9)The Africa Institute, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada.
(10)Department of Population Health, Luxembourg Institute of Health, Strassen,
Luxembourg.
(11)Faculty of Information and Media Sciences, Western University, London,
Ontario, Canada.
(12)Surveillance Studies Centre, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.
(13)Department of Western Libraries, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: Infectious diseases pose a risk to public health, requiring
efficient strategies for disease prevention. Digital health surveillance
technologies provide new opportunities to enhance disease prevention, detection, 
tracking, reporting and analysis. However, in addition to concerns regarding the 
effectiveness of these technologies in meeting public health goals, there are
also concerns regarding the ethics, legality, safety and sustainability of
digital surveillance technologies. This scoping review examines the literature on
digital surveillance for public health purposes during the COVID-19 pandemic to
identify health-related applications of digital surveillance technologies, and to
highlight discussions of the implications of these technologies.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: The scoping review will be guided by the framework proposed
by Arksey and O'Malley and the guidelines outlined by Colquhoun et al and Levac
et al. We will search Medline (Ovid), PsycInfo, PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL
(EBSCOhost), ACM Digital Library, Google Scholar and IEEE Explore for relevant
studies published between December 2019 and December 2020. The review will also
include grey literature. Data will be managed and analysed through an extraction 
table and thematic analysis.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: Findings will be disseminated through traditional
academic channels, as well as social media channels and research briefs and
infographics. We will target our dissemination to provincial and federal public
health organisations, as well as technology companies and community-based
organisations managing the public response to the COVID-19 pandemic.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-053962 
PMCID: PMC8561829
PMID: 34716168  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

