
1. Front Digit Health. 2021 Mar 29;3:564906. doi: 10.3389/fdgth.2021.564906.
eCollection 2021.

COVID-19 and Computer Audition: An Overview on What Speech & Sound Analysis Could
Contribute in the SARS-CoV-2 Corona Crisis.

Schuller BW(1)(2)(3), Schuller DM(3), Qian K(4), Liu J(5), Zheng H(6), Li X(7).

Author information: 
(1)GLAM - Group on Language, Audio & Music, Imperial College London, London,
United Kingdom.
(2)EIHW - Chair of Embedded Intelligence for Health Care and Wellbeing,
University of Augsburg, Augsburg, Germany.
(3)audEERING GmbH, Gilching, Germany.
(4)Educational Physiology Laboratory, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Plastic Surgery, The Central Hospital of Wuhan, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(6)Department of Hand Surgery, Wuhan Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(7)Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, 
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.

At the time of writing this article, the world population is suffering from more 
than 2 million registered COVID-19 disease epidemic-induced deaths since the
outbreak of the corona virus, which is now officially known as SARS-CoV-2.
However, tremendous efforts have been made worldwide to counter-steer and control
the epidemic by now labelled as pandemic. In this contribution, we provide an
overview on the potential for computer audition (CA), i.e., the usage of speech
and sound analysis by artificial intelligence to help in this scenario. We first 
survey which types of related or contextually significant phenomena can be
automatically assessed from speech or sound. These include the automatic
recognition and monitoring of COVID-19 directly or its symptoms such as
breathing, dry, and wet coughing or sneezing sounds, speech under cold, eating
behaviour, sleepiness, or pain to name but a few. Then, we consider potential
use-cases for exploitation. These include risk assessment and diagnosis based on 
symptom histograms and their development over time, as well as monitoring of
spread, social distancing and its effects, treatment and recovery, and patient
well-being. We quickly guide further through challenges that need to be faced for
real-life usage and limitations also in comparison with non-audio solutions. We
come to the conclusion that CA appears ready for implementation of
(pre-)diagnosis and monitoring tools, and more generally provides rich and
significant, yet so far untapped potential in the fight against COVID-19 spread.

Copyright © 2021 Schuller, Schuller, Qian, Liu, Zheng and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fdgth.2021.564906 
PMCID: PMC8521916
PMID: 34713079 

Conflict of interest statement: BS and DS were employed by the company audEERING 
GmbH. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.

