
1. Front Oncol. 2021 Oct 12;11:754541. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.754541. eCollection
2021.

NK Cells in the Tumor Microenvironment as New Potential Players Mediating
Chemotherapy Effects in Metastatic Melanoma.

Garofalo C(1), De Marco C(1), Cristiani CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, "Magna Græcia" University of
Catanzaro, Catanzaro, Italy.

Until the last decade, chemotherapy was the standard treatment for metastatic
cutaneous melanoma, even with poor results. The introduction of immune
checkpoints inhibitors (ICIs) radically changed the outcome, increasing 5-year
survival from 5% to 60%. However, there is still a large portion of unresponsive 
patients that would need further therapies. NK cells are skin-resident innate
cytotoxic lymphocytes that recognize and kill virus-infected as well as cancer
cells thanks to a balance between inhibitory and activating signals delivered by 
surface molecules expressed by the target. Since NK cells are equipped with
cytotoxic machinery but lack of antigen restriction and needing to be primed,
they are nowadays gaining attention as an alternative to T cells to be exploited 
in immunotherapy. However, their usage suffers of the same limitations reported
for T cells, that is the loss of immunogenicity by target cells and the
difficulty to penetrate and be activated in the suppressive tumor
microenvironment (TME). Several evidence showed that chemotherapy used in
metastatic melanoma therapy possess immunomodulatory properties that may restore 
NK cells functions within TME. Here, we will discuss the capability of such
chemotherapeutics to: i) up-regulate melanoma cells susceptibility to NK
cell-mediated killing, ii) promote NK cells infiltration within TME, iii) target 
other immune cell subsets that affect NK cells activities. Alongside traditional 
systemic melanoma chemotherapy, a new pharmacological strategy based on
nanocarriers loaded with chemotherapeutics is developing. The use of
nanotechnologies represents a very promising approach to improve drug
tolerability and effectiveness thanks to the targeted delivery of the therapeutic
molecules. Here, we will also discuss the recent developments in using
nanocarriers to deliver anti-cancer drugs within the melanoma microenvironment in
order to improve chemotherapeutics effects. Overall, we highlight the possibility
to use standard chemotherapeutics, possibly delivered by nanosystems, to enhance 
NK cells anti-tumor cytotoxicity. Combined with immunotherapies targeting NK
cells, this may represent a valuable alternative approach to treat those patients
that do not respond to current ICIs.

Copyright © 2021 Garofalo, De Marco and Cristiani.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.754541 
PMCID: PMC8547654
PMID: 34712615 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

