
1. Liver Int. 2021 Oct 31. doi: 10.1111/liv.15093. [Epub ahead of print]

Brain metabolic and microstructural alterations associated with hepatitis C virus
infection, autoimmune hepatitis and primary biliary cholangitis.

Reichardt JL(1), Dirks M(2), Wirries AK(2), Pflugrad H(2), Nösel P(1), Haag K(2),
Lanfermann H(1), Wedemeyer H(3), Potthoff A(3), Weissenborn K(2), Ding XQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Diagnostic and Interventional Neuroradiology, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany.
(2)Department of Neurology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Neuropsychiatric symptoms in hepatitis C (HCV) patients
resemble those of patients with autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) or primary biliary
cholangitis (PBC), whilst the mechanisms behind them are unknown. Here we looked 
for cerebral metabolic and/or microstructural alterations in patients with HCV,
AIH or PBC as possible causes behind these symptoms.
METHODS: Patients with HCV infection (n = 17), AIH (n = 14) or PBC (n = 11) and
age-adjusted healthy controls (n = 18) underwent brain magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) and psychometric assessment of
memory and attention. Brain relative proton density (PD) and T2 relaxation time
(T2) were determined in 17 regions of interest (ROIs), as were the concentrations
of N-acetyl-aspartate, choline, creatine, myo-inositol and glutamine + glutamate 
in frontal- (fWM) and parietal white matter (pWM). One-way analysis of variance
and Kruskal-Wallis tests were used for group comparison. Correlations between
altered neuropsychological findings and MRI/MRS observations were estimated with 
the Spearman ρ test.
RESULTS: HCV, AIH and PBC patients revealed similar alterations in brain PD and
metabolites compared to controls: significantly decreased PD in 7/17 ROIs in the 
HCV group, 16/17 ROIs in the PBC group and 14/17 ROIs in the AIH group,
significantly increased N-acetyl-aspartate in fWM in all patients, significantly 
increased choline in the PBC group in both fWM and pWM, in the AIH group only in 
pWM and with a trend in the HCV group in pWM. Correlation analysis did not reveal
significant associations between MRI/MRS alterations and neuropsychological
dysfunction.
CONCLUSION: The findings suggest similar pathophysiological mechanisms behind
neuropsychiatric symptoms associated with HCV infection, AIH and PBC.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/liv.15093 
PMID: 34719118 

