
1. Risk Anal. 2021 Oct 28. doi: 10.1111/risa.13844. [Epub ahead of print]

A Quantitative Risk Estimation Platform for Indoor Aerosol Transmission of
COVID-19.

Parhizkar H(1)(2), Van Den Wymelenberg KG(1)(2)(3), Haas CN(4), Corsi RL(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Health in the Built Environment, University of Oregon, Eugene,
OR, USA.
(2)Energy Studies in Building Laboratory, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, USA.
(3)Biology and the Built Environment Center, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR,
USA.
(4)College of Engineering, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)College of Engineering, UC Davis, Davis, CA, USA.

Aerosol transmission has played a significant role in the transmission of
COVID-19 disease worldwide. We developed a COVID-19 aerosol transmission risk
estimation model to better understand how key parameters associated with indoor
spaces and infector emissions affect inhaled deposited dose of aerosol particles 
that convey the SARS-CoV-2 virus. The model calculates the concentration of
size-resolved, virus-laden aerosol particles in well-mixed indoor air challenged 
by emissions from an index case(s). The model uses a mechanistic approach,
accounting for particle emission dynamics, particle deposition to indoor
surfaces, ventilation rate, and single-zone filtration. The novelty of this model
relates to the concept of "inhaled & deposited dose" in the respiratory system of
receptors linked to a dose-response curve for human coronavirus HCoV-229E. We
estimated the volume of inhaled & deposited dose of particles in the 0.5-4 μm
range expressed in picoliters (pL) in a well-documented COVID-19 outbreak in
restaurant X in Guangzhou China. We anchored the attack rate with the
dose-response curve of HCoV-229E which provides a preliminary estimate of the
average SARS-CoV-2 dose per person, expressed in plaque forming units (PFUs). For
a reasonable emission scenario, we estimate approximately three PFU per pL
deposited, yielding roughly 10 PFUs deposited in the respiratory system of those 
infected in restaurant X. To explore the model's utility, we tested it with four 
COVID-19 outbreaks. The risk estimates from the model fit reasonably well with
the reported number of confirmed cases given available metadata from the
outbreaks and uncertainties associated with model assumptions.

© 2021 The Authors. Risk Analysis published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of
Society for Risk Analysis.

DOI: 10.1111/risa.13844 
PMID: 34713463 

