
1. BMC Genomics. 2021 Oct 30;22(1):777. doi: 10.1186/s12864-021-08061-8.

Distinct patterns of whole blood transcriptional responses are induced in mice
following immunisation with adenoviral and poxviral vector vaccines encoding the 
same antigen.

Sheerin D(1)(2), Dold C(3), O'Connor D(3), Pollard AJ(3), Rollier CS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Vaccine Group, Department of Paediatrics, University of Oxford, and the
NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, Centre for Clinical Vaccinology and
Tropical Medicine, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, UK. sheerin.d@wehi.edu.au.
(2)Infectious Diseases and Immune Defence Division, The Walter & Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research (WEHI), Melbourne, Victoria, 3052, Australia.
sheerin.d@wehi.edu.au.
(3)Oxford Vaccine Group, Department of Paediatrics, University of Oxford, and the
NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, Centre for Clinical Vaccinology and
Tropical Medicine, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, UK.

BACKGROUND: Viral vectors, including adenovirus (Ad) and modified vaccinia Ankara
(MVA), have gained increasing attention as vaccine platforms in recent years due 
to their capacity to express antigens from a wide array of pathogens, their rapid
induction of humoral and cellular protective immune responses, and their
relatively low production costs. In particular, the chimpanzee Ad vector,
ChAdOx1, has taken centre stage as a leading COVID-19 vaccine candidate. However,
despite mounting data, both clinical and pre-clinical, demonstrating effective
induction of adaptive immune responses, the innate immune signals that precede
the protective responses that make these vectors attractive vaccine platforms
remain poorly understood.
RESULTS: In this study, a mouse immunisation model was used to evaluate whole
blood gene expression changes 24 h after either a single dose or heterologous
prime-boost regimen of an Ad and/or MVA vaccine. We demonstrate through
comparative analysis of Ad vectors encoding different antigens that a transgene
product-specific gene signature can be discerned from the vector-induced
transcriptional response. Expression of genes involved in TLR2 stimulation and γδ
T cell and natural killer cell activation were induced after a single dose of Ad,
while MVA led to greater expression of type I interferon genes. The order of
prime-boost combinations was found to influence the magnitude of the gene
expression changes, with MVA/Ad eliciting greater transcriptional perturbation
than Ad/MVA. Contrasting the two regimens revealed significant enrichment of
epigenetic regulation pathways and augmented expression of MHC class I and II
molecules associated with MVA/Ad.
CONCLUSION: These data demonstrate that the order in which vaccines from
heterologous prime-boost regimens are administered leads to distinct
transcriptional responses and may shape the immune response induced by such
combinations. The characterisation of early vaccine-induce responses strengthens 
our understanding of viral vector vaccine mechanisms of action ahead of their
characterisation in human clinical trials and are a valuable resource to inform
the pre-clinical design of appropriate vaccine constructs for emerging infectious
diseases.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-021-08061-8 
PMCID: PMC8556829
PMID: 34717548  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

