
1. BMC Infect Dis. 2021 Oct 30;21(1):1121. doi: 10.1186/s12879-021-06717-0.

Isolation and characterization of high affinity and highly stable
anti-Chikungunya virus antibodies using ALTHEA Gold Libraries™.

Pedraza-Escalona M(1)(2), Guzmán-Bringas O(3)(2), Arrieta-Oliva HI(3)(2),
Gómez-Castellano K(3)(2), Salinas-Trujano J(3)(2), Torres-Flores J(3),
Muñoz-Herrera JC(3)(2), Camacho-Sandoval R(3)(2), Contreras-Pineda P(3)(2),
Chacón-Salinas R(3)(2)(4), Pérez-Tapia SM(3)(2)(4), Almagro JC(5)(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)CONACyT-Unidad de Desarrollo e Investigación en Bioprocesos (UDIBI), Escuela
Nacional de Ciencias Biológicas, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Mexico City,
México.
(2)Laboratorio Nacional para Servicios Especializados de Investigación,
Desarrollo e Innovación (I+D+i) para Farmoquímicos y Biotecnológicos,
LANSEIDI-FarBiotec-CONACyT, Mexico City, México.
(3)Unidad de Desarrollo e Investigación en Bioprocesos (UDIBI), Escuela Nacional 
de Ciencias Biológicas, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Mexico City, México.
(4)Departamento de Inmunología, Escuela Nacional de Ciencias Biológicas,
Instituto Politécnico Nacional (ENCB-IPN), México City, México.
(5)Unidad de Desarrollo e Investigación en Bioprocesos (UDIBI), Escuela Nacional 
de Ciencias Biológicas, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Mexico City, México.
juan.c.almagro@globalbioinc.com.
(6)Laboratorio Nacional para Servicios Especializados de Investigación,
Desarrollo e Innovación (I+D+i) para Farmoquímicos y Biotecnológicos,
LANSEIDI-FarBiotec-CONACyT, Mexico City, México. juan.c.almagro@globalbioinc.com.
(7)GlobalBio, Inc, 320 Concord Ave., 02138, Cambridge, MA, USA.
juan.c.almagro@globalbioinc.com.

BACKGROUND: More than 3 million infections were attributed to Chikungunya virus
(CHIKV) in the 2014-2016 outbreak in Mexico, Central and South America, with over
500 deaths directly or indirectly related to this viral disease. CHIKV outbreaks 
are recurrent and no vaccine nor approved therapeutics exist to prevent or treat 
CHIKV infection. Reliable and robust diagnostic methods are thus critical to
control future CHIKV outbreaks. Direct CHIKV detection in serum samples via
highly specific and high affinity anti-CHIKV antibodies has shown to be an early 
and effective clinical diagnosis.
METHODS: To isolate highly specific and high affinity anti-CHIKV, Chikungunya
virions were isolated from serum of a patient in Veracruz, México. After
purification and characterization via electron microscopy, SDS-PAGE and binding
to well-characterized anti-CHIKV antibodies, UV-inactivated particles were
utilized as selector in a solid-phase panning in combination with ALTHEA Gold
Libraries™, as source of antibodies. The screening was based on ELISA and
Next-Generation Sequencing.
RESULTS: The CHIKV isolate showed the typical morphology of the virus. Protein
bands in the SDS-PAGE were consistent with the size of CHIKV capsid proteins.
UV-inactivated CHIKV particles bound tightly the control antibodies. The lead
antibodies here obtained, on the other hand, showed high expression yield, > 95% 
monomeric content after a single-step Protein A purification, and importantly,
had a thermal stability above 75 °C. Most of the antibodies recognized linear
epitopes on E2, including the highest affinity antibody called C7. A sandwich
ELISA implemented with C7 and a potent neutralizing antibody isolated elsewhere, 
also specific for E2 but recognizing a discontinuous epitope, showed a dynamic
range of 0.2-40.0 mg/mL of UV-inactivated CHIKV purified preparation. The number 
of CHIKV particles estimated based on the concentration of E2 in the extract
suggested that the assay could detect clinically meaningful amounts of CHIKV in
serum.
CONCLUSIONS: The newly discovered antibodies offer valuable tools for
characterization of CHIKV isolates. Therefore, the strategy here followed using
whole viral particles and ALTHEA Gold Libraries™ could expedite the discovery and
development of antibodies for detection and control of emergent and quickly
spreading viral outbreaks.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-021-06717-0 
PMCID: PMC8556770
PMID: 34717584  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

