
1. Retrovirology. 2021 Oct 28;18(1):33. doi: 10.1186/s12977-021-00576-y.

Residues T48 and A49 in HIV-1 NL4-3 Nef are responsible for the counteraction of 
autophagy initiation, which prevents the ubiquitin-dependent degradation of Gag
through autophagosomes.

Castro-Gonzalez S(1), Chen Y(2), Benjamin J(2), Shi Y(2), Serra-Moreno R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(2)Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester Medical Center,
Rochester, NY, USA.
(3)Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester Medical Center,
Rochester, NY, USA. ruth_serra-moreno@urmc.rochester.edu.

BACKGROUND: Autophagy plays an important role as a cellular defense mechanism
against intracellular pathogens, like viruses. Specifically, autophagy
orchestrates the recruitment of specialized cargo, including viral components
needed for replication, for lysosomal degradation. In addition to this primary
role, the cleavage of viral structures facilitates their association with pattern
recognition receptors and MHC-I/II complexes, which assists in the modulation of 
innate and adaptive immune responses against these pathogens. Importantly,
whereas autophagy restricts the replicative capacity of human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 (HIV-1), this virus has evolved the gene nef to circumvent this
process through the inhibition of early and late stages of the autophagy cascade.
Despite recent advances, many details of the mutual antagonism between HIV-1 and 
autophagy still remain unknown. Here, we uncover the genetic determinants that
drive the autophagy-mediated restriction of HIV-1 as well as the counteraction
imposed by Nef. Additionally, we also examine the implications of autophagy
antagonism in HIV-1 infectivity.
RESULTS: We found that sustained activation of autophagy potently inhibits HIV-1 
replication through the degradation of HIV-1 Gag, and that this effect is more
prominent for nef-deficient viruses. Gag re-localizes to autophagosomes where it 
interacts with the autophagosome markers LC3 and SQSTM1. Importantly,
autophagy-mediated recognition and recruitment of Gag requires the myristoylation
and ubiquitination of this virus protein, two post-translational modifications
that are essential for Gag's central role in virion assembly and budding. We also
identified residues T48 and A49 in HIV-1 NL4-3 Nef as responsible for impairing
the early stages of autophagy. Finally, a survey of pandemic HIV-1
transmitted/founder viruses revealed that these isolates are highly resistant to 
autophagy restriction.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides evidence that autophagy antagonism is important 
for virus replication and suggests that the ability of Nef to counteract
autophagy may have played an important role in mucosal transmission. Hence,
disabling Nef in combination with the pharmacological manipulation of autophagy
represents a promising strategy to prevent HIV spread.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12977-021-00576-y 
PMCID: PMC8555152
PMID: 34711257 

