
1. Nihon Yakurigaku Zasshi. 2021;156(6):324-329. doi: 10.1254/fpj.21025.

[Responses to the COVID-19 pandemic and its impacts on pharmacology education in 
the universities and colleges in Japan: nationwide emergency survey jointly
conducted by the Physiological Society of Japan and the Japanese Pharmacological 
Society].

[Article in Japanese]

Mogi M(1), Furuyashiki T(2), Takuma K(3), Otsuguro KI(4), Tanaka S(5), Minami
M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine, Ehime University.
(2)Division of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe University.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Dentistry, Osaka University.
(4)Laboratory of Pharmacology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Hokkaido
University.
(5)Department of Pharmacology, Division of Pathological Sciences, Kyoto
Pharmaceutical University.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Hokkaido University.

With the spread of new coronavirus infections (COVID-19), universities/colleges
have transformed their educational format from conventional group education to
distance learning. In order to share information on the new educational format
among the members of the society, the Physiological Society of Japan and the
Japanese Pharmacological Society (JPS) jointly conducted the "Emergency Joint
Survey on Responses of Universities to COVID-19 and Its Impact on Physiology and 
Pharmacology Education". The JPS surveyed pharmacology departments/divisions at
schools of pharmacy, medicine, dentistry, and veterinary medicine in 202
universities (response rate 89%) from August to September 2020. 85% of the
universities changed the lecture method, and 70% changed the practical training. 
30%, 30%, and 40% of the lectures were live, on-demand, and mixed (combination of
live and on-demand) lectures, respectively. 25% of the practical training was
live or a combination of live and on-demand lectures, and 45% was on-demand
delivery. There are many problems to do online methods such as stable network
environment, lack of the reality for students and difficulty of the check of
their understanding. On the other hand, there are unexpected benefits in online
methods such as anytime learning, an increase in questions from students and
repeatable learning. More than 60% considered employing the newly introduced
educational styles even after the pandemic. Students' mental health problems and 
disruption of daily rhythms, quality assurance of online education, and copyright
issues were also concerned. Pharmacology education faces a significant turning
point in introducing and improving distance learning with or post the COVID-19
pandemic.

DOI: 10.1254/fpj.21025 
PMID: 34719562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

