
1. Med J (Ft Sam Houst Tex). 2021 Oct-Dec;(PB 8-21-10/11/12):33-39.

Development of Military Teledentistry.

Kirkwood B(1).

Author information: 
(1)US Army Institute of Surgical Research, JBSA, Fort Sam Houston, TX; and serves
as adjunct faculty at Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences,
Bethesda, MD.

INTRODUCTION: Virtual health technologies came to the forefront during the
COVID-19 Pandemic out of necessity to continue patient care and reduce risk of
transmission. The US military began to explore the use of teledentistry in the
mid-90s with the technology available at the time. The dental profession is slow 
at adopting the use of virtual health technologies as a capability to triage,
screen, and monitor. Dentist to dentist consults routinely occur in both a
civilian and military dental practice via email and phone consults. The idea of
teledentistry for the future battlefield requires using existing technology such 
as advanced digital imaging, cloud technology, and video conferencing to shift
towards a real-time virtual encounter. Real-time encounters create opportunities 
to evaluate a patient at a remote location when a dentist is not physically
present. Advance development of virtual health technologies to include
teledentistry expands the potential utilization of tele-triage, tele-screening,
tele-consult, and tele-monitoring. These capabilities will be useful on the
future battlefield during multi-domain operations as part of the Operational
Virtual Health (OVH) capability. The application of OVH enables military forces
to minimize morbidity and mortality on the battlefield to include prevention of
unnecessary medical evacuation.
METHODS: Comprehensive literature search was conducted in PubMed for published
teledentistry research using military-related and battlefield use of
teledentistry keywords.
RESULTS: Two articles were identified that satisfied all inclusion and exclusion 
criteria.
CONCLUSION: A review of relevant literature demonstrated a severe paucity of
primary sources, highlighting an underdeveloped component of the virtual health
capability required to expand access of dental services throughout the military
operating environment.


PMID: 34714920  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

