
1. Plant Methods. 2021 Oct 28;17(1):110. doi: 10.1186/s13007-021-00808-4.

Genome-wide screening of novel RT-qPCR reference genes for study of GLRaV-3
infection in wine grapes and refinement of an RNA isolation protocol for grape
berries.

Song Y(1), Hanner RH(2), Meng B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, 50 Stone
Road, Guelph, ON, N1G2W1, Canada. yashu@uoguelph.ca.
(2)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Guelph, 50 Stone Road,
Guelph, ON, N1G2W1, Canada.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, 50 Stone
Road, Guelph, ON, N1G2W1, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Grapevine, as an essential fruit crop with high economic values, has 
been the focus of molecular studies in diverse areas. Two challenges exist in the
grapevine research field: (i) the lack of a rapid, user-friendly and effective
RNA isolation protocol for mature dark-skinned berries and, (ii) the lack of
validated reference genes that are stable for quantification of gene expression
across desired experimental conditions. Successful isolation of RNA with
sufficient yield and quality is essential for downstream analyses involving
nucleic acids. However, ripe berries of dark-skinned grape cultivars are
notoriously challenging in RNA isolation due to high contents of polyphenolics,
polysaccharides, RNase and water.
RESULTS: We have optimized an RNA isolation protocol through modulating two
factors at the lysis step that could impact results of RNA isolation - 2-ME
concentration and berry mass. By finding the optimal combination among the two
factors, our refined protocol was highly effective in isolating total RNA with
high yield and quality from whole mature berries of an array of dark-skinned wine
grape cultivars. Our protocol takes a much shorter time to complete, is highly
effective, and eliminates the requirement for hazardous organic solvents. We have
also shown that the resulting RNA preps were suitable for multiple downstream
analyses, including the detection of viruses and amplification of grapevine genes
using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), gene expression
analysis via quantitative reverse transcription PCR (RT-qPCR), and RNA
Sequencing (RNA-Seq). By using RNA-Seq data derived from Cabernet Franc, we have 
identified seven novel reference gene candidates (CYSP, NDUFS8, YLS8, EIF5A2,
Gluc, GDT1, and EF-Hand) with stable expression across two tissue types, three
developmental stages and status of infection with grapevine leafroll-associated
virus 3 (GLRaV-3). We evaluated the stability of these candidate genes together
with two conventional reference genes (actin and NAD5) using geNorm, NormFinder
and BestKeeper. We found that the novel reference gene candidates outperformed
both actin and NAD5. The three most stable reference genes were CYSP, NDUFS8 and 
YSL8, whereas actin and NAD5 were among the least stable. We further tested if
there would be a difference in RT-qPCR quantification results when the most
stable (CYSP) and the least stable (actin and NAD5) genes were used for
normalization. We concluded that both actin and NAD5 led to erroneous RT-qPCR
results in determining the statistical significance and fold-change values of
gene expressional change.
CONCLUSIONS: We have formulated a rapid, safe and highly effective protocol for
isolating RNA from recalcitrant berry tissue of wine grapes. The resulting RNA is
of high quality and suitable for RT-qPCR and RNA-Seq. We have identified and
validated a set of novel reference genes based on RNA-Seq dataset. We have shown 
that these new reference genes are superior over actin and NAD5, two of the
conventional reference genes commonly used in early studies.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13007-021-00808-4 
PMCID: PMC8554853
PMID: 34711253 

