
1. Front Digit Health. 2021 Jun 17;3:660823. doi: 10.3389/fdgth.2021.660823.
eCollection 2021.

Digital Contact Tracing Against COVID-19 in Europe: Current Features and Ongoing 
Developments.

Blasimme A(1), Ferretti A(1), Vayena E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Health Ethics and Policy Lab, Department of Health Sciences and Technology,
ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.

The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic is a public health challenge of unprecedented scale. In
the midst of the first wave of the pandemic, governments worldwide introduced
digital contact tracing systems as part of a strategy to contain the spread of
the virus. In Europe, after intense discussion about privacy-related risks
involving policymakers, technology experts, information technology companies,
and-albeit to a limited extent-the public at large, technical protocols were
created to support the development of privacy-compatible proximity tracing apps. 
However, as the second wave of SARS-CoV-2 sweeps the continent, digital contact
tracing in Europe is evolving in terms of both technological and governance
features. To enable policymakers to harness the full potential of digital health 
tools against SARS-CoV-2, this paper examines the evolution of digital contact
tracing in eight European countries. Our study highlights that while privacy and 
data protection are at the core of contact tracing apps in Europe, countries
differ in their technical protocols, and in their capacity to utilize collected
data beyond proximity tracing alone. In particular, the most recently released
apps tend to offer users more granular information about risk in specific
locations, and to collect data about user whereabouts, in order to enhance
retrospective contact tracing capacity. These developments signal a shift from a 
strict interpretation of data minimization and purpose limitation toward a more
expansive approach to digital contact tracing in Europe, calling for careful
scrutiny and appropriate oversight.

Copyright © 2021 Blasimme, Ferretti and Vayena.

DOI: 10.3389/fdgth.2021.660823 
PMCID: PMC8521942
PMID: 34713135 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

