
1. Ann Glob Health. 2021 Oct 12;87(1):102. doi: 10.5334/aogh.3431. eCollection 2021.

Nipah Virus Disease: Recent Perspective and One Health Approach.

Singhai M(1), Jain R(2), Jain S(3), Bala M(4), Singh S(4), Goyal R(5).

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Disease Control, IN.
(2)Regional Office Health & Family Welfare Thiruvananthapuram, IN.
(3)National Tuberculosis Institute, Bangalore, IN.
(4)National centre for Disease Control Delhi, IN.
(5)Lady Hardinge Medical College Delhi, IN.

Background: Nipah virus (NiV) first emerged in 1998 in Malaysia, causing an
outbreak of respiratory illness and encephalitis in pigs. Pig-to-human
transmission of NiV associated with severe febrile encephalitis was described,
and it was thought to occur through close contact with infected animals. The
first outbreak was reported in India in Siliguri, West Bengal in 2001 followed by
Nadia, West Bengal and adjoining areas of Bangladesh in 2007, where an
intermediate animal host was not identified, suggesting bat-to-human and
human-to-human transmissions. Although it is extremely difficult to document the 
spillover event and ascertain crossing of trans-natural boundaries by bats and
bringing new viruses in an unexposed population, efforts for source
identification are important to understand the epidemiology of disease. As the
disease transcends beyond one species and has shown to infect humans, it
therefore requires the 'One Health approach' in which multiple sectors coordinate
and work together to achieve better public health outcomes.
Objective: We summarize the re-emergence and response of the Nipah virus
outbreaks (NiVD) in Kerala, India, about 1800 kms away, a decade later in 2018
and 2019. The paper recapitulates involvement of various stakeholders from the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Directorate of Health Research, Indian
Council of Agricultural Research, State Health Department, State Animal
Husbandry, District Administration, and multidisciplinary response mechanism
during the NiVD outbreaks of 2018 and 2019.
Methods: Information was collected from the Press Information Bureau (PIB),
media/weekly alerts from the Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP),
news articles from print and electronic media, newsletters, advisories from the
National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC), Disease Outbreak News (DON), World
Health Organization (WHO), and published papers from various stakeholders.
Findings & Conclusion: The evidence of NiV in humans and bats, with samples
collected from the outbreak sites, was laboratory confirmed. The
multidisciplinary response mechanisms during the 2018 outbreak helped in further 
understanding the importance of the One Health approach for systemic and
streamlined response utilizing existing surveillance systems. This was of utmost 
help in the subsequent outbreak of the disease that occurred during 2019, wherein
there was no documented spread of disease from the index case and no mortality
was observed. This success reiterates the need for institutionalizing the
involvement and cooperation of various departments and organizations during
public health emergencies, especially of Zoonotic diseases, using the One Health 
approach.

Copyright: © 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.5334/aogh.3431 
PMCID: PMC8516003
PMID: 34712599  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no competing interests to
declare.

