
1. Rev Epidemiol Sante Publique. 2021 Nov;69(6):321-328. doi:
10.1016/j.respe.2021.09.007. Epub 2021 Oct 30.

[Interest of a geostatistical approach to analyze the geographical disparities in
human papillomavirus vaccine coverage in France].

[Article in French]

Ribassin-Majed L(1), Pereira M(2), Magneron C(2), Levy-Bachelot L(3), Fagherazzi 
G(4), Baldauf JJ(5), Raude J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, MSD France, Courbevoie, France.
Electronic address: laureenmajed@free.fr.
(2)ShoWhere, 132 bis rue Tahère, 92210 Saint-Cloud, France.
(3)Health Economics and Outcomes Research, MSD France, Courbevoie, France.
(4)Luxembourg Institute of Health (LIH), Department of Population Health,
Strassen, Luxembourg.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University hospital of Strasbourg,
France; EA 3181, LabEx LipSTIC ANR-11-LABX-0021, CIC-1431, University of
Franche-Comté, Besançon, France; Association EVE, Illkirch Graffenstaden, France.
(6)Unité des virus émergents (UVE), Université Aix-Marseille - IRD 190 - Inserm
1207 - IHU Méditerranée Infection), Marseille, France.

BACKGROUND: The use of geostatistical methods remains rare in health studies. In 
order to assess the usefulness of the geostatistical approach in epidemiology, we
chose to apply these methods to the vaccination coverage rate (VCR) against human
papillomavirus (HPV) in France. Indeed, HPV vaccine coverage remains low in
France and geographical disparities are sizable. The objective of this study was 
to identify the socioecological factors that may explain these geographical
variations.
METHODS: Sociological, economic and behavioral data for 2016 have been gathered
(demographics and public health database, web and social networks) and were
correlated with the HPV VCR vaccine coverage over the French territory.
Homogeneous geographical areas defined by strong correlations for groups of
variables were selected. In each homogeneous area, principal component analysis
was performed and a geostatistical approach provided an estimate predicting
vaccine coverage at a given scale.
RESULTS: HPV VCR spatial variations in France cannot be fully explained by a
single model. In urban areas, a low rate of HPV VCR is preferentially associated 
with unfavorable socioeconomic factors (poverty, unemployment, immigration). In
rural areas, HPV VCR is preferentially associated with sociocultural factors
(socio-professional categories, education level, interest in alternative
medicines the anti-vaccine movement). Two secondary geographical areas were
defined: the Île-de-France region and 12 departments in northeastern France. In
the Île-de-France region, the association with the economic factors one again
appears as in urban areas in general. The northeasteran departments represent a
particular case insofar as HPV VCR is relatively high, notwithstanding economic
poverty indicators.
CONCLUSION: Geostatistical modeling successfully identifies new potential
explanations for HPV VCR geographical disparities in France. These results could 
help to adapt or develop future vaccination programs in specific areas by taking 
into account the sociological, economic and behavioral characteristics of their
populations.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.respe.2021.09.007 
PMID: 34728109 

Conflict of interest statement: Déclaration de conflits d'intérêts JR, GF, JJB
ont été membres de comités d'experts sur la vaccination pour MSD ; LM, LLB sont
collaborateurs MSD ; CM, MP ont reçu des financements de MSD.

