
1. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2021 Dec;10(1):2151-2168. doi:
10.1080/22221751.2021.2000891.

Single-cell analysis of arthritogenic alphavirus-infected human synovial
fibroblasts links low abundance of viral RNA to induction of innate immunity and 
arthralgia-associated gene expression.

Pott F(1)(2), Postmus D(1)(2), Brown RJP(3), Wyler E(4), Neumann E(5), Landthaler
M(4)(6), Goffinet C(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member 
of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Berlin Institute of Health at Charité, Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.
(3)Division of Veterinary Medicine, Paul Ehrlich Institute, Langen, Germany.
(4)Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC),
Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology (BIMSB), Berlin, Germany.
(5)Internal Medicine and Rheumatology, Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Bad
Nauheim, Germany.
(6)IRI Life Sciences, Institut für Biologie, Humboldt Universität zu Berlin,
Berlin, Germany.

Infection by (re-)emerging RNA arboviruses including Chikungunya virus (CHIKV)
and Mayaro virus primarily cause acute febrile disease and transient
polyarthralgia. However, in a significant subset of infected individuals,
debilitating arthralgia persists for weeks over months up to years. The
underlying immunopathogenesis of chronification of arthralgia upon primary
RNA-viral infection remains unclear. Here, we analysed cell-intrinsic responses
to ex vivo arthritogenic alphaviral infection of primary human synovial
fibroblasts isolated from knee joints, one the most affected joint types during
acute and chronic CHIKV disease. Synovial fibroblasts were susceptible and
permissive to alphaviral infection. Base-line and exogenously added type I
interferon (IFN) partially and potently restricted infection, respectively.
RNA-seq revealed a CHIKV infection-induced transcriptional profile that comprised
upregulation of expression of several hundred IFN-stimulated and
arthralgia-mediating genes. Single-cell virus-inclusive RNA-seq uncovered a
fine-tuned switch from induction to repression of cell-intrinsic immune responses
depending on the abundance of viral RNA in an individual cell. Specifically,
responses were most pronounced in cells displaying low-to-intermediate amounts of
viral RNA and absence of virus-encoded, fluorescent reporter protein expression, 
arguing for efficient counteraction of innate immunity in cells expressing viral 
antagonists at sufficient quantities. In summary, cell-intrinsic sensing of viral
RNA that potentially persists or replicates at low levels in synovial fibroblasts
and other target cell types in vivo may contribute to the chronic arthralgia
induced by alphaviral infections. Our findings might advance our understanding of
the immunopathophysiology of long-term pathogenesis of RNA-viral infections.

DOI: 10.1080/22221751.2021.2000891 
PMCID: PMC8604527
PMID: 34723780 

