
1. J Emerg Manag. 2021 Special Issue on COVID-19;18(7):91-98. doi: 10.5055/jem.0532.

Assessing fear of COVID-19 at an academic medical center.

Brand MW(1), Wiskur B(2), Rojas JI(3).

Author information: 
(1)Social Work and Administration, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral
Sciences, College of Medicine, University of Okla-homa Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
(2)Department of Academic Affairs and Faculty Development, College of Medicine,
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma;
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, College of Medicine, University
of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, College of Medicine,
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Okla-homa City, Oklahoma.

PURPOSE: This study measured the degree of COVID-19-related fear among academic
medical center employees, identified subsections with high COVID-19 fear, and
validated the Fear of COVID-19 Scale with medical professionals in the United
States.
METHODS: This study is a cross-sectional, internet-based survey delivered by
Qualtrics. The survey was conducted at the Oklahoma University Health Sciences
Center between May 21 and June 18, 2020. The medical center is composed of seven 
healthcare colleges, child and adult hospitals, a Veterans Hospital, and
outpatient services clinics across the Oklahoma city area. Faculty, staff, and
students (N = 1,761) from the Oklahoma University Health Sciences Center
completed the survey.
RESULTS: COVID-19 fear is highest among nonclinical employees, smokers, and those
with pre-existing conditions. Males and females, both clinicians and
nonclinicians, appear to express their COVID-19 fears differently. Employees
worried most about their families contracting the virus. The Fear of COVID-19
Scale is a valid and reliable assessment instrument among US healthcare workers. 
Responses were compared based on pre-existing medical condition(s), patient care 
or nonpatient care, sex, and occupational specialization. Analyses reveal a
strong Cronbach's α measure of internal consistency (α = 0.87). Significant
differences were observed among employees with a nonclinical emphasis (p = 0.02),
with a predisposing medical health condition (p < 0.001), and with a nonacademic 
occupational specialization (p < 0.01), and by sex (p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION: COVID-19 fear significantly impacts academic medical 
center employees. Medical centers should address both healthcare and
nonhealthcare workers' COVID-19-related fears. It is important to recognize that 
men and women may have different types of fears and express them differently,
necessitating a gender-specific approach to managing COVID-19 fears. Employees
with pre-existing conditions or who have vulnerable family members require
additional support to remain fully functional and on the job.

DOI: 10.5055/jem.0532 
PMID: 34723350  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

