
1. mSystems. 2021 Nov 2:e0113621. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.01136-21. [Epub ahead of
print]

Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 RNA Persistence across Indoor Surface Materials Reveals
Best Practices for Environmental Monitoring Programs.

Salido RA(#)(1), Cantú VJ(#)(1), Clark AE(2), Leibel SL(3)(4), Foroughishafiei
A(1), Saha A(1), Hakim A(5), Nouri A(5), Lastrella AL(5), Castro-Martínez A(5),
Plascencia A(5), Kapadia BK(5), Xia B(5), Ruiz CA(5), Marotz CA(3)(5), Maunder
D(5), Lawrence ES(5), Smoot EW(5), Eisner E(5), Crescini ES(5), Kohn L(6), Franco
Vargas L(5), Chacón M(5), Betty M(3)(5)(7), Machnicki M(5), Wu MY(5), Baer NA(5),
Belda-Ferre P(3)(5), De Hoff P(4)(5)(8), Seaver P(5), Ostrander RT(5), Tsai
R(3)(5), Sathe S(4)(5)(9), Aigner S(4)(5)(9), Morgan SC(4)(8), Ngo TT(5), Barber 
T(5), Cheung W(4)(5)(10), Carlin AF(2), Yeo GW(4)(9), Laurent LC(4)(8),
Fielding-Miller R(6), Knight R(1)(3)(11)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
California, USA.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases and Global Public Health, Department of
Medicine, University of California San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla,
California, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
California, USA.
(4)Sanford Consortium of Regenerative Medicine, University of California San
Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.
(5)Expedited COVID Identification Environment (EXCITE) Laboratory, Department of 
Pediatrics, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.
(6)Herbert Wertheim School of Public Health, University of California, La Jolla, 
California, USA.
(7)Rady Children's Hospital, San Diego, California, USA.
(8)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, University of
California San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.
(9)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California San
Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.
(10)San Diego State University, San Diego, California, USA.
(11)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California San 
Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.
(12)Center for Microbiome Innovation, Jacobs School of Engineering, University of
California San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Environmental monitoring in public spaces can be used to identify surfaces
contaminated by persons with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and inform
appropriate infection mitigation responses. Research groups have reported
detection of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) on
surfaces days or weeks after the virus has been deposited, making it difficult to
estimate when an infected individual may have shed virus onto a
SARS-CoV-2-positive surface, which in turn complicates the process of
establishing effective quarantine measures. In this study, we determined that
reverse transcription-quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) detection of viral RNA from
heat-inactivated particles experiences minimal decay over 7 days of monitoring on
eight out of nine surfaces tested. The properties of the studied surfaces result 
in RT-qPCR signatures that can be segregated into two material categories, rough 
and smooth, where smooth surfaces have a lower limit of detection. RT-qPCR signal
intensity (average quantification cycle [Cq]) can be correlated with surface
viral load using only one linear regression model per material category. The same
experiment was performed with untreated viral particles on one surface from each 
category, with essentially identical results. The stability of RT-qPCR viral
signal demonstrates the need to clean monitored surfaces after sampling to
establish temporal resolution. Additionally, these findings can be used to
minimize the number of materials and time points tested and allow for the use of 
heat-inactivated viral particles when optimizing environmental monitoring
methods. IMPORTANCE Environmental monitoring is an important tool for public
health surveillance, particularly in settings with low rates of diagnostic
testing. Time between sampling public environments, such as hospitals or schools,
and notifying stakeholders of the results should be minimal, allowing decisions
to be made toward containing outbreaks of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
The Safer At School Early Alert program (SASEA) (https://saseasystem.org/), a
large-scale environmental monitoring effort in elementary school and child care
settings, has processed >13,000 surface samples for SARS-CoV-2, detecting viral
signals from 574 samples. However, consecutive detection events necessitated the 
present study to establish appropriate response practices around persistent viral
signals on classroom surfaces. Other research groups and clinical labs developing
environmental monitoring methods may need to establish their own correlation
between RT-qPCR results and viral load, but this work provides evidence
justifying simplified experimental designs, like reduced testing materials and
the use of heat-inactivated viral particles.

DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.01136-21 
PMCID: PMC8562474
PMID: 34726486 

