
1. Case Rep Neurol. 2021 Aug 19;13(2):549-554. doi: 10.1159/000518196. eCollection
2021 May-Aug.

Leucine-Rich Glioma-Inactivated Protein 1 Antibody-Positive Polyradiculopathy
Associated with Epstein-Barr Virus Infection.

Uzunalimoğlu BP(1), Sağlam A(1), Şişman B(1), Günaydın S(1), Uzuner EG(2), Aysal 
F(3), Tüzün E(4), Baştan B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Haseki Research and Training Hospital, Health
Sciences University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Pathology, Haseki Research and Training Hospital, Health
Sciences University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Department of Neurology, Bakirkoy Research and Training Hospital for
Psychiatric and Neurological Diseases, Istanbul, Turkey.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Aziz Sancar Institute for Experimental Medical
Research, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) has been associated with a plethora of neurological
manifestations including polyneuropathy and polyradiculopathy. A 27-year-old man 
with a recent upper respiratory system infection presented with difficulty in
walking. His neurological examination revealed reduced muscle strength in both
proximal and distal lower limb muscles without sensory and autonomic signs.
Needle electromyography showed abnormal spontaneous activity and reduced
recruitment of motor units in muscles innervated by multiple lumbo-sacral roots. 
Cerebrospinal examination showed increased protein levels with normal cell
counts. While spinal MRI was normal, whole-body CT and PET examination showed
disseminated lymph node enlargement. Anti-EBV viral capsid antigen and
anti-nuclear antigen IgG but not IgM was positive, whereas EBV PCR was negative
in blood. Analysis of inguinal lymph node biopsy showed reactive lymphoid
hyperplasia and EBV DNA. Leucine-rich glioma-inactivated protein 1 (LGI1)
antibody was found in serum but not in CSF. All clinical, imaging, and
electrophysiological findings improved following steroid and intravenous
immunoglobulin treatment. These findings suggested the acute involvement of
lumbo-sacral spinal roots and/or motor neurons. Purely motor polyradiculopathy
has been reported in both EBV-positive and LGI1 antibody-positive patients, and
EBV infection is known to precede different autoimmune manifestations. Whether
EBV infection may trigger LGI1 autoimmunity and cause involvement of spinal motor
roots and/or motor neurons needs to be further studied.

Copyright © 2021 by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000518196 
PMCID: PMC8460942
PMID: 34720961 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
declare.

