
1. Clin Transl Immunology. 2021 Oct 24;10(10):e1350. doi: 10.1002/cti2.1350.
eCollection 2021.

Endothelial cells are not productively infected by SARS-CoV-2.

Schimmel L(1), Chew KY(2), Stocks CJ(1)(3), Yordanov TE(1), Essebier P(1),
Kulasinghe A(4), Monkman J(5), Dos Santos Miggiolaro AFR(6), Cooper C(7)(8), de
Noronha L(9), Schroder K(1)(3), Lagendijk AK(1), Labzin LI(1)(3), Short KR(2),
Gordon EJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, Division of Cell and Developmental Biology
The University of Queensland Brisbane QLD Australia.
(2)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences The University of Queensland
Brisbane QLD Australia.
(3)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, IMB Centre for Inflammation and Disease
Research The University of Queensland Brisbane QLD Australia.
(4)The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute The University of Queensland
Brisbane QLD Australia.
(5)School of Biomedical Science, Faculty of Health Queensland University of
Technology Brisbane QLD Australia.
(6)Postgraduate Program of Health Sciences School of Medicine Hospital Marcelino 
Champagnat - Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Paraná (PUCPR) Curitiba Brazil.
(7)Pathology Queensland Princess Alexandra Hospital Brisbane QLD Australia.
(8)Faculty of Medicine The University of Queensland Brisbane QLD Australia.
(9)School of Medicine & Center of Education, Research and Innovation Hospital
Marcelino Champagnat - Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Paraná (PUCPR)
Curitiba Brazil.

Objectives: Thrombotic and microvascular complications are frequently seen in
deceased COVID-19 patients. However, whether this is caused by direct viral
infection of the endothelium or inflammation-induced endothelial activation
remains highly contentious.
Methods: Here, we use patient autopsy samples, primary human endothelial cells
and an in vitro model of the pulmonary epithelial-endothelial cell barrier.
Results: We show that primary human endothelial cells express very low levels of 
the SARS-CoV-2 receptor ACE2 and the protease TMPRSS2, which blocks their
capacity for productive viral infection, and limits their capacity to produce
infectious virus. Accordingly, endothelial cells can only be infected when they
overexpress ACE2, or are exposed to very high concentrations of SARS-CoV-2. We
also show that SARS-CoV-2 does not infect endothelial cells in 3D vessels under
flow conditions. We further demonstrate that in a co-culture model endothelial
cells are not infected with SARS-CoV-2. Endothelial cells do however sense and
respond to infection in the adjacent epithelial cells, increasing ICAM-1
expression and releasing pro-inflammatory cytokines.
Conclusions: Taken together, these data suggest that in vivo, endothelial cells
are unlikely to be infected with SARS-CoV-2 and that infection may only occur if 
the adjacent pulmonary epithelium is denuded (basolateral infection) or a high
viral load is present in the blood (apical infection). In such a scenario, whilst
SARS-CoV-2 infection of the endothelium can occur, it does not contribute to
viral amplification. However, endothelial cells may still play a key role in
SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis by sensing adjacent infection and mounting a
pro-inflammatory response to SARS-CoV-2.

© 2021 The Authors. Clinical & Translational Immunology published by John Wiley &
Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Australian and New Zealand Society for
Immunology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/cti2.1350 
PMCID: PMC8542944
PMID: 34721846 

Conflict of interest statement: KS is a co‐inventor on patent applications for
NLRP3 inhibitors, which have been licensed to Inflazome Ltd, a company
headquartered in Dublin, Ireland. Inflazome is developing drugs that target the
NLRP3 inflammasome to address unmet clinical needs in inflammatory disease. KS
served on the Scientific Advisory Board of Inflazome in 2016–2017, and serves as 
a consultant to Quench Bio, USA, and Novartis, Switzerland.

