
1. J Emerg Manag. 2021 Special Issue on COVID-19;19(7):177-192. doi:
10.5055/jem.0621.

Difference in stress-related indicators between employees experiencing partial
and complete lockdowns during the COVID-19 pandemic in Pakistan.

Ali A(1), Abbas S(2), Khan AA(3), Khan AS(4), Abbas HSM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Psychologist, Department of Developmental & Behavioral Pediatrics,
The Children's Hospital & The Institute of Child Health (CH&ICH), Lahore,
Pakistan. ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3842-8702.
(2)Clinical Psychologist, Center for Clinical Psychology, University of the
Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan.
(3)North Medicine Unit, King Edward Medical University, Lahore, Pakistan.
(4)Medical Registrar, Acute Medical Unit, North Manchester General Hospital,
Manchester, England.
(5)College of Public Administration, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China.

OBJECTIVES: The present study aimed to compare the stress experience of employees
facing to differentiated types of lockdown situations: total vs. partial. It also
aimed to identify the cognitive appraisal, coping, stress, and fear of
contracting COVID-19 associated with lock down situations among employees.
METHOD: A cross-sectional research design was employed. The sample comprises two 
groups (n = 490 in each group), complete lockdown (people working from home) and 
partial lockdown (people going to workplace), and was drawn from Pakistan using
purposive sampling technique. Stress Appraisal Measure, Brief COPE Inventory,
Perceived Stress Scale, and Fear of Contracting COVID-19 Questionnaire were used 
to measure cognitive appraisal, coping, stress, and fear, respectively.
RESULTS: Independent sample t-test showed that the threat and uncontrollable
appraisal was high in people going to workplace as compared to people working
from home. Results of binary logistic regression showed that people going to
workplace were more likely to cope with COVID-19 situation through seeking
instrumental support, behavior disengagement, acceptance, and religion as
compared to people working from home. Moreover, people working from home were
0.84 times more likely to cope through emotional support than people going to
workplace. Fear was found to be 1.1 times more likely associated with people
going to workplace than people working from home.
CONCLUSION: This study would help administrative authorities and government
institutions in designing mental health services for working population. It would
help the emergency departments in devising first aid management plan to deal with
the psychological needs of the workers under pandemic/lockdown situations.

DOI: 10.5055/jem.0621 
PMID: 34723378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

