
1. J Soc Econ Dev. 2020 Dec 7:1-10. doi: 10.1007/s40847-020-00127-9. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Prisons and the pandemic: the panopticon plays out.

Raghavan V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Criminology and Justice, School of Social Work, Tata Institute of
Social Sciences, V.N. Purav Marg, Deonar, Mumbai, 400088 India.

Fearing the spread of the COVID 19 infection in prisons, governments have
released seemingly large numbers of prisoners in many countries. However, in
terms of overall percentages, the releases have been less significant. In India, 
prisons are overcrowded with nearly 70% under trials. With very poor sanitation
and healthcare facilities, there are numerous deaths in custody due to various
illnesses, including heart, lung, liver and kidney-related ailments as well as
HIV, tuberculosis and cancer. It is in this context that the need to take urgent 
steps to contain the spread of the contagion inside prisons became apparent to
the prison authorities around the time the national lockdown was announced by the
Government of India. Some of the measures taken by prison departments include
creation of temporary prisons to admit new prisoners and keep them in quarantine 
for 14 days before transferring them to the regular prisons, transfer of
prisoners from congested prisons to less crowded prisons, making prisoners aware 
of the virus, setting up Corona care centres inside or outside prisons, etc.
While prison authorities claim that they were taking necessary preventive steps
within existing limitations, there has been some criticism of the inadequacy of
these measures and the conditions inside prisons. The Supreme Court of India took
suo moto cognizance of the issue and asked state governments to constitute a High
Powered Committees to identify categories of prisoners who could be released. The
article highlights that the criteria for release was based on the purported
seriousness of the offence rather than vulnerability to getting infected. Also,
the absence of gender disaggregated data on release of prisoners indicates the
lack of importance given to the needs of women prisoners. It can be said that the
policies and measures taken towards preventing the spread of COVID 19 pandemic in
prisons has reinforced existing biases against prisoners. The major concern of
the prison and judicial authorities was to somehow manage the situation without
disturbing the 'dangerousness' and risk to 'law and order' narrative about
prisoners. The article concludes by drawing attention to the fact that the
Foucauldian principles of segregation, segmentation and surveillance were
maintained in the decision making processes relating to treatment of prisoners
during the pandemic.

© Institute for Social and Economic Change 2020.

DOI: 10.1007/s40847-020-00127-9 
PMCID: PMC7721407
PMID: 34720475 

