
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 13;9:722071. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.722071.
eCollection 2021.

Effect of Anxiety About COVID-19 Infection in the Workplace on the Association
Between Job Demands and Psychological Distress.

Eguchi H(1), Hino A(1), Inoue A(2), Tsuji M(3), Tateishi S(4), Ando H(5), Nagata 
T(6), Matsuda S(7), Fujino Y(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mental Health, Institute of Industrial Ecological Sciences,
University of Occupational and Environmental Health, Japan, Kitakyushu, Japan.
(2)Institutional Research Center, University of Occupational and Environmental
Health, Japan, Kitakyushu, Japan.
(3)Department of Environmental Health, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, Japan, Kitakyushu, Japan.
(4)Department of Occupational Medicine, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, Japan, Kitakyushu, Japan.
(5)Department of Work Systems and Health, Institute of Industrial Ecological
Sciences, University of Occupational and Environmental Health, Japan, Kitakyushu,
Japan.
(6)Department of Occupational Health Practice and Management, Institute of
Industrial Ecological Sciences, University of Occupational and Environmental
Health, Japan, Kitakyushu, Japan.
(7)Department of Preventive Medicine and Community Health, School of Medicine,
University of Occupational and Environmental Health, Japan, Kitakyushu, Japan.
(8)Department of Environmental Epidemiology, Institute of Industrial Ecological
Sciences, University of Occupational and Environmental Health, Japan, Kitakyushu,
Japan.

Purpose: There is limited information about the association between workplace
psychosocial factors and general worker mental health status during the COVID-19 
pandemic. In the present study, we examined how anxiety about being infected by
COVID-19 in the workplace affected the association between job demands and
psychological distress (PD). Method: A cross-sectional online survey was
conducted in December 2020. The final analyzed sample was 27,036. The dependent
variable of PD was assessed using the Kessler Psychological Distress Scale (K6). 
Job demands were assessed using the Job Content Questionnaire. Feelings of
anxiety were assessed by participants' responses to the following question: "Do
you feel anxiety about being infected by COVID-19 in the workplace?" We used a
two-level regression adjusting for prefectural level: each individual-level
variable at level 1 was nested into each prefecture at level 2, stratified by
presence of anxiety. Results: A total of 50.5% of participants felt anxious about
being infected by COVID-19 in the workplace. The interaction between anxiety and 
job demands was significant. Job demands were positively associated with PD. In
the stratified analysis, the associations were stronger among employees who
experienced anxiety about COVID-19 infection in the workplace than among those
who did not. Conclusion: The association between job demands and PD may be
strengthened by anxiety about COVID-19 infection in the workplace.

Copyright © 2021 Eguchi, Hino, Inoue, Tsuji, Tateishi, Ando, Nagata, Matsuda and 
Fujino.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.722071 
PMCID: PMC8548681
PMID: 34722436  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that this study received
funding from a scholarship donation from Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd.

