
1. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2021 Nov 2;9(11):e30674. doi: 10.2196/30674.

Analysis of Apps With a Medication List Functionality for Older Adults With Heart
Failure Using the Mobile App Rating Scale and the IMS Institute for Healthcare
Informatics Functionality Score: Evaluation Study.

Diaz-Skeete YM(1), McQuaid D(2), Akinosun AS(3), Ekerete I(4), Carragher N(5)(6),
Carragher L(1).

Author information: 
(1)NetwellCASALA Advanced Research Centre, Dundalk Institute of Technology,
Dundalk, Ireland.
(2)CCT College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(3)University of Highlands and Islands, Inverness, United Kingdom.
(4)Ulster University, Belfast, United Kingdom.
(5)National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre, University of New South Wales,
Sydney, Australia.
(6)Alcohol, Drugs and Addictive Behaviours, Department of Mental Health and
Substance Use, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Managing the care of older adults with heart failure (HF) largely
centers on medication management. Because of frequent medication or dosing
changes, an app that supports these older adults in keeping an up-to-date list of
medications could be advantageous. During the COVID-19 pandemic, HF outpatient
consultations are taking place virtually or by telephone. An app with the
capability to share a patient's medication list with health care professionals
before consultation could support clinical efficiency, for example, by reducing
consultation time. However, the influence of apps on maintaining an up-to-date
medication history for older adults with HF in Ireland remains largely
unexplored.
OBJECTIVE: The aims of this review are twofold: to review apps with a medication 
list functionality and to assess the quality of the apps included in the review
using the Mobile App Rating Scale (MARS) and the IMS Institute for Healthcare
Informatics functionality scale.
METHODS: A systematic search of apps was conducted in June 2019 using the Google 
Play Store and iTunes App Store. The MARS was used independently by 4 researchers
to assess the quality of the apps using an Android phone and an iPad. Apps were
also evaluated using the IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics functionality
score.
RESULTS: Google Play and iTunes App store searches identified 483 potential apps 
(292 from Google Play and 191 from iTunes App stores). A total of 6 apps (3
across both stores) met the inclusion criteria. Of the 6 apps, 4 achieved an
acceptable MARS score (3/5). The Medisafe app had the highest overall MARS score 
(4/5), and the Medication List & Medical Records app had the lowest overall score
(2.5/5). On average, the apps had 8 functions based on the IMS functionality
criteria (range 5-11). A total of 2 apps achieved the maximum score for number of
features (11 features) according to the IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics 
functionality score, and 2 scored the lowest (5 features). Peer-reviewed
publications were identified for 3 of the apps.
CONCLUSIONS: The quality of current apps with medication list functionality
varies according to their technical aspects. Most of the apps reviewed have an
acceptable MARS objective quality (ie, the overall quality of an app). However,
subjective quality (ie, satisfaction with the apps) was poor. Only 3 apps are
based on scientific evidence and have been tested previously. A total of 2 apps
featured all the IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics functionalities, and
half did not provide clear instructions on how to enter medication data, did not 
display vital parameter data in an easy-to-understand format, and did not guide
users on how or when to take their medication.

©Yohanca Maria Diaz-Skeete, David McQuaid, Adewale Samuel Akinosun, Idongesit
Ekerete, Natacha Carragher, Lucia Carragher. Originally published in JMIR mHealth
and uHealth (https://mhealth.jmir.org), 02.11.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/30674 
PMCID: PMC8596242
PMID: 34726613  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

