
1. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2021 Oct 27. doi: 10.1097/QAI.0000000000002844.
[Epub ahead of print]

Human Immunodeficiency Virus transmission by HIV risk group and along the HIV
care continuum: A contrast of six US cities.

Zang X(1), Mah C, Linh Quan AM, Min JE, Armstrong WS, Behrends CN, Del Rio C,
Dombrowski JC, Feaster DJ, Kirk GD, Marshall BD, Mehta SH, Metsch LR, Pandya A,
Schackman BR, Shoptaw S, Strathdee SA, Krebs E, Nosyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Brown University,
Providence, Rhode Island, United States; Faculty of Health Sciences, Simon Fraser
University; Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada; Dalla Lana School of Public
Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Center for Health
Evaluation and Outcome Sciences; Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; Division of
Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA; 
Department of Healthcare Policy and Research, Weill Cornell Medical College, New 
York City, New York, United States; Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy
and Infectious Disease, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, United
States; Department of Public Health Sciences, Leonard M. Miller School of
Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, Florida, United States; Department of
Epidemiology, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States; Department of Sociomedical Sciences, Mailman 
School of Public Health, Columbia University, New York City, New York, United
States; Department of Health Policy and Management, Harvard T.H. Chan School of
Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States; School of Medicine,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States;
School of Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California,
United States.

BACKGROUND: Understanding the sources of HIV transmission provides a basis for
prioritizing HIV prevention resources in specific geographic regions and
populations. This study estimated the number, proportion, and rate of HIV
transmissions attributable to individuals along the HIV care continuum, within
different HIV transmission risk groups in six US cities.
METHODS: We used a dynamic, compartmental HIV transmission model that draws on
racial/ethnic- and risk-behavior-specific linkage to HIV care and use of HIV
prevention services from local, state and national surveillance sources. We
estimated the rate and number of HIV transmissions attributable to individuals in
the stage of acute undiagnosed HIV, non-acute undiagnosed HIV, HIV diagnosed but 
antiretroviral therapy (ART) naïve, off ART, and on ART, stratified by HIV
transmission group for the 2019 calendar year.
RESULTS: Individuals with undiagnosed non-acute HIV infection accounted for the
highest proportion of total transmissions in every city, ranging from 36.8%
[26.7%-44.9%] in New York City to 64.9% [47.0%-71.6%] in Baltimore. Individuals
who had discontinued ART contributed to the second highest percentage of total
infections in four of six cities. Individuals with acute HIV had the highest
transmission rate per 100 person years, ranging from 76.4 [58.9-135.9] in Miami
to 160.2 [85.7-302.8] in Baltimore.
CONCLUSION: These findings underline the importance of both early diagnosis and
improved ART retention for ending the HIV epidemic in the US. Differences in the 
sources of transmission across cities indicate that localized priority-setting to
effectively address diverse microepidemics at different stages of epidemic
control is necessary.

Copyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/QAI.0000000000002844 
PMID: 34723929 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest
related to this work.

