
1. Rev Gastroenterol Mex. 2021 Oct 29. doi: 10.1016/j.rgmx.2021.08.002. [Epub ahead 
of print]

[Position statement of the Latin American Dysphagia Society for the management of
oropharyngeal and esophageal dysphagia during the COVID-19 pandemic].

[Article in Spanish]

Manzano Aquiahuatl C(1)(2), Tobar Fredes R(3)(4), Zavala Solares MR(2)(5), Salle 
Levy D(6)(7), Imamura R(6)(8), Morales Fernández R(1)(9), Ojeda Peña L(1)(10),
Parra Reyes D(1)(11), Santoro P(8)(12), Ton V(13)(14), Trujillo Benavides OE(15),
Vargas García M(1)(16), Furkim AM(1)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Sociedad Latinoamericana de Disfagia (The Latin American Dysphagia Society),
Brasil.
(2)Sociedad Mexicana de Disfagia, Ciudad de México, México.
(3)Sociedad Chilena de Deglución y Alimentación, Santiago, Chile.
(4)Departamento de Fonoaudiología, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile //
Unidad de Fonoaudiología, Hospital del Trabajador, Santiago, Chile.
(5)Escuela de Altos Estudios en Salud, Universidad La Salle México, Ciudad de
México, México.
(6)Academia Brasileira de Disfagia, Sao Paulo, Brasil.
(7)Departamento de Disfagia de la Sociedad Brasileira de Fonoaudiología, Porto
Alegre, Brasil.
(8)Academia Brasileira de Laringología y Voz, Sao Paulo, Brasil.
(9)Instituto Nacional de Rehabilitación Pedro Aguirre Cerda, Santiago, Chile.
(10)Asociación Paraguaya de Disfagia, Asunción, Paraguay.
(11)Sociedad Peruana de Disfagia, Lima, Perú.
(12)Hospital de las Clínicas de la Facultad de Medicina de la Universidad de Sao 
Paulo, Brasil.
(13)Asociación Argentina de Disfagia, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(14)Unidad de Fonoaudiología C.I.A.R.E.C. Clínica de Internación Aguda en
Rehabilitación y Cirugía, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(15)Departamento de Endoscopia Hospital General de Zona No. 42. Instituto
Mexicano del Seguro Social, Ciudad de México, México.
(16)Departamento de Fonoaudiología, Universidad Metropolitana, Barranquilla,
Colombia.

INTRODUCTION: The SARS-CoV-2 virus that causes the COVID-19 disease is
transmitted through the inhalation of droplets or aerosols and inoculation via
the oronasal or ocular routes, transforming the management of swallowing
disorders into a challenge for healthcare teams, given their proximity to the
aerodigestive tract and the high probability of aerosol generation during patient
evaluation and treatment.
AIM: To provide essential guidance for Latin American multidisciplinary teams,
regarding the evaluation and treatment of oropharyngeal and esophageal dysphagia,
at the different levels of healthcare. The position statement was formulated for 
the purpose of maintaining medical service continuity, in the context of a
pandemic, and minimizing the propagation and infection risks of the virus.
METHODS: Thirteen experts in swallowing disorders were summoned by the Latin
American Dysphagia Society to formulate a series of clinical suggestions, based
on available evidence and clinical experience, for the management of dysphagia,
taking the characteristics of Latin American healthcare systems into account.
RESULTS: The position statement of the Latin American Dysphagia Society provides 
a series of clinical suggestions directed at the multidisciplinary teams that
manage patients with oropharyngeal and esophageal dysphagia. It presents
guidelines for evaluation and treatment in different contexts, from
hospitalization to home care.
CONCLUSIONS: The present statement should be analyzed by each team or healthcare 
professional, to reduce the risk for COVID-19 infection and achieve the best
therapeutic results, while at the same time, being mindful of the reality of each
Latin American country.

© 2021 Published by Masson Doyma México S.A. on behalf of Asociación Mexicana de 
Gastroenterología.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rgmx.2021.08.002 
PMCID: PMC8554136
PMID: 34728891 

