
1. Health Aff (Millwood). 2021 Nov;40(11):1722-1730. doi:
10.1377/hlthaff.2021.00501.

Growth In ACA-Compliant Marketplace Enrollment And Spending Risk Changes During
The COVID-19 Pandemic.

Hsu J(1), Chin CY(2), Weiss M(3), Cohen M(4), Sastry J(5), Katz-Christy N(6),
Bertko J(7), Newhouse JP(8).

Author information: 
(1)John Hsu (john.hsu@mgh.harvard.edu) is director of the Clinical Economics and 
Policy Analysis Program at the Mongan Institute Health Policy Center,
Massachusetts General Hospital, and an associate professor in the Departments of 
Medicine and of Health Care Policy, Harvard Medical School, all in Boston,
Massachusetts.
(2)Chia Yi Chin is a senior consulting actuary at the Wakely Consulting Group, in
Tampa, Florida.
(3)Max Weiss is a research analyst at the Mongan Institute, Massachusetts General
Hospital.
(4)Michael Cohen is a senior consultant, Policy Analytics, Wakely Consulting
Group.
(5)Jay Sastry is an undergraduate at Harvard University, in Cambridge,
Massachusetts, and a clinical research assistant at the Mongan Institute,
Massachusetts General Hospital.
(6)Nina Katz-Christy is an undergraduate at Harvard University and a clinical
research assistant at the Mongan Institute, Massachusetts General Hospital.
(7)John Bertko is the chief actuary and director of research, State Health
Benefit Exchange, Covered California, in San Francisco, California.
(8)Joseph P. Newhouse is the John D. MacArthur Professor of Health Policy and
Management in the Department of Health Care Policy, Harvard Medical School; the
Department of Health Policy and Management at the Harvard T. H. Chan School of
Public Health, in Boston, Massachusetts; and the Harvard Kennedy School, in
Cambridge, Massachusetts. He is also a faculty research fellow at the National
Bureau of Economic Research in Cambridge.

In 2020 the COVID-19 pandemic caused millions to lose their jobs and,
consequently, their employer-sponsored health insurance. Enacted in 2010, the
Affordable Care Act (ACA) created safeguards for such events by expanding
Medicaid coverage and establishing Marketplaces through which people could
purchase health insurance. Using a novel national data set with information on
ACA-compliant individual insurance plans, we found large increases in Marketplace
enrollment in 2020 compared with 2019 but with varying percentage increases and
spending risk implications across states. States that did not expand Medicaid had
enrollment and spending risk increases. States that expanded Medicaid but did not
relax 2020 Marketplace enrollment criteria also had spending risk increases. In
contrast, states that expanded Medicaid and relaxed 2020 enrollment criteria
experienced enrollment increases without spending risk changes. The findings are 
reassuring with respect to the ability of Marketplaces to buffer employment
shocks, but they also provide cautionary signals that risks and premiums could
begin to rise either in the absence of Medicaid expansion or when Marketplace
enrollment is constrained.

DOI: 10.1377/hlthaff.2021.00501 
PMID: 34724431  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

