
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 13;9:737755. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.737755.
eCollection 2021.

Bioethical Concerns During the COVID-19 Pandemic: What Did Healthcare Ethics
Committees and Institutions State in Spain?

Ruiz-Hornillos J(1)(2)(3), Hernández Suárez P(4), Marín Martínez JM(5)(6)(7), de 
Miguel Beriain Í(8), Nieves Vázquez MA(2)(9), Albert M(10), Herrera Abián
M(1)(2)(3), Pacheco-Martínez PA(1)(2)(3), Trasmontes V(11), Guillén-Navarro
E(12)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioética Clínica, Hospital Universitario Infanta Elena,
Madrid, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria, Fundación Jiménez Díaz (IIS-FJD),
Madrid, Spain.
(3)Facultad de Medicina de la Universidad Francisco de Vitoria, Pozuelo de
Alarcón, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Comité de Ética Asistencial, Comité de Ética de Investigación con
Medicamentos, Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Servicio de Urgencias del Hospital Clínico Universitario Virgen de la
Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain.
(6)Presidente Comité de Ética del Área i del Servicio Murciano de Salud, Murcia, 
Spain.
(7)Consejo Asesor Regional de Ética Asistencial de Murcia (CAREA), Murcia, Spain.
(8)Facultad de Derecho, Universidad del País Vasco, EuskalHerriko Uniberstiatea, 
Vizcaya, Spain.
(9)Comité de Ética Asistencial Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain.
(10)Universidad Rey Juan Carlos, Madrid, Spain.
(11)Unidad de Cuidados Intensivos, Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain.
(12)Sección de Genética Médica, S. Pediatría, Hospital Clínico Universitario
Virgen de la Arrixaca, IMIB-Arrixaca, Universidad de Murcia, CIBERER-ISCIII,
Murcia, Spain.
(13)Comité de Bioética de España, Madird, Spain.

Objectives: Each new wave of the COVID-19 pandemic invites the possible
obligation to prioritize individuals' access to vital resources, and thereby
leads to unresolved and important bioethical concerns. Governments have to make
decisions to protect access to the health system with equity. The prioritization 
criteria during a pandemic are both a clinical and legal-administrative decision 
with ethical repercussion. We aim to analyse the prioritization protocols used in
Spain during the pandemic which, in many cases, have not been updated. Method: We
carried out a narrative review of 27 protocols of prioritization proposed by
healthcare ethics committees, scientific societies and institutions in Spain for 
this study. The review evaluated shared aspects and unique differences and
proffered a bioethical reflection. Results: The research questions explored
patient prioritization, the criteria applied and the relative weight assigned to 
each criterion. There was a need to use several indicators, being morbidity and
mortality scales the most commonly used, followed by facets pertaining to disease
severity and functional status. Although age was initially considered in some
protocols, it cannot be the sole criterion used when assigning care resources.
Conclusions: In COVID-19 pandemic there is a need for a unified set of criteria
that guarantees equity and transparency in decision-making processes.
Establishing treatment indications is not the aim of such criteria, but instead
prioritizing access to care resources. In protocols of prioritization, the
principle of efficiency must vary according to the principle of equity and the
criteria used to guarantee such equity.

Copyright © 2021 Ruiz-Hornillos, Hernández Suárez, Marín Martínez, Miguel
Beriain, Nieves Vázquez, Albert, Herrera Abián, Pacheco-Martínez, Trasmontes and 
Guillén-Navarro.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.737755 
PMCID: PMC8548706
PMID: 34722445  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest in the preparation of this manuscript.

