
1. Nurs Philos. 2021 Nov 2:e12374. doi: 10.1111/nup.12374. [Epub ahead of print]

Assembling bodies-without-organs: A poststructuralist analysis of group sex
between men.

Holmes D(1), Hammond C(2), Orser L(1), Nguyen H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, School of Nursing, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.
(2)College of Medicine, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan,
Canada.
(3)Sue and Bill Gross School of Nursing, University of California, Irvine,
California, USA.

Group sex among men who have sex with men may be understood as a 'radical'
practice insofar as it transgresses dominant social discourses around appropriate
sexual relations-prioritizing heteronormative, monogamous and risk-averse sex.
These practices are generally defined as steeped in risk, most commonly due to
the potential for transmitting human immunodeficiency virus and sexually
transmitted infections and accompanied by the possibility of legal and social
repercussions. Our ethnographic research study explored the desires, practices
and contexts of group sex participants (n = 10) within a popular group sex party 
destination located in the United States. We employ a poststructuralist
perspective (utilizing the work of Deleuze and Guattari) to understand group sex 
events with the pretext that bodies have no inherent ethics, meaning or essence: 
they are 'bodies without organs'. We identify group sex as a form of boundary
play, in which participants pursue new limits to what their bodies can do but
within a carefully constructed environment that establishes norms of interaction 
meant to secure trust and safety between participants. A variety of risk
reduction practices are shown to be promoted and honoured within these eventful
sexual(ized) spaces. The application of poststructuralist concepts of 'boundary
play' and 'bodies without organs' helped to depict the construction and
navigation of pleasure, safety and risk among group sex participants.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/nup.12374 
PMID: 34729896 

