
1. J Gen Virol. 2021 Nov;102(11). doi: 10.1099/jgv.0.001671.

Novel circular DNA virus identified in Opuntia discolor (Cactaceae) that codes
for proteins with similarity to those of geminiviruses.

Fontenele RS(1), Köhler M(2), Majure LC(3), Avalos-Calleros JA(4),
Argüello-Astorga GR(4), Font F(5), Vidal AH(6), Roumagnac P(7)(8), Kraberger
S(1), Martin DP(9), Lefeuvre P(10), Varsani A(1)(11).

Author information: 
(1)The Biodesign Center for Fundamental and Applied Microbiomics, Center for
Evolution and Medicine, School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe,
Arizona, 85287, USA.
(2)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Botânica, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do
Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(3)Florida Museum of Natural History, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida, 32611, USA.
(4)División de Biología Molecular, Instituto Potosino de Investigación Científica
y Tecnológica, A.C., Camino a la Presa de San José 2055, Lomas 4ta Secc, San Luis
Potosi 78216, Mexico.
(5)Herbario Museo de Farmacobotánica 'Juan A. Domínguez' (BAF), Universidad de
Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(6)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Biologia Molecular, Universidade de Brasília,
Brasília, Brazil.
(7)CIRAD, UMR PHIM, 34090 Montpellier, France.
(8)PHIM Plant Health Institute, Univ Montpellier, CIRAD, INRAE, Institut Agro,
IRD, Montpellier, France.
(9)Computational Biology Division, Department of Integrative Biomedical Sciences,
Institute of Infectious Diseases and Molecular Medicine, University of Cape Town,
Observatory, 7925, Cape Town, South Africa.
(10)CIRAD, UMR PVBMT, F-97410 St Pierre, La Réunion, France.
(11)Structural Biology Research Unit, Department of Integrative Biomedical
Sciences, University of Cape Town, 7925, Cape Town, South Africa.

Viral metagenomic studies have enabled the discovery of many unknown viruses and 
revealed that viral communities are much more diverse and ubiquitous than
previously thought. Some viruses have multiple genome components that are
encapsidated either in separate virions (multipartite viruses) or in the same
virion (segmented viruses). In this study, we identify what is possibly a novel
bipartite plant-associated circular single-stranded DNA virus in a wild prickly
pear cactus, Opuntia discolor, that is endemic to the Chaco ecoregion in South
America. Two ~1.8 kb virus-like circular DNA components were recovered, one
encoding a replication-associated protein (Rep) and the other a capsid protein
(CP). Both of the inferred protein sequences of the Rep and CP are homologous to 
those encoded by members of the family Geminiviridae. These two putatively
cognate components each have a nonanucleotide sequence within a likely hairpin
structure that is homologous to the origins of rolling-circle replication (RCR), 
found in diverse circular single-stranded DNA viruses. In addition, the two
components share similar putative replication-associated iterative sequences
(iterons), which in circular single-stranded DNA viruses are important for Rep
binding during the initiation of RCR. Such molecular features provide support for
the possible bipartite nature of this virus, which we named utkilio virus (common
name of the Opuntia discolor in South America) components A and B. In the
infectivity assays conducted in Nicotiana benthamiana plants, only the A
component of utkilio virus, which encodes the Rep protein, was found to move and 
replicate systemically in N. benthamiana. This was not true for component B, for 
which we did not detect replication, which may have been due to this being a
defective molecule or because of the model plants (N. benthamiana) used for the
infection assays. Future experiments need to be conducted with other plants,
including O. discolor, to understand more about the biology of these viral
components.

DOI: 10.1099/jgv.0.001671 
PMID: 34726588 

