
1. Elife. 2021 Nov 2;10. pii: e70858. doi: 10.7554/eLife.70858.

Proximal and distal spinal neurons innervating multiple synergist and antagonist 
motor pools.

Ronzano R(#)(1), Lancelin C(#)(1), Bhumbra GS(2), Brownstone RM(1), Beato M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuromuscular Diseases, University College London, London,
United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Neuroscience Physiology and Pharmacology, University College
London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Neuroscience, Physiology and Pharmacology, University College London, London, 
United Kingdom.
(#)Contributed equally

Motoneurons (MNs) control muscle contractions, and their recruitment by premotor 
circuits is tuned to produce accurate motor behaviours. To understand how these
circuits coordinate movement across and between joints, it is necessary to
understand whether spinal neurons pre-synaptic to motor pools have divergent
projections to more than one MN population. Here, we used modified rabies virus
tracing in mice to investigate premotor interneurons projecting to synergist
flexor or extensor MNs, as well as those projecting to antagonist pairs of
muscles controlling the ankle joint. We show that similar proportions of premotor
neurons diverge to synergist and antagonist motor pools. Divergent premotor
neurons were seen throughout the spinal cord, with decreasing numbers but
increasing proportion with distance from the hindlimb enlargement. In the
cervical cord, divergent long descending propriospinal neurons were found in
contralateral lamina VIII, had large somata, were neither glycinergic, nor
cholinergic, and projected to both lumbar and cervical MNs. We conclude that
distributed spinal premotor neurons coordinate activity across multiple motor
pools and that there are spinal neurons mediating co-contraction of antagonist
muscles.

plain-language-summary: We are able to walk, run and move our bodies in other
ways thanks to circuits of neurons in the spinal cord that control how and when
our muscles contract and relax. Neurons known as premotor neurons receive
information from other parts of the central nervous system and control the
activities of groups (known as pools) of motor neurons that directly activate
individual muscles. To bend a joint or move our limbs, the movement of different 
muscles needs to be coordinated. Previous studies have focused on how premotor
neurons activate a pool of motor neurons to contract a single muscle, but it
remains unclear if and how some of these premotor neurons can co-activate
different pools of motor neurons to control more than one muscle at the same
time. Here, Ronzano, Lancelin et al. injected mice with modified rabies viruses
labelled with different fluorescent markers to build a map of the premotor
neurons that connect to motor neurons controlling the leg muscles. The
experiments revealed that many of the individual premotor neurons in the spinal
cords of mice connected to different pools of motor neurons. In the upper region 
of the spinal cord – which is primarily responsible for controlling the front
legs – some large premotor neurons activated motor neurons in this region as well
as other motor neurons in a lower region of the spinal cord that controls the
back legs. This suggests that these large premotor neurons may be important for
coordinating muscles contraction within and between limbs. Many neurological
diseases are associated with difficulties in contracting or relaxing muscles. For
example, individuals with a condition called dystonia experience disorganized and
excessive muscle contractions that prevent them from being able to bend and
straighten their joints properly. By helping us to understand how the body
coordinates the activities of multiple limbs at the same time, the findings of
Ronzano, Lancelin et al. may lead to new lines of research that ultimately
improve the quality of life of patients with dystonia and other similar
neurological diseases.
© 2021, Ronzano et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.70858 
PMCID: PMC8631798
PMID: 34727018 

Conflict of interest statement: RR, CL, GB, RB, MB No competing interests
declared

