
1. Vet Med Sci. 2021 Nov 2. doi: 10.1002/vms3.662. [Epub ahead of print]

First detection and molecular characterisation of a pigeon aviadenovirus A and
pigeon circovirus co-infection associated with Young Pigeon Disease Syndrome
(YPDS) in Turkish pigeons (Columba livia domestica).

Sahindokuyucu I(1), Turkmen MB(2), Sumer T(2), Elhag AE(3)(4), Alcigir ME(2),
Yazici Z(3), Barry G(5), Gulbahar MY(6), Kul O(2).

Author information: 
(1)Poultry Diseases Diagnostic Laboratory, Bornova Veterinary Control Institute, 
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Izmir, Turkey.
(2)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Veterinary Pathology, Kirikkale 
University, Kirikkale, Turkey.
(3)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Veterinary Virology, Ondokuz
Mayis University, Samsun, Turkey.
(4)Faculty of Veterinary Sciences, Department of Preventive Medicine and Clinical
Studies, University of Gadarif, Al Qadarif, Sudan.
(5)Veterinary Science Center, School of Veterinary Medicine, University College
of Dublin, Belfield, Dublin, Ireland.
(6)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Veterinary Pathology, Ondokuz
Mayis University, Samsun, Turkey.

Pigeon aviadenovirus A and Pigeon circovirus are both DNA viruses, infect and
cause severe clinical diseases in pigeons. These viruses are associated with an
immunosuppression syndrome similar to 'Young Pigeon Disease Syndrome' (YPDS).
This study reports the identification of a natural co-infection, with severe
clinical signs (crop vomiting, watery diarrhoea, anorexia and sudden death) of
Pigeon aviadenovirus A and Pigeon circovirus in a breeding pigeon flock in
Central Anatolia, Turkey. Both viruses were isolated from pigeons pooled internal
organs using primary chicken embryo kidney cell cultures (CEKC) and specific
pathogen-free (SPF) embryonated chicken eggs. Also, both viruses were identified 
by PCR amplification followed by Sanger sequencing whereas histopathological
examination showed degenerated hepatocytes with basophilic intranuclear viral
inclusions. As known, both viruses typically have similar transmission
characteristics and common clinical manifestations; however, co-infection may
exacerbate the disease with devastating outcomes. This is the first report of its
kind in Turkey for those viruses and is essential for the protection against
these kinds of infections in pigeons.

© 2021 The Authors. Veterinary Medicine and Science published by John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/vms3.662 
PMID: 34729940 

