
1. J Emerg Manag. 2021 Special Issue on COVID-19;19(7):9-18. doi: 10.5055/jem.0591.

Challenges for the disaster workforce during a compound hurricane-pandemic.

Marshall J(1), Yusuf JW(2), Dunn E(3), Merlo K(4), Behr JG(5), Shekari AM(6),
Scott BL(7), Cruz M(7), Whytlaw JL(8), Hutton NS(9).

Author information: 
(1)University of South Florida College of Public Health, Sunshine Education and
Research Center, Tampa, Florida. ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3907-7729.
(2)School of Public Service, Strome College of Business, Institute for Coastal
Adaptation and Resilience, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, Virginia.
(3)Global Disaster Management, Humanitarian Relief, and Homeland Security (GHH), 
University of South Florida College of Public Health, Tampa Florida.
(4)Department of Psychology, I/O Psychology Program, University of South Florida,
Tampa, Florida.
(5)Virginia Modeling, Analysis and Simulation Center (VMASC), Institute for
Coastal Adaptation and Resilience, Old Dominion University, Suffolk, Virginia.
(6)Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, Daytona Beach, Florida.
(7)University of South Florida College of Public Health, Tampa, Florida.
(8)Department of Political Science & Geography, Old Dominion University, Norfolk,
Virginia.
(9)Department of Political Science and Geography, Old Dominion University,
Norfolk, Virginia.

The COVID-19 pandemic has created new workforce considerations for emergency
management community in addressing cumulative and cascading disasters. This
research identifies how emergency management planning for both the changing
dynamics of COVID-19 and the upcoming hurricane season may change under a
compound threat. Many jurisdictions have faced challenges in providing adequate
staffing of shelters before the pandemic. Now, fatigue among staff further
exacerbates these challenges as resources are stretched thin. Six workshops,
involving 265 national, state, and local leaders, staff, experts, and advocates
from 22 states, and a range of disciplines (disaster planning, public health,
social services, academia, and healthcare), were convened to identify concerns
and potential strategies to address staffing, training, logistics, and support.
Strategies proposed to increase the number and skill set of staff available
involve increased reliance upon volunteers and nonprofit organizations. Mental
health resources, personal protective equipment, sanitation supplies, and
defining roles within emergency shelters were recommended to reduce fatigue and
redistribute responsibilities. Findings illuminate additional research avenues
regarding assessing the underlying stressors contributing to the planning process
and effective means of implementing these interventions to bolster emergency
management shelter operations during a prolonged pandemic and in the future.

DOI: 10.5055/jem.0591 
PMID: 34723365  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

