
1. Elife. 2021 Nov 2;10. pii: e70554. doi: 10.7554/eLife.70554.

Impaired HA-specific T follicular helper cell and antibody responses to influenza
vaccination are linked to inflammation in humans.

Hill DL(1)(2), Whyte CE(2), Innocentin S(2), Lee JL(2), Dooley J(2), Wang J(3),
James EA(4), Lee JC(5)(6), Kwok WW(7)(8), Zand MS(3), Liston A(2), Carr EJ(2)(5),
Linterman MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Pathology, Monash University, Melbourne,
Australia.
(2)Immunology Program, The Babraham Institute, Babraham Research Campus,
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(3)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine and Clinical and Translational 
Science Institute, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, United
States.
(4)Benaroya Research Institute at Virginia Mason, Translational Research Program 
and Tetramer Core Laboratory, Seattle, United States.
(5)Department of Medicine, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(6)Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology & Infectious Disease, Jeffrey
Cheah Biomedical Centre, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(7)Benaroya Research Institute at Virginia Mason, Diabetes Program, Seattle,
United States.
(8)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, United States.

Antibody production following vaccination can provide protective immunity to
subsequent infection by pathogens such as influenza viruses. However,
circumstances where antibody formation is impaired after vaccination, such as in 
older people, require us to better understand the cellular and molecular
mechanisms that underpin successful vaccination in order to improve vaccine
design for at-risk groups. Here, by studying the breadth of anti-haemagglutinin
(HA) IgG, serum cytokines, and B and T cell responses by flow cytometry before
and after influenza vaccination, we show that formation of circulating T
follicular helper (cTfh) cells was associated with high-titre antibody responses.
Using Major Histocompatability Complex (MHC) class II tetramers, we demonstrate
that HA-specific cTfh cells can derive from pre-existing memory CD4+ T cells and 
have a diverse T cell receptor (TCR) repertoire. In older people, the
differentiation of HA-specific cells into cTfh cells was impaired. This
age-dependent defect in cTfh cell formation was not due to a contraction of the
TCR repertoire, but rather was linked with an increased inflammatory gene
signature in cTfh cells. Together, this suggests that strategies that temporarily
dampen inflammation at the time of vaccination may be a viable strategy to boost 
optimal antibody generation upon immunisation of older people.

© 2021, Hill et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.70554 
PMCID: PMC8562996
PMID: 34726156  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DH, CW, SI, JL, JD, JW, EJ, JL, WK, MZ, AL, EC,
ML No competing interests declared

