
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Oct 13;11:755508. doi:
10.3389/fcimb.2021.755508. eCollection 2021.

Quality Management for Point-Of-Care Testing of Pathogen Nucleic Acids: Chinese
Expert Consensus.

Mo X(1), Wang X(2), Zhu Z(3), Yu Y(4), Chang D(5), Zhang X(6), Li D(7), Sun F(8),
Zhou L(9), Xu J(10), Zhang H(11), Gao C(12), Guan M(13), Xiao Y(2), Wu W(14).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Translational Medicine Institute, Shanghai Children's Medical
Center, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Shanghai Centre for Clinical Laboratory,
Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center,
Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai Pudong Hospital, Fudan University 
Affiliated Pudong Medical Center, Shanghai, China.
(6)Department of Infectious Diseases, Research Laboratory of Clinical Virology,
Rui Jin Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
China.
(7)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai Tongji Hospital, School of
Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(8)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital
of Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(9)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Changzheng Hospital, Naval Medical
University, Shanghai, China.
(10)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Children's Hospital of Fudan University,
Shanghai, China.
(11)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Shanghai Children's Hospital, Shanghai,
China.
(12)Clinical Laboratory Medicine Center, Yueyang Hospital of Integrated
Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, Shanghai University of Traditional
Chinese Medicine Shanghai, Shanghai, China.
(13)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Huashan Hospital, Shanghai Medical
College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(14)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

COVID-19 continues to circulate globally in 2021, while under the precise policy 
implementation of China's public health system, the epidemic was quickly
controlled, and society and the economy have recovered. During the pandemic
response, nucleic acid detection of SARS-CoV-2 has played an indispensable role
in the first line of defence. In the cases of emergency operations or patients
presenting at fever clinics, nucleic acid detection is required to be performed
and reported quickly. Therefore, nucleic acid point-of-care testing (POCT)
technology for SARS-CoV-2 identification has emerged, and has been widely carried
out at all levels of medical institutions. SARS-CoV-2 POCT has served as a
complementary test to conventional polymerase chain reaction (PCR) batch tests,
thus forming an experimental diagnosis platform that not only guarantees medical 
safety but also improves quality services. However, in view of the complexity of 
molecular diagnosis and the biosafety requirements involved, pathogen nucleic
acid POCT is different from traditional blood-based physical and chemical index
detection. No guidelines currently exist for POCT quality management, and there
have been inconsistencies documented in practical operation. Therefore, Shanghai 
Society of Molecular Diagnostics, Shanghai Society of Laboratory Medicine,
Clinical Microbiology Division of Shanghai Society of Microbiology and Shanghai
Center for Clinical Laboratory have cooperated with experts in laboratory
medicine to generate the present expert consensus. Based on the current spectrum 
of major infectious diseases in China, the whole-process operation management of 
pathogen POCT, including its application scenarios, biosafety management,
personnel qualification, performance verification, quality control, and result
reporting, are described here. This expert consensus will aid in promoting the
rational application and robust development of this technology in public health
defence and hospital infection management.

Copyright © 2021 Mo, Wang, Zhu, Yu, Chang, Zhang, Li, Sun, Zhou, Xu, Zhang, Gao, 
Guan, Xiao and Wu.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.755508 
PMCID: PMC8548827
PMID: 34722341  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

