
1. Cell Microbiol. 2021 Nov 3:e13399. doi: 10.1111/cmi.13399. [Epub ahead of print]

Hepatitis B virus envelope proteins can serve as therapeutic targets embedded in 
the host cell plasma membrane.

Zhao L(1), Chen F(1), Quitt O(1), Festag M(1), Ringelhan M(2), Wisskirchen K(1), 
Festag J(1), Yakovleva L(3), Sureau C(4), Bohne F(1), Aichler M(5), Bruss V(1),
Shevtsov M(3)(6), van de Klundert M(1), Momburg F(7), Möhl BS(1)(8), Protzer
U(1)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, Technical University of Munich/Helmholtz Zentrum
München, TUM School of Medicine, Munich, Germany.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine II, University Hospital rechts der Isar,
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(3)Laboratory of Biomedical Nanotechnologies, Institute of Cytology of the
Russian Academy of Sciences (RAS), St. Petersburg, Russia.
(4)Molecular Virology laboratory, Institut National de la Transfusion Sanguine,
Paris, France.
(5)Research Unit Analytical Pathology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich,
Germany.
(6)Center for Translational Cancer Research, University Hospital rechts der Isar,
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(7)Clinical Cooperation Unit Applied Tumor Immunity, German Cancer Research
Center, Heidelberg, Germany.
(8)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Munich Partner Site, Munich,
Germany.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a major health threat causing 880,000 deaths
each year. Available therapies control viral replication but do not cure HBV,
leaving patients at risk to develop hepatocellular carcinoma. Here, we show that 
HBV envelope proteins (HBs)-besides their integration into endosomal
membranes-become embedded in the plasma membrane where they can be targeted by
redirected T-cells. HBs was detected on the surface of HBV-infected cells, in
livers of mice replicating HBV and in HBV-induced hepatocellular carcinoma.
Staining with HBs-specific recombinant antibody MoMab recognising a
conformational epitope indicated that membrane-associated HBs remains correctly
folded in HBV-replicating cells in cell culture and in livers of HBV-transgenic
mice in vivo. MoMab coated onto superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles
allowed to detect membrane-associated HBs after HBV infection by electron
microscopy in distinct stretches of the hepatocyte plasma membrane. Last but not 
least, we demonstrate that HBs located on the cell surface allow therapeutic
targeting of HBV-positive cells by T-cells either engrafted with a chimeric
antigen receptor or redirected by bispecific, T-cell engager antibodies. TAKE
AWAYS: HBs become translocated to the plasma membrane. Novel, recombinant
antibody confirmed proper conformation of HBs on the membrane. HBs provide an
interesting target by T-cell-based, potentially curative therapies.

© 2021 The Authors. Cellular Microbiology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.13399 
PMID: 34729894 

