
1. Int J Infect Dis. 2021 Oct 30;114:45-50. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2021.10.052. [Epub
ahead of print]

Ultra-long-acting (XLA) antivirals for chronic viral hepatitis.

Soriano V(1), Alvarez C(2), Edagwa B(3), de Mendoza C(4), Montoya N(2), Treviño
A(2), Gendelman H(3).

Author information: 
(1)UNIR Health Sciences School and Medical Centre, Madrid, Spain. Electronic
address: vicente.soriano@unir.net.
(2)UNIR Health Sciences School and Medical Centre, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, College of Medicine,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(4)Puerta de Hierro University Hospital and Research Foundation, Madrid, Spain.

Viral hepatitis is among the top four causes of mortality globally, causing 1.4
million deaths each year, exceeding tuberculosis, malaria and human
immunodeficiency virus. Hepatitis B and C are responsible for 90% of hepatitis
deaths, and the remaining 10% are caused by other hepatitis viruses. The annual
number of deaths from hepatitis C is declining, whereas the numbers of deaths
from hepatitis B and D are increasing. Hepatitis B alone represents the seven
highest cause of mortality worldwide. Spurred on by development of curative
antivirals for hepatitis C and expanding access to hepatitis B virus (HBV)
vaccination, the World Health Organization has committed to eliminating viral
hepatitis as a public health threat by 2030. Like the majority of current
antivirals, those available for HBV are virostatic. They are capable of
suppressing viral replication but cannot eliminate the virus from infected
patients. Therefore, treatment is lifelong. Long-term adherence to medication
continues to represent a major challenge. Importantly, HBV often reactivates,
leading to potential life-threatening events in immunosuppressed patients.
Therapeutic options are limited for hepatitis D; however, promising new,
effective antivirals are on the horizon. Recent advances have emerged in
medicinal chemistry and drug delivery approaches to produce ultra-long-acting
(XLA) antivirals. These can extend antiviral activity from months to 1 year or
even longer. These new formulations can overcome the challenges of daily dosing
and maximize drug exposure. The development of XLA antivirals targeting viral
hepatitis may also facilitate cure strategies.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2021.10.052 
PMID: 34728344 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement BE and HG hold
stocks in EXAVIR, a biotech company. The other authors declare no financial
conflict of interests.

