
1. J Inflamm Res. 2021 Oct 23;14:5489-5500. doi: 10.2147/JIR.S315716. eCollection
2021.

Exosomal lncRNA HOTTIP Mediates Antiviral Effect of Tenofovir Alafenamide (TAF)
on HBV Infection.

Liu QM(#)(1), He YY(#)(2), Liu LL(3), Wang LK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Intensive Care Unit, Linyi People's Hospital, Linyi, Shandong Province,
People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Disease, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University,
Wuhan, Hubei Province, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Linyi People's Hospital, Linyi, Shandong Province,
People's Republic of China.
(4)Infection Control Center, Linyi People's Hospital, Linyi, Shandong Province,
People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

Introduction: Chronic hepatitis B (CHB) virus (HBV) infection has emerged as a
global health burden affecting nearly 292 million people. Tenofovir alafenamide
(TAF) is an effective treatment for CHB patients. However, the detailed mechanism
underlying the antiviral activity of TAF remains unclear.
Methods: In this study, we investigated the antiviral effect of exosomes derived 
from the serum of CHB patients treated with TAF (Exo-serum) and TAF-treated
macrophages (MP) (Exo-MP(TAF)).
Results: RNAseq analysis was also performed to determine the associated long
non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs). The results demonstrated that both Exo-serum and
Exo-MP(TAF) could be taken up by HepAD38 cells and exhibited potent antiviral
activities, as manifested by significantly downregulating the levels of hepatitis
B surface antigen, hepatitis B e antigen, HBV DNA, and covalently closed circular
DNA. The antiviral effect of Exo-serum was more potent than those of TAF
treatment alone. RNAseq analysis revealed that lncRNA HOTTIP was upregulated
significantly in Exo-serum. Further, lncRNA HOTTIP knockdown reversed the
antiviral effect of Exo-MP(TAF) on HepAD38 cells, whereas lncRNA HOTTIP knockdown
exerted the opposite roles.
Discussion: Taken together, these results suggest that exosomal lncRNA HOTTIP is 
essential for the antiviral activity of TAF and provide a novel understanding of 
the exosome-mediated mechanism underlying HBV infection.

© 2021 Liu et al.

DOI: 10.2147/JIR.S315716 
PMCID: PMC8550561
PMID: 34720597 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest in
this work.

