
1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Oct 14;8:720988. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.720988.
eCollection 2021.

Elevated Humoral Immune Response to SARS-CoV-2 at High Altitudes Revealed by an
Anti-RBD "In-House" ELISA.

Tomas-Grau RH(1), Ploper D(1), Ávila CL(1), Vera Pingitore E(1), Maldonado
Galdeano C(2), Chaves S(1), Socias SB(1), Stagnetto A(1), Navarro SA(1), Chahla
RE(3), Aguilar López M(4), Llapur CJ(5), Aznar P(4), Alcorta ME(4), Costas D(4), 
Flores I(4), Heinze D(6), Apfelbaum G(7), Mostoslavsky R(8), Mostoslavsky G(6),
Cazorla SI(2), Perdigón GDV(2), Chehín R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Medicina Molecular y Celular Aplicada, Universidad Nacional de
Tucumán-Consejo Nacional de Investigación Científicas y Técnicas- Sistema
Provincial de Salud (UNT-CONICET-SIPROSA), Tucumán, Argentina.
(2)Centro de Referencia para Lactobacilos, Consejo Nacional de Investigación
Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Tucumán, Argentina.
(3)Ministerio de Salud Pública de Tucumán, Tucumán, Argentina.
(4)Laboratorio de Salud Pública, Sistema Provincial de Salud, Hospital Néstor
Kirchner, Tucumán, Argentina.
(5)Departamento de Residencias, Dirección General de Recursos Humanos (DGRRHH),
Ministerio de Salud, Tucumán, Argentina.
(6)Section of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Center for Regenerative
Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States.
(7)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Nacional de Tucumán, Tucumán, Argentina.
(8)The Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, United States.

The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) has caused a
global pandemic with dramatic health and socioeconomic consequences. The
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) challenges health systems to quickly respond 
by developing new diagnostic strategies that contribute to identify infected
individuals, monitor infections, perform contact-tracing, and limit the spread of
the virus. In this brief report, we developed a highly sensitive, specific, and
precise "In-House" ELISA to correctly discriminate previously SARS-CoV-2-infected
and non-infected individuals and study population seroprevalence. Among 758
individuals evaluated for anti-SARS-CoV-2 serology in the province of Tucumán,
Argentina, we found a weak correlation between antibodies elicited against the
RBD, the receptor-binding domain of the Spike protein, and the nucleocapsid (N)
antigens of this virus. Additionally, we detected mild levels of anti-RBD IgG
antibodies in 33.6% of individuals diagnosed with COVID-19, while only 19% showed
sufficient antibody titers to be considered as plasma donors. No differences in
IgG anti-RBD titers were found between women and men, neither in between
different age groups ranging from 18 to 60. Surprisingly, individuals from a high
altitude village displayed elevated and longer lasting anti-RBD titers compared
to those from a lower altitude city. To our knowledge, this is the first report
correlating altitude with increased humoral immune response against SARS-CoV-2
infection.

Copyright © 2021 Tomas-Grau, Ploper, Ávila, Vera Pingitore, Maldonado Galdeano,
Chaves, Socias, Stagnetto, Navarro, Chahla, Aguilar López, Llapur, Aznar,
Alcorta, Costas, Flores, Heinze, Apfelbaum, Mostoslavsky, Mostoslavsky, Cazorla, 
Perdigón and Chehín.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.720988 
PMCID: PMC8551828
PMID: 34722566 

Conflict of interest statement: This study received funding from SkyBIO LLC. The 
funder was not involved in the study design, collection, analysis, interpretation
of data, the writing of this article or the decision to submit it for
publication. The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence
of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.

