
1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2021 Oct 1;23:307-318. doi:
10.1016/j.omtm.2021.09.013. eCollection 2021 Dec 10.

Biodistribution of intravitreal lenadogene nolparvovec gene therapy in nonhuman
primates.

Calkins DJ(1), Yu-Wai-Man P(2)(3)(4)(5), Newman NJ(6), Taiel M(7), Singh P(8),
Chalmey C(8), Rogue A(8), Carelli V(9)(10), Ancian P(8), Sahel
JA(11)(12)(13)(14).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, 1161 21st Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.
(2)Cambridge Centre for Brain Repair and MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit,
Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Cambridge Eye Unit, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge University Hospitals,
Cambridge, UK.
(4)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, UK.
(5)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London, UK.
(6)Departments of Ophthalmology, Neurology, and Neurological Surgery, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(7)GenSight Biologics, 74 rue du Faubourg Saint Antoine, 75012 Paris, France.
(8)Charles River Laboratories, Evreux, France.
(9)IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna, UOC Clinica,
Neurologica, Bologna, Italy.
(10)Unit of Neurology, Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences,
University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(11)Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS, Institut de la Vision, Paris, France.
(12)Fondation Ophtalmologique A. de Rothschild, Paris, France.
(13)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(14)CHNO des Quinze-Vingts, Institut Hospitalo-Universitaire FOReSIGHT,
INSERM-DGOS CIC, Paris, France.

Lenadogene nolparvovec (Lumevoq) gene therapy was developed to treat Leber
hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) caused by the m.11778G > A in MT-ND4 that
affects complex I of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Lenadogene nolparvovec 
is a replication-defective, single-stranded DNA recombinant adeno-associated
virus vector 2 serotype 2, containing a codon-optimized complementary DNA
encoding the human wild-type MT-ND4 subunit protein. Lenadogene nolparvovec was
administered by unilateral intravitreal injection in MT-ND4 LHON patients in two 
randomized, double-masked, and sham-controlled phase III clinical trials (REVERSE
and RESCUE), resulting in bilateral improvement of visual acuity. These and other
earlier results suggest that lenadogene nolparvovec may travel from the treated
to the untreated eye. To investigate this possibility further, lenadogene
nolparvovec was unilaterally injected into the vitreous body of the right eye of 
healthy, nonhuman primates. Viral vector DNA was quantifiable in all eye and
optic nerve tissues of the injected eye and was detected at lower levels in some 
tissues of the contralateral, noninjected eye, and optic projections, at 3 and
6 months after injection. The results suggest that lenadogene nolparvovec
transfers from the injected to the noninjected eye, thus providing a potential
explanation for the bilateral improvement of visual function observed in the LHON
patients.

© 2021.

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtm.2021.09.013 
PMCID: PMC8526752
PMID: 34729378 

Conflict of interest statement: The views expressed are those of the authors and 
not necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR, or the Department of Health. M.T. is 
employed by GenSight Biologics, the sponsor of these studies. P.S., C.C., A.R.,
and P.A. are employees of Charles River Laboratories, Evreux, France, which
received payment for the conduct of this research from GenSight Biologics. V.C.
is a consultant for GenSight Biologics, Santhera Pharmaceuticals, and Stealth
BioTherapeutics and has received research support from Santhera Pharmaceuticals
and Stealth BioTherapeutics. D.J.C. is a consultant for GenSight Biologics and
Stuart Therapeutics. P.Y.-W.-M. is a consultant for GenSight Biologics and
Stealth BioTherapeutics and has received research support from GenSight Biologics
and Santhera Pharmaceuticals. N.J.N. is a consultant for GenSight Biologics,
Santhera Pharmaceuticals, and Stealth BioTherapeutics; has received research
support from GenSight Biologics and Santhera Pharmaceuticals; served on the Data 
Safety Monitoring Board for Quark NAION study; and is a medical legal consultant.
J.A.S. is the cofounder and shareholder of GenSight Biologics and the patent
coauthor on allotopic transport.

