
1. Results Phys. 2021 Dec;31:104917. doi: 10.1016/j.rinp.2021.104917. Epub 2021 Oct 
23.

Mathematical analysis for the effect of voluntary vaccination on the propagation 
of Corona virus pandemic.

Ahmad W(1), Abbas M(1), Rafiq M(2), Baleanu D(3)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics, GC University, Lahore, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Sciences, University of Central Punjab
Lahore, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Mathematics, Cankaya University, Ankara, Turkey.
(4)Institute of Space Sciences, Magurele, Bucharest, Romania.
(5)Department of Medical Research, China Medical University Hospital, China
Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.

In this manuscript, a new nonlinear model for the rapidly spreading Corona virus 
disease (COVID-19) is developed. We incorporate an additional class of vaccinated
humans which ascertains the impact of vaccination strategy for susceptible
humans. A complete mathematical analysis of this model is conducted to predict
the dynamics of Corona virus in the population. The analysis proves the
effectiveness of vaccination strategy employed and helps public health services
to control or to reduce the burden of corona virus pandemic. We first prove the
existence and uniqueness and then boundedness and positivity of solutions.
Threshold parameter for the vaccination model is computed analytically. Stability
of the proposed model at fixed points is investigated analytically with the help 
of threshold parameter to examine epidemiological relevance of the pandemic. We
apply LaSalle's invariance principle from the theory of Lyapunov function to
prove the global stability of both the equilibria. Two well known numerical
techniques namely Runge-Kutta method of order 4 (RK4), and the Non-Standard
Finite Difference (NSFD) method are employed to solve the system of ODE's and to 
validate our obtained theoretical results. For different coverage levels of
voluntary vaccination, we explored a complete quantitative analysis of the model.
To draw our conclusions, the effect of proposed vaccination on threshold
parameter is studied numerically. It is claimed that Corona virus disease could
be eradicated faster if a human community selfishly adopts mandatory vaccination 
measures at various coverage levels with proper awareness. Finally, we have
executed the joint variability of all classes to understand the effect of
vaccination strategy on a disease dynamics.

© 2021 Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rinp.2021.104917 
PMCID: PMC8536489
PMID: 34722138 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

