
1. J Emerg Manag. 2021 Special Issue on COVID-19;19(7):59-82. doi: 10.5055/jem.0589.

Data-driven inferences of agency-level risk and response communication on
COVID-19 through social media-based interactions.

Ahmed MA(1), Sadri AM(2), Amini MH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, College of Engineering and 
Computing, Florida Interna-tional University, Miami, Florida.
(2)Moss Department of Construction Management, Moss School of Construction,
Infrastructure and Sustainability, College of Engineering and Computing, Florida 
International University, Miami, Florida.
(3)Knight Foundation School of Computing and Information Sciences, College of
Engineering and Computing, Florida International University, Miami, Florida.

Risk perception and risk averting behaviors of public agencies in the emergence
and spread of COVID-19 can be retrieved through online social media (Twitter),
and such interactions can be echoed in other information outlets. This study
collected time-sensitive online social media data and analyzed patterns of health
risk communication of public health and emergency agencies in the emergence and
spread of novel coronavirus using data-driven methods. The major focus is toward 
understanding how policy-making agencies communicate risk and response
information through social media during a pandemic and influence community
response-ie, timing of lockdown, timing of reopening, etc.-and disease outbreak
indicators-ie, number of confirmed cases and number of deaths. Twitter data of
six major public organizations (1,000-4,500 tweets per organization) are
collected from February 21, 2020 to June 6, 2020. Several machine learning
algorithms, including dynamic topic model and sentiment analysis, are applied
over time to identify the topic dynamics over the specific timeline of the
pandemic. Organizations emphasized on various topics-eg, importance of wearing
face mask, home quarantine, understanding the symptoms, social distancing and
contact tracing, emerging community transmission, lack of personal protective
equipment, COVID-19 testing and medical supplies, effect of tobacco, pandemic
stress management, increasing hospitalization rate, upcoming hurricane season,
use of convalescent plasma for COVID-19 treatment, maintaining hygiene, and the
role of healthcare podcast in different timeline. The findings can benefit
emergency management, policymakers, and public health agencies to identify
targeted information dissemination policies for public with diverse needs based
on how local, federal, and international agencies reacted to COVID-19.

DOI: 10.5055/jem.0589 
PMID: 34723369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

