
1. Prim Health Care Res Dev. 2021 Nov 3;22:e64. doi: 10.1017/S1463423621000207.

Coping with COVID-19 pandemic: reflections of older couples living alone in urban
Odisha, India.

Mahapatra P(1), Sahoo KC(2), Desaraju S(2), Pati S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Kalinga Institute of Medical Sciences, Bhubaneswar, 
Odisha, India.
(2)Regional Medical Research Centre, Indian Council of Medical Research,
Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India.

AIM: We explored the 'coping reflections' of elderly couples living alone
(without any other family members) during the COVID-19 pandemic in urban Odisha, 
India.
BACKGROUND: Evidence worldwide suggests that older people are at increased risk
from COVID-19 adverse outcomes and experience greater stress. In our previous
community-based study urban dwelling, particularly elderly participants, and
living alone reported higher pandemic-associated health care challenges than
their rural and residing-with-family counterparts. We intended to explore how the
elderly couples living alone coped through this challenging yet stressful
situation during the COVID-19 pandemic and what were their key strategies adopted
toward this.
METHODS: We conducted telephonic in-depth interviews (IDIs) with 11 urban elderly
couples living alone in Bhubaneswar city of Odisha, India using a semi-structured
interview guide. All IDIs were digitally recorded, transcribed into the original 
language, and translated to English. We used a thematic approach for analysis.
FINDINGS: Four themes emerged: (1) Risk appraisal and feeling vulnerable; (2)
Safeguarding against COVID-19; (3) Managing routine health care and emergency;
and (4) Pursuing mental and psychological well-being. Although fear, anxiety, and
loneliness were continuing stressors, many of them learnt to adapt and emerge
resilient with the evolving situation. Various elements at the individual,
family, community, and organizational levels were conducive to better coping. The
companionship and complementary support of spouse, self-health literacy, and
digital efficacy, virtual connectedness with family and friends, availability of 
community pharmacy and diagnostic services in the vicinity, support of neighbors,
reengaging with creative leisure time activity, and assurance of a responsive
administration at the time of emergency helped them to cruise through the
pandemic. Furthermore, watching the re-telecast of prime time serials made these 
elderly fondly remember their own youth time memories. Self-health monitoring,
indoor physical exercise, spiritual practices, continuation of previous
prescription, telephonic advice of physicians were add-on strategies that
facilitated their physical and psychological well-being during the pandemic.

DOI: 10.1017/S1463423621000207 
PMCID: PMC8569829
PMID: 34728006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

