
1. J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle. 2021 Nov 1. doi: 10.1002/jcsm.12826. [Epub ahead of
print]

Chronic aryl hydrocarbon receptor activity phenocopies smoking-induced skeletal
muscle impairment.

Thome T(1), Miguez K(2), Willms AJ(3), Burke SK(4), Chandran V(5), de Souza
AR(3), Fitzgerald LF(4), Baglole C(3), Anagnostou ME(4), Bourbeau J(3), Jagoe
RT(3), Morais JA(3), Goddard Y(6), Taivassalo T(7), Ryan TE(1), Hepple RT(4)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Physiology and Kinesiology, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, USA.
(2)Department of Kinesiology and Physical Education, McGill University, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada.
(3)Research Institute of the McGill University Health Center, McGill University, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(4)Department of Physical Therapy, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(7)Department of Physiology and Functional Genomics, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, USA.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients exhibit
skeletal muscle atrophy, denervation, and reduced mitochondrial oxidative
capacity. Whilst chronic tobacco smoke exposure is implicated in COPD muscle
impairment, the mechanisms involved are ambiguous. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor 
(AHR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor that activates detoxifying
pathways with numerous exogenous ligands, including tobacco smoke. Whereas
transient AHR activation is adaptive, chronic activation can be toxic. On this
basis, we tested the hypothesis that chronic smoke-induced AHR activation causes 
adverse muscle impact.
METHODS: We used clinical patient muscle samples, and in vitro (C2C12 myotubes)
and in vivo models (mouse), to perform gene expression, mitochondrial function,
muscle and neuromuscular junction morphology, and genetic manipulations
(adeno-associated virus-mediated gene transfer).
RESULTS: Sixteen weeks of tobacco smoke exposure in mice caused muscle atrophy,
neuromuscular junction degeneration, and reduced oxidative capacity. Similarly,
smoke exposure reprogrammed the muscle transcriptome, with down-regulation of
mitochondrial and neuromuscular junction genes. In mouse and human patient
specimens, smoke exposure increased muscle AHR signalling. Mechanistically,
experiments in cultured myotubes demonstrated that smoke condensate activated the
AHR, caused mitochondrial impairments, and induced an AHR-dependent myotube
atrophy. Finally, to isolate the role of AHR activity, expression of a
constitutively active AHR mutant without smoke exposure caused atrophy and
mitochondrial impairments in cultured myotubes, and muscle atrophy and
neuromuscular junction degeneration in mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These results establish that chronic AHR activity, as occurs in
smokers, phenocopies the atrophy, mitochondrial impairment, and neuromuscular
junction degeneration caused by chronic tobacco smoke exposure.

© 2021 The Authors. Journal of Cachexia, Sarcopenia and Muscle published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Society on Sarcopenia, Cachexia and Wasting
Disorders.

DOI: 10.1002/jcsm.12826 
PMID: 34725955 

