
1. Cell Discov. 2021 Nov 2;7(1):105. doi: 10.1038/s41421-021-00337-3.

Multiomics interrogation into HBV (Hepatitis B virus)-host interaction reveals
novel coding potential in human genome, and identifies canonical and
non-canonical proteins as host restriction factors against HBV.

Yuan S(#)(1)(2)(3), Liao G(#)(2)(3), Zhang M(#)(2), Zhu Y(#)(4), Xiao W(#)(5),
Wang K(1), Li C(1), Jia C(1), Sun N(6), Walch A(6), Gao D(2), Xu P(7), Deng Q(8),
Zhang J(9), Wang H(10), Hu R(11)(12)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, School of Medicine, Tongji
University, Shanghai, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry 
and Cell Biology, Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(3)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology (MOE & MOH), School of Basic
Medical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National
Center for Protein Sciences (Beijing), Research Unit of Proteomics & Research and
Development of New Drug of Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing Institute
of Lifeomics, Beijing, China.
(6)Research Unit Analytical Pathology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg,
Germany.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National
Center for Protein Sciences (Beijing), Research Unit of Proteomics & Research and
Development of New Drug of Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing Institute
of Lifeomics, Beijing, China. xuping_bprc@126.com.
(8)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology (MOE & MOH), School of Basic
Medical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. qdeng@fudan.edu.cn.
(9)Key Laboratory of Cell Differentiation and Apoptosis, Medicinal Bioinformatics
Center, Shanghai JiaoTong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
jian.zhang@sjtu.edu.cn.
(10)Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-Inspired Intelligence, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China. hewang@fudan.edu.cn.
(11)Cancer Center, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, School of Medicine, Tongji
University, Shanghai, China. coryhu@sibcb.ac.cn.
(12)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry
and Cell Biology, Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China. coryhu@sibcb.ac.cn.
(13)School of Life Science, Hangzhou Institute for Advance Study, University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. coryhu@sibcb.ac.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) constitutes a major threat to global public health.
Current understanding of HBV-host interaction is yet limited. Here, ribosome
profiling, quantitative mass spectrometry and RNA-sequencing were conducted on a 
recently established HBV replication system, through which we identified
multiomic differentially expressed genes (DEGs) that HBV orchestrated to remodel 
host proteostasis networks. Our multiomics interrogation revealed that HBV
induced significant changes in both transcription and translation of 35 canonical
genes including PPP1R15A, PGAM5 and SIRT6, as well as the expression of at least 
15 non-canonical open reading frames (ncORFs) including ncPON2 and ncGRWD1, thus 
revealing an extra coding potential of human genome. Overexpression of these five
genes but not the enzymatically deficient SIRT6 mutants suppressed HBV
replication while knockdown of SIRT6 had opposite effect. Furthermore, the
expression of SIRT6 was down-regulated in patients, cells or animal models of HBV
infection. Mechanistic study further indicated that SIRT6 directly binds to
mini-chromosome and deacetylates histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9ac) and histone H3
lysine 56 (H3K56ac), and chemical activation of endogenous SIRT6 with MDL800
suppressed HBV infection in vitro and in vivo. By generating the first multiomics
landscape of host-HBV interaction, our work is thus opening a new avenue to
facilitate therapeutic development against HBV infection.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41421-021-00337-3 
PMCID: PMC8560872
PMID: 34725333 

