
1. BMJ Open. 2021 Nov 1;11(11):e052971. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-052971.

Health workers' perspectives on asthma care coordination between primary and
specialised healthcare in the COVID-19 pandemic: a protocol for a qualitative
study in Ecuador and Brazil.

Romero NC(1)(2), Cisneros-Caceres MJ(3), Granadillo E(1), Aragao E(4),
Romero-Sandoval A(2)(5), Barbosa C(4), Barreto de Oliveira AL(4), Rodriguez A(1),
Pinheiro GP(6), Cruz A(4), Cooper P(1)(7), Ferreira da Silva MR(2)(8).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, International University of Ecuador, Quito, Ecuador.
(2)Department of Medicine, Red Groups in Latin America and Africa, Barcelona,
Spain.
(3)School of Medicine, International University of Ecuador, Quito, Ecuador
majocc93@gmail.com.
(4)Collective Health Institute, Federal University of Bahia, Salvador, Brazil.
(5)School of Basic Sciences, International University of Ecuador, Quito, Ecuador.
(6)Department of Medicine, ProAR Foundation, Salvador, Brazil.
(7)Institute of Infection and Immunity, St George's University of London, London,
UK.
(8)School of Medicine, UPE, Recife, Brazil.

INTRODUCTION: Asthma is a common long-term disorder and strategies to improve
asthma control are still a challenge. Integrated delivery of health systems is
critical for effective asthma care: there is limited information on experiences
of care coordination for asthma from Latin America, especially on perspectives of
health personnel and in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: This protocol details a qualitative approach to analyse
health workers' perspectives of healthcare coordination for asthma control during
COVID-19 pandemic in Ecuador and Brazil, at primary and specialised levels,
through in-depth semistructured interviews using a video communications platform.
The analysis will identify knowledge and perspectives based on coordination of
clinical information, clinical management and administrative coordination.
Theoretical sampling will be used to obtain approximately equal numbers of women 
and men within each level of healthcare; data saturation will be used to
determine sample size. Transcripts will be analysed using content-coding
procedures to mark quotations related to major topics and subthemes included in
the interview guide, and narrative analysis will be based on a theoretical
framework for healthcare coordination to identify new themes and subthemes.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: Ethical approval was obtained from the ethics
committees of Hospital General Docente Calderón, Quito, Ecuador; and Universidade
Federal da Bahia, Salvador, Brazil. The findings of this study will be
disseminated through peer-reviewed articles, conference presentations and
condensed summaries for key stakeholders and partners.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-052971 
PMCID: PMC8561830
PMID: 34725080  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

