
1. Am J Case Rep. 2021 Nov 1;22:e934216. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.934216.

Rickets Due to Severe Vitamin D and Calcium Deficiency During the COVID-19
Pandemic in Malaysia.

Sodri NI(1), Mohamed-Yassin MS(1), Mohd Nor NS(2)(3), Ismail IA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Primary Care Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Teknologi
MARA, Batu Caves, Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Teknologi MARA,
Sungai Buloh, Selangor, Malaysia.
(3)Institute for Pathology, Laboratory and Forensic Medicine (I-PPerForM),
Universiti Teknologi MARA, Sungai Buloh, Selangor, Malaysia.

BACKGROUND Rickets is the deficiency in mineralization of the bone associated
with lack of sunlight exposure and inadequate dietary calcium and/or vitamin D in
children. Important efforts to eradicate rickets include appropriate sunlight
exposure advice and fortification of food and milk with vitamin D. However, there
is a growing concern that the current Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
pandemic will increase the incidence of rickets due to inadequate sunlight
exposure resulting from movement restriction measures imposed by governments
across the world. CASE REPORT A 22-month-old girl presented to our primary care
clinic in Selangor, Malaysia with abnormal gait and bowing of the legs during the
COVID-19 pandemic. She had a history of inadequate sun exposure as she lived in
an apartment and there was a Movement Control Order in place because of the
pandemic. Calcium intake was also poor as she could not tolerate formula milk and
did not consume any other dairy products. Investigations revealed severe
hypocalcemia and low vitamin D level. She was diagnosed with nutritional rickets 
and was referred for admission to correct the hypocalcemia. She was subsequently 
discharged with oral calcium and vitamin D supplementation. Her calcium and
vitamin D levels improved and at her 6-month review, her bilateral bowed legs had
improved significantly. CONCLUSIONS This case highlights the importance of having
a high degree of suspicion for vitamin D deficiency and rickets in young children
growing up during the COVID-19 pandemic. Public health messages on preventing the
spread of COVID-19 should also be interlaced with messages addressing the
possible effects of our new norms such as inadequate sunlight exposure.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.934216 
PMCID: PMC8570386
PMID: 34723934  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

