
1. World J Gastrointest Oncol. 2021 Oct 15;13(10):1440-1452. doi:
10.4251/wjgo.v13.i10.1440.

Nutritional therapy for hepatocellular carcinoma.

Ruiz-Margáin A(1), Román-Calleja BM(1), Moreno-Guillén P(1), González-Regueiro
JA(2), Kúsulas-Delint D(2), Campos-Murguía A(2), Flores-García NC(2),
Macías-Rodríguez RU(3).

Author information: 
(1)Liver Nutrition Clinic, Department of Gastroenterology, Instituto Nacional de 
Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, Mexico City 14080, Mexico.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y
Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, Mexico City 14080, Mexico.
(3)Liver Fibrosis and Nutrition Lab, MICTLÁN-Network (Mechanisms of Liver Injury,
Cell Death and Translational Nutrition in Liver Diseases- Research Network),
Mexico City 14080, Mexico.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most frequent primary liver cancer and
presents together with cirrhosis in most cases. In addition to commonly
recognized risk factors for HCC development, such as hepatitis B virus/hepatitis 
C virus infection, age and alcohol/tobacco consumption, there are nutritional
risk factors also related to HCC development including high intake of saturated
fats derived from red meat, type of cooking (generation of heterocyclic amines)
and contamination of foods with aflatoxins. On the contrary, protective
nutritional factors include diets rich in fiber, fruits and vegetables, n-3
polyunsaturated fatty acids and coffee. While the patient is being evaluated for 
staging and treatment of HCC, special attention should be paid to nutritional
support, including proper nutritional assessment and therapy by a
multidisciplinary team. It must be considered that these patients usually develop
HCC on top of long-lasting cirrhosis, and therefore they could present with
severe malnutrition. Cirrhosis-related complications should be properly addressed
and considered for nutritional care. In addition to traditional methods,
functional testing, phase angle and computed tomography scan derived skeletal
muscle index-L3 are among the most useful tools for nutritional assessment.
Nutritional therapy should be centered on providing enough energy and protein to 
manage the increased requirements of both cirrhosis and cancer. Supplementation
with branched-chain amino acids is also recommended as it improves response to
treatment, nutritional status and survival, and finally physical exercise must be
encouraged and adapted to individual needs.

©The Author(s) 2021. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.4251/wjgo.v13.i10.1440 
PMCID: PMC8529929
PMID: 34721776 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All authors
declare no conflicts of interest related to this article.

