
1. Transpl Infect Dis. 2021 Nov 1:e13751. doi: 10.1111/tid.13751. [Epub ahead of
print]

A multicenter evaluation of hepatitis B reactivation with and without antiviral
prophylaxis after kidney transplantation.

Shaikh SA(1), Kahn J(2), Aksentijevic A(3), Kawewat-Ho P(1), Bixby A(4), Rendulic
T(5), Park JM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Transplant Surgery, Keck Hospital of USC, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(2)Keck School of Medicine, Division of Gastrointestinal and Liver Diseases,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(3)Keck Hospital of USC, Department of Pharmacy Services, Los Angeles,
California, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacy Services, University Hospitals Cleveland Medical
Center, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(5)Department of Pharmacy Services, University of Kentucky HealthCare, Lexington,
Kentucky, USA.
(6)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, University of Michigan College of Pharmacy,
Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

BACKGROUND: Hepatitis B virus (HBV) reactivation in hepatitis B surface antigen
(HBsAg)-negative and hepatitis B core antibody (anti-HBc)-positive kidney
transplant recipients ranges between 1.4% and 9.6%. Limited evidence is available
regarding routine antiviral prophylaxis and identifiable risk factors for HBV
reactivation in this population.
METHODS: In this multicenter retrospective study, we evaluated the prevalence of 
HBV reactivation in HBsAg-negative anti-HBc-positive kidney transplant recipients
who did or did not receive antiviral prophylaxis. The primary outcome assessed
the prevalence of HBV reactivation, defined as a positive HBV DNA by PCR of any
viral load at or above the minimal detection level. The principal safety outcomes
assessed 1-year graft survival, 1-year all-cause mortality, biopsy-proven acute
rejection, and antibody-mediated rejection.
RESULTS: One hundred and sixty-one patients met inclusion criteria and comprised 
two groups, antiviral prophylaxis (n = 14) and no antiviral prophylaxis
(n = 147). Of patients who did not receive prophylaxis, only five (3.4%)
experienced HBV reactivation, whereas one (7.1%) patient in the prophylaxis group
experienced reactivation over a median follow-up of 1103 days (p = .43).
Furthermore, there were no differences with respect to all secondary outcomes.
Statistical analysis demonstrated delayed graft function to be a significant
factor associated with HBV reactivation.
CONCLUSION: These study results suggest that the prevalence of HBV reactivation
in HBsAg-negative anti-HBc-positive kidney transplant recipients is low,
regardless of antiviral prophylaxis. Furthermore, there were no significant
graft-related outcomes among those that did experience reactivation.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/tid.13751 
PMID: 34725887 

