
1. Int J Prev Med. 2021 Aug 24;12:105. doi: 10.4103/ijpvm.IJPVM_493_20. eCollection 
2021.

Potential Dietary Interventions for COVID-19 Infection Based on the Gut-Immune
Axis: An Update Review on Bioactive Component of Macronutrients.

Nejati M(1), Dehghan P(2), Hashempour-Baltork F(3), Alizadeh AM(3), Farshi P(4), 
Khosravi-Darani K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Student Research Committee, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz,
Iran.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Diet Therapy, Faculty of Nutrition and Food
Sciences, Tabriz, University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(3)Department of Food Science and Technology, National Nutrition and Food
Technology Research Institute, Faculty of Nutrition Science and Food Technology, 
Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Food Science Institute, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, USA.

Recently emerged coronavirus, known as SARS-CoV-2 or Covid-19 is considered as a 
serious threat for human health. Due to unavailable specific drugs for this
virus, there is an urgent need for supportive cares. Epigenetic immune boosting
approaches and developing anti-inflammatory agents by gut-associated bioactive
macronutrients can be plausible protective cares for COVID-19. Suitable intake of
bioactive macronutrients including prebiotics, fatty acids, proteins and
branched-chain amino acids may result in anti-viral responses through modulating 
macrophages and dendritic cells via Toll-like receptors, decreasing viral load,
inactivating the enveloped viruses, increasing the anti-inflammatory metabolites 
and inhibiting the proliferation of microbial organisms. Bioactive macronutrients
may help in promotion of immunological responses and recovery acceleration
against Covid-19. This review focuses on the mechanisms of bioactive
macronutrients and related clinical trials on enveloped viruses with emphasis on 
gut-microbiome-immune axis. Macronutrients and this axis may be conducive
strategies to protect host against the viral infection.

Copyright: © 2021 International Journal of Preventive Medicine.

DOI: 10.4103/ijpvm.IJPVM_493_20 
PMCID: PMC8505687
PMID: 34729139 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.

