
1. Anim Genet. 2021 Nov 2. doi: 10.1111/age.13152. [Epub ahead of print]

Characterisation and comparison of immune response mechanisms in an indigenous
and a commercial pig breed after classical swine fever vaccination.

Mehrotra A(1), Bhushan B(1), Kumar A(1), Panigrahi M(1), Chauhan A(2), Kumari
S(1), Saini BL(1), Dutt T(2), Mishra BP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Animal Genetics, ICAR - Indian Veterinary Research Institute,
Izatnangar, Bareilly, UP, 243122, India.
(2)Division of Livestock Production and Management, ICAR - Indian Veterinary
Research Institute, Izatnangar, Bareilly, UP, 243122, India.
(3)Animal Biotechnology, ICAR - Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnangar,
Bareilly, UP, 243122, India.

The live attenuated classical swine fever (CSF) vaccine has been successfully
used to prevent and control CSF outbreaks for 6 decades. However, the immune
response mechanisms against the vaccine remain poorly understood. Moreover, very 
few reports exist regarding the breed differences in the response to CSF vaccine.
In this study, we generated the peripheral blood mononuclear cell transcriptomes 
of indigenous Ghurrah and commercial Landrace pig breeds, before and 7 days after
CSF vaccination. Subsequently, between and within-breed differential gene
expression analyses were carried out. Results revealed large differences in
pre-vaccination peripheral blood mononuclear cell transcriptome profiles of the
two breeds, which were homogenised 7 days after vaccination. Before vaccination, 
gene set enrichment analysis showed that pathways related to antigen sensing and 
innate immune response were enriched in Ghurrah, while pathways related to
adaptive immunity were enriched in Landrace. Ghurrah exhibited greater
immunomodulation compared to Landrace following the vaccination. In Ghurrah,
cell-cycle processes and T-cell response pathways were upregulated after
vaccination. However, no pathways were upregulated in Landrace after vaccination.
Pathways related to inflammation were downregulated in both the breeds after
vaccination. Key regulators of inflammation such as IL1A, IL1B, NFKBIA and TNF
genes were strongly downregulated in both the breeds after vaccination. Overall, 
our results have elucidated the mechanisms of host immune response against CSF
vaccination in two distinct breeds and revealed common key genes instrumental in 
the global immune response to the vaccine.

© 2021 Stichting International Foundation for Animal Genetics.

DOI: 10.1111/age.13152 
PMID: 34729794 

