
1. PeerJ. 2021 Oct 11;9:e12227. doi: 10.7717/peerj.12227. eCollection 2021.

Extracellular pH, osmolarity, temperature and humidity could discourage
SARS-CoV-2 cell docking and propagation via intercellular signaling pathways.

Cicconetti F(1), Sestili P(2), Madiai V(3), Albertini MC(2), Campanella L(4),
Coppari S(2), Fraternale D(2), Saunders B(5)(6), Teodori L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency DEA-Surgery, University of Roma "La Sapienza", Rome,
Italy.
(2)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, University of Urbino, Urbino, Italy.
(3)Laboratory of Diagnostics and Metrology, FSN-TECFIS-DIM, ENEA, Frascati-Rome, 
Italy.
(4)Department of Chemistry, University of Roma "La Sapienza", Rome, Italy.
(5)Applied Physiology and Nutrition Research Group, Universidade de São Paulo,
São Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Institute of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Faculty of Medicine FMUSP,
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

The COVID-19 pandemic and its virus variants continue to pose a serious and
long-lasting threat worldwide. To combat the pandemic, the world's largest
COVID-19 vaccination campaign is currently ongoing. As of July 19th 2021, 26.2%
of the world population has received at least one dose of a COVID-19 vaccine
(1.04 billion), and one billion has been fully vaccinated, with very high
vaccination rates in countries like Israel, Malta, and the UEA. Conversely, only 
1% of people in low-income countries have received at least one dose with
examples of vaccination frequency as low as 0.07% in the Democratic Republic of
Congo. It is thus of paramount importance that more research on alternate methods
to counter cell infection and propagation is undertaken that could be implemented
in low-income countries. Moreover, an adjunctive therapeutic intervention would
help to avoid disease exacerbation in high-rate vaccinated countries too. Based
on experimental biochemical evidence on viral cell fusion and propagation, herein
we identify (i) extracellular pH (epH), (ii) temperature, and (iii) humidity and 
osmolarity as critical factors. These factors are here in discussed along with
their implications on mucus thick layer, proteases, abundance of sialic acid,
vascular permeability and exudate/edema. Heated, humidified air containing sodium
bicarbonate has long been used in the treatment of certain diseases, and here we 
argue that warm inhalation of sodium bicarbonate might successfully target these 
endpoints. Although we highlight the molecular/cellular basis and the signalling 
pathways to support this intervention, we underscore the need for clinical
investigations to encourage further research and clinical trials. In addition, we
think that such an approach is also important in light of the high mutation rate 
of this virus originating from a rapid increase.

© 2021 Cicconetti et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.12227 
PMCID: PMC8515994
PMID: 34721966 

Conflict of interest statement: Maria Cristina Albertini is an Academic Editor
for PeerJ.

