
1. ANZ J Surg. 2021 Nov 1. doi: 10.1111/ans.17340. [Epub ahead of print]

Clearing the air on surgical plume.

Watters DA(1)(2)(3), Foran P(1)(4)(5), McKinley S(1)(6), Campbell G(1)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Victorian Perioperative Consultative Council, Victoria, Australia.
(2)School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia.
(3)Department of Surgery, University Hospital Geelong, Barwon Health, Geelong,
Australia.
(4)College of Health and Medicine, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Australia.
(5)Mercy Hospital for Women, Heidelberg, Australia.
(6)CURA Day Hospitals Group, Australia.
(7)Department of Surgery, Bendigo Health, Bendigo, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Surgical smoke or plume is produced by a variety of surgical
coagulators and dissectors. A number of jurisdictions have recently introduced
policies to reduce the associated occupational health risks including WorkSafe
Victoria and New South Wales Health.
METHOD: This paper is a narrative review of potential risks, including any
associated with COVID-19, and options for mitigation.
RESULTS: Surgical smoke or plume contains potentially toxic chemicals, some of
which are carcinogens. Plume may also contain live virus, notably Human Papilloma
and Hepatitis B, though any possible viral transmission is limited to a few case 
reports. Despite identifying COVID-19 ribonucleic acid fragments in various body 
tissues and fluids there are no current reports of COVID-19 transmission.
Although plume is rapidly removed from the atmosphere in modern operating rooms, 
it is still inhaled by the operative team. Mitigation should include ensuring
diathermy devices have evacuators while plume extraction should be standard for
laparoscopic procedures. Consideration needs to be given to the potential to
compromise the operating field of view, or the noise of the extractor impairing
communication. There is an increasing range of suitable products on the market.
The future includes pendant systems built into the operating room.
CONCLUSION: The potential risks associated with surgical plume cannot be ignored.
Health services should invest in plume extraction devices with a view to
protecting their staff. The conduct of the operation should not be compromised by
the devices chosen. Future operating theatres need to be designed to minimize
exposure to plume.

© 2021 Royal Australasian College of Surgeons.

DOI: 10.1111/ans.17340 
PMID: 34724305 

