
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2022 Feb;127:104303. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2021.104303. Epub 2021 
Oct 30.

The mitochondrial activity of leukocytes from Artibeus jamaicensis bats remains
unaltered after several weeks of flying restriction.

Sánchez-García FJ(1), Aguilar-Setien JA(2), Pérez-Hernández CA(1), Kolstoe SE(3),
Coker A(4), Rendon-Franco E(5), Moreno-Altamirano MMB(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Inmunorregulación, Departamento de Inmunología, Escuela
Nacional de Ciencias Biológicas, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Ciudad de
México, Mexico.
(2)Centro Médico Nacional Siglo XXI, Ciudad de México, Mexico.
(3)School of Health Sciences, University of Portsmouth, Portsmouth, UK.
(4)University College London, London, UK.
(5)Departamento de Producción Agrícola y Animal, Universidad Autónoma
Metropolitana Unidad Xochimilco, Ciudad de México, Mexico.
(6)Laboratorio de Inmunorregulación, Departamento de Inmunología, Escuela
Nacional de Ciencias Biológicas, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Ciudad de
México, Mexico. Electronic address: mmorenoal@ipn.mx.

Bats are the only flying mammals known. They have longer lifespan than other
mammals of similar size and weight and can resist high loads of many pathogens,
mostly viruses, with no signs of disease. These distinctive characteristics have 
been attributed to their metabolic rate that is thought to be the result of their
flying lifestyle. Compared with non-flying mammals, bats have lower production of
reactive oxygen species (ROS), and high levels of antioxidant enzymes such as
superoxide dismutase. This anti-oxidative vs. oxidative profile may help to
explain bat's longer than expected lifespans. The aim of this study was to assess
the effect that a significant reduction in flying has on bats leukocytes
mitochondrial activity. This was assessed using samples of lymphoid and myeloid
cells from peripheral blood from Artibeus jamaicensis bats shortly after capture 
and up to six weeks after flying deprivation. Mitochondrial membrane potential
(Δψm), mitochondrial calcium (mCa2+), and mitochondrial ROS (mROS) were used as
key indicators of mitochondrial activity, while total ROS and glucose uptake were
used as additional indicators of cell metabolism. Results showed that total ROS
and glucose uptake were statistically significantly lower at six weeks of flying 
deprivation (p < 0.05), in both lymphoid and myeloid cells, however no
significant changes in mitochondrial activity associated with flying deprivation 
was observed (p > 0.05). These results suggest that bat mitochondria are stable
to sudden changes in physical activity, at least up to six weeks of flying
deprivation. However, decrease in total ROS and glucose uptake in myeloid cells
after six weeks of captivity suggest a compensatory mechanism due to the lack of 
the highly metabolic demands associated with flying.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2021.104303 
PMID: 34728275 

