
1. J Pineal Res. 2021 Nov 2:e12778. doi: 10.1111/jpi.12778. [Epub ahead of print]

Melatonin supplementation in the culture medium rescues impaired glucose
metabolism in IVF mice offspring.

Jia Y(1), Liu W(1)(2), Bai D(2), Zhang Y(2), Li Y(2), Liu Y(2), Yin J(2), Chen
Q(1), Ye M(1), Zhao Y(2), Kou X(2), Wang H(2), Gao S(2), Li K(1), Chen M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Assisted Reproduction, Shanghai First Maternity and Infant
Hospital, School of Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Clinical and Translational Research Center of Shanghai First Maternity and
Infant Hospital, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Signaling and Disease Research,
Frontier Science Center for Stem Cell Research, School of Life Sciences and
Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.

Increasing evidence suggests that in vitro fertilization (IVF) may be associated 
with an increased risk of developing obesity and metabolic diseases later in life
in the offspring. Notably, the addition of melatonin to culture medium may
improve embryo development and prevent cardiovascular dysfunction in IVF adult
mice. This study aimed to determine if melatonin supplementation in the culture
medium can reverse impaired glucose metabolism in IVF mice offspring and the
underlying mechanisms. Blastocysts used for transfer were generated by natural
mating (control group) or IVF with or without melatonin (10-6  M) supplementation
(mIVF and IVF group, respectively) in clinical-grade culture media. Here, we
first report that IVF decreased hepatic expression of Fbxl7, which was associated
with impaired glucose metabolism in mice offspring. Melatonin addition reversed
the phenotype by up-regulating the expression of hepatic Fbxl7. In vitro
experiments showed that Fbxl7 enhanced the insulin signaling pathway by degrading
RhoA through ubiquitination and was up-regulated by transcription factor Foxa2.
Specific knockout of Fbxl7 in the liver of adult mice, through tail intravenous
injection of recombinant adeno-associated virus, impaired glucose tolerance,
while overexpression of hepatic Fbxl7 significantly improved glucose tolerance in
adult IVF mice. Thus, the data suggest that Fbxl7 plays an important role in
maintaining glucose metabolism of mice, and melatonin supplementation in the
culture medium may rescue the long-term risk of metabolic diseases in IVF
offspring.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jpi.12778 
PMID: 34726796 

