
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 13;12:738073. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.738073. eCollection
2021.

Immune Response in Severe and Non-Severe Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
Infection: A Mechanistic Landscape.

Mukund K(1), Nayak P(1), Ashokkumar C(2)(3), Rao S(4), Almeda J(4),
Betancourt-Garcia MM(4), Sindhi R(2)(3), Subramaniam S(1)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
CA, United States.
(2)Plexision Inc., Pittsburgh, PA, United States.
(3)Hillman Center for Pediatric Transplantation, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, United States.
(4)DHR Health and DHR Health Institute for Research and Development, Edinburg,
TX, United States.
(5)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, CA, United States.
(6)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA, United States.

The mechanisms underlying the immune remodeling and severity response in
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) are yet to be fully elucidated. Our
comprehensive integrative analyses of single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNAseq) data 
from four published studies, in patients with mild/moderate and severe
infections, indicate a robust expansion and mobilization of the innate immune
response and highlight mechanisms by which low-density neutrophils and
megakaryocytes play a crucial role in the cross talk between lymphoid and myeloid
lineages. We also document a marked reduction of several lymphoid cell types,
particularly natural killer cells, mucosal-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells,
and gamma-delta T (γδT) cells, and a robust expansion and extensive heterogeneity
within plasmablasts, especially in severe COVID-19 patients. We confirm the
changes in cellular abundances for certain immune cell types within a new patient
cohort. While the cellular heterogeneity in COVID-19 extends across cells in both
lineages, we consistently observe certain subsets respond more potently to
interferon type I (IFN-I) and display increased cellular abundances across the
spectrum of severity, as compared with healthy subjects. However, we identify
these expanded subsets to have a more muted response to IFN-I within severe
disease compared to non-severe disease. Our analyses further highlight an
increased aggregation potential of the myeloid subsets, particularly monocytes,
in COVID-19. Finally, we provide detailed mechanistic insights into the
interaction between lymphoid and myeloid lineages, which contributes to the
multisystemic phenotype of COVID-19, distinguishing severe from non-severe
responses.

Copyright © 2021 Mukund, Nayak, Ashokkumar, Rao, Almeda, Betancourt-Garcia,
Sindhi and Subramaniam.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.738073 
PMCID: PMC8548832
PMID: 34721400  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Phenotyping of the independent cohort was
performed at Plexision, a University of Pittsburgh spinoff in which RS and the
University hold equity. RS and CA are currently employed at Plexision. The
remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conflict of interest.

