
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 13;12:747458. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.747458.
eCollection 2021.

Strategy and Performance Evaluation of Low-Frequency Variant Calling for
SARS-CoV-2 Using Targeted Deep Illumina Sequencing.

Van Poelvoorde LAE(1)(2)(3), Delcourt T(1), Coucke W(4), Herman P(5), De
Keersmaecker SCJ(1), Saelens X(2)(3), Roosens NHC(1), Vanneste K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Transversal Activities in Applied Genomics, Sciensano, Brussels, Belgium.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent, Belgium.
(4)Quality of Laboratories, Sciensano, Brussels, Belgium.
(5)Expertise and Service Provision, Sciensano, Brussels, Belgium.

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, caused by SARS-CoV-2, constitutes a tremendous
global health issue. Continuous monitoring of the virus has become a cornerstone 
to make rational decisions on implementing societal and sanitary measures to
curtail the virus spread. Additionally, emerging SARS-CoV-2 variants have
increased the need for genomic surveillance to detect particular strains because 
of their potentially increased transmissibility, pathogenicity and immune escape.
Targeted SARS-CoV-2 sequencing of diagnostic and wastewater samples has been
explored as an epidemiological surveillance method for the competent authorities.
Currently, only the consensus genome sequence of the most abundant strain is
taken into consideration for analysis, but multiple variant strains are now
circulating in the population. Consequently, in diagnostic samples, potential
co-infection(s) by several different variants can occur or quasispecies can
develop during an infection in an individual. In wastewater samples, multiple
variant strains will often be simultaneously present. Currently, quality criteria
are mainly available for constructing the consensus genome sequence, and some
guidelines exist for the detection of co-infections and quasispecies in
diagnostic samples. The performance of detection and quantification of
low-frequency variants using whole genome sequencing (WGS) of SARS-CoV-2 remains 
largely unknown. Here, we evaluated the detection and quantification of mutations
present at low abundances using the mutations defining the SARS-CoV-2 lineage
B.1.1.7 (alpha variant) as a case study. Real sequencing data were in silico
modified by introducing mutations of interest into raw wild-type sequencing data,
or by mixing wild-type and mutant raw sequencing data, to construct mixed samples
subjected to WGS using a tiling amplicon-based targeted metagenomics approach and
Illumina sequencing. As anticipated, higher variation and lower sensitivity were 
observed at lower coverages and allelic frequencies. We found that detection of
all low-frequency variants at an abundance of 10, 5, 3, and 1%, requires at least
a sequencing coverage of 250, 500, 1500, and 10,000×, respectively. Although
increasing variability of estimated allelic frequencies at decreasing coverages
and lower allelic frequencies was observed, its impact on reliable quantification
was limited. This study provides a highly sensitive low-frequency variant
detection approach, which is publicly available at https://galaxy.sciensano.be,
and specific recommendations for minimum sequencing coverages to detect
clade-defining mutations at certain allelic frequencies. This approach will be
useful to detect and quantify low-frequency variants in both diagnostic (e.g.,
co-infections and quasispecies) and wastewater [e.g., multiple variants of
concern (VOCs)] samples.

Copyright © 2021 Van Poelvoorde, Delcourt, Coucke, Herman, De Keersmaecker,
Saelens, Roosens and Vanneste.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.747458 
PMCID: PMC8548777
PMID: 34721349 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

