
1. mBio. 2021 Nov 2:e0262121. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02621-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Highly Potent Host-Specific Small-Molecule Inhibitor of Paramyxovirus and
Pneumovirus Replication with High Resistance Barrier.

Shrestha N(#)(1), Gall FM(#)(2), Mathieu C(3), Hierweger MM(1), Brügger
M(4)(5)(6), Alves MP(4)(5), Vesin J(7), Banfi D(7), Kalbermatter D(8), Horvat
B(3), Chambon M(7), Turcatti G(7), Fotiadis D(8), Riedl R(2), Plattet P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurological Sciences, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of
Berngrid.5734.5, Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Chemistry and Biotechnology, Center for Organic and Medicinal
Chemistry, Zurich University of Applied Sciences (ZHAW), Wädenswil, Switzerland.
(3)CIRI, Centre International de Recherche en Infectiologie, Team Immunobiology
of the Viral Infections, Univ Lyon, INSERM, U1111, CNRS, UMR5308, Université
Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Lyon, France.
(4)Institute of Virology and Immunology, Bern, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases and Pathobiology, Vetsuisse Faculty,
University of Berngrid.5734.5, Bern, Switzerland.
(6)Graduate School for Cellular and Biomedical Sciences, University of
Berngrid.5734.5, Bern, Switzerland.
(7)Biomolecular Screening Facility, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
(EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland.
(8)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, and Swiss National Centre of
Competence in Research (NCCR) TransCure, University of Berngrid.5734.5, Bern,
Switzerland.
(#)Contributed equally

Multiple enveloped RNA viruses of the family Paramyxoviridae and Pneumoviridae,
like measles virus (MeV), Nipah virus (NiV), canine distemper virus (CDV), or
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), are of high clinical relevance. Each year a
huge number of lives are lost as a result of these viral infections. Worldwide,
MeV infection alone is responsible for over a hundred thousand deaths each year
despite available vaccine. Therefore, there is an urgent need for treatment
options to counteract these viral infections. The development of antiviral drugs 
in general stands as a huge challenge due to the rapid emergence of viral escape 
mutants. Here, we disclose the discovery of a small-molecule antiviral, compound 
1 (ZHAWOC9045), active against several pneumo-/paramyxoviruses, including MeV,
NiV, CDV, RSV, and parainfluenza virus type 5 (PIV-5). A series of mechanistic
characterizations revealed that compound 1 targets a host factor which is
indispensable for viral genome replication. Drug resistance profiling against a
paramyxovirus model (CDV) demonstrated no detectable adaptation despite prolonged
time of investigation, thereby mitigating the rapid emergence of escape variants.
Furthermore, a thorough structure-activity relationship analysis of compound 1
led to the invention of 100-times-more potent-derivatives, e.g., compound 2
(ZHAWOC21026). Collectively, we present in this study an attractive host-directed
pneumoviral/paramyxoviral replication inhibitor with potential therapeutic
application. IMPORTANCE Measles virus, respiratory syncytial virus, canine
distemper virus, and Nipah virus are some of the clinically significant RNA
viruses that threaten substantial number of lives each year. Limited to no
availability of treatment options for these viral infections makes it arduous to 
handle the outbreaks. This highlights the major importance of developing
antivirals to fight not only ongoing infections but also potential future
epidemics. Most of the discovered antivirals, in clinical trials currently, are
virus targeted, which consequently poses the challenge of rapid emergence of
escape variants. Here, we present compound 1 (ZHAWOC9045), discovered to target
viral replication in a host-dependent manner, thereby exhibiting broad-spectrum
activity against several members of the family Pneumo-/Paramyxoviridae. The
inability of viruses to mutate against the inhibitor mitigated the critical issue
of generation of escape variants. Importantly, compound 1 was successfully
optimized to a highly potent variant, compound 2 (ZHAWOC21026), with a promising 
profile for pharmacological intervention.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02621-21 
PMCID: PMC8561388
PMID: 34724816 

