
1. Mol Plant Pathol. 2021 Nov 2. doi: 10.1111/mpp.13157. [Epub ahead of print]

Concurrent evolution of resistance and tolerance to potato virus Y in Capsicum
annuum revealed by genome-wide association.

Tamisier L(1)(2), Szadkowski M(1)(2), Girardot G(1), Djian-Caporalino C(3),
Palloix A(2), Hirsch J(1), Moury B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pathologie Végétale, INRAE, Montfavet, France.
(2)GAFL, INRAE, Montfavet, France.
(3)Institut Sophia Agrobiotech, INRAE, Université Côte d'Azur, CNRS, Sophia
Antipolis, France.

We performed a genome-wide association study of pepper (Capsicum annuum)
tolerance to potato virus Y (PVY). For 254 pepper accessions, we estimated the
tolerance to PVY as the coefficient of regression of the fresh weight (or height)
of PVY-infected and mock-inoculated plants against within-plant virus load. Small
(strongly negative) coefficients of regression indicate low tolerance because
plant biomass or growth decreases sharply as virus load increases. The tolerance 
level varied largely, with some pepper accessions showing no symptoms or fairly
mild mosaics, whereas about half (48%) of the accessions showed necrotic
symptoms. We found two adjacent single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at one
extremity of chromosome 9 that were significantly associated with tolerance to
PVY. Similarly, in three biparental pepper progenies, we showed that the
induction of necrosis on PVY systemic infection segregated as a monogenic trait
determined by a locus on chromosome 9. Our results also demonstrate the existence
of a negative correlation between resistance and tolerance among the cultivated
pepper accessions at both the phenotypic and genetic levels. By comparing the
distributions of the tolerance-associated SNP alleles and previously identified
PVY resistance-associated SNP alleles, we showed that cultivated pepper
accessions possess favourable alleles for both resistance and tolerance less
frequently than expected under random associations, while the minority of wild
pepper accessions frequently combined resistance and tolerance alleles. This
divergent evolution of PVY resistance and tolerance could be related to pepper
domestication or farmer's selection.

© 2021 The Authors. Molecular Plant Pathology published by British Society for
Plant Pathology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mpp.13157 
PMID: 34729890 

