
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2021 Nov 2;15(11):e0009839. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0009839. eCollection 2021 Nov.

Dengue and Zika virus infection patterns vary among Aedes aegypti field
populations from Belo Horizonte, a Brazilian endemic city.

Godoy RSM(1), Felix LDS(1)(2), Orfanó ADS(1), Chaves BA(3)(4), Nogueira PM(1),
Costa BDA(1)(5), Soares AS(1)(2), Oliveira CCA(1), Nacif-Pimenta R(1), Silva
BM(6), Duarte AP(3)(4), Lacerda MVG(3)(4)(7), Monteiro WM(3)(4), Secundino
NFC(1)(3)(4), Pimenta PFP(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Pesquisas René Rachou, FIOCRUZ, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais,
Brazil.
(2)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Biologia Celular, Universidade Federal de Minas
Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(3)Fundação de Medicina Tropical Dr. Heitor Vieira Dourado, Manaus, Amazonas,
Brazil.
(4)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Medicina Tropical, Universidade do Estado do
Amazonas, Manaus, Amazonas, Brazil.
(5)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências da Saúde, FIOCRUZ, Belo Horizonte, Minas
Gerais, Brazil.
(6)Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Ouro Preto, Ouro 
Preto, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(7)Instituto Leônidas e Maria Deane, FIOCRUZ, Manaus, Amazonas, Brazil.

Dengue virus (DENV) and Zika virus (ZIKV) belong to the same viral family, the
Flaviviridae. They cause recurring threats to the public health systems of
tropical countries such as Brazil. The primary Brazilian vector of both viruses
is the mosquito Aedes aegypti. After the mosquito ingests a blood meal from an
infected person, the viruses infect and replicate in the midgut, disseminate to
secondary tissues and reach the salivary gland (SG), where they are ready to be
transmitted to a vertebrate host. It is thought that the intrinsic discrepancies 
among mosquitoes could affect their ability to deal with viral infections. This
study confirms that the DENV and ZIKV infection patterns of nine Ae. aegypti
field populations found in geographically separate health districts of an endemic
Brazilian city vary. We analyzed the infection rate, disseminated infection,
vector competence, and viral load through quantitative PCR. Mosquitoes were
challenged using the membrane-feeding assay technique and were tested seven and
fourteen days post-infection (early and late infection phases, respectively). The
infection responses varied among the Ae. aegypti populations for both
flaviviruses in the two infection phases. There was no similarity between DENV
and ZIKV vector competencies or viral loads. According to the results of our
study, the risk of viral transmission overtime after infection either increases
or remains unaltered in ZIKV infected vectors. However, the risk may increase,
decrease, or remain unaltered in DENV-infected vectors depending on the mosquito 
population. For both flaviviruses, the viral load persisted in the body even
until the late infection phase. In contrast to DENV, the ZIKV accumulated in the 
SG over time in all the mosquito populations. These findings are novel and may
help direct the development of control strategies to fight dengue and Zika
outbreaks in endemic regions, and provide a warning about the importance of
understanding mosquito responses to arboviral infections.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0009839 
PMCID: PMC8562804
PMID: 34727099 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

