
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2021 Nov 1;15(11):e0009925. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0009925. eCollection 2021 Nov.

A novel high performing multiplex immunoassay Multi-HTLV for serological
confirmation and typing of HTLV infections.

Marqué L(1), Liehl P(1), De Boer J(2), Pottel H(2), Murphy EL(3), Bruhn R(3),
Stone M(3), Kaidarova Z(3), Lee TH(3), Busch M(3), Zrein M(1).

Author information: 
(1)InfYnity Biomarkers, Lyon, France.
(2)Department of Public Health and Primary Care, KU Leuven Campus Kulak Kortrijk,
Kortrijk, Belgium.
(3)Vitalant Research Institute, San Francisco, California, United States of
America.

BACKGROUND: Human T-Cell Lymphotropic Viruses (HTLV) type 1 and type 2 account
for an estimated 5 to 10 million infections worldwide and are transmitted through
breast feeding, sexual contacts and contaminated cellular blood components.
HTLV-associated syndromes are considered as neglected diseases for which there
are no vaccines or therapies available, making it particularly important to
ensure the best possible diagnosis to enable proper counselling of infected
persons and avoid secondary transmission. Although high quality antibody
screening assays are available, currently available confirmatory tests are costly
and have variable performance, with high rates of indeterminate and non-typable
results reported in many regions of the world. The objective of this project was 
to develop and validate a new high-performance multiplex immunoassay for
confirmation and discrimination of HTLV-1 and HTLV-2 strains.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The multiplex platform was used first as a tool
to identify suitable antigens and in a second step for assay development. With
data generated on over 400 HTLV-positive blood donors sourced from USA and French
blood banks, we developed and validated a high-precision interpretation
algorithm. The Multi-HTLV assay demonstrated very high performance for
confirmation and strain discrimination with 100% sensitivity, 98.1% specificity
and 100% of typing accuracy in validation samples. The assay can be interpreted
either visually or automatically with a colorimetric image reader and custom
algorithm, providing highly reliable results.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The newly developed Multi-HTLV is very competitive with
currently used confirmatory assays and reduces considerably the number of
indeterminate results. The multiparametric nature of the assay opens new avenues 
to study specific serological signatures of each patient, follow the evolution of
infection, and explore utility for HTLV disease prognosis. Improving HTLV
diagnostic testing will be critical to reduce transmission and to improve
monitoring of seropositive patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0009925 
PMCID: PMC8584783
PMID: 34724004 

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal’s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: LM, PL, MZ are
currently employed by INFYNITY BIOMARKERS. The other authors have declared that
no competing interests exist.

