
1. Cureus. 2021 Sep 23;13(9):e18207. doi: 10.7759/cureus.18207. eCollection 2021
Sep.

Epstein-Barr Virus: An Infrequent Pathogen of Acute Undifferentiated Febrile
Illness From a Tertiary Care Hospital in Southern India.

Dhodapkar R(1), M M(2), Thangavelu K(2), Sivaradjy M(1), Veerappan K(1), Gunalan 
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical
Education and Research, Puducherry, IND.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical
Sciences, Lucknow, IND.

CONTEXT: Acute undifferentiated febrile illness (AUFI) is characterized by a
sudden onset of raised body temperature and is a common cause of hospital
admission though not recognized as a disease state by the World Health
Organization. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is reported to account for a significant
occurrence of AUFI cases.
AIM: To know the role of EBV infection as a cause of acute undifferentiated
febrile illness (AUFI).
SETTINGS AND DESIGN: We have used the combination of EBV serological assays to
establish the role of the Epstein-Barr virus as the cause of acute
undifferentiated febrile illness.
METHODS AND MATERIAL: A total of 721 suspected cases of acute undifferentiated
febrile illness which were tested negative for other common causes of acute
febrile illness were selected for the study. Serum samples collected from these
cases were tested for the presence of the EBV viral capsid antigen (VCA) IgM
antibody. All positive serum samples were tested for the presence of EBV
Epstein-Barr nuclear antigen (EBNA) IgG.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS USED:  Statistical analysis was performed with the help
of Microsoft Excel software (Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, USA).  Results: Out 
of 721 suspected AUFI cases tested for EBV VCA IgM antibodies, 117 samples were
positive and 604 were negative. All these 117 samples were tested for EBV EBNA
IgG antibodies in which 88 were positive and 29 were negative. In our study, we
found that around 4% (positive for VCA IgM and negative for EBNA IgG) of AUFI
cases can be attributed to primary acute EBV infection.
CONCLUSIONS: EBV infection should be considered particularly in AUFI cases of
less than five years of age even in those who do not meet the typical
presentation of fever, lymphadenopathy and sore throat. Our study should help to 
raise awareness regarding the possibility of EBV infection particularly in AUFI
cases. A high index of suspicion and timely diagnosis will definitely help
clinicians to avoid a battery of investigations and misuse of antibiotics in
cases of AUFI.

Copyright © 2021, Dhodapkar et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.18207 
PMCID: PMC8544617
PMID: 34722023 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

