
1. Front Psychol. 2021 Oct 13;12:721588. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.721588. eCollection
2021.

What Drives Task Performance in Fluency Tasks in People With HIV?

Rofes A(1), Sampedro B(2), Abusamra L(3), Cañataro P(3), Jonkers R(1), Abusamra
V(2)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Language and Cognition Groningen (CLCG), University of Groningen,
Groningen, Netherlands.
(2)Linguistics School, University of Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Hospital Dr. Diego Thompson, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(4)Argentina's National Council for Scientific and Technical Research (CONICET), 
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(5)Hospital Interzonal General de Agudos Eva Perón, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Introduction: Fluency tasks require language (i.e., semantics, phonological
output lexicon, and phonological assembly) and executive functions (i.e.,
inhibition; mental set shifting; updating, and monitoring). Little is known about
whether people with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) are more impaired on a
specific type of fluency task and what aspects of language and executive
functions drive such performance. Aims: To understand (1) whether people with HIV
are more impaired in animal, letter, or unconstrained fluency relative to a
normative sample; (2) whether there exist differences between tasks relative to
the total number of words; and (3) which aspects of executive function and
language are involved in their performance. Methods: Data from animal, letter,
and unconstrained fluency of 50 Spanish-speaking people with HIV were analyzed.
The number of switches and mean cluster size for each task and 10 word properties
(e.g., frequency, age of acquisition, length in graphemes) for each of the
correct words were measured. A chi-square test was used to address Aim 1, linear 
mixed effects models for Aim 2, and random forests and conditional inference
trees for Aim 3. The results were cross-validated with a normative sample.
Results: People with HIV were not more impaired in animal, letter, or
unconstrained fluency relative to a normative sample. People with HIV produced
fewer words in letter fluency compared to animal and unconstrained fluency. In
addition, they produced fewer words in animal fluency compared to unconstrained
fluency. Number of switches emerged as the most important variable to predict the
total number of correct words when considering the three tasks together and for
each task separately. Word frequency was relevant to predict animal fluency, age 
of acquisition to predict letter fluency, and cluster size to predict
unconstrained fluency. These results were cross-validated with the exception
cluster size. Conclusion: People with HIV rely on language (phonological output
lexicon, not necessarily semantics) and executive functioning (updating and
monitoring) to produce words in fluency tasks. These results concur with the
current literature. Future work may correlate fluency scores with other tests
measuring language and executive functions or study other types of fluency tasks 
(e.g., action, cities, supermarket, and professions).

Copyright © 2021 Rofes, Sampedro, Abusamra, Cañataro, Jonkers and Abusamra.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.721588 
PMCID: PMC8548841
PMID: 34721177 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

