
1. Epidemiol Prev. 2021;45(5):401-410. doi: 10.19191/EP21.5.A003.098.

[The CCM Project "Preventing vector-borne diseases through the development and
pilot implementation of new operational supporting tools"].

[Article in Italian]

Angelini P(1), Parodi P(2), Bellini R(3), Venturi G(4), Montarsi F(5), Capelli
G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Servizio prevenzione collettiva e sanità pubblica, Regione Emilia-Romagna,
Bologna; paola.angelini@regione.emilia-romagna.it.
(2)Direzione generale della prevenzione sanitaria, Ministero della salute, Roma.
(3)Dipartimento entomologia medica e veterinaria, Centro agricoltura ambiente
"Giorgio Nicoli", Crevalcore (BO).
(4)Istituto superiore di sanità, Roma.
(5)Istituto zooprofilattico sperimentale delle Venezie, sede di Legnaro (PD).

The relevant ecological changes due to the anthropological pressure on the planet
is causing reactions in the biological systems, which we must understand and
characterize at the local scale to assist the adoption of suitable decisions in
the public health risk management. The project presented in this paper is focused
on the vector-borne diseases, mainly transmitted by mosquitoes. The species of
mosquito currently playing an active role of public health importance in Italy
are Aedes albopictus, as a vector of Chikungunya, Dengue and Zika viruses, as
well as Culex pipiens, as a vector of West Nile and Usutu viruses. Predictive
models are indicating the risk of introduction and establishment in the
Mediterranean basin of Aedes aegypti, which is causing a mayor concern. The
project has been conducted by the Emilia-Romagna, Piemonte, Veneto, Marche and
Sicilia Regions, together with the Italian National Health Institute. The aim was
to develop and pilot testing new approaches and technological tools possibly
assisting the public health system in the management of the risk. The activities 
have been organized on six specific objectives: 1. Development and field testing 
of guidelines for the surveillance of invasive mosquito species; 2. Creation of
risk maps for Chikungunya, Dengue and Zika viruses based on the quantitative
monitoring of Aedes albopictus populations; 3. Shaping web platform models
assisting the sharing of data from/to actors involved in the integrated
surveillance of West Nile at the regional level; 4. Developing communication
formats dealing with vector borne diseases addressing citizen and specific
categories; 5. Approaching the cost-benefit analysis in the view to assist
decision makers; 6. Sero-surveillance on arboviruses not included in the Ministry
directive (Tick Borne Encephalitis and Toscana virus). The achieved results are
presented and the acquired experience is made available to promote the adoptions 
on a larger scale of the approaches and methods to be certainly adapted in the
specific contexts. The one health approach seems suitable to address the
necessities emerging in this field by taking into consideration the different
triggers shaping the dynamics we are observing.

DOI: 10.19191/EP21.5.A003.098 
PMID: 34738457  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

