
1. PLoS Genet. 2021 Nov 4;17(11):e1009885. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1009885.
eCollection 2021 Nov.

Serotonin transporter-mediated molecular axis regulates regional retinal ganglion
cell vulnerability and axon regeneration after nerve injury.

Kingston R(1), Amin D(1), Misra S(1), Gross JM(1)(2), Kuwajima T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, The Louis J. Fox Center for Vision Restoration,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(2)Department of Developmental Biology, The McGowan Institute for Regenerative
Medicine, The University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Molecular insights into the selective vulnerability of retinal ganglion cells
(RGCs) in optic neuropathies and after ocular trauma can lead to the development 
of novel therapeutic strategies aimed at preserving RGCs. However, little is
known about what molecular contexts determine RGC susceptibility. In this study, 
we show the molecular mechanisms underlying the regional differential
vulnerability of RGCs after optic nerve injury. We identified RGCs in the mouse
peripheral ventrotemporal (VT) retina as the earliest population of RGCs
susceptible to optic nerve injury. Mechanistically, the serotonin transporter
(SERT) is upregulated on VT axons after injury. Utilizing SERT-deficient mice,
loss of SERT attenuated VT RGC death and led to robust retinal axon regeneration.
Integrin β3, a factor mediating SERT-induced functions in other systems, is also 
upregulated in RGCs and axons after injury, and loss of integrin β3 led to VT RGC
protection and axon regeneration. Finally, RNA sequencing analyses revealed that 
loss of SERT significantly altered molecular signatures in the VT retina after
optic nerve injury, including expression of the transmembrane protein, Gpnmb.
GPNMB is rapidly downregulated in wild-type, but not SERT- or integrin
β3-deficient VT RGCs after injury, and maintaining expression of GPNMB in RGCs
via AAV2 viruses even after injury promoted VT RGC survival and axon
regeneration. Taken together, our findings demonstrate that the SERT-integrin
β3-GPNMB molecular axis mediates selective RGC vulnerability and axon
regeneration after optic nerve injury.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1009885 
PMCID: PMC8594818
PMID: 34735454 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

