
1. Cell Res. 2021 Nov 4. doi: 10.1038/s41422-021-00581-y. [Epub ahead of print]

Comparison of viral RNA-host protein interactomes across pathogenic RNA viruses
informs rapid antiviral drug discovery for SARS-CoV-2.

Zhang S(#)(1), Huang W(#)(1), Ren L(#)(2)(3), Ju X(#)(4), Gong M(#)(4), Rao
J(#)(2)(3), Sun L(1), Li P(1), Ding Q(5), Wang J(6)(7), Zhang QC(8).

Author information: 
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for
Structural Biology & Frontier Research Center for Biological Structure, Center
for Synthetic and Systems Biology, Tsinghua-Peking Joint Center for Life
Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
(2)NHC Key Laboratory of Systems Biology of Pathogens and Christophe Mérieux
Laboratory, Institute of Pathogen Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & 
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease Pathogenomics, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(4)Center for Infectious Disease Research, School of Medicine, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China.
(5)Center for Infectious Disease Research, School of Medicine, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China. qding@tsinghua.edu.cn.
(6)NHC Key Laboratory of Systems Biology of Pathogens and Christophe Mérieux
Laboratory, Institute of Pathogen Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & 
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China. wangjw28@163.com.
(7)Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease Pathogenomics, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
wangjw28@163.com.
(8)MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for
Structural Biology & Frontier Research Center for Biological Structure, Center
for Synthetic and Systems Biology, Tsinghua-Peking Joint Center for Life
Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
qczhang@tsinghua.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

In contrast to the extensive research about viral protein-host protein
interactions that has revealed major insights about how RNA viruses engage with
host cells during infection, few studies have examined interactions between host 
factors and viral RNAs (vRNAs). Here, we profiled vRNA-host protein interactomes 
for three RNA virus pathogens (SARS-CoV-2, Zika, and Ebola viruses) using
ChIRP-MS. Comparative interactome analyses discovered both common and
virus-specific host responses and vRNA-associated proteins that variously promote
or restrict viral infection. In particular, SARS-CoV-2 binds and hijacks the host
factor IGF2BP1 to stabilize vRNA and augment viral translation. Our
interactome-informed drug repurposing efforts identified several FDA-approved
drugs (e.g., Cepharanthine) as broad-spectrum antivirals in cells and hACE2
transgenic mice. A co-treatment comprising Cepharanthine and Trifluoperazine was 
highly potent against the newly emerged SARS-CoV-2 B.1.351 variant. Thus, our
study illustrates the scientific and medical discovery utility of adopting a
comparative vRNA-host protein interactome perspective.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41422-021-00581-y 
PMCID: PMC8566969
PMID: 34737357 

