
1. Acta Biomed. 2021 Oct 5;92(S6):e2021461. doi: 10.23750/abm.v92iS6.12313.

One-week longitudinal daily description of moral distress, coping, and general
health in healthcare workers during the first wave of the COVID-19 outbreak in
Italy: A quantitative diary study.

Manara DF(1), Villa G(2), Korelic L(3), Arrigoni C(4), Dellafiore F(5), Milani
V(6), Ghizzardi G(7), Magon A(8), Giannetta N(9), Caruso R(10).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Nursing Research and Innovation, Vita-Salute San Raffaele
University, Milan. manara.duilio@hsr.it.
(2)Center for Nursing Research and Innovation, Vita-Salute San Raffaele
University, Milan. villa.giulia@hsr.it.
(3)Nephrology and Rheumatology ward, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo,
Pavia, Italy. lisa.korelic01@universitadipavia.it.
(4)3Department of Public Health, Experimental and Forensic Medicine, Section of
Hygiene, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. cristina.arrigoni@unipv.it.
(5)Department of Public Health, Experimental and Forensic Medicine, Section of
Hygiene, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. federica.dellafiore@unipv.it.
(6)Biostatistics service, Scientific Directorate, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato,
San Donato Milanese, Milan, Italy. valentina.milani@grupposandonato.it.
(7)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, University of Rome Tor Vergata,
Rome, Italy. gretaghizza91@gmail.com.
(8)Health Professions Research and Development Unit, IRCCS Policlinico San
Donato, San Donato Milanese, Milan, Italy. arianna.magon@grupposandonato.it.
(9)Faculty of Philosophy, Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy.
giannetta.noemi@hsr.it.
(10)Health Professions Research and Development Unit, IRCCS Policlinico San
Donato, San Donato Milanese, Milan, Italy. rosario.caruso@grupposandonato.it.

Background and aim of the work .The fluctuation from day to day within a working 
week of moral distress, coping, and general health of frontline healthcare
workers (HCWs) in facing the challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic has been poorly 
studied. This study described the weekly fluctuation from day to day of moral
distress, coping, and general health in frontline HCWs who worked during the
first epidemic wave (May-June 2020) of the COVID-19 pandemic in Italy.METHODS:
This study has an intensive longitudinal design, and a convenience sampling
procedure was employed to enroll physicians, nurses, allied health professions,
and healthcare assistants. Data collection was performed using diary encompassed 
four sections: a socio-demographic form (required only at the baseline data
collection) and three scales to assess moral distress, coping, and general
health.
RESULTS: Results confirmed poor perceived health and mild moral distress in
frontline HCWs, especially in HCWs with offspring, during the initial phases of
the COVID-19 pandemic and the stability of their daily perception over a working 
week regarding moral distress, general health, and avoidant coping strategy,
while approach coping strategy reported a slight fluctuation over time.
CONCLUSIONS: Accordingly, on the one hand, these results confirm that outcomes
regarding mental health and moral distress are pretty stable and provide
insights, on the other hand, regarding the possible organizational interventions 
to support approach coping strategy as it seems more susceptible to variation
over time.

DOI: 10.23750/abm.v92iS6.12313 
PMID: 34739455  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

