
1. Biologicals. 2021 Nov;74:10-15. doi: 10.1016/j.biologicals.2021.10.003. Epub 2021
Nov 1.

Zoonoses Anticipation and Preparedness Initiative, stakeholders conference,
February 4 & 5, 2021.

Beer M(1), Amery L(2), Bosch BJ(3), Brix A(4), Daramola O(2), Inman S(2),
Jungbäck C(5), Kortekaas J(6), Lindo V(2), Okorji-Obike U(2), Rodriguez-Conde
S(2), Tang A(2), Tchelet R(7), Vandeputte J(8), Wichgers Schreur PJ(6), Osterhaus
A(9), Haagmans B(10), Audonnet JC(11).

Author information: 
(1)European Virus Bioinformatics Center, Jena, Germany; Institute of Diagnostic
Virology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institute, Greifswald, Germany.
(2)Biopharmaceutical Development, BioPharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, Cambridge,
United Kingdom.
(3)Virology Section, Infectious Diseases and Immunology Division, Department of
Biomolecular Health Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University,
Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(4)Boehringer Ingelheim Human Pharma, Biberach, Germany.
(5)International Association for Biological Standardization for Europe, Lyon,
France.
(6)Department of Virology and Molecular Biology, Wageningen Bioveterinary
Research, Lelystad, the Netherlands.
(7)Dyadic Netherlands, Wageningen, the Netherlands.
(8)International Association for Biological Standardization for Europe, Lyon,
France. Electronic address: joris.vandeputte@iabs.org.
(9)University of Veterinary Medicine, Hannover, Germany.
(10)Department of Viroscience, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, the
Netherlands.
(11)Boehringer Ingelheim Animal Health, Global Innovation, Saint Priest, France. 
Electronic address: jean-christophe.audonnet@boehringer-ingelheim.com.

The Zoonoses Anticipation and Preparedness Initiative (ZAPI) was set up to
prepare for future outbreaks and to develop and implement new technologies to
accelerate development and manufacturing of vaccines and monoclonal antibodies.
To be able to achieve surge capacity, an easy deployment and production at
multiple sites is needed. This requires a straightforward manufacturing system
with a limited number of steps in upstream and downstream processes, a minimum
number of in vitro Quality Control assays, and robust and consistent platforms.
Three viruses were selected as prototypes: Middle East Respiratory Syndrome
(MERS) coronavirus, Rift Valley fever virus, and Schmallenberg virus. Selected
antibodies against the viral surface antigens were manufactured by transient gene
expression in Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cells, scaling up to 200 L. For vaccine
production, viral antigens were fused to multimeric protein scaffold particles
using the SpyCatcher/SpyTag system. In vivo models demonstrated the efficacy of
both antibodies and vaccines. The final step in speeding up vaccine (and
antibody) development is the regulatory appraisal of new platform technologies.
Towards this end, within ZAPI, a Platform Master File (PfMF) was developed, as
part of a licensing dossier, to facilitate and accelerate the scientific
assessment by avoiding repeated discussion of already accepted platforms. The
veterinary PfMF was accepted, whereas the human PfMF is currently under review by
the European Medicines Agency, aiming for publication of the guideline by January
2022.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biologicals.2021.10.003 
PMCID: PMC8560051
PMID: 34736782 

