
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 3:JVI0168921. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01689-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Internalization of HIV-1 by phagocytes is increased when virions are opsonized
with multimeric antibody in the presence of complement.

Gach JS(1), Matsuno SY(1), Mercado M(1), Hangartner L(2), Forthal DN(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, University of
California School of Medicine, Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La 
Jolla, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA.

The low abundance of envelope spikes and the inability of IgG to aggregate
virions render HIV-1 an inadequate target for antibody-mediated clearance by
phagocytes. In an attempt to improve the ability of antibody to mediate the
internalization of HIV-1 virions, we generated multimers of the broadly
neutralizing HIV-1-specific monoclonal antibody (mAb) VRC01 using site-directed
mutagenesis of the Fc segment. We then measured virion internalization using
primary human monocytes and neutrophils. We found that, in the absence of
complement, immune complexes consisting of HIV-1 virions and VRC01 multimers were
slightly more efficiently internalized than were complexes formed with monomeric 
VRC01. The presence of complement, however, greatly augmented internalization of 
immune complexes formed with the multimeric mAb but had little impact on
monomeric mAb-mediated internalization. Multimerization and the presence of
complement overcome the limited ability of monomeric antibody to mediate
internalization of HIV-1 virions and may thus provide a therapeutic approach to
clearing virus. IMPORTANCE Antibody-mediated internalization of HIV-1 by
phagocytes, a potential mechanism for clearing virus, is very inefficient. In an 
effort to improve viral clearance, we produced a multimeric form of the broadly
neutralizing monoclonal antibody VRC01. We found that VRC01 antibody multimers
(primarily hexamers) were only slightly more efficient in mediating HIV-1
internalization than was monomeric VRC01. However, the addition of complement
resulted in substantially greater internalization of multimer-opsonized virus. In
contrast, complement had little if any impact on internalization of
monomer-opsonized virus. Therefore, antibody multimerization in combination with 
complement may overcome the limited ability of monomeric antibody to mediate
internalization of HIV-1 virions. Our findings may provide a therapeutic approach
to clearing virus.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01689-21 
PMID: 34730392 

