
1. BMJ Open. 2021 Nov 3;11(11):e049928. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-049928.

Which older Brazilians will accept a COVID-19 vaccine? Cross-sectional evidence
from the Brazilian Longitudinal Study of Aging (ELSI-Brazil).

Macinko J(1)(2), Seixas BV(3), Mambrini JVM(4), Lima-Costa MF(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Policy and Management, University of California Los
Angeles Jonathan and Karin Fielding School of Public Health, Los Angeles,
California, USA jmacinko@ucla.edu.
(2)Department of Community Health Sciences, University of California Los Angeles 
Jonathan and Karin Fielding School of Public Health, Los Angeles, California,
USA.
(3)Department of Health Policy and Management, University of California Los
Angeles Jonathan and Karin Fielding School of Public Health, Los Angeles,
California, USA.
(4)Programa de Pós Graduação em Saúde Pública, Universidade Federal de Minas
Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(5)Núcleo de Estudos em Saúde Pública e Envelhecimento, Fundacao Oswaldo Cruz
Instituto Rene Rachou, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.

OBJECTIVES: Vaccine hesitancy may represent a barrier to effective COVID-19
immunisation campaigns. This study assesses individual, disease-specific and
contextual factors associated with COVID-19 vaccine acceptance among a nationally
representative sample of older Brazilian adults.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional analysis of data from household interviews and a
supplementary telephone survey.
SETTING: Brazil and its five geographic regions.
PARTICIPANTS: Data are derived from 6584 individuals aged 50 years and over who
participated in the second wave of the Brazilian Longitudinal Study of Aging.
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY OUTCOME MEASURES: Survey-weighted multinomial logistic
regression assesses factors associated with intending, not intending or being
uncertain about one's intention to vaccinate against COVID-19.
FINDINGS: Seventy-one per cent of study participants intend to receive a COVID-19
vaccine once available, while 17% (representative of nearly 9 million people)
have no intention to vaccinate, and 12% are still undecided. Besides age,
demographic and health-related factors related to COVID-19 severity and
complications were not associated with intention to vaccinate. Those who most
trusted social media or friends and family for COVID-19 information and those who
did not trust any information source were 68% and 78% more likely to refuse
vaccination, respectively, as compared with those who trusted official
information sources. People who inconsistently used face masks when outside were 
3.4 times more likely than consistent face mask users to intend to refuse
vaccination. Higher municipal COVID-19 fatality rates were negatively associated 
with vaccine refusal.
CONCLUSIONS: Most national COVID-19 immunisation strategies identify older
individuals as among those prioritised for early vaccination, given their
increased risk of more severe symptoms and complications of the disease. Because 
individual, disease-specific, and contextual factors were associated with vaccine
acceptance, there is a clear need for multilevel and multichannel information and
outreach campaigns to increase COVID-19 vaccine acceptance among vulnerable older
populations.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-049928 
PMCID: PMC8572357
PMID: 34732479  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

