
1. Antiviral Res. 2021 Dec;196:105195. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2021.105195. Epub
2021 Nov 1.

Determination of infectious hepatitis B virus particles by an end-point dilution 
assay identifies a novel class of inhibitors.

Jo E(1), Kim H(2), König A(3), Yang J(4), Yoon SK(5), Windisch MP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Applied Molecular Virology Laboratory, Discovery Biology Division, Institut
Pasteur Korea, 696 Sampyeong-dong, Bundang-gu, Seongnam-si, Gyeonggi-do, South
Korea. Electronic address: eunji.jo@ip-korea.org.
(2)Applied Molecular Virology Laboratory, Discovery Biology Division, Institut
Pasteur Korea, 696 Sampyeong-dong, Bundang-gu, Seongnam-si, Gyeonggi-do, South
Korea; Division of Bio-Medical Science and Technology, University of Science and 
Technology, 217, Gajeong-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, South Korea. Electronic
address: hyun.kim@ip-korea.org.
(3)Applied Molecular Virology Laboratory, Discovery Biology Division, Institut
Pasteur Korea, 696 Sampyeong-dong, Bundang-gu, Seongnam-si, Gyeonggi-do, South
Korea. Electronic address: alexander.koenig@ip-korea.org.
(4)Applied Molecular Virology Laboratory, Discovery Biology Division, Institut
Pasteur Korea, 696 Sampyeong-dong, Bundang-gu, Seongnam-si, Gyeonggi-do, South
Korea. Electronic address: Jaewon.yang@ip-korea.org.
(5)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
College of Medicine, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, The Catholic University of Korea,
Seoul, South Korea; Catholic University Liver Research Center, The Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul, South Korea. Electronic address:
yoonsk@catholic.ac.kr.
(6)Applied Molecular Virology Laboratory, Discovery Biology Division, Institut
Pasteur Korea, 696 Sampyeong-dong, Bundang-gu, Seongnam-si, Gyeonggi-do, South
Korea; Division of Bio-Medical Science and Technology, University of Science and 
Technology, 217, Gajeong-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, South Korea. Electronic
address: marc.windisch@ip-korea.org.

The quantification of infectious virus particles is fundamental to perform in
vitro virology studies. To determine the number of hepatitis B virus (HBV)
genome-containing particles in vitro, the genome equivalents (GEq) are measured
using quantitative PCR (qPCR). However, in addition to infectious virions, HBV
DNA-containing, non-infectious HBV particles are also produced in vitro, which
can lead to an over-estimation of the number of infectious HBV particles when
analyzed by qPCR. Here, we establish an end-point dilution assay that can
precisely determine the number of infectious HBV particles. The cell-based HBV
infection assay uses a 384-well plate format and enables the calculation of the
50% tissue culture infective dose (TCID50) in a semi-automated manner. Cell
culture-derived HBV (HBVcc), produced by either stable HBV-replicating cells
(HepAD38) or HBV-infected HepG2-NTCP cells, as well as patient-derived HBV sera
were serially diluted and used to infect naïve target cells. Applying the
end-point dilution assay, we infected HepG2-NTCP cells with PEG precipitated HBV 
derived from HepAD38-and HepG2-NTCPsec+ cell supernatants, calculated the
TCID50/mL, converted to plaque-forming units (PFUs), and generated the specific
infectivity (ratio of PFU/GEq). As a result, a TCID50/mL of 7.22 × 106 and
2.16 × 106, and the specific infectivity of 1/13,816 and 1/8798 were calculated
for HepAD38 and HepG2-NTCPsec+ cell supernatants, respectively. The specific
infectivity further increased by approximately 2-fold after removal of
non-infectious "naked" particles by immunoprecipitation. Purification of
HepAD38 cell supernatants by heparin columns increased the TCID50/mL and specific
infectivity by 18- and 15-fold, respectively. Interestingly, non-purified
patient-derived HBV sera from two individuals had a specific infectivity of 1/88 
and 1/3609. After converting TCID50 to multiplicity of infection (MOI) values, we
inoculated HepG2-NTCP cells with HBVcc based on GEq or MOI values and
demonstrated that MOI-based infection leads to more reproducible infection rates.
Furthermore, the assay was validated using serially diluted lamivudine, an HBV
replication inhibitor, inhibiting HBV DNA secretion and infectious viral progeny 
by approx. 56- and 470-fold, respectively. Interestingly, we identified
dexmedetomidine (DMM), an alpha-2 adrenergic agonist, inhibiting the secretion of
infectious viral progeny by approx. 6-fold, without interfering in the secretion 
of HBV DNA. Taken together, we developed an assay that is suitable for the
standard quantification of infectious HBV particles. We identified DMM as a novel
inhibitor that exclusively interferes with the secretion of infectious HBV
particles without affecting the secretion of HBV genomes. This end-point dilution
assay enables the precise determination of the number of infectious HBV
particles, assessment of the specific infectivity and stability of HBV particles,
and identification of novel classes of HBV inhibitors.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2021.105195 
PMID: 34736995 

