
1. Bioelectricity. 2021 Sep 1;3(3):204-214. doi: 10.1089/bioe.2021.0014. Epub 2021
Sep 9.

Lung Ablation with Irreversible Electroporation Promotes Immune Cell Infiltration
by Sparing Extracellular Matrix Proteins and Vasculature: Implications for
Immunotherapy.

Fujimori M(1)(2), Kimura Y(3), Ueshima E(4), Dupuy DE(5), Adusumilli PS(6),
Solomon SB(1)(2), Srimathveeravalli G(3)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Interventional Radiology Service, Department of Radiology, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Radiology, Mie University, Mie, Japan.
(3)Department of Mechanical & Industrial Engineering, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Department of Radiology, Kobe University, Kobe, Japan.
(5)Department of Radiology, Cape Cod Healthcare, Hyannis, Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Thoracic Service, Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, New York, USA.
(7)Institute for Applied Life Sciences, University of Massachusetts, Amherst,
Massachusetts, USA.

Background: This study investigated the sparing of the extracellular matrix (ECM)
and blood vessels at the site of lung irreversible electroporation (IRE), and its
impact on postablation T cell and macrophage populations. Materials and Methods: 
Normal swine (n = 8) lung was treated with either IRE or microwave ablation
(MWA), followed by sacrifice at 2 and 28 days (four animals/timepoint) after
treatment. En bloc samples of ablated lung were stained for blood vessels (CD31),
ECM proteins (Collagen, Heparan sulfate, and Decorin), T cells (CD3), and
macrophages (Iba1). Stained slides were analyzed with an image processing
software (ImageJ) to count the number of positive staining cells or the
percentage area of tissue staining for ECM markers, and the statistical
difference was evaluated with Student's t-test. Results: Approximately 50% of the
blood vessels and collagen typically seen in healthy lung were evident in IRE
treated samples at Day 2, with complete destruction within MWA treated lung.
These levels increased threefold by Day 28, indicative of post-IRE tissue
remodeling and regeneration. Decorin and Heparan sulfate levels were reduced, and
it remained so through the duration of observation. Concurrently, numbers of CD3+
T cells and macrophages were not different from healthy lung at Day 2 after IRE, 
subsequently increasing by 2.5 and 1.5-fold by Day 28. Similar findings were
restricted to the peripheral inflammatory rim of MWA samples, wherein the central
necrotic regions remained acellular through Day 28. Conclusion: Acute
preservation of blood vessels and major ECM components was observed in IRE
treated lung at acute time points, and it was associated with the increased
infiltration and presence of T cells and macrophages, features that were
spatially restricted in MWA treated lung.

Copyright 2021, Mary Ann Liebert, Inc., publishers.

DOI: 10.1089/bioe.2021.0014 
PMCID: PMC8558078 [Available on 2022-09-01]
PMID: 34734168 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no relevant conflict of
interest related to the work presented here. S.B.S. is a consultant to BTG,
Johnson & Johnson, XACT, Adegro, and Medtronic. S.B.S. has funding support from
GE Healthcare and Angiodynamics, and holds stock in Aperture Medical. G.S. has
received consulting fees from Farapulse and Intuitive Surgical, and holds stock
options in Aperture Medical. P.S.A. has received research funding from ATARA
Biotherapeutics and Acea Biosciences, has served on the Scientific Advisory Board
or as consultant to ATARA Biotherapeutics, Bayer, Carisma Therapeutics, Imugene, 
and Takeda Therapeutics, and has patents, royalties, and intellectual property on
mesothelin-targeted CARs and other T cell therapies, and method for detection of 
cancer cells using virus, and pending patent applications on T cell therapies.
D.E.D. is a cofounder and Chief Medical Officer of Theromics, Inc., a consultant 
to Boston Scientific and Perseon Medical, receives royalties from Springer Verlag
and UpToDate.

