
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 4;16(11):e0256323. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0256323.
eCollection 2021.

Investigating differential effects of socio-emotional and mindfulness-based
online interventions on mental health, resilience and social capacities during
the COVID-19 pandemic: The study protocol.

Godara M(1), Silveira S(1), Matthäus H(1), Heim C(2), Voelkle M(3), Hecht M(4),
Binder EB(5), Singer T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Social Neuroscience Lab, Max Planck Society, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Charité - Universitätsmedizin, Corporate Member of the Free University of
Berlin and Humboldt University of Berlin, Institute for Medical Psychology,
Berlin, Germany.
(3)Institute of Psychology, Humboldt University of Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Hector Research Institute of Education Sciences and Psychology, University of 
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(5)Department for Translational Research in Psychiatry, Max Planck Institute of
Psychiatry, Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has led to a mental health crisis on a global
scale. Epidemiological studies have reported a drastic increase in mental health 
problems, such as depression and anxiety, increased loneliness and feelings of
disconnectedness from others, while resilience levels have been negatively
affected, indicating an urgent need for intervention. The current study is
embedded within the larger CovSocial project which sought to evaluate
longitudinal changes in vulnerability, resilience and social cohesion during the 
pandemic. The current second phase will investigate the efficacy of brief online 
mental training interventions in reducing mental health problems, and enhancing
psychological resilience and social capacities. It further provides a unique
opportunity for the prediction of intervention effects by individual
biopsychosocial characteristics and preceding longitudinal change patterns during
the pandemic in 2020/21.
METHODS: We will examine the differential effects of a socio-emotional (including
'Affect Dyad') and a mindfulness-based (including 'Breathing Meditation')
intervention, delivered through a web- and cellphone application. Participants
will undergo 10 weeks of intervention, and will be compared to a retest control
group. The effectiveness of the interventions will be evaluated in a community
sample (N = 300), which is recruited from the original longitudinal CovSocial
sample. The pre- to post-intervention changes, potential underlying mechanisms,
and prediction thereof, will be assessed on a wide range of outcomes: levels of
stress, loneliness, depression and anxiety, resilience, prosocial behavior,
empathy, compassion, and the impact on neuroendocrine, immunological and
epigenetic markers. The multi-method nature of the study will incorporate
self-report questionnaires, behavioral tasks, ecological momentary assessment
(EMA) approaches, and biological, hormonal and epigenetic markers assessed in
saliva.
DISCUSSION: Results will reveal the differential effectiveness of two brief
online interventions in improving mental health outcomes, as well as enhancing
social capacities and resilience. The present study will serve as a first step
for future application of scalable, low-cost interventions at a broader level to 
reduce stress and loneliness, improve mental health and build resilience and
social capacities in the face of global stressors.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: This trial has been registered on May 17, 2020 with the
ClinicalTrials.gov NCT04889508 registration number
(clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04889508).

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0256323 
PMCID: PMC8568275
PMID: 34735441  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

