
1. Acta Biomed. 2021 Oct 5;92(S6):e2021446. doi: 10.23750/abm.v92iS6.12229.

Covid-19 Massive Vaccination Center Layouts.

Brambilla A(1), Mangili S(2), Macchi M(3), Trucco P(4), Perego A(5), Capolongo
S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Politecnico di Milano, Department of Architecture, Built environment and
Construction engineering (DABC), Design & Health Lab, Milano, Italy.
andrea1.brambilla@polimi.it.
(2)Politecnico di Milano, Department of Architecture, Built environment and
Construction engineering (DABC), Design & Health Lab, Milano, Italy.
silvia.mangili@polimi.it.
(3)Politecnico di Milano, Department of Department of Management, Economics and
Industrial Engineering (DIG), Milano, Italy. marco.macchi@polimi.it.
(4)Politecnico di Milano, Department of Department of Management, Economics and
Industrial Engineering (DIG), Milano, Italy. paolo.trucco@polimi.it.
(5)Politecnico di Milano, Department of Department of Management, Economics and
Industrial Engineering (DIG), Milano, Italy. alessandro.perego@polimi.it.
(6)Politecnico di Milano, Department of Architecture, Built environment and
Construction engineering (DABC), Design & Health Lab, Milano, Italy.
stefano.capolongo@polimi.it.

BACKGROUND AND AIM OF THE WORK: The rapid evolution of Covid-19 and the
availability of numerous vaccines led countries to set up Massive Vaccination
campaign in a very short time. Since December 2020, due to the lack of specific
guidelines, multidisciplinary groups started to investigate the minimum
requirements for Massive Vaccination Centers (MVC). The aim of the paper is to
shed light on the process of development of a scalable model for MVC layout
design and implementation.
METHODS: The methodology included two phases and six steps: 1)Study of MVC with
i) acquisition of process data from experimental study on an early set up
vaccination hub; ii) review of scientific literature on MVC; iii) review of
existing available guidelines and international examples; 2) Design proposal with
iv) functional and space requirements collection; v) standard MVC layout design
and vi) scalable model definition.
RESULTS: The resulting layout is compact, has a good wayfinding and address
safety reducing cross-contamination risks. Different vaccine lines have been
designed with a central dilution area for process efficiency. Healthcare staff
wellbeing is guaranteed by the provision of resting spaces, short distances, and 
the correct sizing of space for the different activities. To ensure optimal
vaccination capacity at the peak of vaccination, a modular and scalable model of 
different sizes has been designed ranging from 400 to 12000 m2.
CONCLUSIONS: The modular layout has been used as basic model in the regional
legislation, disclosed with the Deliberation n° XI / 4353 of 24/02/2021. Further 
research is encouraged to compare different national and international layouts.

DOI: 10.23750/abm.v92iS6.12229 
PMID: 34739468  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

