
1. Acta Biomed. 2021 Oct 19;92(S6):e2021441. doi: 10.23750/abm.v92iS6.12236.

Telephone counselling in coping with the COVID-19 lockdown consequences:
preliminary data.

Macchiarulo E(1), Branca F(2), Mallardi A(3), Costanza A(4), Amerio A(5), Aguglia
A(6), Serafini G(7), Amore M(8), Merli R(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mental Health, Mental Health and Suicide Prevention Center,
Biella, Italy. elena.macchiarulo@aslbi.piemonte.it.
(2)Department of Mental Health, Mental Health and Suicide Prevention Center,
Biella, Italy. francesco.branca@aslbi.piemonte.it.
(3)Department of Mental Health, Mental Health and Suicide Prevention Center,
Biella, Italy. posta@antoniomallardi.it.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva (UNIGE),
Geneva, Switzerland. alessandra.costanza@unige.ch.
(5)University of Genoa. andrea.amerio@unige.it.
(6)University of Genoa. andrea.aguglia@unige.it.
(7)University of Genoa. gianluca.serafini@unige.it.
(8)University of Genoa. mario.amore@unige.it.
(9)Department of Mental Health, Mental Health and Suicide Prevention Center,
Biella, Italy. roberto.merli@aslbi.piemonte.it.

The direct and indirect stressful effects of COVID-19 lockdown measures adopted
to restrict population movements to help curb the epidemic impacted on people's
daily lives. Biella is a small Northern Italy province, historically
characterized by the presence of an important and once flourishing textile
industry. For decades this province has had suicide rates higher than the
Piedmonts and Italian average. In two most recent decades a positive correlation 
between financial stressors, 2008 economic crisis related, and suicide has been
found. As the current economic crisis COVID-19 related is expected to exacerbate 
again the vulnerability to suicide of this province, during the first lockdown
the Crisis Center for Suicide Prevention of Biella set up a telephone counselling
service. We aimed to evaluate whether it represented a suitable and useful tool
for suicidal crisis prevention. Each phone intervention consisted of four phases:
(i) psychoeducation, (ii) emotional stabilization, (iii) personal resources
identification/reinforcement, (iv) session ending. This service provided a rapid 
therapeutic response to urgent requests for care, psychological support, and
reassurance. It was able to mitigate stress and reinforce resilience in
particularly vulnerable populations. The most innovative element of this project 
was that it proposed interventions for the emotional stabilization, something
that is usually used in face-to-face sessions. Using the right protocols, it
proved to offer continuity care and reduce pressure on hospital emergency
departments while delivering good outcomes and patient satisfaction. Therefore,
the COVID-19 pandemic provided an opportunity to overcome normative,
technological, and cultural barriers regarding the use of remote healthcare
services.

DOI: 10.23750/abm.v92iS6.12236 
PMID: 34739465  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

