
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 19;12:769653. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.769653. eCollection
2021.

Myelin Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein Antibody-Associated Disease and Varicella
Zoster Virus Infection - Frequency of an Association.

Di Pauli F(1), Morschewsky P(1), Berek K(1), Auer M(1), Bauer A(1), Berger T(2), 
Bsteh G(2), Rhomberg P(3), Schanda K(1), Zinganell A(1), Deisenhammer F(1),
Reindl M(1), Hegen H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(2)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Department of Neuroradiology, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck,
Austria.

To determine whether there is a correlation between myelin oligodendrocyte
glycoprotein (MOG) antibody-associated diseases and varicella zoster virus (VZV) 
infection. We provide a case report and performed a study to determine the
frequency of MOG antibodies (MOG-IgG) in neurological VZV infections. Patients
admitted to the Medical University of Innsbruck from 2008-2020 with a diagnosis
of a neurological manifestation of VZV infection (n=59) were included in this
study; patients with neuroborreliosis (n=34) served as control group. MOG-IgG was
detected using live cell-based assays. In addition, we performed a literature
review focusing on MOG and aquaporin-4 (AQP4) antibodies and their association
with VZV infection. Our case presented with VZV-associated longitudinally
extensive transverse myelitis and had MOG-IgG at a titer of 1:1280. In the study,
we did not detect MOG-IgG in any other patient neither in the VZV group
(including 15 with VZV encephalitis/myelitis) nor in the neuroborreliosis group. 
In the review of the literature, 3 cases with MOG-IgG and additional 9 cases with
AQP4 IgG associated disorders in association with a VZV infection were
identified. MOG-IgG are rarely detected in patients with VZV infections
associated with neurological diseases.

Copyright © 2021 Di Pauli, Morschewsky, Berek, Auer, Bauer, Berger, Bsteh,
Rhomberg, Schanda, Zinganell, Deisenhammer, Reindl and Hegen.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.769653 
PMCID: PMC8560958
PMID: 34737756 

Conflict of interest statement: FDP has participated in meetings sponsored by,
received honoraria (lectures, advisory boards, consultations) or travel funding
from Almirall, Bayer, Biogen, Celgene, Janssen, Merck, Novartis, Sanofi-Genzyme, 
Roche and Teva. Her institution has received research grants from Roche. KB has
participated in meetings sponsored by and received travel funding from Roche. MA 
received speaker honoraria and/or travel grants from Biogen, Merck, Novartis and 
Sanofi. AB has participated in meetings sponsored by Merck and Biogen. TB has
participated in meetings sponsored by and received honoraria (lectures, advisory 
boards, consultations) from pharmaceutical companies marketing treatments for
multiple sclerosis: Almirall, Biogen, Biologix, Bionorica, Celgene/BMS, GSK,
MedDay, Merck, Novartis, Roche, Sandoz, Sanofi/Genzyme, TG Pharmaceuticals,
TEVA-ratiopharm and UCB. His institution has received financial support in the
last 12 months by unrestricted research grants (Biogen, Bayer, Celgene/BMS,
Merck, Novartis, Roche, Sanofi/Genzyme, and TEVA ratiopharm) and for
participation in clinical trials in multiple sclerosis sponsored by Alexion,
Bayer, Biogen, Merck, Novartis, Roche, Sanofi/Genzyme, and TEVA. GB has
participated in meetings sponsored by, received speaker honoraria or travel
funding from Biogen, Celgene, Lilly, Merck, Novartis, Roche, Sanofi-Genzyme and
Teva, and received honoraria for consulting Biogen, Celgene, Roche and Teva. AZ
has participated in meetings sponsored by, received speaking honoraria or travel 
funding from Biogen, Merck, Sanofi-Genzyme and Teva. FDe has participated in
meetings sponsored by or received honoraria for acting as an advisor/speaker for 
Almirall, Alexion, Biogen, Celgene, Genzyme-Sanofi, Merck, Novartis Pharma,
Roche, and TEVA ratiopharm. His institution has received research grants from
Biogen and Genzyme Sanofi. He is section editor of the MSARD Journal (Multiple
Sclerosis and Related Disorders). MR was supported by a research support from
Euroimmun and Roche. His institution receives payments for antibody assays (MOG, 
AQP4, and other autoantibodies) and for MOG and AQP4 antibody validation
experiments organized by Euroimmun (Lübeck, Germany). HH has participated in
meetings sponsored by, received speaker honoraria or travel funding from Bayer,
Biogen, Merck, Novartis, Sanofi-Genzyme, Siemens, Teva, and received honoraria
for acting as consultant for Biogen and Teva. The remaining authors declare that 
the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

