
1. Maturitas. 2021 Dec;154:31-45. doi: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2021.09.007. Epub 2021
Sep 20.

Health status of women affected by homelessness: A cluster of in concreto human
rights violations and a time for action.

Grammatikopoulou MG(1), Gkiouras K(2), Pepa A(3), Persynaki A(4), Taousani E(5), 
Milapidou M(6), Smyrnakis E(7), Goulis DG(8).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Reproductive Endocrinology, 1st Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Medical School, Faculty of Health Sciences, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece; Department of Nutritional Sciences and
Dietetics, Faculty of Health Sciences, Alexander Campus, International Hellenic
University, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(2)Medical School, Faculty of Health Sciences, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(3)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, Agricultural University of
Athens, Greece.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK.
(5)Department of Midwifery, Faculty of Health Sciences, International Hellenic
University, Alexander Campus, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(6)Dr. Juris, Post Doc Researcher, Faculty of Law, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(7)Laboratory of Primary Health Care, General Practice and Health Services
Research, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(8)Unit of Reproductive Endocrinology, 1st Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Medical School, Faculty of Health Sciences, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece. Electronic address: dgg@auth.gr.

Health problems of women experiencing homelessness are driven either from the
usual background characteristics of this population, or from the homeless
lifestyle. Apart from poverty and unemployment, transition to homelessness is
often associated with substance abuse, history of victimization, stress, poor
mental health and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Water insecurity can
undermine bodily hygiene and dental health, posing a greater risk of dehydration 
and opportunistic infections. Exposure to extreme environmental conditions like
heat waves and natural disasters increases morbidity, accelerates aging, and
reduces life expectancy. Nutrition-wise, a high prevalence of food insecurity,
obesity, and micronutrient deficiencies are apparent due to low diet quality and 
food waste. Poor hygiene, violence, and overcrowding increase the susceptibility 
of these women to communicable diseases, including sexually transmitted ones and 
COVID-19. Furthermore, established cardiovascular disease and diabetes mellitus
are often either undertreated or neglected, and their complications are more
widespread than in the general population. In addition, lack of medical screening
and contraception non-use induce a variety of reproductive health issues. All
these health conditions are tightly related to violations of human rights in this
population, including the rights to housing, water, food, reproduction, health,
work, and no discrimination. Thus, the care provided to women experiencing
homelessness should be optimized at a multidimensional level, spanning beyond the
provision of a warm bed, to include access to clean water and sanitation,
psychological support and stress-coping strategies, disease management and acute 
health care, food of adequate quality, opportunities for employment and support
for any minor dependants.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2021.09.007 
PMID: 34736578  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

