
1. BMJ Open. 2021 Nov 3;11(11):e053959. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-053959.

Preparing social workers to address health inequities emerging during the
COVID-19 pandemic by building capacity for health policy: a scoping review
protocol.

Ashcroft R(1), Lam S(2), Kourgiantakis T(2), Begun S(2), Nelson MLA(3)(4),
Adamson K(2), Cadell S(5), Walsh B(6), Greenblatt A(2), Hussain A(2), Sur D(7),
Sirotich F(8), Craig SL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Factor-Inwentash Faculty of Social Work, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada rachelle.ashcroft@utoronto.ca.
(2)Factor-Inwentash Faculty of Social Work, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.
(3)Bridgepoint Collaboratory for Research and Innovation, Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum
Research Institute, Sinai Health System, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Institute of Health Policy, Management and Evaluation, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Renison University College, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Robarts Library, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(7)Ontario Association of Social Workers, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(8)Canadian Mental Health Association, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: The COVID-19 pandemic has brought tremendous changes in healthcare 
delivery and exacerbated a wide range of inequities. Social workers across a
broad range of healthcare settings bring an expertise in social, behavioural and 
mental healthcare needed to help address these health inequities. In addition,
social workers integrate policy-directed interventions and solutions in clinical 
practice, which is a needed perspective for recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. 
It remains unclear, however, what the most pressing policy issues are that have
emerged during the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, many social workers in health 
settings tend to underuse policy in their direct practice. The objectives of this
scoping review are to: (1) systematically scope the literature on social work,
COVID-19 pandemic and policy; and (2) describe the competencies required by
social workers and the social work profession to address the policy issues
emerging during the COVID-19 pandemic.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: The scoping review follows Arksey and O'Malley's five-stage
framework. Identification of literature published between 1 December 2019 and the
search date, 31 March 2021, will take place in two stages: (1) title and abstract
review, and (2) full-text review. In partnership with a health science librarian,
the research team listed keywords related to social work and policy to search
databases including Medline, Embase, PsycINFO, CINAHL, Social Services Abstract
and Social Work Abstracts. Two graduate-level research assistants will conduct
screening and full-text review. Data will then be extracted, charted, analysed
and summarised to report on our results and implications on practice, policy and 
future research.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: Results will help develop a policy practice competence 
framework to inform how social workers can influence policy. We will share our
findings through peer-reviewed publications and conference presentations. This
study does not require Research Ethics Board approval as it uses publicly
available sources of data.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-053959 
PMCID: PMC8572402
PMID: 34732499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

