
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 3:JVI0090921. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00909-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Characterization of the interaction domains between the phosphoprotein and the
nucleoprotein of human Metapneumovirus.

Decool H(1), Bardiaux B(2), Checa Ruano L(2), Sperandio O(2)(3), Fix J(1),
Gutsche I(4), Richard CA(1), Bajorek M(1), Eléouët JF(1), Galloux M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris-Saclay, INRAE, UVSQ, VIM, 78350, Jouy-en-Josas, France.
(2)Institut Pasteur, Université de Paris, CNRS UMR3528, Unité de Bioinformatique 
Structurale, 28 rue du Dr Roux, 75015, Paris, France.
(3)Inserm U973 MTi, 25 rue Hélène Brion 75013, Paris, France.
(4)University of Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, CEA, CNRS, IBS, Grenoble, France.

Human metapneumovirus (HMPV) causes severe respiratory diseases in young
children. The HMPV RNA genome is encapsidated by the viral nucleoprotein (N),
forming an RNA-N complex (NNuc), which serves as template for genome replication 
and mRNA transcription by the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp). The RdRp is
formed by the association of the large polymerase subunit (L), which has RNA
polymerase, capping and methyltransferase activities, and the tetrameric
phosphoprotein (P). P plays a central role in the RdRp complex by binding to NNuc
and L, allowing the attachment of the L polymerase to the NNuc template. During
infection these proteins concentrate in cytoplasmic inclusion bodies (IBs) where 
viral RNA synthesis occurs. By analogy to the closely related pneumovirus
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), it is likely that the formation of IBs depends
on the interaction between HMPV P and NNuc, which has not been demonstrated yet. 
Here, we finely characterized the binding P- NNuc interaction domains by using
recombinant proteins, combined with a functional assay for the polymerase complex
activity, and the study of the recruitment of these proteins to IBs by
immunofluorescence. We show that the last 6 C-terminal residues of HMPV P are
necessary and sufficient for binding to NNuc, that P binds to the N-terminal
domain of N (NNTD), and identified conserved N residues critical for the
interaction. Our results allowed to propose a structural model for the HMPV
P-NNuc interaction. IMPORTANCE Human metapneumovirus (HMPV) is a leading cause of
severe respiratory infections in children but also affects human populations of
all ages worldwide. Nowadays, no vaccine or efficient antiviral treatments are
available for this pneumovirus. A better understanding of the molecular
mechanisms involved in viral replication could help the design or discovery of
specific antiviral compounds. In this work we have investigated the interaction
between two major viral proteins involved in HMPV RNA synthesis, the N and P
proteins. We finely characterized their domains of interaction, and identified a 
pocket on the surface of the N protein, a potential target of choice for the
design of compounds interfering with N-P complexes and inhibiting viral
replication.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00909-21 
PMID: 34730389 

