
1. AIDS Patient Care STDS. 2021 Nov;35(11):428-434. doi: 10.1089/apc.2021.0101.

Participatory Prototyping of a Tailored Undetectable Equals Untransmittable
Message to Increase HIV Testing Among Men in Western Cape, South Africa.

Smith PJ(1), Joseph Davey DL(1)(2)(3), Schmucker L(4)(5), Bruns C(6), Bekker
LG(1), Medina-Marino A(7)(8), Thirumurthy H(4)(5), Buttenheim AM(4)(5)(9).

Author information: 
(1)The Desmond Tutu HIV Centre, Institute for Infectious Disease and Molecular
Medicine, Faculty of Health Science, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South
Africa.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Fielding School of Public Health, University of
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(3)Division of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health and Family
Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(4)Medical Ethics and Health Policy, Perelman School of Medicine of the
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(5)Center for Health Incentives and Behavioral Economics, Medical Ethics and
Health Policy, Perelman School of Medicine of the University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(6)Matchboxology, Kalk Bay, Cape Town, South Africa.
(7)Division of Men's Health, Desmond Tutu HIV Centre, University of Cape Town,
South Africa.
(8)Department of Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine of the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(9)Department of Family and Community Health, School of Nursing, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Daily antiretroviral therapy (ART) suppresses viral replication, rendering HIV
undetectable through viral load (VL) testing. People living with HIV (PLWH) who
have an undetectable VL cannot transmit HIV to sexual partners or through giving 
birth, a message commonly referred to as U = U (undetectable equals
untransmittable). To increase knowledge and understanding of U = U among men, who
have poorer HIV testing and treatment outcomes than women, we engaged men from
high HIV burden communities in Cape Town in two interactive human-centered design
cocreation workshops to develop local U = U messaging for men. Two trained
workshop facilitators, explained the U = U message to 39 adult men (in two
separate workshops), and asked them how to effectively communicate U = U to other
men in the local language (isiXhosa). Participant-designed messages sought to
inform men about U = U to help assuage fears of testing HIV positive (by removing
the stigma of living with HIV and being a vector of disease), and to explain that
ART enables PLWH to live normal healthy lives, making HIV "untransmittable" to
sex partners. Participants' messages emphasized that when virally suppressed, "I 
cannot spread HIV to the other person" and "(the pill) keeps on killing the virus
so I can live a normal life for the rest of my life." Men cocreated simple local 
U = U messages to address fears of testing HIV positive and emphasizing ART's
positive effects. Cocreated tailored messaging may reduce stigma associated with 
living with HIV and improve the uptake of HIV testing and treatment among South
African men. This study was registered at clinicaltrials.gov under NCT04364165.

DOI: 10.1089/apc.2021.0101 
PMID: 34739334  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

