
1. Acta Biomed. 2021 Oct 5;92(S6):e2021458. doi: 10.23750/abm.v92iS6.12311.

Experiences of healthcare providers from a working week during the first wave of 
the COVID-19 outbreak.

Villa G(1), Dellafiore F(2), Caruso R(3), Arrigoni C(4), Galli E(5), Moranda
D(6), Prampolini L(7), Bascape B(8), Merlo MG(9), Giannetta N(10), Manara DF(11).

Author information: 
(1)Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy. villa.giulia@hsr.it.
(2)Università degli Studi di Pavia. federica.dellafiore@unipv.it.
(3)IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, San Donato Milanese, Milan, Italy.
rosario.caruso@grupposandoanto.it.
(4)University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. cristina.arrigoni@unipv.it.
(5)Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy. galli.emanuele@hsr.it.
(6)Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy. moranda.dina@hsr.it.
(7)IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Galeazzi, Milan, Italy.
loredana.prampolini@grupposandonato.it.
(8)Istituti Clinici di Pavia e Vigevano S.p.A., Pavia (Italy).
barbara.bascape@grupposandonato.it.
(9)IRCCS Policlinic San Matteo Foundation, Pavia (Italy). M.Merlo@smatteo.pv.it.
(10)Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy. Giannetta.Noemi@hsr.it.
(11)Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy. manara.duilio@hsr.it.

BACKGROUND AND AIM OF THE WORK: The delivery of care to patients with COVID-19
enhanced many psychological issues among healthcare workers (HCWs), exacerbating 
the risk of burnout and compromising the efficacy and quality of services
provided to patients. In this context, the peculiarities regarding professional
roles in delivering care to patients with COVID-19 might reflect daily lived
experiences that could impact psychological outcomes in specific professional
groups. However, daily lived experiences considering different groups of HCWs
have been poorly investigated, especially with a longitudinal qualitative study. 
Accordingly, our study aims firstly to longitudinally explore perceptions and
experiences of HCWs about their daily working life during the initial COVID-19
outbreak, highlighting the specific lived experiences of physicians, nurses,
radiology technicians, and healthcare assistants.
METHODS: A longitudinal qualitative content analysis was conducted to analyse the
comments and quotations made on a daily diary lasting seven days by physicians,
nurses, radiology technicians, and healthcare assistants during the first wave of
the COVID-19 outbreak. According to Elo and Kyngäs recommendation, the data
analysis process was developed in three main phases: preparation, organising, and
reporting.
RESULTS: Four main generic categories emerged by data analysis: 'Clinical
practice in COVID-19 patients'; 'The importance of relationship'; 'Navigating by 
sight'; and 'Good always pays off'. Several differences emerged from the
sentences of the HCWs, which require further investigation.
CONCLUSIONS: Understanding the profession-specific experiences of the involved
HCWs in facing the challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic is key for boosting
reflections, research, and actions to adequately support each professional group.

DOI: 10.23750/abm.v92iS6.12311 
PMID: 34739456  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

