
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 3:JVI0164821. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01648-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Structural Basis of Human Parainfluenza Virus 3 Unassembled Nucleoprotein in
Complex with Its Viral ChaperoneHPIV3 Nucleoprotein-Phosphoprotein Structure.

Dong X(1), Wang X(1), Xie M(1), Wu W(1), Chen Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology and Beijing Advanced Innovation
Center for Food Nutrition and Human Health, College of Biological Sciences, China
Agricultural University, Beijing100193, China.

Human parainfluenza virus 3 (HPIV3) belongs to the Paramyxoviridae, causing
annual worldwide epidemics of respiratory diseases, especially in newborns and
infants. The core components consist of just three viral proteins: nucleoprotein 
(N), phosphoprotein (P), and RNA polymerase (L), playing essential roles in
replication and transcription of HPIV3 as well as other paramyxoviruses. Viral
genome encapsidated by N is as a template and recognized by RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase complex composed of L and P. The offspring RNA also needs to assemble 
with N to form nucleocapsids. The N is one of the most abundant viral proteins in
infected cells and chaperoned in the RNA-free form (N0) by P before
encapsidation. In this study, we presented the structure of unassembled HPIV3 N0 
in complex with the N-terminal portion of the P, revealing the molecular details 
of the N0 and the conserved N0-P interaction. Combined with biological
experiments, we showed that the P binds to the C-terminal domain of N0 mainly by 
hydrophobic interaction and maintains the unassembled conformation of N by
interfering with the formation of N-RNA oligomers, which might be a target for
drug development. Based on the complex structure, we developed a method to obtain
the monomeric N0. Furthermore, we designed a P-derived fusion peptide with
10-times higher affinity, which hijacked the N and interfered with the binding of
the N to RNA significantly. Finally, we proposed a model of conformational
transition of N from the unassembled state to the assembled state, which helped
to further understand viral replication. IMPORTANCE Human parainfluenza virus 3
causes annual epidemics of respiratory diseases, especially in newborns and
infants. For the replication of HPIV3 and other paramyxoviruses, only three viral
proteins are required: phosphoprotein (P), RNA polymerase (L), and nucleoprotein 
(N). Here, we reported the crystal structure of the complex of N and its
chaperone P. We described in details how P acts as a chaperone to maintain the
unassembled conformation of N. Our analysis indicated that the interaction
between P and N is conserved and mediated by hydrophobicity, which can be used as
a target for drug development. We obtained a high-affinity P-derived peptide
inhibitor, specifically targeted N and greatly interfered with the binding of the
N to RNA, thereby inhibiting viral encapsidation and replication. In summary, our
results provide new insights into the paramyxovirus genome replication and
nucleocapsid assembly, and lay the basis for drug development.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01648-21 
PMID: 34730394 

