
1. Acta Biomed. 2021 Oct 1;92(S6):e2021417. doi: 10.23750/abm.v92iS6.12249.

From "The Interpersonal Theory of Suicide" to "The Interpersonal Trust": an
unexpected and effective resource to mitigate economic crisis-related suicide
risk in times of Covid-19?

Costanza A(1), Amerio A(2), Aguglia A(3), Serafini G(4), Amore M(5), Macchiarulo 
E(6), Branca F(7), Merli R(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva (UNIGE),
Geneva. alessandra.costanza@unige.ch.
(2)University of Genoa. andrea.amerio@unige.it.
(3). andrea.aguglia@unige.it.
(4)University of Genoa. gianluca.serafini@unige.it.
(5)University of Genoa. mario.amore@unige.it.
(6)Department of Mental Health, Mental Health and Suicide Prevention Center,
Biella. elena.macchiarulo@aslbi.piemonte.it.
(7)Department of Mental Health, Mental Health and Suicide Prevention Center,
Biella. francesco.branca@aslbi.piemonte.it.
(8)Department of Mental Health, Mental Health and Suicide Prevention Center,
Biella. roberto.merli@aslbi.piemonte.it.

Suicide risk and resilience strategies during the different phases of the
COVID-19 pandemic are of great interest to researchers. At the pandemic onset, a 
dramatic suicides exacerbation was feared. Some authoritative authors warned the 
scientific and clinical community about this risk by pointing out that especially
psychiatric, psychological, and social factors could interact with each other to 
create a vicious cycle. While worldwide case-reports and studies conducted at
emergency departments did indeed find an increase in suicidal behavior, recent
systematic reviews, meta-analyses, and time-series analyses could not confirm
this for the first COVID-19 wave. Instead, it appears that the increased suicide 
risk outlasted the acute phase of the pandemic and thus affected people more
during the pandemic following phases. One possible reason for this phenomenon may
be a persistent state of insecurity regarding the economic crisis evolution with 
serious financial stressors in terms of income decrease, unemployment, repaying
debts difficulty, home loss, one's social status derive, social hierarchy drop,
and poverty. During the COVID-19 first wave, with particular regard to vulnerable
populations, one of the postulated theories unifying different risk factors under
a single frame was the "Interpersonal Theory of Suicide". Conversely, the
"Interpersonal Trust" theory emerged as a protective factor even during an
economic crisis. In a possible mirroring of the two theories, it seems to be
feasible to find common themes between them and, above all, to gain relevant
insights to devise effective prevention and supportive strategies for dealing
with suicide risk challenges that COVID-19 will continue to pose in the
foreseeable future. (www.actabiomedica.it).

DOI: 10.23750/abm.v92iS6.12249 
PMID: 34739460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

