
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 3:JVI0147621. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01476-21. [Epub ahead of print]

iTRAQ-based proteomics analysis of HCMV latency and reactivation in T98G cells.

Cheng S(1), Zhao F(2)(3), Wen L(4)(5), Yang B(4)(5), Wang XZ(1)(6), Huang
SN(1)(6), Jiang X(4)(5), Zeng WB(1), Sun JY(1), Zhang FK(7), Shen HJ(7),
Fortunato E(8), Luo MH(1)(6)(9), Cheng H(9).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science
and Intelligence Technology, Center for Biosafety Mega-Science, Wuhan Institute
of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.
(2)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(3)Chinese Institute for Brain Research, Beijing, China.
(4)The Joint Center of Translational Precision Medicine, Guangzhou Institute of
Pediatrics, Guangzhou Women and Children Medical Center, Guangzhou, China.
(5)The Joint Center of Translational Precision Medicine, Wuhan Institute of
Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.
(6)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(7)Changchun Keygen Biological Products Co. Ltd, Changchun, China.
(8)Department of Biological Sciences and Center for Reproductive Biology,
University of Idaho, Moscow, Idaho, USA.
(9)Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) establishes a persistent/latent infection after
primary infection, and host factor(s) plays a key role in regulating HCMV
infection status. The spread of reactivated HCMV via the hematogenous or neural
route usually results in severe diseases in newborns and immunocompromised
individuals. As the primary reservoirs in vivo, cells of myeloid lineage have
been utilized extensively to study HCMV infection. However, the molecular
mechanism of HCMV latency/reactivation in neural cells is still poorly
understood. We previously showed that HCMV infected T98G cells maintain a large
number of viral genomes and support HCMV reactivation from latency upon cAMP/IBMX
treatment. Here we employed iTRAQ-based proteomics to characterize cellular
protein changes during HCMV latency and reactivation in T98G cells. A total of
168 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified, including 89
proteins in latency and 85 proteins in reactivation. Bioinformatics analysis
showed that a few biological pathways were associated with HCMV latency or
reactivation. Moreover, we validated 16 DEPs by both mRNA and protein expression 
profiles and further evaluated the effects of ApoE and PI3K pathway on HCMV
infection. ApoE knockdown reduced HCMV loads and virus release, whereas
overexpressing ApoE hampered HCMV latent infection, indicating a role in HCMV
latency establishment/maintenance. Blocking the PI3K pathway by LY294002, a PI3K 
inhibitor, induced HCMV reactivation from latency in T98G cells. Overall, this
comparative proteomic analysis delineates the cellular protein changes during
HCMV latency and reactivation and provides a road map to advance our
understanding of the mechanism(s) in the context of neural cells. IMPORTANCE
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a highly transmissible beta-herpesvirus that has 
a prevalence of 60%-90% worldwide. This opportunist pathogen poses a significant 
threat to newborns and immunosuppressed individuals. One major obstacle for
developing effective therapeutics is a poor understanding of HCMV
latency/reactivation mechanisms. This study presents, for the first time, a
systemic analysis of host cell protein expression changes during HCMV latency
establishment and reactivation processes in neural cells. We showed that ApoE was
downregulated by HCMV to facilitate latent infection. Also, the proteomic
analysis has associated a few PI3K pathway-related proteins with HCMV
reactivation. Altogether, this study highlights multiple host proteins and
signaling pathways that can be further investigated as potential druggable
targets for HCMV-related diseases, especially brain disorders.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01476-21 
PMID: 34730396 

