
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 19;12:689866. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.689866. eCollection
2021.

Neutrophil-Dependent Immunity During Pulmonary Infections and Inflammations.

Effah CY(1), Drokow EK(2), Agboyibor C(3), Ding L(1), He S(1), Liu S(4), Akorli
SY(5), Nuamah E(5), Sun T(4), Zhou X(6), Liu H(7), Xu Z(8), Feng F(1), Wu Y(1),
Zhang X(8).

Author information: 
(1)College of Public Health, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Zhengzhou University People's Hospital &
Henan Provincial People's Hospital, Zhengzhou, China.
(3)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.
(4)General ICU, Henan Key Laboratory of Critical Care Medicine, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.
(5)College of Agriculture and Natural Sciences, University of Cape Coast, Cape
Coast, Ghana.
(6)Department of Respiratory, Henan Provincial Chest Hospital, Zhengzhou, China.
(7)Department of Respiratory, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, China.
(8)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, People's Hospital of
Zhengzhou University & Henan Provincial People's Hospital, Zhengzhou, China.

Rapid recruitment of neutrophils to an inflamed site is one of the hallmarks of
an effective host defense mechanism. The main pathway through which this happens 
is by the innate immune response. Neutrophils, which play an important part in
innate immune defense, migrate into lungs through the modulation actions of
chemokines to execute a variety of pro-inflammatory functions. Despite the
importance of chemokines in host immunity, little has been discussed on their
roles in host immunity. A holistic understanding of neutrophil recruitment,
pattern recognition pathways, the roles of chemokines and the pathophysiological 
roles of neutrophils in host immunity may allow for new approaches in the
treatment of infectious and inflammatory disease of the lung. Herein, this review
aims at highlighting some of the developments in lung neutrophil-immunity by
focusing on the functions and roles of CXC/CC chemokines and pattern recognition 
receptors in neutrophil immunity during pulmonary inflammations. The
pathophysiological roles of neutrophils in COVID-19 and thromboembolism have also
been summarized. We finally summarized various neutrophil biomarkers that can be 
utilized as prognostic molecules in pulmonary inflammations and discussed various
neutrophil-targeted therapies for neutrophil-driven pulmonary inflammatory
diseases.

Copyright © 2021 Effah, Drokow, Agboyibor, Ding, He, Liu, Akorli, Nuamah, Sun,
Zhou, Liu, Xu, Feng, Wu and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.689866 
PMCID: PMC8560714
PMID: 34737734  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

