
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2021 Nov 4;15(11):e0009907. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0009907. eCollection 2021 Nov.

Yellow fever vaccine protects mice against Zika virus infection.

Vicente Santos AC(1)(2), Guedes-da-Silva FH(2)(3), Dumard CH(2)(3), Ferreira
VNS(1)(2), da Costa IPS(1)(2), Machado RA(1)(2), Barros-Aragão FGQ(4), Neris
RLS(5), Dos-Santos JS(5)(6), Assunção-Miranda I(5), Figueiredo CP(4), Dias AA(7),
Gomes AMO(1)(2), de Matos Guedes HL(5)(6), Oliveira AC(1)(2), Silva JL(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Biologia Estrutural de Vírus, Instituto de Bioquímica Médica
Leopoldo de Meis, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)Instituto Nacional de Ciência e Tecnologia de Biologia Estrutural e Bioimagem,
Centro Nacional de Biologia Estrutural e Bioimagem (CENABIO), Universidade
Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Laboratório de Termodinâmica de Proteínas e Vírus Gregorio Weber, Instituto de
Bioquímica Médica Leopoldo de Meis, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro
(UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(4)Faculdade de Farmácia, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil.
(5)Laboratório de Imunobiotecnologia, Instituto de Microbiologia Paulo de Góes,
Centro de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.
(6)Laboratório de Imunofarmacologia, Instituto de Biofísica Carlos Chagas Filho, 
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(7)Laboratório de Microbiologia Celular, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz (FIOCRUZ), Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.

Zika virus (ZIKV) emerged as an important infectious disease agent in Brazil in
2016. Infection usually leads to mild symptoms, but severe congenital
neurological disorders and Guillain-Barré syndrome have been reported following
ZIKV exposure. Creating an effective vaccine against ZIKV is a public health
priority. We describe the protective effect of an already licensed attenuated
yellow fever vaccine (YFV, 17DD) in type-I interferon receptor knockout mice
(A129) and immunocompetent BALB/c and SV-129 (A129 background) mice infected with
ZIKV. YFV vaccination provided protection against ZIKV, with decreased mortality 
in A129 mice, a reduction in the cerebral viral load in all mice, and weight loss
prevention in BALB/c mice. The A129 mice that were challenged two and three weeks
after the first dose of the vaccine were fully protected, whereas partial
protection was observed five weeks after vaccination. In all cases, the YFV
vaccine provoked a substantial decrease in the cerebral viral load. YFV
immunization also prevented hippocampal synapse loss and microgliosis in
ZIKV-infected mice. Our vaccine model is T cell-dependent, with AG129 mice being 
unable to tolerate immunization (vaccination is lethal in this mouse model),
indicating the importance of IFN-γ in immunogenicity. To confirm the role of T
cells, we immunized nude mice that we demonstrated to be very susceptible to
infection. Immunization with YFV and challenge 7 days after booster did not
protect nude mice in terms of weight loss and showed partial protection in the
survival curve. When we evaluated the humoral response, the vaccine elicited
significant antibody titers against ZIKV; however, it showed no neutralizing
activity in vitro and in vivo. The data indicate that a cell-mediated response
promotes protection against cerebral infection, which is crucial to vaccine
protection, and it appears to not necessarily require a humoral response. This
protective effect can also be attributed to innate factors, but more studies are 
needed to strengthen this hypothesis. Our findings open the way to using an
available and inexpensive vaccine for large-scale immunization in the event of a 
ZIKV outbreak.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0009907 
PMCID: PMC8594798
PMID: 34735450 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

