
1. Vopr Virusol. 2021 Nov 4;66(5):383-389. doi: 10.36233/0507-4088-79.

[Construction of norovirus (Caliciviridae: Norovirus) virus-like particles
containing VP1 of the Echovirus 30 (Picornaviridae: Enterovirus: Enterovirus B)].

[Article in Russian]

Novikov DV(1), Melentev DA(2), Mokhonov VV(1), Kashnikov AY(1), Novikova NA(1),
Lapin VA(2), Mokhonova EV(1), Novikov VV(2).

Author information: 
(1)FSBI «Academician I.N. Blokhina Nizhny Novgorod Scientific Research Institute 
of Epidemiology and Microbiology» of the Federal Service for Supervision of
Consumer Rights Protection and Human Welfare (Rospotrebnadzor).
(2)FSBI «Academician I.N. Blokhina Nizhny Novgorod Scientific Research Institute 
of Epidemiology and Microbiology» of the Federal Service for Supervision of
Consumer Rights Protection and Human Welfare (Rospotrebnadzor); FSAEI HE
«National Research Lobachevsky State University of Nizhny Novgorod» of the
Ministry of Education and Science of Russia.

INTRODUCTION: Enterovirus (nonpolio) infection is widespread all over the world, 
registered as sporadic cases and large-scale outbreaks and can cause severe
lesions such as serous meningitis. Epidemiological studies have shown that
enterovirus (Picornaviridae; Enterovirus) variant Echovirus 30 (E30) is the most 
frequently detected variant in patients with enterovirus meningitis in the
Russian Federation. However, no vaccines to prevent the disease caused by this
pathogen have been developed so far. One of the promising modern trends in terms 
of creating vaccine preparations is the use of virus-like particles (VLPs),
including chimeric ones containing the biological structures of viruses belonging
to different species.The aim of this work was to obtain norovirus (Caliciviridae;
Norovirus) VLPs displaying enterovirus Echovirus E30 full-length VP1 on the
surface.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The nucleotide sequences of VP1 protein of norovirus
genotype GII.4 and VP1 E30 of genotype h circulating in Russia were used. The
SN-VP1E30 protein was constructed, in which the shell (S) and the hinge regions
of the norovirus VP1 are fused into one molecule with the full-length VP1 of the 
E30 virus. The protein was expressed in E. coli, purified using affinity
chromatography, and characterized by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE)
and immunoblotting. VLPs were visualized by electron microscopy.
RESULTS: The S N-VP1E30 protein expressed in E. coli as insoluble form, so the
conditions for SN-VP1E30 solublisation were defined. Sucrose has been shown to
significantly increase the efficiency of renaturation. Electrophoretic mobility
comparison of denatured and non-denatured SN-VP1E30 demonstrated that most
monomers form high molecular weight compounds. Electron microscopy showed that
renatured SN-VP1E30 spontaneously forms empty virus-like particles about 50 nm in
diameter.
CONCLUSION: Chimeric protein SN-VP1E30 self-assemble into VLPs displaying the VP1
protein of E30 variant that is highly prevalent in Russia. Further immunological 
research is necessary to characterize VLPs potential for development of the
vaccine for enteroviral meningitis prevention.

DOI: 10.36233/0507-4088-79 
PMID: 34738453 

