
1. Biomed Khim. 2021 Sep;67(5):383-393. doi: 10.18097/PBMC20216705383.

[Atmospheric reactive oxygen species and some aspects of the antiviral protection
of the respiratory epithelium].

[Article in Russian; Abstract available in Russian from the publisher]

Salmin VV(1), Morgun AV(1), Olovyannikova RY(1), Kutyakov VA(1), Lychkovskaya
EV(1), Brusina EB(2), Salmina AB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Professor V.F. Voino-Yasenetsky Krasnoyarsk State Medical University,
Krasnoyarsk, Russia.
(2)Kemerovo State Medical University, Kemerovo, Russia.
(3)Professor V.F. Voino-Yasenetsky Krasnoyarsk State Medical University,
Krasnoyarsk, Russia; Research Center of Neurology, Moscow, Russia.

The review focuses on molecular and biochemical mechanisms of nonspecific
protection of respiratory epithelium. The authors provide a comprehensive
analysis of up-to-date data on the activity of the lactoperoxidase system
expressed on the surface of the respiratory epithelium which provides the
generation of hypothiocyanate and hypoiodite in the presence of locally produced 
or inhaled hydrogen peroxide. Molecular mechanisms of production of active
compounds with antiviral and antibacterial effects, expression profiles of
enzymes, transporters and ion channels involved in the generation of
hypothiocyanite and hypoiodate in the mucous membrane of the respiratory system
in physiological and pathological conditions (inflammation) are discussed. In the
context of antibacterial and antiviral defense special attention is paid to
recent data confirming the effects of atmospheric air composition on the
efficiency of hypothiocyanite and hypoiodate synthesis in the respiratory
epithelium. The causes and outcomes of lactoperoxidase system impairment due to
the action of atmospheric factors are discussed in the context of controlling the
sensitivity of the epithelium to the action of bacterial agents and viruses.
Restoration of the lactoperoxidase system activity can be achieved by application
of pharmacological agents aimed to compensate for the lack of halides in tissues,
and by the control of chemical composition of the inhaled air.

Publisher: Obobshcheny dannye literatury po molekuliarnym i biokhimicheskim
mekhanizmam nespetsificheskoĭ zashchity respiratornogo épiteliia. Osoboe vnimanie
udeleno analizu sovremennykh predstavleniĭ o rabote laktoperoksidaznoĭ sistemy na
poverkhnosti épiteliia respiratornogo trakta, obespechivaiushcheĭ generatsiiu
gipotiotsianata i gipoiodita v prisutstvii lokal'no produtsiruemym libo
postupaiushchim s vdykhaemym vozdukhom peroksidom vodoroda. Obsuzhdaiutsia
molekuliarnye mekhanizmy generatsii aktivnykh soedineniĭ s protivovirusnym i
antibakterial'nym éffektami, osobennosti ékspressii fermentov, transporterov i
ionnykh kanalov, uchastvuiushchikh v obrazovanii étikh soedineniĭ v slizistoĭ
dykhatel'noĭ sistemy v norme i pri patologii (vospalenie). Predstavlena gipoteza 
o vliianii sostava atmosfernogo vozdukha na éffektivnost' generatsii
gipotiotsianata i gipoiodita v respiratornom épitelii v kontekste realizatsii ego
antibakterial'noĭ i protivovirusnoĭ zashchity. Obsuzhdaiutsia prichiny i
posledstviia nedostatochnosti laktoperoksidaznoĭ sistemy, vyzvannoĭ deĭstviem
atmosfernykh faktorov, v kontekste kontrolia chuvstvitel'nosti épiteliia k
deĭstviiu bakterial'nykh agentov i virusov. Predstavleny dokazatel'stva togo,
chto vosstanovlenie aktivnosti laktoperoksidaznoĭ sistemy mozhet dostigat'sia
primeneniem farmakologicheskikh preparatov, kompensiruiushchikh nedostatok
galogenidov v tkaniakh, i kontrolem khimicheskogo sostava vdykhaemogo vozdukha.
DOI: 10.18097/PBMC20216705383 
PMID: 34730551  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

