
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 4;16(11):e0259226. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259226.
eCollection 2021.

Development and testing of an explorative BPM acceptance model: Insights from the
COVID-19 pandemic.

Ahmad T(1), Van Looy A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Business Informatics and Operations Management, Faculty of
Economics and Business Administration, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.

When emerging technologies transform an organization's way of working,
explorative business process management (BPM) becomes a new challenge. Although
digital innovations can boost process efficacy and business productivity,
employees do not necessarily accept the implied work changes. We therefore looked
at the increased digitalization efforts during the COVID-19 lockdowns, during
which employees were forced to drastically rethink work by heavily depending on
technology for communication and almost all business tasks. This global setting
allowed us to scrutinize disruptive work changes and how employees can cope with 
disruptive work adaptations. We also looked into the explorative skillset needed 
to adapt to these changes. To theorize about an explorative BPM acceptance model,
eleven hypotheses were supported based on a solid theoretical foundation. We
followed a quantitative research design using partial least squares for
structural equation modeling (PLS-SEM) at the university administration settings 
in two regions, including purposive sampling. Data analysis covered both a
measurement model assessment and structural model assessment. Our findings reveal
that employees' perceived work modalities, feeling creative and feeling flexible 
are more promising features than perceived influence and attitude related to
explorative work and skill development. We also offer novel insights into
explorative business process management (BPM) skills, and which skills are more
productive in uncertain or dynamic working conditions. This research is a
learning path for managers struggling with flexible or competitive business
environments, and more specifically to facilitate employee willingness.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259226 
PMCID: PMC8568138
PMID: 34735499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

