
1. Vopr Virusol. 2021 Nov 4;66(5):354-367. doi: 10.36233/0507-4088-75.

[Optimization of rabies (Rhabdoviridae: Lyssavirus) dog vaccination schedule
using a mathematical model].

[Article in Russian]

Lobanova VA(1), Klyukina VI(2).

Author information: 
(1)FSBI «All-Russian Research and Technological Institute of Biological
Industry»; FSBEI HE «Russian State Agrarian University - Moscow Timiryazev
Agricultural Academy».
(2)FSBI «All-Russian Research and Technological Institute of Biological
Industry».

INTRODUCTION: Most cases of human rabies are caused by dog (Canis lupus
familiaris) bites. Therefore, the implementation of vaccination programs of these
animals is one of the urgent tasks.The work aims to identify the factors
influencing the production of antirabies virus-neutralizing antibodies (VNAs) in 
vaccinated dogs, and to formulate recommendations for adjusting the vaccination
schedule using mathematical modeling (MM).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We used a fixed-effects modeling procedure to estimate the 
two-compartment model parameters using log-transformed data (obtained by RFFIT,
rapid fluorescent focus inhibition test; and FAVN, fluorescent antibody
virus-neutralization test) on the VNAs levels in the serum of vaccinated dogs.
RESULTS: More vigorous immune response after a two-dose primary vaccination is
formed in juvenile dogs at the age of 3 months to 1 year compared to the adult
dogs. Following the primary vaccination and revaccination 1 year after, VNAs were
produced more intensively in adult stray dogs than in domestic dogs.
DISCUSSION: The short-term immune response observed in dogs aged up to 3 months
is due to the presence of colostral antibodies and the active growth of the
organism at this age. The results of our study confirm that most of the dogs have
a level of antirabies VNAs of ≥0.5 IU/ml up to two or more years following
immunization. However, only regular annual revaccination ensures the protective
VNAs level in animals that responded poorly to vaccination due to various
factors.
CONCLUSION: The following antirabies vaccination schedule is recommended: primary
vaccination of the dog at the age of 3 months up to 1 year with 1-2 month
intervals, then revaccination annually. This work also demonstrates the
possibility of a wider application of MM methods for solving problems of vaccine 
prevention.

DOI: 10.36233/0507-4088-75 
PMID: 34738451 

