
1. J Med Virol. 2021 Nov 5. doi: 10.1002/jmv.27432. [Epub ahead of print]

HCV infection in hemophilia A patients is associated with altered cytokines and
chemokines profile and might modulate the levels of FVIII inhibitor.

Bolina-Santos E(1), Chaves DG(2), da Silva-Malta MCF(2), Carmo RA(3),
Barbosa-Stancioli EF(1), Lobato Martins M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Microbiologia, Laboratório de Virologia Básica e Aplicada,
Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo
Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(2)Serviço de Pesquisa, Gerência de Desenvolvimento Técnico Científico, Fundação 
Hemominas, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(3)Ambulatório de Infectologia, Hemocentro de Belo Horizonte, Fundação Hemominas,
Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.

Prevalence of hepatitis C virus (HCV) is high in hemophilia A patients and the
development of FVIII inhibitor is another challenge in the management of these
individuals. The influence of HCV infection in the occurrence of inhibitors was
investigated by the comparison of clinical and laboratory data from noninfected
(NI, n = 96) and chronically HCV-infected (HCV, n = 58) hemophilia A patients.
Concentrations of plasmatic cytokines (IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, TNF, IFN-γ, and
IL-17A) and chemokines (CCL2, CCL5, CXCL8, CXCL9, and CXCL10) were quantified
from patients' samples. The results showed that older age, use of cryoprecipitate
and fresh frozen plasma, and severe hemophilia were associated with HCV
infection, whereas exclusive use of virus inactivated clotting factors was a
protector factor to acquiring HCV infection. HCV infection was strongly
associated with low levels of inhibitor (OR = 20.53, p < 0.001). Patients with a 
history of inhibitor (INB+) presented a mixed immune profile characterized by
higher levels of pro-and anti-inflammatory cytokines than those without a history
of inhibitor (INB-). The highest levels of CCL2 and CXCL8 were seen in HCVINB- , 
whereas CXCL9 and CXCL10 in HCVINB+ . Heatmap analysis of the set of cytokines
and chemokines concentration distributed HCV patients into two distinct clusters,
HCVINB+ and HCVINB- , both characterized by low concentrations of IL-4, while
noninfected patients were grouped in a single block regardless of inhibitor
development history (NIINB-/INB+ ). This finding suggests that the strong
association between HCV infection and low levels of factor VIII inhibitors might 
be due to the modulation of the cytokine and chemokine network established by the
antiviral response.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.27432 
PMID: 34738645 

