
1. J Korean Acad Nurs. 2021 Oct;51(5):511-524. doi: 10.4040/jkan.21156.

Healthcare Considerations for Special Populations during the COVID-19 Pandemic: A
Review.

Kim JI(#)(1), Im Y(#)(2), Song JE(3), Jang SJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, Soonchunhyang University, Cheonan, Korea.
(2)College of Nursing Science · East-West Nursing Research Institute, Kyung Hee
University, Seoul, Korea.
(3)College of Nursing · Research Institute of Nursing Science, Ajou University,
Suwon, Korea. songje@ajou.ac.kr.
(4)Red Cross College of Nursing, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Korea.
icedcoffee@cau.ac.kr.
(#)Contributed equally

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has emerged as a threat to human health
and public safety. People of all ages are susceptible to severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 infection. However, the clinical manifestations of this
infection differ by age. This study purposes to describe healthcare
considerations for special populations, such as children, pregnant and lactating 
women, and older adults, who may have unique healthcare needs, in the pandemic
situation. To realize the research purpose, we conducted a review of the practice
guidelines of public documents and qualified studies that were published
online/offline during a specific period. The review identified current knowledge 
on care for newborns, children in schools, pregnant women (from antenatal to
postpartum care), and older adults suffering from high-risk conditions.
Subsequently, we summarize vaccination guidance for special populations and,
finally, discuss the issues currently affecting special populations. Therefore,
this current knowledge on care for special populations helps nurses to provide
accurate information on vaccinations aimed at preventing COVID-19 and protecting 
the masses from infection. Currently, the scarcity of information on COVID-19
variants necessitates further research on measures to reduce pandemic spread.

© 2021 Korean Society of Nursing Science.

DOI: 10.4040/jkan.21156 
PMID: 34737245  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no conflict of interest.

