
1. Geospat Health. 2021 Nov 3;16(2). doi: 10.4081/gh.2021.994.

Evaluating the spatial and temporal patterns of the severe fever thrombocytopenia
syndrome in Republic of Korea.

Park S(1), Nam HS(2), Na BJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, Chungnam National University Graduate School,
Daejeon; Division of Climate Change and Health Protection, Korea Disease Control 
and Prevention Agency (KDCA), Chungcheongbuk-do. 21seeyou@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Preventive Medicine, Chungnam National University College of
Medicine, Daejeon. hsnam@cnu.ac.kr.
(3)Graduate School of Urban Public Health, University of Seoul, Seoul.
baegju.na@uos.ac.kr.

Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome (SFTS) is a new infectious disease
with a high mortality rate and increased incidence in Republic of Korea since the
first case was reported in 2013. The average mortality rate varies by region and 
year but remains high in Asia. This study aimed to evaluate the spatial and
temporal patterns of SFTS cases reported to the national Disease Control and
Prevention Agency (KDCA). We analysed the spatial and temporal distribution of
SFTS and observed changes in areas vulnerable to the disease. We analysed data
concerning 1086 confirmed SFTS patients from 2013 to 2019 categorized according
to the 247 district level administrative units. To better understand the
epidemiology of SFTS, we carried out spatiotemporal analyses on a yearly basis
and also calculated and mapped spatial clusters of domestic SFTS by global
(regional) and local Moran's indices. To observe the annual changes in SFTS
incidence rate, scan statistics for each city and district were calculated. The
incidence rate showed significant clustering in specific regions, which
reoccurred annually in some regions. In Republic of Korea, SFTS clusters have
been expanding into the southern regions, with annual clusters concentrated
between May and October. This pattern allows prediction of SFTS occurrences
through spatiotemporal analysis, which makes it possible to guide measures of
disease prevention.

DOI: 10.4081/gh.2021.994 
PMID: 34730319  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

