
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 3:JVI0158221. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01582-21. [Epub ahead of print]

SOSIP trimer-specific antibodies isolated from a SHIV-infected monkey with versus
without a pre-blocking step with gp41.

Duggan NN(1), Weisgrau KL(2), Magnani DM(1), Rakasz EG(2), Desrosiers RC(1),
Martinez-Navio JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine,
Miami, FL, USA.
(2)Wisconsin National Primate Research Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

BG505 SOSIP.664 (hereafter referred to as SOSIP), a stabilized trimeric mimic of 
the HIV-1 envelope spike resembling the native viral spike, is a useful tool for 
isolating anti-HIV-1 neutralizing antibodies. We screened long-term SHIV-AD8
infected rhesus monkeys for potency and breadth of serum neutralizing activity
against autologous and heterologous viruses: SHIV-AD8, HIV-1 YU2, HIV-1 JR-CSF,
and HIV-1 NL4-3. Monkey rh2436 neutralized all viruses tested and showed strong
reactivity to the SOSIP trimer, suggesting this was a promising candidate for
attempts at monoclonal antibody (mAb) isolation. Monoclonal antibodies were
isolated by performing single B-cell sorts from peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMC) by FACS using the SOSIP trimer as a probe. An initial round of
sorted cells revealed the majority of isolated mAbs were directed to the gp41
external domain portion of the SOSIP trimer and were mostly non-neutralizing
against tested isolates. A second sort was performed, introducing a gp41 blocking
step prior to PBMC staining and FACS sorting. These isolated mAbs bound SOSIP
trimer but were no longer directed to the gp41 external domain portion. A
significantly higher proportion of mAbs with neutralizing activity were obtained 
with this strategy. Our data show this pre-blocking step with gp41 greatly
increases the yield of non-gp41 reactive, SOSIP- specific mAbs and increases the 
likelihood of isolating mAbs with neutralizing activity. Importance Recent
advancements in the field have focused on the isolation and use of broadly
neutralizing antibodies for both prophylaxis and therapy. Finding a useful probe 
to isolate broad potent neutralizing antibodies while avoiding non-neutralizing
antibodies is important. The SOSIP trimer has been shown to be a great tool for
this purpose because it binds known broadly neutralizing antibodies. However, the
SOSIP trimer can isolate non-neutralizing antibodies as well, including
gp41-specific mAbs. Introducing a pre-blocking step with gp41 recombinant protein
decreased the percent of gp41-specific antibodies isolated with SOSIP probe, as
well as increased the number of neutralizing antibodies isolated. This method
could be used as a tool to increase the chances of isolating neutralizing
antibodies.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01582-21 
PMID: 34730398 

