
1. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2021 Oct 27;285:173-178. doi: 10.3233/SHTI210593.

Toward an Agile System: Iranian Information System for Covid-19-Affected Patients
Data Collection from Iranian Hospitals.

Abedian S(1)(2), Kolivand P(1), Lornejad HR(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Emergency Medical Services Organization, Ministry of Health and
Medical Education, Tehran, I.R. Iran.
(2)Department of Information Technology Management, Islamic Azad University,
Qazvin, Iran.

COVID-19's rapid spreads has caused a global pandemic. On 19th February 2020,
Iran reported its first confirmed cases of infections in Qom City and the number 
of diagnosed cases and the death toll rose exponentially in March [1-3]. Managing
the disease, which is considered a pandemic according to the World Health
Organization (WHO) [4], requires definite approaches differing according to
various factors in each country, which may also lead to (in)effective dealing
with the disease. In addition, using international data and information, and WHO 
advice, especially in the crisis and therapeutic procedures, is one of the best
crisis management strategies [5]. For every plan by governances, the first step
is collecting information on epidemic distribution for the purpose of isolating
provinces and cities at a national scale. Thus, Ministry of Health and Medical
Education of Iran (MOHME) attempted to collect the minimum required data on the
infection-affected patients based on medical records and epidemiological factors,
such as demographic data (gender, age and national code), exposure history (close
contact with the infected, suspect patients or even having traveled) and signs
and symptoms (fever, cough, shortness or difficulties in breathing, fatigue,
anorexia, hemoptysis, sputum production, dyspnea, Myalgia, Pharyngalgia, nausea, 
vomiting, Diarrhea, Headache, Abdominal pain, Dizziness, etc.). Therefore, to
ensure accuracy and validity, and to speed up data collection in an area,
Information Technology (IT) tools were required [6]. In this regard, developing
an information system with a simple format and user-friendly interface in the
shortest possible time was the aim. This study presents the local information
system developed in March 2020, which has been registering hospitalized
Covide-19-affected patients in Iranian hospitals up till now. In other words,
this paper introduces features and procedures of one of the national systems as a
health registry that includes clinical information on admitted Covid-19 patients 
in Iranian hospitals from admission to discharge or death. This system is
supported by MOHME, and along with outpatient Point of Care Information Systems
(POCS), feeds the national and international pandemic reports and decisions.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI210593 
PMID: 34734870  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

