
1. Immunobiology. 2021 Nov;226(6):152150. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2021.152150. Epub
2021 Oct 25.

Genomic and epigenomic adaptation in SP-R210 (Myo18A) isoform-deficient
macrophages.

Yau E(1), Chen Y(2), Song C(3), Webb J(4), Carillo M(4), Kawasawa YI(5), Tang
Z(6), Takahashi Y(6), Umstead TM(4), Dovat S(6), Chroneos ZC(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Microbiology and Immunology, Pulmonary Immunology
and Physiology Laboratory, Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, PA,
USA. Electronic address: eyau@pennstatehealth.psu.edu.
(2)Department of Pediatrics and Microbiology and Immunology, Pulmonary Immunology
and Physiology Laboratory, Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, PA,
USA; Department of Pediatrics, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology,
Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, PA, USA; Department of
Internal Medicine, Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus, OH, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics and Microbiology and Immunology, Pulmonary Immunology
and Physiology Laboratory, Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, PA,
USA.
(5)Department of Pharmacology and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute
for Personalized Medicine, Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, PA,
USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(7)Department of Pediatrics and Microbiology and Immunology, Pulmonary Immunology
and Physiology Laboratory, Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, PA,
USA. Electronic address: zchroneos@pennstatehealth.psu.edu.

Macrophages play an important role in maintaining tissue homeostasis, from
regulating the inflammatory response to pathogens to resolving inflammation and
aiding tissue repair. The surfactant protein A (SP-A) receptor SP-R210 (MYO18A)
has been shown to affect basal and inflammatory macrophage states. Specifically, 
disruption of the longer splice isoform SP-R210L/MYO18Aα renders macrophages
hyper-inflammatory, although the mechanism by which this occurs is not well
understood. We asked whether disruption of the L isoform led to the
hyper-inflammatory state via alteration of global genomic responses. RNA
sequencing analysis of L isoform-deficient macrophages (SP-R210L(DN)) revealed
basal and influenza-induced upregulation of genes associated with inflammatory
pathways, such as TLR, RIG-I, NOD, and cytoplasmic DNA signaling, whereas
knockout of both SP-R210 isoforms (L and S) only resulted in increased RIG-I and 
NOD signaling. Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) analysis
showed increased genome-wide deposition of the pioneer transcription factor PU.1 
in SP-R210L(DN) cells, with increased representation around genes relevant to
inflammatory pathways. Additional ChIP-seq analysis of histone H3 methylation
marks showed decreases in both repressive H3K9me3 and H3K27me3 marks with a
commensurate increase in transcriptionally active (H3K4me3) histone marks in the 
L isoform deficient macrophages. Influenza A virus (IAV) infection, known to
stimulate a wide array of anti-viral responses, caused a differential
redistribution of PU.1 binding between proximal promoter and distal sites and
decoupling from Toll-like receptor regulated gene promoters in SP-R210L(DN)
cells. These finding suggest that the inflammatory differences seen in
SP-R210L-deficient macrophages are a result of transcriptional differences that
are mediated by epigenetic changes brought about by differential expression of
the SP-R210 isoforms. This provides an avenue to explore how the signaling
pathways downstream of the receptor and the ligands can modulate the macrophage
inflammatory response.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imbio.2021.152150 
PMID: 34735924 

