
1. Protein Sci. 2021 Nov 4. doi: 10.1002/pro.4221. [Epub ahead of print]

CTD of SARS-CoV-2 N protein is a cryptic domain for binding ATP and nucleic acid 
that interplay in modulating phase separation.

Dang M(1), Song J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore.

SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid (N) protein plays essential roles in many steps of the
viral life cycle, thus representing a key drug target. N protein contains the
folded N-/C-terminal domains (NTD/CTD) and three intrinsically disordered
regions, while its functions including liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS)
depend on the capacity in binding various viral/host-cell RNA/DNA of diverse
sequences. Previously NTD was established to bind various RNA/DNA while CTD to
dimerize/oligomerize for forming high-order structures. By NMR, here for the
first time we decrypt that CTD is not only capable of binding S2m, a specific
probe derived from SARS-CoV-2 gRNA but with the affinity even higher than that of
NTD. Very unexpectedly, ATP, the universal energy currency for all living cells
with high cellular concentrations (2-16 mM), specifically binds CTD with Kd of
1.49 ± 0.28 mM. Strikingly, the ATP-binding residues of NTD/CTD are identical in 
the SARS-CoV-2 variants while ATP and S2m interplay in binding NTD/CTD, as well
as in modulating LLPS critical for the viral life cycle. Results together not
only define CTD as a novel binding domain for ATP and nucleic acid, but enforce
our previous proposal that ATP has been evolutionarily exploited by SARS-CoV-2 to
complete its life cycle in the host cell. Most importantly, the unique
ATP-binding pockets on NTD/CTD may offer promising targets for design of specific
anti-SARS-CoV-2 molecules to fight the pandemic. Fundamentally, ATP emerges to
act at mM as a cellular factor to control the interface between the host cell and
virus lacking the ability to generate ATP.

© 2021 The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.4221 
PMID: 34734665 

