
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 3:JVI0176821. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01768-21. [Epub ahead of print]

The Unique Glycosylation at Position 986 on the E2 Glycoprotein of Classical
Swine Fever Virus Is Responsible for Viral Attenuation and Protection against
Lethal Challenge.

Li Y(1), Yuan M(1), Han Y(1), Xie L(1), Ma Y(1), Li S(1), Sun Y(1), Luo Y(1), Li 
W(2), Qiu HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Lanzhou Veterinary
Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, China.

Classical swine fever (CSF) is an economically important disease of pigs caused
by the classical swine fever virus (CSFV). The live attenuated vaccine C-strain
(also called HCLV strain) against CSF was produced by multiple passages of a
highly virulent strain in rabbits. However, the molecular determinants for its
attenuation and protection remain unclear. In this study, we identified a unique 
glycosylation at position 986 (986NYT988) on the E2 glycoprotein Domain IV of
C-strain but not (986NYA988) the highly virulent CSFV Shimen strain. We evaluated
the infectivity, virulence, and protective efficacy of the C-strain-based mutant 
rHCLV-T988A lacking the glycosylation and Shimen strain mutant rShimen-A988T
acquiring an additional glycosylation at position 986. rShimen-A988T showed a
significantly decreased viral replication ability in SK6 cells, while rHCLV-T988A
exhibited a growth kinetics indistinguishable from that of C-strain. Removal of
the C-strain glycosylation site does not affect viral replication in rabbits and 
the attenuated phenotype in pigs. However, rShimen-A988T was attenuated and
protected the pigs from a lethal challenge at 14 days post-inoculation. In
contrast, the rHCLV-T988A-inoculated pigs showed transient fever, a few clinical 
signs, and pathological changes in the spleens upon challenge with the Shimen
strain. Mechanistic investigations revealed that the unique glycosylation at
position 986 influences viral spreading, alters the formation of E2 homodimers,
and leads to increased production of neutralizing antibodies. Collectively, our
data for the first time demonstrate that the unique glycosylation at position 986
on the E2 glycoprotein is responsible for viral attenuation and protection.
IMPORTANCE Viral glycoproteins involve in infectivity, virulence, and host immune
responses. Deglycosylation on the Erns, E1, or E2 glycoprotein of highly virulent
classical swine fever virus (CSFV) attenuated viral virulence in pigs, indicating
that the glycosylation contributes to the pathogenicity of highly virulent
strain. However, the effects of the glycosylation on the C-strain E2 glycoprotein
on viral infectivity in cells, viral attenuation, and protection in pigs have not
been elucidated. This study demonstrates the unique glycosylation at position 986
on the C-strain E2 glycoprotein. C-strain mutant removing the glycosylation at
the site provides only partial protection against CSFV challenge. Remarkably, the
addition of the glycan to E2 of the highly virulent Shimen strain attenuates the 
viral virulence and confers complete protection against the lethal challenge in
pigs. Our findings provide a new insight into the contribution of the
glycosylation to the virus attenuation and protection.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01768-21 
PMID: 34730400 

