
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021 Nov 5. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14385. [Epub ahead of print]

Red deer reveal spatial risks of Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever virus
infection.

Cuadrado-Matías R(1), Cardoso B(1)(2), Sas MA(3), García-Bocanegra I(4), Schuster
I(3), González-Barrio D(1)(5), Reiche S(6), Mertens M(3), Cano-Terriza D(4),
Casades-Martí L(1), Jiménez-Ruiz S(1)(4), Martínez-Guijosa J(1), Fierro Y(7),
Gómez-Guillamón F(8), Gortázar C(1), Acevedo P(1), Groschup MH(3), Ruiz-Fons
F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Health & Biotechnology (SaBio) Group, Instituto de Investigación en Recursos
Cinegéticos (CSIC-UCLM-JCCM), Ciudad Real, Spain.
(2)CIBIO/InBio, Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos,
Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(3)Institute of Novel and Emerging Infectious Diseases,
Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Insel Riems, Germany.
(4)Grupo de Investigación en Sanidad Animal y Zoonosis (GISAZ), Dpto. de Sanidad 
Animal, Universidad de Córdoba, Córdoba, Spain.
(5)Parasitology Reference and Research Laboratory, Spanish National Centre for
Microbiology, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Department of Experimental Animal Facilities and Biorisk Management,
Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Insel Riems, Germany.
(7)Yolfie Properties, Ciudad Real, Spain.
(8)Consejería de Agricultura, Ganadería, Pesca y Desarrollo Sostenible, Junta de 
Andalucía, Málaga, Spain.

Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV) continues to cause new human cases
in Iberia while its spatial distribution and ecological determinants remain
unknown. The virus remains active in a silent tick-animal cycle to which animals 
contribute maintaining the tick populations and the virus itself. Wild ungulates,
in particular red deer, are essential hosts for Hyalomma ticks in Iberia, which
are the principal competent vector of CCHFV. Red deer could be an excellent model
to understand the ecological determinants of CCHFV as well as to predict
infection risks for humans because it is large, gregarious, abundant and the
principal host for Hyalomma lusitanicum. We designed a cross-sectional study,
analysed the presence of CCHFV antibodies in 1444 deer from 82 populations, and
statistically modelled exposure risk with host and environmental predictors. The 
best-fitted statistical model was projected for peninsular Spain to map infection
risks. Fifty out of 82 deer populations were seropositive, with individual
population prevalence as high as 88%. The highest prevalence of exposure to CCHFV
occurred in the southwest of the Iberian Peninsula. Climate and ungulate
abundance were the most influential predictors of the risk of exposure to the
virus. The highest risk regions were those where H. lusitanicum is most abundant.
Eight of the nine primary human cases occurred in or bordering these regions,
demonstrating that the model predicts human infection risk accurately. A recent
human case of CCHF occurred in northwestern Spain, a region that the model
predicted as low risk, pointing out that it needs improvement to capture all
determinants of the CCHFV infection risk. In this study, we have been able to
identify the main ecological determinants of CCHFV, and we have also managed to
create an accurate model to assess the risk of CCHFV infection.

© 2021 The Authors. Transboundary and Emerging Diseases published by Wiley-VCH
GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14385 
PMID: 34739746 

