
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 4;16(11):e0258738. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258738.
eCollection 2021.

Safe reopening of college campuses during COVID-19: The University of California 
experience in Fall 2020.

Pollock BH(1), Kilpatrick AM(2), Eisenman DP(3)(4), Elton KL(5), Rutherford
GW(6), Boden-Albala BM(7), Souleles DM(7), Polito LE(8), Martin NK(9), Byington
CL(5)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health Sciences, University of California Davis, Davis,
California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California Santa
Cruz, Santa Cruz, California, United States of America.
(3)Division of General Internal Medicine and Health Services Research, David
Geffen School of Medicine, Fielding School of Public Health, University of
California, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(4)Center for Public Health and Disasters, Fielding School of Public Health,
University of California, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(5)University of California Office of the President, Oakland, California, United 
States of America.
(6)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San
Francisco, California, United States of America.
(7)Department of Health Society and Behavior, Program in Public Health,
Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Susan and Henry Samueli College of
Health Sciences, University of California Irvine, Irvine, California, United
States of America.
(8)Student Health, University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara,
California, United States of America.
(9)Division of Infectious Diseases and Global Public Health, Department of
Medicine, University of California San Diego, San Diego, California, United
States of America.
(10)Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Department of Pediatrics,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States 
of America.

BACKGROUND: Epidemics of COVID-19 in student populations at universities were a
key concern for the 2020-2021 school year. The University of California (UC)
System developed a set of recommendations to reduce campus infection rates.
SARS-CoV-2 test results are summarized for the ten UC campuses during the Fall
2020 term.
METHODS: UC mitigation efforts included protocols for the arrival of students
living on-campus students, non-pharmaceutical interventions, daily symptom
monitoring, symptomatic testing, asymptomatic surveillance testing, isolation and
quarantine protocols, student ambassador programs for health education, campus
health and safety pledges, and lowered density of on-campus student housing. We
used data from UC campuses, the UC Health-California Department of Public Health 
Data Modeling Consortium, and the U.S. Census to estimate the proportion of each 
campus' student populations that tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 and compared it
to the fraction individuals aged 20-29 years who tested positive in their
respective counties.
RESULTS: SARS-CoV-2 cases in campus populations were generally low in September
and October 2020, but increased in November and especially December, and were
highest in early to mid-January 2021, mirroring case trajectories in their
respective counties. Many students were infected during the Thanksgiving and
winter holiday recesses and were detected as cases upon returning to campus. The 
proportion of students who tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 during Fall 2020 ranged
from 1.2% to 5.2% for students living on campus and was similar to students
living off campus. For most UC campuses the proportion of students testing
positive was lower than that for the 20-29-year-old population in which campuses 
were located.
CONCLUSIONS: The layered mitigation approach used on UC campuses, informed by
public health science and augmented perhaps by a more compliant population,
likely minimized campus transmission and outbreaks and limited transmission to
surrounding communities. University policies that include these mitigation
efforts in Fall 2020 along with SARS-CoV-2 vaccination, may alleviate some local 
concerns about college students returning to communities and facilitate
resumption of normal campus operations and in-person instruction.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258738 
PMCID: PMC8568179
PMID: 34735480  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No authors have competing interests

