
1. Clin Mol Hepatol. 2021 Nov 5. doi: 10.3350/cmh.2021.0236. [Epub ahead of print]

A cost-effectiveness study of universal screening for hepatitis C virus infection
in South Korea: A societal perspective.

Kim HL(1), Kim KA(2), Choi GH(3), Jang ES(3), Ki M(4), Choi HY(4), Jeong SH(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Sahmyook University, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Inje University Ilsan Paik Hospital, Goyang, 
Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, Korea.
(4)Department of Cancer Control and Policy, Graduate School of Cancer Science and
Policy, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Korea.

Background/Aims: This study aimed to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of hepatitis
C virus (HCV) screening compared with no screening in the Korean population from 
societal and healthcare system perspectives.
Methods: A published decision-tree plus Markov model was used to compare the
expected costs and quality-adjusted life years (QALY) between one-time universal 
HCV screening and no screening in the population aged 40-65 years using the
National Health Examination program (NHE). Input parameters were obtained from
analyses of the National Health Insurance claims data, Korean HCV cohort data, or
from the literature review. The population aged 40-65 years was simulated in a
model spanning a lifetime from both the healthcare system and societal
perspectives, which included productivity loss cost owing to HCV-related deaths. 
The incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) between universal screening and
no screening was estimated.
Results: The HCV screening strategy had an ICER of $2,666QALY and $431/QALY from 
the healthcare system and societal perspectives, respectively. Both ICERs were
far less than the willingness-to-pay (WTP) threshold of $25,000/QALY, showing
that universal screening was highly cost-effective compared with no screening. In
the various sensitivity analyses, the most influential parameters on
cost-effectiveness were the antibodies to HCV (anti-HCV) prevalence, screening
costs, and treatment acceptance; however, all ICERs were consistently less than
the threshold. If the anti-HCV prevalence was over 0.18%, screening could be
cost-effective.
Conclusions: One-time universal HCV screening in the Korean population aged 40-65
years using NHE would be highly cost-effective from both healthcare system and
societal perspectives.

DOI: 10.3350/cmh.2021.0236 
PMID: 34736311 

