
1. Acta Biomed. 2021 Oct 1;92(S6):e2021456. doi: 10.23750/abm.v92iS6.12072.

Web-based analysis on the role of Digital Media in Health Communication: the
experience of VaccinarSinSardegna Website.

Arghittu A(1), Deiana G(2), Dettori M(3), Dempsey E(4), Masia MD(5), Plamieri
A(6), Spano AL(7), Azara A(8), Castiglia P(9).

Author information: 
(1)1) University Hospital of Sassari; 2) Department of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Sassari. arghittu.antonella@gmail.com.
(2)1) University Hospital of Sassari; 2) Department of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Sassari. deiana.giovanna90@gmail.com.
(3)1) University Hospital of Sassari; 2) Department of Medical, Surgical and
Experimental Sciences, University of Sassari. madettori@uniss.it.
(4)University Hospital of Sassari. dempseyemma@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Medical, Surgical and Experimental Sciences, University of
Sassari. mdmasia@uniss.it.
(6)1) University Hospital of Sassari; 2) Department of Medical, Surgical and
Experimental Sciences, University of Sassari. luca@uniss.it.
(7)University Hospital of Sassari. antonio.spano@aousassari.it.
(8)1) University Hospital of Sassari; 2) Department of Medical, Surgical and
Experimental Sciences, University of Sassari. azara@uniss.it.
(9)1) University Hospital of Sassari; 2) Department of Medical, Surgical and
Experimental Sciences, University of Sassari. castigli@uniss.it.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Vaccinarsinsardegna.org website is a medical and scientific
communication portal regarding vaccinations of Sardinia region. This article aims
to present the structure of the portal, to demonstrate the actions carried out to
provide accurate information for users and to analyse the website's activity from
its launch until the current pandemic period in terms of dissemination and
visibility.
METHODS: Various metrics such as the number of visits to the site (sessions,
number of users and average session duration), user behaviour (pages viewed,
bounce rate and organic search) and the session acquisition path (direct traffic,
referrals and social traffic) were recorded, extrapolated and processed with
Google Analytics. Qualitative and normally distributed quantitative variables
were summarised with absolute (relative) frequencies and means. The statistical
differences between the two periods (before and during the anti-COVID-19
vaccination campaign) were evaluated applying the Wilkoxon runk-sum test. A
two-tailed p-value less than 0.01 was considered to be statistically significant.
RESULTS: The metrics recorded using Google Analytics show that from its
publication to date, the VaccinarSinSardegna.org portal has significantly
increased its visibility: in fact, the number of users who have accessed the
site, the number of sessions and individual web pages visited have grown
exponentially. These findings are confirmed by the increasing number of visits to
both versions of the regional website (Italian- and English-language) during the 
COVID-19 emergency and COVID-19 vaccination campaign. When the total values
recorded over the period were compared, an overall increase in metrics was
observed-the number of individual users, visits and individual pageviews rose in 
a statistically significant way.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on the success on VaccinarSinSardegna and given its potential 
for expansion to include further collaborations with national and international
scientific bodies, the authors affirm that similar initiatives should be
implemented in the fight against vaccine hesistancy.

DOI: 10.23750/abm.v92iS6.12072 
PMID: 34739476  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

