
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 18;12:689065. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.689065. eCollection
2021.

Generation and Effect Testing of a SARS-CoV-2 RBD-Targeted Polyclonal Therapeutic
Antibody Based on a 2-D Airway Organoid Screening System.

He Y(1), Qu J(2), Wei L(2)(3), Liao S(2)(4)(5), Zheng N(2)(6)(7), Liu Y(2), Wang 
X(1), Jing Y(8)(9), Shen CK(8)(9), Ji C(8), Luo G(9), Zhang Y(10), Xiang Q(1), Fu
Y(1), Li S(11)(12), Fan Y(5), Fang S(13), Wang P(1), Li L(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen,
China.
(2)Institute of Biomedicine and Biotechnology, Shenzhen Institute of Advanced
Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China.
(3)School of Biomedical Science and Pharmacy, Faculty of Health and Medicine,
Hunter Medical Research Institute, University of Newcastle, New Lambton Heights, 
NSW, Australia.
(4)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The Seventh Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Shenzhen, China.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology, The Seventh Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Shenzhen, China.
(6)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head Neck Surgery, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(7)Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Otorhinolaryngology, Guangzhou, China.
(8)Department of Research & Development Department, Jiangxi Institute of
Biological Products Co. Ltd., Jiangxi, China.
(9)Department of Research & Development Department, Jiangxi Institute of
Biological Products Shenzhen R&D Center Co. Ltd., Shenzhen, China.
(10)Department of Research & Development Department, Hainan Institute of
Pharmaceutical Research Co. Ltd., Hainan, China.
(11)Department of Otolaryngology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Union Shenzhen Hospital, Shenzhen, China.
(12)Department of Otolaryngology, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen
University Health Science Center, Shenzhen, China.
(13)Department of Pathogen Biology, Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and
Prevention, Shenzhen, China.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is an acute respiratory infectious disease
caused by infection with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2). The US FDA has approved several therapeutics and vaccines worldwide
through the emergency use authorization in response to the rapid spread of
COVID-19. Nevertheless, the efficacies of these treatments are being challenged
by viral escape mutations. There is an urgent need to develop effective
treatments protecting against SARS-CoV-2 infection and to establish a stable
effect-screening model to test potential drugs. Polyclonal antibodies (pAbs) have
an intrinsic advantage in such developments because they can target rapidly
mutating viral strains as a result of the complexity of their binding epitopes.
In this study, we generated anti-receptor-binding domain (anti-RBD) pAbs from
rabbit serum and tested their safety and efficacy in response to SARS-CoV-2
infection both in vivo and ex vivo. Primary human bronchial epithelial
two-dimensional (2-D) organoids were cultured and differentiated to a mature
morphology and subsequently employed for SARS-CoV-2 infection and drug screening.
The pAbs protected the airway organoids from viral infection and tissue damage.
Potential side effects were tested in mouse models for both inhalation and vein
injection. The pAbs displayed effective viral neutralization effects without
significant side effects. Thus, the use of animal immune serum-derived pAbs might
be a potential therapy for protection against SARS-CoV-2 infection, with the
strategy developed to produce these pAbs providing new insight into the treatment
of respiratory tract infections, especially for infections with viruses
undergoing rapid mutation.

Copyright © 2021 He, Qu, Wei, Liao, Zheng, Liu, Wang, Jing, Shen, Ji, Luo, Zhang,
Xiang, Fu, Li, Fan, Fang, Wang and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.689065 
PMCID: PMC8559598
PMID: 34733269  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: YJ, CK-FS, CJ, and GL are currently employed by
Jiangxi Institute of Biological Products Co. Ltd., Jiangxi, China, and Jiangxi
Institute of Biological Products Shenzhen R&D Center Co. Ltd., Shenzhen, China.
YZ is employed by Hainan Institute of Pharmaceutical Research Co. Ltd., Hainan,
China. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.

