
1. Vopr Virusol. 2021 Nov 4;66(5):368-382. doi: 10.36233/0507-4088-76.

[Antiviral activity of the organic germanium complex with aciclovir against
herpes simplex virus (Herpesviridae: Alphaherpesvirinae: Simplexvirus: Human
alphaherpesvirus 1/2) in the in vitro and in vivo systems].

[Article in Russian]

Alimbarova LM(1), Ambrosov IV(2), Matelo SK(2), Barinsky IF(1).

Author information: 
(1)FSBI «National Research Centre for Epidemiology and Microbiology named after
the honorary academician N.F. Gamaleya» of the Ministry of Health of Russia.
(2)«VDS Pharma» LLC.

INTRODUCTION: A significant increase in the incidence of various forms of
herpesvirus infection (HVI) determines the need to search for new approaches to
the modification of one of the basic antiviral drugs aciclovir (ACV) and its
dosage forms to improve their biopharmaceutical characteristics and increase the 
effectiveness of therapy. In this aspect, an innovative organic germanium complex
with aciclovir (OGCA) is promising.The aim of the study was to assess the
antiviral activity of OGCA against the herpes simplex virus (HSV) (human herpes
virus, HHV) on the HVI models both in vitro and in vivo.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We studied the activity of OGCA in a therapeutic regimen
against HSV-1 (HHV-1) (Kl strain), HSV-2 (HHV-2) (VN strain) using virological
and statistical research methods in the in vitro model of HVI on Vero cell
culture and the model of genital herpes (GH) caused by HHV-2 (VN strain) in male 
guinea pigs (Canis porcellus).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: It was found OGCA inhibits the replication of HHV-1 and
HHV-2 in Vero cells, and has anti-HHV activity in the GH model in male guinea
pigs, leading to a decrease in the severity and duration of the disease, the
intensity and duration of viral shedding. The most pronounced activity was
detected when preparation was applied topically 5 times a day for 5 days at the
early stages of infection (3% gel). The delayed use of OGCA (48 hours after
infection) also had statistically significant efficacy compared to commercial
reference drugs containing aciclovir or its pro-drugs: aciclovir (5% cream), AIL 
(acyclovir+interferon alfa-2b+lidocaine, 3% ointment), penciclovir (1% cream).
OGCA significantly reduced the number of days of the pathogen shedding, as well
as its infectivity, compared to animals in the control group and ones receiving
placebo. The activity of OGCA, apparently, is due to its improved
biopharmaceutical characteristics compared to aciclovir, as well as the presence 
of a number of biological activities of its constituent components.
CONCLUSION: The results of the study allow us to consider OGCA as the basis for
the development of antiviral agents for the treatment of HVI.

DOI: 10.36233/0507-4088-76 
PMID: 34738452 

