
1. Electrophoresis. 2021 Nov 5. doi: 10.1002/elps.202100269. [Epub ahead of print]

Sixteen capillary electrophoresis applications for viral vaccine analysis.

Geurink L(1)(2), van Tricht E(1), van der Burg D(1), Scheppink G(1), Pajic B(1), 
Dudink J(1), Sänger-van de Griend C(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Janssen Vaccines and Prevention B.V., CN Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Biomedical Centre,
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Kantisto B.V., Baarn, The Netherlands.

A broad range of CE applications from our organization is reviewed to give a
flavor of the use of CE within the field of vaccine analyses. Applicability of CE
for viral vaccine characterization, and release and stability testing of seasonal
influenza virosomal vaccines, universal subunit influenza vaccines, Sabin
inactivated polio vaccines (sIPV), and adenovirus vector vaccines were
demonstrated. Diverse CZE, CE-SDS, CGE, and cIEF methods were developed,
validated, and applied for virus, protein, posttranslational modifications, DNA, 
and excipient concentration determinations, as well as for the integrity and
composition verifications, and identity testing (e.g., CZE for intact virus
particles, CE-SDS application for hemagglutinin quantification and influenza
strain identification, chloride or bromide determination in process samples).
Results were supported by other methods such as RP-HPLC, dynamic light scattering
(DLS), and zeta potential measurements. Overall, 16 CE methods are presented that
were developed and applied, comprising six adenovirus methods, five viral protein
methods, and methods for antibodies determination of glycans, host cell-DNA,
excipient chloride, and process impurity bromide. These methods were applied to
support in-process control, release, stability, process- and product
characterization and development, and critical reagent testing. Thirteen methods 
were validated. Intact virus particles were analyzed at concentrations as low as 
0.8 pmol/L. Overall, CE took viral vaccine testing beyond what was previously
possible, improved process and product understanding, and, in total, safety,
efficacy, and quality.

© 2021 The Authors. Electrophoresis published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/elps.202100269 
PMID: 34739151 

