
1. Croat Med J. 2021 Oct 31;62(5):495-503.

The effect of standard-dose wintertime vitamin D supplementation on influenza
infection in immunized nursing home elderly residents.

Godan Hauptman A, Lukić-Grlić A(1), Vraneš J, Milošević M, Gagro A.

Author information: 
(1)Amarela Lukić-Grlić, Department of Laboratory Diagnostics, Laboratory of
Clinical Microbiology, Zagreb Children's Hospital, Klaićeva 16, 10000 Zagreb,
Croatia, amarela.lukic@kdb.hr.

AIM: To investigate whether three-month oral vitamin D supplementation (800 IU in
drops) reduces the risk of influenza infection in elderly nursing home residents 
vaccinated against influenza.
METHODS: This cross-sectional observational study enrolled 97 participants (73.2%
women) who received one dose of seasonal trivalent 2016-2017 influenza vaccine.
The patients were randomized into an experimental group, which received vitamin D
supplementation for three months starting on the day of vaccination, and a
control group, which did not receive vitamin D supplementation. The primary
outcome was the number of influenza infections laboratory-confirmed using a rapid
point-of-care test based on nasal swabs collected during vitamin D
supplementation. The secondary outcome was serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D level at the
end of the study.
RESULTS: The mean age ±standard deviation was 78.5± 8.8 years. All participants
had vitamin D deficiency at baseline. Twenty-three participants who developed
signs of respiratory infections during the study were tested for influenza virus.
Although the number of influenza-positive participants was lower in the group
receiving vitamin D supplementation as compared with the control group (5 vs 12),
this difference was not significant. Vitamin D supplementation failed to increase
25(OH)D levels after three months of supplementation.
CONCLUSION: Elderly nursing home residents in Zagreb County have a significant
vitamin D deficiency. The recommended national supplementation of 800 IU daily
failed to lead to vitamin D sufficiency and did not reduce the risk of influenza 
infection among the vaccinated elderly.


PMCID: PMC8596483
PMID: 34730890  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

