
1. J Med Virol. 2021 Nov 5. doi: 10.1002/jmv.27433. [Epub ahead of print]

Assessment of anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies level in convalescents plasma.

Skorek A(1), Jaźwińska-Curyłło A(2), Romanowicz A(3), Kwaśniewski K(4), Narożny
W(1), Tretiakow D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Medical University of Gdańsk, Gdańsk, Poland.
(2)Regional Center of Blood Donation and Treatment, Gdańsk, Poland.
(3)Student Scientific Club at the Department of Otolaryngology, Medical
University of Gdańsk, Gdańsk, Poland.
(4)Vascular Surgery and Angiology Department, Antoni Jurasz University Hospital
No. 1, Bydgoszcz, Poland.

Despite extensive vaccination, the quantity of patients infected with the
SARS-CoV-2 virus and its variants continues to grow worldwide. Treating patients 
with a severe course of COVID-19 is a difficult challenge. One of the generally
accepted and specific therapy methods is the use of plasma rich in
anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies. On the other hand, assessing the antibodies level
depending on the time after infection allows for vaccine-decision. The study
marked the level of anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgG antibodies in 351 COVID-19 convalescent
residents of one geographical region in Poland. The study group included blood
donors. The studies were cross-sectional and extended to a questionnaire to
determine infection severity. These data were compiled statistically. The study
considered epidemiological factors, the time from the end of the infection, and
infection severity. The fastest increase of the antibodies level was observed up 
to 59 days after COVID-19, and it was statistically significantly higher among
men. Higher levels of antibodies were found among people above the average age in
both men and women. There was an increase in the level of antibodies since the
onset of the disease in men, while in women, it decreased. The antibodies level
was also found to depend on the severity of the course of COVID-19 infection. The
optimal group of plasma donors in the studied geographical region is men and
women above 39 years old. after a more severe infection. The titer of antibodies 
increases with time from the disease.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.27433 
PMID: 34738646 

