
1. Acta Biomed. 2021 Oct 1;92(S6):e2021420. doi: 10.23750/abm.v92iS6.12241.

An assessment of case-fatality and infection-fatality rates of first and second
COVID-19 waves in Italy.

Filippini T(1), Zagnoli F(2), Bosi M(3), Giannone ME(4), Marchesi C(5), Vinceti
M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental, Genetic and Nutritional Epidemiology Research Center (CREAGEN),
Section of Public Health, Department of Biomedical, Metabolic and Neural
Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
tommaso.filippini@unimore.it.
(2)Environmental, Genetic and Nutritional Epidemiology Research Center (CREAGEN),
Section of Public Health, Department of Biomedical, Metabolic and Neural
Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
federico.zagnoli@unimore.it.
(3)Environmental, Genetic and Nutritional Epidemiology Research Center (CREAGEN),
Section of Public Health, Department of Biomedical, Metabolic and Neural
Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
matteo.bosi@unimore.it.
(4)Environmental, Genetic and Nutritional Epidemiology Research Center (CREAGEN),
Section of Public Health, Department of Biomedical, Metabolic and Neural
Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
edvige.giannone@unimore.it.
(5)Head Office, Direzione Generale, Azienda USL-IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, Reggio
Emilia, Italy. Cristina.Marchesi@ausl.re.it.
(6)Environmental, Genetic and Nutritional Epidemiology Research Center (CREAGEN),
Section of Public Health, Department of Biomedical, Metabolic and Neural
Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy and 3Department
of Epidemiology, Boston University School of Public Health, Boston, MA, US.
marco.vinceti@unimore.it.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: The exact COVID-19 severity is still not well defined and it 
is hotly debated due to the a few methodological issues such as the uncertainties
about the spread of the SARS-CoV-2 infection.
METHODS: We investigated COVID-19 case-fatality rate and infection-fatality rate 
in 2020 in Italy, a country severely affected by the pandemic, basing our
assessment on publicly available data, and calculating such measures during the
first and second waves.
RESULTS: We found that province-specific crude case-fatality rate in the first
wave (February-July 2020) had a median value of 12.0%. Data about
infection-fatality rate was more difficult to compute, due to large
underestimation of SARS-CoV-2 infection during the first wave when asymptomatic
individuals were very rarely tested. However, when using as a reference
population-based seroprevalence data for anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies collected in 
May-July 2020, we computed an infection-fatality rate of 2.2%. During the second 
wave (Sep-Dec 2020), when SARS-CoV-2 testing was greatly increased and extended
to many asymptomatic individuals, we could only compute a 'hybrid'
case/infection-fatality rate with a value of 2.2%, similar to the
infection-fatality rate of the first wave.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, this study allowed to assess the COVID-19 case- and
infection-fatality rates in Italy before of variant spread and vaccine
availability, confirming their high values compared with other airborne
infections like influenza. Our findings for Italy were similar to those
characterizing other Western European countries.

DOI: 10.23750/abm.v92iS6.12241 
PMID: 34739462  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

