
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 3:JVI0118921. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01189-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Zika virus infection in the ovary induces continuously elevated progesterone
level and compromises conception in interferon α/β receptor-deficient mice.

Zhang Y(1), Sheng Z(1), Gao N(1), Wu N(2), Wang P(1), Fan D(1), Zhou D(3), Cheng 
G(4), An J(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing 100069, China.
(2)Laboratory Animal Center, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100069, China.
(3)Department of Histology and Embryology, School of Basic Medical Sciences,
Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(4)Tsinghua-Peking Center for Life Sciences, School of Medicine, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China.
(5)Center of Epilepsy, Beijing Institute for Brain Disorders, Beijing 100093,
China.

Zika virus (ZIKV) belongs to mosquito-borne flaviviruses. Unlike other members in
the family, ZIKV can be sexually transmitted, and the female genital tracts are
susceptible to ZIKV. However, the impacts of ZIKV infection on nonpregnant female
reproductive health are not understood. In this study, we investigated the
effects of ZIKV infection on the ovary by using nonpregnant female interferon α/β
receptor-deficient (Ifnar1-/-) mice. The results showed that the ovary supported 
ZIKV replication, and the granulosa and theca cells of antral follicles were
susceptible. ZIKV replication in situ significantly reduced the numbers of antral
follicles, aggravated follicular atresia and disrupted folliculogenesis. Notably,
ZIKV replication in the ovary caused disordered ovarian steroidogenesis
manifested by decreased expression of key enzymes linked to sex hormone synthesis
including the cytochrome P450 17A1 (CYP17A1) and aromatase (CYP19A1). Further, we
observed that ZIKV infection disrupted the estrous cycle, and thus prolonged the 
time to conceive. More importantly, although ZIKV RNA could not be detected at 3 
months post infection, the damaged ovarian structure and dysfunction were also
observed. Taken together, our study demonstrates that ZIKV infection in
nonpregnant female mice cause ovarian damage and dysfunction, even long after
ZIKV clearance. These data provide important information to understand the
effects of ZIKV infection in female reproductive tissues and basic evidence for
further studies. IMPORTANCE ZIKV, a flavivirus, is primarily transmitted by
mosquito bites. But it can also be transmitted vertically and sexually. Although 
ZIKV-associated Guillain-Barre syndrome and microcephaly have drawn great
attention, there have been few studies on the potential effects of ZIKV on
genital tract of non-pregnant female. This study investigated the effects of ZIKV
on the ovary in mice. We found that ZIKV replicated in the ovary and the
granulosa and theca cells of antral follicles were susceptible. ZIKV replication 
in situ significantly damaged ovarian structure and function, and disrupted
folliculogenesis. Notably, ZIKV infection further disrupted the estrous cycle and
prolonged the time to conceive in mice by causing disordered ovarian
steroidogenesis. These effects were observed in both the acute phase and the
recovery phase after viral elimination. Overall, the new findings provide
important additions to make out the potential adverse impacts of ZIKV on
reproductive health in females.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01189-21 
PMID: 34730391 

