
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021 Nov 5. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14381. [Epub ahead of print]

Comparative susceptibility of eastern cottontails and New Zealand white rabbits
to classical rabbit haemorrhagic disease virus (RHDV) and RHDV2.

Mohamed F(1), Gidlewski T(2), Berninger ML(1), Petrowski HM(1), Bracht AJ(1), de 
Rueda CB(1), Barrette RW(1), Grady M(2), O'Hearn ES(1), Lewis CE(1), Moran KE(1),
Sturgill TL(3), Capucci L(4), Root JJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)United States Department of Agriculture, Animal and Plant Health Inspection
Service, Foreign Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory, Plum Island Animal Disease
Center, Greenport, New York, USA.
(2)United States Department of Agriculture, Animal and Plant Health Inspection
Service, Wildlife Services, National Wildlife Disease Program, Fort Collins,
Colorado, USA.
(3)United States Department of Agriculture, Animal and Plant Health Inspection
Service, Veterinary Services, Regionalization Evaluation Services, Raleigh, North
Carolina, USA.
(4)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimenatale della Lombardia e dell'Emilia Romagna
and OIE Reference Laboratory for Rabbit Hemorrhagic Disease, Brescia, Italy.
(5)United States Department of Agriculture, Animal and Plant Health Inspection
Service, Wildlife Services, National Wildlife Research Center, Fort Collins,
Colorado, USA.

Rabbit haemorrhagic disease virus (RHDV) is associated with high morbidity and
mortality in the European rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus). In 2010, a genetically 
distinct RHDV named RHDV2 emerged in Europe and spread to many other regions,
including North America in 2016. Prior to this study it was unknown if eastern
cottontails (ECT(s); Sylvilagus floridanus), one of the most common wild
lagomorphs in the United States, were susceptible to RHDV2. In this study, 10
wild-caught ECTs and 10 New Zealand white rabbits (NZWR(s); O. cuniculus) were
each inoculated orally with either RHDV (RHDVa/GI.1a; n = 5 per species) or RHDV2
(a recombinant GI.1bP-GI.2; n = 5 per species) and monitored for the development 
of disease. Three of the five ECTs that were infected with RHDV2 developed
disease consistent with RHD and died at 4 and 6 days post-inoculation (DPI). The 
RHDV major capsid protein/antigen (VP60) was detected in the livers of three ECTs
infected with RHDV2, but none was detected in the ECTs infected with RHDV.
Additionally, RHD viral RNA was detected in the liver, spleen, intestine and
blood of ECTs infected with RHDV2, but not in the ECTs infected with RHDV. RHD
viral RNA was detected in urine, oral swabs and rectal swabs in at least two of
five ECTs infected with RHDV2. One ECT inoculated with RHDV2 seroconverted and
developed a high antibody titre by the end of the experimental period (21 DPI).
ECTs inoculated with the classic RHDV did not seroconvert. In comparison, NZWRs
inoculated with RHDV2 exhibited high mortality (five of five) at 2 DPI and four
of five NZWRs inoculated with RHDV either died or were euthanized at 2 DPI
indicating both of these viruses were highly pathogenic to this species. This
experiment indicates that ECTs are susceptible to RHDV2 and can shed viral RNA,
thereby suggesting this species could be involved in the epidemiology of this
virus.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH. This article has been contributed to by US Government
employees and their work is in the public domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14381 
PMID: 34738741 

