
1. J Periodontol. 2021 Nov 3. doi: 10.1002/JPER.21-0335. [Epub ahead of print]

Virus transmission by ultrasonic scaler and its prevention by antiviral agent: an
in vitro study.

Fidler A(1)(2), Steyer A(3), Manevski D(4), Gašperšič R(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Endodontic and
Restorative Dentistry.
(2)University Clinical Centre Ljubljana, Department of Endodontic and Restorative
Dentistry.
(3)University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Microbiology and
Immunology.
(4)University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Medicine, Institute for Biostatistics and 
Medical Informatics.
(5)University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Oral Medicine and 
Periodontology.
(6)University Clinical Centre Ljubljana, Department of Oral Medicine and
Periodontology.

BACKGROUND: It is well recognized that dental procedures represent a potential
way of infection transmission. With the COVID-19 pandemic, the focus of dental
procedure associated transmission has rapidly changed from bacteria to viruses.
The aim was to develop an experimental setup for testing the spread of viruses by
ultrasonic scaler (USS) generated dental spray and evaluate its mitigation by
antiviral coolants.
METHODS: In a virus transmission tunnel, the dental spray was generated by USS
with saline coolant and suspension of Equine Arteritis Virus (EAV) delivered to
the USS tip. Virus transmission by settled droplets was evaluated with adherent
RK13 cell lines culture monolayer. The suspended droplets were collected by a
cyclone aero-sampler. Antiviral activity of 0.25% NaOCl and electrolyzed
oxidizing water (EOW) was tested using a suspension test. Antiviral agents'
transmission prevention ability was evaluated by using them as a coolant.
RESULTS: In the suspension test with 0.25% NaOCl or EOW, the TCID50/ml was below 
the detection limit after 5s. With saline coolant, the EAV-induced cytopathic
effect on RK13 cells was found up to the distance of 45 cm, with the number of
infected cells decreasing with distance. By aero-sampler, viral particles were
detected in concentration ≤4.2 TCID50/ml. With both antiviral agents used as
coolants, no EAV-associated RK-13 cell infection was found.
CONCLUSION: We managed to predictably demonstrate EAV spread by droplets due to
USS action. More importantly, we managed to mitigate the spread by a simple
substitution of the USS coolant with NaOCl or EOW. This article is protected by
copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1002/JPER.21-0335 
PMID: 34730843 

