
1. Appl Psychol Health Well Being. 2021 Nov 3. doi: 10.1111/aphw.12320. [Epub ahead 
of print]

University students' adherence and vaccination attitudes during the COVID-19
pandemic: Focusing on costs and benefits.

Kulcar V(1), Straganz C(2), Kreh A(1), Siller H(3), File N(1), Canazei M(1),
Bork-Hüffer T(2), Juen B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(2)Department of Geography, University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(3)Gender Medicine and Diversity Unit, Medical University of Innsbruck,
Innsbruck, Austria.

Numerous measures were implemented to contain the COVID-19 pandemic. Adhering to 
these measures as well as getting vaccinated is associated with subjective costs 
and benefits. Since young people like university students largely feel less
vulnerable to the virus, other costs and benefits than health might be more
decisive for them. This article combines the results of a qualitative and a
quantitative longitudinal study conducted with university students mainly living 
in Tyrol, Austria. The studies focused on the second wave of infections of the
COVID-19 pandemic. Health concerns, altruistic concerns, worrying about the
economic consequences of the measures and reactance played an important role for 
students in deciding what measures to follow and their vaccination attitudes. The
effects were partially mediated by understanding the measures' necessity.
Qualitative results enabled further insights into thought processes during these 
decisions and revealed additional aspects, such as concerns about mental health
consequences. This research suggests that students make their decisions about
adherence and vaccinations based on a variety of aspects that they weigh against 
each other. Understanding the individual assessments of costs and benefits is
crucial to promote both adherence to the measures against the COVID-19 pandemic
and vaccination readiness.

© 2021 The Authors. Applied Psychology: Health and Well-Being published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of International Association of Applied Psychology.

DOI: 10.1111/aphw.12320 
PMID: 34734472 

