
1. Allergy Asthma Immunol Res. 2021 Nov;13(6):850-862. doi:
10.4168/aair.2021.13.6.850.

The Impact of Environmental Pollutants on Barrier Dysfunction in Respiratory
Disease.

Lee PH(1), Park S(1), Lee YG(1), Choi SM(1), An MH(1), Jang AS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Soonchunhyang University Bucheon Hospital,
Bucheon, Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Soonchunhyang University Bucheon Hospital,
Bucheon, Korea. jas877@schmc.ac.kr.

Respiratory epithelial cells form a selective barrier between the outside
environment and underlying tissues. Epithelial cells are polarized and form
specialized cell-cell junctions, known as the apical junctional complex (AJC).
Assembly and disassembly of the AJC regulates epithelial morphogenesis and
remodeling processes. The AJC consists of tight and adherens junctions, functions
as a barrier and boundary, and plays a role in signal transduction. Endothelial
junction proteins play important roles in tissue integrity and vascular
permeability, leukocyte extravasation, and angiogenesis. Air pollutants such as
particulate matter, ozone, and biologic contaminants penetrate deep into the
airways, reaching the bronchioles and alveoli before entering the bloodstream to 
trigger airway inflammation. Pollutants accumulating in the lungs exacerbate the 
symptoms of respiratory diseases, including asthma and chronic obstructive lung
disease. Biological contaminants include bacteria, viruses, animal dander and cat
saliva, house dust mites, cockroaches, and pollen. Allergic inflammation develops
in tissues such as the lung and skin with large epithelial surface areas exposed 
to the environment. Barrier dysfunction in the lung allows allergens and
environmental pollutants to activate the epithelium and produce cytokines that
promote the induction and development of immune responses. In this article, we
review the impact of environmental pollutants on the cell barrier in respiratory 
diseases.

Copyright © 2021 The Korean Academy of Asthma, Allergy and Clinical Immunology • 
The Korean Academy of Pediatric Allergy and Respiratory Disease.

DOI: 10.4168/aair.2021.13.6.850 
PMCID: PMC8569032
PMID: 34734504 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no financial or other issues that might
lead to conflict of interest.

