
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 3:JVI0170421. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01704-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Role of the arginine cluster in the disordered domain of Herpes Simplex Virus 1
UL34 for the recruitment of ESCRT-III for viral primary envelopment.

Arii J(1)(2)(3)(4), Takeshima K(1)(2), Maruzuru Y(1)(2)(3), Koyanagi N(1)(2)(3), 
Nakayama Y(1), Kato A(1)(2)(3), Mori Y(4), Kawaguchi Y(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Virology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The
Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Infectious Disease Control, International Research Center for
Infectious Diseases, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Research Center for Asian Infectious Diseases, The Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Division of Clinical Virology, Center for Infectious Diseases, Kobe University
Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan.

During the nuclear export of nascent nucleocapsids of herpesviruses, the
nucleocapsids bud through the inner nuclear membrane (INM) by acquiring the INM
as a primary envelope (primary envelopment). We recently reported that herpes
simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) nuclear egress complex (NEC), which consists of UL34 and 
UL31, interacts with an ESCRT-III adaptor ALIX and recruits ESCRT-III machinery
to the INM for efficient primary envelopment. In this study, we identified a
cluster of six arginine residues in the disordered domain of UL34 as a minimal
region required for the interaction with ALIX as well as the recruitment of ALIX 
and an ESCRT-III protein CHMP4B to the INM in HSV-1-infected cells. Mutations in 
the arginine cluster exhibited phenotypes similar to those with ESCRT-III
inhibition reported previously, including the mis-localization of NEC, induction 
of membranous invagination structures containing enveloped virions, aberrant
accumulation of enveloped virions in the invaginations and perinuclear space, and
reduction of viral replication. We also showed that the effect of the arginine
cluster in UL34 on HSV-1 replication was dependent primarily on ALIX. These
results indicated that the arginine cluster in the disordered domain of UL34 was 
required for the interaction with ALIX and the recruitment of ESCRT-III machinery
to the INM to promote primary envelopment. IMPORTANCE Herpesvirus UL34 homologs
contain conserved amino-terminal domains that mediate vesicle formation through
interactions with UL31 homologs during primary envelopment. UL34 homologs also
comprise other domains adjacent to their membrane-anchoring regions, which differ
in length, are variable in herpesviruses and do not form distinguished secondary 
structures. However, the role of these disordered domains in infected cells
remains to be elucidated. In this study, we present data suggesting that the
arginine cluster in the disordered domain of HSV-1 UL34 mediates the interaction 
with ALIX, thereby leading to the recruitment of ESCRT-III machinery to the INM
for efficient primary envelopment. This is the first study to report the role of 
the disordered domain of a UL34 homolog in herpesvirus infections.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01704-21 
PMID: 34730397 

