
1. Injury. 2021 Oct 21. pii: S0020-1383(21)00892-5. doi:
10.1016/j.injury.2021.10.020. [Epub ahead of print]

Are deep infections that present before and after 90 days from orthopaedic trauma
different? An analysis of the validity of the recent change in CDC criteria for
infections.

Wise BT(1), Connelly D(1), Rocca M(1), Mascarenhas D(1), Huang Y(2), Maceroli
MA(1), Joshi M(1), Castillo RC(2), O'Toole RV(3).

Author information: 
(1)R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center, Department of Orthopaedics, University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(2)Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD,
United States.
(3)R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center, Department of Orthopaedics, University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States. Electronic address:
rotoole@som.umaryland.edu.

BACKGROUND: In 2016, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) changed
the time frame for their definition of deep surgical site infection (SSI) from
within 1 year to within 90 days of surgery. We hypothesized that a substantial
number of infections in patients who have undergone fracture fixation present
beyond 90 days and that there are patient or injury factors that can predict who 
is more likely to present with SSI after 90 days.
METHODS: A retrospective review yielded 452 deep SSI after fracture fixation.
These patients were divided into two groups-those infected within 90 days of
surgery and those infected beyond 90 days . Data were collected on risk factors
for infection. Univariate and multiple logistic regression analyses were
performed to compare the two groups. A randomly selected control group was used
to build infection prediction models for both outcomes. The two outcomes were
then modelled against each other to determine whether differences in predictors
for early versus late infection exist.
RESULTS: Of the 452 infections, 144 occurred beyond 90 days (32% [95% CI,
28%-36%]). No statistically significant patient factors were found in
multivariable analysis between the early and late infection groups. The need for 
flap coverage was the only injury characteristic that differed significantly
between groups, with patients in the late infection group more likely to have
needed a flap. When modelled against the control group and directly comparing the
two models, predictors for early infection include male sex and fractures of the 
pelvis, acetabulum, or hip, whereas predictors of late infection include
hepatitis C and/or human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and admission to the
intensive care unit (ICU).
CONCLUSION: Use of the recent CDC definition will underestimate the rate of
actual postoperative infections when applied to orthopaedic trauma patients.
Hepatitis C and/or HIV and ICU admission are predictors of late infection,
whereas male sex and pelvis, acetabulum, or hip fractures are predictors of early
infection. Patients who receive flap coverage may be more likely to present with 
late infection.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.injury.2021.10.020 
PMID: 34732287 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest R. V. O'Toole
is a paid consultant for Lincotek and Smith & Nephew, receives stock options from
Imagen, and receives royalties from Lincotek, all unrelated to this study. The
authors report no conflicts of interest related to this study.

