
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021 Nov 4. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14376. [Epub ahead of print]

Spatiotemporal risk assessment for avian influenza outbreak based on the dynamics
of habitat suitability for wild birds.

Yoo DS(1), Lee K(2), Beatriz ML(2), Chun BC(3), Belkhiria J(4), Lee KN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, Graduate School, Korea University, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.
(2)Center for Animal Disease Modeling and Surveillance (CADMS), Department of
Medicine and Epidemiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
California, Davis, California, USA.
(3)Department of Public Health, College of Medicine, Korea University, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.
(4)One Health Institute, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California,
Davis, California, USA.

Highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) has predominantly damaged the poultry
industry worldwide. The fundamental prevention and control strategy for HPAI
includes early detection and timely intervention enforcement through a systematic
surveillance system for wild birds based on the ecological understanding of the
dynamics of wild birds' movements. Our study aimed to develop a spatiotemporal
risk assessment model for avian influenza (AI) infection in wild birds to empower
surveillance information for a contingency strategy. For this purpose, first, we 
predicted the monthly habitat suitability of seven waterfowl species, using
227,671 Global Positioning System (GPS) tracking records of 562 birds from 2014
to 2018 in the Republic of Korea (ROK). Then, that predicted habitat suitability 
and 421 coordinates of AI detection sites in wild birds were used to build the
risk assessment model. Subsequently, we compared the monthly predicted risk of
avian influenza virus (AIv) identification in wild birds between case and
non-case poultry farms with HPAI H5N6 outbreak in the ROK between 2016 and 2017. 
The results reported considerable variation of monthly habitat suitability of
seven waterfowls and the impact of predicting AI occurrences in wild birds. The
high habitat suitability for spot-billed ducks (contribution rate in
November = 40.9%) and mallards (contribution rate in January = 34.3%)
significantly contributed to predicting the average risk of AIv identification in
wild birds, with high predictive performance [the monthly mean of area under the 
curve (AUC) = 0.978]. Moreover, our model showed that the averaged risk of
identification AI in wild birds was significantly higher in HPAI infected
premises, with infected domestic duck holdings exhibiting a significantly higher 
risk than the chicken farms in November. This study suggests that animal health
authority establishes a risk-based HPAI surveillance system grounded on the
ecological nature of wild birds to improve the effectiveness of prevention and
preparedness of emerging epidemics.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14376 
PMID: 34738338 

