
1. Ann Transl Med. 2021 Sep;9(18):1489. doi: 10.21037/atm-21-4295.

Conversion therapy with tislelizumab for high microsatellite instability,
unresectable stage III gastric cancer: a case report.

Jian D(1), Qian C(1), Wang D(1), Ma Q(2), Wang L(3), Li C(3), Xu M(1), Dai N(1), 
Chen Q(1), He J(1), Zhang H(4), Yuan M(4), Chen R(4), Chao R(5), Feng Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Daping Hospital, Army Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Daping Hospital, Army Medical University, Chongqing, 
China.
(3)Department of Gastric & Colorectal Surgery, Daping Hospital, Army Medical
University, Chongqing, China.
(4)Geneplus-Beijing, Beijing, China.
(5)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Chongqing Emergency Medical Center, The
Fourth People's Hospital of Chongqing, Chongqing University Central Hospital,
Chongqing, China.

Gastric cancer (GC) is the fifth-highest ranked cancer for incidence and second
for mortality from cancer worldwide. Conversion therapy has recently emerged as
an alternative therapy for advanced/metastatic GC patients who are unable to
undergo surgical resection at the time of diagnosis. Herein, we present the case 
of a patient with unresectable stage III GC of high microsatellite instability
(MSI), high tumor mutation burden (TMB), and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) positive.
The patient received conversion therapy involving a combination of chemotherapy
and immunotherapy regimens. After 3 courses of chemotherapy combined with
tislelizumab, the patient underwent laparoscopic radical total gastrectomy. The
pathological examination demonstrated that there was no cancerous tissue at the
proximal or distal end of the tumor and no lymph node metastases in the lesser or
greater curvature, indicating a pathologic complete response. Thereafter, the
patient continued tislelizumab treatment to prevent postoperative carcinoma
recurrence and metastasis, and to improve prognosis. In conclusion, our study
confirmed that chemotherapy combined with immunotherapy is a promising conversion
therapy for GC patients with locally unresectable lesions or distant lymph node
metastasis, and these findings warrant large-scale clinical studies. This report 
highlights the clinical importance of next-generation sequencing technology in
investigating therapeutic strategy to provide the maximal clinical benefit for
patients with GC.

2021 Annals of Translational Medicine. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/atm-21-4295 
PMCID: PMC8506721
PMID: 34734041 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have completed
the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at
https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/atm-21-4295). Dr. Zhang, Dr. Yuan and Dr. Chen are
employees of Geneplus-Beijing. Dr. Feng reports funding support from Science and 
Technology Innovation Capability Improvement Project of Army Medical University
(2019XLC3061). The other authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.

