
1. Popul Health Metr. 2021 Nov 4;19(1):44. doi: 10.1186/s12963-021-00274-z.

Addressing missing values in routine health information system data: an
evaluation of imputation methods using data from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Feng S(1), Hategeka C(2), Grépin KA(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, University of Hong Kong, Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong.
(2)Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health, Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)School of Public Health, University of Hong Kong, Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong.
kgrepin@hku.hk.

BACKGROUND: Poor data quality is limiting the use of data sourced from routine
health information systems (RHIS), especially in low- and middle-income
countries. An important component of this data quality issue comes from missing
values, where health facilities, for a variety of reasons, fail to report to the 
central system.
METHODS: Using data from the health management information system in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the advent of COVID-19 pandemic as an
illustrative case study, we implemented seven commonly used imputation methods
and evaluated their performance in terms of minimizing bias in imputed values and
parameter estimates generated through subsequent analytical techniques, namely
segmented regression, which is widely used in interrupted time series studies,
and pre-post-comparisons through paired Wilcoxon rank-sum tests. We also examined
the performance of these imputation methods under different missing mechanisms
and tested their stability to changes in the data.
RESULTS: For regression analyses, there were no substantial differences found in 
the coefficient estimates generated from all methods except mean imputation and
exclusion and interpolation when the data contained less than 20% missing values.
However, as the missing proportion grew, k-NN started to produce biased
estimates. Machine learning algorithms, i.e. missForest and k-NN, were also found
to lack robustness to small changes in the data or consecutive missingness. On
the other hand, multiple imputation methods generated the overall most unbiased
estimates and were the most robust to all changes in data. They also produced
smaller standard errors than single imputations. For pre-post-comparisons, all
methods produced p values less than 0.01, regardless of the amount of missingness
introduced, suggesting low sensitivity of Wilcoxon rank-sum tests to the
imputation method used.
CONCLUSIONS: We recommend the use of multiple imputation in addressing missing
values in RHIS datasets and appropriate handling of data structure to minimize
imputation standard errors. In cases where necessary computing resources are
unavailable for multiple imputation, one may consider seasonal decomposition as
the next best method. Mean imputation and exclusion and interpolation, however,
always produced biased and misleading results in the subsequent analyses, and
thus, their use in the handling of missing values should be discouraged.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12963-021-00274-z 
PMCID: PMC8567342
PMID: 34736462  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

