
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 3:JVI0164321. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01643-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Selection of HIV Envelope strains for standardized assessments of
vaccine-elicited antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC)-mediating
antibodies.

Mielke D(1), Stanfield-Oakley S(1), Borate B(2)(3), Fisher LH(3), Faircloth K(1),
Tuyishime M(1), Greene K(1), Gao H(1), Williamson C(4)(5)(6), Morris
L(5)(6)(7)(8), Ochsenbauer C(9), Tomaras G(1)(10)(11), Haynes BF(11)(12)(13),
Montefiori D(1)(12), Pollara J(1)(12), deCamp AC(3), Ferrari G(1)(10)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Duke University, Durham, NC, United States.
(2)Statistical Center for HIV/AIDS Research and Prevention, Fred Hutchinson
Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, United States.
(3)Vaccine and Infectious Diseases Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center, Seattle, WA, United States.
(4)Division of Medical Virology, Department of Pathology, University of Cape
Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(5)National Health Laboratory Services, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(6)Centre for the AIDS Programme of Research in South Africa (CAPRISA),
University of KwaZulu Natal, Durban, South Africa.
(7)HIV Virology Section, Center for HIV and STIs, National Institute for
Communicable Diseases, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(8)MRC Antibody Immunity Research Unit, University of Witwatersrand,
Johannesburg, South Africa.
(9)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL,
United States.
(10)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University, Durham,
NC, United States.
(11)Department of Immunology, Duke University, Durham, NC, United States.
(12)Duke Human Vaccine Institute, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC,
United States.
(13)Department of Medicine, Duke University, Durham, NC, United States.

Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) has been correlated with reduced 
risk of HIV-1 infection in several preclinical vaccine trials and the RV144
clinical trial, indicating this is a relevant antibody function to study. Given
the diversity of HIV-1, the breadth of vaccine-induced antibody responses is a
critical parameter to understand if a universal vaccine is to be realised.
Moreover, breadth of ADCC responses can be influenced by different vaccine
strategies and regimens, including adjuvants. Therefore, to accurately evaluate
ADCC and to compare vaccine regimens, it is important to understand the range of 
HIV Envelope susceptibility to these responses. These evaluations have been
limited because of the complexity of the assay and the lack of a comprehensive
panel of viruses for the assessment of these humoral responses. Here, we used
twenty-nine HIV-1 infectious molecular clones (IMCs) representing different
Envelope subtypes and circulating recombinant forms to characterise
susceptibility to ADCC from antibodies in plasma from infected individuals,
including thirteen viraemic individuals, ten controllers and six with broadly
neutralizing antibody responses. We found in our panel that ADCC susceptibility
of the IMCs in our panel did not cluster by subtype, infectivity, level of CD4
downregulation, level of shedding, or neutralization sensitivity. Using
partition-around-medoids (PAM) clustering to distinguish smaller groups of IMCs
with similar ADCC susceptibility, we identified nested panels of four to eight
IMCs that broadly represent the ADCC susceptibility of the entire 29 IMC panel.
These panels, together with reagents developed to specifically accommodate
circulating viruses at the geographical sites of vaccine trials, will provide a
powerful tool to harmonise ADCC data generated across different studies, and
detect common themes of ADCC responses elicited by various vaccines. IMPORTANCE
Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) responses were found to correlate
with reduced risk of infection in the RV144 trial, the only human HIV-1 vaccine
to show any efficacy to date. However, reagents to understand the breadth and
magnitude of these responses across preclinical and clinical vaccine trials
remain underdeveloped. In this study, we characterise HIV-1 infectious molecular 
clones encoding 29 distinct envelope strains (Env-IMCs) to understand factors
which impact virus susceptibility to ADCC and use statistical methods to identify
smaller nested panels of four to eight Env-IMCs which accurately represent the
full set. These reagents can be used as standardized reagents across studies to
fully understand how ADCC may affect efficacy of future vaccine studies, and how 
studies differed in the breadth of responses developed.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01643-21 
PMID: 34730393 

