
1. Cureus. 2021 Oct 30;13(10):e19152. doi: 10.7759/cureus.19152. eCollection 2021
Oct.

Critical Updates on Chronic Hepatitis B Virus Infection in 2021.

Philips CA(1), Ahamed R(2), Abduljaleel JK(2), Rajesh S(3), Augustine P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Translational Hepatology, The Liver Institute, Rajagiri Hospital,
Aluva, IND.
(2)Gastroenterology and Advanced Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, Center of Excellence
in Gastrointestinal Sciences, Rajagiri Hospital, Aluva, IND.
(3)Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, Center of Excellence in
Gastrointestinal Sciences, Rajagiri Hospital, Aluva, IND.

Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a global healthcare burden in the
form of chronic liver disease, cirrhosis, liver failure and liver cancer. There
is no definite cure for the virus and even though extensive vaccination programs 
have reduced the burden of liver disease in the future population, treatment
options to eradicate the virus from the host are still lacking. In this review,
we discuss in detail current updates on the structure and applied biology of the 
virus in the host, examine updates to current treatment and explore novel and
state-of-the-art therapeutics in the pipeline for management of chronic HBV.
Furthermore, we also specifically review clinical updates on HBV-related acute on
chronic liver failure (ACLF). Current treatments for chronic HBV infection have
seen important updates in the form of considerations for treating patients in the
immune tolerant phase and some clarity on end points for treatment and decisions 
on finite therapy with nucleos(t)ide inhibitors. Ongoing cutting-edge research on
HBV biology has helped us identify novel target areas in the life cycle of the
virus for application of new therapeutics. Due to improvements in the area of
genomics, the hope for therapeutic vaccines, vector-based treatments and focused 
management aimed at targeting host integration of the virus and thereby a total
cure could become a reality in the near future. Newer clinical prognostic tools
have improved our understanding of timing of specific treatment options for the
catastrophic syndrome of ACLF secondary to reactivation of HBV. In this review,
we discuss in detail pertinent updates regarding virus biology and novel
therapeutic targets with special focus on the appraisal of prognostic scores and 
treatment options in HBV-related ACLF.

Copyright © 2021, Philips et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.19152 
PMCID: PMC8557099
PMID: 34733599 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

