
1. BJOG. 2021 Nov 4. doi: 10.1111/1471-0528.16974. [Epub ahead of print]

COVID-19 and vertical transmission: assessing the expression of ACE2/TMPRSS2 in
the human fetus and placenta to assess the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection.

Beesley MA(1), Davidson JR(1)(2), Panariello F(3), Shibuya S(1), Scaglioni D(1), 
Jones BC(1), Maksym K(2), Ogunbiyi O(4), Sebire NJ(1)(5), Cacchiarelli D(3)(5),
David AL(2)(6), De Coppi P(1)(4)(7), Gerli M(1)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, University College London, UK.
(2)EGA Institute for Women's Health, University College London, UK.
(3)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Armenise/Harvard
Laboratory of Integrative Genomics, Pozzuoli, Italy.
(4)NIHR Great Ormond Street Biomedical Research Centre, London, UK.
(5)Department of Translational Medicine, University of Naples 'Federico II',
Naples, Italy.
(6)Fetal Medicine Unit, University College London NHS Foundation Trust, London,
UK.
(7)Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London, UK.
(8)UCL Division of Surgery and Interventional Science, Royal Free Hospital,
London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Pregnant women have been identified as a potentially at-risk group
concerning COVID-19 infection, but little is known regarding the susceptibility
of the fetus to infection. Co-expression of ACE2 and TMPRSS2 has been identified 
as a prerequisite for infection, and expression across different tissues is known
to vary between children and adults. However, the expression of these proteins in
the fetus is unknown.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective analysis of a single cell data repository. 
The data were then validated at both gene and protein level by performing RT-qPCR
and two-colour immunohistochemistry on a library of second-trimester human fetal 
tissues.
FINDINGS: TMPRSS2 is present at both gene and protein level in the predominantly 
epithelial fetal tissues analysed. ACE2 is present at significant levels only in 
the fetal intestine and kidney, and is not expressed in the fetal lung. The
placenta also does not co-express the two proteins across the second trimester or
at term.
INTERPRETATION: This dataset indicates that the lungs are unlikely to be a viable
route of SARS-CoV2 fetal infection. The fetal kidney, despite presenting both the
proteins required for the infection, is anatomically protected from the exposure 
to the virus. However, the gastrointestinal tract is likely to be susceptible to 
infection due to its high co-expression of both proteins, as well as its exposure
to potentially infected amniotic fluid.
TWEETABLE ABSTRACT: This work provides detailed mechanistic insight into the
relative protection & vulnerabilities of the fetus & placenta to SARS-CoV-2
infection by scRNAseq & protein expression analysis for ACE2 & TMPRSS2. The
findings help to explain the low rate of vertical transmission.

© 2021 The Authors. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology 
published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1471-0528.16974 
PMID: 34735736 

