
1. J Korean Acad Nurs. 2021 Oct;51(5):585-596. doi: 10.4040/jkan.21148.

[Nurses' Experience with Caring for COVID-19 Patients in a Negative Pressure Room
Amid the Pandemic Situation].

[Article in Korean]

Noh EY(1), Chai YJ(2), Kim HJ(3), Kim E(4), Park YH(5).

Author information: 
(1)College of Nursing, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.
(2)College of Medicine, Seoul National University · Department of Surgery, Seoul 
Metropolitan Government-Seoul National University Boramae Medical Center, Seoul, 
Korea.
(3)Department of Dental Anesthesiology, School of Dentistry, Seoul National
University, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Department of Nursing, Seoul Metropolitan Government-Seoul National University
Boramae Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.
(5)College of Nursing · The Research Institute of Nursing Science, Seoul National
University, Seoul, Korea. hanipyh@snu.ac.kr.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to explore nurses' experience with caring 
for COVID-19 patients in a negative pressure room amid the spread of the
pandemic.
METHODS: This study was a qualitative research, and focus group interviews were
used to collect data. Three focus groups comprising 19 nurses were interviewed
from February 17 to 25, 2021. All interviews were recorded and transcribed
verbatim with the consent of the participants. The verbatim transcripts were
scrutinized using thematic analysis.
RESULTS: Two main themes emerged from the analysis: 'Struggling in an isolated
space' and 'Limitations of nursing infrastructure and system'. The nurses caring 
for COVID-19 patients experienced anxiety and fear about the infection, physical 
exhaustion, emotional burnout, and a sense of duty as a nurse. They also
acknowledged the lack of guidelines, increased task and burden, limitations of
nursing care, and the demand for improving the limitations of the nursing system.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study demonstrate that nurses caring for COVID-19
patients encounter physical and emotional problems within the limited healthcare 
system. The study suggests that comprehensive interventions are needed for
nurses. Furthermore, detailed guidelines, strengthening of nursing personnel, and
improvements to the nursing system are vital to effectively cope with the
pandemic. The government and medical institutions should be aware of the needs of
nurses and what they are going through, and make efforts to improve the quality
of life of healthcare workers and create a safe healthcare environment.

© 2021 Korean Society of Nursing Science.

DOI: 10.4040/jkan.21148 
PMID: 34737251  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no conflict of interest.

