
1. Mol Plant Pathol. 2021 Nov 5. doi: 10.1111/mpp.13156. [Epub ahead of print]

A group I WRKY transcription factor regulates mulberry mosaic dwarf-associated
virus-triggered cell death in Nicotiana benthamiana.

Sun S(1), Ren Y(1)(2), Wang D(1), Farooq T(3), He Z(3), Zhang C(1), Li S(1), Yang
X(1), Zhou X(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant Diseases and Insect Pests, Institute
of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Agro-Biotechnology and Ministry of Agriculture Key
Laboratory of Soil Microbiology, College of Biological Sciences, China
Agricultural University, Beijing, China.
(3)Plant Protection Research Institute, Guangdong Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Rice Biology, Institute of Biotechnology, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China.

Geminiviruses constitute the largest group of known plant viruses and cause
devastating losses to a wide range of crops and woody plants globally. Mulberry
mosaic dwarf-associated virus (MMDaV), identified from Chinese mulberry trees via
small RNA-based deep sequencing, is a divergent monopartite geminivirus belonging
to the genus Mulcrilevirus of the family Geminiviridae. Previous studies have
shown that plants employ multiple layers of defence to protect themselves from
geminivirus infection. The interplay between plant and MMDaV is nevertheless less
studied. This study presents evidence that MMDaV triggers hypersensitive response
(HR)-mediated antiviral defence in Nicotiana benthamiana plants. We show that the
RepA protein of MMDaV is engaged in HR-type cell death induction. We find that
the RepA mutants with compromised nuclear localization ability impair their
capabilities of cell death induction. Virus-induced gene silencing of the key
components of the R protein-mediated signalling pathway reveals that
down-regulation of the nucleus-targeting NbWRKY1 alleviates the cell death
induction activity of RepA. We further demonstrate that RepA up-regulates the
transcript level of NbWRKY1. Furthermore, expression of RepA in N. benthamiana
confers plant resistance against two begomoviruses. We propose that plant
resistance against RepA can be potentially used to improve plant defence against 
geminiviruses in crops.

© 2021 The Authors. Molecular Plant Pathology published by British Society for
Plant Pathology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mpp.13156 
PMID: 34738705 

