
1. Vopr Virusol. 2021 Nov 4;66(5):331-339. doi: 10.36233/0507-4088-70.

[The role of antiviral therapy in the management of patients with liver cirrhosis
associated with chronic HBV and HCV infection].

[Article in Russian]

Garbuzenko DV(1).

Author information: 
(1)FSBEI HE «South Ural State Medical University» of the Ministry of the Health
of Russia.

The formation of the liver cirrhosis (LC) is an unfavorable event of the natural 
history of chronic liver diseases being accompanied by complications that often
cause a fatal outcome. The study of the effectiveness of drugs that affect
various etiopathogenetic mechanisms of this condition is an urgent problem of
modern hepatology.The aim of the review was to show the role of antiviral therapy
(AVT) in the management of patients with LC associated with chronic HBV
(hepatitis B virus) and HCV (hepatitis C virus) infection.PubMed database, Google
Scholar search engine, Cochrane Systematic Reviews, eLIBRARY.RU electronic
scientific library, as well as the reference lists of articles were used to
search for scientific articles. The relevant objectives of the review of the
publications were identified for the period since 2000 up to 2021 by the search
queries as following: «liver cirrhosis», «liver fibrosis», «chronic HBV
infection», «chronic HCV infection», «portal hypertension», «treatment». The
inclusion criteria were restricted to the management of patients with LC
associated with chronic HBV and HCV infection.Current guidelines recommend
indefinite treatment of patients with HBV-associated LC with nucleos(t)ide
analogues regardless of serum HBV DNA levels, while the modern concept of using
direct-acting antiviral drug combinations has become the standard treatment for
HCV-associated cirrhosis. Studies have shown the ability of AVT to inhibit and
reverse fibrotic processes in LC associated with chronic HBV and HCV infection.
It has also been reported that HBV/HCV eradication prior to orthotopic liver
transplantation improves long-term overall survival.This, in turn, can reduce the
severity of portal hypertension and decrease the risk of associated
complications, as well as normalize liver function. Thus, ensuring the
availability of drugs for those in need of AVT will not only help prevent the
development of LC, but also improve the quality of life and increase its
expectancy of patients suffering from this disease.

DOI: 10.36233/0507-4088-70 
PMID: 34738448 

