
1. JCO Clin Cancer Inform. 2021 Oct;5:1096-1105. doi: 10.1200/CCI.20.00145.

Digital Health for Patients With Multiple Myeloma: An Unmet Need.

Jagannath S(1), Mikhael J(2), Nadeem O(3), Raje N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY.
(2)Translational Genomics Research Institute (TGen), City of Hope Cancer Center, 
Phoenix, AZ.
(3)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(4)Center for Multiple Myeloma, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA.

Multiple myeloma (MM) is associated with the highest symptom burden and lowest
health-related quality of life (HRQoL) among patients with hematologic
malignancies. HRQoL in MM is heterogeneous, varying over the course of disease,
with the highest burden at diagnosis and relapse. Patients with MM are
increasingly being treated with oral maintenance medications at home. As a
result, longitudinal monitoring of medication adherence and patient-reported
outcomes, including HRQoL, could inform on disease status, therapeutic
tolerability, and satisfaction with care. Digital health technologies, including 
telemedicine, mobile health, and wearable devices, are poised to become an
integral part of modern health care, in part due to the surge in telemedicine
necessitated by the COVID-19 pandemic. Although the literature has many reports
on the use of digital health technologies in other types of cancers, fewer
studies report on their application to MM. In the current narrative review, we
survey the applications of digital health for MM. Although there is evidence that
some are associated with improved health outcomes, challenges exist that must be 
met to ensure more widespread adoption. These include the need for increased
awareness by patients and health care providers, lack of access by the typical
older patient with MM, absence of randomized clinical trials, and low integration
with current workflows such as electronic health records. Following our summary
of technologies that could benefit patients with MM, we end by describing our
vision for how they can be integrated into each phase of the patient journey.

DOI: 10.1200/CCI.20.00145 
PMID: 34735265  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Sundar JagannathConsulting or Advisory Role:
BioMED Corp, Bristol Myers Squibb, Janssen, Karyopharm Therapeutics, Legend
Biotech, Merck & Co, Surface Oncology, Takeda, Sanofi Joseph MikhaelHonoraria:
Amgen, Karyopharm Therapeutics, Sanofi, Janssen, Celgene, GlaxoSmithKline, Takeda
Omar NadeemConsulting or Advisory Role: Celgene, Janssen, Amgen, Sanofi, Takeda, 
Adaptive Biotechnologies Noopur RajeConsulting or Advisory Role: Bristol Myers
SquibbNo other potential conflicts of interest were reported.

