
1. Acta Biomed. 2021 Nov 3;92(5):e2021275. doi: 10.23750/abm.v92i5.11900.

Medically assisted procreation in times of COVID-19: what impact on health care
system organization and the reproductive rights of couples?

Rallo G(1), Negro F(2), Consalvo F(3), Piersanti V(4), Marinelli S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical, Histological, Medicolegal and Orthopedic Sciences,
Sapienza University of Rome, Italy. giuseppe.rallo@uniroma1.it.
(2)Department of Anatomical, Histological, Medicolegal and Orthopedic Sciences,
Sapienza University of Rome, Italy. frannynegro@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Anatomical, Histological, Medicolegal and Orthopedic Sciences,
Sapienza University of Rome, Italy. francesca.consalvo@uniroma1.it.
(4)Department of Anatomical, Histological, Medicolegal and Orthopedic Sciences,
Sapienza University of Rome, Italy. valeria.piersanti@uniroma1.it.
(5)School of Law, Marche Polytechnic University, Ancona, Italy.
susanna.marinelli@tiscali.it.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: The emergency caused by the spread of COVID-19 has
overwhelmed health care facilities and required the reorganization of health
systems in many nations worldwide. A year after its appearance, measures aimed at
further containing disease transmission through massive vaccination campaigns. In
pregnancy, vaccination should be administered with caution, in light of the lack 
of reliable data, since pregnant women have been excluded from experimentation.
The pandemic has had a significant impact on assisted reproduction procedures in 
Italy. Methods: The authors have set out to analyze the measures issued by the
Italian government in order to counter the spread of COVID-19, in addition to the
national and international guidelines on assisted reproduction.
DISCUSSION: The purpose of these documents is precautionary in nature: such
measures are based on the principles of responsibility and solidarity, essential 
to stave off the saturation of health systems, curb contagion, but also to lay
out a set of rules to starting a pregnancy while preserving the health of
couples, operators and newborns. The authors also expound upon the rights claimed
by couples seeking access to MAP (i.e. the right to become a parent, the couple's
right to health, interest in demographic development). Conclusions: The
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has had a major impact on infertile couples. 
Since the pandemic broke out, Italy, like most European countries, has
interrupted most ordinary activities of the centers operating in the field of
assisted fertilization. We believe that access to assisted fertilization
techniques by sterile and infertile couples should be part of the right to health
rather than of the supposed right to become parents or the increase in the birth 
rate, also evoked as the COVID-19 pandemic unfolded. The current system of
compensation and reimbursements needs to be reconfigured in order to prevent any 
form of discrimination.

DOI: 10.23750/abm.v92i5.11900 
PMID: 34738563  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

