
1. Acta Biomed. 2021 Nov 3;92(S6):e2021448. doi: 10.23750/abm.v92iS6.12227.

COVID-19 pandemic impact on the therapeutic setting in Mental Health Services.

Trabucco A(1), Aguglia A(2), Amerio A(3), Corsini G(4), Cervetti A(5), Escelsior 
A(6), Costanza A(7), Serafini G(8), Amore M(9).

Author information: 
(1)a:1:{s:5:"en_US";s:19:"University of Genoa";}. alice.quantum@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal 
and Child Health (DINOGMI), Section of Psychiatry, University of Genoa, Genoa,
Italy; IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Genoa, Italy.
andrea.aguglia@unige.it.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal 
and Child Health (DINOGMI), Section of Psychiatry, University of Genoa, Genoa,
Italy; IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Genoa, Italy.
andrea.amerio@unige.it.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal 
and Child Health (DINOGMI), Section of Psychiatry, University of Genoa, Genoa,
Italy; IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Genoa, Italy.
giovannipietro.corsini@hsanmartino.it.
(5)Department of Neuroscience, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal 
and Child Health (DINOGMI), Section of Psychiatry, University of Genoa, Genoa,
Italy; IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Genoa, Italy.
alice.cervetti@hsanmartino.it.
(6)Department of Neuroscience, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal 
and Child Health (DINOGMI), Section of Psychiatry, University of Genoa, Genoa,
Italy; IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Genoa, Italy.
andrea.escelsior@live.com.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva (UNIGE),
Geneva, Switzerland. alessandra.costanza@unige.ch.
(8)Department of Neuroscience, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal 
and Child Health (DINOGMI), Section of Psychiatry, University of Genoa, Genoa,
Italy; IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Genoa, Italy.
gianluca.serafini@unige.it.
(9)Department of Neuroscience, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal 
and Child Health (DINOGMI), Section of Psychiatry, University of Genoa, Genoa,
Italy; IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Genoa, Italy.
mario.amore@unige.it.

BACKGROUND: The new 2019 coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak forced mental
health providers to overcome their general reluctance about telematic assistance,
shifting from a face-to-face approach to online therapy to promote continuity of 
care for psychiatric patients.
METHODS: An ad-hoc web-based survey questionnaire assessing the impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic on therapeutic setting in Mental Health Services was sent via
email from March 15, 2021 to June 15, 2021 to mental health providers in Genova, 
Italy. The survey was anonymous and a free Google Forms® software was used.
RESULTS: Two hundred nineteen mental health providers completed the survey, and
the overall response rate (ORR) was 65%. During the COVID-19 pandemic period, the
continuity of care was mainly guaranteed using electronic devices. Psychologists 
reported a higher availability of video call assistance service to guarantee
continuity of care for psychiatric patients compared to psychiatrists and
psychotherapists (p<0,001). Psychiatrists reported the lowest degree of
satisfaction about this new telematic approach (p<0,01), while psychologists and 
to a lesser extent psychotherapists speculated to use it even in non-pandemic
times (p=0,02).
CONCLUSIONS: COVID-19 pandemic creates an opportunity to overcome normative,
technological and cultural barriers to the use of online psychotherapy, showing
the importance of adapting the therapeutic setting to both collective and
individual needs. Despite initial concerns about its effectiveness and efficacy, 
a general degree of satisfaction was expressed by the majority of the mental
health providers. Further efforts will be needed to enhance this new way of
working and to train therapists with particular regard to those employed in the
public health system.

DOI: 10.23750/abm.v92iS6.12227 
PMID: 34739470  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

