
1. Transl Pediatr. 2021 Sep;10(9):2402-2406. doi: 10.21037/tp-21-154.

Multidisciplinary treatment of chronic active Epstein-Barr virus infection with
multiple complications: a case report.

Ali AF(1), Liu J(1), Shang S(2), Chen Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, The Children's Hospital, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Children's Hospital, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.

Chronic active Epstein-Barr virus (CAEBV) infection is a very rare and
potentially life-threatening illness caused by long-term EBV infection. Globally,
the prevalence is the highest among young children and adolescents with increased
frequency in Asians and Native Americans, whereas it is sporadically encountered 
in European countries. Typically, patients present with nonspecific symptoms such
as fever, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and liver dysfunction. However,
the complications of CAEBV and its treatment are quite complex and require great 
care. We report a case of a 3-year-old boy with CAEBV infection who was later
diagnosed with pancreatic mass and recurrent pancreatitis. A multidisciplinary
board was consulted for correct diagnosis and treatment plan making. The
treatment included pharmaceutical and surgical (duodenum-preserving pancreatic
head resection) approaches. The patient showed tremendous improvement following
the third discharge from the hospital and is still free of any symptoms. In this 
case report, we discuss differential diagnosis and comprehensively examined the
possibility of the development of pancreatitis caused by EBV infection, the
possibility of autoimmune pancreatitis, and the possibility of hereditary
pancreatitis. To confirm or rule out the first two etiologies, laboratory and
pathology results were studied. We also performed exon sequencing using Agilent
exome capture kit to rule out hereditary pancreatitis. The clinical course of
this disease and the way it was handled deserves attention so that similar cases 
receive prompt treatment.

2021 Translational Pediatrics. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tp-21-154 
PMCID: PMC8506058
PMID: 34733681 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have completed
the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at
https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/tp-21-154). The authors have no conflicts of interest
to declare.

