
1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2021 Nov 5. doi: 10.1007/5584_2021_674. [Epub ahead of print]

Metabolomics Signatures of SARS-CoV-2 Infection.

Arjmand B(#)(1)(2), Alavi-Moghadam S(3), Parhizkar-Roudsari P(4), Rezaei-Tavirani
M(5), Tayanloo-Beik A(3), Goodarzi P(6), Mehrdad N(7), Mohamadi-Jahani F(6),
Larijani B(#)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Therapy and Regenerative Medicine Research Center, Endocrinology and
Metabolism Molecular-Cellular Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. barjmand@sina.tums.ac.ir.
(2)Metabolomics and Genomics Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism
Molecular-Cellular Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran. barjmand@sina.tums.ac.ir.
(3)Cell Therapy and Regenerative Medicine Research Center, Endocrinology and
Metabolism Molecular-Cellular Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Metabolomics and Genomics Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism
Molecular-Cellular Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran.
(5)Proteomics Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran.
(6)Brain and Spinal Cord Injury Research Center, Neuroscience Institute, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(7)Elderly Health Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism Population
Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(8)Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism
Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical sciences, Tehran, Iran.
emrc@tums.ac.ir.
(#)Contributed equally

For a very long time, viral infections have been considered as one of the most
important causes of death and disability around the world. Through the viral
infection, viruses as small pathogens enter the host cells and use hosts'
biosynthesis machinery to replicate and collect infectious lineages. Moreover,
they can modify hosts' metabolic pathways in order to their own purposes.
Nowadays (in 2019-2020), the most famous type of viral infection which was caused
by a novel type of coronavirus is called COVID-19 disease. It has claimed the
lives of many people around the world and is a very serious threat to health.
Since investigations of the effects of viruses on host metabolism using
metabolomics tools may have given focuses on novel appropriate treatments, in the
current review the authors highlighted the virus-host metabolic interactions and 
metabolomics perspective in COVID-19.

© 2021. Springer Nature Switzerland AG.

DOI: 10.1007/5584_2021_674 
PMID: 34735713 

