
1. Acta Biomed. 2021 Oct 1;92(S6):e2021442. doi: 10.23750/abm.v92iS6.12235.

Stigma, mental illness, and COVID-19 from a frontline clinician perspective: a
way to go against the grain?

Branca F(1), Macchiarulo E(2), Costanza A(3), Ambrosetti J(4), Amerio A(5),
Aguglia A(6), Serafini G(7), Amore M(8), Merli R(9).

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Mental Health, Mental Health and Suicide Prevention Center,
Biella, Italy. francesco.branca@aslbi.piemonte.it.
(2)1Department of Mental Health, Mental Health and Suicide Prevention Center,
Biella, Italy. elena.macchiarulo@aslbi.piemonte.it.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva (UNIGE),
Geneva, Switzerland. alessandra.costanza@unige.ch.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Department of Emergency, Emergency Psychiatric
Unit (UAUP), Geneva University Hospitals (HUG), Geneva, Switzerland.
julia.ambrosetti@hcuge.ch.
(5)University of Genoa. andrea.amerio@unige.it.
(6)University of Genoa. andrea.aguglia@unige.it.
(7)University of Genoa. gianluca.serafini@unige.it.
(8)University of Genoa. mario.amore@unige.it.
(9)Department of Mental Health, Mental Health and Suicide Prevention Center,
Biella, Italy. roberto.merli@aslbi.piemonte.it.

A well-known insidious obstacle for patients with mental illness is stigma,
linked to feelings of incomprehensibility, incurability, and dangerousness. The
COVID-19 pandemic represented a relevant additional barrier for these patients,
which contributed to their marginalization, quality of life reduction and
diminished treatments feasibility. As part of a cross-sectional multidisciplinary
project conducted in the psychiatric service of Biella, a northern Italy
province, preliminary data were collected by frontline clinicians during the
COVID-19 first wave regarding the vicious cycle that may have been created
between stigma and psychiatric patients in COVID-19 time. Therefore, we tried to 
frame the observed changes not in the dual literature paradigms stigma-mental
illness or stigma-social consequences in COVID-19 time, but in the mental
illness-stigma-COVID-19 three-way paradigm. The protection of this vulnerable
segment of population, including a rapid access to COVID-19 vaccination, needs to
be recognized as a real public health priority. The role of mental health
services in providing information and activating supportive interventions for
patients with mental illness is also crucial. Particularly, a multidisciplinary
therapeutic team including mental health providers, general practitioners,
hospital physicians, and social services would be needed to ensure adequate
networks and cares continuity. Actions to contrast stigma can be arduous and
exhausting because they must counteract the gravitational pull of customs,
prejudices, and ingrained cultural beliefs, and may therefore appear to be moving
in an "unnatural" direction, like the water in Escher's lithograph entitled
"Waterfall". Nevertheless, there is no less strenuous way to go against the
grain.

DOI: 10.23750/abm.v92iS6.12235 
PMID: 34739466  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

