
1. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2021 Nov 4. doi: 10.1002/ijgo.14007. [Epub ahead of print]

COVID-19 in pregnant women and children: Insights on clinical manifestations,
complexities, and pathogenesis.

Meyyazhagan A(1)(2), Pushparaj K(3), Balasubramanian B(4), Kuchi Bhotla H(2),
Pappusamy M(2), Arumugam VA(5), Easwaran M(6), Pottail L(7), Mani P(3), Tsibizova
V(8), Di Renzo GC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Centre for Perinatal and
Reproductive Medicine, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, CHRIST (Deemed to be University), Bengaluru,
Karnataka, India.
(3)Department of Zoology, Avinashilingam Institute for Home Science and Higher
Education for Women, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India.
(4)Department of Food Science and Biotechnology, College of Life Science, Sejong 
University, Seoul, South Korea.
(5)Medical Genetics and Epigenetics Laboratory, Department of Human Genetics and 
Molecular Biology, Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India.
(6)Nutritional Improvement of Crops, International Centre for Genetic Engineering
and Biotechnology, New Delhi, India.
(7)Department of Chemistry, School of Physical and Computational Sciences,
Avinashilingam Institute for Home Science and Higher Education for Women,
Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India.
(8)Institute of Perinatology and Pediatrics, Almazov National Medical Research
Centre, Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation.

Pregnancy changes the body's immune system to counteract the spectrum of
infections, including COVID-19, which can pose complications. Pregnant women are 
less likely to contract COVID-19 infections than the general public. However,
pregnant women are at slightly increased risk of becoming severely unwell if they
do catch COVID-19, and congenital conditions in pregnant women may worsen the
state of infection and lead to critical stages and even mortality. The
possibility of vertical transmission has been reported in only a few cases of
COVID-19; however, it was not noted in cases of SARS and MERS. Vaccination
coverage in pregnant women remains a challenge. Children are the next suspected
and vulnerable population to acquire infection after the first and second waves. 
Children are disproportionately infected compared with older populations, but the
severity of infection is less compared to adults. This review highlights the
complexities of COVID-19 in pregnant women and the underlying reasons why
children tend to be comparatively less severely affected. Ethnicity, nutrition,
lifestyle, and therapeutics influence the severity of infection in children. Low 
expression of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 receptors, indigenous virus
competence, and maternal immunity is the first-line defense for children against 
COVID-19. Habituating herbal medicines from childhood may help support a robust
and defensive immune system to counteract novel antigens and encourage healthy
generations.

© 2021 International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics.

DOI: 10.1002/ijgo.14007 
PMID: 34735717 

