
1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Nov 3;297(6):101380. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101380. [Epub
ahead of print]

Histone deacetylase 5 deacetylates the phosphatase PP2A for positively regulating
NF-κB signaling.

Xu C(1), Tang J(2), Yang Q(3), Zhao H(4), Liu Y(1), Cao J(1), Zhou Y(4), Chen
X(5), Chen J(6).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Center for
Biosafety Mega-Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China; Guangzhou
Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Center for
Biosafety Mega-Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China; Guangzhou
Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou,
China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Center for
Biosafety Mega-Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China; Department of 
Gastroenterology, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou,
China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Center for
Biosafety Mega-Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Center for
Biosafety Mega-Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China; Guangzhou
Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou,
China. Electronic address: chenxw@wh.iov.cn.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Center for
Biosafety Mega-Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China; Guangzhou
Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou,
China. Electronic address: chenjz@wh.iov.cn.

Histone deacetylase 5 (HDAC5) has been reported to have a strong regulatory
function in the proinflammatory response, but the mechanism is still unknown.
Here, we identified HDAC5 as a positive regulator of NF-κB signaling in vivo.
HDAC5-deficient mice exhibited enhanced survival in response to LPS challenge.
Using LPS, TNFα, different kinds of viruses, hydrogen peroxide, or ultraviolet
stimulation, we demonstrate that HDAC5-mediated regulation of NF-κB occurs in
manners both dependent on and independent of IKK, an upstream kinase in the NF-κB
signaling pathway. Deficiency in HDAC5 impaired the phosphorylation of IKKβ,
subsequent phosphorylation of the NF-κB inhibitor protein IκBα and NF-κB subunit 
p65. We also show that the phosphatase PP2A repressed transcriptional activation 
of NF-κB by decreasing phosphorylation of IKKβ, p65, and IκBα. In vitro
deacetylation experiments and site-directed mutagenesis experiments indicated
that HDAC5 directly deacetylated PP2Ac at Lys136, which resulted in the
deactivation of PP2A. Our data add mechanistic insight into the cross talk
between epigenetic and posttranslational modifications regulating NF-κB signaling
and protein phosphatase activation that mediate survival in response to
inflammatory challenges.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101380 
PMCID: PMC8634046
PMID: 34740611 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.

