
1. Georgian Med News. 2021 Oct;(319):160-165.

THE HUMAN RIGHT TO QUALITY MEDICAL CARE: CHANGING THE PARADIGM OF INTERNATIONAL
COOPERATION BETWEEN STATES AND INTERACTION OF PUBLIC AUTHORITIES AND LOCAL
SELF-GOVERNMENT IN FOREIGN COUNTRIES.

Deshko L(1), Lotiuk O(1), Sinkevych O(1), Kravtsova Z(1), Kudriavtseva O(1),
Cherniak I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv, Ukraine.

The article examines the issue of international cooperation between states to
ensure the human right to quality medical aid, the paradigm of which is radically
changing under the influence of such a catalyst as the Covid-19 pandemic, as well
as the issue of interaction between public authorities and local governments for 
ensuring this right in foreign countries.The purpose of the article is to
identify features of normative-legal as well as organizational and legal
(institutional) mechanisms of international cooperation between countries to
ensure the human right to quality medical aid during the Covid-19 pandemic,
interaction of public authorities and local governments to ensure this right in
foreign countries.The object of the research is the public relations arising
during the Covid-19 pandemic with international cooperation of states as for
ensuring the human right to quality medical aidalong with the interaction of
public authorities and local governments.The methodological basis of the
conducted research is the general methods of scientific cognitivism as well as
concerning those used in legal science: methods of analysis and synthesis, formal
logic, comparative law etc. The concept of international cooperation between
states to ensure the human right to quality medical aid has been clarified. The
fact of the evolution of its goal under the influence of such a catalyst as the
Covid-19 pandemic has been proven: from achieving the balance of interests
between the main participants in relations of the health sector to achieving
common goals of sustainable development in the health sector. For the first time 
within domestic scientific research new features of the regulatory and legal
mechanism of international cooperation of states as for ensuring the human right 
to quality medical aid have been identified, which arose during the Covid-19
pandemic. It is argued that it is the concept of sustainable development that
should be the paradigm of such cooperation. For the first time, new features of
the institutional mechanism of international cooperation of states as
forensuring, the human right to quality medical aid that arose during the
Covid-19 pandemic were identified. It is emphasized that the UN established new
international legal requirements for national health systems, which did not
change the paradigm ensuring the human right to quality medical care is the main 
responsibility of the state, but they changed the paradigm of interaction between
public authorities and local governments in foreign countries during the period
Covid-19 pandemic. New established approaches to such interaction have been
revealed.


PMID: 34749343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

