
1. Front Psychol. 2021 Oct 22;12:680552. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.680552. eCollection
2021.

Belief in Protecting Others and Social Perceptions of Face Mask Wearing Were
Associated With Frequent Mask Use in the Early Stages of the COVID Pandemic in
the UK.

Warnock-Parkes E(1)(2), Thew GR(1), Clark DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom.
(2)King's College London, London, United Kingdom.

Face masks are now seen as a key tool in the world's recovery from the COVID-19
pandemic. However, during the early stages of the outbreak, face mask use in the 
United Kingdom (UK) was significantly lower than that of countries equally
impacted by the virus. We were interested to explore whether social cognitions
played a role in levels of mask wearing. A cross-sectional online survey of UK
adults (n=908) was conducted in July 2020. Estimated face mask use and thoughts
about wearing face masks were assessed using measures developed for this study.
Participants also answered questions about their general mood, social anxiety and
basic demographic data. Multiple regression was used to examine factors
associated with mask wearing. Participants' estimated mask wearing was low when
in public spaces, such as the park (17%) or walking on the high street (36%).
However, broadly fitting with UK guidance at the time, rates were considerably
higher when in situations of closer proximity to others, such as on public
transport (94%), in a shop or café (62%), when speaking to somebody in an
enclosed public space (67%) or in a busy area when social distancing was not
possible (79%). When looking at estimated mask wearing when in proximity to
others, positive social cognitions (e.g., I'll look confident and competent
wearing a mask) were associated with more wearing, whereas negative social
cognitions (e.g., I'll look anxious, I'll look foolish) were associated with less
wearing. These results remained after controlling for factors that have indicated
increased risk from COVID-19 (age, gender, ethnicity, presence of a health
condition or pregnancy), belief about the health benefit for others and levels of
depression and social anxiety. The largest predictors of mask wearing were the
amount of people believed wearing a mask would keep others safe and the presence 
of an underlying health condition. The study findings indicate that future public
health campaigns would benefit from a focus on strengthening beliefs about the
protective benefits of masks, but also promoting positive social messages about
wearing in public (e.g., mask wearing means you are confident and competent).

Copyright © 2021 Warnock-Parkes, Thew and Clark.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.680552 
PMCID: PMC8569128
PMID: 34744858 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

