
1. Eur Stroke J. 2021 Sep;6(3):CXVI-CXXI. doi: 10.1177/23969873211030842. Epub 2021 
Jul 20.

European stroke organization interim expert opinion on cerebral venous thrombosis
occurring after SARS-CoV-2 vaccination.

Ferro JM(1)(2), de Sousa DA(1)(2), Coutinho JM(3), Martinelli I(4).

Author information: 
(1)Serviço de Neurologia, Departamento de Neurociências e Saúde Mental, Hospital 
Santa Maria/Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, Lisboa, Portugal.
(2)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de
Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal.
(3)Department of Neurology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Location AMC,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)A. Bianchi Bonomi Hemophilia and Thrombosis Centre, Fondazione IRCCS Ca'
Granda - Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.

Severe cases of cerebral venous thrombosis (CVT) with thrombocytopenia and
anti-platelet factor 4 (PF4) antibodies occurring after adenoviral vector
anti-SARS-CoV-2 vaccines have been recently reported. We aim to present a
guidance document on the diagnosis and treatment of patients presenting with CVT 
after vaccination against SARS-CoV-2 infection. We reviewed the available
evidence which consists on case reports, small case series, expert opinion and
analogy with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) management. Because of the
low level of evidence, this is an interim document, based only on expert opinion 
consensus. In patients presenting with CVT after being vaccinated against
SARS-CoV-2 infection, if there is thrombocytopenia a reliable HIT PF4 Antibody
ELISA test should be performed, to confirm vaccine-induced immune thrombotic
thrombocytopenia (VITT). In patients with CVT and thrombocytopenia, in whom VITT 
is suspected or confirmed, heparin (unfractionated or low molecular weight)
should be avoided and non-heparin anticoagulants are preferred. If possible,
platelet transfusions should be avoided. If the diagnosis of VITT is confirmed or
suspected, early intravenous immunoglobulins are indicated. This expert opinion
is supported by low quality evidence. It should be periodically updated, or
changed to a formal guideline, as new and higher quality evidence is eventually
produced. Because of their potential unfavourable clinical course, patients
developing symptoms and signs suggestive of CVT after being vaccinated against
SARS-CoV-2 virus should undergo urgent clinical and neuroimaging evaluation. In
cases of suspected or confirmed VITT, non-heparin anticoagulants should be used, 
platelet transfusions avoided and intravenous immunoglobulin started early.

© European Stroke Organisation 2021.

DOI: 10.1177/23969873211030842 
PMCID: PMC8564159
PMID: 34746428 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The
author(s) declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect to 
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: JMF reports fees
and DSMB or Advisory Board participation for Boehringer Ingelheim and consulting 
fees from Bayer. DAS reports travel support from Boehringer Ingelheim, DSMB
participation for the SECRET trial, and being a member of the ESO Executive
Committee. JMC reports grants, paid to his institution from Boehringer Ingelheim 
and Bayer, and payments, paid to his institution for DSMB participation by Bayer.

