
1. Eur J Neurol. 2021 Nov 8. doi: 10.1111/ene.15175. [Epub ahead of print]

Hepatitis E virus and Bell's palsy.

Fritz-Weltin M(1), Niedermeier L(1), Frommherz E(1), Isenmann N(1), Csernalabics 
B(2), Boettler T(2), Neumann-Haefelin C(2), Endres D(3), Panning M(4), Berger
B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinic of Neurology and Neurophysiology, Medical Center-University of
Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Medicine II, Medical Center-University of Freiburg, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Medical Center-University of
Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Institute of Virology, Medical Center-University of Freiburg, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Acute hepatitis E virus (HEV) infections have been
associated with various neurological disorders, including individual cases with
Bell's palsy. Nonetheless, systematic studies in the latter are lacking.
Therefore, this retrospective study systematically screened a cohort of patients 
with Bell's palsy for an acute HEV infection.
METHODS: Overall, 104 patients with Bell's palsy treated in our clinic between
2008 and 2018 were identified. Serum samples were analyzed for anti-HEV
immunoglobulin (Ig)M and IgG antibodies by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
Additionally, serum samples were tested for HEV RNA by polymerase chain reaction 
in 92 of these 104 patients presenting within the first 7 days from symptom
onset. A large group of 263 healthy individuals served as controls.
RESULTS: None of the patients with Bell's palsy but two healthy controls (0.8%)
had an acute HEV infection. Anti-HEV IgG seroprevalence indicating previous
infection was unexpectedly high in patients with Bell's palsy (34%) and revealed 
an age-dependent increase.
CONCLUSIONS: In this first systematic study, no cases of Bell's palsy in
association with an acute HEV infection were identified. However, based on
previous case descriptions, rare associations cannot be excluded. Therefore,
large prospective multicenter studies will be necessary for conclusions that are 
more definitive.

© 2021 The Authors. European Journal of Neurology published by John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd on behalf of European Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1111/ene.15175 
PMID: 34748257 

