
1. Virulence. 2021 Nov 7. doi: 10.1080/21505594.2021.2000689. [Epub ahead of print]

Site-specific SUMOylation of viral polymerase processivity factor: a way of
localizingtoND10 subnuclear domains for restricted and self-controlled
reproduction of herpesvirus.

Lai S(1), Xu M(1), Wang Y(1), Li R(1), Xia C(1), Xia S(2), Chen J(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Virology, Institute of Medical
Microbiology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, College of Life Science
and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China.
(3)Foshan Institute of Medical Microbiology, Foshan, Guangdong, China.

Lytic replication of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), a member of β-herpesvirus, is 
a highly complicated and organized process that requires its DNA polymerase
processivity factor, UL44, the first reported HCMV replication protein subjected 
to SUMO post-translational modification (PTM). SUMOylation plays a pleiotropic
role in protein functions of host cells and infecting viruses. Particularly,
formation of herpesviral replication compartments (RCs) upon infection is induced
in proximity to ND10 subnuclear domains, the host cell's intrinsic antiviral
immune devices and hot SUMOylation spots, relying just on SUMOylation of their
protein components to become mature and functional in restriction of the viral
replication. In this study, to unveil the exact role of SUMO PTM on UL44 involved
in HCMV replication, we screened and identified PIAS3, an annotated E3 SUMO
ligase, as a novel UL44-interacting protein engaged in cellular SUMOylation
pathway. Co-existence of PIAS3 could enhance the UBC9-based SUMO modification of 
UL44 specifically at its conserved 410lysine residue lying within the single
canonical ψKxE SUMO Conjugation Motif (SCM). Intriguingly, we found this
SCM-specific SUMOylation contributes to UL44 co-localization and interaction with
subnuclear ND10 domains during infection, which in turn exerts an inhibitory
effect on HCMV replication and growth. Together, these results highlight the
importance of SUMOylation in regulating viral protein subnuclear localization,
representing a novel way of utilizing ND10-based restriction to achieve the
self-controlled replication and reproduction of herpesviruses.ImportanceIn this
study, we found PIAS3 serves as an additional E3 SUMO ligase towards UL44
possessing modification site specificity at canonical SCM, which renders the UL44
SUMOylation system more integral. We reveal how the site-specific SUMOylation
mediates the recruitment of viral replication protein onto the host antiviral
subnuclear structures, shedding light on virus-host interplay during infection
and meanwhile providing insight into antiviral mechanism of ND10 domains. In
addition, from the view of viral evolution, the site-specific SUMOylation motif, 
genetically retained in HCMV replicating protein to exert an ND10-based antiviral
effect, might in turn guarantee the virus a self-controlled slower replication
progression upon infection, which is beneficial for viral long-term reproduction.

DOI: 10.1080/21505594.2021.2000689 
PMID: 34747321 

