
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 21;9:625640. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.625640.
eCollection 2021.

Elena+ Care for COVID-19, a Pandemic Lifestyle Care Intervention: Intervention
Design and Study Protocol.

Ollier J(1)(2), Neff S(3), Dworschak C(4), Sejdiji A(3), Santhanam P(1), Keller
R(2), Xiao G(5), Asisof A(1), Rüegger D(1), Bérubé C(1), Hilfiker Tomas L(6),
Neff J(6), Yao J(2), Alattas A(2), Varela-Mato V(7), Pitkethly A(8), Vara
MD(9)(10), Herrero R(9)(10), Baños RM(9)(10)(11), Parada C(12), Agatheswaran
RS(13), Villalobos V(14), Keller OC(1)(2)(15), Chan WS(16), Mishra V(17),
Jacobson N(18), Stanger C(18), He X(19), von Wyl V(20)(21), Weidt S(22), Haug
S(23), Schaub M(23), Kleim B(4), Barth J(24), Witt C(24), Scholz U(25)(26),
Fleisch E(1)(2)(15), von Wangenheim F(1)(2), Car LT(3)(27),
Müller-Riemenschneider F(28)(29), Hauser-Ulrich S(30), Asomoza AN(31),
Salamanca-Sanabria A(3), Mair JL(3), Kowatsch T(1)(2)(15)(28).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Digital Health Interventions, Department of Management, Technology 
and Economics, Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule (ETH) Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.
(2)Future Health Technologies Programme, Singapore-Eidgenössische Technische
Hochschule (ETH) Centre at Campus for Research Excellence and Technological
Enterprise (CREATE), Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Department of Management, Technology, and Economics, Eidgenössische Technische
Hochschule (ETH) Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(5)School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(6)Executive School of Management, Technology and Law, University of St. Gallen, 
St. Gallen, Switzerland.
(7)School of Sport, Exercise and Health Sciences, Loughborough University,
Loughborough, United Kingdom.
(8)Sport, Exercise and Health Sciences, Edinburgh Napier University, Edinburgh,
United Kingdom.
(9)Polibienestar Research Institute, University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
(10)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y
Nutrición (CIBERObn) Physiopathology of Obesity and Nutrition, Instituto de Salud
Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(11)Department of Personality, Evaluation and Psychological Treatment, Faculty of
Psychology, University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
(12)Department of Psychology, Universidad San Buenaventura, Bogotá, Colombia.
(13)National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore,
Singapore.
(14)Interdisciplinary Center for Health Workplaces, University of California,
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, United States.
(15)Centre for Digital Health Interventions, Institute of Technology Management, 
University of St. Gallen, St. Gallen, Switzerland.
(16)Department of Psychology, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, SAR
China.
(17)Department of Computer Science, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, United
States.
(18)Center for Technology and Behavioral Health, Geisel School of Medicine,
Hanover, NH, United States.
(19)Business School, Durham University, Durham, United Kingdom.
(20)Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Prevention Institute, University of Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland.
(21)Institute for Implementation Science in Health Care, University of Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland.
(22)Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, University of
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(23)Swiss Research Institute for Public Health and Addiction, Zurich University, 
Zurich, Switzerland.
(24)Institute for Complementary and Integrative Medicine, University Hospital
Zurich, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(25)Applied Social and Health Psychology, Department of Psychology, University of
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(26)Dynamics of Healthy Aging, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(27)Family Medicine and Primary Care, Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang 
Technological University, Singapore, Singapore.
(28)Department of Medicine, Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health, Yong Loo Lin
School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(29)Center for Digital Health, Berlin Institute of Health and Charité, Berlin,
Germany.
(30)Department of Applied Psychology, University of Applied Sciences Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland.
(31)Unidad Académica de Cultura, Universidad Autónoma de Zacatecas, Zacatecas,
Mexico.

Background: The current COVID-19 coronavirus pandemic is an emergency on a global
scale, with huge swathes of the population required to remain indoors for
prolonged periods to tackle the virus. In this new context, individuals'
health-promoting routines are under greater strain, contributing to poorer mental
and physical health. Additionally, individuals are required to keep up to date
with latest health guidelines about the virus, which may be confusing in an age
of social-media disinformation and shifting guidelines. To tackle these factors, 
we developed Elena+, a smartphone-based and conversational agent (CA) delivered
pandemic lifestyle care intervention. Methods: Elena+ utilizes varied
intervention components to deliver a psychoeducation-focused coaching program on 
the topics of: COVID-19 information, physical activity, mental health (anxiety,
loneliness, mental resources), sleep and diet and nutrition. Over 43 subtopics, a
CA guides individuals through content and tracks progress over time, such as
changes in health outcome assessments per topic, alongside user-set behavioral
intentions and user-reported actual behaviors. Ratings of the usage experience,
social demographics and the user profile are also captured. Elena+ is available
for public download on iOS and Android devices in English, European Spanish and
Latin American Spanish with future languages and launch countries planned, and no
limits on planned recruitment. Panel data methods will be used to track user
progress over time in subsequent analyses. The Elena+ intervention is open-source
under the Apache 2 license (MobileCoach software) and the Creative Commons 4.0
license CC BY-NC-SA (intervention logic and content), allowing future
collaborations; such as cultural adaptions, integration of new sensor-related
features or the development of new topics. Discussion: Digital health
applications offer a low-cost and scalable route to meet challenges to public
health. As Elena+ was developed by an international and interdisciplinary team in
a short time frame to meet the COVID-19 pandemic, empirical data are required to 
discern how effective such solutions can be in meeting real world, emergent
health crises. Additionally, clustering Elena+ users based on characteristics and
usage behaviors could help public health practitioners understand how
population-level digital health interventions can reach at-risk and
sub-populations.

Copyright © 2021 Ollier, Neff, Dworschak, Sejdiji, Santhanam, Keller, Xiao,
Asisof, Rüegger, Bérubé, Hilfiker Tomas, Neff, Yao, Alattas, Varela-Mato,
Pitkethly, Vara, Herrero, Baños, Parada, Agatheswaran, Villalobos, Keller, Chan, 
Mishra, Jacobson, Stanger, He, von Wyl, Weidt, Haug, Schaub, Kleim, Barth, Witt, 
Scholz, Fleisch, Wangenheim, Car, Müller-Riemenschneider, Hauser-Ulrich, Asomoza,
Salamanca-Sanabria, Mair and Kowatsch.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.625640 
PMCID: PMC8566727
PMID: 34746067  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JO, PS, AA, DR, CB, OK, EF, FW, and TK are
affiliated with the Centre for Digital Health Interventions www.c4dhi.org, a
joint initiative of the Department of Management, Technology and Economics at ETH
Zurich and the Institute of Technology Management at the University of St.
Gallen, which was funded in part by the Swiss health insurer CSS Versicherung. EF
and TK are also cofounders of Pathmate Technologies, a university spin-off
company that creates and delivers digital clinical pathways. However, neither CSS
nor Pathmate Technologies are involved in the Elena+ project or this article. The
remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conflict of interest. The reviewer AR declared a past co-authorship with several 
of the authors AS and RB to the handling editor.

