
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 21;9:751197. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.751197.
eCollection 2021.

The Determinants of the Low COVID-19 Transmission and Mortality Rates in Africa: 
A Cross-Country Analysis.

Bouba Y(1)(2), Tsinda EK(3), Fonkou MDM(4), Mmbando GS(5), Bragazzi NL(6)(7),
Kong JD(7).

Author information: 
(1)Chantal BIYA International Reference Center for Research on HIV/AIDS
Prevention and Management (CIRCB), Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome,
Italy.
(3)Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tohoku, Sendai, Japan.
(4)UFR IM2AG, Université Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France.
(5)Graduate School of Life Sciences, University of Tohoku, Sendai, Japan.
(6)Laboratory for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (LIAM), Department of
Mathematics and Statistics, York University, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(7)Africa-Canada Artificial Intelligence and Data Innovation Consortium (ACADIC),
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, York University, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Background: More than 1 year after the beginning of the international spread of
coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19), the reasons explaining its apparently lower reported
burden in Africa are still to be fully elucidated. Few studies previously
investigated the potential reasons explaining this epidemiological observation
using data at the level of a few African countries. However, an updated analysis 
considering the various epidemiological waves and variables across an array of
categories, with a focus on African countries might help to better understand the
COVID-19 pandemic on the continent. Thus, we investigated the potential reasons
for the persistently lower transmission and mortality rates of COVID-19 in
Africa. Methods: Data were collected from publicly available and well-known
online sources. The cumulative numbers of COVID-19 cases and deaths per 1 million
population reported by the African countries up to February 2021 were used to
estimate the transmission and mortality rates of COVID-19, respectively. The
covariates were collected across several data sources: clinical/diseases data,
health system performance, demographic parameters, economic indicators, climatic,
pollution, and radiation variables, and use of social media. The collinearities
were corrected using variance inflation factor (VIF) and selected variables were 
fitted to a multiple regression model using the R statistical package. Results:
Our model (adjusted R-squared: 0.7) found that the number of COVID-19 tests per 1
million population, GINI index, global health security (GHS) index, and mean body
mass index (BMI) were significantly associated (P < 0.05) with COVID-19 cases per
1 million population. No association was found between the median life
expectancy, the proportion of the rural population, and Bacillus Calmette-Guérin 
(BCG) coverage rate. On the other hand, diabetes prevalence, number of nurses,
and GHS index were found to be significantly associated with COVID-19 deaths per 
1 million population (adjusted R-squared of 0.5). Moreover, the median life
expectancy and lower respiratory infections rate showed a trend towards
significance. No association was found with the BCG coverage or communicable
disease burden. Conclusions: Low health system capacity, together with some
clinical and socio-economic factors were the predictors of the reported burden of
COVID-19 in Africa. Our results emphasize the need for Africa to strengthen its
overall health system capacity to efficiently detect and respond to public health
crises.

Copyright © 2021 Bouba, Tsinda, Fonkou, Mmbando, Bragazzi and Kong.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.751197 
PMCID: PMC8568130
PMID: 34746085  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

