
1. mBio. 2021 Nov 9:e0025021. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00250-21. [Epub ahead of print]

High Temperature Cycles Result in Maternal Transmission and Dengue Infection
Differences Between Wolbachia Strains in Aedes aegypti.

Mancini MV(#)(1), Ant TH(#)(1), Herd CS(1), Martinez J(1), Murdochy SM(1),
Gingell DD(1), Mararo E(1), Johnson PCD(2), Sinkins SP(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, Glasgow, UK.
(2)Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health and Comparative Medicine, University 
of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(#)Contributed equally

Environmental factors play a crucial role in the population dynamics of arthropod
endosymbionts, and therefore in the deployment of Wolbachia symbionts for the
control of dengue arboviruses. The potential of Wolbachia to invade, persist, and
block virus transmission depends in part on its intracellular density. Several
recent studies have highlighted the importance of larval rearing temperature in
modulating Wolbachia densities in adults, suggesting that elevated temperatures
can severely impact some strains, while having little effect on others. The
effect of a replicated tropical heat cycle on Wolbachia density and levels of
virus blocking was assessed using Aedes aegypti lines carrying strains wMel and
wAlbB, two Wolbachia strains currently used for dengue control. Impacts on
intracellular density, maternal transmission fidelity, and dengue inhibition
capacity were observed for wMel. In contrast, wAlbB-carrying Ae. aegypti
maintained a relatively constant intracellular density at high temperatures and
conserved its capacity to inhibit dengue. Following larval heat treatment, wMel
showed a degree of density recovery in aging adults, although this was
compromised by elevated air temperatures. IMPORTANCE In the past decades, dengue 
incidence has dramatically increased all over the world. An emerging dengue
control strategy utilizes Aedes aegypti mosquitoes artificially transinfected
with the bacterial symbiont Wolbachia, with the ultimate aim of replacing wild
mosquito populations. However, the rearing temperature of mosquito larvae is
known to impact on some Wolbachia strains. In this study, we compared the effects
of a temperature cycle mimicking natural breeding sites in tropical climates on
two Wolbachia strains, currently used for open field trials. When choosing the
Wolbachia strain to be used in a dengue control program it is important to
consider the effects of environmental temperatures on invasiveness and virus
inhibition. These results underline the significance of understanding the impact 
of environmental factors on released mosquitoes, in order to ensure the most
efficient strategy for dengue control.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00250-21 
PMCID: PMC8576525
PMID: 34749528 

