
1. mBio. 2021 Nov 9:e0279221. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02792-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Heparanase-Induced Activation of AKT Stabilizes β-Catenin and Modulates
Wnt/β-Catenin Signaling during Herpes Simplex Virus 1 Infection.

Koujah L(1)(2), Madavaraju K(2), Agelidis AM(1)(2), Patil CD(2), Shukla D(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Illinois at
Chicagogrid.185648.6, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Illinois at
Chicagogrid.185648.6, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Under pathological conditions like herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) infection,
host-pathogen interactions lead to major reconstruction of the host protein
network, which contributes to the dysregulation of signaling pathways and disease
onset. Of note is the upregulation of a multifunctional host protein, heparanase 
(HPSE), following infection, which serves as a mediator in HSV-1 replication. In 
this study, we identify a novel function of HPSE and highlight it as a key
regulator of β-catenin signal transduction. The regulatory role of HPSE on the
activation, nuclear translocation, and signal transduction of β-catenin disrupts 
cellular homeostasis and establishes a pathogenic environment that promotes viral
replication. Under normal physiological conditions, β-catenin is bound to a group
of proteins, referred to as the destruction complex, and targeted for
ubiquitination and, ultimately, degradation. We show that virus-induced
upregulation of HPSE leads to the activation of Akt and subsequent stabilization 
and activation of β-catenin through (i) the release of β-catenin from the
destruction complex, and (ii) direct phosphorylation of β-catenin at Ser552. This
study also provides an in-depth characterization of the proviral role of
β-catenin signaling during HSV-1 replication using physiologically relevant cell 
lines and in vivo models of ocular infection. Furthermore, pharmacological
inhibitors of this pathway generated a robust antiviral state against multiple
laboratory and clinical strains of HSV-1. Collectively, our findings assign a
novel regulatory role to HPSE as a driver of β-catenin signaling in HSV-1
infection. IMPORTANCE Heparanase (HPSE) and β-catenin have independently been
implicated in regulating key pathophysiological processes, including
neovascularization, angiogenesis, and inflammation; however, the relationship
between the two proteins has remained elusive thus far. For that reason,
characterizing this relationship is crucial and can lead to the development of
novel therapeutics. For HSV-1 specifically, current antivirals are not able to
abolish the virus from the host, leaving patients susceptible to episodes of
viral reactivation. Identifying a host-based intervention can provide a better
alternative with enhanced efficacy and sustained relief.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02792-21 
PMCID: PMC8576534
PMID: 34749529 

