
1. Ann Intern Med. 2021 Nov 9. doi: 10.7326/M21-2780. [Epub ahead of print]

Current Insights Into Respiratory Virus Transmission and Potential Implications
for Infection Control Programs : A Narrative Review.

Klompas M(1), Milton DK(2), Rhee C(1), Baker MA(1), Leekha S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Population Medicine, Harvard Medical School and Harvard Pilgrim 
Health Care Institute, and Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts (M.K., C.R., M.A.B.).
(2)Maryland Institute for Applied Environmental Health, School of Public Health, 
University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland (D.K.M.).
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland (S.L.).

Policies to prevent respiratory virus transmission in health care settings have
traditionally divided organisms into Droplet versus Airborne categories. Droplet 
organisms (for example, influenza) are said to be transmitted via large
respiratory secretions that rapidly fall to the ground within 1 to 2 meters and
are adequately blocked by surgical masks. Airborne pathogens (for example,
measles), by contrast, are transmitted by aerosols that are small enough and
light enough to carry beyond 2 meters and to penetrate the gaps between masks and
faces; health care workers are advised to wear N95 respirators and to place these
patients in negative-pressure rooms. Respirators and negative-pressure rooms are 
also recommended when caring for patients with influenza or SARS-CoV-2 who are
undergoing "aerosol-generating procedures," such as intubation. An increasing
body of evidence, however, questions this framework. People routinely emit
respiratory particles in a range of sizes, but most are aerosols, and most
procedures do not generate meaningfully more aerosols than ordinary breathing,
and far fewer than coughing, exercise, or labored breathing. Most transmission
nonetheless occurs at close range because virus-laden aerosols are most
concentrated at the source; they then diffuse and dilute with distance, making
long-distance transmission rare in well-ventilated spaces. The primary risk
factors for nosocomial transmission are community incidence rates, viral load,
symptoms, proximity, duration of exposure, and poor ventilation. Failure to
appreciate these factors may lead to underappreciation of some risks (for
example, overestimation of the protection provided by medical masks, insufficient
attention to ventilation) or misallocation of limited resources (for example,
reserving N95 respirators and negative-pressure rooms only for aerosol-generating
procedures or requiring negative-pressure rooms for all patients with SARS-CoV-2 
infection regardless of stage of illness). Enhanced understanding of the factors 
governing respiratory pathogen transmission may inform the development of more
effective policies to prevent nosocomial transmission of respiratory pathogens.

DOI: 10.7326/M21-2780 
PMID: 34748374 

