
1. mBio. 2021 Nov 9:e0268421. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02684-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Spatial and Functional Organization of Human Papillomavirus Replication Foci in
the Productive Stage of Infection.

Khurana S(1), Markowitz TE(2)(3), Kabat J(4), McBride AA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseasesgrid.419681.3, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)NIAID Collaborative Bioinformatics Resource (NCBR), National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseasesgrid.419681.3, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(3)Advanced Biomedical Computational Science, Frederick National Laboratory for
Cancer Research, Frederick, Maryland, USA.
(4)Biological Imaging Section, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseasesgrid.419681.3, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

The life cycle of human papillomavirus (HPV) depends on keratinocyte
differentiation as the virus modulates and takes advantage of cellular pathways
to replicate its genome and assemble viral particles in differentiated cells.
Viral genomes are amplified in nuclear replication foci in differentiated
keratinocytes, and DNA repair factors from the DNA damage response signaling
pathway are recruited to replicate viral DNA. The HPV genome is associated with
cellular histones at all stages of the infectious cycle, and here, we show that
the histone variant macroH2A1 is bound to the HPV genome and enriched in viral
replication foci in differentiated cells. macroH2A1 isoforms play important roles
in cellular transcriptional repression, double-strand break repair, and
replication stress. The viral E8^E2 protein also binds to the HPV genome and
inhibits viral replication and gene expression by recruiting NCoR/SMRT complexes.
We show here that E8^E2 and SMRT also localize within replication foci, though
independently from macroH2A1. Conversely, transcription complexes containing RNA 
polymerase II and Brd4 are located on the surface of the foci. Foci generated
with an HPV16 E8^E2 mutant genome are not enriched for SMRT or macroH2A1 but
contain transcriptional complexes throughout the foci. We propose that both the
cellular macroH2A1 protein and viral E8^E2 protein help to spatially separate
replication and transcription activities within viral replication foci.
IMPORTANCE Human papillomaviruses are small DNA viruses that cause chronic
infection of cutaneous and mucosal epithelium. In some cases, persistent
infection with HPV can result in cancer, and 5% of human cancers are the result
of HPV infection. In differentiated cells, HPV amplifies viral DNA in nuclear
replication factories and transcribes late mRNAs to produce capsid proteins.
However, very little is known about the spatial organization of these activities 
in the nucleus. Here, we show that repressive viral and cellular factors localize
within the foci to suppress viral transcription, while active transcription takes
place on the surface. The cellular histone variant macroH2A1 is important for
this spatial organization.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02684-21 
PMCID: PMC8576538
PMID: 34749533 

