
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 21;12:736780. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.736780.
eCollection 2021.

Flavonoid Library Screening Reveals Kaempferol as a Potential Antiviral Agent
Against African Swine Fever Virus.

Arabyan E(1), Hakobyan A(1), Hakobyan T(1), Grigoryan R(1), Izmailyan R(2),
Avetisyan A(2), Karalyan Z(2), Jackman JA(3), Ferreira F(4), Elrod CC(5)(6),
Zakaryan H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Antiviral Drug Discovery, Institute of Molecular Biology of NAS,
Yerevan, Armenia.
(2)Laboratory of Cell Biology and Virology, Institute of Molecular Biology of
NAS, Yerevan, Armenia.
(3)School of Chemical Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, South Korea.
(4)Faculdade de Medicina Veterinária, Centro de Investigação Interdisciplinar em 
Sanidade Animal, Universidade de Lisboa, Avenida da Universidade Técnica, Lisboa,
Portugal.
(5)Natural Biologics Inc., Newfield, NY, United States.
(6)Department of Animal Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, United States.

Naturally occurring plant flavonoids are a promising class of antiviral agents to
inhibit African swine fever virus (ASFV), which causes highly fatal disease in
pigs and is a major threat to the swine industry. Currently known flavonoids with
anti-ASFV activity demonstrate a wide range of antiviral mechanisms, which
motivates exploration of new antiviral candidates within this class. The
objective of this study was to determine whether other flavonoids may
significantly inhibit ASFV infection in vitro. We performed a cell-based library 
screen of 90 flavonoids. Our screening method allowed us to track the development
of virus-induced cytopathic effect by MTT in the presence of tested flavonoids.
This screening method was shown to be robust for hit identification, with an
average Z-factor of 0.683. We identified nine compounds that inhibit ASFV Ba71V
strain in Vero cells. Among them, kaempferol was the most potent and exhibited
dose-dependent inhibition, which occurred through a virostatic effect.
Time-of-addition studies revealed that kaempferol acts on the entry and
post-entry stages of the ASFV replication cycle and impairs viral protein and DNA
synthesis. It was further identified that kaempferol induces autophagy in
ASFV-infected Vero cells, which is related to its antiviral activity and could be
partially abrogated by the addition of an autophagy inhibitor. Kaempferol also
exhibited dose-dependent inhibition of a highly virulent ASFV Arm/07 isolate in
porcine macrophages. Together, these findings support that kaempferol is a
promising anti-ASFV agent and has a distinct antiviral mechanism compared to
other anti-ASFV flavonoids.

Copyright © 2021 Arabyan, Hakobyan, Hakobyan, Grigoryan, Izmailyan, Avetisyan,
Karalyan, Jackman, Ferreira, Elrod and Zakaryan.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.736780 
PMCID: PMC8567988
PMID: 34745038 

Conflict of interest statement: CE was employed by company Natural Biologics Inc.
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.

