
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 20;12:733231. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.733231. eCollection
2021.

Transcriptomic Analysis Identifies A Tolerogenic Dendritic Cell Signature.

Robertson H(1), Li J(1), Kim HJ(2)(3), Rhodes JW(4), Harman AN(4)(5), Patrick
E(1)(3)(4), Rogers NM(1)(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Kidney Injury Group, Centre for Transplant and Renal Research, Westmead
Institute for Medical Research, Westmead, NSW, Australia.
(2)Computational Systems Biology Group, Children's Medical Research Institute,
Westmead, NSW, Australia.
(3)School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW,
Australia.
(4)Centre for Virus Research, Westmead Institute for Medical Research, Westmead, 
NSW, Australia.
(5)The University of Sydney, School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and 
Health Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(6)Renal and Transplantation Medicine, Westmead Hospital, Westmead, NSW,
Australia.
(7)Thomas E. Starzl Transplantation Institute, Department of Surgery, University 
of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, United States.

Dendritic cells (DC) are central to regulating innate and adaptive immune
responses. Strategies that modify DC function provide new therapeutic
opportunities in autoimmune diseases and transplantation. Current pharmacological
approaches can alter DC phenotype to induce tolerogenic DC (tolDC), a
maturation-resistant DC subset capable of directing a regulatory immune response 
that are being explored in current clinical trials. The classical phenotypic
characterization of tolDC is limited to cell-surface marker expression and
anti-inflammatory cytokine production, although these are not specific. TolDC may
be better defined using gene signatures, but there is no consensus definition
regarding genotypic markers. We address this shortcoming by analyzing available
transcriptomic data to yield an independent set of differentially expressed genes
that characterize human tolDC. We validate this transcriptomic signature and also
explore gene differences according to the method of tolDC generation. As well as 
establishing a novel characterization of tolDC, we interrogated its translational
utility in vivo, demonstrating this geneset was enriched in the liver, a known
tolerogenic organ. Our gene signature will potentially provide greater
understanding regarding transcriptional regulators of tolerance and allow
researchers to standardize identification of tolDC used for cellular therapy in
clinical trials.

Copyright © 2021 Robertson, Li, Kim, Rhodes, Harman, Patrick and Rogers.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.733231 
PMCID: PMC8564488
PMID: 34745103 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

