
1. BMJ Open Respir Res. 2021 Nov;8(1). pii: e000911. doi:
10.1136/bmjresp-2021-000911.

Improving the early identification of COVID-19 pneumonia: a narrative review.

Goyal D(1), Inada-Kim M(2)(3), Mansab F(4), Iqbal A(5), McKinstry B(6), Naasan
AP(7), Millar C(7), Thomas S(8), Bhatti S(4), Lasserson D(9)(10), Burke D(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Acute Internal Medicine, Gibraltar Health Authority, Gibraltar, 
Gibraltar daniel.goyal@gha.gi.
(2)Department of Infection, Antimicrobial Resistance and Deterioration, NHS
England, Redditch, Worcestershire, UK.
(3)Department of Acute Medicine, Hampshire Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
Winchester, Hampshire, UK.
(4)Department of Public Health, Gibraltar Health Authority, Gibraltar, Gibraltar.
(5)Department of Covid-19 Remote Monitoring of Patients During Response &
Recovery, NHS Grampian, Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK.
(6)Usher Institute of Population Health Sciences and Informatics, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(7)Department of General Medicine, Islands Hospital, Oban, UK.
(8)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Raigmore Hospital, Inverness, Highland,
UK.
(9)Hospital at Home, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford, Oxfordshire, 
UK.
(10)Department of Ambulatory Medicine, University of Warwick, Coventry, West
Midlands, UK.
(11)Department of Clinical Governance, Gibraltar Health Authority, Gibraltar,
Gibraltar.

Delayed presentation of COVID-19 pneumonia increases the risk of mortality and
need for high-intensity healthcare. Conversely, early identification of COVID-19 
pneumonia grants an opportunity to intervene early and thus prevent more
complicated, protracted and less successful hospital admissions. To improve the
earlier detection of COVID-19 pneumonia in the community we provide a narrative
review of current evidence examining the clinical parameters associated with
early disease progression. Through an evolving literature review, we examined:
the symptoms that may suggest COVID-19 progression; the timing of deterioration; 
the utility of basic observations, clinical examination and chest X-ray; the
value of postexertion oxygen saturations; and the use of CRP to monitor disease
progression. We go on to discuss the challenges in monitoring the COVID-19
patient in the community and discuss thresholds for further assessment.
Confusion, persistent fever and shortness of breath were identified as worrying
symptoms suggestive of COVID-19 disease progression necessitating urgent clinical
contact. Importantly, a significant proportion of COVID-19 pneumonia patients
appear not to suffer dyspnoea despite severe disease. Patients with this
asymptomatic hypoxia seem to have a poorer prognosis. Such patients may present
with other signs of hypoxia: severe fatigue, exertional fatigue and/or altered
mental status. We found duration of symptoms to be largely unhelpful in
determining risk, with evidence of deterioration at any point in the disease.
Basic clinical parameters (pulse, respiratory rate, blood pressure, temperature
and oxygen saturations (SpO2)) are likely of high value in detecting the
deteriorating community COVID-19 patient and/or COVID-19 mimickers/complications 
(eg, sepsis, bacterial pneumonia and pulmonary embolism). Of these, SpO2 carried 
the greatest utility in detecting COVID-19 progression. CRP is an early
biochemical parameter predictive of disease progression and used appropriately is
likely to contribute to the early identification of COVID-19 pneumonia.
Identifying progressive COVID-19 in the community is feasible using basic
clinical questions and measurements. As such, if we are to limit the mortality,
morbidity and the need for complicated, protracted admissions, monitoring
community COVID-19 cases for signs of deterioration to facilitate early
intervention is a viable strategy.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjresp-2021-000911 
PMCID: PMC8573292
PMID: 34740942  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

