
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2021 Nov 8;15(11):e0009887. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0009887. eCollection 2021 Nov.

The expression of FOXP3 in lesions of several forms of leprosy in patients
co-infected with HIV.

Xavier MB(1)(2), Pires CAA(1)(2), Gomes CMC(3), Rodrigues GF(3), Xavier DP(1),
Brito JAGSM(2), Corbett CEP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratory in Tropical Dermatology and Endemic Diseases of the
Nucleus of Tropical Medicine/Federal University of Pará (NMT/UFPA), Belém, Pará, 
Brazil.
(2)Research Laboratory on Skin diseases of Sanitary Interest, Biological and
Health Sciences Center, State University of Pará (UEPA), Belém, Pará, Brazil.
(3)Laboratory of Pathology of Infectious Diseases, Department of Pathology,
Medical School, São Paulo University, São Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Brazil remains endemic for infection by the human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) and leprosy, having a major impact on public health and the life
quality of affected patients. Although the relevance of this co-infection is
recognized, several aspects, such as the immune response, are not yet fully
understood. The objective of this study was to investigate the expression of
FOXP3+ Treg cells in leprosy skin lesions and to correlate their clinical forms, 
laboratory characteristics (CD4, CD8, and CV), and the immune reconstitution
syndrome in HIV-leprosy co-infection.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: An observational, cross-sectional, and analytical
study was carried out comparing four groups of patients: those with concomitant
diagnosis of leprosy and HIV infection without a leprosy reaction, those with
leprosy and HIV co-infection patients with a reverse reaction (RR), those with
leprosy without HIV and without reaction, and those with leprosywithout HIV and
with RR. The patients were diagnosed at a dermatology outpatient clinic located
in Belém, Pará, Brazil, from 2003 to 2017. In the sample studied, there was a
positive correlation between FOXP3+ cell density and viral load, negative
correlation with blood CD4+ (not statistically significant), significant positive
correlation in CD8 count in patients with leprosy reaction, and positive
relationship in patients with IRIS. The density of cells expressing FOXP3 was
higher in the BL/LL forms in patients without HIV, although the difference was
not statistically significant. However, the cell mean was higher in the TT/BT
forms in patients co-infected with leprosy and HIV, showing contradictory
results.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These findings support that higher activity of the HIV 
may stimulate or result in a higher expression of FOXP3-Tregs and that they may
be involved in active immunosuppression observed at the infection site at the
tissue level. This supports the need to expand studies on FOXP3+ Treg cells in
co-infected patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0009887 
PMCID: PMC8601607
PMID: 34748560 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

