
1. J Am Pharm Assoc (2003). 2021 Oct 20. pii: S1544-3191(21)00434-9. doi:
10.1016/j.japh.2021.10.015. [Epub ahead of print]

Exploration of pharmacist comfort with harm reduction behaviors: Cross-sectional 
latent class analysis.

Agley J, Meyerson BE, Eldridge LA, Crosby RA, Bentele KG, Jun M, Vadiei N,
Kennedy A, Anderson K.

BACKGROUND: Pharmacists are positioned to play important roles in implementing
evidence-based prevention and harm reduction approaches for opioid misuse and
related health care outcomes such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and
hepatitis C. More research is needed to understand how best to facilitate harm
reduction practices among pharmacists.
OBJECTIVES: This hypothesis-generating study investigated (1) whether subgroups
(latent classes) were observable among pharmacists based on self-reported comfort
with specific harm reduction behaviors, (2) whether having reported expertise in 
key content areas was associated with any latent classes that might be
identified, and (3) whether comfort and training were associated with actually
having dispensed syringes for likely nonprescription drug use.
METHODS: This was a statewide census of community managing pharmacists in Arizona
conducted from December 2018 to May 2019. Participants reported their degree of
comfort with 10 harm reduction behaviors, their expertise (e.g., recent
continuing pharmacy education or specialization) in selected content areas, and
their syringe dispensing behavior. Additional sociodemographic information was
also collected. Subgroups related to harm reduction were computed using latent
class analysis, and associations between study variables were assessed using the 
Fisher's exact tests.
RESULTS: Data suggested the existence of 4 latent, comfort-based harm reduction
classes: high comfort, moderate comfort, and clinical comfort, and opioid
prevention only. Reported expertise in pre-exposure prophylaxis for HIV was
likely associated with harm reduction class. However, class membership was not
associated with reporting having dispensed nonprescription syringes, although the
single comfort item for syringe dispensing, by itself, was associated therewith.
CONCLUSION: Comfort with harm reduction likely clusters, so pharmacists may be
broadly comfortable with topics or methods of harm reduction; however, comfort
with a specific harm reduction pharmacy practice may be a better predictor of
engaging in that behavior than harm reduction comfort class. In contrast,
strategies to improve comfort, such as intervention development, might
successfully be informed by pharmacists' latent class.

Copyright © 2021 American Pharmacists Association®. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.japh.2021.10.015 
PMID: 34742654 

