
1. Acta Biomed. 2021 Nov 4;92(S1):e2021117. doi: 10.23750/abm.v92iS1.11017.

Not all is COVID19: a case of eclampsia and posterior reversible encephalopathy
syndrome in the emergency room.

Poggiali E(1), Morelli N(2), Terracciano C(3), Minervino G(4), Contardi E(5),
Zaino D(6), Vercelli A(7), Magnacavallo A(8).

Author information: 
(1)Emergency Department, Guglielmo da Saliceto Hospital, Piacenza, Italy.
erikapoggiali2@gmail.com.
(2)Ospedale Guglielmo da Saliceto, Neurology Department, Piacenza, Italy.
N.Morelli@ausl.pc.it.
(3)Ospedale Guglielmo da Saliceto, Neurology Department, Piacenza, Italy.
C.Terracciano@ausl.pc.it.
(4)Ospedale Guglielmo da Saliceto, Gynecologic and Obstretic Unit, Piacenza,
Italy. G.Minervino@ausl.pc.it.
(5)Ospedale Guglielmo da Saliceto, Gynecologic and Obstretic Unit, Piacenza,
Italy. E.Contardi@ausl.pc.it.
(6)Ospedale Guglielmo da Saliceto, Neurology Department, Piacenza, Italy.
D.Zaino@ausl.pc.it.
(7)Ospedale Guglielmo da Saliceto, Emergency Department, Piacenza, Italy.
A.Vercelli@ausl.pc.it.
(8)Ospedale Guglielmo da Saliceto, Emergency Department, Piacenza, Italy.
A.Magnacavallo@ausl.pc.it.

In the so called COVID19 era, headache, fever and gastrointestinal symptoms are
highly suggestive for SARS-CoV-2 infection, but in all the cases presenting to
the emergency room, clinicians should always keep in mind alternative diagnoses, 
particularly if the patient is pregnant.  Life-threatening diseases, such as
eclampsia and posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES), should be
promptly recognized and treated. Eclampsia is defined as a seizure occurring in
association with pre-eclampsia, and it represents one of the major and serious
obstetric disorders associated with significant maternal and perinatal morbidity 
and mortality. PRES is a distinctive clinical and imaging syndrome characterized 
by acute headaches, visual impairment, seizures, and altered sensorium, that can 
be associated with severe eclampsia. Emergency clinicians should always consider 
eclampsia in the differential diagnosis of headache in pregnant women. The prompt
and accurate diagnosis of eclampsia/PRES is crucial to prevent adverse maternal
and perinatal outcomes. Here we describe the case of a young pregnant woman
admitted to our emergency department for fever, dyspnea, headache, nausea and
vomiting, who developed generalized tonic clonic seizures and a subsequent status
epilepticus due to eclampsia and PRES.

DOI: 10.23750/abm.v92iS1.11017 
PMID: 34747378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

