
1. BMJ Open Respir Res. 2021 Nov;8(1). pii: e001038. doi:
10.1136/bmjresp-2021-001038.

Effect modification by age of the association between obstructive lung diseases, 
smoking, and COVID-19 severity.

Moschovis PP(1), Lu M(2), Hayden D(3), Yonker LM(2), Lombay J(2), Taveras E(2),
Arauz Boudreau A(2), Triant VA(4), Foulkes AS(3), Bassett I(4), Hibberd PL(5),
Kinane TB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA pmoschovis@mgh.harvard.edu.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Biostatistics Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.
(5)Department of Global Health, Boston University School of Public Health,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Obstructive lung diseases (asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD)) and smoking are associated with greater risk of respiratory
infections and hospitalisations, but conflicting data exist regarding their
association with severity of COVID-19, and few studies have evaluated whether
these associations differ by age.
OBJECTIVES: To examine the associations between asthma, COPD and smoking on the
severity of COVID-19 among a cohort of hospitalised patients, and to test for
effect modification by age.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective analysis of electronic health record data
of patients admitted to Massachusetts General Hospital, assigning the maximal WHO
Clinical Progression Scale score for each patient during the first 28 days
following hospital admission. Using ordered logistic regression, we measured the 
association between maximal severity score and asthma, COPD and smoking and their
interaction with age.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Among 1391 patients hospitalised with COVID-19, we
found an increased risk of severe disease among patients with COPD and prior
smoking, independent of age. We also found evidence of effect modification by age
with asthma and current smoking; in particular, asthma was associated with
decreased COVID-19 severity among older adults, and current smoking was
associated with decreased severity among younger patients.
CONCLUSIONS: This cohort study identifies age as a modifying factor for the
association between asthma and smoking on severity of COVID-19. Our findings
highlight the complexities of determining risk factors for COVID-19 severity, and
suggest that the effect of risk factors may vary across the age spectrum.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjresp-2021-001038 
PMCID: PMC8573665
PMID: 34740944  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: Dr Moschovis is a member of 
an adjudication committee for Pfizer.

