
1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2021 Oct 22;15:749595. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2021.749595.
eCollection 2021.

Unwanted Exacerbation of the Immune Response in Neurodegenerative Disease: A Time
to Review the Impact.

Leite AOF(1), Bento Torres Neto J(1), Dos Reis RR(1), Sobral LL(1), de Souza
ACP(1), Trévia N(1), de Oliveira RB(1), Lins NAA(1), Diniz DG(1)(2), Diniz
JAP(2), Vasconcelos PFDC(3), Anthony DC(4), Brites D(5)(6), Picanço Diniz CW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Investigações em Neurodegeneração e Infecção, Hospital
Universitário João de Barros Barreto, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas,
Universidade Federal do Pará, Belém, Brazil.
(2)Laboratório de Microscopia Eletrônica, Instituto Evandro Chagas, Belém,
Brazil.
(3)Seção de Arbovirologia e Febres Hemorrágicas, Instituto Evandro Chagas,
Ananindeua, Brazil.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(5)Research Institute for Medicines (iMed.ULisboa), Faculty of Pharmacy,
Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(6)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Medicines, Faculty of Pharmacy,
Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.

The COVID-19 pandemic imposed a series of behavioral changes that resulted in
increased social isolation and a more sedentary life for many across all age
groups, but, above all, for the elderly population who are the most vulnerable to
infections and chronic neurodegenerative diseases. Systemic inflammatory
responses are known to accelerate neurodegenerative disease progression, which
leads to permanent damage, loss of brain function, and the loss of autonomy for
many aged people. During the COVID-19 pandemic, a spectrum of inflammatory
responses was generated in affected individuals, and it is expected that the
elderly patients with chronic neurodegenerative diseases who survived SARSCoV-2
infection, it will be found, sooner or later, that there is a worsening of their 
neurodegenerative conditions. Using mouse prion disease as a model for chronic
neurodegeneration, we review the effects of social isolation, sedentary living,
and viral infection on the disease progression with a focus on sickness behavior 
and on the responses of microglia and astrocytes. Focusing on aging, we discuss
the cellular and molecular mechanisms related to immunosenescence in chronic
neurodegenerative diseases and how infections may accelerate their progression.

Copyright © 2021 Leite, Bento Torres Neto, dos Reis, Sobral, de Souza, Trévia, de
Oliveira, Lins, Diniz, Diniz, Vasconcelos, Anthony, Brites and Picanço Diniz.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2021.749595 
PMCID: PMC8570167
PMID: 34744633 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

