
1. BMJ Glob Health. 2021 Nov;6(11). pii: e006345. doi: 10.1136/bmjgh-2021-006345.

Ethical and sociocultural challenges in managing dead bodies during epidemics and
natural disasters.

Suwalowska H(1), Amara F(2), Roberts N(3), Kingori P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department of Population Health, Wellcome Centre for Ethics and
Humanities, Ethox Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford, Oxfordshire, UK
halina.suwalowska@ethox.ox.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Chemistry, City University of New York, New York, New York, USA.
(3)Population Health and Primary Care Bodleian Health Care Libraries, University 
of Oxford, Oxford, Oxfordshire, UK.
(4)Nuffield Department of Population Health, Wellcome Centre for Ethics and
Humanities, Ethox Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford, Oxfordshire, UK.

BACKGROUND: Catastrophic natural disasters and epidemics claim thousands of lives
and have severe and lasting consequences, accompanied by human suffering. The
Ebola epidemic of 2014-2016 and the current COVID-19 pandemic have revealed some 
of the practical and ethical complexities relating to the management of dead
bodies. While frontline staff are tasked with saving lives, managing the bodies
of those who die remains an under-resourced and overlooked issue, with numerous
ethical and practical problems globally.
METHODS: This scoping review of literature examines the management of dead bodies
during epidemics and natural disasters. 82 articles were reviewed, of which only 
a small number were empirical studies focusing on ethical or sociocultural issues
that emerge in the management of dead bodies.
RESULTS: We have identified a wide range of ethical and sociocultural challenges,
such as ensuring dignity for the deceased while protecting the living, honouring 
the cultural and religious rituals surrounding death, alleviating the suffering
that accompanies grieving for the survivors and mitigating inequalities of
resource allocation. It was revealed that several ethical and sociocultural
issues arise at all stages of body management: notification, retrieving,
identification, storage and burial of dead bodies.
CONCLUSION: While practical issues with managing dead bodies have been discussed 
in the global health literature and the ethical and sociocultural facets of
handling the dead have been recognised, they are nonetheless not given adequate
attention. Further research is needed to ensure care for the dead in epidemics
and that natural disasters are informed by ethical best practice.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjgh-2021-006345 
PMCID: PMC8573672
PMID: 34740913  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

