
1. Acad Pediatr. 2021 Nov-Dec;21(8S):S177-S183. doi: 10.1016/j.acap.2021.02.006.

Poverty Related Education in Pediatrics: Current State, Gaps and Call to Action.

Klein M(1), Hanson E(2), Lichtenstein C(3), Mogilner L(4), Falusi O(5), Tolliver 
DG(6), Lungelow L(7), Chamberlain L(8).

Author information: 
(1)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati
College of Medicine (M Klein), Cincinnati, Ohio. Electronic address:
Melissa.klein@cchmc.org.
(2)Joe R. and Teresa Lozano Long School of Medicine, UT Health San Antonio (E
Hanson), San Antonio, Tex.
(3)The George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Children's National Hospital (C Lichtenstein), Washington, DC.
(4)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Kravis Children's Hospital (L
Mogilner), New York, NY.
(5)The George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Children's National Hospital (O Falusi), Washington, DC.
(6)Yale National Clinician Scholars Program, Yale School of Medicine (DG
Tolliver), New Haven, Conn.
(7)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center (L Lungelow), Cincinnati, Ohio.
(8)Stanford University School of Medicine (L Chamberlain), Stanford, Calif.

Children are the poorest age group in our country, with 1 in 6, or 12 million,
living in poverty. This sobering statistic became even more appalling in spring
2020 when COVID-19 magnified existing inequities. These inequities are
particularly important to pediatricians, because poverty, along with racism and
other interrelated social factors, significantly impact overall child health and 
well-being. It is imperative that pediatric educators redouble their efforts to
train learners to recognize and address health inequities related to poverty and 
all of its counterparts. In this paper, we describe the current state of
poverty-related training in pediatric undergraduate, graduate, and continuing
medical education as well as opportunities for growth. We highlight gaps in the
current curricula, particularly around the intersectionality between poverty and 
racism, as well as the need for robust evaluation. Using a logic model framework,
we outline content, learning strategies, and outcomes for poverty-related
education. We include opportunities for the deployment of best practice learning 
strategies and the incorporation of newer technologies to deliver the content. We
assert that collaboration with community partners is critical to shape the depth 
and breadth of education. Finally, we emphasize the paramount need for
high-quality faculty development and accessible career paths to create the cadre 
of role models and mentors necessary to lead this work. We conclude with a call
for collaboration between institutions, accrediting bodies, and policymakers to
promote meaningful, outcome-oriented, poverty-related education, and training
throughout the medical education continuum.

Copyright © 2021 Academic Pediatric Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.acap.2021.02.006 
PMID: 34740426  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

