
1. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis. 2021 Nov;21(11):892-899. doi: 10.1089/vbz.2021.0010.
Epub 2021 Nov 8.

Emergence of West Nile Virus Lineage-2 in Resident Corvids in Istanbul, Turkey.

Erdogan Bamac O(1), Cizmecigil UY(2), Mete A(3), Yilmaz A(2), Aydin O(2), Tali
HE(2), Tali BH(2), Yilmaz SG(2), Gurel A(1), Turan N(2), Ozsoy S(4), Vatansever
Celik E(4), Sadeyen JR(5), Roman-Sosa G(6), Iqbal M(5), Richt JA(6), Yilmaz H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, and Veterinary Faculty, Istanbul
University-Cerrahpasa, Avcilar, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Virology, Veterinary Faculty, Istanbul University-Cerrahpasa,
Avcilar, Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)California Animal Health and Food Safety Laboratory, Davis Branch, University 
of California-Davis, Davis, California, USA.
(4)Department of Wild Animals and Ecology, Veterinary Faculty, Istanbul
University-Cerrahpasa, Avcilar, Istanbul, Turkey.
(5)Avian Influenza Group, The Pirbright Institute, Pirbright, Woking, United
Kingdom.
(6)Department of Diagnostic Medicine and Pathobiology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas, USA.

West Nile fever is a vector-borne viral disease affecting animals and humans
causing significant health and economic problems globally. This study was aimed
at investigating circulating West Nile virus (WNV) strains in free-ranging
corvids in Istanbul, Turkey. Brain, liver, and kidney were collected from corvids
(n = 34) between June 2019 and April 2020 and analyzed for the presence of
WNV-specific RNA by quantitative RT-PCR. In addition, histopathologic and
immunohistochemical examinations were also performed. Samples found to be
positive by qRT-PCR were partially sequenced. WNV-specific RNA was detected in 8 
of 34 corvids analyzed, which included 7 hooded crows (Corvus cornix) and 1
Eurasian magpie (Pica pica). Phylogenetic analysis based on partial WNV sequences
from the 8 WNV-positive corvids identified in this study revealed that all
sequences clustered within the WNV lineage-2; they were at least 97% homologues
to WNV lineage-2 sequences from Slovakia, Italy, Czechia, Hungary, Senegal,
Austria, Serbia, Greece, Bulgaria, and Germany. WNV sequences showed a divergence
(87.94-94.46%) from sequences reported from Romania, Central African Republic,
South Africa, Madagascar, Israel, and Cyprus, which clustered into a different
clade of WNV lineage-2. Common histopathologic findings of WNV-positive corvids
included lymphoplasmacytic hepatitis, myocarditis, and splenitis. The liver and
heart were found to be the tissues most consistently positive for WNV-specific
antigen by immunohistochemistry, followed by the kidney and brain. This study
demonstrates for the first time the existence of WNV virus belonging to the
genetic lineage-2 in resident corvids in Istanbul, Turkey. We hypothesize that
the WNV strains circulating in Istanbul are possibly the result of a spillover
event from Europe. Since WNV is a zoonotic pathogen transmitted by mosquito
vectors, the emergence of WNV in Istanbul also poses a risk to humans and other
susceptible animals in this densely populated city and needs to be addressed by
animal and public health authorities.

DOI: 10.1089/vbz.2021.0010 
PMID: 34748405 

