
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021 Nov 7. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14386. [Epub ahead of print]

A longitudinal study on PRRSV detection in swine herds with different
demographics and PRRSV management strategies.

Campler MR(1), Cheng TY(1), Schroeder DC(2), Yang M(2), Mor SK(2), Ferreira
JB(3), Arruda AG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Preventive Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
the Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.
(2)Department of Veterinary Population Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Minnesota, Saint Paul, Minnesota.
(3)Department of Population Health & Pathobiology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) has been one of the
major health-related concerns in the swine production industry. Through its rapid
transmission and mutation, the simultaneous circulation of multiple PRRSV strains
can be a challenge in PRRSV diagnostic, control and surveillance. The objective
of this longitudinal study was to describe the temporal detection of PRRSV in
swine farms with different production types and PRRS management strategies.
Tonsil scraping (n = 344) samples were collected from three breeding and two
growing herds for approximately one year. In addition, processing fluids
(n = 216) were obtained from piglet processing batches within the three breeding 
farms while pen-based oral fluids (n = 125) were collected in the two growing pig
farms. Viral RNA extraction and reverse-transcription quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) 
were conducted for all samples. The sample positivity threshold was set at
quantification cycle (Cq) of ≤ 37. Statistical analyses were performed using
generalized linear modelling and post hoc pairwise comparisons with Bonferroni
adjustments using R statistical software. The results suggested a higher
probability of detection in processing fluids compared to tonsil scraping
specimens [odds ratio (OR) = 3.86; p = .096] in breeding farms whereas oral
fluids were outperformed by tonsil scrapings (OR = 0.26; p < .01) in growing pig 
farms. The results described herein may lead to an improvement in PRRSV
diagnostic and surveillance by selecting proper specimens.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14386 
PMID: 34747126 

