
1. Plant Biotechnol J. 2021 Nov 6. doi: 10.1111/pbi.13745. [Epub ahead of print]

CdWRKY2-mediated sucrose biosynthesis and CBF-signalling pathways coordinately
contribute to cold tolerance in bermudagrass.

Huang X(1)(2)(3), Cao L(1)(2), Fan J(4), Ma G(1)(2), Chen L(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Plant Germplasm Enhancement and Specialty Agriculture,
Wuhan Botanical Garden, The Innovative Academy of Seed Design, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Wuhan, China.
(2)Center of Economic Botany, Core Botanical Gardens, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Wuhan, China.
(3)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)College of Animal Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou,
China.

Bermudagrass (Cynodon dactylon) is one of the most widely cultivated warm-season 
turfgrass species around the world. Cold stress has been a key environmental
factor that adversely affects the growth, development, and geographical
distribution of bermudagrass; however, the underlying mechanism of bermudagrass
responsive to cold stress remains largely unexplored. Here, we identified a
cold-induced WRKY transcription factor CdWRKY2 from bermudagrass and demonstrated
its function in cold stress response. Overexpression of CdWRKY2 enhanced cold
tolerance in transgenic Arabidopsis and bermudagrass hairy roots, while knocking 
down CdWRKY2 expression via virus-induced gene silencing increased cold
susceptibility. RNA sequencing showed that overexpression of CdWRKY2 in
Arabidopsis activated the expression of genes involved in sucrose synthesis and
metabolism, including sucrose synthase 1 (AtSUS1) and sucrose phosphate synthase 
2F (AtSPS2F). CdSPS1, the homology gene of AtSPS2F in bermudagrass, was
subsequently proven to be the direct target of CdWRKY2 by yeast one-hybrid,
electrophoretic mobility shift assay, and transient expression analysis. As
expected, overexpression of CdSPS1 conferred cold tolerance in transgenic
Arabidopsis plants, whereas silencing CdSPS1 expression enhanced cold sensitivity
in bermudagrass. Besides, CdCBF1 whose expression was dramatically up-regulated
in CdWRKY2-overexpressing bermudagrass hairy roots but down-regulated in
CdWRKY2-silencing bermudagrass both under normal and cold stress conditions was
confirmed as another target of CdWRKY2. Collectively, this study reveals that
CdWRKY2 is a positive regulator in cold stress by targeting CdSPS1 and CdCBF1
promoters and activating their expression to coordinately mediate sucrose
biosynthesis and CBF-signalling pathway, which provides valuable information for 
breeding cold-resistant bermudagrass through gene manipulation.

© 2021 The Authors. Plant Biotechnology Journal published by Society for
Experimental Biology and The Association of Applied Biologists and John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pbi.13745 
PMID: 34743386 

