
1. Urol J. 2021 Nov 8:6863. doi: 10.22037/uj.v18i.6863. [Epub ahead of print]

An investigation into the Effects of Intravenous Vitamin C on Pulmonary CT
Findings and Clinical Outcomes of Patients with COVID 19 Pneumonia A Randomized
Clinical Trial.

Tehrani S(1), Yadegarynia D(2), Abrishami A(3), Moradi H(4), Gharaei B(5), Rauofi
M(6), Maghsoudi Nejad F(7), Sali S(8), Khabiri N(9), Abolghasemi S(10).

Author information: 
(1)Labbafinejad Clinical Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Tehrani.shabnam89@yahoo.com.
(2)Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine Research Center, Shahid Beheshti
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. d.yadegarynia@gmail.com.
(3)Assistant Professor of Radiology, Department of Radiology, Shahid Labbafinejad
hospital,Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences,Tehran,Iran.
abr.alireza@yahoo.com.
(4)Labbafinejad Clinical Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. hamidehmoradi05@gmail.com.
(5)Anesthesiology department, school of medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. babakgaraei@gmail.com.
(6)Department of radiology, school of medicine, Imam Hossein hospital, Shahid
Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. masomeraoufi@gmail.com.
(7)School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
Iran. F.maghsoudi92@gmail.com.
(8)Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine Research Center, Shahid Beheshti
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Dr.sali@gmail.com.
(9)Labbafinejad Clinical Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. dr.neda_khabiri@yahoo.com.
(10)Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine Research Center, Shahid Beheshti
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. saraabolghsemi1@gmail.com.

PURPOSE: In late December 2019, a series of unexplained cases of pneumonia were
reported in Wuhan, China. On January 12, 2020, the World Health Organization
temporarily named the virus responsible for the emerging cases of pneumonia as
the 2019 coronavirus. Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) due to Covid-19 
has rapidly spread around the world, and while no specific treatment or vaccine
has been reported, mortality rates remain high. One of the suggested treatments
for cellular damage in the pathogenesis of ARDS caused by the coronavirus is the 
administration of high doses of intravenous vitamin C. Considering the paucity of
literature on the therapeutic effects of high doses of intravenous vitamin C in
patients with ARDS resulting from the coronavirus, this study was conducted to
assess this therapeutic supplement in these patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This study was performed as a single-center clinical trial
in patients with a documented diagnosis of COVID-19 pneumonia. 54 eligible
patients with moderate to severe COVID-19 symptoms, based on specific inclusion
and exclusion criteria, were included in the investigation and randomly divided
into two groups. The control group consisted of 26 patients who received standard
treatment, whereas the treatment group was comprised of 18 patients administered 
intravenous vitamin C at a dose of 2 g every 6 hours for 5 days in addition to
standard treatment. Demographic characteristics, underlying diseases, length of
hospital stay, and mortality rates were reviewed and collected. Oxygen
saturation, respiratory rates, serum C Reactive Protein (CRP) levels, lymphopenia
and lung parenchymal involvement on CT were investigated at the time of admission
and on the sixth day after hospitalization. Finally, all variables were analyzed 
with IBM SPSS Statistics 23 software and a significant statistical difference was
defined for all variables, P <0.05.
RESULTS: Of these variables, the amount of oxygen saturation in the vitamin C
group increased significantly from 86±5% on the first day of hospitalization to
90±3% on the sixth day of hospitalization (P value=0.02). Also, the respiratory
rate in the vitamin C group decreased significantly from 27±3 on the first day of
hospitalization to 24±3 on the sixth day of hospitalization (P value=0.03). Lung 
CT scans of patients in the two groups reported by two radiologists were also
compared. Based on the report of the radiologists, the rate of lung involvement
in the vitamin C group was significantly lower than in the control group at the
end of treatment (P value=0.02).
CONCLUSION: Due to the effectiveness of high doses of intravenous vitamin C on
reducing lung involvement and improving clinical symptoms, further studies with a
larger sample size are recommended to demonstrate the effects of this drug
supplement.

DOI: 10.22037/uj.v18i.6863 
PMID: 34746999 

