
1. Parasit Vectors. 2021 Nov 8;14(1):569. doi: 10.1186/s13071-021-05047-z.

A new cluster of rhabdovirus detected in field-caught sand flies (Diptera:
Psychodidae: Phlebotominae) collected from southern Thailand.

Phumee A(1)(2)(3), Wacharapluesadee S(4), Petcharat S(4), Siriyasatien P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Technology, School of Allied Health Sciences, Walailak
University, Nakhon Si Thammarat, 80160, Thailand.
(2)Research Excellence Center for Innovation and Health Products, Walailak
University, Nakhon Si Thammarat, 80160, Thailand.
(3)Excellent Center for Dengue and Community Public Health (EC for DACH),
Walailak University, Nakhon Si Thammarat, 80160, Thailand.
(4)Thai Red Cross Emerging Infectious Diseases Clinical Centre, King
Chulalongkorn Memorial Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, 10330, Thailand.
(5)Vector Biology and Vector Borne Disease Research Unit, Department of
Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, 10330,
Thailand. padet.s@chula.ac.th.

BACKGROUND: The distribution of phlebotomine sand flies is changing rapidly due
to climate change. This issue has implications for the epidemiology of sand
fly-borne diseases, especially sand fly-associated viruses. Few studies
concerning sand fly-associated viruses have been conducted in Thailand.
Therefore, this study aimed to perform a molecular survey of groups of pathogenic
RNA viruses belonging to the Orbivirus, Phlebovirus, and Flavivirus genera and
family Rhabdoviridae in sand fly samples collected from southern Thailand.
METHODS: Sand flies were collected at two locations in Trang and Songkhla
provinces of southern Thailand, and individual sand fly samples were processed
for species identification and virus detection. The Orbivirus, Phlebovirus, and
Flavivirus genera and family Rhabdoviridae molecular determination was performed 
by RT-PCR, and positive samples were identified by cloning and sequencing, cell
culture inoculation, and phylogenetic analysis.
RESULTS: The results presented in this study were based on the analysis of a
total of 331 female sand flies. This molecular study revealed evidence of
Rhabdoviridae family virus presence in Phlebotomus papatasi (3/331, 0.9%). The
findings demonstrated a new cluster of rhabdovirus that was closely related to
Bactrocera dorsalis sigmavirus strain BDSV.abc5 and the lineages of
insect-specific Rhabdoviridae. In addition, the Bayesian tree suggested that the 
common ancestor of this group was the dimarhabdovirus clade. It was assumed that 
the virus may have switched hosts during its evolution. However, the detection of
Orbivirus, Phlebovirus, and Flavivirus genera using specific primers for RT-PCR
was negative in the collected sand flies.
CONCLUSIONS: There is limited knowledge on the genetic diversity and ecology of
Rhabdoviridae in Thailand. This is the first data regarding the circulation of
Rhabdoviridae in Ph. papatasi from Thailand. We found a new cluster of
rhabdoviruses that was close to the new B. dorsalis sigmavirus. It is possible
that there is a great deal of diversity in this family yet to be discovered, and 
a more extensive survey for new rhabdoviruses may uncover viruses from a wide
diversity of host taxa and broaden our understanding of the relationships among
the Rhabdoviridae.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-021-05047-z 
PMCID: PMC8576998
PMID: 34749797 

