
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Nov 8;17(11):e1010039. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010039.
eCollection 2021 Nov.

Species-specific quantification of circulating ebolavirus burden using
VP40-derived peptide variants.

Shu Q(1), Kenny T(2), Fan J(1), Lyon CJ(1), Cazares LH(2), Hu TY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cellular and Molecular Diagnostics, Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana,
United States of America.
(2)Systems and Structural Biology Division, Protein Sciences Branch, U.S. Army
Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases, Frederick, Maryland, United
States of America.

Six ebolavirus species are reported to date, including human pathogens Bundibugyo
virus (BDBV), Ebola virus (EBOV), Sudan virus (SUDV), and Taï Forest virus
(TAFV); non-human pathogen Reston virus (RESTV); and the plausible Bombali virus 
(BOMV). Since there are differences in the disease severity caused by different
species, species identification and viral burden quantification are critical for 
treating infected patients timely and effectively. Here we developed an
immunoprecipitation-coupled mass spectrometry (IP-MS) assay for VP40 antigen
detection and quantification. We carefully selected two regions of VP40,
designated as peptide 8 and peptide12 from the protein sequence that showed minor
variations among Ebolavirus species through MS analysis of tryptic peptides and
antigenicity prediction based on available bioinformatic tools, and generated
high-quality capture antibodies pan-specific for these variant peptides. We
applied this assay to human plasma spiked with recombinant VP40 protein from
EBOV, SUDV, and BDBV and virus-like particles (VLP), as well as EBOV infected NHP
plasma. Sequence substitutions between EBOV and SUDV, the two species with
highest lethality, produced affinity variations of 2.6-fold for p8 and 19-fold
for p12. The proposed IP-MS assay differentiates four of the six known EBV
species in one assay, through a combination of p8 and p12 data. The IP-MS assay
limit of detection (LOD) using multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) as signal
readout was determined to be 28 ng/mL and 7 ng/mL for EBOV and SUDV respectively,
equivalent to ~1.625-6.5×105 Geq/mL, and comparable to the LOD of lateral flow
immunoassays currently used for Ebola surveillance. The two peptides of the IP-MS
assay were also identified by their tandem MS spectra using a miniature MALDI-TOF
MS instrument, greatly increasing the feasibility of high specificity assay in a 
decentralized laboratory.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010039 
PMCID: PMC8601621
PMID: 34748613 

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal’s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: T.Y.H. and C.J.L.
report other interests from NanoPin Technologies, Inc., outside the submitted
work. In addition, T.Y.H. and Q.S. has a patent (“Compositions and methods of
determining a level of infection in a subject”) licensed to NanoPin Technologies,
Inc. The rest of us declare no competing interests.

