
1. BMJ Glob Health. 2021 Nov;6(11). pii: e007433. doi: 10.1136/bmjgh-2021-007433.

Ethnic minority status as social determinant for COVID-19 infection,
hospitalisation, severity, ICU admission and deaths in the early phase of the
pandemic: a meta-analysis.

Agyemang C(#)(1), Richters A(#)(2), Jolani S(3)(4), Hendriks S(5), Zalpuri S(6), 
Yu E(7)(8), Pijls B(9), Prins M(10)(11), Stronks K(12), Zeegers MP(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public and Occupational Health, Amsterdam Public Health Research
Institute, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
c.o.agyemang@amsterdamumc.nl.
(2)Department of Research and Development, The Netherlands Comprehensive Cancer
Organisation, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Methodology and Statistics, Care and Public Health Research
Institute (CAPHRI), Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(4)School of Health Professions Education (SHE), Maastricht University,
Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(5)School of Mental Health and Neuroscience (MHeNS), Maastricht University,
Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(6)Real World Evidence, UCBPharma, Breda, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Complex Genetics and Epidemiology, Maastricht University,
Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Nanjing, 
People's Republic of China.
(9)Department of Orthopaedics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.
(10)Department of Infectious Diseases, Amsterdam Infection and Immunity (AII),
Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(11)Department of Infectious Diseases, Research and Prevention, Public Health
Service (GGD) of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(12)Department of Public and Occupational Health, Amsterdam Public Health
Research Institute, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(13)Care and Public Health Research Institute (CAPHRI), Maastricht University,
Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: Early literature on the COVID-19 pandemic indicated striking ethnic
inequalities in SARS-CoV-2-related outcomes. This systematic review and
meta-analysis aimed to describe the presence and magnitude of associations
between ethnic groups and COVID-19-related outcomes.
METHODS: PubMed and Embase were searched from December 2019 through September
2020. Studies reporting extractable data (ie, crude numbers, and unadjusted or
adjusted risk/ORs) by ethnic group on any of the five studied outcomes: confirmed
COVID-19 infection in the general population, hospitalisation among infected
patients, and disease severity, intensive care unit (ICU) admission and mortality
among hospitalised patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection, were included using
standardised electronic data extraction forms. We pooled data from published
studies using random-effects meta-analysis.
RESULTS: 58 studies were included from seven countries in four continents, mostly
retrospective cohort studies, covering a total of almost 10 million individuals
from the first wave until the summer of 2020. The risk of diagnosed SARS-CoV-2
infection was higher in most ethnic minority groups than their White counterparts
in North American and Europe with the differences remaining in the US ethnic
minorities after adjustment for confounders and explanatory factors. Among people
with confirmed infection, African-Americans and Hispanic-Americans were also more
likely than White-Americans to be hospitalised with SARS-CoV-2 infection. No
increased risk of COVID-19 outcomes (ie, severe disease, ICU admission and death)
was found among ethnic minority patients once hospitalised, except for a higher
risk of death among ethnic minorities in Brazil.
CONCLUSION: The risk of SARS-CoV-2 diagnosis was higher in most ethnic
minorities, but once hospitalised, no clear inequalities exist in COVID-19
outcomes except for the high risk of death in ethnic minorities in Brazil. The
findings highlight the necessity to tackle disparities in social determinants of 
health, preventative opportunities and delay in healthcare use. Ethnic minorities
should specifically be considered in policies mitigating negative impacts of the 
pandemic.
PROSPERO REGISTRATION NUMBER: CRD42020180085.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjgh-2021-007433 
PMCID: PMC8573300
PMID: 34740916  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

