
1. Med Sci Monit. 2021 Nov 8;27:e932836. doi: 10.12659/MSM.932836.

Risk Factors of Neurological Complications in Severe Fever Patients with
Thrombolytic Syndrome: A Single-Center Retrospective Study in China.

Fei X(1)(2), Fang K(3), Ni X(2), Ren WH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Shandong Provincial Hospital, Cheeloo
College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China (mainland).
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Yidu Central Hospital of Weifang Affiliated
to Weifang Medical University, Weifang, Shandong, China (mainland).
(3)Department of Vertigo Medicine, Qingzhou Hospital Affiliated to Shandong First
Medical University, Weifang, Shandong, China (mainland).

BACKGROUND Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome is a serious insect-borne 
infectious disease caused by the Huaiyangshanbanyang virus. We conducted a
retrospective study to identify risk factors for neurological complications
caused by the virus. MATERIAL AND METHODS We included 121 patients who had severe
fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome and were admitted to our hospital from 2013 
to 2020. Patients' laboratory test results and clinical data were collected.
Univariate and multivariate regression were used for statistical analysis.
RESULTS Patients with neurological complications had higher mortality rates and
longer hospital stays and disease duration than did patients without neurological
complications. The neurological symptoms with the highest incidence rates were
involuntary tremors (tongue and mandible), cognitive disorder, and limb tremors. 
Patients with neurological complications had a higher incidence of abnormal heart
rhythms. Subcutaneous bleeding, pulmonary rales, percentage of neutrophils,
increased lactate dehydrogenase and C-reactive protein levels, and decreased
chloride ion concentration were closely related to the occurrence of neurological
complications. The significant decrease in chloride ion concentration within 1 to
5 days of disease onset may be a risk factor for predicting the occurrence of
neurological complications in patients with severe fever with thrombocytopenia
syndrome. CONCLUSIONS Early monitoring of subcutaneous bleeding, pulmonary rales,
electrocardiogram changes, and biochemical indicators in patients with severe
fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome can predict the occurrence of neurological
complications.

DOI: 10.12659/MSM.932836 
PMCID: PMC8588710
PMID: 34744159 

