
1. Urologiia. 2021 Nov;(5):78-83.

[Lower urinary tract symptoms and COVID-19].

[Article in Russian]

Bernikov AN(1)(2), Kupriyanov AA(1)(2), Stroganov RV(1)(2), O AA(1)(2), Khodyreva
LA(1)(2), Zaitsev AV(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology Moscow State University of Medicine and Dentistry named 
after A.I. Evdokimov, Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation, Moscow,
Russia.
(2)State Budgetary Institution Research Institute of Health Organization and
Medical Management of the Moscow Department of Health, Moscow, Russia.

The data presented in the review showed that the coronavirus affects not only the
lungs, but also the organs of the urinary system. The new virus causes a mosaic, 
multi-organ disease with severe consequences after the egg and has a wide
organotropism. The role of SARS-CoV-2 in the development of lower urinary tract
symptoms (LUTs), which are manifested by frequent, imperative urges, dysuria,
nocturia, is not entirely clear. It is assumed that biologically active
substances, the activation of which is caused by a virus, play a certain role in 
the development of SNMP, namely the expression of angiotensin converting enzyme 2
(ACE2), cytokines, activation of toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), etc. An increase in
cytokines that are released into the urine and / or expressed in the bladder and 
the presence of SNMP in patients with coronavirus infection have been called de
novo urinary symptoms or COVID-19 associated cystitis (CAC) in the literature.
Urinary symptoms de novo or associated cystitis COVID-19 (CAC) develops against
the background of a complete lack of data for the presence of a bacterial
pathogen in the urine. Despite the unusual manifestation of coronavirus
infection, similar mechanisms of damage to urothelial cells in viral and
bacterial infections give us the right to think about the use of pathogenetically
justified prevention of the development of an inflammatory reaction in the
urinary tract, as well as short-and long-term consequences of this disease. For
this purpose, it is necessary to recommend drugs that have a multifactorial
effect: diuretic, anti-adhesive, anti-inflammatory and regulate the local
immunity of the bladder mucosa. We assume that against this background, we can
expect a decrease in the number of complications from the organs of the urinary
system, and more successful rehabilitation of patients with coronavirus infection
and in the post-ovarian period. Final conclusions and recommendations will be
available after well-planned clinical trials have been conducted.


PMID: 34743438  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

