
1. Acta Clin Croat. 2021 Jun;60(2):216-230. doi: 10.20471/acc.2021.60.02.07.

A CROSS-SECTIONAL STUDY OF HEPATITIS B AND HEPATITIS C KNOWLEDGE AMONG DENTAL
MEDICINE STUDENTS AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ZAGREB.

Homolak J(1), Tomljanović D(1), Milošević M(1), Vražić D(1), Živković M(1),
Budimir I(1), Pezo Nikolić B(1), Muslim A(1), Ljubičić N(1), Nikolić M(1).

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Pharmacology, University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb, 
Croatia; 2University of Zagreb School of Dental Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia;
3Department of Environmental and Occupational Health and Sports, Andrija Štampar 
School of Public Health, University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb,
Croatia; 4Department of Periodontology, University of Zagreb School of Dental
Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia; 5Gastroenterology and Hepatology Division, Sestre
milosrdnice University Hospital Centre, Zagreb, Croatia; 6Department of Internal 
Medicine, University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia;
7Cardiovascular Division, Zagreb University Hospital Centre, Zagreb, Croatia;
8Gastroenterology Unit, Dr. Ivo Pedišić General Hospital, Sisak, Croatia;
9Department of Internal Medicine, University of Zagreb School of Dental Medicine,
Zagreb, Croatia.

Dental health care workers, particularly dental medicine students (DMS), are at
an increased risk of hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV)
infection. The aim of our study was to assess the level of knowledge on HBV and
HCV, estimate needlestick injury (NSI) prevalence and reporting practice in DMS
at the University of Zagreb, and analyze how enrolment in obligatory and
supplemental courses affects knowledge and NSI reporting practice. The knowledge 
was assessed by our questionnaires based on the Centers for Disease Control
general handouts. Additional information was collected to examine the prevalence 
and reporting practice of NSI. Data were analyzed by descriptive statistical
analysis, independent-samples t-test, proportion analyses, and combined factor
analyses of categorical and quantitative variables in SPSS and R. In total, 206
students participated in the survey. The overall level of HBV- and HCV-related
knowledge was poor, with the mean scores of 61.90% and 51.35%, respectively.
Moreover, students enrolled in the first year demonstrated significantly lower
levels of knowledge in comparison with their older peers. Of all participants,
18.2% had sustained a NSI and the majority of them (78.95%) had never reported
the injury. In conclusion, DMS have low levels of knowledge on important
occupational pathogens and poor NSI reporting practice. Moreover, formal
education in the current form has failed to significantly improve student
competence and theoretical knowledge translates poorly into more conscientious
injury reporting practice. We should look for a better way to increase student
awareness and level of knowledge on this topic.

DOI: 10.20471/acc.2021.60.02.07 
PMCID: PMC8564850
PMID: 34744271  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

