
1. Emerg Med J. 2021 Nov 5. pii: emermed-2021-211814. doi:
10.1136/emermed-2021-211814. [Epub ahead of print]

COVID-19 rapid diagnostics: practice review.

Reynard C(1)(2), Allen JA(3)(4), Shinkins B(5), Prestwich G(6), Goves J(2),
Davies K(7)(8), Body R(9)(2); CONDOR group.

Collaborators: Body R, Hayward G, Allen J, Braybrook J, Buckle P, Dark P, Davies 
K, Cook E, Gordon A, Halstead A, Lasserson D, Lewington A, Nicholson B,
Perera-Salazar R, Simpson J, Turner P, Prestwich G, Reynard C, Riley B, Tate V,
Wilcox M, Ni MZ, Edgeworth J, Price A, Inkson C, Logan M, Harden C, Micocci M,
Lendrem C, Lee J, Jones N, Adams E.

Author information: 
(1)Emergency Department, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, 
UK charlie.reynard@nhs.net.
(2)Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester,
UK.
(3)NIHR Newcastle In Vitro Diagnostics Co-operative, Translational and Clinical
Research Institute, Newcastle University School of Clinical Medical Sciences,
Newcastle University, Tyne and Wear, UK.
(4)Newcastle Upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK.
(5)Test Evaluation Group, Leeds Institute for Health Sciences, University of
Leeds, Leeds, UK.
(6)Patient and Public Involvement, Yorkshire and Humber Academic Health Science
Networks, Leeds, UK.
(7)Healthcare Associated Infections Research Group, University of Leeds, Leeds,
UK.
(8)NIHR Leeds In Vitro Diagnostics Co-operative, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
(9)Emergency Department, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, 
UK.

Point-of-care tests for SARS-CoV-2 could enable rapid rule-in and/or rule-out of 
COVID-19, allowing rapid and accurate patient cohorting and potentially reducing 
the risk of nosocomial transmission. As COVID-19 begins to circulate with other
more common respiratory viruses, there is a need for rapid diagnostics to help
clinicians test for multiple potential causative organisms
simultaneously.However, the different technologies available have strengths and
weaknesses that must be understood to ensure that they are used to the benefit of
the patient and healthcare system. Device performance is related to the deployed 
context, and the diagnostic characteristics may be affected by user
experience.This practice review is written by members of the UK's COVID-19
National Diagnostic Research and Evaluation programme. We discuss relative merits
and test characteristics of various commercially available technologies. We do
not advocate for any given test, and our coverage of commercially supplied tests 
is not intended to be exhaustive.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. No commercial re-use. See rights and
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/emermed-2021-211814 
PMID: 34740887 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: RB has consulted for
Siemens, Roche, Beckman, Singulex, LumiraDx and Abbott but not relating to
COVID-19.

