
1. Sci Total Environ. 2022 Feb 1;806(Pt 4):151391. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.151391. Epub 2021 Nov 3.

Comprehensive investigation of SARS-CoV-2 fate in wastewater and finding the
virus transfer and destruction route through conventional activated sludge and
sequencing batch reactor.

Pourakbar M(1), Abdolahnejad A(1), Raeghi S(2), Ghayourdoost F(3), Yousefi R(4), 
Behnami A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Engineering, Maragheh University of Medical
Sciences, Maragheh, Iran.
(2)Department of Laboratory Sciences, Maragheh University of Medical Sciences,
Maragheh, Iran.
(3)Department of Environmental Health Engineering, Zanjan University of Medical
Sciences, Zanjan, Iran.
(4)Department of Environmental Health Engineering, Tabriz University of Medical
Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(5)Department of Environmental Health Engineering, Maragheh University of Medical
Sciences, Maragheh, Iran. Electronic address: ali.behnami64@gmail.com.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) RNA transmission
route was thoroughly investigated in the hospital wastewater, sewage collection
network, and wastewater treatment plants. Samples were taken on four occasions
from December 2020 to April 2021. The performance of two different wastewater
treatment processes of sequencing batch reactor (SBR) and conventional activated 
sludge (CAS) was studied for virus destruction. For this purpose, liquid phase,
solid phase and bioaerosol samples were taken from different units of the
investigated wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs). The results revealed that all
untreated hospital wastewater samples were positive for SARS-CoV-2 RNA. The virus
detection frequency increased when the number of hospitalized cases increased.
Detection of viral RNA in the wastewater collection system exhibited higher load 
of virus in the generated wastewater in areas with poor socioeconomic conditions.
Virus detection in the emitted bioaerosols in WWTPs showed that bioaerosols
released from CAS with surface aeration contains SARS-CoV-2 RNA posing a
potential threat to the working staff of the WWTPs. However, no viral RNA was
detected in the bioaerosols of the SBR with diffused aeration system.
Investigation of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in WWTPs showed high affinity of the virus to be 
accumulated in biosolids rather than transporting via liquid phase. Following the
fate of virus in sludge revealed that it is completely destructed in anaerobic
sludge treatment process. Therefore, based on the results of the present study,
it can be concluded that receiving water resources could not be contaminated with
virus, if the wastewater treatment processes work properly.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.151391 
PMCID: PMC8563086
PMID: 34740662 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare no conflicts of interest associated with this study.

