
1. Sci Total Environ. 2021 Nov 6:151430. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.151430. [Epub
ahead of print]

Wheat yellow mosaic enhances bacterial deterministic processes in a plant-soil
system.

Zhang H(1), Wu C(1), Wang F(1), Wang H(2), Chen G(3), Cheng Y(1), Chen J(4), Yang
J(1), Ge T(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality
and Safety of Agro-products, Institute of Plant Virology, Ningbo University,
Ningbo 315211, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality
and Safety of Agro-products, Institute of Plant Virology, Ningbo University,
Ningbo 315211, China; College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Central
South University of Forestry and Technology, Changsha 410004, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality
and Safety of Agro-products, Institute of Plant Virology, Ningbo University,
Ningbo 315211, China; School of Resources and Environmental Engineering, Jiangxi 
University of Science and Technology, Ganzhou 341000, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality
and Safety of Agro-products, Institute of Plant Virology, Ningbo University,
Ningbo 315211, China. Electronic address: jianpingchen@nbu.edu.cn.
(5)State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality
and Safety of Agro-products, Institute of Plant Virology, Ningbo University,
Ningbo 315211, China. Electronic address: getida@nbu.edu.cn.

Understanding the mechanisms that govern microbial community assembly across
soil-plant continuum is crucial for predicting the response of ecosystems to
environmental changes. However, the impact of the health status of plant on
microbial assembly across this continuum still remain poorly understood. Here, we
investigated how wheat yellow mosaic (WYM), caused by the wheat mosaic virus
transmitted by Polymyxa graminis, affected microbial assembly across soil (bulk
soil, rhizosphere soil), and plant (roots and leaves) continuum in a winter wheat
(Triticum aestivum L.) system in northern China, using null model analysis. The
results showed that deterministic processes dominated the bacterial community
assembly, whereas stochastic processes were primarily responsible for the
assembly of the fungal communities. With increasing levels of WYM, deterministic 
processes were greatly enhanced for bacterial community assembly, accompanied by 
a decrease in community niche breadth. Intensified competition between bacteria
and fungi and increased soil total nitrogen (TN) and soil organic carbon (SOC)
contents were mainly responsible for the enhanced deterministic processes for
bacterial community assembly. Random forest modeling indicated a strong potential
of rhizosphere bacterial community assembly for predicting the pathological
conditions of wheat. Structural equation modeling showed that disease level was
positively correlated with SOC and TN contents, competitions between bacteria and
fungi, and the contribution of variable selection processes to the bacterial
community assembly in the wheat rhizosphere. Our study revealed the ecological
mechanisms underlying the associations between microbial communities and
soil-borne disease, and highlighted the significance of microbial community
assembly for maintaining soil and plant health.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.151430 
PMID: 34748834 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

