
1. J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol. 2021 Nov 5. doi: 10.1038/s41370-021-00399-1. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Bridge the gap: correlate face mask leakage and facial features with 3D morphable
face models.

Wang TK(1), Solano T(1), Shoele K(2).

Author information: 
(1)FAMU-FSU College of Engineering, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL,
USA.
(2)FAMU-FSU College of Engineering, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL,
USA. kshoele@eng.famu.fsu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Face masks have been proven to be effective in protecting the public 
against airborne transmitted diseases when fitted appropriately. However, for
homemade cloth masks and surgical masks, the fit is often poor, allowing viruses 
to escape through the gap.
OBJECTIVE: This work aims to identify the correlation between the mask leakage,
mask configurations, and individual's facial features.
METHODS: A novel locally morphing 3D face model, and a minimum-energy-based mask 
deployment model are used to systematically examine the mask fit for a large
cohort of exemplars.
RESULTS: The results show that the mask size and tuck-in ratio, along with
selective facial features, especially nose height and chin length, are key
factors determining the leakage location and extent. A polynomial regression
model is presented for mask fitness based on localized facial features.
SIGNIFICANCE: This study is a complete pipeline to test various masks on a wide
range of faces with controlled modification of distinct regions of the face,
which is difficult to achieve with human subjects, and provide knowledge on how
the masks should be designed in the future.
IMPACT STATEMENT: The face mask "fit" affects the mask's efficacy in preventing
airborne transmission. To date, research on the face mask fit has been conducted 
mainly using experiments on limited subjects. The limited sample size in
experimental studies makes it hard to reach a statistical correlation between
mask fit and facial features in a population. Here, we employ a novel framework
that utilizes a morphable face model and mask's deployment simulation to test
mask fit for many facial characteristics and mask designs. The proposed technique
is an important step toward enabling personalized mask selection with maximum
efficacy for society members.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41370-021-00399-1 
PMCID: PMC8570071
PMID: 34741114 

