
1. Math Biosci. 2021 Nov 6;343:108724. doi: 10.1016/j.mbs.2021.108724. [Epub ahead
of print]

Sterile insect technique with accidental releases of sterile females. Impact on
mosquito-borne diseases control when viruses are circulating.

Dumont Y(1), Yatat-Djeumen IV(2).

Author information: 
(1)CIRAD, Umr AMAP, Pôle de Protection des Plantes, F-97410 Saint Pierre, France;
AMAP, Univ Montpellier, CIRAD, CNRS, INRA, IRD, Montpellier, France; University
of Pretoria, Department of Mathematics and Applied Mathematics, Pretoria, South
Africa. Electronic address: yves.dumont@cirad.fr.
(2)University of Yaoundé I, National Advanced School of Engineering of Yaoundé,
Department of Mathematics and Physics, Yaoundé, Cameroon; UMI 209 IRD/UPMC
UMMISCO, Bondy, France.

The sterile insect technique (SIT) is a technique to control some vectors of
diseases by releasing sterile males. However, during these releases, sterilized
females can be (accidentally) released and since only females are vectors of
diseases, it is important to study their impact when arthropod viruses are
circulating. To that aim, we develop and study an entomological-epidemiological
model, considering either permanent or periodic releases. Qualitative analyses of
the continuous and periodic models are conducted. We highlight a critical sterile
males release rate, ΛMcrit, above which the control of wild population is always 
effective, using massive releases. Estimating the basic reproduction number of
the epidemiological model, R02, we show that if it is above a certain threshold, 
R0,∗2, that depends on the basic offspring number, N, and the release rate of
sterile females, the epidemiological risk can only be controlled using (very)
massive releases. Otherwise, we can estimate the basic reproduction number of the
SIT epidemiological model, R0,SIT2, that shapes the stability property of the
(periodic) disease-free equilibrium. We show that it might be possible to take
R0,SIT2 below 1 using non-massive, but large enough, releases. However,
practically, it seems more efficient to consider massive releases, followed by
small releases once the vector population is small enough. In addition to SIT, we
also recommend mechanical control, i.e. the reduction of breeding sites, that
greatly improves the efficacy of SIT, in terms of duration or size of the
releases. Our results reveal that outside an epidemic period, the release of
sterile females is not an issue, as long as the sterile males release rate is
greater than ΛMcrit. Within an epidemic period, we show that sterile females
releases do not really impact the SIT efficiency, as long as the release rate,
ΛF, is lower than a critical value, ΛFcrit, that depends on the mosquito and
epidemiological threshold parameters, N, and R02. To illustrate numerically our
theoretical results, we consider Dengue parameters. We estimate all thresholds
and also the effective reproduction number, Reff2, and highlight the importance
of early permanent or periodic SIT control to prevent or mitigate the risk of a
Dengue epidemic, with and without sterile females releases.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mbs.2021.108724 
PMID: 34748880 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

