
1. BMC Oral Health. 2021 Nov 8;21(1):567. doi: 10.1186/s12903-021-01921-5.

Estimating the viral loads of SARS-CoV-2 in the oral cavity when complicated with
periapical lesions.

Altaie AM(1), Hamdy R(1), Venkatachalam T(1)(2), Hamoudi R(#)(1)(3), Soliman
SSM(#)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Medical and Health Sciences, University of Sharjah,
Sharjah, UAE.
(2)Department of Physiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, Khalifa
University, Abu Dhabi, UAE.
(3)Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Medicine, University of Sharjah,
Sharjah, UAE.
(4)Research Institute of Medical and Health Sciences, University of Sharjah,
Sharjah, UAE. ssoliman@sharjah.ac.ae.
(5)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, College of Pharmacy, University of Sharjah,
Sharjah, UAE. ssoliman@sharjah.ac.ae.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The oral cavity represents a main entrance of the severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2). Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 
(ACE-2), neuropilin-1 (NRP-1), and transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2) are 
essential for the entry of SARS-CoV-2 to the host cells. Both ACE-2 and NRP-1
receptors and TMPRSS2 have been identified in the oral cavity. However, there is 
limited knowledge about the impact of periapical lesions and their metabolites on
the expression of these critical genes. This study aims to measure the impact of 
periapical lesions and their unique fatty acids (FAs) metabolites on the
expression of the aforementioned genes, in addition to interleukin 6 (IL-6) gene 
and hence SARS-CoV-2 infection loads can be estimated.
METHODS: Gene expression of ACE-2, NRP-1, TMPRSS2, and IL-6 was performed in
periapical lesions in comparison to healthy oral cavity. Since FAs are important 
immunomodulators required for the lipid synthesis essential for receptors
synthesis and viral replication, comparative FAs profiling was determined in oral
lesions and healthy pulp tissues using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry
(GC-MS). The effect of major identified and unique FAs was tested on mammalian
cells known to express ACE-2, NRP-1, and TMPRSS2 genes.
RESULTS: Gene expression analysis indicated that ACE-2, NRP-1, and TMPRSS2 were
significantly upregulated in healthy clinical samples compared to oral lesions,
while the reverse was true with IL-6 gene expression. Saturated and
monounsaturated FAs were the major identified shared and unique FAs,
respectively. Major shared FAs included palmitic, stearic and myristic acids with
the highest percentage in the healthy oral cavity, while unique FAs included
17-octadecynoic acid in periapical abscess, petroselinic acid and L-lactic acid
in periapical granuloma, and 1-nonadecene in the radicular cyst. Computational
prediction showed that the binding affinity of identified FAs to ACE-2, TMPRSS2
and S protein were insignificant. Further, FA-treated mammalian cells showed
significant overexpression of ACE-2, NRP-1 and TMPRSS2 genes except with L-lactic
acid and oleic acid caused downregulation of NRP-1 gene, while 17-octadecynoic
acid caused insignificant effect.
CONCLUSION: Collectively, a healthy oral cavity is more susceptible to viral
infection when compared to that complicated with periapical lesions. FAs play
important role in viral infection and their balance can affect the viral loads.
Shifting the balance towards higher levels of palmitic, stearic and 1-nonadecene 
caused significant upregulation of the aforementioned genes and hence higher
viral loads. On the other hand, there is a reverse correlation between
inflammation and expression of SARS-CoV-2 receptors. Therefore, a mouth
preparation that can reduce the levels of palmitic, stearic and 1-nonadecene,
while maintaining an immunomodulatory effect can be employed as a future
protection strategy against viral infection.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12903-021-01921-5 
PMCID: PMC8573761
PMID: 34749700  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

