
1. Eur J Public Health. 2021 Nov 9;31(Supplement_4):iv9-iv13. doi:
10.1093/eurpub/ckab151.

Reducing the impact of the coronavirus on disadvantaged migrants and ethnic
minorities.

Kumar BN(1), Hargreaves S(2), Agyemang C(3), James RA(4), Blanchet K(4), Gruer
L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Folkehelseinstituttet, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Migrant Health Research Group, Institute for Infection and Immunity, St
George's University of London, London, UK.
(3)Department of Public Health, Amsterdam Public Health Research Institute,
Amsterdam University Medical Centers, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(4)Lancet Migration European Regional Hub, Geneva Centre of Humanitarian Studies,
Geneva, Switzerland.
(5)Usher Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.

Studies from several countries have shown that the COVID-19 pandemic has
disproportionally affected migrants. Many have numerous risk factors making them 
vulnerable to infection and poor clinical outcome. Policies to mitigate this
effect need to take into account public health principles of inclusion, universal
health coverage and the right to health. In addition, the migrant health agenda
has been compromised by the suspension of asylum processes and resettlement,
border closures, increased deportations and lockdown of camps and excessively
restrictive public health measures. International organizations including the
World Health Organization and the World Bank have recommended measures to
actively counter racism, xenophobia and discrimination by systemically including 
migrants in the COVID-19 pandemic response. Such recommendations include issuing 
additional support, targeted communication and reducing barriers to accessing
health services and information. Some countries have had specific policies and
outreach to migrant groups, including facilitating vaccination. Measures and
policies targeting migrants should be evaluated, and good models disseminated
widely.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
European Public Health Association.

DOI: 10.1093/eurpub/ckab151 
PMCID: PMC8576303
PMID: 34751368  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

