
1. J Nurs Scholarsh. 2021 Nov 8. doi: 10.1111/jnu.12736. [Epub ahead of print]

Using infrared imaging and deep learning in fit-checking of respiratory
protective devices among healthcare professionals.

Siah CR(1), Lau ST(1), Tng SS(2), Chua CHM(2).

Author information: 
(1)National University of Singapore, Alice Lee Centre for Nursing Studies,
Singapore.
(2)National University of Singapore, Institute of Systems Science, Singapore.

AIMS: This study aimed to investigate the application of infrared thermal imaging
and adopt deep learning to detect air leakage for determining the fitness of
respirators during fit-checks.
BACKGROUND: The outbreak of Covid-19 virus constitutes a public health crisis
with substantial resultant morbidities and mortalities; has exerted profound
impacts.
METHODS: This was a prospective observational study, employing a non-probability 
sampling method on a convenience sample to recruit the participants and followed 
the Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology
statement guidelines.
RESULTS: The use of infrared thermal imaging identified air leakage points as a
disruption to the facial thermal pattern distribution at (a) front of face; (b)
right lateral of the face; (c) left lateral of the face; (d) top of the facemask 
with the head facing down; and (e) bottom of the facemask with the head facing
up. Results also indicated that artificial intelligence tools and the
proliferation of deep learning have the potential to detect the location of air
leakage locations.
CONCLUSION: The use of infrared thermal imaging provides evidence of the
feasibility and applicability of infrared thermal imaging techniques in detecting
air leakage for individuals wearing respirators.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: The use of infrared thermal technology can serve a potential 
role in complement fit-checking of respiratory protective devices and offers
promising practical utility in determining the fitness of respirators for nurses 
at the frontline to protect against the air-borne viruses.

© 2021 Sigma Theta Tau International.

DOI: 10.1111/jnu.12736 
PMID: 34750962 

