
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Nov 9;17(11):e1009433. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009433.
eCollection 2021 Nov.

Impact of extrinsic incubation temperature on natural selection during Zika virus
infection of Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus.

Murrieta RA(1), Garcia-Luna SM(1)(2), Murrieta DJ(1), Halladay G(1), Young MC(1),
Fauver JR(1)(3), Gendernalik A(1), Weger-Lucarelli J(1)(4), Rückert C(1)(5), Ebel
GD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins,
Colorado, United States of America.
(2)Department of Entomology, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, United
States of America.
(3)Yale School of Public Health, Department of Epidemiology of Microbial
Diseases, Laboratory of Epidemiology of Public Health, New Haven, Connecticut,
United States of America.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences & Pathobiology, Virginia-Maryland College of
Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia, United States of
America.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Agriculture,
Biotechnology & Natural Resources, University of Nevada, Reno, Nevada, United
States of America.

Arthropod-borne viruses (arboviruses) require replication across a wide range of 
temperatures to perpetuate. While vertebrate hosts tend to maintain temperatures 
of approximately 37°C-40°C, arthropods are subject to ambient temperatures which 
can have a daily fluctuation of > 10°C. Temperatures impact vector competence,
extrinsic incubation period, and mosquito survival unimodally, with optimal
conditions occurring at some intermediate temperature. In addition, the mean and 
range of daily temperature fluctuations influence arbovirus perpetuation and
vector competence. The impact of temperature on arbovirus genetic diversity
during systemic mosquito infection, however, is poorly understood. Therefore, we 
determined how constant extrinsic incubation temperatures of 25°C, 28°C, 32°C,
and 35°C control Zika virus (ZIKV) vector competence and population dynamics
within Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus mosquitoes. We also examined
fluctuating temperatures which better mimic field conditions in the tropics. We
found that vector competence varied in a unimodal manner for constant
temperatures peaking between 28°C and 32°C for both Aedes species. Transmission
peaked at 10 days post-infection for Aedes aegypti and 14 days for Aedes
albopictus. Conversely, fluctuating temperature decreased vector competence.
Using RNA-seq to characterize ZIKV population structure, we identified that
temperature alters the selective environment in unexpected ways. During mosquito 
infection, constant temperatures more often elicited positive selection whereas
fluctuating temperatures led to strong purifying selection in both Aedes species.
These findings demonstrate that temperature has multiple impacts on ZIKV biology,
including major effects on the selective environment within mosquitoes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009433 
PMCID: PMC8629396
PMID: 34752502 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

