
1. Am J Med Sci. 2021 Nov 6. pii: S0002-9629(21)00403-1. doi:
10.1016/j.amjms.2021.10.012. [Epub ahead of print]

COVID-19 Associated Coagulopathy: Mechanisms and Host-Directed Treatment.

Plášek J(1), Gumulec J(2), Máca J(3), Škarda J(4), Procházka V(5), Grézl T(6),
Václavík J(7).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Internal Medicine and Cardiology, University Hospital Ostrava,
Ostrava, Czech Republic; Dept. of Cardiology, Institute for Clinical and
Experimental Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic; Faculty of Medicine, University of
Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic. Electronic address: jiri.plasek@fno.cz.
(2)Dept. of Clinical Hematology, University Hospital of Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech
Republic.
(3)Dept. of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care, University Hospital Ostrava,
Ostrava, Czech Republic; Institute of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Medical
Faculty, University of Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic.
(4)Institute of Clinical Pathology, University Hospital of Ostrava, Ostrava,
Czech Republic; Faculty of Medicine, University of Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech
Republic.
(5)Institute of Radiology, University Hospital of Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech
Republic.
(6)Dept. of Internal Medicine and Cardiology, University Hospital Ostrava,
Ostrava, Czech Republic.
(7)Dept. of Internal Medicine and Cardiology, University Hospital Ostrava,
Ostrava, Czech Republic; Faculty of Medicine, University of Ostrava, Ostrava,
Czech Republic.

Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) is associated with
specific coagulopathy that frequently occurs during the different phases of
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and can result in thrombotic complications
and/or death. This COVID-19-associated coagulopathy (CAC) exhibits some of the
features associated with thrombotic microangiopathy, particularly
complement-mediated hemolytic-uremic syndrome. In some cases, due to the
anti-phospholipid antibodies, CAC resembles catastrophic anti-phospholipid
syndrome. In other patients, it exhibits features of hemophagocytic syndrome. CAC
is mainly identified by: increases in fibrinogen, D-dimers, and von Willebrand
factor (released from activated endothelial cells), consumption of a disintegrin 
and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin type 1 motifs, member 13 (ADAMTS13),
over activated and dysregulated complement, and elevated plasma cytokine levels. 
CAC manifests as both major cardiovascular and/or cerebrovascular events and
dysfunctional microcirculation, which leads to multiple organ damage. It is not
clear whether the mainstay of COVID-19 is complement overactivation,
cytokine/chemokine activation, or a combination of these activities. Available
data have suggested that non-critically ill hospitalized patients should be
administered full-dose heparin. In critically ill, full dose heparin treatment is
discouraged due to higher mortality rate. In addition to anti-coagulation, four
different host-directed therapeutic pathways have recently emerged that influence
CAC: (1) Anti-von Willebrand factor monoclonal antibodies; (2) activated
complement C5a inhibitors; (3) recombinant ADAMTS13; and (4) Interleukin (IL)-1
and IL-6 antibodies. Moreover, neutralizing monoclonal antibodies against the
virus surface protein have been tested. However, the role of antiplatelet
treatment remains unclear for patients with COVID-19.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjms.2021.10.012 
PMCID: PMC8576106
PMID: 34752741 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Authors have no
conflict of interest related to this article.

