
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 25;12:738915. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.738915. eCollection
2021.

Secondary Immunodeficiency in Hematological Malignancies: Focus on Multiple
Myeloma and Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia.

Allegra A(1), Tonacci A(2), Musolino C(1), Pioggia G(3), Gangemi S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Human Pathology in Adulthood and
Childhood "Gaetano Barresi", University of Messina, Messina, Italy.
(2)Clinical Physiology Institute, National Research Council of Italy (IFC-CNR),
Pisa, Italy.
(3)Institute for Biomedical Research and Innovation (IRIB), National Research
Council of Italy (CNR), Messina, Italy.
(4)School of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Department of Clinical and
Experimental Medicine, University of Messina, Messina, Italy.

Secondary immunodeficiency is reported in most patients with hematological
malignancies such as chronic lymphocytic leukemia and multiple myeloma. The aim
of our review was to evaluate the existing literature data on patients with
hematological malignancies, with regard to the effect of immunodeficiency on the 
outcome, the clinical and therapeutic approach, and on the onset of noninfectious
complications, including thrombosis, pleural effusion, and orofacial
complications. Immunodeficiency in these patients has an intense impact on their 
risk of infection, in turn increasing morbidity and mortality even years after
treatment completion. However, these patients with increased risk of severe
infectious diseases could be treated with adequate vaccination coverage, but the 
vaccines' administration can be associated with a decreased immune response and
an augmented risk of adverse reactions. Probably, immunogenicity of the
inactivated is analogous to that of healthy subjects at the moment of
vaccination, but it undertakes a gradual weakening over time. However, the
dispensation of live attenuated viral vaccines is controversial because of the
risk of the activation of vaccine viruses. A particular immunization schedule
should be employed according to the clinical and immunological condition of each 
of these patients to guarantee a constant immune response without any risks to
the patients' health.

Copyright © 2021 Allegra, Tonacci, Musolino, Pioggia and Gangemi.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.738915 
PMCID: PMC8573331
PMID: 34759921 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

