
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2021 Nov 7;120:31-44. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2021.11.006.
[Epub ahead of print]

Transcriptome profiling reveals the novel immunometabolism-related genes against 
WSSV infection from Fenneropenaeus merguiensis.

Jaree P(1), Boonchuen P(2), Thawonsuwan J(3), Kondo H(4), Hirono I(4),
Somboonwiwat K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Applied Shrimp Research and Innovation, Institute of Molecular
Biosciences, Mahidol University, Salaya, Nakhon Pathom, Thailand.
(2)School of Biotechnology, Institute of Agricultural Technology, Suranaree
University of Technology, Nakhon Ratchasima, Thailand.
(3)Songkhla Aquatic Animal Health Research Center, Department of Fisheries,
Songkhla, Thailand.
(4)Graduate School of Marine Science and Technology, Tokyo University of Marine
Science and Technology, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Center of Excellence for Molecular Biology and Genomics of Shrimp, Department 
of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
Electronic address: kunlaya.s@chula.ac.th.

The white spot syndrome virus (WSSV) has been considered a serious threat to
shrimp aquaculture. Besides, the activation of cell metabolism as an immune
reaction to the virus is now recognized as a piece of the pivotal puzzle of the
antiviral responses. Hence, this study explores the relationship between
metabolic gene expression and antiviral responses in shrimp using transcriptome
analysis. The RNA-seq libraries of Fenneropenaeus merguensis hemocytes after WSSV
challenge at early (6 hpi) and late (24 hpi) stages of infection were analyzed to
identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) that the WSSV subverted the
expression. One-hundred-thirty-three DEGs that were expressed in response to WSSV
infection at both stages were identified. Based on the GO annotation, they were
related to innate immunity and metabolic pathway. The expression correlation
between "full term" (NGS) and qRT-PCR of 16 representative DEGs is shown.
Noticeably, the expression profiles of all the selected metabolic genes involved 
in glucose metabolism, lipid metabolism, amino acid metabolism, and nucleotide
metabolism showed a specific correlation between NGS and qRT-PCR upon WSSV
infection. Of these, we further characterized the function related to the WSSV
response of glutamine: fructose-6-phosphate aminotransferase (FmGFAT), the
rate-limiting enzyme of the hexosamine biosynthesis pathway, which was found to
be up-regulated at the late stage of WSSV infection. Suppression of FmGFAT by RNA
interference resulted in postponing the death of WSSV-infected shrimp and
reduction of viral copy number. These results suggested that the FmGFAT is linked
between metabolic change and WSSV responses in shrimp, where the virus-induced
metabolic rewiring hijack biological compounds and/or energy sources to benefit
the viral replication process.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2021.11.006 
PMID: 34758397 

