
1. Cureus. 2021 Oct 5;13(10):e18487. doi: 10.7759/cureus.18487. eCollection 2021
Oct.

Impact of Vitamin D Supplementation on Multiple Sclerosis.

Gandhi F(1), Jhaveri S(2), Avanthika C(3)(4), Singh A(5), Jain N(6), Gulraiz
A(7), Shah P(8), Nasir F(9).

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine, Shree Krishna Hospital, Anand, IND.
(2)Internal Medicine, Nathiba Hargovandas Lakhmichand Municipal Medical College, 
Ahmedabad, IND.
(3)Medicine and Surgery, Karnataka Institute of Medical Sciences, Hubli, IND.
(4)Pediatrics, Karnataka Institute of Medical Sciences, Hubli, IND.
(5)Internal Medicine, Mount Sinai Morningside, New York City, USA.
(6)Internal Medicine, Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, New Delhi, IND.
(7)Medicine, California Institute of Behavioral Neurosciences and Psychology,
Fairfield, USA.
(8)Vascular Surgery, Shree Krishna Hospital, Anand, IND.
(9)Internal Medicine, Harlem Hospital Center, New York City, USA.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disease affecting a large number of
people every year. The exact causal factor for this disease is unclear, but it
commonly affects middle-aged women, with known triggers like stress, childbirth, 
infections, poor diet, lack of sleep, etc. Many epidemiological studies have
indicated that various genetic abnormalities are also critical drivers of the
onset of MS. The major risk factors of MS identified include hypovitaminosis
D while environmental protective factors include allele HLA DRB1 1501, obesity,
Epstein-Barr virus infection, sexual hormones, and smoking. Our article explores 
the correlation between the deficiency of vitamin D and the onset and progression
of MS. The study uses a systematic review methodology by researching and
reviewing scholarly articles exploring the topic. We conducted online searches of
literature on Google Scholar and PubMed using the keywords "vitamin D deficiency"
and "multiple sclerosis" and accessed the relevant secondary literature sources
for review. The variables under study included vitamin D insufficiency as the
dependent variable while MS was the independent variable. Causal variables
included environmental, genetic, and protective factors. We hypothesized that
there is indeed a correlation between vitamin D deficiency and MS. The findings
from our review indicate a strong correlation between the insufficiency of
vitamin D and the onset and progression of MS. These results are essential in
devising interventions to accomplish primary and secondary prevention of MS, as
well as integrating vitamin D supplementation in current treatment protocols for 
MS.

Copyright © 2021, Gandhi et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.18487 
PMCID: PMC8567111
PMID: 34754649 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

