
1. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2021 Nov 1;16:2983-2996. doi:
10.2147/COPD.S325211. eCollection 2021.

Alpha 1 Antitrypsin Therapy in Patients with Alpha 1 Antitrypsin Deficiency:
Perspectives from a Registry Study and Practical Considerations for
Self-Administration During the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Herth FJF(1), Sandhaus RA(2), Turner AM(3), Sucena M(4), Welte T(5), Greulich
T(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pneumology and Critical Care Medicine, University of Heidelberg,
Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, National Jewish
Health, Denver, CO, USA.
(3)Institute of Applied Health Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham,
England.
(4)Pulmonology Department, Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto, Porto,
Portugal.
(5)Department of Pulmonary and Infectious Diseases, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, Germany.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine and Pneumology, University Hospital Marburg,
Marburg, Germany.

Alpha 1 Antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is a hereditary condition characterized by 
low serum Alpha 1 Antitrypsin (AAT) levels and a predisposition towards
early-onset emphysema. Infusion of AAT is the only disease-modifying therapy that
can sufficiently raise plasma AAT levels above the putative protective threshold 
and reduce the decline in lung density loss. Several randomized controlled trials
(RCTs) and registry studies support the clinical efficacy of AAT therapy in
slowing the progression of AATD-related emphysema and improving survival
outcomes. The COVID-19 pandemic has prompted physicians to develop additional
strategies for delivering AAT therapy, which are not only more convenient for the
patient, but are "COVID-19 friendly", thereby reducing the risk of exposing these
vulnerable patients. Intravenous (IV) self-administration of AAT therapy is
likely to be beneficial in certain subgroups of patients with AATD and can remove
the need for weekly hospital visits, thereby improving independence and
well-being. Increasing the awareness of self-administration in AATD through the
development of formal guidelines and training programs is required among both
physicians and patients and will play an essential role, especially
post-COVID-19, in encouraging physicians to consider self-administration for AATD
in suitable patients. This review summarizes the benefits of AAT therapy on the
clinical endpoints of mortality and quality of life (QoL) and discusses the
benefits of self-administration therapy compared with conventional therapy
administered by a healthcare professional. In addition, this review highlights
the challenges of providing AAT therapy during the COVID-19 pandemic and the
potential considerations for its implementation thereafter.

© 2021 Herth et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S325211 
PMCID: PMC8570922
PMID: 34754184  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: RA Sandhaus has received honoraria, research
funding, and/or travel reimbursement from CSL Behring, Grifols, Vertex,
AstraZeneca, Takeda, Dicerna, Arrowhead, Inhibrx and the US National Institutes
of Health. AM Turner has received grant funding and/or honoraria from CSL
Behring, Grifols and Vertex within the last 5 years. M Sucena has received
consulting fees for lectures and participation in advisory boards from Bial,
Boehringer Ingelheim, CSL Behring, Grifols and Novartis. FJF Herth reports
personal fees from CSL, during the conduct of the study. T Greulich reports
personal fees from CSL-Behring, grants from Grifols, outside the submitted work. 
The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.

