
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 9;16(11):e0259664. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259664.
eCollection 2021.

Computer-assisted instruction versus inquiry-based learning: The importance of
working memory capacity.

Chevalère J(1), Cazenave L(1), Berthon M(1), Martinez R(2), Mazenod V(2), Borion 
MC(1)(3), Pailler D(3), Rocher N(3), Cadet R(4)(5), Lenne C(5)(6), Maïonchi-Pino 
N(1), Huguet P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Psychologie Sociale et Cognitive (LAPSCO), Université Clermont 
Auvergne et CNRS, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(2)Laboratoire d'Informatique, de Modélisation et d'Optimisation des Systèmes
(LIMOS), Université Clermont Auvergne et CNRS, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(3)Rectorat de Clermont-Ferrand, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(4)Laboratoire Activité, Connaissance, Transmission, Éducation (ACTé), Université
Clermont Auvergne, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(5)Maison pour la Science/Auvergne (MPSA), Université Clermont Auvergne,
Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(6)Laboratoire Physique et Physiologie Intégratives de l'Arbre en Environnement
Fluctuant (PIAF), Université Clermont Auvergne et INRAe, Clermont-Ferrand,
France.

The Covid-19 pandemic has led millions of students worldwide to intensify their
use of digital education. This massive change is not reflected by the scant
scientific research on the effectiveness of methods relying on digital learning
compared to other innovative and more popular methods involving face-to-face
interactions. Here, we tested the effectiveness of computer-assisted instruction 
(CAI) in Science and Technology compared to inquiry-based learning (IBL), another
modern method which, however, requires students to interact with each other in
the classroom. Our research also considered socio-cognitive factors-working
memory (WM), socioeconomic status (SES), and academic self-concept (ASC)-known to
predict academic performance but usually ignored in research on IBL and CAI. Five
hundred and nine middle-school students, a fairly high sample size compared with 
relevant studies, received either IBL or CAI for a period varying from four to
ten weeks prior to the Covid-19 events. After controlling for students' prior
knowledge and socio-cognitive factors, multilevel modelling showed that CAI was
more effective than IBL. Although CAI-related benefits were stable across
students' SES and ASC, they were particularly pronounced for those with higher WM
capacity. While indicating the need to adapt CAI for students with poorer WM,
these findings further justify the use of CAI both in normal times (without
excluding other methods) and during pandemic episodes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259664 
PMCID: PMC8577743
PMID: 34752504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.

