
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 10;16(11):e0259097. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259097.
eCollection 2021.

High variability in transmission of SARS-CoV-2 within households and implications
for control.

Toth DJA(1)(2)(3), Beams AB(1)(3), Keegan LT(1)(2), Zhang Y(1), Greene T(1),
Orleans B(1), Seegert N(4), Looney A(4), Alder SC(5), Samore MH(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt
Lake City, Utah, United States of America.
(2)Department of Veterans Affairs Salt Lake City Healthcare System, Salt Lake
City, Utah, United States of America.
(3)Department of Mathematics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United
States of America.
(4)Department of Finance, University of Utah David Eccles School of Business,
Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America.
(5)Department of Family and Preventive Medicine, University of Utah School of
Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) poses a 
high risk of transmission in close-contact indoor settings, which may include
households. Prior studies have found a wide range of household secondary attack
rates and may contain biases due to simplifying assumptions about transmission
variability and test accuracy.
METHODS: We compiled serological SARS-CoV-2 antibody test data and prior
SARS-CoV-2 test reporting from members of 9,224 Utah households. We paired these 
data with a probabilistic model of household importation and transmission. We
calculated a maximum likelihood estimate of the importation probability, mean and
variability of household transmission probability, and sensitivity and
specificity of test data. Given our household transmission estimates, we
estimated the threshold of non-household transmission required for epidemic
growth in the population.
RESULTS: We estimated that individuals in our study households had a 0.41% (95%
CI 0.32%- 0.51%) chance of acquiring SARS-CoV-2 infection outside their
household. Our household secondary attack rate estimate was 36% (27%- 48%),
substantially higher than the crude estimate of 16% unadjusted for imperfect
serological test specificity and other factors. We found evidence for high
variability in individual transmissibility, with higher probability of no
transmissions or many transmissions compared to standard models. With household
transmission at our estimates, the average number of non-household transmissions 
per case must be kept below 0.41 (0.33-0.52) to avoid continued growth of the
pandemic in Utah.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that crude estimates of household secondary
attack rate based on serology data without accounting for false positive tests
may underestimate the true average transmissibility, even when test specificity
is high. Our finding of potential high variability (overdispersion) in
transmissibility of infected individuals is consistent with characterizing
SARS-CoV-2 transmission being largely driven by superspreading from a minority of
infected individuals. Mitigation efforts targeting large households and other
locations where many people congregate indoors might curb continued spread of the
virus.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259097 
PMCID: PMC8580228
PMID: 34758042  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal’s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: DJAT and MHS report
grants from Pfizer, Inc., outside the submitted work. LTK reports grants from
Pfizer, Inc. and Becton, Dickinson and Company, outside the submitted work. TG
reports grants from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, CSL, and Vertex
Pharmaceuticals and personal fees from Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Pfizer, Inc.,
Novartis and AstraZeneca, outside the submitted work. This does not alter our
adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.

