
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 10:JVI0153521. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01535-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Two distinct mechanisms leading to loss of virological control in the rare group 
of antiretroviral therapy-na誰ve, transiently aviraemic children living with HIV.

Vieira VA(1), Adland E(1), Grayson NE(1), Csala A(1), Richards F(2), Dacon C(3), 
Athavale R(1), Tsai MH(1), D'Souza R(1), Muenchhoff M(4)(5), Bonsall D(6)(7),
Jooste P(2), Goulder PJR(1)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, Kimberley Hospital, Kimberley, South Africa.
(3)Antibody Biology Unit, Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville,
Maryland, USA.
(4)Max von Pettenkofer Institute & Gene Center, Virology, National Reference
Center for Retroviruses, LMU M端nchen, Munich, Germany.
(5)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), partner site Munich, Germany.
(6)Big Data Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre for Health Information and Discovery,
Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(7)Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom.
(8)HIV Pathogenesis Programme, Doris Duke Medical Research Institute, Nelson R
Mandela School of Medicine, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa.

HIV-specific CD8+ T-cells play a central role in immune control of adult HIV, but
their contribution in paediatric infection is less well-characterised.
Previously, we identified a group of ART-na誰ve children with persistently
undetectable plasma viraemia, termed 'elite controllers', and a second group who 
achieved aviraemia only transiently. To investigate the mechanisms of failure to 
maintain aviraemia, we characterized in three transient aviraemics (TAs), each of
whom expressed the disease-protective HLA-B*81:01, longitudinal HIV-specific
T-cell activity and viral sequences. In two TAs, a CD8+ T-cell response targeting
the immunodominant epitope TPQDLNTML ('Gag-TL9') was associated with viral
control, followed by viral rebound and the emergence of escape variants with
lower replicative capacity. Both TAs mounted variant-specific responses, but only
at low functional avidity, resulting in immunological progression. By contrast,
in TA-3, intermittent viraemic episodes followed aviraemia without virus escape
or a diminished CD4+ T-cell count. High quality and magnitude of the CD8+ T-cell 
response was associated with aviraemia. We therefore identify two distinct
mechanisms of loss of viral control. In one scenario, CD8+ T-cell responses
initially cornered low replicative capacity escape variants, but with
insufficient avidity to prevent viraemia and disease progression. In the other,
loss of viral control was associated neither with virus escape nor progression,
but with a decrease in the quality of the CD8+ T-cell response, followed by
recovery of viral control in association with improved antiviral response. These 
data suggest the potential for a consistently strong and polyfunctional antiviral
response to achieve long-term viral control without escape. IMPORTANCE Very early
initiation of antiretroviral therapy (ART) in paediatric HIV infection offers a
unique opportunity to limit the size and diversity of the viral reservoir.
However, only exceptionally is ART alone sufficient to achieve remission.
Additional interventions are therefore required that likely include contributions
from host immunity. The HIV-specific T-cell response plays a central role in
immune control of adult HIV, often mediated through protective alleles such as
HLA-B*57/58:01/81:01. However, due to the tolerogenic and type 2 biased immune
response in early life, HLA-I-mediated immune suppression of viraemia is seldom
observed in children. We describe a rare group of HLA-B*81:01-positive, ART-na誰ve
children who achieved aviraemia, albeit only transiently, and investigate the
role of the CD8+ T-cell response in the establishment and loss of viral control. 
We identify a mechanism by which the HIV-specific response can achieve viraemic
control without viral escape, that can be explored in strategies to achieve
remission.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01535-21 
PMID: 34757843 

