
1. Health Technol Assess. 2021 Nov;25(61):1-102. doi: 10.3310/hta25610.

Feasibility and design of a trial regarding the optimal mode of delivery for
preterm birth: the CASSAVA multiple methods study.

Norman JE(1), Lawton J(2), Stock SJ(2), Siassakos D(3), Norrie J(4), Hallowell
N(5), Chowdhry S(6), Hart RI(2), Odd D(7), Brewin J(8), Culshaw L(9), Lee-Davey
C(9), Tebbutt H(10), Whyte S(11).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.
(2)Usher Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(3)Institute for Women's Health, University College London, London, UK.
(4)Edinburgh Clinical Trials Unit, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(5)Ethox Centre and Wellcome Centre for Ethics & Humanities, Nuffield Department 
of Population Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(6)School of Health Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK.
(7)Division of Population Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Cardiff,
Cardiff, UK.
(8)Tommy's, London, UK.
(9)Bliss, London, UK.
(10)Edinburgh, UK.
(11)Tommy's Centre for Maternal and Fetal Health, MRC Centre for Maternal and
Fetal Health, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.

BACKGROUND: Around 60,000 babies are born preterm (prior to 37 weeks' gestation) 
each year in the UK. There is little evidence on the optimal birth mode (vaginal 
or caesarean section).
OBJECTIVE: The overall aim of the CASSAVA project was to determine if a trial to 
define the optimal mode of preterm birth could be carried out and, if so,
determine what sort of trial could be conducted and how it could best be
performed. We aimed to determine the specific groups of preterm women and babies 
for whom there are uncertainties about the best planned mode of birth, and if
there would be willingness to recruit to, and participate in, a randomised trial 
to address some, but not all, of these uncertainties. This project was conducted 
in response to a Heath Technology Assessment programme commissioning call (17/22 
'Mode of delivery for preterm infants').
METHODS: We conducted clinician and patient surveys (n = 224 and n = 379,
respectively) to identify current practice and opinion, and a consensus survey
and Delphi workshop (n = 76 and n = 22 participants, respectively) to inform the 
design of a hypothetical clinical trial. The protocol for this clinical
trial/vignette was used in telephone interviews with clinicians (n = 24) and in
focus groups with potential participants (n = 13).
RESULTS: Planned sample size and data saturation was achieved for all groups
except for focus groups with participants, as this had to be curtailed because of
the COVID-19 pandemic and data saturation was not achieved. There was broad
agreement from parents and health-care professionals that a trial is needed. The 
clinician survey demonstrated a variety of practice and opinion. The parent
survey suggested that women and their families generally preferred vaginal birth 
at later gestations and caesarean section for preterm infants. The interactive
workshop and Delphi consensus process confirmed the need for more evidence (hence
the case for a trial) and provided rich information on what a future trial should
entail. It was agreed that any trial should address the areas with most
uncertainty, including the management of women at 26-32 weeks' gestation, with
either spontaneous preterm labour (cephalic presentation) or where preterm birth 
was medically indicated. Clear themes around the challenges inherent in
conducting any trial emerged, including the concept of equipoise itself. Specific
issues were as follows: different clinicians and participants would be in
equipoise for each clinical scenario, effective conduct of the trial would
require appropriate resources and expertise within the hospital conducting the
trial, potential participants would welcome information on the trial well before 
the onset of labour and minority ethnic groups would require tailored approaches.
CONCLUSION: Given the lack of evidence and the variation of practice and opinion 
in this area, and having listened to clinicians and potential participants, we
conclude that a trial should be conducted and the outlined challenges resolved.
FUTURE WORK: The CASSAVA project could be used to inform the design of a
randomised trial and indicates how such a trial could be carried out. Any future 
trial would benefit from a pilot with qualitative input and a study within a
trial to inform optimal recruitment.
LIMITATIONS: Certainty that a trial could be conducted can be determined only
when it is attempted.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Current Controlled Trials ISRCTN12295730.
FUNDING: This project was funded by the National Institute for Health Research
(NIHR) Health Technology Assessment programme and will be published in full in
Health Technology Assessment; Vol. 25, No. 61. See the NIHR Journals Library
website for further project information.

plain-language-summary: Around 60,000 babies are born preterm each year in the
UK. We do not know what the safest mode of birth is for these babies. Birth
options include a vaginal birth or a caesarean section (which involves an
operation for the mother). Normally, the ideal way to find out what clinical
options are best is to carry out a ‘randomised trial’ in which participants are
allocated to a particular treatment group (in this case, vaginal birth or
caesarean section) by chance. It is not clear if women who have their babies
preterm would want to take part in such a trial or that the clinicians looking
after the women would be happy to ask them to, as previous trials have failed to 
recruit sufficient participants. The purpose of the CASSAVA research project was 
to find out what people think is the best and safest method of delivering preterm
babies, their views on doing a research trial and what sort of research trial
could be carried out. We conducted a survey asking clinicians and women their
views. We gathered clinicians and women together to discuss and agree the key
questions for a trial to answer. We then developed a protocol (plan) for a
possible trial. Using this trial protocol, we conducted telephone interviews with
clinicians, asking them if they would be willing to be involved and if they would
be willing to ask pregnant women to participate. We also conducted focus groups
with women, using a vignette (storyboard) about a possible trial. We found that
there is a lot of uncertainty about the best way for preterm babies to be born.
Clinicians and women broadly agreed that it would be good to resolve this
uncertainty through a trial. We were able to identify some areas of the greatest 
uncertainty where clinicians and women would consider participating in a study.
We gained a lot of useful information about how we could best set up a trial and 
support clinicians and women to get involved.
DOI: 10.3310/hta25610 
PMID: 34751645  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

