
1. Clin Infect Dis. 2021 Nov 10. pii: ciab940. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciab940. [Epub ahead
of print]

SARS-CoV-2 reinfection associates with unstable housing and occurs in the
presence of antibodies.

Bean DJ(1), Monroe J(2), Turcinovic J(1), Moreau Y(2), Connor JH(1), Sagar
M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: The factors associated with severe acute respiratory coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) reinfection remain poorly defined.
METHODS: We identified patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection and at least one repeat
reverse transcription (RT) - polymerase chain reaction (PCR) result a minimum of 
90 days after the initial positive test and prior to January 21, 2021. Those with
a repeat positive test were deemed to have reinfection (n = 75), and those with
only negative tests were classified as convalescents (n = 1,594). Demographics,
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) severity, and treatment histories were
obtained from the Boston Medical Center electronic medical record. Humoral
responses were analyzed using SARS-CoV-2 specific enzyme linked immunosorbent
assays and pseudovirus neutralizations in subset of reinfection (n = 16) and
convalescent samples (n = 32). Univariate, multivariate, and time to event
analyses were used to identify associations.
RESULTS: Individuals with reinfection had more frequent testing at shorter
intervals compared to the convalescents. Unstable housing was associated with
more than two-fold greater chance of reinfection. Pre-existing comorbidities and 
COVID-19 severity after the initial infection were not associated with
reinfection. SARS-CoV-2 IgG levels and pseudovirus neutralization were not
different within the early weeks after primary infection and at a time-point at
least 90 days later in the two groups. In the convalescents, but not in those
with reinfection, the late as compared to early humoral responses were
significantly higher.
CONCLUSIONS: Reinfection associates with unstable housing, which is likely a
marker for virus exposure, and reinfection occurs in the presence of SARS-CoV-2
antibodies.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciab940 
PMID: 34755830 

