
1. J Med Internet Res. 2021 Nov 10;23(11):e26310. doi: 10.2196/26310.

Cancer Communication and User Engagement on Chinese Social Media: Content
Analysis and Topic Modeling Study.

Chen L(1), Wang P(2), Ma X(3), Wang X(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Journalism and Communication, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
(2)School of Media and Communication, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China.
(3)Department of Communication, University of Maryland, Maryland, MD, United
States.
(4)Department of Media and Communication, City University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong, China.

BACKGROUND: Cancer ranks among the most serious public health challenges
worldwide. In China-the world's most populous country-about one-quarter of the
population consists of people with cancer. Social media has become an important
platform that the Chinese public uses to express opinions.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated cancer-related discussions on the Chinese social media
platform Weibo (Sina Corporation) to identify cancer topics that generate the
highest levels of user engagement.
METHODS: We conducted topic modeling and regression analyses to analyze and
visualize cancer-related messages on Weibo and to examine the relationships
between different cancer topics and user engagement (ie, the number of retweets, 
comments, and likes).
RESULTS: Our results revealed that cancer communication on Weibo has generally
focused on the following six topics: social support, cancer treatment, cancer
prevention, women's cancers, smoking and skin cancer, and other topics.
Discussions about social support and cancer treatment attracted the highest
number of users and received the greatest numbers of retweets, comments, and
likes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our investigation of cancer-related communication on Weibo provides 
valuable insights into public concerns about cancer and can help guide the
development of health campaigns in social media.

©Liang Chen, Pianpian Wang, Xin Ma, Xiaohui Wang. Originally published in the
Journal of Medical Internet Research (https://www.jmir.org), 10.11.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/26310 
PMID: 34757320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

