
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 10:JVI0155021. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01550-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Synergetic contributions of viral VP1, VP3, and 3C to activation of the
AKT-AMPK-MAPK-MTOR signaling pathway for Seneca Valley virus-induced autophagy.

Song J(1), Hou L(2)(3), Quan R(1), Wang D(1), Jiang H(1), Liu J(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory for Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases in
Livestock and Poultry, Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine,
Beijing Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China.
(3)Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal
Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China.

Seneca Valley virus (SVV), a member of the Picornaviridae family, can activate
autophagy via the PERK and ATF6 unfolded protein response pathways and facilitate
viral replication; however, the precise molecular mechanism that regulates
SVV-induced autophagy remains unclear. Here, we revealed that SVV infection
inhibited the phosphorylation of mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase (MTOR)
and activated phosphorylation of the serine/threonine kinase AKT. We observed
that activating adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK),
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK), and p38 MAPK signaling by SVV infection promoted autophagy induction and 
viral replication; additionally, the SVV-induced autophagy was independent of the
ULK1 complex. We further evaluated the role of viral protein(s) in the
AKT-AMPK-MAPK-MTOR pathway during SVV-induced autophagy and found that VP1
induced autophagy, as evidenced by puncta colocalization with
microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 (LC3) in the cytoplasm and
enhanced LC3-II levels. This might be associated with the interaction of VP1 with
sequestosome 1 and promoting its degradation. In addition, the expression of VP1 
enhanced AKT phosphorylation and AMPK phosphorylation, while MTOR phosphorylation
was inhibited. These results indicate that VP1 induces autophagy by the
AKT-AMPK-MTOR pathway. Additionally, expression of VP3 and 3C was found to
activate autophagy induction via the ERK1/2 MAPK-MTOR and p38 MAPK-MTOR pathway. 
Taken together, our data suggest that SVV-induced autophagy has finely-tuned
molecular mechanisms in which VP1, VP3, and 3C contribute synergistically to the 
AKT-AMPK-MAPK-MTOR pathway. IMPORTANCE Autophagy is an essential cellular
catabolic process to sustain normal physiological processes that modulated by a
variety of signaling pathways. Invading virus is a stimulus to induce autophagy
that regulates viral replication. It has been demonstrated that Seneca Valley
virus (SVV) induced autophagy via the PERK and ATF6 unfolded protein response
pathways. However, the precise signaling pathway involved in autophagy is still
poorly understood. In this study, our results demonstrated that viral proteins
VP1, VP3, and 3C contribute synergistically to activation of the
AKT-AMPK-MAPK-MTOR signaling pathway for SVV-induced autophagy. These findings
reveal systemically the finely-tuned mocleular mechanism of SVV-induced
autophagy, thereby facilitating to deeper insight into the development of
potential control strategies against SVV infection.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01550-21 
PMID: 34757844 

