
1. Front Genet. 2021 Oct 25;12:735489. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.735489. eCollection
2021.

Integrating CRISPR-Cas and Next Generation Sequencing in Plant Virology.

Mushtaq M(1), Dar AA(2), Basu U(3), Bhat BA(4), Mir RA(5), Vats S(6), Dar MS(7), 
Tyagi A(8), Ali S(8), Bansal M(9), Rai GK(2), Wani SH(10).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Germplasm Evaluation, ICAR-National Bureau of Plant Genetic
Resources, New Delhi, India.
(2)School of Biotechnology, Sher-e-Kashmir University of Agricultural Sciences
and Technology of Jammu, Jammu, India.
(3)Division of Plant Pathology, Sher-e-Kashmir University of Agricultural
Sciences and Technology of Jammu, Jammu, India.
(4)Department of Bioresources, University of Kashmir, Srinagar, India.
(5)Department of Biotechnology, School of Biosciences and Biotechnology, BGSB
University, Rajouri, India.
(6)Department of Agricultural Biotechnology, National Agri-Food Biotechnology
Institute (NABI), Mohali, India.
(7)Division of Plant Pathology, Sher-e-Kashmir University of Agricultural
Sciences and Technology of Kashmir, Srinagar, India.
(8)Department of Biotechnology, Yeungnam University, Gyeongsan, South Korea.
(9)School of Agricultural Biotechnology, Punjab Agricultural University,
Ludhiana, India.
(10)Mountain Research Centre for Field Crops, Sher-e-Kashmir University of
Agricultural Sciences and Technology of Kashmir, Srinagar, India.

Plant pathology has been revolutionized by the emergence and intervention of
next-generation sequencing technologies (NGS) which provide a fast,
cost-effective, and reliable diagnostic for any class of pathogens. NGS has made 
tremendous advancements in the area of research and diagnostics of plant
infecting viromes and has bridged plant virology with other advanced research
fields like genome editing technologies. NGS in a broader perspective holds the
potential for plant health improvement by diagnosing and mitigating the new or
unusual symptoms caused by novel/unidentified viruses. CRISPR-based genome
editing technologies can enable rapid engineering of efficient viral/viroid
resistance by directly targeting specific nucleotide sites of plant viruses and
viroids. Critical genes such as eIf (iso) 4E or eIF4E have been targeted via the 
CRISPR platform to produce plants resistant to single-stranded RNA (ssRNA)
viruses. CRISPR/Cas-based multi-target DNA or RNA tests can be used for rapid and
accurate diagnostic assays for plant viruses and viroids. Integrating NGS with
CRISPR-based genome editing technologies may lead to a paradigm shift in
combating deadly disease-causing plant viruses/viroids at the genomic level.
Furthermore, the newly discovered CRISPR/Cas13 system has unprecedented potential
in plant viroid diagnostics and interference. In this review, we have highlighted
the application and importance of sequencing technologies on covering the viral
genomes for precise modulations. This review also provides a snapshot vision of
emerging developments in NGS technologies for the characterization of plant
viruses and their potential utilities, advantages, and limitations in plant viral
diagnostics. Furthermore, some of the notable advances like novel virus-inducible
CRISPR/Cas9 system that confers virus resistance with no off-target effects have 
been discussed.

Copyright © 2021 Mushtaq, Dar, Basu, Bhat, Mir, Vats, Dar, Tyagi, Ali, Bansal,
Rai and Wani.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2021.735489 
PMCID: PMC8572880
PMID: 34759957 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

