
1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2021 Oct 29. pii: S1198-743X(21)00616-9. doi:
10.1016/j.cmi.2021.10.015. [Epub ahead of print]

Transmission of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) from
pre and asymptomatic infected individuals: a systematic review.

Jefferson T(1), Spencer EA(2), Brassey J(3), Onakpoya IJ(4), Rosca EC(5),
Plüddemann A(2), Evans DH(6), Conly JM(7), Heneghan CJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department for Continuing Education, University of Oxford, UK. Electronic
address: tom.jefferson@conted.ox.ac.uk.
(2)Centre for Evidence Based Medicine, Nuffield Department of Primary Care Health
Sciences, University of Oxford, UK.
(3)Trip Database Ltd, Newport, UK.
(4)Department for Continuing Education, University of Oxford, UK.
(5)Victor Babes University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
(6)Li Ka Shing Institute of Virology and Deptartment of Medical Microbiology &
Immunology, University of Alberta, Canada.
(7)Departments of Medicine, Microbiology, Immunology & Infectious Diseases, and
Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Synder Institute for Chronic Diseases and
O'Brien Institute for Public Health, Cumming School of Medicine, University of
Calgary and Alberta Health Services, Calgary, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The role of SARS-Cov-2-infected persons who develop symptoms after
testing (presymptomatics) or not at all (asymptomatics) in the pandemic spread is
unknown.
OBJECTIVES: To determine infectiousness and probable contribution of asymptomatic
persons (at the time of testing) to pandemic SARS-CoV-2 spread.
DATA SOURCES: LitCovid, medRxiv, Google Scholar, and WHO Covid-19 databases (to
31 March 2021) and references in included studies.
STUDY ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA: Studies with a proven or hypothesized transmission
chain based either on serial PCR cycle threshold readings and/or viral culture
and/or gene sequencing, with adequate follow-up.
PARTICIPANTS: People exposed to SARS-CoV-2 within 2-14 days to index asymptomatic
(at time of observation) infected individuals.
INTERVENTIONS: Reliability of symptom and signs was assessed within contemporary 
knowledge; transmission likelihood was assessed using adapted causality criteria.
METHODS: Systematic review. We contacted all included studies' corresponding
authors requesting further details.
RESULTS: We included 18 studies from a diverse setting with substantial
methodological variation (this field lacks standardized methodology). At initial 
testing, prevalence of asymptomatic cases was 12.5-100%. Of these, 6-100% were
later determined to be presymptomatic, this proportion varying according to
setting, methods of case ascertainment and population. Nursing/care home
facilities reported high rates of presymptomatic: 50-100% (n = 3 studies).
Fourteen studies were classified as high risk of, and four studies as at moderate
risk of symptom ascertainment bias. High-risk studies may be less likely to
distinguish between presymptomatic and asymptomatic cases. Six asymptomatic
studies and four presymptomatic studies reported culturing infectious virus; data
were too sparse to determine infectiousness duration. Three studies provided
evidence of possible and three of probable/likely asymptomatic transmission; five
studies provided possible and two probable/likely presymptomatic SARS-CoV-2
transmission.
CONCLUSION: High-quality studies provide probable evidence of SARS-CoV-2
transmission from presymptomatic and asymptomatic individuals, with highly
variable estimated transmission rates.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmi.2021.10.015 
PMCID: PMC8555342
PMID: 34757116 

