
1. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2021 Dec 1;34(6):627-634. doi:
10.1097/QCO.0000000000000794.

Beyond antivirals: virus-specific T-cell immunotherapy for BK virus haemorrhagic 
cystitis and JC virus progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy.

Nelson AS(1)(2), Yalamarthi N(3), Yong MK(4)(5)(6), Blyth E(3)(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Kids Cancer Centre, Sydney Children's Hospital Randwick, Sydney Children's
Hospital's Network.
(2)School of Women's and Children's Health, University of New South Wales Faculty
of Medicine.
(3)Sydney Medical School, Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of Sydney,
Sydney, New South Wales.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne.
(5)Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, The University of Melbourne,
Parkville.
(6)National Centre for Infections in Cancer, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre,
Melbourne, Victoria.
(7)Westmead Institute for Medical Research, University of Sydney.
(8)Blood Transplant and Cell Therapies Program, Department of Haematology,
Westmead Hospital, Westmead, New South Wales, Australia.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The clinical manifestations of the polyomaviruses BK and JC in
immunocompromised patients include BK virus (BKV) induced haemorrhagic cystitis
and nephropathy, and JC virus (JCV) associated progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy (PML) and are typically a consequence of impaired adaptive
immunity in the host. To date, little clinical success has been achieved with
antiviral agents or other drug therapies to treat these conditions. Here we
review the methods and outcomes of the most recent clinical studies utilising
adoptive immunotherapy with BK and/or JC virus-specific T-cells (VST) as either
prophylaxis or treatment alternatives.
RECENT FINDINGS: In the last 12-18 months, several clinical trials have been
published in the post-haemopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) setting showing
good clinical success with the use of VST for treatment of BK viremia ±
haemorrhagic cystitis. Between 82 and 100% clinical response has been observed in
haemorrhagic cystitis using either third-party or donor-derived VST. The therapy 
was well tolerated with few cases of graft versus host disease in HSCT
recipients, but immune mediated renal allograft loss was observed in one renal
transplant recipient. Studies using BKV/JCV VST to treat PML are hindered by few 
patients who are sufficiently stable to receive VST. In a condition that
otherwise carries such poor prognosis, VST were associated with clearance of JC
virus, clinical and radiological improvement in some patients. Immune
reconstitution inflammatory syndrome was a noted adverse event.
SUMMARY: Restoration of BK and JC virus immunity using VST immunotherapy has
shown good clinical outcomes in BKV associated infections. Further evaluation
with the administration of VST earlier in the course of disease is warranted for 
the treatment of BKV associated nephropathy in renal allograft and in JCV PML. In
both indications, larger cohorts and standardisation of dosing and outcome
measures would be of benefit.

Copyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/QCO.0000000000000794 
PMID: 34751182 

