
1. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2021 Nov 8;286:99-106. doi: 10.3233/SHTI210646.

Assessing the Usability of a Tumor Dashboard for Multidisciplinary Care Teams for
First Time Users; First Exploration of a Comparative Participatory Cognitive
Walkthrough to Show Mismatches in Cognitive Models.

Ter Beek E(1), Kos M(2), Streppel M(2), Dusseljee-Peute L(1), van Oijen M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department Medical Informatics, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam University 
Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department Oncology, Amsterdam University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, multidisciplinary team (MDT) meetings have to
switch from physical to digital meetings. However, the technology they currently 
use to facilitate these meetings can sometimes be lacking, therefore many
software companies have developed new software to ease our new digital workspace.
In this study, we propose a new method, a comparative participatory cognitive
walkthrough, which can show mismatches in cognitive models. To test our method,
we tested the compatibility of EPIC EMR (EPIC Care) and the NAVIFY Tumor Board
for preparing MDT meetings. The identified mismatches are categorized in the
HOT-fit model by Yusof et al, a common way to evaluate if a healthcare
information system fits with the healthcare professionals and the organization.
In total, 16 mismatches were identified. These mismatches were discussed in a
feedback session with an implementation manager of the NAVIFY Tumor Board. The
proposed method seems to be a fast and cheap method to gain useful insights in
how well new software matches with the software currently in use, by comparing
the cognitive models in place when performing tasks involved with specific
scenarios. The identified aspects can be of use for the development and
adaptation of the new software, as well as provide guidelines on which aspects to
focus on when training healthcare professionals to use the new software to have a
smooth transition of software.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI210646 
PMID: 34755698  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

