
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 10:JVI0177421. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01774-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Structurally conserved domains between flavivirus and alphavirus fusion
glycoproteins contribute to replication and infectious virion production.

Rangel MV(1), Catanzaro N(2), Thannickal SA(1), Crotty KA(1), Noval MG(1),
Johnson KEE(3), Ghedin E(3)(4), Lazear HM(2), Stapleford KA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, New York University Grossman School of Medicine,
New York, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(3)Center for Genomics & Systems Biology, Department of Biology, New York
University, New York, New York, USA.
(4)Systems Genomics Section, Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA.

Alphaviruses and flaviviruses have class II fusion glycoproteins that are
essential for virion assembly and infectivity. Importantly, the tip of domain II 
is structurally conserved between the alphavirus and flavivirus fusion proteins, 
yet whether these structural similarities between virus families translate to
functional similarities is unclear. Using in vivo evolution of Zika virus (ZIKV),
we identified several novel emerging variants including an envelope glycoprotein 
variant in β-strand c (V114M) of domain II. We have previously shown that the
analogous β-strand c and the ij loop, located in the tip of domain II of the
alphavirus E1 glycoprotein, are important for infectivity. This led us to
hypothesize that flavivirus E β-strand c also contributes to flavivirus
infection. We generated this ZIKV glycoprotein variant and found that while it
had little impact on infection in mosquitoes, it reduced replication in human
cells and mice, and increased virus sensitivity to ammonium chloride, as seen for
alphaviruses. In light of these results and given our alphavirus ij loop studies,
we mutated a conserved alanine at the tip of the flavivirus ij loop to valine to 
test its effect on ZIKV infectivity. Interestingly, this mutation inhibited
infectious virion production of ZIKV and yellow fever virus, but not West Nile
virus. Together, these studies show that shared domains of the alphavirus and
flavivirus class II fusion glycoproteins harbor structurally analogous residues
that are functionally important and contribute to virus infection in vivo.
Importance Arboviruses are a significant global public health threat, yet there
are no antivirals targeting these viruses. This problem is in part due to our
lack of knowledge on the molecular mechanisms involved in the arbovirus life
cycle. In particular, virus entry and assembly are essential processes in the
virus life cycle and steps that can be targeted for the development of antiviral 
therapies. Therefore, understanding common, fundamental mechanisms used by
different arboviruses for entry and assembly is essential. In this study, we show
that flavivirus and alphavirus residues located in structurally conserved and
analogous regions of the class II fusion proteins contribute to common mechanisms
of entry, dissemination, and infectious virion production. These studies
highlight how class II fusion proteins function and provide novel targets for
development of antivirals.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01774-21 
PMID: 34757841 

