
1. Virus Evol. 2021 Jun 8;7(2):veab056. doi: 10.1093/ve/veab056. eCollection 2021.

Increased virulence of Italian infectious hematopoietic necrosis virus (IHNV)
associated with the emergence of new strains.

Abbadi M(1), Gastaldelli M(1), Pascoli F(1), Zamperin G(1), Buratin A(1), Bedendo
G(1), Toffan A(1), Panzarin V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale delle Venezie, Viale dell'Università 10,
35020, Legnaro, Padova, Italy.

Infectious hematopoietic necrosis virus (IHNV) is the causative agent of IHN
triggering a systemic syndrome in salmonid fish. Although IHNV has always been
associated with low levels of mortality in Italian trout farming industries, in
the last years trout farmers have experienced severe disease outbreaks. However, 
the observed increasing virulence of IHNV is still based on empirical evidence
due to the poor and often confounding information from the field. Virulence
characterization of a selection of sixteen Italian isolates was performed through
in vivo challenge of juvenile rainbow trout to confirm field evidence. The
virulence of each strain was firstly described in terms of cumulative mortality
and survival probability estimated by Kaplan-Meier curves. Furthermore,
parametric survival models were applied to analyze the mortality rate profiles.
Hence, it was possible to characterize the strain-specific mortality peaks and to
relate their topology to virulence and mortality. Indeed, a positive correlation 
between maximum mortality probability and virulence was observed for all the
strains. Results also indicate that more virulent is the strain, the earliest and
narrowest is the mortality peak. Additionally, intra-host viral quantification
determined in dead animals showed a significant correlation between viral
replication and virulence. Whole-genome phylogeny conducted to determine whether 
there was a relation between virulence phenotype and IHNV genetics evidenced no
clear clustering according to phenotype. Moreover, a root-to-tip analysis based
on genetic distances and sampling date of Italian IHNV isolates highlighted a
relevant temporal signal indicating an evolving nature of the virus, over time,
with the more virulent strains being the more recent ones. This study provides
the first systematic characterization of Italian IHNV's virulence. Overall
results confirm field data and point out an abrupt increase in IHNV virulence,
with strains from 2015-2019 showing moderate to high virulence in rainbow trout. 
Further investigations are needed in order to extensively clarify the relation
between evolution and virulence of IHNV and investigate the genetic determinants 
of virulence of this viral species in rainbow trout.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/ve/veab056 
PMCID: PMC8570149
PMID: 34754510 

