
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Nov 10:e0066821. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.00668-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

Culture-Independent Detection of Poliovirus in Stool Samples by Direct RNA
Extraction.

Harrington C(1), Sun H(1), Jeffries-Miles S(1), Gerloff N(1), Mandelbaum M(1),
Pang H(2), Collins N(3), Burns CC(1), Vega E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Viral Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and
Preventiongrid.416738.f, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(2)Cherokee Nation Assurance, contracting agency to the Division of Viral
Diseases, Arlington, Virginia, USA.
(3)IHRC, Inc., contracting agency to the Division of Viral Diseases, Atlanta,
Georgia, USA.

Laboratory surveillance for poliovirus (PV) relies on virus isolation by cell
culture to identify PV in stool specimens from acute flaccid paralysis (AFP)
cases. Although this method successfully identifies PV, it is time-consuming and 
necessitates the additional biorisk of growing live virus in an increasingly
polio-free world. To reduce the risk of culturing PV, the Global Polio Laboratory
Network (GPLN) must switch to culture-independent diagnostic methods with
sensitivity at least equivalent to that of cell culture procedures. Five
commercial nucleic acid extraction kits and one enrichment method were tested for
PV extraction efficiency. RNA yield was measured using real-time reverse
transcription (RT)-PCR. Based on greater RNA yield, compared with the other kits,
the Quick-RNA viral kit was selected for further testing and was optimized using 
an RNA extraction procedure for stool suspensions. RNA extraction was
retrospectively tested with 182 stool samples that had previously tested positive
for PVs, in parallel with the standard GPLN virus isolation algorithm. After
virus isolation or RNA extraction, real-time RT-PCR assays were performed. RNA
extraction was significantly more sensitive than virus isolation (McNemar's test,
P < 0.001). Thereafter, the RNA extraction method was tested in parallel for 202 
prospective samples; RNA extraction and virus isolation were not significantly
different from each other (McNemar's test, P = 0.13). Direct RNA extraction was
noninferior to current cell culture methods for detecting PV in stool samples.
Our results show that direct RNA extraction can make downstream manipulation
safer and can reduce the risk of accidental posteradication viral release. The
method is amenable to implementation in a wide variety of polio laboratories.
IMPORTANCE Successfully identifying poliovirus from acute flaccid paralysis (AFP)
cases is a vital role of the Global Polio Laboratory Network to achieve the goals
of the Global Polio Eradication Initiative. Currently, laboratory surveillance
relies on virus isolation by cell culture to test for PV present in stool
samples. Although this method can identify polioviruses, laboratories must switch
to culture-independent methods to reduce the risk associated with growing live
viruses in a soon-to-be polio-free world. By implementing this streamlined
method, in combination with real-time RT-PCR, laboratories can quickly screen for
and type polioviruses of programmatic importance to support the final stages of
global polio eradication.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.00668-21 
PMCID: PMC8579935
PMID: 34756088 

