
1. Geohealth. 2021 Nov 1;5(11):e2021GH000461. doi: 10.1029/2021GH000461. eCollection
2021 Nov.

Population Vulnerability to the SARS-CoV-2 Virus Infection. A County-Level
Geographical-Methodological Approach in Romania.

Mitrică B(1), Mocanu I(1), Grigorescu I(2), Dumitraşcu M(3), Pistol A(4), Damian 
N(2), Şerban PR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Human Geography and Regional Development Department Institute of Geography
Romanian Academy Bucharest Romania.
(2)Environmental Geography and GIS Department Institute of Geography Romanian
Academy Bucharest Romania.
(3)Physical Geography Department Institute of Geography Romanian Academy
Bucharest Romania.
(4)National Institute of Public Health Bucharest Romania.

The assessment and identification of risk/vulnerable groups and risk factors are 
vital elements that can help quantify the pandemic potential of the SARS-CoV-2
virus in order to plan prevention and treatment measures. The aim of the study is
to identify a methodological approach of population vulnerability to the
SARS-CoV-2 virus infection. The study identifies reliable data sources and sets
up a unitary database with statistical variables, quantitative and qualitative
indicators with potential for being updated and improved. The analysis takes into
account a number of variables/indicators (e.g., elderly persons, population
without physician care, number of people suffering from cardiovascular diseases, 
number of people suffering from respiratory diseases, dwellings not connected to 
the public water supply network, no. of medical staff, number of COVID-19
hospitals, PCR testing laboratories, number of vaccinated persons) grouped into
the key vulnerability components: exposure, sensitivity, coping capacity and
adaptive capacity. They allowed the computation of the final Index of Population 
Vulnerability to the SARS-CoV-2 virus infection and the mapping of different
dimensions of vulnerability. The study was performed using the statistical data
available at NUTS3/County level provided by different institutions (e.g., the
Ministry of Health, the National Institute of Public Health, the Strategic
Communication Group, and the National Institute of Statistics). The mapping of
the different degrees of vulnerability could solve a problem of visibility for
possible areas with vulnerable population, but also a problem of communication
between different institutional health and administrative levels, as well as
between all of them and the local communities and/or professionals.

© 2021 The Authors. GeoHealth published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of
American Geophysical Union.

DOI: 10.1029/2021GH000461 
PMCID: PMC8556730
PMID: 34755001 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest
relevant to this study.

