
1. J Mycol Med. 2021 Oct 29;32(1):101213. doi: 10.1016/j.mycmed.2021.101213. [Epub
ahead of print]

Tuberculosis and neurocryptococcosis by Cryptococcus neoformans molecular type
VNI in A non-HIV patient: A comorbidities case report.

Oliveira EP(1), Inácio CP(1), de Freitas JF(1), Valeriano CAT(1), Neves RP(1),
Sobrinho PM(2), Lima-Neto RG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Post-Graduation Program in Biology of Fungi, Department de Mycology, Federal
University of Pernambuco (UFPE), Recife, Pernambuco, Brazil.
(2)Correia Picanço Hospital for Infectious and Contagious Diseases, Department of
Health, Pernambuco State, Brazil.
(3)Post-Graduation Program in Biology of Fungi, Department de Mycology, Federal
University of Pernambuco (UFPE), Recife, Pernambuco, Brazil; Department of
Tropical Medicine, UFPE, Recife, Pernambuco, Brazil. Electronic address:
reginaldo.limant@ufpe.br.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis, which is responsible for tuberculosis (TB) and
Cryptococcus sp. responsible for cryptococcosis, are pathogenic microorganisms
that especially affect patients infected with the human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV). Both diseases present similar classic symptoms, which makes diagnosis and 
treatment consequently difficult. To our knowledge, a few reported cases of M.
tuberculosis and Cryptococcus sp. co-infection in non-HIV patients exist. This
study reports a TB and neurocryptococcosis (NC) comorbidity case in a patient who
had no clinical or serological evidence of HIV-compromised immunity. A
49-year-old male patient, a farmer with a low education level, previously
diagnosed with TB and was undergoing treatment for a month when he presented
progressive headaches, fever, drowsiness and photosensitivity, a stiff neck and a
positive Lasègue test. During hospitalization, the patient was also diagnosed
with NC through cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis, which revealed the presence
of capsulated yeasts by contrast with india ink. Following the yeast isolation,
proteomic and molecular analyzes were performed. The patient received antifungal 
therapy in parallel with TB treatment, which caused complications and had to be
modified twice. However, after three months of hospitalization the patient was
discharged. Tuberculosis and cryptococcosis co-infection is a clinical and
laboratory challenge, often leading to a delay in diagnosis. In this paper we
emphasize the need to understand these infectious comorbidities in non-HIV
patients from South America, since the few cases reported in the literature are
from studies conducted in the United States and China.

Copyright © 2021 SFMM. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mycmed.2021.101213 
PMID: 34758424 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no conflict of interest.

