
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Nov 10:e0065121. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.00651-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

Positive and Negative Ions Potently Inhibit the Viability of Airborne
Gram-Positive and Gram-Negative Bacteria.

Comini S(1), Mandras N(1), Iannantuoni MR(1), Menotti F(1), Musumeci AG(1),
Piersigilli G(1), Allizond V(1), Banche G(#)(1), Cuffini AM(#)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Pediatrics, University of Torino, Turin,
Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

Positive and negative ions (PAIs and NAIs, respectively) generated by air
ionizers curb indoor spread of airborne pathogens through cellular oxidative
damage. Thus, here, we asked whether ion exposure of Staphylococcus aureus and
Escherichia coli bacteria-either plated on agar or trapped in air filters-would
affect their viability and whether this effect would be influenced by variations 
in bacterial type and load, action area, distance from the ion generator,
exposure time, or filter type. We selected these two vegetative bacterium species
because, besides being representative of Gram-positive and Gram-negative strains,
respectively, they are widely recognized as the two most common airborne
pathogens. We observed a robust ion inhibitory effect on the viability of free
bacteria regardless of the experimental condition employed. Specifically, 12-h
ion exposure of plated S. aureus and E. coli, at either 5 cm or 10 cm from the
ion source, reduced bacterial viability by ∼95% and 70%, respectively.
Furthermore, 3-h ion exposure was sufficient to reduce the viability of both
bacterial species trapped in filters. Our results showing a strong antibacterial 
activity of PAI and NAI under all experimental conditions tested further support 
the use of air ionizers for preventing and/or containing airborne infection in
domestic and nondomestic settings. IMPORTANCE Indoor air is a well-established
vehicle for direct and indirect spread of a wide variety of human pathogens-as
bioaerosols are composed of bacteria, viruses, fungi, and other types of
organisms-that may trigger some pathologies. Plasmacluster ionizers are known for
their ability to generate positively or negatively charged air ions (PAIs and
NAIs, respectively) that can kill/inactivate indoor airborne pathogens, through
oxidative stress-induced damage, in various environments. Given these premises,
the aim of this study was to evaluate the viability of Gram-positive and
Gram-negative bacteria exposed to PAI and NAI under different experimental
variables such as bacterial type and load, action area, distance from the ion
generator, ion exposure time, and filter type. Altogether, our findings,
demonstrating a remarkable PAI and NAI antibacterial activity, stress the
importance of using air ionizers to prevent indoor airborne infection.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.00651-21 
PMCID: PMC8579920
PMID: 34756075 

