
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Nov 10:e0107421. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.01074-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

The Vaginal Microbiome of Nonhuman Primates Can Be Only Transiently Altered to
Become Lactobacillus Dominant without Reducing Inflammation.

Langner CA(1), Ortiz AM(1), Flynn JK(1), Kendall H(2), Lagenaur LA(3), Brenchley 
JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Barrier Immunity Section, Laboratory of Viral Diseases, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, 
Maryland, USA.
(2)Comparative Medicine Branch, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(3)Osel, Inc., Mountain View, California, USA.

The vaginal microbiome composition in humans is categorized based upon the degree
to which one of four species of Lactobacillus is dominant (Lactobacillus
crispatus, community state type I [CST I], Lactobacillus gasseri, CST
II, Lactobacillus iners, CST III, and Lactobacillus jensenii, CST V). Women with 
a vaginal microbiome not dominated by one of the four Lactobacillus species tend 
to have a more diverse microbiome, CST IV. CSTs I, II, III, and V are common in
North America and Europe and are associated with lower incidences of some
pathogens, such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), human papillomavirus
(HPV), and Gardnerella vaginalis. As a result, therapeutic interventions to
change the composition of the vaginal microbiomes are under development.
However, Homo sapiens is the only mammalian species which has high frequencies
of Lactobacillus-dominated vaginal microbiomes. Here, we treated female nonhuman 
primates (NHPs) with regimens of metronidazole and high levels of L. crispatus to
determine how well these animals could be colonized with L. crispatus, how this
influenced the immunological milieu, and how Lactobacillus treatment influenced
or was influenced by the endogenous vaginal microbiome. We find that NHPs can
transiently be colonized with L. crispatus, that beta diversity and not the
number of doses of L. crispatus or pretreatment with metronidazole predicts
subsequent L. crispatus colonization, that L. crispatus does not alter the local 
immunological milieu, and that the vaginal microbiome composition was resilient, 
normalizing by 4 weeks after our manipulations. Overall, this study suggests
these animals are not amenable to long-term L. crispatus colonization. IMPORTANCE
NHPs have proven to be invaluable animal models for the study of many human
infectious diseases. The use of NHPs to study the effect of the microbiome on
disease transmission and susceptibility is limited due to differences between the
native microbiomes of humans and NHPs. In particular, Lactobacillus dominance of 
the vaginal microbiome is unique to humans and remains an important risk factor
in reproductive health. By assessing the extent to which NHPs can be colonized
with exogenously applied L. crispatus to resemble a human vaginal microbiome and 
examining the effects on the vaginal microenvironment, we highlight the utility
of NHPs in analysis of vaginal microbiome manipulations in the context of human
disease.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.01074-21 
PMCID: PMC8579922
PMID: 34756073 

