
1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2021 Nov 10;22(1):546. doi: 10.1186/s12859-021-04465-1.

Employing phylogenetic tree shape statistics to resolve the underlying host
population structure.

Kayondo HW(1)(2), Ssekagiri A(3)(4), Nabakooza G(4)(5)(6), Bbosa N(7), Ssemwanga 
D(3)(7), Kaleebu P(3)(7), Mwalili S(8), Mango JM(9), Leigh Brown AJ(10), Saenz
RA(11), Galiwango R(6), Kitayimbwa JM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Sciences, Technology and Innovation (PAUSTI), Pan African
University, Nairobi, Kenya. whkayondo@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Mathematics, Makerere University, Kampala, Uganda.
whkayondo@gmail.com.
(3)Uganda Virus Research Institute (UVRI), Entebbe, Uganda.
(4)Department of Immunology and Molecular Biology, Makerere University, Kampala, 
Uganda.
(5)UVRI Centre of Excellence in Infection and Immunity Research and Training
(MUII-Plus), Makerere University, Entebbe, Uganda.
(6)Centre for Computational Biology, Uganda Christian University, Mukono, Uganda.
(7)Medical Research Council (MRC)/Uganda Virus Research Institute (UVRI) and
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (LSHTM) Uganda Research Unit,
Entebbe, Uganda.
(8)Department of Statistics and Actuarial Sciences, Jomo Kenyatta University of
Agriculture and Technology, Nairobi, Kenya.
(9)Department of Mathematics, Makerere University, Kampala, Uganda.
(10)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, University of Edinburg, Edinburg, UK.
(11)Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Colima, Colima, Mexico.

BACKGROUND: Host population structure is a key determinant of pathogen and
infectious disease transmission patterns. Pathogen phylogenetic trees are useful 
tools to reveal the population structure underlying an epidemic. Determining
whether a population is structured or not is useful in informing the type of
phylogenetic methods to be used in a given study. We employ tree statistics
derived from phylogenetic trees and machine learning classification techniques to
reveal an underlying population structure.
RESULTS: In this paper, we simulate phylogenetic trees from both structured and
non-structured host populations. We compute eight statistics for the simulated
trees, which are: the number of cherries; Sackin, Colless and total cophenetic
indices; ladder length; maximum depth; maximum width, and width-to-depth ratio.
Based on the estimated tree statistics, we classify the simulated trees as from
either a non-structured or a structured population using the decision tree (DT), 
K-nearest neighbor (KNN) and support vector machine (SVM). We incorporate the
basic reproductive number ([Formula: see text]) in our tree simulation procedure.
Sensitivity analysis is done to investigate whether the classifiers are robust to
different choice of model parameters and to size of trees. Cross-validated
results for area under the curve (AUC) for receiver operating characteristic
(ROC) curves yield mean values of over 0.9 for most of the classification models.
CONCLUSIONS: Our classification procedure distinguishes well between trees from
structured and non-structured populations using the classifiers, the two-sample
Kolmogorov-Smirnov, Cucconi and Podgor-Gastwirth tests and the box plots. SVM
models were more robust to changes in model parameters and tree size compared to 
KNN and DT classifiers. Our classification procedure was applied to real -world
data and the structured population was revealed with high accuracy of [Formula:
see text] using SVM-polynomial classifier.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-021-04465-1 
PMCID: PMC8579572
PMID: 34758743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

