
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Nov 10:e0145921. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.01459-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

A Two-Level, Intramutant Spectrum Haplotype Profile of Hepatitis C Virus Revealed
by Self-Organized Maps.

Delgado S(#)(1), Perales C(#)(2)(3)(4), García-Crespo C(3)(4), Soria ME(2)(3)(4),
Gallego I(3)(4), de Ávila AI(3)(4), Martínez-González B(2)(4), Vázquez-Sirvent
L(2)(4), López-Galíndez C(5), Morán F(6), Domingo E(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Sistemas Informáticos, Escuela Técnica Superior de Ingeniería 
de Sistemas Informáticos (ETSISI), Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Madrid,
Spain.
(2)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Instituto de Investigación
Sanitaria-Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid (IIS-FJD), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa" (CSIC-UAM), Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Madrid, Spain.
(4)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y
Digestivas (CIBERehd), Instituto de Salud Carlos IIIgrid.413448.e, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Unidad de Virología Molecular, Laboratorio de Referencia e Investigación en
Retrovirus, Centro Nacional de Microbiología, Instituto de Salud Carlos
IIIgrid.413448.e, Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Universidad Complutense de
Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(#)Contributed equally

RNA viruses replicate as complex mutant spectra termed viral quasispecies. The
frequency of each individual genome in a mutant spectrum depends on its rate of
generation and its relative fitness in the replicating population ensemble. The
advent of deep sequencing methodologies allows for the first-time quantification 
of haplotype abundances within mutant spectra. There is no information on the
haplotype profile of the resident genomes and how the landscape evolves when a
virus replicates in a controlled cell culture environment. Here, we report the
construction of intramutant spectrum haplotype landscapes of three amplicons of
the NS5A-NS5B coding region of hepatitis C virus (HCV). Two-dimensional (2D)
neural networks were constructed for 44 related HCV populations derived from a
common clonal ancestor that was passaged up to 210 times in human hepatoma
Huh-7.5 cells in the absence of external selective pressures. The haplotype
profiles consisted of an extended dense basal platform, from which a lower number
of protruding higher peaks emerged. As HCV increased its adaptation to the cells,
the number of haplotype peaks within each mutant spectrum expanded, and their
distribution shifted in the 2D network. The results show that extensive HCV
replication in a monotonous cell culture environment does not limit HCV
exploration of sequence space through haplotype peak movements. The landscapes
reflect dynamic variation in the intramutant spectrum haplotype profile and may
serve as a reference to interpret the modifications produced by external
selective pressures or to compare with the landscapes of mutant spectra in
complex in vivo environments. IMPORTANCE The study provides for the first time
the haplotype profile and its variation in the course of virus adaptation to a
cell culture environment in the absence of external selective constraints. The
deep sequencing-based self-organized maps document a two-layer haplotype
distribution with an ample basal platform and a lower number of protruding peaks.
The results suggest an inferred intramutant spectrum fitness landscape structure 
that offers potential benefits for virus resilience to mutational inputs.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.01459-21 
PMCID: PMC8579923
PMID: 34756074 

