
1. JBJS Rev. 2021 Nov 10;9(11). doi: 10.2106/JBJS.RVW.20.00223.

Perioperative Management of Hepatitis C in Patients Undergoing Total Joint
Arthroplasty.

Ross PE(1), Young JR, O'Connor CM, Anoushiravani AA, DiCaprio MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Albany Medical Center, Albany, New York.

»: A small yet growing subset of total joint arthroplasty (TJA) candidates are
diagnosed with the hepatitis C virus (HCV), which is a known risk factor for
periprosthetic joint infections. Given the poor outcomes associated with TJA
infection, we recommend that candidates with HCV receive treatment prior to
elective TJA.
»: Interferon and ribavirin have historically been the standard treatment regimen
for the management of HCV; however, adverse events and an inconsistent viral
response have limited the efficacy of these therapies. The advent of
direct-acting antivirals has resolved many of the issues associated with
interferon and ribavirin regimens.
»: Despite the success of direct-acting antivirals, there are still barriers to
seeking treatment for TJA candidates with HCV. Many patients are faced with
financial burdens, as insurance coverage of direct-acting antiviral therapies is 
inconsistent and varies by the patient's state of residence and specific
treatment regimen.
»: TJA candidates with HCV present health-care providers with a unique set of
challenges, often encompassing economic, psychosocial, and complex medical
concerns. Multidisciplinary care teams can be beneficial when caring for and
optimizing this patient cohort.
»: Management of HCV prior to elective TJA is associated with higher up-front
costs but ultimately reduces long-term patient morbidity as well as associated
direct and indirect health-care expenditures.

Copyright © 2021 by The Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery, Incorporated.

DOI: 10.2106/JBJS.RVW.20.00223 
PMID: 34757978 

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The Disclosure of Potential Conflicts
of Interest forms are provided with the online version of the article
(http://links.lww.com/JBJSREV/A774).

