
1. BMJ Open Respir Res. 2021 Nov;8(1). pii: e001120. doi:
10.1136/bmjresp-2021-001120.

Promoting early diagnosis and recovering from the COVID-19 pandemic in lung
cancer through public awareness campaigns: learning from patient and public
insight work.

Evison M(1)(2), Taylor S(3), Grundy S(4), Perkins A(5), Peake M(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Lung Cancer & Thoracic Surgery Directorate, Wythenshawe Hospital, Manchester
University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK m.evison@nhs.net.
(2)Lung Pathway Board, Greater Manchester Cancer Alliance, Greater Manchester,
UK.
(3)Macmillan GP Lead for Early Diagnosis, Greater Manchester Strategic Health
Authority, Manchester, UK.
(4)Respiratory Medicine, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Salford, UK.
(5)Greater Manchester Cancer Communications Team, Greater Manchester Strategic
Health Authority, Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(6)Emeritus Consultant and Honorary Professor of Respiratory Medicine, University
of Leicester, Leicester, UK.
(7)Clinical Director, Centre for Cancer Outcomes, North Central and North East
London Cancer Alliances, UCLH Cancer Division, London, UK.

COVID-19 has had a devastating impact on outcomes in lung cancer leading to later
stage presentation, less curative treatment and higher mortality. This has
amplified the existing problem of late-stage presentation in lung cancer and is a
call to arms for a multifaceted strategy to address this, including public
awareness campaigns to promote healthcare review in patients with persistent
chest symptoms. We report the learning from patient and public insight work from 
across the North of England exploring the barriers to seeking healthcare review
with persistent chest symptoms. Members of the public described how a lack of
importance is placed on the common symptoms of lung cancer and a feeling of being
unworthy of review by healthcare professionals. They would feel motivated to seek
review by dispelling the nihilism of lung cancer and would be able to take action
more easily by removing the logistical hassle in the process. We propose a
four-pillar framework (validation-endorsement-motivation-action) for developing
the content of any public awareness campaigns promoting early diagnosis of lung
cancer based on the findings of this comprehensive insight work. All providers
and commissioners must work together to overcome the perceived and real barriers 
to patients with persistent chest symptoms.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjresp-2021-001120 
PMCID: PMC8576481
PMID: 34750168  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

