
1. Med Arch. 2021 Aug;75(4):307-312. doi: 10.5455/medarh.2021.75.307-312.

Non-Pharmacological Measures in the Prevention and Treatment of COVID-19
Infection.

Zildzic M(1), Salihefendic D(2), Masic I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Academy of Medical Sciences of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Sarajevo, Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
(2)Polyclinic "Medicus A", Gracanica, Gracanica, Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Background: Previous pandemic and catastrophic events significantly changed the
life of every human being, bringing him/her into a state of stress and the need
to quickly adapt to new ways of daily activity. COVID-19 has a negative impact on
all elements of health: social, physical and mental. Pharmacotherapy, as well as 
protective measures (isolation, wearing masks and maintaining physical distance) 
did not give the expected results. Vaccination has not yet led to herd immunity, 
so it is still jeopardizing every aspect of human health (1, 2).
Non-pharmacological methods, such as stress and sleep control, physical activity 
and contact with nature are of great importance since they can significantly
contribute to staying healthy during a pandemic.
Objectives: The aim of this paper is to evaluate the impact of
non-pharmacological measures such as stress and sleep control (with different
measures against the negative effects of anxiety and depression on mental state) 
and the possible positive impact of "forest bathing" on improving the immune
response to the virus and its consequences.
Methods: Available evidence-based studies on ways to com- bat stress and the
effect of the proposed measures on human mental health and the im- mune system
were analyzed. From the mentioned studies, recommended measures have been
registered, which refer to stress and sleep control, diet and eating habits,
contact with nature ("forest bathing", gardening), virtual communication and
meditation (mindfulness practice).
Results and Discussion: The combined results of these studies indicate that
COVID-19 has a chronic course and complications that significantly affect the
physical, mental and emotional state of the patient. Proven positive effects of
non-pharmacological measures can be applied in the daily practice of primary
health care in the comprehensive fight against the COVID-19 pandemic.
Conclusion: Non-pharmacological measures such as stress and sleep control,
spending time in nature, healthy diet, and physical activity may improve the
immune response to COVID-19. These measures, with their positive effects on all
aspects of health, can make a major contribution to controlling and improving the
quality of life during the COVID-19 pandemic.

© 2021 Dzenita Salihefendic, Muharem Zildzic, Izet Masic.

DOI: 10.5455/medarh.2021.75.307-312 
PMCID: PMC8563044
PMID: 34759453  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.

