
1. Ann Hepatol. 2021 Oct 29:100569. doi: 10.1016/j.aohep.2021.100569. [Epub ahead of
print]

Analysis of the complete genome of HBV genotypes F and H found in Brazil and
Mexico using the next generation sequencing method.

Gionda PO(1), Gomes-Gouvea M(1), Malta FM(2), Sebe P(3), Salles APM(2), Francisco
RDS(3), José-Abrego A(4), Roman S(4), Panduro A(4), Pinho JRR(5).

Author information: 
(1)LIM-07, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Department of Gastroenterology,
University of São Paulo School of Medicine, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)LIM-07, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Department of Gastroenterology,
University of São Paulo School of Medicine, São Paulo, Brazil; Hospital Israelita
Albert Einstein, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology in Medicine, Civil Hospital of Guadalajara,
"Fray Antonio Alcalde," Guadalajara, Mexico; Health Sciences Center, University
of Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Mexico.
(5)LIM-07, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Department of Gastroenterology,
University of São Paulo School of Medicine, São Paulo, Brazil; Hospital Israelita
Albert Einstein, São Paulo, Brazil; LIM-03, Central Laboratories Division,
Clinics Hospital, SãoPaulo School of Medicine, University of SãoPaulo, SãoPaulo, 
Brazil. Electronic address: jrrpinho@usp.br.

INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES: Hepatitis B Virus is classified into ten different
genotypes (A- J). Genotypes F and H cluster apart from others in phylogenetic
trees and is particularly frequent in the Americas. The aim of this study was to 
sequence complete genomes of samples of HBV genotypes F and H from Brazil and
Mexico using next generation sequencing (NGS) and to study relevant
characteristics for the disease associated with this virus.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Ninety plasma samples with detectable HBV DNA belonging to
the F (n=59) and H (n=31) genotypes were submitted to amplification of the
complete HBV genome by three different methologies. Data analysis was developed
using bioinformatics tools for quality assurance and comprehensive coverage of
the genome. Sequences were aligned with reference sequences for subgenotyping and
detecting variants in relevant positions. A phylogenetical tree was constructed
using Bayesian methods.
RESULTS: HBV genome of 31 samples were amplified and 18 of them were sequenced
(HBV/F=16 and HBV/H=2). One genotype F sample was co-infected with the F1b and F3
subgenotypes, while the other samples were all F2a subgenotype. Two genotype H
samples clustered with other Mexican sequences. The main variants observed were
found in preS and S genes (7/18) and mutations in the precore/core region
(11/18).
CONCLUSIONS: A NGS methodology was applied to F and H genotypes samples from
Mexico and Brazil to fully characterize their sequences. This methodology will be
relevant for clinical and epidemiological studies of hepatitis B in Latin
America.

Copyright © 2021 Fundación Clínica Médica Sur, A.C. Published by Elsevier España,
S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aohep.2021.100569 
PMID: 34757035 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors declare that
they do not have any conflict of interest.

