
1. Nephrol Nurs J. 2021 Sep-Oct;48(5):493-498.

Acute Kidney Failure During SARS-CoV-2.

Fortin C(1), Boucher A(2).

Author information: 
(1)an Adult Specialized Nurse Practitioner and an Associate Professor, University
of Montréal, Integrated University Health and Social Services Center,
Maisonneuve- Rosemont Hospital, Transplant Clinic, Ambulatory Centre, Montréal,
Quebec, Canada.
(2)Nephrologist and Full Clinical Professor of Medicine, University of Montréal, 
Integrated University Health and Social Services Center, Maisonneuve-Rosemont
Hospital, Transplant Clinic, Ambulatory Centre, Montréal, Quebec, Canada.

The occurrence of acute kidney injury (AKI) during COVID infection is associated 
with increased morbidity and mortality of patients. AKI can occur at any stage of
COVID-19 infection; clinical judgment and the consideration of AKI risk factors
along with early detection and diagnosis are essential to prevent short- and
long-term complications. A review of the literature found that pre-existing
chronic kidney disease, obesity, and the severe presentation of the illness
appear to be risk factors; people who develop AKI during acutely severe disease
may have slightly worse outcomes than patients without COVID-19 who develop AKI; 
and finally, certain genetic susceptibilities may play a role in developing
COVID-19-related AKI. Nurses can assist in detecting, preventing, and treating
AKI in patients with COVID-19. Nursing interventions can be implemented to
optimize care for individuals and their families in the context of COVID-19 and
kidney injury. Finally, discoveries from this critical situation can help health 
care facilities plan resources and prepare for the increased health care burden
of survivors of AKI associated with COVID-19. This article discusses recent data 
about how the virus causes kidney injury and suggests nursing solutions to
optimize care for patients with AKI.

Copyright© by the American Nephrology Nurses Association.


PMID: 34756004  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors reported no actual or potential
conflict of interest in relation to this nursing continuing professional
development (NCPD) activity.

