
1. J Cyst Fibros. 2021 Oct 29. pii: S1569-1993(21)02103-2. doi:
10.1016/j.jcf.2021.10.001. [Epub ahead of print]

Unexpected associations between respiratory viruses and bacteria with Pulmonary
Function Testing in children suffering from Cystic Fibrosis (MUCOVIB study).

Scherz V(1), Caruana G(1), Taffé P(2), Brouillet R(1), Bertelli C(1), Jaton-Ogay 
K(1), Fougère Y(3), Posfay-Barbe KM(4), Mornand A(5), Rochat-Guignard I(6), Mamin
A(7), Kaiser L(8), Greub G(9), Asner SA(10).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, Lausanne University Hospital and University of
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(2)Center for Primary Care and Public Health (Unisanté), University of Lausanne, 
Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Pediatric Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology Unit, Department
Mother-Woman-Child, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(4)Pediatric Infectious Diseases Unit, Children's Hospital of Geneva, University 
Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(5)Pediatric Pulmonology Unit, Children's Hospital of Geneva, University
Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(6)Pediatric Pulmonology Unit, Department Mother-Woman-Child, Lausanne University
Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(7)Virology Laboratory, Laboratory Medicine, Department of Laboratory Medicine,
University Hospital of Geneva, Switzerland.
(8)Virology Laboratory, Laboratory Medicine, Department of Laboratory Medicine,
University Hospital of Geneva, Switzerland; Infectious Diseases Service,
Department of Internal Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne,
Switzerland.
(9)Institute of Microbiology, Lausanne University Hospital and University of
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland; Infectious Diseases Service, Department of
Internal Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(10)Pediatric Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology Unit, Department
Mother-Woman-Child, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland;
Infectious Diseases Service, Department of Internal Medicine, Lausanne University
Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland. Electronic address: Sandra.Asner@chuv.ch.

BACKGROUND: Various bacterial and viral assemblages composing Cystic Fibrosis
(CF) lung microbiota contribute to long-term lung function decline over time.
Yet, the impact of individual microorganisms on pulmonary functions remains
uncertain in children with CF.
METHODS: As part of the 'Mucoviscidosis, respiratory VIruses, intracellular
Bacteria and fastidious organisms'' project, children with CF were longitudinally
followed in a Swiss multicentric study. Respiratory samples included mainly
throat swabs and sputa samples for bacterial culture and 16S rRNA metagenomics
and nasopharyngeal swabs for respiratory virus detection by molecular assays.
Percentage of predicted Forced Expiratory Volume in one second (FEV1%) and Lung
Clearance Index (LCI) were recorded.
RESULTS: Sixty-one children, of whom 20 (32.8%) presented with at least one
pulmonary exacerbation, were included. Almost half of the 363 nasopharyngeal
swabs tested by RT-PCR were positive for a respiratory virus, mainly rhinovirus
(26.5%). From linear mixed-effects regression models, P. aeruginosa (-11.35,
95%CI [-17.90; -4.80], p = 0.001) was significantly associated with a decreased
FEV1%, whereas rhinovirus was associated with a significantly higher FEV1% (+4.24
95%CI [1.67; 6.81], p = 0.001). Compared to conventional culture, 16S rRNA
metagenomics showed a sensitivity and specificity of 80.0% and 85.4%,
respectively for detection of typical CF pathogens. However, metagenomics
detected a bacteria almost twice more often than culture.
CONCLUSIONS: As expected, P. aeruginosa impacted negatively on FEV1% while
rhinovirus was surprisingly associated with better FEV1%. Culture-free assays
identifies significantly more pathogens than standard culture, with disputable
clinical correlation.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcf.2021.10.001 
PMID: 34756681 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The funding
sources had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to
publish or preparation of the manuscript. GC received a travel grand from Gilead 
Sciences Europe Ltd (The Voice: CPD-certified clinical research training
programme). All other authors declared no financial or other forms of conflicts
of interest.

