
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 10:JVI0119821. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01198-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Viral fitness and antigenic determinants of porcine parvovirus at the amino acid 
level of the capsid protein.

Streck AF(1)(2), Canal CW(3), Truyen U(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Diagnóstico em Medicina Veterinária, Universidade de Caxias do 
Sul, Caxias do Sul, Brazil.
(2)Institut für Tierhygiene und Öffentliches Veterinärwesen,
Veterinärmedizinische Fakultät, Universität Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Laboratório de Virologia, Faculdade de Veterinária, Universidade Federal do
Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.

Since 2001, strains of porcine parvovirus (PPV), designated 27a-like strains,
were observed in Europe, suggesting a predominance of these viruses over older
strains. The reasons for the obvious evolutionary advantage are unknown. Here, a 
series of mutants containing amino acid replacements found in the predominant
field strains were generated in a PPV-NADL2 background and their impact on
replication efficiency and antibody binding activity was determined. Some amino
acid substitutions observed in the 27a-like strains significantly increased viral
fitness and decreased neutralization activity of sera raised against commercial
vaccines and old virus strains (e.g. NADL2). These mutant viruses and a
monoclonal antibody raised against a classical PPV strain defined an 27a-specific
neutralizing epitope around amino acid 228 of the capsid protein VP2. Based on
the analysis of the mutant viruses, it is hypothesized that the predominant
factor for the global spread of the PPV-27a strain substitutions is an increased 
viral fitness of the 27a-like viruses, possibly supported by a partial immune
selection. This is reminiscent to the evolution of canine parvovirus and
worldwide replacement of the original virus by the so-called new antigenic types.
Importance Porcine parvovirus is one of the most important causes of reproductive
failure in swine. Recently, despite the continuous use of vaccines, "new" strains
emerged, leading to the hypothesis that the emergence of new amino acid
substitutions could be a viral adaptation to the immune response against the
commercial vaccines. Our results indicate the amino acid substitutions observed
in the 27a-like strains can modify viral fitness and antigenicity. However, an
absolute immune escape was not evident.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01198-21 
PMID: 34757840 

