
1. Bioconjug Chem. 2021 Nov 10. doi: 10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.1c00388. [Epub ahead of
print]

Inactivation of an Enveloped Virus by Immobilized Antimicrobial Peptides.

Gabriel M(1), Holtappels R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität
Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Dental
Materials and Biomaterial Research, Department of Prosthodontics, Geriatric
Dentistry and Craniomandibular Disorders, Aßmannshauser Str. 4-6, Berlin, DE
10117, Germany.
(2)Institute for Virology and Research Center of Immunotherapy, University
Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University, Obere Zahlbacher Str. 67,
Mainz, DE 55101, Germany.

Infections caused by viruses are difficult to treat due to their life cycle,
which depends on the replication machinery of the respective host cells. Commonly
used antiviral strategies are based upon the application of, e.g., entry
inhibitors and other compounds that interfere with virus replication. Besides
possible side effects, the rapid occurrence of viral resistance poses a great
challenge. Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), as a component of the innate immunity, 
are able to kill bacteria and fungi and, in addition, may inactivate enveloped
viruses. Many AMPs exert their biological function by impairing microbial and
viral membranes. As a result, membrane integrity is lost, leading to bacterial
killing and virus inactivation. Covalently immobilized AMPs have been shown to be
biocidal too, which is of special interest when the presence of a soluble agent
is to be avoided. Here, we demonstrate the conjugation of the human AMP LL37 to a
solid support consisting of cellulose beads and its capability to inactivate
murine cytomegalovirus as an example. Virus inactivation was highly reduced by
several orders of magnitude when an appropriate coupling strategy was chosen.
Coupling the AMP via a long and hydrophilic polyethylene glycol spacer proved to 
perform less effective compared to LL37 immobilization using a short
cross-linker. In addition, it was found that LL37-conjugated beads did not induce
hemolysis, a prerequisite for the development of blood contacting applications.
Our findings may serve as a basis for the development of an implementable device 
that is able to reduce the viral load under real-life conditions.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.1c00388 
PMID: 34755515 

