
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Nov 10:e0109421. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.01094-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

Intracellular Low Iron Exerts Anti-BK Polyomavirus Effect by Inhibiting the
Protein Synthesis of Exogenous Genes.

Sun J(#)(1)(2), Shi Y(#)(1), Shi H(#)(1)(2), Hou Y(1), Hu C(1), Zeng Y(1), Wu
G(1), Zhu T(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Organ Transplantation, Shanghai, China.
(#)Contributed equally

BK polyomavirus (BKPyV) is a small double-stranded DNA virus and ubiquitous human
pathogen that particularly affects immunocompromised individuals. Antiviral
therapy for BKPyV is urgently needed. Intracellular irons have an important role 
in many viral infections, yet its contribution to BKPyV and replication has not
been explored. In this study, we explored the interaction between BKPyV infection
and intracellular iron and the inhibitory effect of iron depletion on BKPyV
infection. By creating a low-intracellular-iron environment, we demonstrated that
the iron-chelating-induced iron depletion inhibits BKPyV infection in primary
renal tubular epithelial cells (RPTECs) and urinary bladder cancer cells (TCCSUP 
cells). Iron depletion exerts an inhibitory effect after BKPyV enters the
nucleus, which might be due to the inhibition of the protein synthesis of
exogenous genes in iron-depleted cells. Further exploration of the target
proteins of iron-regulating viral infection could potentially be used to develop 
new strategies for urgently needed anti-BKPyV therapies. IMPORTANCE BKPyV poses a
serious threat to the health of immunocompromised patients, and there are
currently no curative drugs. Understanding the relationship between the virus and
intracellular environment contributes to the discovery of antiviral targets. We
demonstrate here that BKPyV is inhibited in cells with a low-iron environment. We
also find that iron-chelating-induced iron depletion inhibits viral and exogenous
protein synthesis. Further exploration of the target proteins of iron regulation 
could have great potential in developing new drugs against BKPyV and other
viruses.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.01094-21 
PMCID: PMC8579847
PMID: 34756078 

