
1. BMJ Open Respir Res. 2021 Nov;8(1). pii: e001086. doi:
10.1136/bmjresp-2021-001086.

Exploration of therapists' views of practice within critical care.

Twose P(1)(2), Jones U(2), Bharal M(3), Bruce J(4), Firshman P(5), Highfield
J(6), Jones G(7), Merriweather J(8), Newey V(9), Newman H(10), Rock C(11),
Terblanche Mbe E(12), Wallace Obe S(13).

Author information: 
(1)Physiotherapy Department, Cardiff and Vale University Local Health Board,
Cardiff, UK TwosePW@cardiff.ac.uk.
(2)School of Health Sciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.
(3)Nutrition and Dietetics Department, London North West Hospitals University
Trust, London, UK.
(4)Occupational Therapy Department, Torbay and South Devon NHS Foundation Trust, 
Torquay, UK.
(5)Occupational Therapy Department, King's College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust,
London, UK.
(6)Critical Care, Cardiff and Vale University Health Board, Cardiff, UK.
(7)Speech and Language Therapy Department, Cardiff and Vale University Health
Board, Cardiff, UK.
(8)Dietetics Department, Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(9)Physiotherapy Department, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, UK.
(10)Speech and Language Therapy Department, Royal Free London NHS Foundation
Trust, London, UK.
(11)Occupational Therapy Department, Basildon and Thurrock University Hospitals
NHS Foundation Trust, Basildon, UK.
(12)Dietetics Department, St George's University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 
London, UK.
(13)Speech and Language Therapy Department, Manchester University NHS Foundation 
Trust, Manchester, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Therapists are increasing recognised as core members of the
critical care multiprofessional team. Each therapy profession provides specialist
assessments and interventions, but also work collaboratively across the
rehabilitation pathway. Despite inclusion in several national guidance documents,
there remains a lack of evidence regarding the perceived role of therapists
working within critical care, the unique contributions of each profession and
opinion on the day-to-day tasks and responsibilities of each therapy profession.
METHOD: A descriptive qualitative methodology was used involving seven focus
groups. Purposeful sampling was used to recruit therapists via professional
specialist interest groups. All focus groups were uniprofessional and discussions
based on a predesigned framework. Data were analysed thematically.
RESULTS: Participants (n=65) from across the UK were recruited to seven focus
groups with an average of 18.3 years postgraduate clinical experience of which
11.6 years was within critical care. Three core themes were generated from 875
codes and 237 potential subthemes. The final themes were (1) professional
characteristics; (2) multidisciplinary team and (3) staffing. An additional theme
of 'COVID-19 pandemic' was also identified. Findings were similar across all
profession groups particularly regarding the need for holistic, patient-centred
care. Expected variation was observed for professional characteristics especially
regarding specific assessments and interventions.
DISCUSSION: Therapy services are an essential component to the delivery of
critical care especially regarding recovery and rehabilitation. Through three
core themes, this qualitative study has provided new evidence of the perceptions 
and opinions of the role that therapists undertake within critical care.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjresp-2021-001086 
PMCID: PMC8576474
PMID: 34750167  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

