
1. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2021 Nov 8;286:3-8. doi: 10.3233/SHTI210625.

The Importance of Contextual Understanding in Solving the Last Mile Problem.

Kuziemsky C(1), Nøhr C(2), Marcilly R(3), Dusseljee-Peute L(4), Zhu X(5), Elkin
PL(6).

Author information: 
(1)MacEwan University, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Danish Centre for Health Informatics, Aalborg University, Denmark.
(3)Univ. Lille, CHU Lille, ULR 2694 - METRICS: Évaluation des technologies de
santé et des pratiques médicales, F-59000 Lille, France.
(4)Department Medical Informatics, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam University 
Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(5)Center for Biomedical Data Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT, U.S.A.
(6)Department of Biomedical Informatics, University at Buffalo, U.S.A.

The COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted many global industries and shifted the
digital health landscape by stimulating and accelerating the delivery of digital 
care. It has emphasized the need for a system level informatics implementation
that supports the healthcare management of populations at a macro level while
also providing the necessary support for front line care delivery at a micro
level. From data dashboard to Telemedicine, this crisis has necessitated the need
for health informatics transformation that can bridge time and space to provide
timely care. However, heath transformation cannot solely rely on Health
Information Technology (HIT) for progress, but rather success must be an outcome 
of system design focus on the contextual complexity of the health system where
HIT is used. This conference highlights the important roles context plays for
health informatics in global pandemics and aims to answer critical questions in
four main areas: 1) health information management in the covid-19 context, 2)
implementation of new practices and technologies in healthcare, 3) sociotechnical
analysis of task performance and workload in healthcare, and 4) innovations in
design and evaluation methods of health technologies. We deem this as a call to
action to understand the importance of context while solving the last mile
problem in delivering the informatics solutions that are needed to support our
public health response.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI210625 
PMID: 34755681  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

