
1. Eur J Public Health. 2021 Nov 9;31(Supplement_4):iv40-iv49. doi:
10.1093/eurpub/ckab159.

Precarious employment and health in the context of COVID-19: a rapid scoping
umbrella review.

McNamara CL(1), McKee M(2), Stuckler D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Global Health Inequalities Research (CHAIN), Department of
Sociology and Political Science, Norwegian University of Science and Technology
(NTNU), Trondheim, Norway.
(2)Faculty of Public Health and Policy, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, London, UK.
(3)Dondena Centre for Research on Social Dynamics, Department of Social &
Political Sciences, Bocconi University, Milano, Italy.

BACKGROUND: There are widespread concerns that workers in precarious employment
have suffered the most in the COVID-19 pandemic and merit special attention. The 
aim of this rapid scoping umbrella review was to examine what evidence exists
about how COVID-19 has affected the health of this highly vulnerable group, and
what gaps remain to be investigated.
METHODS: Five databases were searched for systematic or scoping reviews from
January 2020 to May 2021. The quality of the included reviews was determined
using A MeaSurement Tool to Assess systematic Reviews.
RESULTS: We identified 6 reviews that reported 30 unique relevant primary
studies. The included studies indicate that essential (non-health) workers are at
greater risk of COVID-19 infection and case fatality than others in their
surrounding community. The occupational risk of exposure to COVID-19 also seems
to be greater among more precarious categories of workers, including younger
workers and workers in low-income and low-skilled occupations. Further, hazardous
working conditions faced by many essential workers appear to have amplified the
pandemic, as several occupational sites became 'super-spreaders', due to an
inability to socially distance at work and high contact rates among workers.
Finally, employment and financial insecurity generated by the pandemic appears to
be associated with negative mental health outcomes. The quality of the included
reviews however, and their primary studies, were generally weak and many gaps
remain in the evidence base.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study highlights that COVID-19 is creating new health risks for 
precarious workers as well as exacerbating the pre-existing health risks of
precarious employment.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
European Public Health Association.

DOI: 10.1093/eurpub/ckab159 
PMCID: PMC8576296
PMID: 34751369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

