
1. Eur J Public Health. 2021 Nov 9;31(Supplement_4):iv31-iv35. doi:
10.1093/eurpub/ckab153.

The COVID-19 disaster and mental health-assessing, responding and recovering.

Lindert J(1)(2), Jakubauskiene M(3), Bilsen J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departement of Health and Social Work, University of Applied Sciences
Emden/Leer, Emden, Germany.
(2)WRSC, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA, USA.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.
(4)Mental Health and Wellbeing Research Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel,
Brussels, Belgium.

The coronavirus disease 19 (COVID-19) pandemic is a disaster that has impacted
lives globally. The purpose of this paper is to understand the linkage between
COVID-19 and its impact on mental health. To reach this aim, we reviewed the
literature on COVID-19 and mental conditions. Based on the literature, we
identified COVID-19 as an unexpected, large-scale event that disrupted
communities and caused death, destruction and trauma which upended normal
existence. For mental conditions, effects of the pandemic are likely to manifest 
in different ways: development of symptoms in previously healthy individuals, new
episodes in those with predisposition to mental disorders and development of
symptoms that do not meet diagnostic criteria. The level of mental health
problems varies depending on the stage of the pandemic, country, population
groups and types of conditions. This also applies to the level of suicide,
although suicides do not seem to have increased during the pandemic. Yet, we
identified a net of factors contributing to mental conditions, in general. These 
factors include demographic factors (e.g. female gender, younger and older age), 
social factors (e.g. economically disadvantaged), mental factors (e.g.
pre-existing mental conditions) and relationship factors (e.g. stressful
relationship, lack of relationships). Additionally, we identified
COVID-19-specific factors such as threat to own life and threat to life of loved 
ones, containment measures and interruption of services and social life. We
further explored potentially additional suicide-related risk factors. Regardless 
of differences, health care and psychosocial systems were in many countries not
prepared to respond to a viral disaster. Viral disaster requires that responses
not only include direct care but also responses to populations that may need
support due to known determinants of mental health.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
European Public Health Association.

DOI: 10.1093/eurpub/ckab153 
PMCID: PMC8576295
PMID: 34751367  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

