
1. Public Health Res Pract. 2021 Nov 10;31(4). pii: 3142120. doi:
10.17061/phrp3142120.

Politics and political determinants of health policy and systems research funding
in Latin America and the Caribbean.

Becerra-Posada F(1), Dos Santos Boeira L(2), García-Godoy B(3), Lloyd E(4),
Martínez-Sánchez HX(5), O'Donnell C(6), de Barros Panisset U(7), Simeon DT(8),
Salazar-Barragán D(9), Villa-Maldonado P(10), Bustamante-Garcia M(11).

Author information: 
(1)Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo en
Ciencias de la Salud, Monterrey, Mexico; Florida International University Robert 
Stempel College of Public Health and Social Work, Global Health Consortium,
Miami, Florida, US; fcobecerra@gmail.com.
(2)Instituto Veredas, Federal District, Brazil.
(3)Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(4)Condell Consulting, Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago.
(5)MCMX Consultants, Querétaro, Mexico.
(6)Fundación H. A Barcelo, Instituto Universitario de Ciencias de la Salud,
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(7)Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(8)The University of the West Indies, Caribbean Centre for Health Systems
Research and Development, St Augustine, Trinidad and Tobago.
(9)Independent health consultant, Bogota, Colombia.
(10)Department of Women's Imaging, Clínica Montesur, Lima, Peru.
(11)Global Health & Education Management, Lima, Peru.

Objectives and importance of study: The importance of health policy and systems
research (HPSR) has been acknowledged since 2004 and was recognised by the United
Nations World Health Assembly in 2005. However, many factors influence its
development. This paper aims to analyse the impact of politics and political
determinants on HPSR funding in selected countries of Latin America and the
Caribbean.METHODS: Using a standardised protocol, we performed an analysis of
available data and financing structures for health research and HPSR, based on
research in eight countries, including interviews with key stakeholders (n = 42).
RESULTS: Dollar depreciation and gross national product growth in the region may 
play a role in how governments fund research. There have been shifts in the
political spectrum in governments, which have affected research coordination and 
funding in positive and negative ways. HPSR funding in some countries was
dependent on budget decisions and although some have improved funding, others
have regressed by decreasing funding or have completely cancelled financing
mechanisms. Caribbean countries rely mainly on institutional funding. HPSR is
recognised as important but remains underfunded; stakeholders believed it should 
be used more in decision making.
CONCLUSION: Although HPSR is recognised as valuable for decision making and
policy development, it does not have the financial support required to flourish
in Latin America and the Carribean. Data on health research financing were not
easy to access. There was little or no evidence of published reports or papers
about research financing, health research funding, and HPSR funding in particular
in the studied countries. Because of the fragility of health systems highlighted 
by the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, HPSR should be of great
relevance and value to both policy makers and funders.

DOI: 10.17061/phrp3142120 
PMID: 34753166  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None delcared.

