
1. Acc Chem Res. 2021 Dec 7;54(23):4272-4282. doi: 10.1021/acs.accounts.1c00541.
Epub 2021 Nov 10.

Therapeutic mRNA Engineering from Head to Tail.

Jia L(1), Qian SB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, 
United States.

ConspectusSynthetic messenger RNA (mRNA), once delivered into cells, can be
readily translated into proteins by ribosomes, which do not distinguish exogenous
mRNAs from endogenous transcripts. Until recently, the intrinsic instability and 
immunostimulatory property of exogenous RNAs largely hindered the therapeutic
application of synthetic mRNAs. Thanks to major technological innovations, such
as introduction of chemically modified nucleosides, synthetic mRNAs have become
programmable therapeutic reagents. Compared to DNA or protein-based therapeutic
reagents, synthetic mRNAs bear several advantages: flexible design, easy
optimization, low-cost preparation, and scalable synthesis. Therapeutic mRNAs are
commonly designed to encode specific antigens to elicit organismal immune
response to pathogens like viruses, express functional proteins to replace
defective ones inside cells, or introduce novel enzymes to achieve unique
functions like genome editing. Recent years have witnessed stunning progress on
the development of mRNA vaccines against SARS-Cov2. This success is built upon
our fundamental understanding of mRNA metabolism and translational control, a
knowledge accumulated during the past several decades. Given the astronomical
number of sequence combinations of four nucleotides, sequence-dependent control
of mRNA translation remains incompletely understood. Rational design of synthetic
mRNAs with robust translation and optimal stability remains challenging.
Massively paralleled reporter assay (MPRA) has been proven to be powerful in
identifying sequence elements in controlling mRNA translatability and stability. 
Indeed, a completely randomized sequence in 5' untranslated region (5'UTR) drives
a wide range of translational outputs. In this Account, we will discuss general
principles of mRNA translation in eukaryotic cells and elucidate the role of
coding and noncoding regions in the translational regulation. From the
therapeutic perspective, we will highlight the unique features of 5' cap, 5'UTR, 
coding region (CDS), stop codon, 3'UTR, and poly(A) tail. By focusing on the
design strategies in mRNA engineering, we hope this Account will contribute to
the rational design of synthetic mRNAs with broad therapeutic potential.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.accounts.1c00541 
PMID: 34756012 

