
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Nov 10:e0100321. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.01003-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

Early Adoption of Longitudinal Surveillance for SARS-CoV-2 among Staff in
Long-Term Care Facilities: Prevalence, Virologic and Sequence Analysis.

Gallichotte EN(#)(1), Quicke KM(#)(1), Sexton NR(1), Fitzmeyer E(1), Young MC(1),
Janich AJ(1), Dobos K(1), Pabilonia KL(1), Gahm G(2)(3), Carlton EJ(4), Ebel
GD(1), Ehrhart N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Colorado State Universitygrid.47894.36, Ft. Collins, Colorado, USA.
(2)University of Colorado Medical Center, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(3)Vivage Senior Living, Denver, Colorado, USA.
(4)University of Colorado Anschutz, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) emerged in 2019 and 
has become a major global pathogen in an astonishingly short period of time. The 
emergence of SARS-CoV-2 has been notable due to its impacts on residents in
long-term care facilities (LTCFs). LTCF residents tend to possess several risk
factors for severe outcomes of SARS-CoV-2 infection, including advanced age and
the presence of comorbidities. Indeed, residents of LTCFs represent approximately
40% of SARS-CoV-2 deaths in the United States. Few studies have focused on the
prevalence and transmission dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 among LTCF staff during the
early months of the pandemic, prior to mandated surveillance testing. To assess
the prevalence and incidence of SARS-CoV-2 among LTCF staff, characterize the
extent of asymptomatic infections, and investigate the genomic epidemiology of
the virus within these settings, we sampled staff for 8 to 11 weeks at six LTCFs 
with nasopharyngeal swabs from March through June of 2020. We determined the
presence and levels of viral RNA and infectious virus and sequenced 54 nearly
complete genomes. Our data revealed that over 50% of infections were
asymptomatic/mildly symptomatic and that there was a strongly significant
relationship between viral RNA (vRNA) and infectious virus, prolonged infections,
and persistent vRNA (4+ weeks) in a subset of individuals, and declining
incidence over time. Our data suggest that asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2-infected LTCF 
staff contributed to virus persistence and transmission within the workplace
during the early pandemic period. Genetic epidemiology data generated from
samples collected during this period support that SARS-CoV-2 was commonly spread 
between staff within an LTCF and that multiple-introduction events were less
common. IMPORTANCE Our work comprises unique data on the characteristics of
SARS-CoV-2 dynamics among staff working at LTCFs in the early months of the
SARS-CoV-2 pandemic prior to mandated staff surveillance testing. During this
time period, LTCF residents were largely sheltering-in-place. Given that staff
were able to leave and return daily and could therefore be a continued source of 
imported or exported infection, we performed weekly SARS-CoV-2 PCR on nasal swab 
samples collected from this population. There are limited data from the early
months of the pandemic comprising longitudinal surveillance of staff at LTCFs.
Our data reveal the surprisingly high level of asymptomatic/presymptomatic
infections within this cohort during the early months of the pandemic and show
genetic epidemiological analyses that add novel insights into both the origin and
transmission of SARS-CoV-2 within LTCFs.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.01003-21 
PMCID: PMC8579921
PMID: 34756092 

