
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Nov 10:e0063921. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.00639-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

Sequencing Using a Two-Step Strategy Reveals High Genetic Diversity in the S Gene
of SARS-CoV-2 after a High-Transmission Period in Tunis, Tunisia.

Fares W(#)(1), Ghedira K(#)(2), Gdoura M(1)(3), Chouikha A(1), Haddad-Boubaker
S(1), Khedhiri M(1), Ayouni K(1), Lamari A(1), Touzi H(1), Hammemi W(1), Medeb
Z(1), Sadraoui A(1), Hogga N(1), Ben Alaya N(4)(5), Triki H(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Virology, Reasearch Laboratory Viruses Vectors and
Hosts (LR20-IPT10), Institut Pasteur, University of Tunis-El Manar, Tunis,
Tunisia.
(2)Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Biomathematics and Biostatistics (BIMS),
Institut Pasteur de Tunisgrid.418517.e (IPT), University of Tunis-El Manar,
Tunis, Tunisia.
(3)Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Monastir, Monastir, Tunisia.
(4)National Observatory for New and Emerging Diseases, Ministry of Health, Tunis,
Tunisia.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, University of Tunis-El Manar, Tunis, Tunisia.
(#)Contributed equally

Recent efforts have reported numerous variants that influence severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) viral characteristics, including 
pathogenicity, transmission rate, and detectability by molecular tests.
Whole-genome sequencing based on next-generation sequencing technologies is the
method of choice to identify all viral variants; however, the resources needed to
use these techniques for a representative number of specimens remain limited in
many low- and middle-income countries. To decrease sequencing costs, we developed
a primer set allowing partial sequences to be generated in the viral S gene,
enabling rapid detection of numerous variants of concern (VOCs) and variants of
interest (VOIs); whole-genome sequencing is then performed on a selection of
viruses based on partial sequencing results. Two hundred one nasopharyngeal
specimens collected during the decreasing phase of a high-transmission COVID-19
wave in Tunisia were analyzed. The results reveal high genetic variability within
the sequenced fragment and allow the detection of first introductions in the
country of already-known VOCs and VOIs, as well as other variants that have
interesting genomic mutations and need to be kept under surveillance. IMPORTANCE 
The method of choice for SARS-CoV-2 variant detection is whole-genome sequencing 
using next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies. Resources for this
technology remain limited in many low- and middle-income countries, where it is
not possible to perform whole-genome sequencing for representative numbers of
SARS-CoV-2-positive cases. In the present work, we developed a novel strategy
based on a first partial Sanger screening in the S gene, which includes key
mutations of the already known VOCs and VOIs, for rapid identification of these
VOCs and VOIs and to help better select specimens that need to be sequenced by
NGS technologies. The second step consists of whole-genome sequencing to allow a 
holistic view of all variants within the selected viral strains and confirm the
initial classification of the strains based on partial S gene sequencing.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.00639-21 
PMCID: PMC8579926
PMID: 34756072 

