
1. J Med Virol. 2021 Nov 9. doi: 10.1002/jmv.27440. [Epub ahead of print]

Cell-free EBV DNA as a biomarker during clinical management of nasopharyngeal
carcinoma in a nonendemic region.

Pramanik R(1), Arora S(1), Sharma P(1), Biswas A(2), Nayak B(3), Thakar A(4),
Sharma A(1), Ghose S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Radiotherapy and Oncology, All India Institute of Medical
Sciences, New Delhi, Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, Delhi, India.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology and Head Neck Surgery, All India Institute of
Medical Sciences, New Delhi, Delhi, India.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is the most common malignant tumor of the
nasopharynx. Although NPC is not endemic in India, higher incidences were
observed in its North-Eastern regions particularly Sikkim, Nagaland, Manipur, and
Mizoram. Early detection of NPC is difficult because the nasopharynx is not
readily amenable to clinical examination and symptoms of NPC are nonspecific. The
development of suitable biomarkers for early diagnosis of NPC as well as accurate
monitoring of treatment response is needed urgently. In this exploratory pilot
study, we have investigated the clinical significance of assessing plasma
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) DNA load at diagnosis and during treatment. We found
that EBV DNA is detectable at diagnosis in the majority of patients with
nonendemic NPC and the absolute copy number of circulating EBV DNA per milliliter
increases progressively with the stage of the disease. The viral load declined
significantly with induction chemotherapy and definitive chemoradiation but
showed a sharp rise at relapse. Patients with EBV DNA levels ≥1500 copies/ml had 
a higher risk of disease progression or relapse when compared with patients who
had EBV DNA <1500 copies/ml at baseline. Estimation of plasma EBV DNA may serve
as an excellent noninvasive tool to monitor disease extent, response to therapy, 
and for better prediction of future relapse or progression-free survival in a
nonendemic NPC patient population.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.27440 
PMID: 34750844 

