
1. Eur J Public Health. 2021 Nov 9;31(Supplement_4):iv14-iv20. doi:
10.1093/eurpub/ckab152.

Health workforce protection and preparedness during the COVID-19 pandemic: a tool
for the rapid assessment of EU health systems.

Kuhlmann E(1)(2), Brînzac MG(3), Burau V(4)(5), Correia T(6), Ungureanu MI(3).

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for Rheumatology and Immunology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany.
(2)Institute of Infection Control and Infectious Diseases, University Medical
Centre, Georg August University, Göttingen, Germany.
(3)Faculty of Political, Administrative and Communication Sciences, Department of
Public Health, Babeș-Bolyai University, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(4)Department of Political Science, University of Aarhus, Aarhus, Denmark.
(5)Department of Public Health, University of Aarhus, Aarhus, Denmark.
(6)Global Health and Tropical Medicine, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.

This article is dedicated to the WHO International Year of Health and Care
Workers in 2021 in recognition of their commitment during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
The study aims to strengthen health workforce preparedness, protection and
ultimately resilience during a pandemic. We argue for a health system approach
and introduce a tool for rapid comparative assessment based on integrated
multi-level governance. We draw on secondary sources and expert information,
including material from Denmark, Germany, Portugal and Romania. The results
reveal similar developments across countries: action has been taken to improve
physical protection, digitalization and prioritization of healthcare worker
vaccination, whereas social and mental health support programmes were weak or
missing. Developments were more diverse in relation to occupational and
organizational preparedness: some ad-hoc transformations of work routines and
tasks were observed in all countries, yet skill-mix innovation and collaboration 
were strongest in Demark and weak in Portugal and Romania. Major governance gaps 
exist in relation to education and health integration, surveillance, social and
mental health support programmes, gendered issues of health workforce capacity
and integration of migrant healthcare workers (HCW). There is a need to step up
efforts and make health systems more accountable to the needs of HCW during
global public health emergencies.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
European Public Health Association.

DOI: 10.1093/eurpub/ckab152 
PMCID: PMC8576297
PMID: 34751366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

