
1. Mol Ecol Resour. 2021 Nov 10. doi: 10.1111/1755-0998.13548. [Epub ahead of print]

High-Throughput Sequencing of faeces provides evidence for dispersal of parasites
and pathogens by migratory waterbirds.

Briscoe AG(1)(2), Nichols S(1), Hartikainen H(1)(3), Knipe H(1), Foster R(1),
Green AJ(4), Okamura B(1), Bass D(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Natural History Museum, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Core Research Laboratories, Natural History Museum, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Eawag and Institute for Integrative Biology, Eidgenössische Technische
Hochschule (ETH), Zurich, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Wetland Ecology, Estación Biológica de Doñana, EBD-CSIC, 41092, 
Sevilla, Spain.
(5)Centre for Environment, Aquaculture and Fisheries Science (Cefas), Weymouth,
UK.

Examination of faecal material has demonstrated how a broad range of organisms
are distributed by bird movements. Such research has largely focused on dispersal
of plant seeds by frugivores and of freshwater organisms by waterbirds. However, 
with few exceptions (e.g. avian influenza, Ebola virus), there is a dearth of
evidence for transport of parasites and pathogens. High-throughput sequencing
methods now provide a powerful means of addressing this knowledge gap by
elucidating faecal contents in unprecedented detail. We collected faeces excreted
by a range of migratory waterbirds in south-west Spain and pooled faecal DNA to
create libraries reflective of feeding behavior. We created sets of libraries
using high-throughput metagenomic and amplicon sequencing. For the latter we
employed two sets of primers to broadly target the V4 region of the 18S rRNA gene
(one set amplifying the region across all eukaryotes, the other excluding
amplification of metazoans). Libraries revealed a wide diversity of eukaryotes,
including parasites of the faecal producers themselves, parasites of food items, 
or those incidentally ingested. We also detected novel microbial eukaryotic taxa 
and found that parasite assemblage profiles were relatively distinct. Comparing
the performance of the methods used supports their joint use for future studies
of diversity and abundance. Because viable stages of many parasites are likely to
be present in faeces, our results suggest significant levels of bird-mediated
dispersal of parasites (both from avian and other hosts). Our methods revealed
much hidden biodiversity, and allowed identification of the individuals who
produced the faecal samples to species level, facilitating the study of
interaction networks.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/1755-0998.13548 
PMID: 34758191 

