
1. Salud Colect. 2021 Nov 4;17:e3748. doi: 10.18294/sc.2021.3748.

[Syndemic, infodemic, pandemic of COVID-19: Towards a pandemiology of emerging
diseases].

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Almeida-Filho N(1).

Author information: 
(1)PhD en Epidemiología. Investigador I-A, Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento
Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq). Profesor Titular jubilado, Instituto de Saúde
Coletiva, Universidade Federal da Bahia. Profesor Visitante, Instituto de Estudos
Avançados, Universidade de São Paulo, Brasil. naomaralmeida@gmail.com.

As the basis for a theory of the co-occurrence of epidemic and pandemic
processes, the article begins with a discussion of the concept of syndemic,
created during the HIV/AIDS epidemic to understand the social, behavioral, and
cultural components of emerging diseases, as is the case of the current COVID-19 
pandemic. Secondly, the notion of infodemic is highlighted, which has great
potential to better understand the impacts of the pandemic from approaches that
are generally neglected in conventional epidemiological research. Third, in order
to illustrate these points, a "micro-archaeological" case study of the infodemic 
resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic is presented, focusing on the specific
situation in Brazil. Then, the correlations between scientific evidence,
intervention models, and measures to control the pandemic are comparatively
analyzed in different countries, as well as their adoption or rejection in the
Brazilian context, which is structured by deep economic inequalities, social
inequities, and health inequities.

Publisher: Como base para una teoría de la coocurrencia de procesos epidémicos y 
pandémicos, en primer lugar, se introduce el concepto de sindemia, creado en la
epidemia de VIH/sida para comprender componentes sociales, conductuales y
culturales de enfermedades emergentes, tal como la actual pandemia de COVID-19.
En segundo lugar, se destaca la noción de infodemia, que tiene gran potencial
para comprender los impactos de la pandemia desde planos que generalmente se
descuidan en los enfoques epidemiológicos convencionales. En tercer lugar, como
complemento e ilustración, se presenta un estudio de caso “microarqueológico” de 
la infodemia resultante de la pandemia de COVID-19, centrado en la situación
concreta de Brasil. Luego, se analizan las correlaciones entre la evidencia
científica, los modelos de intervención y las medidas para controlar la pandemia 
en varios países y su adopción o rechazo en la realidad brasileña, estructurada
sobre profundas desigualdades económicas, inequidades sociales e inequidades en
salud.
DOI: 10.18294/sc.2021.3748 
PMID: 34752025  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

