
1. BMC Genomics. 2021 Nov 11;22(1):814. doi: 10.1186/s12864-021-08098-9.

Integration of adeno-associated virus (AAV) into the genomes of most Thai and
Mongolian liver cancer patients does not induce oncogenesis.

Schäffer AA(#)(1), Dominguez DA(#)(2), Chapman LM(1), Gertz EM(1), Budhu A(2)(3),
Forgues M(2), Chaisaingmongkol J(4)(5), Rabibhadana S(4), Pupacdi B(4), Wu X(6), 
Bayarsaikhan E(7), Harris CC(2), Ruchirawat M(4)(5), Ruppin E(8), Wang XW(9)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Data Science Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis, Center for Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Liver Cancer Program, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)Laboratory of Chemical Carcinogenesis, Chulabhorn Research Institute, Bangkok,
Thailand.
(5)Center of Excellence on Environmental Health and Toxicology, Office of Higher 
Education Commission, Ministry of Education, Bangkok, Thailand.
(6)Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Leidos Biomedical Research 
Inc, Frederick, MD, USA.
(7)General Laboratory Department, National Cancer Center, Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia.
(8)Cancer Data Science Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
eytan.ruppin@nih.gov.
(9)Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis, Center for Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. xw3u@nih.gov.
(10)Liver Cancer Program, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. xw3u@nih.gov.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Engineered versions of adeno-associated virus (AAV) are commonly used
in gene therapy but evidence revealing a potential oncogenic role of natural AAV 
in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has raised concerns. The frequency of
potentially oncogenic integrations has been reported in only a few populations.
AAV infection and host genome integration in another type of liver cancer,
cholangiocarcinoma (CCA), has been studied only in one cohort. All reported
oncogenic AAV integrations in HCC come from strains resembling the fully
sequenced AAV2 and partly sequenced AAV13. When AAV integration occurs, only a
fragment of the AAV genome is detectable in later DNA or RNA sequencing. The
integrated fragment is typically from the 3' end of the AAV genome, and this
positional bias has been only partly explained. Three research groups searched
for evidence of AAV integration in HCC RNAseq samples in the Cancer Genome Atlas 
(TCGA) but reported conflicting results.
RESULTS: We collected and analyzed whole transcriptome and viral capture DNA
sequencing in paired tumor and non-tumor samples from two liver cancer Asian
cohorts from Thailand (N = 147, 47 HCC and 100 intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma
(iCCA)) and Mongolia (N = 70, all HCC). We found only one HCC patient with a
potentially oncogenic integration of AAV, in contrast to higher frequency
reported in European patients. There were no oncogenic AAV integrations in iCCA
patients. AAV genomic segments are present preferentially in the non-tumor
samples of Thai patients. By analyzing the AAV genome positions of oncogenic and 
non-oncogenic integrated fragments, we found that almost all the putative
oncogenic integrations overlap the X gene, which is present and functional only
in the strain AAV2 among all fully sequenced strains. This gene content
difference could explain why putative oncogenic integrations from other AAV
strains have not been reported. We resolved the discrepancies in previous
analyses of AAV presence in TCGA HCC samples and extended it to CCA. There are 12
TCGA samples with an AAV segment and none are in Asian patients. AAV segments are
present in preferentially in TCGA non-tumor samples, like what we observed in the
Thai patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest a minimal AAV risk of hepatocarcinogenesis in
Asian liver cancer patients. The partial genome presence and positional bias of
AAV integrations into the human genome has complicated analysis of possible roles
of AAV in liver cancer.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-021-08098-9 
PMCID: PMC8588581
PMID: 34763675  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

