
1. Front Vet Sci. 2021 Oct 25;8:730874. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2021.730874. eCollection 
2021.

Management of Suspected Cases of Feline Immunodeficiency Virus Infection in
Eurasian Lynx (Lynx lynx) During an International Translocation Program.

Ryser-Degiorgis MP(1), Marti I(1), Pisano SRR(1), Pewsner M(1), Wehrle M(2),
Breitenmoser-Würsten C(3), Origgi FC(1), Kübber-Heiss A(4), Knauer F(4), Posautz 
A(4), Eberspächer-Schweda M(5), Huder JB(6), Böni J(6), Kubacki J(7), Bachofen
C(7), Riond B(8), Hofmann-Lehmann R(8), Meli ML(8).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Fish and Wildlife Health, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern,
Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Natur- und Tierpark Goldau, Goldau, Switzerland.
(3)Foundation KORA (Carnivore Ecology and Wildlife Management), Muri bei Bern,
Switzerland.
(4)Research Institute of Wildlife Ecology, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(5)Dentistry and Oral Surgery Service, Department/Hospital for Companion Animals 
and Horses, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(6)Swiss National Center for Retroviruses, Institute of Medical Virology,
University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(7)Institute of Virology, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.
(8)Clinical Laboratory, Department of Clinical Diagnostics and Services, and
Center for Clinical Studies, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.

The Eurasian lynx (Lynx lynx) population in Switzerland serves as a source for
reintroductions in neighboring countries. In 2016-2017, three lynx from the same 
geographical area were found seropositive for feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)
in the framework of an international translocation program. This novel finding
raised questions about the virus origin and pathogenicity to lynx, the emerging
character of the infection, and the interpretation of serological results in
other lynx caught for translocation. Archived serum samples from 84 lynx captured
in 2001-2016 were retrospectively tested for FIV antibodies by Western blot. All 
archived samples were FIV-negative. The three seropositive lynx were monitored in
quarantine enclosures prior to euthanasia and necropsy. They showed disease
signs, pathological findings, and occurrence of co-infections reminding of those 
described in FIV-infected domestic cats. All attempts to isolate and characterize
the virus failed but serological data and spatiotemporal proximity of the cases
suggested emergence of a lentivirus with antigenic and pathogenic similarities to
FIV in the Swiss lynx population. A decision scheme was developed to minimize
potential health risks posed by FIV infection, both in the recipient and source
lynx populations, considering conservation goals, animal welfare, and the limited
action range resulting from local human conflicts. Development and implementation
of a cautious decision scheme was particularly challenging because FIV pathogenic
potential in lynx was unclear, negative FIV serological results obtained within
the first weeks after infection are unpredictable, and neither euthanasia nor
repatriation of multiple lynx was acceptable options. The proposed scheme
distinguished between three scenarios: release at the capture site,
translocation, or euthanasia. Until April 2021, none of the 40 lynx newly
captured in Switzerland tested FIV-seropositive. Altogether, seropositivity to
FIV was documented in none of 124 lynx tested at their first capture, but three
of them seroconverted in 2016-2017. Diagnosis of FIV infection in the three
seropositive lynx remains uncertain, but clinical observations and pathological
findings confirmed that euthanasia was appropriate. Our experiences underline the
necessity to include FIV in pathogen screenings of free-ranging European wild
felids, the importance of lynx health monitoring, and the usefulness of health
protocols in wildlife translocation.

Copyright © 2021 Ryser-Degiorgis, Marti, Pisano, Pewsner, Wehrle,
Breitenmoser-Würsten, Origgi, Kübber-Heiss, Knauer, Posautz, Eberspächer-Schweda,
Huder, Böni, Kubacki, Bachofen, Riond, Hofmann-Lehmann and Meli.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2021.730874 
PMCID: PMC8573149
PMID: 34760956 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

