
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2021 Nov 11;15(11):e0009916. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0009916. [Epub ahead of print]

Tomatidine reduces Chikungunya virus progeny release by controlling viral protein
expression.

Troost-Kind B(1), van Hemert MJ(2), van de Pol D(1), van der Ende-Metselaar H(1),
Merits A(3), Borggrewe M(4), Rodenhuis-Zybert IA(1), Smit JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infection Prevention, University of
Groningen; University Medical Center Groningen; Groningen, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, Molecular Virology Laboratory, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, the Netherlands.
(3)Institute of Technology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences of Cells & Systems, Section Molecular
Neurobiology, University of Groningen; University Medical Center Groningen;
Groningen, the Netherlands.

Tomatidine, a natural steroidal alkaloid from unripe green tomatoes has been
shown to exhibit many health benefits. We recently provided in vitro evidence
that tomatidine reduces the infectivity of Dengue virus (DENV) and Chikungunya
virus (CHIKV), two medically important arthropod-borne human infections for which
no treatment options are available. We observed a potent antiviral effect with
EC50 values of 0.82 μM for DENV-2 and 1.3 μM for CHIKV-LR. In this study, we
investigated how tomatidine controls CHIKV infectivity. Using mass spectrometry, 
we identified that tomatidine induces the expression of p62, CD98,
metallothionein and thioredoxin-related transmembrane protein 2 in Huh7 cells.
The hits p62 and CD98 were validated, yet subsequent analysis revealed that they 
are not responsible for the observed antiviral effect. In parallel, we sought to 
identify at which step of the virus replication cycle tomatidine controls virus
infectivity. A strong antiviral effect was seen when in vitro transcribed CHIKV
RNA was transfected into Huh7 cells treated with tomatidine, thereby excluding a 
role for tomatidine during CHIKV cell entry. Subsequent determination of the
number of intracellular viral RNA copies and viral protein expression levels
during natural infection revealed that tomatidine reduces the RNA copy number and
viral protein expression levels in infected cells. Once cells are infected,
tomatidine is not able to interfere with active RNA replication yet it can reduce
viral protein expression. Collectively, the results delineate that tomatidine
controls viral protein expression to exert its antiviral activity. Lastly,
sequential passaging of CHIKV in presence of tomatidine did not lead to viral
resistance. Collectively, these results further emphasize the potential of
tomatidine as an antiviral treatment towards CHIKV infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0009916 
PMID: 34762680 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

