
1. Indian J Sex Transm Dis AIDS. 2021 Jan-Jun;42(1):1-6. doi:
10.4103/ijstd.ijstd_20_21. Epub 2021 May 3.

Male circumcision and Sexually transmitted Infections - An update.

Mehta KS(1), Marfatia YS(2), Jain AP(2), Shah DJ(3), Baxi DS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Consultant Dermatologist, SBKS Medical Institute and Research Centre,
Vadodara, Gujarat, India.
(2)Department of Skin and VD, SBKS Medical Institute and Research Centre,
Vadodara, Gujarat, India.
(3)Department of Skin and VD, Baroda Medical College, Vadodara, Gujarat, India.

Role of male circumcision (MC) as a tool to prevent sexually transmitted
infections (STIs)/human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was assessed. An attempt was
made to search articles related to association between MC and STIs/HIV. A
thorough search was carried out to find out quality articles published in indexed
specialty journals. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and World Health
Organization (WHO) sites were also referred. Warm and moist environment of area
under foreskin facilitates some pathogens to persist and replicate. Further, the 
thinness of foreskin predisposes it to minor trauma and abrasions that facilitate
the entry of pathogens. MC reduces HIV infection risk by 50%-60% over time and
reduces the risk of men acquiring herpes simplex virus-2 and human papillomavirus
(HPV) that can cause penile and other anogenital cancers, by 30%. There is no
significant reduction in risk of acquiring syphilis, but reduced risk of
acquisition of Haemophilus ducreyi is reported. MC is reported to be beneficial
in conditions such as traumatic injury, Balanitis Xerotica Obliterans, refractory
balanoposthitis, and chronic, recurrent urinary tract infections. MC also reduces
the chances of penile carcinoma by facilitating improved penile hygiene, lowering
HPV/HIV transmission rates, and reducing chronic inflammatory conditions such as 
phimosis and balanitis. MC has been recommended by the WHO and UNAIDS in 2007 as 
an additional HIV prevention intervention in settings of high HIV prevalence. MC 
is an important adjunct to safe sex education, condom use, and vaccination (HPV) 
in reducing the global burden of HIV/STIs-related morbidity and mortality.

Copyright: © 2021 Indian Journal of Sexually Transmitted Diseases and AIDS.

DOI: 10.4103/ijstd.ijstd_20_21 
PMCID: PMC8579597
PMID: 34765930 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.

