
1. Influenza Other Respir Viruses. 2021 Nov 10. doi: 10.1111/irv.12926. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Community predictors of COVID-19 cases and deaths in Massachusetts: Evaluating
changes over time using geospatially refined data.

Spangler KR(1), Patil P(2), Peng X(2), Levy JI(1), Lane KJ(1), Tieskens KF(1),
Carnes F(1), Klevens RM(3), Erdman EA(4), Troppy TS(3), Fabian MP(1), Leibler
JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, Boston University School of Public Health,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public Health,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Bureau of Infectious Disease and Laboratory Sciences, Massachusetts Department
of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Office of Population Health, Massachusetts Department of Public Health,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

BACKGROUND: The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the need for targeted local
interventions given substantial heterogeneity within cities and counties.
Publicly available case data are typically aggregated to the city or county level
to protect patient privacy, but more granular data are necessary to identify and 
act upon community-level risk factors that can change over time.
METHODS: Individual COVID-19 case and mortality data from Massachusetts were
geocoded to residential addresses and aggregated into two time periods: "Phase 1"
(March-June 2020) and "Phase 2" (September 2020 to February 2021). Institutional 
cases associated with long-term care facilities, prisons, or homeless shelters
were identified using address data and modeled separately. Census tract
sociodemographic and occupational predictors were drawn from the 2015-2019
American Community Survey. We used mixed-effects negative binomial regression to 
estimate incidence rate ratios (IRRs), accounting for town-level spatial
autocorrelation.
RESULTS: Case incidence was elevated in census tracts with higher proportions of 
Black and Latinx residents, with larger associations in Phase 1 than Phase 2.
Case incidence associated with proportion of essential workers was similarly
elevated in both Phases. Mortality IRRs had differing patterns from case IRRs,
decreasing less substantially between Phases for Black and Latinx populations and
increasing between Phases for proportion of essential workers. Mortality models
excluding institutional cases yielded stronger associations for age,
race/ethnicity, and essential worker status.
CONCLUSIONS: Geocoded home address data can allow for nuanced analyses of
community disease patterns, identification of high-risk subgroups, and exclusion 
of institutional cases to comprehensively reflect community risk.

© 2021 The Authors. Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/irv.12926 
PMID: 34761531 

