
1. J Family Med Prim Care. 2021 Sep;10(9):3355-3360. doi:
10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_801_21. Epub 2021 Sep 30.

Response of the health system in Nipah outbreak in Ernakulam district: A
qualitative analysis.

Menon VB(1), George LS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community Medicine and Public Health, Amrita Institute of
Medical Sciences, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Kochi, Kerala, India.

Background: Nipah is an emerging zoonotic disease that is transmitted through
contaminated food or directly between people. Recently, Nipah virus infection was
confirmed in Kochi, Kerala, making it the fourth outbreak reported in India.
However, due to its good epidemic response, the health system of Kerala was able 
to control it in a timely manner.
Objective: To qualitatively analyse the response of the health system of Kerala
in controlling the Nipah outbreak (2019) by identifying the enabling factors and 
the challenges faced by it.
Methods: A qualitative study was conducted using grounded theory approach. Key
informant interviews were conducted till data saturation was reached. The audio
recorded data was translated, transcribed and was manually coded and thematically
analysed.
Results: The major enablers for its apt response were identified to be effective 
communication, good line of control, effective division of work, intersectorial
coordination, strong leadership, political commitment, resilient public private
partnership and support groups, past experiences in disaster management, quick
procurement of medicines and availability of lab facilities. On the other hand,
the challenges identified were initial confusions, lack of standard operating
procedures/guidelines for epidemic management, complacency, lack of effective
zoonotic surveillance, media management and community participation.
Conclusion: This study attributes the success of the outbreak response to the
strong leadership and political commitment. In order to prevent recurrences in
the future, there is a need to build a resilient health system through capacity
building and further strengthening of the surveillance system.

Copyright: © 2021 Journal of Family Medicine and Primary Care.

DOI: 10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_801_21 
PMCID: PMC8565131
PMID: 34760757 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.

