
1. Front Mol Biosci. 2021 Oct 26;8:728661. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.728661.
eCollection 2021.

Bromodomain Containing Protein 4 (BRD4) Regulates Expression of its Interacting
Coactivators in the Innate Response to Respiratory Syncytial Virus.

Xu X(1), Mann M(1), Qiao D(1), Li Y(2), Zhou J(2), Brasier AR(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin-Madison School of Medicine and
Public Health (SMPH), Madison, WI, United States.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX, United States.
(3)Institute for Clinical and Translational Research (ICTR), University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, United States.

Bromodomain-containing protein 4 plays a central role in coordinating the complex
epigenetic component of the innate immune response. Previous studies implicated
BRD4 as a component of a chromatin-modifying complex that is dynamically
recruited to a network of protective cytokines by binding activated transcription
factors, polymerases, and histones to trigger their rapid expression via
transcriptional elongation. Our previous study extended our understanding of the 
airway epithelial BRD4 interactome by identifying over 100 functionally important
coactivators and transcription factors, whose association is induced by
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection. RSV is an etiological agent of
recurrent respiratory tract infections associated with exacerbations of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Using a highly selective small-molecule BRD4
inhibitor (ZL0454) developed by us, we extend these findings to identify the gene
regulatory network dependent on BRD4 bromodomain (BD) interactions. Human small
airway epithelial cells were infected in the absence or presence of ZL0454, and
gene expression profiling was performed. A highly reproducible dataset was
obtained which indicated that BRD4 mediates both activation and repression of
RSV-inducible gene regulatory networks controlling cytokine expression,
interferon (IFN) production, and extracellular matrix remodeling. Index genes of 
functionally significant clusters were validated independently. We discover that 
BRD4 regulates the expression of its own gene during the innate immune response. 
Interestingly, BRD4 activates the expression of NFκB/RelA, a coactivator that
binds to BRD4 in a BD-dependent manner. We extend this finding to show that BRD4 
also regulates other components of its functional interactome, including the
Mediator (Med) coactivator complex and the SWI/SNF-related, matrix-associated,
actin-dependent regulator of chromatin (SMARC) subunits. To provide further
insight into mechanisms for BRD4 in RSV expression, we mapped 7,845 RSV-inducible
Tn5 transposase peaks onto the BRD4-dependent gene bodies. These were located in 
promoters and introns of cytostructural and extracellular matrix (ECM) formation 
genes. These data indicate that BRD4 mediates the dynamic response of airway
epithelial cells to RNA infection by modulating the expression of its
coactivators, controlling the expression of host defense mechanisms and
remodeling genes through changes in promoter accessibility.

Copyright © 2021 Xu, Mann, Qiao, Li, Zhou and Brasier.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.728661 
PMCID: PMC8577543
PMID: 34765643 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

