
1. Sch Psychol. 2021 Nov;36(6):546-554. doi: 10.1037/spq0000464.

Experiences and perceptions of school staff regarding the COVID-19 pandemic and
racial equity: The role of colorblindness.

Jones TM(1), Diaz A(2), Bruick S(2), McCowan K(2), Wong DW(2), Chatterji A(2),
Malorni A(2), Spencer MS(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Work, Colorado State University.
(2)School of Social Work, University of Washington.

As schools physically closed across the country to protect against the spread of 
the COVID-19 pandemic, it became clear early on that the burden on students will 
not be equally shared. Structural racism patterns the lives of people of color
that, in turn, increases their exposure to the effects of the pandemic further
impacting the quality of education the students of color have access to. It is
critical to examine the ways in which racial disparities in social emotional and 
educational outcomes have the potential to increase as a result of the pandemic. 
To that end, using a content analysis of an open-ended survey, this study
examines (a) how teachers and school staff experienced the pandemic, (b) their
perception of student experiences during the transition to remote learning, and
(c) school staff's perceptions of how racial inequities may be increased as a
result of the pandemic. Our findings highlight the deep, but unequal impact of
the pandemic on school staff, students, and their families. Teachers are
overwhelmed and overworked, struggling to manage multiple roles while working at 
home. They also have tremendous empathy for the weight of the losses that
students have experienced, and concern for the well-being of students in
difficult living or family situations. However, most school staff maintained a
colorblind analysis of the way the pandemic is affecting their students and did
not recognize the role of systemic racism or potential for racial disparities to 
be increased. Implications and limitations are discussed. (PsycInfo Database
Record (c) 2021 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/spq0000464 
PMID: 34766816  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

