
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 26;12:750386. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.750386. eCollection
2021.

Isolation and Characterization of Mouse Monoclonal Antibodies That Neutralize
SARS-CoV-2 and Its Variants of Concern Alpha, Beta, Gamma and Delta by Binding
Conformational Epitopes of Glycosylated RBD With High Potency.

Mariotti S(1), Capocefalo A(2), Chiantore MV(1), Iacobino A(1), Teloni R(1), De
Angelis ML(3), Gallinaro A(4), Pirillo MF(4), Borghi M(1), Canitano A(4),
Michelini Z(4), Baggieri M(1), Marchi A(1), Bucci P(1), McKay PF(5), Acchioni
C(1), Sandini S(1), Sgarbanti M(1), Tosini F(1), Di Virgilio A(6), Venturi G(1), 
Marino F(7), Esposito V(7), Di Bonito P(1), Magurano F(1), Cara A(4), Negri D(1),
Nisini R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Malattie infettive, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Roma, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento Sicurezza alimentare, nutrizione e sanità pubblica veterinaria,
Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Roma, Italy.
(3)Dipartimento di Oncologia e Medicina Molecolare, Istituto Superiore di Sanità,
Roma, Italy.
(4)Centro nazionale per la salute globale, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Roma,
Italy.
(5)Department of Infectious Disease, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Centro per la sperimentazione ed il benessere animale, Istituto Superiore di
Sanità, Roma, Italy.
(7)Centro nazionale per il controllo e la valutazione dei farmaci, Istituto
Superiore di Sanità, Roma, Italy.

Antibodies targeting Receptor Binding Domain (RBD) of SARS-CoV-2 have been
suggested to account for the majority of neutralizing activity in COVID-19
convalescent sera and several neutralizing antibodies (nAbs) have been isolated, 
characterized and proposed as emergency therapeutics in the form of monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs). However, SARS-CoV-2 variants are rapidly spreading worldwide
from the sites of initial identification. The variants of concern (VOC) B.1.1.7
(Alpha), B.1.351 (Beta), P.1 (Gamma) and B.1.167.2 (Delta) showed mutations in
the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein potentially able to cause escape from nAb responses 
with a consequent reduction of efficacy of vaccines and mAbs-based therapy. We
produced the recombinant RBD (rRBD) of SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein from the
Wuhan-Hu 1 reference sequence in a mammalian system, for mice immunization to
isolate new mAbs with neutralizing activity. Here we describe four mAbs that were
able to bind the rRBD in Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay and the transmembrane 
full-length spike protein expressed in HEK293T cells by flow cytometry assay.
Moreover, the mAbs recognized the RBD in supernatants of SARS-CoV-2 infected VERO
E6 cells by Western Blot under non-reducing condition or in supernatants of cells
infected with lentivirus pseudotyped for spike protein, by immunoprecipitation
assay. Three out of four mAbs lost their binding efficiency to completely
N-deglycosylated rRBD and none was able to bind the same recombinant protein
expressed in Escherichia coli, suggesting that the epitopes recognized by three
mAbs are generated by the conformational structure of the glycosylated native
protein. Of particular relevance, three mAbs were able to inhibit Wuhan
SARS-CoV-2 infection of VERO E6 cells in a plaque-reduction neutralization test
and the Wuhan SARS-CoV-2 as well as the Alpha, Beta, Gamma and Delta VOC in a
pseudoviruses-based neutralization test. These mAbs represent important
additional tools for diagnosis and therapy of COVID-19 and may contribute to the 
understanding of the functional structure of SARS-CoV-2 RBD.

Copyright © 2021 Mariotti, Capocefalo, Chiantore, Iacobino, Teloni, De Angelis,
Gallinaro, Pirillo, Borghi, Canitano, Michelini, Baggieri, Marchi, Bucci, McKay, 
Acchioni, Sandini, Sgarbanti, Tosini, Di Virgilio, Venturi, Marino, Esposito, Di 
Bonito, Magurano, Cara, Negri and Nisini.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.750386 
PMCID: PMC8576447
PMID: 34764961  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

