
1. Mol Ther. 2021 Nov 2. pii: S1525-0016(21)00516-5. doi:
10.1016/j.ymthe.2021.10.009. [Epub ahead of print]

sEVsRVG selectively delivers antiviral siRNA to fetus brain, inhibits ZIKV
infection and mitigates ZIKV-induced microcephaly in mouse model.

Zhang R(1), Fu Y(2), Cheng M(1), Ma W(1), Zheng N(1), Wang Y(3), Wu Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Public Health Research, Medical School, Nanjing University,
Nanjing, PR China.
(2)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity, Institutes of Biology and
Medical Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou, China.
(3)Department of Orthopedics, Northern Jiangsu People's Hospital, the Affiliated 
Hospital of Nanjing University Medical School, Yangzhou, China. Electronic
address: wyx918spine@126.com.
(4)Center for Public Health Research, Medical School, Nanjing University,
Nanjing, PR China; State Key Lab of Analytical Chemistry for Life Science,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, PR China; Medical School and Jiangsu Key Laboratory 
of Molecular Medicine, Nanjing University, Nanjing, PR China. Electronic address:
wzhw@nju.edu.cn.

Zika virus (ZIKV), a flavivirus associated with neurological disorders,
constitutes a global health threat. During pregnancy, ZIKV traverses the placenta
and causes congenital disease such as microcephaly and Guillain-Barré syndrome in
newborns. To develop a specific antiviral therapy against ZIKV-induced
microcephaly that could cross placental and blood-brain barriers, we designed
targeted small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) encapsulating antiviral siRNA (small
interfering RNA) to inhibit ZIKV. The neuro-specific targeting was achieved by
engineering EVs membrane protein lamp2b fused with a neuron-specific rabies virus
glycoprotein derived peptide (RVG). Intravenous administration of the
RVG-engineered sEVs loaded with siRNA (ZIKV-specific siRNA) protected pregnant
AG6 mice against vertical transmission of ZIKV. Particularly, sEVsRVG-siRNA
traversed placental and blood-brain barriers and suppressed ZIKV infection in
fetal brains. Moreover, sEVsRVG-siRNA alleviated the neuroinflammation and
neurological damage caused by ZIKV in the fetal mouse model. In general, we
developed a sEVs-based targeted system of antiviral therapy for brain and fetal
brain infections.

Copyright © 2021 The American Society of Gene and Cell Therapy. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2021.10.009 
PMID: 34762817 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors have
declared no conflict of interest.

