
1. Pest Manag Sci. 2021 Nov 11. doi: 10.1002/ps.6709. [Epub ahead of print]

Discovery of glyantrypine-family alkaloids as novel antiviral and
antiphytopathogenic-fungus agents.

Hao YN(1), Yu M(1), Wang KH(1), Zhu BB(1), Wang ZW(2), Liu YX(1), Ma DJ(1), Wang 
QM(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Elemento-Organic Chemistry, Research Institute of
Elemento-Organic Chemistry, College of Chemistry, Frontiers Science Center for
New Organic Matter, Nankai University, Tianjin, China.
(2)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Structure and Performance for Functional Molecules, 
College of Chemistry, Tianjin Normal University, Tianjin, China.

BACKGROUND: Plant diseases caused by viruses and fungi have caused great losses
to crop quality and yield. The discovery of novel and efficient antiviral and
antiphytopathogenic-fungus agents is urgently needed. It is the most important
pesticide innovation strategy to find active compounds from natural products.
Here, glyantrypine-family alkaloids were taken as the parent structures and a
series of their derivatives were designed through molecular splicing, ring
expansion, and ring contraction strategies, and synthesized. The anti-tobacco
mosaic virus (TMV) activities and antifungal activities of these alkaloids were
systematically investigated for the first time.
RESULT: The antiviral activities of compounds 7bb, 7bc, 11c, 18b, 18d, 28d, and
28e are equivalent to or better than that of ribavirin (inhibitory rates 39%,
37%, and 40% at 500 μg mL-1 for inactivation, curative, and protection activity
in vivo, respectively). Compounds 18d and 28d with good antiviral activities were
selected for antiviral mode of action studies, which indicated that these
alkaloids could achieve good antiviral effects by inhibiting TMV particle
extension during assembly. These compounds also exhibited broad-spectrum
fungicidal activities.
CONCLUSION: Glyantrypine-family alkaloids and their derivatives were synthesized 
and evaluated for anti-TMV and fungicidal activities for the first time.
Compounds 18d and 28d with excellent antiviral activities and compound 7bc with
remarkable fungicidal activity emerged as novel lead compounds. This study lays a
foundation for the application of glyantrypine alkaloids in plant protection.

© 2021 Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/ps.6709 
PMID: 34761501 

