
1. Acta Ophthalmol. 2021 Nov 11. doi: 10.1111/aos.15061. [Epub ahead of print]

Anterior segment involvement in Epstein-Barr virus: a review.

Alba-Linero C(1)(2), Rocha-de-Lossada C(3)(4)(5), Rachwani-Anil R(6),
Sainz-de-la-Maza M(7), Sena-Corrales G(8), Romano V(9)(10),
Rodríguez-Calvo-de-Mora M(11).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Clínico Universitario Málaga, Málaga, Spain.
(2)Departamento Oftalmología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Málaga,
Málaga, Spain.
(3)Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology (Qvision), Vithas Virgen del Mar Hospital,
Almería, Spain.
(5)Ceuta Medical Center, Ceuta, Spain.
(6)Hospital de Antequera, Málaga, Spain.
(7)Institute Clinic Ophthalmology, Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, Barcelona,
Spain.
(8)Hospital Costa del Sol, Marbella, Spain.
(9)Eye Clinic, Department of Neurological and Vision Sciences, University of
Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(10)Department of Eye and Vision Science, Institute of Life Course and Medical
Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
(11)Hospital Regional de Málaga, Málaga, Spain.

The aim of this study is to describe the involvement of Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) 
in the diseases of the ocular anterior segment. This is a narrative review
designed using the PUBMED, SCOPE and Web of Science databases, searching for
reported literature on findings in the anterior ocular segment related to EBV
between 1990 and 2020. Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) is implicated in the development 
of salmon-coloured conjunctival masses in the context of acute mononucleosis and 
lymphoproliferative disorders. Moreover, EBV can cause haemorrhagic
conjunctivitis and its corneal implications appear as different types of
keratitis patterns. The involvement of EBV in the pathogenesis of anterior
segment inflammation is not well-defined. Current evidence regarding anterior
segment disease caused by EBV infection has been proved by positive viral
detection through polymerase chain reaction test in eyes with lymphoproliferative
disorders known to be caused by EBV, as B- and NK/T-cell lymphoid tumours.
Antiviral treatment (oral Aciclovir or Valaciclovir) in anterior segment disease 
caused by EBV remains controversial.

© 2021 Acta Ophthalmologica Scandinavica Foundation. Published by John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/aos.15061 
PMID: 34766457 

