
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 26;12:746986. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.746986. eCollection
2021.

Cross-Reactivity to Mutated Viral Immune Targets Can Influence CD8+ T Cell
Functionality: An Alternative Viral Adaptation Strategy.

Currenti J(1), Law BMP(1), Qin K(2), John M(3)(4), Pilkinton MA(5), Bansal A(2), 
Leary S(3), Ram R(3), Chopra A(3), Gangula R(5), Yue L(6)(7), Warren C(5),
Barnett L(5), Alves E(1), McDonnell WJ(5), Sooda A(3), Heath SL(2), Mallal
S(3)(5), Goepfert P(2), Kalams SA(5), Gaudieri S(1)(3)(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Human Sciences, University of Western Australia, Crawley, WA,
Australia.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL,
United States.
(3)Institute for Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Murdoch University, Murdoch,
WA, Australia.
(4)Department of Clinical Immunology, Royal Perth Hospital, Perth, WA, Australia.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, United States.
(6)Emory Vaccine Center at Yerkes National Primate Research Center, Emory
University, Atlanta, GA, United States.
(7)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta,
GA, United States.

Loss of T cell immunogenicity due to mutations in virally encoded epitopes is a
well-described adaptation strategy to limit host anti-viral immunity. Another
described, but less understood, adaptation strategy involves the selection of
mutations within epitopes that retain immune recognition, suggesting a benefit
for the virus despite continued immune pressure (termed non-classical
adaptation). To understand this adaptation strategy, we utilized a single cell
transcriptomic approach to identify features of the HIV-specific CD8+ T cell
responses targeting non-adapted (NAE) and adapted (AE) forms of epitopes
containing a non-classical adaptation. T cell receptor (TCR) repertoire and
transcriptome were obtained from antigen-specific CD8+ T cells of chronic (n=7)
and acute (n=4) HIV-infected subjects identified by either HLA class I tetramers 
or upregulation of activation markers following peptide stimulation. CD8+ T cells
were predominantly dual tetramer+, confirming a large proportion of
cross-reactive TCR clonotypes capable of recognizing the NAE and AE form.
However, single-reactive CD8+ T cells were identified in acute HIV-infected
subjects only, providing the potential for the selection of T cell clones over
time. The transcriptomic profile of CD8+ T cells was dependent on the autologous 
virus: subjects whose virus encoded the NAE form of the epitope (and who
transitioned to the AE form at a later timepoint) exhibited an 'effective' immune
response, as indicated by expression of transcripts associated with
polyfunctionality, cytotoxicity and apoptosis (largely driven by the genes GZMB, 
IFNɣ, CCL3, CCL4 and CCL5). These data suggest that viral adaptation at a single 
amino acid residue can provide an alternative strategy for viral survival by
modulating the transcriptome of CD8+ T cells and potentially selecting for less
effective T cell clones from the acute to chronic phase.

Copyright © 2021 Currenti, Law, Qin, John, Pilkinton, Bansal, Leary, Ram, Chopra,
Gangula, Yue, Warren, Barnett, Alves, McDonnell, Sooda, Heath, Mallal, Goepfert, 
Kalams and Gaudieri.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.746986 
PMCID: PMC8577586
PMID: 34764960 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

