
1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Oct 26;12:742146. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.742146.
eCollection 2021.

Modulating Neurological Complications of Emerging Infectious Diseases:
Mechanistic Approaches to Candidate Phytochemicals.

Fakhri S(1), Mohammadi Pour P(2), Piri S(1), Farzaei MH(1), Echeverría J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Sciences Research Center, Health Institute, Kermanshah
University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran.
(2)Department of Pharmacognosy, School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
(3)Departamento de Ciencias del Ambiente, Facultad de Química y Biología,
Universidad de Santiago de Chile, Santiago, Chile.

Growing studies are revealing the critical manifestations of influenza, dengue
virus (DENV) infection, Zika virus (ZIKV) disease, and Ebola virus disease (EVD) 
as emerging infectious diseases. However, their corresponding mechanisms of major
complications headed for neuronal dysfunction are not entirely understood. From
the mechanistic point of view, inflammatory/oxidative mediators are activated
during emerging infectious diseases towards less cell migration, neurogenesis
impairment, and neuronal death. Accordingly, the virus life cycle and associated 
enzymes, as well as host receptors, cytokine storm, and multiple signaling
mediators, are the leading players of emerging infectious diseases. Consequently,
chemokines, interleukins, interferons, carbohydrate molecules, toll-like
receptors (TLRs), and tyrosine kinases are leading orchestrates of peripheral and
central complications which are in near interconnections. Some of the resulting
neuronal manifestations have attracted much attention, including inflammatory
polyneuropathy, encephalopathy, meningitis, myelitis, stroke, Guillain-Barré
syndrome (GBS), radiculomyelitis, meningoencephalitis, memory loss, headaches,
cranial nerve abnormalities, tremor, and seizure. The complex pathophysiological 
mechanism behind the aforementioned complications urges the need for finding
multi-target agents with higher efficacy and lower side effects. In recent
decades, the natural kingdom has been highlighted as promising neuroprotective
natural products in modulating several dysregulated signaling pathways/mediators.
The present study provides neuronal manifestations of some emerging infectious
diseases and underlying pathophysiological mechanisms. Besides, a
mechanistic-based strategy is developed to introduce candidate natural products
as promising multi-target agents in combating major dysregulated pathways towards
neuroprotection in influenza, DENV infection, ZIKV disease, and EVD.

Copyright © 2021 Fakhri, Mohammadi Pour, Piri, Farzaei and Echeverría.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.742146 
PMCID: PMC8576094
PMID: 34764869 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

