
1. PeerJ. 2021 Oct 29;9:e12308. doi: 10.7717/peerj.12308. eCollection 2021.

Modeling the current distribution suitability and future dynamics of Culicoides
imicola under climate change scenarios.

Gao H(1)(2), Wang L(1)(2), Ma J(1)(2), Gao X(1)(2), Xiao J(1)(2), Wang H(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin,
People's Republic of China.
(2)Key Laboratory of the Provincial Education Department of Heilongjiang for
Common Animal Disease Prevention and Treatment, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, People's Republic of China.

Background: African horse sickness, a transboundary and non-contagious arboviral 
infectious disease of equids, has spread without any warning from sub-Saharan
Africa towards the Southeast Asian countries in 2020. It is imperative to predict
the global distribution of Culicoides imicola (C. imicola), which was the main
vector of African horse sickness virus.
Methods: The occurrence records of C. imicola were mainly obtained from the
published literature and the Global Biodiversity Information Facility database.
The maximum entropy algorithm was used to model the current distribution
suitability and future dynamics of C. imicola under climate change scenarios.
Results: The modeling results showed that the currently suitable habitats for C. 
imicola were distributed in most of the southern part areas of America,
southwestern Europe, most of Africa, the coastal areas of the Middle East, almost
all regions of South Asia, southern China, a few countries in Southeast Asia, and
the whole Australia. Our model also revealed the important environmental
variables on the distribution of C. imicola were temperature seasonality,
precipitation of coldest quarter, and mean temperature of wettest quarter.
Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) is an assumption of possible
greenhouse gases emissions in the future. Under future climate change scenarios, 
the area of habitat suitability increased and decreased with time, and RCP 8.5 in
the 2070s gave the worst prediction. Moreover, the habitat suitability of C.
imicola will likely expand to higher latitudes. The prediction of this study is
of strategic significance for vector surveillance and the prevention of
vector-borne diseases.

© 2021 Gao et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.12308 
PMCID: PMC8559603
PMID: 34760364 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

