
1. Indian J Sex Transm Dis AIDS. 2021 Jan-Jun;42(1):50-56. doi:
10.4103/ijstd.IJSTD_102_19. Epub 2020 Jul 31.

A randomized prospective study to assess health-related quality-of-life outcomes 
of antiretroviral therapy in human immunodeficiency virus-positive adults.

Kumar V(1), Singh J(2), Singh H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
Rishikesh, Uttarakhand, India.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Government Medical College, Amritsar, Punjab,
India.
(3)Department of Medicine, Government Medical College, Amritsar, Punjab, India.

Introduction: Health-related quality of life (HRQOL) in human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV)-positive individuals is substantially challenged due to disease,
opportunistic infections, lifelong commitment, and tolerability to antiretroviral
therapy (ART) and various social, physical, and psychological domains.
Aim: This study was conducted to assess the magnitude of the impact on HRQOL in
HIV-positive people from early access to ART.
Settings and Design: This was a randomized, prospective, open-label study,
conducted at the ART center attached to the Government Medical College, Amritsar.
Subjects and Methods: This study comprised 240 HIV-infected adults in the age
group >18 years who presented to the ART center. Approval from the Institutional 
Ethics Committee was obtained. Informed consent was taken from all the enrolled
participants after explaining the study therapy and its benefits and side
effects. Patients who presented early in their course of disease and had baseline
CD4 count ≥350/mm3 were recruited in early arm and those with <350/mm3 or the
development of symptomatic HIV-related disease in the late arm. Following
stratification, both groups were 1:1 randomized by permuted block randomization. 
The primary objective was to assess HRQOL using the World Health Organization
Quality of Life-HIV brief instrument (WHOQOL-HIV).
Statistical Analysis Used: The summary domain and total HRQOL scores were
calculated using method developed by the WHOQOL-HIV group. Unpaired t-test was
applied for statistical analysis, with level of significance expressed as P <
0.05.
Results: Out of the total 240 HIV-positive patients, 120 who met eligibility
criteria were recruited for the final analysis. There was a significant
difference between HRQOL score of Physical domains and Psychological domains,
between early and late arms at baseline and at the end of 9 months.
Conclusions: Quality of life is an important holistic measure for assessing the
health of people living with HIV/AIDS.

Copyright: © 2020 Indian Journal of Sexually Transmitted Diseases and AIDS.

DOI: 10.4103/ijstd.IJSTD_102_19 
PMCID: PMC8579595
PMID: 34765938 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.

