
1. J BUON. 2021 Sep-Oct;26(5):2183-2190.

COVID-19 vaccines and cancer patients: acceptance, attitudes and safety.

Matovina Brko G(1), Popovic M, Jovic M, Radic J, Bodlovic Kladar M, Nikolic I,
Vidovic V, Kolarov Bjelobrk I, Kukic B, Salma S, Litavski J, Petrovic N,
Vranjkovic B, Roganovic T, Ruzic M, Dugandzija T, Popovic L.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Medical Oncology, Oncology Institute of Vojvodina, Sremska
Kamenica, Serbia.

PURPOSE: Recommendations and guidelines consider cancer patients a high-priority 
population for COVID-19 immunization. Vaccination process in Serbia began in
January 2021 with four available vaccines. We have conducted a cross-sectional
study investigating cancer patients' acceptability of anti SARS-COV2 vaccines.
METHODS: The study included 767 patients with solid and hematologic malignancies 
treated at the Oncology Institute of Vojvodina, Serbia. During July and August
2021 patients filled in an individual paper questionnaire on anti SARS-COV2
vaccination acceptance, preferences, side effects and information origin. Data on
treatment phase, diagnosis and treatment was collected from electronic health
records.
RESULTS: During the first six months of vaccination campaign in Serbia 41%
(320/767) of the investigated oncology patients received COVID-19 vaccines. The
median age of vaccinated patients was 65 years (28-84). Most of them (75%) were
in active treatment of cancer. Half of the unvaccinated patients (52%) wish to
get vaccinated after the end of their cancer treatment. Around 10% of the
patients definitely refused vaccination. The majority of information on COVID-19 
vaccines cancer patients got from their oncologist, television and newspapers.
Side effects were reported by 10.93% of the patients after the first dose and
13,31% after the second dose. No serious side effects were reported.
CONCLUSION: We have confirmed that patients are reluctant of receiving vaccine
due to fear of side effects, especially during the active cancer treatment.
However, real-world evidence and clinical trials data have gathered enough
evidence to reassure any doubts of the patients and their oncologists on safety
and efficacy of anti SARS-COV2 vaccines.


PMID: 34761633  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

