
1. Mol Ther. 2021 Nov 8. pii: S1525-0016(21)00576-1. doi:
10.1016/j.ymthe.2021.11.005. [Epub ahead of print]

Long-term efficacy and safety of eladocageneexuparvovec in patients with AADC
deficiency.

Tai CH(1), Lee NC(2), Chien YH(2), Byrne BJ(3), Muramatsu SI(4), Tseng SH(5), Hwu
WL(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, National Taiwan University Hospital and National
Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics and Pediatrics, National Taiwan University
Hospital and National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Powell Gene Therapy Center and Departments of Molecular Genetics and
Microbiology and Pediatrics, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(4)Division of Neurological Gene Therapy, Center for Innovation, Jichi Medical
University, Shimotsuke, Japan; Center for Gene & Cell Therapy, The Institute of
Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Surgery, National Taiwan University Hospital and National Taiwan
University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Medical Genetics and Pediatrics, National Taiwan University
Hospital and National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
Electronic address: hwuwlntu@ntu.edu.tw.

Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency results in decreased
neurotransmitter levels and severe motor dysfunction. Twenty-six patients without
head control received bilateral intraputaminal infusions of a recombinant
adeno-associated virus type 2 vector containing the human aromatic L-amino acid
decarboxylase gene (eladocagene exuparvovec) and have completed 1-year
evaluations. Rapid improvements in motor and cognitive function occurred within
12 months after gene therapy and were sustained during follow-up for >5 years. An
increase in dopamine production was demonstrated by positron emission tomography 
and neurotransmitter analysis. Patient symptoms (mood, sweating, temperature, and
oculogyric crises), patient growth, and patient caretaker quality of life
improved. Although improvements were observed in all treated participants,
younger age was associated with greater improvement. There were no
treatment-associated brain injuries, and most adverse events were related to
underlying disease. Post-surgery complications such as cerebrospinal fluid
leakage were managed with standard of care. Most patients experienced mild to
moderate dyskinesia that resolved in a few months. These observations suggest
that eladocagene exuparvovec treatment for aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
deficiency provides durable and meaningful benefits with a favorable safety
profile.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2021.11.005 
PMID: 34763085 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests C.-H.T. and S.-H.T. have
nothing to disclose. B.J.B. has served as an advisory board member for Pfizer,
RDRU, AavantBio, and SAB. He has received consulting fees from Pfizer and
AavantBio. He is a stock owner of AavantBio, an employee of the University of
Florida, and a research investigator for NIH Awards. Y.-H.C. participated as an
advisory board member of Asklepios BioPharmaceutical, Amicus, Biogen, Novartis,
Sanofi, and Takeda. He has received consulting fees from Abeona, Biogen,
Novartis, and PTC Therapeutics. He has also served as a research investigator for
Biogen and Sanofi and as a speaker for Avexis, Biogen, BioMarin, Novartis,
Sanofi, and Takeda. W.-L.H. participated as an advisory board member, received
consulting fees, and was a speaker for PTC Therapeutics, BioMarin, and Sanofi. He
was a grant recipient for PTC Therapeutics and BioMarin and a research
investigator for PTC Therapeutics. N.-C.L. has received consulting fees from PTC 
Therapeutics. S.-I.M. is an employee, has served as a research investigator, and 
owns stock in Gene Therapy Research Institution, which commercializes the use of 
AAV2 vectors for gene therapy applications. He participated as an advisory board 
member and received consulting fees for PTC Therapeutics. To the extent that the 
work in this manuscript increases the value of these commercial holdings, they
have a conflict of interest.

