
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 28;22(21). pii: 11694. doi: 10.3390/ijms222111694.

Biological Therapies in the Treatment of Cancer-Update and New Directions.

Papież MA(1), Krzyściak W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytobiology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Jagiellonian University
Medical College, 30-688 Kraków, Poland.
(2)Department of Medical Diagnostic, Faculty of Pharmacy, Jagiellonian University
Medical College, 30-688 Kraków, Poland.

Biological therapies have changed the face of oncology by targeting cancerous
cells while reducing the effect on normal tissue. This publication focuses mainly
on new therapies that have contributed to the advances in treatment of certain
malignancies. Immunotherapy, which has repeatedly proven to be a breakthrough
therapy in melanoma, as well as B-ALL therapy with CAR T cells, are of great
merit in this progress. These therapies are currently being developed by
modifying bispecific antibodies and CAR T cells to improve their efficiency and
bioavailability. Work on improving the therapy with oncolytic viruses is also
progressing, and efforts are being made to improve the immunogenicity and
stability of cancer vaccines. Combining various biological therapies,
immunotherapy with oncolytic viruses or cancer vaccines is gaining importance in 
cancer therapy. New therapeutic targets are intensively sought among neoantigens,
which are not immunocompromised, or antigens associated with tumor stroma cells. 
An example is fibroblast activation protein α (FAPα), the overexpression of which
is observed in the case of tumor progression. Universal therapeutic targets are
also sought, such as the neurotrophic receptor tyrosine kinase (NTRK) gene
fusion, a key genetic driver present in many types of cancer. This review also
raises the problem of the tumor microenvironment. Stromal cells can protect tumor
cells from chemotherapy and contribute to relapse and progression. This
publication also addresses the problem of cancer stem cells resistance to
treatment and presents attempts to avoid this phenomenon. This review focuses on 
the most important strategies used to improve the selectivity of biological
therapies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222111694 
PMCID: PMC8583892
PMID: 34769123 

