
1. View (Beijing). 2021 Jan 31:20200186. doi: 10.1002/VIW.20200186. [Epub ahead of
print]

Exosome therapeutics for COVID-19 and respiratory viruses.

Popowski KD(1)(2), Dinh PC(1)(2), George A(3)(4), Lutz H(1)(2), Cheng
K(1)(2)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences North Carolina State University
Raleigh North Carolina USA.
(2)Comparative Medicine Institute North Carolina State University Raleigh North
Carolina USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Structural Biochemistry North Carolina State
University Raleigh North Carolina USA.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences North Carolina State University Raleigh
North Carolina USA.
(5)Joint Department of Biomedical Engineering University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill and North Carolina State University Raleigh/Chapel Hill North
Carolina USA.
(6)Division of Pharmacoengineering and Molecular Pharmaceutics University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill Chapel Hill North Carolina USA.

Respiratory viral diseases are a leading cause of mortality in humans. They have 
proven to drive pandemic risk due to their complex transmission factors and viral
evolution. However, the slow production of effective antiviral drugs and vaccines
allows for outbreaks of these diseases, emphasizing a critical need for refined
antiviral therapeutics. The delivery of exosomes, a naturally secreted
extracellular vesicle, yields therapeutic effects for a variety of diseases,
including viral infection. Exosomes and viruses utilize similar endosomal sorting
pathways and mechanisms, providing exosomes with the potential to serve as a
therapeutic that can target, bind, and suppress cellular uptake of various
viruses including the novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2.
Here, we review the relationship between exosomes and respiratory viruses,
describe potential exosome therapeutics for viral infections, and summarize
progress toward clinical translation for lung-derived exosome therapeutics.

© 2021 The Authors. VIEW published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd and
Shanghai Fuji Technology Consulting Co., Ltd, authorized by Professional
Community of Experimental Medicine, National Association of Health Industry and
Enterprise Management (PCEM).

DOI: 10.1002/VIW.20200186 
PMCID: PMC7995024
PMID: 34766162 

Conflict of interest statement: Ke Cheng is a co‐founder and equity holder of
BreStem Therapeutics and Xollent Biotechnology. BreStem and Xollent provided no
funding to this study. The remaining authors declare no conflict of interest.

