
1. Ann Palliat Med. 2021 Oct;10(10):11221-11225. doi: 10.21037/apm-21-2513.

Low frequency sound stimulation greatly improved the outcome of a refractory
postherpetic neuralgia patient with mood and sleep disorder: a case report.

Wang X(1), Ye J(1), Yang B(2), Xiang J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Practice, Chengdu Wuhou District Yulin Community Health 
Center, Chengdu, China.
(2)Department of Pain Management, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, China.
(3)Department of Audio Engineering, Chengdu Melody Wellness Tech Company,
Chengdu, China.

Postherpetic neuralgia (PHN) is a common and severe chronic complication of the
herpes zoster (HZ) virus (shingles) involving prolonged pain which may last from 
weeks to years. Primary treatment involves oral therapies, although few patients 
experience a pain reduction of greater than 50%. Due to limited effective
treatments, symptoms and comorbidities, including physical disability and
emotional distress, are recurrent, and interfere with daily activities and sleep.
A 34-year-old male had experienced refractory PHN on the right 3 to 5 thoracic
dermatomes for about 3.5 years, accompanied with mood and sleep disorder. During 
this time, several treatments had been attempted, including systemic tricyclic
antidepressants, opioid analgesics, anticonvulsants, topical lidocaine, epidural 
block, and spinal cord stimulation (SCS); however, their outcomes had been
unsatisfactory. Low frequency sound stimulation (LFSS) was found effective in
reducing the pain, and improving the state of both mood and the sleep. At the
time of this report, the patient had been using this treatment for more than 240 
days, his quality of life had improved significantly, and no side effects had
been observed. LFSS is component of musical therapy, which categorized under
complementary and alternative medicine (CAM). It uses audible sound (40-120 Hz)
to produce a physical effect through the transducer when applied directly to the 
body, which can affect pain perception via mood and sleep improvement, activating
an anti-pain effect in the brain. This case provides a rationale to study LFSS in
patients with refractory neuropathic pain.

DOI: 10.21037/apm-21-2513 
PMID: 34763480  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

