
1. Public Health Nurs. 2021 Nov 10. doi: 10.1111/phn.13012. [Epub ahead of print]

Alternative capstone nursing experience to scale up testing and case
investigation.

Diamond-Caravella M(1), Fox A(2), Clark M(2), Goodstone L(3), Glaser C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Associate Professor, Department of Nursing, Farmingdale State College,
Farmingdale, New York, USA.
(2)Alum, Farmingdale State College, Farmingdale, New York, USA.
(3)Professor and Chairperson, Department of Nursing, Farmingdale State College,
Farmingdale, New York, USA.

BACKGROUND: Surges related to the SARS-COV2 virus in the United States have
underscored the critical importance of large-scale testing, case investigation
and contact tracing. Baccalaureate nursing students have the potential to serve
as surge capacity workforce in mitigation measures during this public health
emergency.
METHODS: Over the course of eight weeks (September-December 2020) baccalaureate
senior capstone nursing students served as case investigators for a local health 
department (LHD) on Long Island, New York and surveillance pooled saliva testers 
for their college to ensure compliance with a state-wide COVID-19 testing
mandate. To determine student perceptions working in these concurrent novel
academic-partnerships during the COVID-19 pandemic, a descriptive survey of
open-ended interview questions was completed by student participants (n = 10).
RESULTS: Analysis of aggregate responses revealed common themes across the data
set linking student learning and appreciation of the "eye-opening" experience to 
a sense of purpose, the value of communication, education and teamwork-all within
the structure of public health nursing.
CONCLUSIONS: Baccalaureate nursing students can effectively serve as an untapped 
workforce within an academic partnership to support surveillance testing and case
investigation during the COVID-19 pandemic and future public health crises. This 
partnership had the added benefit of exposing nursing students to the critical
nature of public health nursing during this historic time in our nation.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/phn.13012 
PMID: 34761426 

