
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 26;12:737941. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.737941. eCollection
2021.

Following the Clues: Usefulness of Biomarkers of Neuroinflammation and
Neurodegeneration in the Investigation of HTLV-1-Associated Myelopathy
Progression.

Souza FDS(1)(2), Freitas NL(1), Gomes YCP(1), Torres RC(3)(4), Echevarria-Lima
J(5), da Silva-Filho IL(1), Leite ACCB(1), de Lima MASD(1)(6), da Silva MTT(1),
Araújo AQC(1)(7), Espíndola OM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Pesquisa Clínica em Neuroinfecções, Instituto Nacional de
Infectologia Evandro Chagas (INI), Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (FIOCRUZ), Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)Seção de Imunodiagnóstico, Instituto Nacional de Infectologia Evandro Chagas
(INI), Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (FIOCRUZ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Plataforma de Imunoanálises, Instituto de Biofísica Carlos Chagas Filho
(IBCCF), Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(4)Serviço de Citometria de Fluxo, Instituto de Puericultura e Pediatria Martagão
Gesteira, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(5)Laboratório de Imunologia Básica e Aplicada, Instituto de Microbiologia Paulo 
de Góes, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(6)Serviço de Neurologia, Hospital Universitário Clementino Fraga Filho,
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(7)Instituto de Neurologia Deolindo Couto (INDC), Universidade Federal do Rio de 
Janeiro (UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1)-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic
paraparesis (HAM/TSP) is a neurodegenerative disease due to axonal damage of the 
corticospinal secondary to an inflammatory response against infected T-cells. In 
the present work, we aimed to evaluate biomarkers of neurodegeneration and
neuroinflammation in the definition of HAM/TSP prognosis. Neurofilament light
(NfL) and phosphorylated heavy (pNfH) chains, total Tau protein, cellular prion
protein (PrPc), inflammatory chemokines, and neopterin were quantified in paired 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and serum samples from HAM/TSP patients (n=21), HTLV-1 
asymptomatic carriers (AC) (n=13), and HTLV-1 seronegative individuals with
non-inflammatory non-degenerative neurological disease (normal-pressure
hydrocephalus) (n=9) as a control group. HTLV-1 proviral load in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells and the expression of chemokine receptors CCR4, CCR5, and CXCR3
in infected CD4+ T-cells (HTLV-1 Tax+ cells) were also assessed. CSF levels of
Tau, NfL, and pNfH were similar between groups, but PrPc and neopterin were
elevated in HAM/TSP patients. Most individuals in the control group and all
HTLV-1 AC had CSF/serum neopterin ratio < 1.0, and two-thirds of HAM/TSP patients
had ratio values > 1.0, which positively correlated with the speed of disease
progression and pNfH levels, indicating active neuroinflammation. HAM/TSP
patients showed high serum levels of CXCR3-binding chemokines (CXCL9, CXCL10, and
CXCL11) and elevated CSF levels of CCL2, CCL3, CCL4, CCL17, CXCL5, CXCL10, and
CXCL11. Indeed, CXCL10 concentration in CSF of HAM/TSP patients was 5.8-fold and 
8.7-fold higher in than in HTLV-1 AC and controls, respectively, and correlated
with CSF cell counts. HAM/TSP patients with typical/rapid disease progression had
CSF/serum CXCL10 ratio > 1.0 and a higher frequency of CXCR3+Tax+CD4+ T-cells in 
blood, which indicated a positive gradient for the migration of infected cells
and infiltration into the central nervous system. In conclusion, the slow
progression of HAM/TSP abrogates the usefulness of biomarkers of neuronal injury 
for the disease prognosis. Thus, markers of inflammation provide stronger
evidence for HAM/TSP progression, particularly the CSF/serum neopterin ratio,
which may contribute to overcome differences between laboratory assays.

Copyright © 2021 Souza, Freitas, Gomes, Torres, Echevarria-Lima, Silva-Filho,
Leite, Lima, Silva, Araújo and Espíndola.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.737941 
PMCID: PMC8576432
PMID: 34764955 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

