
1. Sch Psychol. 2021 Nov;36(6):494-503. doi: 10.1037/spq0000469.

Teachers navigating distance learning during COVID-19 without feeling emotionally
exhausted: The protective role of self-efficacy.

Soncini A(1), Politi E(2), Matteucci MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Bologna.
(2)Center for Social and Cultural Psychology, KU Leuven.

In the context of the Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak, teachers faced
unprecedented challenges and threats while implementing distance learning.
Consequently, teachers may have experienced emotional exhaustion. The aim of our 
study was threefold: To explore teachers' threat appraisals, to investigate the
relation between teachers' threat appraisals and their emotional exhaustion, and 
to examine processes protecting teachers from emotional exhaustion. Self-efficacy
belief, especially, may have driven teachers' perceptions of distance learning as
an opportunity (i.e., distance learning strengths), rather than an impediment
(i.e., distance learning weakness) to teaching. During the first wave of
COVID-19, Italian teachers (N = 1,036) filled in an online survey. A mixed-method
design was used to address our three research aims. Findings indicated that,
above and beyond other COVID-19 threats, one third of teachers reported worries, 
fears, and concerns related to their job (i.e., job-related threats).
Furthermore, those who mentioned job-related threats experienced greater
emotional exhaustion. Finally, teachers' self-efficacy was related to lower
emotional exhaustion both directly and indirectly via teachers' perceptions of
distance learning. Indeed, distance learning weaknesses (but not distance
learning strengths) mediated the negative relationship between self-efficacy and 
emotional exhaustion. Altogether, our findings encourage reflection on possible
interventions to reduce teachers' job-related threats and help them navigate
distance learning effectively. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2021 APA, all rights
reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/spq0000469 
PMID: 34766813  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

