
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2021 Nov 12;15(11):e0009940. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0009940. eCollection 2021 Nov.

Immunoprofiling of fresh HAM/TSP blood samples shows altered innate cell
responsiveness.

Rocamonde B(1), Futsch N(1), Orii N(2), Allatif O(3), Penalva de Oliveira AC(4), 
Mahieux R(1), Casseb J(2), Dutartre H(1).

Author information: 
(1)International Center for Research in Infectiology, Retroviral Oncogenesis
Laboratory, INSERM U1111-Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, Ecole Normale
Supérieure de Lyon, Université Lyon, Lyon, France, Equipe labelisée par la
Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale, Labex Ecofect.
(2)Faculdade de Medicina/Instituto de Medicina Tropical de São Paulo/Universidade
da São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(3)International Center for Research in Infectiology, service BIBS, INSERM
U1111-Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon,
Université Lyon, Lyon, France.
(4)Instituto de Infectologia "Emilio Ribas", São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

The Human T-cell Leukemia Virus-1 (HTLV-1)-Associated Myelopathy/Tropical Spastic
Paraparesis (HAM/TSP) is a devastating neurodegenerative disease with no
effective treatment, which affects an increasing number of people in Brazil.
Immune cells from the adaptive compartment are involved in disease manifestation 
but whether innate cell functions participate in disease occurrence has not been 
evaluated. In this study, we analyzed innate cell responses at steady state and
after blood cell stimulation using an agonist of the toll-like receptor
(TLR)7/8-signaling pathway in blood samples from HTLV-1-infected volunteers,
including asymptomatic carriers and HAM/TSP patients. We observed a lower
response of IFNα+ DCs and monocytes in HAM/TSP compared to asymptomatic carriers,
as a potential consequence of corticosteroid treatments. In contrast, a higher
frequency of monocytes producing MIP-1α and pDC producing IL-12 was detected in
HAM/TSP blood samples, together with higher IFNγ responsiveness of NK cells,
suggesting an increased sensitivity to inflammatory response in HAM/TSP patients 
compared to asymptomatic carriers. This sustained inflammatory responsiveness
could be linked or be at the origin of the neuroinflammatory status in HAM/TSP
patients. Therefore, the mechanism underlying this dysregulations could shed
light onto the origins of HAM/TSP disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0009940 
PMCID: PMC8631667
PMID: 34767551 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist. Author Renaud Mahieux was unable to confirm their authorship
contributions. On their behalf, the corresponding author has reported their
contributions to the best of their knowledge.

