
1. J Formos Med Assoc. 2021 Nov 8. pii: S0929-6646(21)00486-1. doi:
10.1016/j.jfma.2021.10.014. [Epub ahead of print]

Hepatic steatosis and development of type 2 diabetes: Impact of chronic hepatitis
B and viral specific factors.

Yu MW(1), Lin CL(2), Liu CJ(3), Huang YW(4), Hu JT(5), Wu WJ(6), Wu CF(6).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, College of Public 
Health, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address:
yumw@ntu.edu.tw.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Ren-Ai Branch, Taipei City Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan
University Hospital and Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Taiwan 
University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, School of
Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan;
Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan
University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Liver Center, Cathay General Hospital Medical Center, School of Medicine,
Fu-Jen Catholic University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Graduate Institute of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, College of Public 
Health, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Chronic hepatitis B (CHB) was associated with a lower prevalence of
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). The impact of CHB on the link between
NAFLD and type 2 diabetes (T2D) and related virological implications remain
unclear.
METHODS: We recruited 2255 middle-to older-aged individuals who were examined
serially for hepatic steatosis by ultrasonography and blood biochemistry as part 
of a population-based hepatocellular-carcinoma cohort study. In CHB patients,
hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) seroclearance and variation in viral load
trajectory were also evaluated.
RESULTS: During the average follow-up of 6 years, 168 participants developed T2D.
CHB, as compared with uninfected subjects, was associated with lower risks for
both new development and persistence of hepatic steatosis. Furthermore, the risk 
of steatosis decreased with higher levels of past viral load trajectories (p for 
trend = 0.0002). However, concomitant steatosis at baseline in CHB patients was
still significantly associated with a 1.98-fold increased risk for T2D after
multivariate adjustment including age, impaired fasting glucose, cirrhosis, and
time-varying body mass index, although CHB reduced the propensity of hepatic
steatosis to develop diabetes, especially for patients with high levels of past
viral-load trajectory. In CHB, the functional cure of HBV infection, as indicated
by HBsAg seroclearance, was associated with a 1.41-fold (95% CI 1.12-1.79)
increased risk of steatosis. In addition, the increased risk for progressive
impairment of glucose metabolism due to steatosis was especially prominent after 
HBsAg seroclearance.
CONCLUSION: The data showed that HBV interferes with fatty liver disease and
modulates its related T2D risk, offering additional insight into the interplay
between NAFLD and CHB.

Copyright © 2021 Formosan Medical Association. Published by Elsevier B.V. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jfma.2021.10.014 
PMID: 34764005 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.

