
1. Ann Palliat Med. 2021 Oct;10(10):11209-11215. doi: 10.21037/apm-21-2236.

Negative anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies and eosinophilic granulomatosis
with polyangiitis accompanied by cough variant asthma: a case report.

Li Y(1), Chen Z(1), Zhu S(1), Bai F(1), Liu Y(1), Gao L(2), Li X(1), Geng Y(1),
Zhang G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, The First Hospital of Hebei Medical
University, Shijiazhuang, China.
(2)Physical Examination Center, The First Hospital of Hebei Medical University,
Shijiazhuang, China.
(3)Department of Dermatology, The First Hospital of Hebei Medical University,
Shijiazhuang, China.

Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA), formerly called
Churg-Strauss syndrome, is a rare chronic necrotizing eosinophilic granulomatous 
inflammatory disease characterized by eosinophil-rich granulomatous inflammation 
and small- to medium-size vessel vasculitis associated with bronchial asthma and 
eosinophilia, which is positive for anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)
in approximately 50-70% of cases. We report a case of a 23-year-old woman was
admitted to our hospital because of a of small vesicles on both lower limbs and a
4-month history of small scattered skin rash with pruritus V6 on both lower limbs
four-month history of scattered skin rash with pruritus. Laboratory data from
peripheral blood revealed leukocytosis, eosinophilia, thrombocytosis,
hyperfibrinolysis, and mild renal injury. Her ANCA was negative, and the skin
pathological examination showed granuloma lesions with eosinophils, while
elevated eosinophils were also found in the bone marrow. EGPA was diagnosed. On
the other hand, the patient had 2-year-long rhinosinusitis, 9-month-long
nephrotic syndrome, and 1-month-long dry cough, which might be a type of asthma. 
With steroid therapy followed by systemic immunomodulatory therapy, the patient's
symptoms were relieved. Our case report and literature review highlight the
importance of recognizing cough variant asthma as an initial presenting symptom
of EGPA, providing an opportunity for early diagnosis and treatment to reduce the
risk of further disease progression and morbidity.

DOI: 10.21037/apm-21-2236 
PMID: 34763478  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

