
1. BMJ Open. 2021 Nov 11;11(11):e048750. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-048750.

What influences people's responses to public health messages for managing risks
and preventing infectious diseases? A rapid systematic review of the evidence and
recommendations.

Ghio D(1)(2), Lawes-Wickwar S(3), Tang MY(4), Epton T(5), Howlett N(6), Jenkinson
E(7), Stanescu S(8), Westbrook J(9), Kassianos AP(10), Watson D(11), Sutherland
L(12), Stanulewicz N(13), Guest E(14), Scanlan D(15), Carr N(2)(16), Chater
A(17), Hotham S(18), Thorneloe R(19), Armitage CJ(2)(20), Arden M(19), Hart J(2),
Byrne-Davis L(2), Keyworth C(2)(21).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Faculty of Health and Society, University of
Salford, Manchester, UK.
(2)Manchester Centre for Health Psychology, University of Manchester, Manchester,
UK.
(3)Department of Primary Care and Population Health, University College London,
London, UK.
(4)Behavioural Science Policy Research Unit, Population Health Sciences,
Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(5)Manchester Centre for Health Psychology, University of Manchester, Manchester,
UK tracy.epton@manchester.ac.uk.
(6)Department of Psychology, Sports, and Geography, School of Life and Medical
Sciences, University of Hertfordshire, Hertfordshire, UK.
(7)Department of Health and Social Sciences, University of West England, Bristol,
UK.
(8)School of Psychology, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(9)Department of Psychology, University of Bath, Bath, UK.
(10)Department of Applied Health Research, University College London, London, UK.
(11)Human Development and Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton,
Southampton, UK.
(12)Behavioural Insight for Public Affairs, Ipsos Mori, Edinburgh & London, UK.
(13)Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, School of Applied Social Sciences, De
Montfort University, Leicester, UK.
(14)Centre for Appearance Research,Faculty of Health and Applied Sciences,
University of the West of England, Bristol, UK.
(15)Department of Communication, Policy, and Research, Education Support, London,
UK.
(16)Faculty of Health, Psychology, and Social Care, Manchester Metropolitan
University, Manchester, UK.
(17)Centre for Health, Wellbeing and Behaviour Change, University of
Bedfordshire, Bedfordshire, UK.
(18)Centre for Health Services Studies, University of Kent, Canterbury, UK.
(19)Centre for Behavioural Science and Applied Psychology, Sheffield Hallam
University, Sheffield, UK.
(20)Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health
Science Centre, Manchester; and NIHR Greater Manchester Patient Safety
Translational Research Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(21)School of Psychology, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.

BACKGROUND: Individual behaviour changes, such as hand hygiene and physical
distancing, are required on a population scale to reduce transmission of
infectious diseases such as COVID-19. However, little is known about effective
methods of communicating risk reducing information, and how populations might
respond.
OBJECTIVE: To synthesise evidence relating to what (1) characterises effective
public health messages for managing risk and preventing infectious disease and
(2) influences people's responses to messages.
DESIGN: A rapid systematic review was conducted. Protocol is published on
Prospero CRD42020188704.
DATA SOURCES: Electronic databases were searched: Ovid Medline, Ovid PsycINFO and
Healthevidence.org, and grey literature (PsyarXiv, OSF Preprints) up to May 2020.
STUDY SELECTION: All study designs that (1) evaluated public health messaging
interventions targeted at adults and (2) concerned a communicable disease spread 
via primary route of transmission of respiratory and/or touch were included.
Outcomes included preventative behaviours, perceptions/awareness and intentions. 
Non-English language papers were excluded.
SYNTHESIS: Due to high heterogeneity studies were synthesised narratively
focusing on determinants of intentions in the absence of measured
adherence/preventative behaviours. Themes were developed independently by two
researchers and discussed within team to reach consensus. Recommendations were
translated from narrative synthesis to provide evidence-based methods in
providing effective messaging.
RESULTS: Sixty-eight eligible papers were identified. Characteristics of
effective messaging include delivery by credible sources, community engagement,
increasing awareness/knowledge, mapping to stage of epidemic/pandemic. To
influence intent effectively, public health messages need to be acceptable,
increase understanding/perceptions of health threat and perceived susceptibility.
DISCUSSION: There are four key recommendations: (1) engage communities in
development of messaging, (2) address uncertainty immediately and with
transparency, (3) focus on unifying messages from sources and (4) frame messages 
aimed at increasing understanding, social responsibility and personal control.
Embedding principles of behavioural science into public health messaging is an
important step towards more effective health-risk communication during
epidemics/pandemics.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-048750 
PMCID: PMC8587350
PMID: 34764167  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

