
1. Epidemiol Prev. 2021;45:In press. doi: 10.19191/EP21.6.113.

'Scuola sicura': a school screening testing programme to prevent the spread of
COVID-19 in students in Piedmont.

Farina E(1), Eboli I(1), Spadea T(1), Saugo C(2), Richiardi L(3), Maule M(3),
Presti P(4), Bena A(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)SCaDU Servizio sovrazonale di epidemiologia, Azienda sanitaria locale TO3,
Grugliasco (Italy).
(2)Scuola di specializzazione in igiene e medicina preventiva, Università di
Torino, Turin (Italy).
(3)Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche, Università di Torino, Turin (Italy).
(4)Regione Piemonte, Turin (Italy).
(5)SCaDU Servizio sovrazonale di epidemiologia, Azienda sanitaria locale TO3,
Grugliasco (Italy); antonella.bena@epi.piemonte.it.
(6)Centro regionale di documentazione per la promozione della salute, Turin
(Italy).

BACKGROUND: 'Scuola sicura' (SS) programme aims to monitor the rate of COVID-19
and to contain its spread within the school population through early case
isolation.
OBJECTIVES: to describe the initial process and outcome evaluation results.
DESIGN: descriptive study of an experimental screening testing programme in
children in Piedmont Region (Northern Italy) in the period January-March 2021.
The data used came from the COVID-19 platform and the Local Health Units, the
archives of birth certificates (CedAP), and hospital discharge files (SDO).
SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: the screening programme targeted second and third grade
students in first level secondary schools. Participants were subdivided into four
groups; one group each week underwent screening, yielding one test per student
per month.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: it was calculated: 1. number of positive cases detected vs
total number of students tested in the SS programme; 2. number of positive cases 
detected outside the SS program vs. total number of students in the target
population. The number of quarantines due to SS and no-SS case identification
were detected. To investigate the spread of COVID-19 in households, the
mother-child pairs were identified through record linkage between the CedAP and
SDO archives, and positive mothers were identified.
RESULTS: sixty-nine percent of schools and 19.5% of the students participated in 
the programme. SS detected 114 positives cases for SARS-CoV-2. On 08.03.2021, the
target classes started distance learning: 69 of the 114 positive students were
identified before that date, leading to the activation of 67 quarantine measures.
Only for 61 out of 69 of those students (88%) was possible to identify the
mother; 46 mothers had performed a swab test after the positivity of their child 
with a positive result in 11 cases. Asymptomatic cases identified at screening
during in-class learning period accounted for 26.5% of the total number of cases 
occurred in the participating classes.
CONCLUSIONS: this is one of the few studies (and the first in Italy) to describe 
the functioning and predictive capacity of school screening testing for
SARS-CoV-2 in a real-world situation. The findings provide data-driven
suggestions for government agencies when planning large-scale school screening
testing programmes.

DOI: 10.19191/EP21.6.113 
PMID: 34766497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

