
1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2021 Nov 9. pii: S1198-743X(21)00622-4. doi:
10.1016/j.cmi.2021.10.020. [Epub ahead of print]

How to interpret viral markers in the management of chronic hepatitis B
infection.

Riveiro-Barciela M(1), Pericàs JM(2), Buti M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Liver Unit, Internal Medicine Department, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron,
Vall d'Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus, Barcelona, Spain; Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd),
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain; Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona
(UAB), Department of Medicine.
(2)Liver Unit, Internal Medicine Department, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron,
Vall d'Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus, Barcelona, Spain; Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd),
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Liver Unit, Internal Medicine Department, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron,
Vall d'Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus, Barcelona, Spain; Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd),
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain; Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona
(UAB), Department of Medicine. Electronic address: mbuti@vhebron.net.

BACKGROUND: Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a global public health issue
with several unsolved clinical challenges. As multiple new drugs are under
development, HBV markers are gaining importance for both diagnostic and
prognostic purposes.
OBJECTIVES: This review summarizes the most important data on the usefulness of
HBV markers in the natural history of this infection, and in predicting clinical 
and treatment outcomes.
SOURCES: Selected peer-reviewed publications on HBV markers published between
January 2009 and July 2021.
CONTENT: In addition to the classical markers (eg, HBV-DNA), newer ones, such as 
quantitative HBsAg, HBcrAg, HBV-RNA and quantitative anti-HBc, have proven useful
for predicting events within the natural history of HBV infection, the
development of complications (eg, hepatocellular carcinoma), and the response to 
antiviral therapy. Most data regarding the response to treatment have been
related to nucleos(t)ide analogues, whereas evidence on new therapeutic agents,
such as capsid assembly modulators or small interference RNAs, is promising, but 
still scarce.
IMPLICATIONS: Knowledge on the use of viral markers is a key factor for
optimizing the clinical appraisal of HBV infection. The new markers have an
enhanced ability to predict clinical outcomes. Further studies should expand the 
current evidence on the use of markers in relation to antiviral agents currently 
under evaluation. Wide availability of these markers in regions with a high
incidence of HBV infection is of paramount importance.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmi.2021.10.020 
PMID: 34768018 

