
1. Allergol Immunopathol (Madr). 2021 Nov 1;49(6):63-66. doi: 10.15586/aei.v49i6.92.
eCollection 2021.

Transient increased immunoglobulin levels in a hyper-IgM syndrome patient with
COVID-19 infection.

Safarirad M(1), Ganji AA(2), Nazari F(3)(4), Yazdani R(3), Abolhassani H(3)(5),
Motlagh AV(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, North Khorasan University of Medical Sciences,
Bojnurd, Iran.
(2)Research Committee, North Khorasan University of Medical Sciences, Bojnurd,
Iran.
(3)Research Center for Immunodeficiencies, Pediatrics Center of Excellence,
Children's Medical Center, Tehran University of Medical Science, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Immunology Today, Universal Scientific Education and Research Network (USERN),
Tehran, Iran.
(5)Division of Clinical Immunology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska
Institute at Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, North Khorasan University of Medical Sciences,
Bojnurd, Iran; dr.ahmadvosughi@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has affected
millions of people around the world. This zoonotic-enveloped virus is primarily
transmitted through inhalation. Infected people are commonly asymptomatic or
manifest mild symptoms, including fever, cough, diarrhea, and fatigue. However,
it may lead to severe patterns associated with multiple organ failure in
individuals with an impaired immune system.
OBJECTIVE: Here we report a 7-year-old girl with hyper-immunoglobulin M (IgM)
(HIgM) phenotype, admitted to the hospital emergency department with fever,
cough, and pneumonia symptoms because of the COVID-19 infection. Coronavirus
infection was confirmed by a positive real-time polymerase chain reaction test.
Surprisingly, serum levels of both IgG and IgA of the patient were transiently
normalized during the COVID-19 infection when tested prior to the monthly
injection of intravenous immunoglobulin. After she recovered from the COVID
infection, her immunoglobulin levels returned to the primary stage and she
demonstrated HIgM phenotype.
CONCLUSION: Since this transient increase in the levels of immunoglobulins was
solely observed during the COVID-19 infection, and no other infectious episodes
were diagnosed in the patient, clarifying the exact cause would help to
understand in a better manner the implications and specification of humoral
immunity in patients with primary antibody deficiencies.

DOI: 10.15586/aei.v49i6.92 
PMID: 34761659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors state that there are no conflicts of 
interest to disclose.

