
1. Allergol Immunopathol (Madr). 2021 Nov 1;49(6):8-15. doi: 10.15586/aei.v49i6.478.
eCollection 2021.

SEMA3A protects against hyperoxia-induced lung injury in a bronchopulmonary
dysplasia model of newborn rat by inhibiting ERK pathway.

Liang Z(1), Zhang X(1), Liu Y(1), Wu Q(1), You C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Guangdong Second Provincial General Hospital,
Guangdong Province, China.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Guangdong Second Provincial General Hospital,
Guangdong Province, China; youchuming@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Hyperoxia induces lung injury through lung inflammation in premature 
infants, leading to bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD). Semaphorin 3A (SEMA3A)
participates in diverse biological processes, including cell migration,
angiogenesis, and inflammation. The effect of SEMA3A on hyperoxic lung injury of 
neonatal rats with BPD was investigated in this study.
METHODS: Neonatal rats with BPD were established through hyperoxia treatment.
Hematoxylin-eosin staining was used to evaluate histopathological analysis in
lung tissues. SEMA3A expression was assessed by reverse
transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) and western blot
assay. Adeno-associated virus (AAV)-mediated over-expression of SEMA3A
(AAV-SEMA3A) was administrated into hyperoxia-induced rats, and apoptosis was
evaluated by TUNEL staining. Levels of inflammatory cytokines were investigated
by enzyme-linked-immunosorbent serologic assay (ELISA).
RESULTS: Hyperoxia-induced histopathological changes in lung tissue reduced
alveolar number and enhanced alveolar interval and alveolar volume. SEMA3A was
downregulated in lung tissue of hyperoxia-induced rats. AAV-SEMA3A injection
attenuated hyperoxia-induced cell apoptosis in lung tissues by increasing Bcl-2
and decreasing Bax and cleaved caspase-3. Moreover, the enhanced levels of
Interleukin (IL)-1β, monocyte chemoattractant protein (MCP)-1, and tumor necrosis
factor-α (TNF-α) in hyperoxia-induced rats were restored by AAV-SEMA3A injection 
by the downregulation of nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) phosphorylation.
AAV-SEMA3A injection also ameliorated histopathological changes in lung tissues
of hyperoxia-induced rats by increasing the number of radial alveolar count and
decreasing the volume of mean linear intercept. Besides, the protein expression
levels of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase
(JNK) phosphorylation were reduced in hyperoxia-induced rats post-AAV-SEMA3A
injection.
CONCLUSION: Ectopical expression of SEMA3A suppressed hyperoxia-induced apoptosis
and inflammation in neonatal rats, and ameliorated the histopathological changes 
through inactivation of ERK/JNK pathway.

DOI: 10.15586/aei.v49i6.478 
PMID: 34761651 

