
1. Plant Direct. 2021 Nov 8;5(11):e359. doi: 10.1002/pld3.359. eCollection 2021 Nov.

Tomato and cotton G protein beta subunit mutants display constitutive autoimmune 
responses.

Ninh TT(1)(2), Gao W(3), Trusov Y(1), Zhao JR(3), Long L(3), Song CP(3), Botella 
JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Plant Genetic Engineering Laboratory, School of Agriculture and Food Sciences 
University of Queensland Brisbane Australia.
(2)Department of Plant Biotechnology, Faculty of Biotechnology Vietnam National
University of Agriculture Hanoi Vietnam.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Cotton Biology, School of Life Science Henan
University Kaifeng China.

Heterotrimeric G protein Gβ-deficient mutants in rice and maize display
constitutive immune responses, whereas Arabidopsis Gβ mutants show impaired
defense, suggesting the existence of functional differences between monocots and 
dicots. Using CRISPR/Cas9, we produced one hemizygous tomato line with a mutated 
SlGB1 Gβ gene. Homozygous slgb1 knockout mutants exhibit all the hallmarks of
autoimmune mutants, including development of necrotic lesions, constitutive
expression of defense-related genes, and high endogenous levels of salicylic acid
(SA) and reactive oxygen species, resulting in early seedling lethality.
Virus-induced silencing of Gβ in cotton reproduced the symptoms observed in
tomato mutants, confirming that the autoimmune phenotype is not limited to
monocot species but is also shared by dicots. Even though multiple genes involved
in SA and ethylene signaling are highly induced by Gβ silencing in tomato and
cotton, co-silencing of SA or ethylene signaling components in cotton failed to
suppress the lethal phenotype, whereas co-silencing of the oxidative burst
oxidase RbohD can repress lethality. Despite the autoimmune response observed in 
slgb1 mutants, we show that SlGB1 is a positive regulator of the
pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP)-triggered immunity (PTI) response in
tomato. We speculate that the phenotypic differences observed between Arabidopsis
and tomato/cotton/rice/maize Gβ knockouts do not necessarily reflect divergences 
in G protein-mediated defense mechanisms.

© 2021 The Authors. Plant Direct published by American Society of Plant
Biologists and the Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pld3.359 
PMCID: PMC8573408
PMID: 34765865 

Conflict of interest statement: The Authors did not report any conflict of
interest.

