
1. J Stud Alcohol Drugs. 2021 Nov;82(6):776-781.

Associations Between Substance Use Problems and Stress During COVID-19.

Vogel EA(1), Chieng A(1), Robinson A(2), Pajarito S(2), Prochaska JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stanford Prevention Research Center, Department of Medicine, School of
Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California.
(2)Woebot Health, San Francisco, California.

OBJECTIVE: The COVID-19 pandemic has produced major life disruptions and
increased stress. We explored associations between pandemic-related stress and
substance use problems.
METHOD: Adults (N = 180; 65% female) with problematic substance use (CAGE-AID >
1) were recruited online June-August 2020. Measures included the 15-item Short
Inventory of Problems-Alcohol and Drugs (SIP-AD), Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7 
(GAD-7) seven-item anxiety measure, Patient Health Questionnaire-8 (PHQ-8)
eight-item depression measure, a three-item measure of pandemic life disruptions,
a six-item measure of pandemic-related mental health effects, and a five-item
measure of pandemic-related personal growth. Participants reported whether they
frequented bars and attended large gatherings. Participants with children (<18
years of age) in the home completed a four-item measure of pandemic-related worry
about children's well-being. Pandemic-related measures with significant bivariate
associations with SIP-AD, GAD, and PHQ scores were tested in multivariable linear
regression, adjusting for sex, age, and race/ethnicity.
RESULTS: Participants who struggled with responsibilities at home, had greater
mental health impacts, had greater personal growth, and frequented bars or large 
gatherings had higher SIPAD scores (all ps < .05). Participants who struggled
with responsibilities at home, had difficulty getting necessities, had greater
mental health impacts, and worried more about their children had higher GAD-7 and
PHQ-8 scores (all ps < .05). Participants who lost a job or income during the
pandemic had higher PHQ-8 scores (p = .015). In multivariable analyses, greater
mental health impacts were associated with higher SIP-AD, PHQ-8, and GAD-7 scores
(all ps < .05).
CONCLUSIONS: Experiencing worsened mental health symptoms during COVID-19 was
associated with more substance use problems and symptoms of depression and
anxiety. Pandemic disruptions may exacerbate preexisting substance use problems.


PMID: 34762037  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Athena Robinson, Ph.D., and Sarah Pajarito, M.A.,
are Woebot Health employees.

