
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 11;16(11):e0259376. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259376.
eCollection 2021.

Exploring the awareness, attitudes, and actions (AAA) of UK adults at high risk
of severe illness from COVID-19.

Flint SW(1)(2), Brown A(3)(4), Sanders G(5), Tahrani AA(6)(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)School of Psychology, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom.
(2)Scaled Insights, Nexus, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom.
(3)Centre for Obesity Research, University College London, London, United
Kingdom.
(4)National Institute of Health Research, University College London, London,
United Kingdom.
(5)School of Sport, Leeds Beckett University, Leeds, United Kingdom.
(6)Institute of Metabolism and Systems Research, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(7)Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS 
Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(8)Centre for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Birmingham Health Partners,
Birmingham, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: People at high risk of severe illness from COVID-19 have experienced 
greater restrictions during the pandemic, yet there is a paucity of research
exploring their lived experience.
OBJECTIVES: This study explored the impact of COVID-19 on people identified as at
high risk of severe illness by UK Government, and in particular, the impact of
the first lockdown on access to healthcare, medications and use of technological 
platforms.
METHODS: 1038 UK adults who identified as at high risk of severe illness from
COVID-19 in line with UK Government guidance or self-identified with acute or
other chronic health conditions, completed the Awareness, Attitudes and Actions
survey which explored the impact of COVID-19 on access to healthcare, management 
of long-term health condition, mental health, and health behaviours.
RESULTS: Most participants reported feelings of vulnerability, anxiety and
isolation, noticed that other people changed their behaviour towards them
including a feeling of being stigmatised by people not categorised as high risk. 
Participants described the largely negative impact that the COVID-19 lockdown had
on to health-related behaviours and access to healthcare, which had resulted in
large declines in mental health and wellbeing. Participants also indicated
disappointment at the UK Governments response and handling of the COVID-19
lockdown.
IMPLICATIONS: This study provides novel evidence of the lived experience of the
first COVID-19 lockdown for people identified as at high risk of severe illness. 
In the context of behavioural health interventions, the ubiquity of digital
technologies and their adoption into day-to-day life translates into greater
potential reach than traditional interventions, and consequently, greater
potential for positive public health impact. Findings should be considered by
policymakers and healthcare professionals to support people now and as we
transition through the recovery phase with a particular emphasis on supporting
mental health and changes to the management of long-term health conditions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259376 
PMCID: PMC8584659
PMID: 34762659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

