
1. Front Vet Sci. 2021 Oct 25;8:737250. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2021.737250. eCollection 
2021.

Immunogenicity of the Oral Rabies Vaccine Strain SPBN GASGAS in Dogs Under Field 
Settings in Namibia.

Molini U(1), Hassel R(1), Ortmann S(2), Vos A(2), Loschke M(1), Shilongo A(3),
Freuling CM(4), Müller T(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Namibia, Windhoek, Namibia.
(2)Ceva Innovation Center, Ceva Santé Animale, Dessau-Roßlau, Germany.
(3)Directorate of Veterinary Services, Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Land
Reform, Windhoek, Namibia.
(4)Institute of Molecular Virology and Cell Biology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut,
WHO Collaborating Centre for Rabies Surveillance and Research, OIE Reference
Laboratory for Rabies, Riems, Germany.

Dog-mediated rabies is endemic throughout Africa. While free-roaming dogs that
play a crucial role in rabies transmission are often inaccessible for parenteral 
vaccination during mass dog vaccination campaigns, oral rabies vaccination (ORV) 
is considered to be a promising alternative to increase vaccination coverage in
these hard-to-reach dogs. The acceptance of ORV as an efficient supplementary
tool is still low, not least because of limited immunogenicity and field trial
data in local dogs. In this study, the immunogenicity of the highly attenuated
3rd-generation oral rabies vaccine strain SPBN GASGAS in local free-roaming dogs 
from Namibia was assessed by determining the immune response in terms of
seroconversion for up to 56 days post-vaccination. At two study sites,
free-roaming dogs were vaccinated by administering the vaccine either by direct
oral administration or via a vaccine-loaded egg bait. Pre- and post-vaccination
blood samples were tested for rabies virus neutralizing as well as binding
antibodies using standard serological assays. A multiple logistic regression
(MLR) analysis was performed to determine a possible influence of study area,
vaccination method, and vaccine dose on the seroconversion rate obtained. About
78% of the dogs vaccinated by the oral route seroconverted (enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay, ELISA), though the seroconversion as determined by a rapid
fluorescence focus inhibition test (RFFIT) was much lower. None of the factors
examined had a significant effect on the seroconversion rate. This study confirms
the immunogenicity of the vaccine strain SPBN GASGAS and the potential utility of
ORV for the control of dog-mediated rabies in African dogs.

Copyright © 2021 Molini, Hassel, Ortmann, Vos, Loschke, Shilongo, Freuling and
Müller.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2021.737250 
PMCID: PMC8573107
PMID: 34760958 

Conflict of interest statement: AV and SO are employees of the Ceva Innovation
Center GmbH, Dessau, Germany. This company is manufacturing oral rabies vaccine
baits for wildlife. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted
in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be
construed as a potential conflict of interest. The collection, analyses, and
interpretation of data, the drafting of the manuscript, and the subsequent
decision to publish was jointly made by all co-authors. The reviewer SM declared 
a past co-authorship with several of the authors TM and CF, to the handling
editor.

