
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 25;9:735658. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.735658.
eCollection 2021.

A Local Health Situation Room for COVID-19: Recommendations for Decision-Making
From a Higher Education Institution in Mexico.

Ramos Herrera IM(1), Romero Lozano DC(1), López Corona A(1), Muñoz Valle
JF(2)(3), González Castañeda ME(4), Pérez Gómez HR(5), Kasten Monges MJ(1), Ramos
Solano M(3), Ruvalcaba Romero NA(6), Pérez Ávila FA(7), Yokogawa Teraoka P(8),
Macedo Ojeda G(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, University of Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Mexico.
(2)Institute for Research in Biomedical Sciences (IICB), University of
Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Mexico.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Guadalajara, Guadalajara,
Mexico.
(4)Department of Geography and Territorial Ordering, University of Guadalajara,
Guadalajara, Mexico.
(5)Department of Medical Clinics, University of Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Mexico.
(6)Department of Applied Psychology, University of Guadalajara, Guadalajara,
Mexico.
(7)Department of Community Nursing, University of Guadalajara, Guadalajara,
Mexico.
(8)Department of Social Sciences, University of Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Mexico.

Introduction: The Situation Room is a physical or virtual space where experts
systematically analyze information to characterize a health situation, especially
during emergencies. Decision-making processes are made toward solving health
needs and promoting collaboration among institutions and social sectors. This
paper presents the context and circumstances that led the University of
Guadalajara (UdeG) to install a local health situation room (HSR) to address the 
COVID-19 pandemic at this institution based in the state of Jalisco, Mexico, a
narrative is also made of its working processes and some of its results. Methods:
The design of this situation room for COVID-19 was based on the methodology
established by the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO)/WHO. This local-type
situation room was installed on February 12, 2020. The health problem was
characterized, and strategic lines, objectives, and goals were established; the
first analysis was derived from an action plan deployed at the UdeG. The
strategic lines were situational diagnosis, preventive actions, and containment
strategies. Results: The situation room influenced the activities of the UdeG
before the epidemic cases started in the state. One of the actions with the
greatest impact was developing a mathematical model for predicting COVID-19
cases. Subsequently, new models have been developed according to the
epidemiological evolution of the disease, helping manage the epidemic in the
state. Another important result was the early closing of face-to-face university 
activities, reducing contagion risks and the mobility of more than 310,000
students, faculty, and administrative personnel throughout Jalisco. Conclusions: 
A consequence of the closure was that the confinement generated by the pandemic
was the change to virtual meetings from April 2020 to date; but at the same time,
this working format was a strength, since it influenced the decision of the
university board to change all the academic activities to virtual format before
other educational, economic, and social activities in the state did. By April
2020, the situation room transcended its institutional boundaries and was invited
to participate at the Jalisco State's Health Committee. Its recommendations have 
helped to maintain the state with one of Mexico's lowest COVID-19 incidence and
mortality rates.

Copyright © 2021 Ramos Herrera, Romero Lozano, López Corona, Muñoz Valle,
González Castañeda, Pérez Gómez, Kasten Monges, Ramos Solano, Ruvalcaba Romero,
Pérez Ávila, Yokogawa Teraoka and Macedo Ojeda.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.735658 
PMCID: PMC8573138
PMID: 34760864  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The handling editor declared a 
past collaboration with one of the authors IR.

