
1. Int J Prev Med. 2021 Sep 29;12:127. doi: 10.4103/ijpvm.IJPVM_634_20. eCollection 
2021.

Different Approaches to Confronting the Biological Epidemic; Prevention Tools
with an Emphasis on COVID-19: A Systematized Study.

Hadian M(1), Mazaheri E(2), Jabbari A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Services Management, Student Research Committee of School
of Management and Medical Information, Health Management and Economics Research
Center, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
(2)Department of Medical Library and Information Sciences, Health Information
Technology Research Center, Student Research Committee, School of Management and 
Medical Information Sciences, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan,
Iran.
(3)Health Management and Economics Research Center, Isfahan University of Medical
Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.

Background: The World Health Organization has identified COVID-19 as a public
health emergency and is urging governments to stop the virus transmission by
adopting appropriate policies. In this regard, authorities have taken different
approaches to cutting the chain or controlling the spread of the disease. The aim
of this study was to determine the approaches to biological epidemics and related
prevention tools with emphasis on COVID-19 disease.
Methods: The present study was a systematize study of publications related to the
prevention strategies for Covid-19 disease. The study was carried out based on
the PRISMA guidelines, CASP and AACODS. The data resources included ISI/WOS,
PubMed, Scopus, science direct, Ovid and ProQuest. WHO website, published reports
of countries, as well as the Worldometer website were evaluated. The time-frame
of the study was from 1 December 2019 to 30 May 2020.
Results: The study findings showed that in order to confronting the COVID-19
epidemic, in general, there are three approaches of "mitigation", "active
control", and "suppression" and four strategies of "quarantine", "isolation",
"social distance", and "lockdown" in both individual and social dimensions to
deal with epidemics. Selection and implementation of each approach requires
specific strategies and has different effects when it comes to controlling and
inhibiting the disease.
Conclusion: One possible approach to control the disease is to change individual 
behavior and lifestyle. In addition to prevention strategies, use of masks,
observance of personal hygiene principles such as regular hand washing and
non-contact of contaminated hands with the face, as well as observance of public 
health principles such as sneezing and coughing etiquettes, safe extermination of
personal protective equipment must be strictly observed. The use of the previous 
experiences in the world, along with the current experiences of countries, can be
very helpful in choosing the accurate approach for each country in accordance
with the characteristics of that country and lead to the reduction of possible
costs at the national and international levels.

Copyright: © 2021 International Journal of Preventive Medicine.

DOI: 10.4103/ijpvm.IJPVM_634_20 
PMCID: PMC8551797
PMID: 34760138 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.

