
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 22;22(21). pii: 11407. doi: 10.3390/ijms222111407.

Nanotechnology Frontiers in γ-Herpesviruses Treatments.

Granato M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Piazzale
Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Roma, RM, Italy.

Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) and Kaposi's sarcoma associated-herpesvirus (KSHV) are
γ-herpesviruses that belong to the Herpesviridae family. EBV infections are
linked to the onset and progression of several diseases, such as Burkitt lymphoma
(BL), nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), and lymphoproliferative malignancies
arising in post-transplanted patients (PTDLs). KSHV, an etiologic agent of
Kaposi's sarcoma (KS), displays primary effusion lymphoma (PEL) and multicentric 
Castleman disease (MCD). Many therapeutics, such as bortezomib, CHOP cocktail
medications, and natural compounds (e.g., quercetin or curcumin), are
administrated to patients affected by γ-herpesvirus infections. These drugs
induce apoptosis and autophagy, inhibiting the proliferative and cell cycle
progression in these malignancies. In the last decade, many studies conducted by 
scientists and clinicians have indicated that nanotechnology and nanomedicine
could improve the outcome of several treatments in γ-herpesvirus-associated
diseases. Some drugs are entrapped in nanoparticles (NPs) expressed on the
surface area of polyethylene glycol (PEG). These NPs move to specific tissues and
exert their properties, releasing therapeutics in the cell target. To treat EBV- 
and KSHV-associated diseases, many studies have been performed in vivo and in
vitro using virus-like particles (VPLs) engineered to maximize antigen and
epitope presentations during immune response. NPs are designed to improve
therapeutic delivery, avoiding dissolving the drugs in toxic solvents. They
reduce the dose-limiting toxicity and reach specific tissue areas. Several
attempts are ongoing to synthesize and produce EBV vaccines using nanosystems.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222111407 
PMCID: PMC8583734
PMID: 34768838 

