
1. JMIR Res Protoc. 2021 Jul 20. doi: 10.2196/27921. [Epub ahead of print]

Rapid Project Management in a Time of Crisis: Lessons from a Global COVID-19
Registry-VIRUS.

Turek JR(1), Bansal V(2), Tekin A(3), Singh S(3), Deo NN(4), Sharma M(3),
Bogojevic M(2), Qamar S(5), Singh R(3), Kumar V(6), Kashyap R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic Rochester, Department of Management Engineering and Consulting,
Rochester, US.
(2)Mayo Clinic Rochester, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine,
Rochester, US.
(3)Mayo Clinic Rochester, Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative
Medicine, 1216 2nd St SW, Rochester, US.
(4)Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine, Rochester, US.
(5)Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science, Post-baccalaureate Research
Education Program, Rochester, US.
(6)The Society of Critical Care Medicine, Mount Prospect, US.

UNSTRUCTURED: The rapid emergence of COVID-19 pandemic globally collapsed
healthcare organizations worldwide. Incomplete knowledge of best practices,
progression of disease and its impact could result in fallible care. Data on
symptoms and advancement of the SARS-CoV-2 virus leading to critical care
admission has not been captured or communicated well between international
organizations experiencing the same impact from the virus. This led to the
expedited need for establishing international communication and data collection
on the critical care patients admitted with COVID-19. Developing a global
registry to collect patient data in the critical care setting was imperative with
the goal of analyzing and ameliorating outcomes. Project management was crucial
for prompt implementation of the registry for synchronization, improving
efficiency, increasing innovation and fostering global collaboration for valuable
data collection. Basing the Society of Critical Care Discovery VIRUS: COVID-19
Registry would compile data for crucial longitudinal outcomes for disease,
treatment and research. Agile project management approach expedited establishing 
the registry in 15 days and submission of IRB agreement for 250 participating
sites. There has been enrollment of sites every month with a total of 306 sites
from 28 countries and 64114 patients enrolled (as of June 7, 2021). This article 
addresses project management lessons in a time of crises which can be a precept
for rapid project management for a large-scale health care data registry. We aim 
to discuss the approach and methodology for establishing the registry, the
challenges faced and the factors contributing to successful outcomes.

DOI: 10.2196/27921 
PMID: 34762062 

