
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 30;22(21). pii: 11788. doi: 10.3390/ijms222111788.

Surface Engineering Strategies to Enhance the In Situ Performance of Medical
Devices Including Atomic Scale Engineering.

Sultana A(1), Zare M(1), Luo H(2), Ramakrishna S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Nanotechnology & Sustainability, Department of Mechanical
Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117581, Singapore.
(2)Engineering Research Center in Biomaterials, Sichuan University, Chengdu
610064, China.

Decades of intense scientific research investigations clearly suggest that only a
subset of a large number of metals, ceramics, polymers, composites, and
nanomaterials are suitable as biomaterials for a growing number of biomedical
devices and biomedical uses. However, biomaterials are prone to microbial
infection due to Escherichia coli (E. coli), Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus),
Staphylococcus epidermidis (S. epidermidis), hepatitis, tuberculosis, human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and many more. Hence, a range of surface
engineering strategies are devised in order to achieve desired biocompatibility
and antimicrobial performance in situ. Surface engineering strategies are a group
of techniques that alter or modify the surface properties of the material in
order to obtain a product with desired functionalities. There are two categories 
of surface engineering methods: conventional surface engineering methods (such as
coating, bioactive coating, plasma spray coating, hydrothermal, lithography, shot
peening, and electrophoretic deposition) and emerging surface engineering methods
(laser treatment, robot laser treatment, electrospinning, electrospray, additive 
manufacturing, and radio frequency magnetron sputtering technique). Atomic-scale 
engineering, such as chemical vapor deposition, atomic layer etching, plasma
immersion ion deposition, and atomic layer deposition, is a subsection of
emerging technology that has demonstrated improved control and flexibility at
finer length scales than compared to the conventional methods. With the
advancements in technologies and the demand for even better control of
biomaterial surfaces, research efforts in recent years are aimed at the atomic
scale and molecular scale while incorporating functional agents in order to
elicit optimal in situ performance. The functional agents include synthetic
materials (monolithic ZnO, quaternary ammonium salts, silver nano-clusters,
titanium dioxide, and graphene) and natural materials (chitosan, totarol,
botanical extracts, and nisin). This review highlights the various strategies of 
surface engineering of biomaterial including their functional mechanism,
applications, and shortcomings. Additionally, this review article emphasizes
atomic scale engineering of biomaterials for fabricating antimicrobial
biomaterials and explores their challenges.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222111788 
PMCID: PMC8583812
PMID: 34769219 

