
1. Eur J Pain. 2021 Nov 12. doi: 10.1002/ejp.1887. [Epub ahead of print]

Chemogenetic inhibition of trigeminal ganglion neurons attenuates behavioural and
neural pain responses in a model of trigeminal neuropathic pain.

Korczeniewska OA(1)(2), James MH(3)(2), Eliav T(4), Katzmann Rider G(1), Mehr
JB(3)(2), Affendi H(1), Aston-Jones G(3)(2), Benoliel R(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Orofacial Pain and Temporomandibular Disorders, Department of
Diagnostic Sciences, Rutgers School of Dental Medicine, Rutgers University,
Newark, New Jersey, USA.
(2)Brain Health Institute, Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Rutgers
University, Piscataway, New Jersey, USA.
(4)School of Graduate Studies, Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences, Newark,
New Jersey, USA.

BACKGROUND: Nerve injury can lead to ectopic activation of injured nociceptorsand
central sensitization characterized by allodynia and hyperalgesia. Reduction in
the activity of primary afferent neurons has been shown to be sufficient in
alleviating peripherally generated pain. The cell bodies of such trigeminal
nociceptors are located in the trigeminal ganglia (TG) with central processes
that terminate in the brainstem trigeminal nucleus caudalis (TNC). The TG is
therefore a strategic locus where afferent input can be manipulated. We
hypothesized that chemogenetic inhibition of TG would suppress TNC neuronal
activity and attenuate pain behaviour in a rat model of painful traumatic
trigeminal neuropathy (PTTN).
METHODS: Trigeminal neuropathic pain was induced in adult male Sprague-Dawley
rats (n = 24) via chronic constriction injury to the infraorbital nerve
(ION-CCI). Naïve and sham rats were used as controls (n = 20/group). Rats within 
each group received TG-directed microinjections of AAV virus containing either
the inhibitory hM4Di-DREADD construct or EGFP.
RESULTS: In the ION-CCI group, systemic administration of the DREADD agonist
clozapine N-oxide (CNO) reversed the hypersensitivity phenotype in animals
expressing hM4Di but not EGFP. CNO-mediated activation of hM4Di DREADD in ION-CCI
animals was also associated with reduced Fos expression in the TNC elicited by
repeated mechanical stimulation of the dermatome ipsilateral to the injury. There
was no effect of CNO on pain behaviour or TNC Fos expression in eGFP animals.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that DREADDs may offer an effective therapeutic 
approach for treatment of trigeminal neuropathic pain.
SIGNIFICANCE: Trigeminal neuropathic pain is highly resistant to therapy and we
are in dire need of novel approaches. This study provides further evidence for
the successful application of DREADDs as an effective tool for modulating central
nervous system function. CNO mediated activation of hM4Di-DREADDs in the
trigeminal ganglion (TG) attenuates nerve injury induced neuropathic pain by
acting on hyperactive TG cells. It also establishes the TG as an effective target
to manage pain in the face and head. Accessing the TG in clinical populations is 
a relatively simple and safe procedure, making this approach highly significant. 
Moreover, the methodology described here has applications in trigeminal
neuropathic pain from traumatic other etiologies and in spinal neuropathic pain. 
Chronic pain syndromes are characterized by a progressive failure of brain
centers to adequately inhibit pain and as these are identified, we may be able to
target them for therapy. Therefore, our findings might have wide application in
chronic pain syndromes.

© 2021 European Pain Federation - EFIC®.

DOI: 10.1002/ejp.1887 
PMID: 34767278 

