
1. Sch Psychol. 2021 Nov;36(6):504-515. doi: 10.1037/spq0000475.

Educators' online teaching self-efficacy and compassion fatigue during the
COVID-19 pandemic: The dual roles of "connect".

Yang C(1), Manchanda S(1), Greenstein J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Education, University of California, Berkeley.

Guided by the job demands-resources model and social-cognitive theory, we
examined how educator perceived school connectedness and their attempts to
connect with school members (i.e., administrators, staff, students, and families)
concurrently and interactively influenced educators' compassion fatigue and
online teaching self-efficacy during distance learning in the Coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. Participants were 321 educators in a large, urban school
district in northern California. Results of linear regression modeling suggested 
that educators with longer years of working in education and White educators
reported higher levels of compassion fatigue than their counterparts. White
educators also reported a lower level of online teaching self-efficacy than their
counterparts. With the control of educators' gender, race/ethnicity, and years of
teaching in education, educators' self-reported school connectedness is
negatively associated with compassion fatigue. Educators' attempts to connect
with students not only positively associated with compassion fatigue but also
intensified the negative association between school connectedness and compassion 
fatigue. Moreover, educators' school connectedness and attempts to connect with
administrators and staff both positively associated with online teaching
self-efficacy. Also, educators' attempts to connect with families mitigated the
positive association between school connectedness and online teaching
self-efficacy. The findings highlight the importance of promoting educators'
school connectedness in improving educators' occupational wellbeing. It also
highlights that educators' school connectedness and their attempts to connect
with certain group of school members mutually and interactively influence
educators' compassion fatigue and online teaching self-efficacy. (PsycInfo
Database Record (c) 2021 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/spq0000475 
PMID: 34766814  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

