
1. JCI Insight. 2021 Nov 12. pii: e154882. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.154882. [Epub
ahead of print]

Cross-validation of SARS-CoV-2 responses in kidney organoids and clinical
populations.

Helms L(1), Marchiano S(1), Stanaway IB(2), Hsiang TY(3), Juliar BA(2), Saini
S(4), Zhao YT(4), Khanna A(1), Menon R(5), Alakwaa F(5), Mikacenic C(6), Morrell 
ED(2), Wurfel MM(7), Kretzler M(5), Harder JL(5), Murry CE(8), Himmelfarb J(2),
Ruohola-Baker H(8), Bhatraju PK(7), Gale M Jr(3), Freedman BS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Washington
School of Medicine, Seattle, United States of America.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, 
United States of America.
(3)Department of Immunology, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, United States of America.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, United States of America.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, United
States of America.
(6)Translational Research, Benaroya Research Institute, Seattle, United States of
America.
(7)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, University of
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, United States of America.
(8)University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, United States of
America.

Kidneys are critical target organs of COVID-19, but susceptibility and responses 
to infection remain poorly understood. Here, we combine SARS-CoV-2 variants with 
genome edited kidney organoids and clinical data to investigate tropism,
mechanism, and therapeutics. SARS-CoV-2 specifically infects organoid proximal
tubules amongst diverse cell types. Infections produce replicating virus,
apoptosis, and disrupted cell morphology, features of which are revealed in the
context of polycystic kidney disease. Cross-validation of gene expression
patterns in organoids reflect proteomic signatures of COVID-19 in the urine of
critically ill patients indicating interferon pathway upregulation. SARS-CoV-2
viral variants Alpha, Beta, Gamma, Kappa, and Delta exhibit comparable levels of 
replication in organoids. Infection is ameliorated in ACE2-/- organoids and
blocked via treatment with de novo designed spike binder peptides. Collectively, 
these studies clarify the impact of kidney infection in COVID-19 as reflected in 
organoids and clinical populations, enabling assessment of viral fitness and
emerging therapies.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.154882 
PMID: 34767537 

