
1. BMJ Glob Health. 2021 Nov;6(11). pii: e005537. doi: 10.1136/bmjgh-2021-005537.

The influence of gender and ethnicity on facemasks and respiratory protective
equipment fit: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Chopra J(1), Abiakam N(2), Kim H(3), Metcalf C(2), Worsley P(2), Cheong Y(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Scool of Human Development and Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(2)School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Environmental & Life Sciences,
University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(3)School of Electronics and Computer Science, University of Southampton,
Southampton, UK.
(4)Scool of Human Development and Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Southampton, Southampton, UK Y.Cheong@soton.ac.uk.
(5)Complete Fertility Southampton, Princess Anne Hospital, Southampton, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) people are
disproportionately affected by COVID-19. Respiratory protective equipment (RPE)
has conventionally been developed for a predominantly white male population that 
does not represent the healthcare workforce. The literature was reviewed to
determine the protection offered to female and BAME users.
METHODS: Five databases were searched. Eligible studies related to respirator fit
in the context of anthropometrics, gender and ethnicity. Meta-analysis was
performed for gender-based anthropometric differences. A priori protocol
registration was not performed.
RESULTS: 32 studies were included and anthropometric data was extracted from 15
studies. Meta-analysis revealed 14 anthropometric measurements were significantly
smaller for females. Mean differences ranged from 0.37 mm to 22.05 mm.
Gender-based anthropometric differences did not always translate to lower fit
factor scores, with 12 studies reporting worse performance and fit for females
and 10 reporting no gender effect. No studies provided disaggregate
anthropometric data by ethnic group. Pass rates (PR) were low or moderate in 12
BAME or mixed-ethnicity cohorts. 14 studies reported associations between facial 
dimensions (FD) and respirator fit. Three comparative studies showed lower PR
among selective BAME people. 18 studies reported RPE performance differed with
model and design. Most studies did not prespecify inclusion/exclusion criteria.
Small sample size and lack of justification or power calculations was a concern. 
Significant heterogeneity in study designs limited comparisons, particularly
relating to respirator selection or availability and defining study outcomes
relating to RPE performance.
CONCLUSION: The literature reports on largely Caucasian or single ethnic
populations, and BAME people remain under-represented, limiting comparisons
between ethnic groups. Facial anthropometrics vary between gender and likely
between ethnicity, which may contribute to lower PR among females and ethnic
minorities, particularly Asians. There is a need for studies including a broader 
spectrum of ethnicities and for consideration of female and BAME users during RPE
development.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjgh-2021-005537 
PMCID: PMC8587533
PMID: 34764145  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

