
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 12;16(11):e0259513. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259513.
eCollection 2021.

COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy and refusal and associated factors in an adult
population in Saskatchewan, Canada: Evidence from predictive modelling.

Muhajarine N(1)(2), Adeyinka DA(1)(2), McCutcheon J(3), Green KL(4), Fahlman
M(5), Kallio N(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community Health and Epidemiology, College of Medicine,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.
(2)Saskatchewan Population Health and Evaluation Research Unit, Saskatoon,
Saskatchewan, Canada.
(3)Canadian Hub for Applied and Social Research, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.
(4)Department of Community Health and Epidemiology, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.
(5)HACAN Consulting Ltd., Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.

BACKGROUND: A high population level of vaccination is required to control the
COVID-19 pandemic, but not all Canadians are convinced of the value and safety of
vaccination. Understanding more about these individuals can aid in developing
strategies to increase their acceptance of a COVID-19 vaccine. The objectives of 
this study were to describe COVID-19 vaccine acceptance, hesitancy and refusal
rates and associated factors in Saskatchewan, Canada.
METHODS: This is a cross-sequential study that consisted of pooled responses from
weighted samples of 9,252 Saskatchewan adults (≥18 years) across nine rounds of
data collection between May 4, 2020 and April 3, 2021. The outcome variable was
vaccine intention: vaccine acceptance, hesitancy, and refusal. The independent
variables were layered into socio-demographic factors, risk of exposure to
coronavirus, mitigating behaviours, and perceptions of COVID-19. Data were
analyzed using multinomial logistic regression and a classification and
regression tree.
RESULTS: Seventy-six percent of the respondents indicated that they had been or
were willing to be vaccinated, 13% had not yet decided, and the remaining 11%
said they would not be vaccinated. Factors that increased the likelihood of
vaccine refusal and hesitancy were lower education level, financial instability, 
Indigenous status, and not being concerned about spreading the coronavirus.
Perceiving COVID-19 to be more of a threat to one's community and believing that 
one had a higher risk of illness or death from COVID-19 decreased the likelihood 
of both vaccine refusal and hesitancy. Women and newcomers to Canada were more
likely to be unsure about getting vaccinated. Respondents who did not plan to be 
vaccinated were less likely to wear face masks and practice physical distancing.
CONCLUSION: While many Canadians have voluntarily and eagerly become vaccinated
already, reaching sufficient coverage of the population is likely to require
targeted efforts to convince those who are resistant or unsure. Identifying and
overcoming any barriers to vaccination that exist within the socio-demographic
groups we found were least likely to be vaccinated is a crucial component.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259513 
PMCID: PMC8589208
PMID: 34767603  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

