
1. Sch Psychol. 2021 Nov;36(6):516-532. doi: 10.1037/spq0000457.

Exceptional circumstances: Changes in teachers' work characteristics and
well-being during COVID-19 lockdown.

Hilger KJE(1), Scheibe S(2), Frenzel AC(3), Keller MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics Education, IPN-Leibniz Institute for Science and
Mathematics Education.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Groningen.
(3)Department of Psychology, Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich.

The COVID-19 pandemic extensively changed the work life of many employees.
Teachers seemed particularly challenged, confronted with sudden remote teaching
due to school closures. Drawing on the job demands-resources (JD-R) model, we
investigated (a) changes in seven work characteristics (job demands: emotional
demands, interpersonal conflict, workload; job resources: autonomy, social
support, feedback, task variety) and three job-related well-being indicators
(fatigue, psychosomatic complaints, job satisfaction), (b) how changes in work
characteristics correlated with well-being, and (c) the impact of two individual 
difference factors (caretaking responsibilities, career stage). Data were
collected in two waves (just prior to and a few months into the COVID-19
pandemic) across Germany from 207 teachers with an average work experience of 6
years (range: 1-36 years). Using latent change score (LCS) modeling, we found
significant, small-to-medium-sized decreases over time for both job demands and
resources as well as fatigue, with variability in the magnitude of changes.
Decreases in job demands correlated with decreases in fatigue and psychosomatic
complaints, whereas decreases in job resources correlated with decreases in job
satisfaction. Teachers with caretaking responsibilities and more experienced
teachers were more vulnerable to the crisis as they experienced a smaller or no
decrease in job demands in concert with diminished job resources. These findings 
reveal the double-edged consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic for teachers' work 
life. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2021 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/spq0000457 
PMID: 34766815  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

