
1. J Stud Alcohol Drugs. 2021 Nov;82(6):752-757.

Smart Syringe Vending Machines: Research Capabilities and Implications for
Research Data Collection.

Otiashvili D(1)(2), Kirtadze I(1)(3), Mgebrishvili T(1), Beselia A(1), Tabatadze 
M(1), Otiashvili N(1), Ober AJ(4), Iguchi MY(4).

Author information: 
(1)Addiction Research Center Alternative Georgia, Tbilisi, Georgia.
(2)School of Natural Sciences and Medicine, Ilia State University, Tbilisi,
Georgia.
(3)School of Arts and Sciences, Ilia State University, Tbilisi, Georgia.
(4)RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, California.

OBJECTIVE: Syringe vending machines (SVMs) are intended to supplement the
standard syringe exchange programs to access hard-to-reach groups and to cover
unserved geographical areas. This report describes how we adapted SVMs to deliver
interventions and collect research data as part of a study of smart SVMs (SSVMs) 
in Tbilisi, Georgia.
METHOD: To create SSVMs, we upgraded commercial vending machines and developed a 
computer program to track and record interactions and to display messages related
to study procedures. Preferred locations for SSVMs, product specifications, and
the mode of operation were determined through formative input from people who
inject drugs (PWID). SSVMs were installed near pharmacies and serve both the
general population and PWID. The "hidden" interactive menu for the PWID
prevention kits was displayed on the screen only when a special plastic card was 
used. The plastic cards were distributed to the clients of fixed syringe exchange
programs and to their peers who were not in contact with harm-reduction services.
RESULTS: Ten SSVMs were operational in Tbilisi as of March 2021, with more than
800 PWID using them on a regular basis. More than half of sterile equipment kits 
were distributed during weekends and night hours.
CONCLUSIONS: Our innovative SSVM integrates features for intervention delivery
and research data collection. It can be used for testing a variety of
interventions beyond syringes (e.g., distribution of HIV/hepatitis C virus
self-tests) and provides opportunities for serving various at-risk groups that
might not otherwise access these products and services (e.g., men who have sex
with men, commercial sex workers).


PMID: 34762034 

