
1. J Aging Sci. 2021;Vol 9(Suppl 7). pii: 001. Epub 2021 Sep 30.

Angiotensin Converting Enzyme 2 (ACE2) Expression in the Aged Brain and Visual
System.

Hill JM(1)(2)(3)(4), Clement C(5), Arceneaux L(1), Lukiw WJ(1)(2)(6).

Author information: 
(1)LSU Neuroscience Center, Louisiana State University Health Sciences, New
Orleans, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences
Center, New Orleans, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, LSU Health Science Center, New Orleans, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology, LSU Health Science Center, New Orleans, USA.
(5)Experimental Therapeutics and Human Toxicology Lab, Southern University, New
Orleans, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center,
New Orleans, USA.

Multiple lines of evidence currently indicate that the severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) gains entry into human host cells via a
high-affinity interaction with the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2)
transmembrane receptor. Research has further shown the widespread expression of
the ACE2 receptor on the surface of many different immune, non-immune and neural 
host cell types, and that SARS-CoV-2 has the remarkable capability to attack many
different types of human-host cells simultaneously. One principal neuroanatomical
region for high ACE2 expression patterns occurs in the brainstem, an area of the 
brain containing regulatory centers for respiration, and this may in part explain
the predisposition of many COVID-19 patients to respiratory distress. Early
studies also indicated extensive ACE2 expression in the whole eye and the brain's
visual circuitry in aged humans. In this study we analyzed ACE2 receptor
expression at the mRNA and protein level in multiple cell types involved in human
vision, including cell types of the external eye and several deep brain regions
known to be involved in the processing of visual signals. Here we provide
evidence: (i) that many different optical and neural cell types of the human
visual system provide receptors essential for SARS-CoV-2 invasion; (ii) of the
remarkable ubiquity of ACE2 presence in cells of the eye and anatomical regions
of the brain involved in visual signal processing; (iii) that ACE2 receptor
expression in different ocular cell types and visual processing centers of the
brain provide multiple compartments for SARS-CoV-2 infiltration; and (iv) of a
gradient of increasing ACE2 expression from the anterior surface of the eye to
the visual signal processing areas of the occipital lobe and the primary visual
neocortex. A gradient of ACE2 expression from the eye surface to the occipital
lobe may provide the SARS-CoV-2 virus a novel pathway from the outer eye into
deeper anatomical regions of the brain involved in vision. These findings may
explain, in part, the many recently reported neuro-ophthalmic manifestations of
SARS-CoV-2 infection in COVID-19 affected patients.


PMCID: PMC8580311
PMID: 34765681 

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST AND COMPETING INTERESTS The 
authors declare that they have no conflict of interest of any kind with any of
the material presented in this research report. The authors declare that they
have no competing interests associated with any data in this report.

