
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 11;16(11):e0259803. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259803.
eCollection 2021.

Do racial and ethnic disparities in following stay-at-home orders influence
COVID-19 health outcomes? A mediation analysis approach.

Hu S(1), Luo W(1), Darzi A(1), Pan Y(2), Zhao G(1), Liu Y(1), Xiong C(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Maryland Transportation Institute (MTI), Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, United States of America.
(2)Shock Trauma and Anesthesiology Research (STAR) Center, School of Medicine,
University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, United States of America.

Racial/ethnic disparities are among the top-selective underlying determinants
associated with the disproportional impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on human
mobility and health outcomes. This study jointly examined county-level
racial/ethnic differences in compliance with stay-at-home orders and COVID-19
health outcomes during 2020, leveraging two-year geo-tracking data of mobile
devices across ~4.4 million point-of-interests (POIs) in the contiguous United
States. Through a set of structural equation modeling, this study quantified how 
racial/ethnic differences in following stay-at-home orders could mediate COVID-19
health outcomes, controlling for state effects, socioeconomics, demographics,
occupation, and partisanship. Results showed that counties with higher Asian
populations decreased most in their travel, both in terms of reducing their
overall POIs' visiting and increasing their staying home percentage. Moreover,
counties with higher White populations experienced the lowest infection rate,
while counties with higher African American populations presented the highest
case-fatality ratio. Additionally, control variables, particularly partisanship, 
median household income, percentage of elders, and urbanization, significantly
accounted for the county differences in human mobility and COVID-19 health
outcomes. Mediation analyses further revealed that human mobility only
statistically influenced infection rate but not case-fatality ratio, and such
mediation effects varied substantially among racial/ethnic compositions. Last,
robustness check of racial gradient at census block group level documented
consistent associations but greater magnitude. Taken together, these findings
suggest that US residents' responses to COVID-19 are subject to an entrenched and
consequential racial/ethnic divide.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259803 
PMCID: PMC8584966
PMID: 34762685  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

