
1. Lancet. 2021 Dec 4;398(10316):2109-2124. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)01897-3. Epub
2021 Nov 8.

How an outbreak became a pandemic: a chronological analysis of crucial junctures 
and international obligations in the early months of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Singh S(1), McNab C(2), Olson RM(3), Bristol N(2), Nolan C(3), Bergstrøm E(2),
Bartos M(4), Mabuchi S(2), Panjabi R(2), Karan A(3), Abdalla SM(5), Bonk M(2),
Jamieson M(6), Werner GK(2), Nordström A(2), Legido-Quigley H(7), Phelan A(8).

Author information: 
(1)The Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response, Geneva,
Switzerland; Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, University of Auckland,
Auckland, New Zealand. Electronic address: singhsu@ipppr.org.
(2)The Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response, Geneva,
Switzerland.
(3)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(4)The Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response, Geneva,
Switzerland; School of Sociology, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, 
Australia.
(5)The Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response, Geneva,
Switzerland; Boston University School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Institute of Health Policy, Management and Evaluation, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(7)The Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response, Geneva,
Switzerland; London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, UK; Saw Swee
Hock School of Public Health, Singapore.
(8)The Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response, Geneva,
Switzerland; Center for Global Health Science & Security, Georgetown University, 
Washington, DC, USA.

Understanding the spread of SARS-CoV-2, how and when evidence emerged, and the
timing of local, national, regional, and global responses is essential to
establish how an outbreak became a pandemic and to prepare for future health
threats. With that aim, the Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and
Response has developed a chronology of events, actions, and recommendations, from
December, 2019, when the first cases of COVID-19 were identified in China, to the
end of March, 2020, by which time the outbreak had spread extensively worldwide
and had been characterised as a pandemic. Datapoints are based on two literature 
reviews, WHO documents and correspondence, submissions to the Panel, and an
expert verification process. The retrospective analysis of the chronology shows a
dedicated initial response by WHO and some national governments, but also aspects
of the response that could have been quicker, including outbreak notifications
under the International Health Regulations (IHR), presumption and confirmation of
human-to-human transmission of SARS-CoV-2, declaration of a Public Health
Emergency of International Concern, and, most importantly, the public health
response of many national governments. The chronology also shows that some
countries, largely those with previous experience with similar outbreaks, reacted
quickly, even ahead of WHO alerts, and were more successful in initially
containing the virus. Mapping actions against IHR obligations, the chronology
shows where efficiency and accountability could be improved at local, national,
and international levels to more quickly alert and contain health threats in the 
future. In particular, these improvements include necessary reforms to
international law and governance for pandemic preparedness and response,
including the IHR and a potential framework convention on pandemic preparedness
and response.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)01897-3 
PMCID: PMC8575464
PMID: 34762857 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests AP has worked as a
consultant with WHO on unrelated projects; was a member of a WHO Technical
Advisory Group related to the IHR and COVID-19; is principal investigator in a
project funded by the Carnegie Corporation to examine legal elements of a
potential pandemic treaty (grant number G-21-58414); and is principal
investigator of a project funded by the US Centers for Disease Control to examine
national responses to COVID-19 (grant number NU2HGH2021000469: Component 3). HL-Q
has worked as a consultant with WHO on unrelated projects and is a member of the 
WHO Europe High Level Expert Consultation Group on COVID-19 strategies. MBa has
worked as a consultant with WHO on projects concerning gaps in pandemic
preparedness, a global hub for pandemic and epidemic intelligence, and investment
in WHO. RMO has previously worked as a Consultant for WHO with the Violence
Against Women Team on unrelated topics. MBo has worked as a consultant with WHO
on unrelated projects. CM has worked as a consultant with WHO on unrelated
projects and worked full time at the WHO Headquarters from 2000 to 2008. SMA has 
worked as a consultant with WHO on unrelated projects and is the Lead Project
Director of a grant from The Rockefeller Foundation to examine the intersection
of data, determinants of health, and decision making. NB has worked as a
consultant to WHO through the Global Preparedness Monitoring Board, on a project 
related to polio assets and COVID-19, and on unrelated topics; and is consulting 
with the Nuclear Threat Initiative and Johns Hopkins University as they develop
the Global Health Security Index (2021). SM has worked with the World Bank to
help accelerate their COVID-19 rapid response, and as a Senior Advisor with the
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. AN has worked as a staff member at WHO,
including as Acting Director General and as a Country Representative; and worked 
as the Ambassador for Global Health for the Government of Sweden before being
appointed to lead the Independent Panel secretariat. AK has done unpaid work for 
the Biden-Harris campaign on COVID-19 related school reopenings, and worked as an
unpaid medical fellow on the Massachusetts Department of Public Health COVID-19
response. RP is the US Global Malaria Coordinator at the US Agency for
International Development, but his views in this paper are based on his work with
the Independent Panel, in which he served until Jan 31, 2021. GKW has served on
the UN's High-Level Commission on Health Employment and Economic Growth. The
views expressed herein do not necessarily reflect the views of the US Government 
or its departments and agencies. All other authors declare no competing
interests.

