
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 28;9:746387. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.746387.
eCollection 2021.

Assessing the Role of Trust in Information Sources, Adoption of Preventive
Practices, Volunteering and Degree of Training on Biological Risk Prevention, on 
Perceived Risk of Infection and Usage of Personal Protective Equipment Among
Italian Medical Students During the SARS-CoV-2 Pandemic.

Maietti E(1), Greco M(1), Reno C(1), Rallo F(1), Trerè D(2)(3), Savoia E(4),
Fantini MP(1), Scheier LM(1)(5), Gori D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, Alma Mater
Studiorum-University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialistic Medicine, Alma Mater
Studiorum-University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(3)IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(4)Emergency Preparedness Research Evaluation & Practice Program, Harvard T.H.
Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, United States.
(5)LARS Research Institute, Prevention Strategies, Scottsdale, AZ, United States.

Background: During the initial phase of the COVID-19 pandemic, the University of 
Bologna Medical School surveyed medical students to learn more about their
preparation to confront challenges posed by the pandemic and whether it affects
perceptions of viral infection risk. This information could help design
risk-reduction interventions with training to mitigate possible viral exposure.
Method: A cross-sectional online survey examining students' characteristics,
volunteer status, adoption of evidence-based preventive measures, trust in
information sources used, infectious disease training, and knowledge of PPE usage
in relation to perceived risk of infection from SARS-CoV-2 in daily living,
academic, and healthcare activities. A multivariate path model estimated the
simultaneous influences of all exogenous factors on perceived risk. A Poisson
regression model assessed the same multivariate effects on knowledge of PPE
usage. Results: The analysis sample included 537 respondents. Perceived risk of
infection was highest in hospital activities. On average, students were able to
use only four out of seven types of PPE albeit they adopted most of the
evidence-based preventive measures. Adoption of preventive measures was
positively associated with perceived risk of COVID infection. Conversely,
training on PPE usage and volunteer work were associated with lower perceived
risk in healthcare setting and higher PPE knowledge. Conclusion: Implementing
early safety-based educational programs remedy students' lack of knowledge in
infectious disease prevention and mitigate their risk of infection. Voluntary
work should be encouraged with potential benefit for both their continued medical
training and strengthening the healthcare system's response to public health
emergencies.

Copyright © 2021 Maietti, Greco, Reno, Rallo, Trerè, Savoia, Fantini, Scheier and
Gori.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.746387 
PMCID: PMC8581255
PMID: 34778180  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

