
1. Front Public Health. 2021 Oct 28;9:759444. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.759444.
eCollection 2021.

Factors Affecting Perceived Health Benefits and Use Behaviors in Urban Green
Spaces During the COVID-19 Pandemic in Southern China Megacities.

Li H(1), Luo W(1), Hou Y(1), Xia Y(1), Yao J(2), Kang N(3), Deng C(4), Sun H(4), 
Chen C(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Forestry and Landscape Architecture, South China Agricultural
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Urban Big Data Centre, School of Social and Political Sciences, University of 
Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(3)School of Architecture, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
(4)Guangzhou Sun & Partners Incorporation Design Co., Ltd., Guangzhou, China.

Background: The COVID-19 pandemic has alienated people from urban green spaces
(UGSs) that have various health outcomes for humans. However, little is known
about the influential factors of perceived health benefits and use behaviors in
UGSs during the COVID-19 pandemic. This study aims to explore the key factors
that influence perceived health benefits and use behaviors in UGSs and to assess 
the mediating role of place attachment in relationships during the COVID-19
pandemic in Chinese megacities. Methods: We conducted an online questionnaire
survey from December 2020 to March 2021 in Guangzhou and Shenzhen, China. Six
multiple regression models were constructed to investigate the main factors by
which UGSs influence citizens' perceived health benefits and use behaviors. Four 
mediation models were established using the structural equation modeling (SEM)
method to explore the mediating effect of place attachment. Results: A total of
628 questionnaires were included in the analysis. The results revealed that some 
UGS components (green space access, maintenance, and soundscape) significantly
affected perceived health benefits for citizens (physical, mental, and social
health) during the COVID-19 pandemic. Conversely, use behaviors (frequency of
visits, duration of visits, and activity intensity) were mainly affected by the
sociodemographic context but less affected by UGS components. In addition, UGS
components were found to significantly predict place attachment, which in turn
influenced the perceived health benefits, frequency, and duration of visits.
Conclusions: This study distinguished the key factors that affect perceived
health benefits and use behaviors during the COVID-19 pandemic: green space
access, maintenance, soundscape, and sociodemographic characteristics. Place
attachment still needs to be considered when discussing how to encourage citizens
to visit UGSs during the pandemic. These findings provide implications for
policymakers and landscape planners regarding design and management measures for 
UGSs that are conducive to coping with pandemics.

Copyright © 2021 Li, Luo, Hou, Xia, Yao, Kang, Deng, Sun and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.759444 
PMCID: PMC8581461
PMID: 34778190  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CD and HS were employed by Guangzhou Sun &
Partners Incorporation Design Co., Ltd. The remaining authors declare that the
research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

