
1. Infect Agent Cancer. 2021 Nov 14;16(1):65. doi: 10.1186/s13027-021-00404-0.

Metagenomic analysis to identify novel infectious agents in systemic anaplastic
large cell lymphoma.

Mahale P(#)(1), Nomburg J(#)(2), Song JY(3), Steinberg M(4), Starrett G(5),
Boland J(4), Lynch CF(6), Chadburn A(7), Rubinstein PG(8), Hernandez BY(9),
Weisenburger DD(3), Bullman S(10), Engels EA(11).

Author information: 
(1)Infections and Immunoepidemiology Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and 
Genetics, National Cancer Institute, Rockville, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, CA,
USA.
(4)Cancer Genomics Research Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, Rockville, MD,
USA.
(5)Laboratory of Cellular Oncology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(6)Department of Epidemiology, The University of Iowa College of Public Health,
Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
(7)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York,
NY, USA.
(8)Stroger Hospital of Cook County, Ruth M. Rothstein Core Center, Rush
University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA.
(9)University of Hawaii Cancer Center, Honolulu, HI, USA.
(10)Human Biology Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, 
USA.
(11)Infections and Immunoepidemiology Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and
Genetics, National Cancer Institute, Rockville, MD, USA.
engelse@exchange.nih.gov.
(#)Contributed equally

Systemic anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) is a rare CD30-expressing T-cell
non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Risk of systemic ALCL is highly increased among
immunosuppressed individuals. Because risk of cancers associated with viruses is 
increased with immunosuppression, we conducted a metagenomic analysis of systemic
ALCL to determine whether a known or novel pathogen is associated with this
malignancy. Total RNA was extracted and sequenced from formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tumor specimens from 19 systemic ALCL cases (including one case
from an immunosuppressed individual with human immunodeficiency virus infection),
3 Epstein-Barr virus positive diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs) occurring
in solid organ transplant recipients (positive controls), and 3 breast cancers
(negative controls). We used a pipeline based on the Genome Analysis Toolkit
(GATK)-PathSeq algorithm to subtract out human RNA reads and map the remaining
RNA reads to microbes. No microbial association with ALCL was identified, but we 
found Epstein-Barr virus in the DLBCL positive controls and determined the breast
cancers to be negative. In conclusion, we did not find a pathogen associated with
systemic ALCL, but because we analyzed only one ALCL tumor from an
immunosuppressed person, we cannot exclude the possibility that a pathogen is
associated with some cases that arise in the setting of immunosuppression.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13027-021-00404-0 
PMCID: PMC8591940
PMID: 34775986 

