
1. Mol Immunol. 2021 Dec;140:240-249. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2021.10.018. Epub 2021
Nov 10.

Antivirus activity, but not thiolreductase activity, is conserved in
interferon-gamma-inducible GILT protein in arthropod.

Izumida M(1), Hayashi H(2), Smith C(3), Ishibashi F(4), Suga K(5), Kubo Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Nagasaki
University, Nagasaki, Japan.
(2)Medical University Research Administrator, Nagasaki University School of
Medicine, Nagasaki, Japan.
(3)Department of Clinical Medicine, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Nagasaki
University, Nagasaki, Japan; School of Tropical Medicine and Global Health,
Nagasaki University, Japan; Department of Clinical Research, London School of
Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, United Kingdom.
(4)Graduate School of Fisheries and Environmental Sciences, Nagasaki University, 
Nagasaki, Japan.
(5)Graduate School of Fisheries and Environmental Sciences, Nagasaki University, 
Nagasaki, Japan; Organization for Marine Science and Technology, Nagasaki
University, Nagasaki, Japan.
(6)Department of Clinical Medicine, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Nagasaki
University, Nagasaki, Japan; Program for Nurturing Global Leaders in Tropical
Medicine and Emerging Communicable Diseases, Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan. Electronic address:
yoshinao@nagasaki-u.ac.jp.

We have previously reported that gamma-interferon inducible lysosomal
thiolreductase (GILT) functions as a host defense factor against retroviruses by 
digesting disulfide bonds on viral envelope proteins. GILT is widely conserved
even in plants and fungi as well as animals. The thiolreductase active site of
mammalian GILT is composed of a CXXC amino acid motif, whereas the C-terminal
cysteine residue is changed to serine in arthropods including shrimps, crabs, and
flies. GILT from Penaeus monodon (PmGILT) also has the CXXS motif instead of the 
CXXC active site. We demonstrate here that a human GILT mutant (GILT C75S) with
the CXXS motif and PmGILT significantly inhibit amphotropic murine leukemia virus
vector infection in human cells without alterning its expression level and
lysosomal localization, showing that the C-terminal cysteine residue of the
active site is not required for the antiviral activity. We have reported that
human GILT suppresses HIV-1 particle production by digestion of disulfide bonds
on CD63. However, GILT C75S mutant and PmGILT did not digest CD63 disulfide
bonds, and had no effect on HIV-1 virion production, suggesting that they do not 
have thiolreductase activity. Taken together, this study found that antiviral
activity, but not thiolreductase activity, is conserved in arthropod GILT
proteins. This finding provides a new insight that the common function of GILT is
antiviral activity in many animals.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2021.10.018 
PMID: 34773863 

