
1. J Spinal Cord Med. 2021;44(sup1):S147-S158. doi: 10.1080/10790268.2021.1936946.

Improving practice through collaboration: Early experiences from the multi-site
Spinal Cord Injury Implementation and Evaluation Quality Care Consortium.

Bateman EA(1)(2), Sreenivasan VA(3), Farahani F(4), Casemore S(5), Chase AD(3),
Duley J(6), Evbuomwan IK(7), Flett HM(4)(8)(9), Ventre A(8), Craven BC(4)(8)(10),
Wolfe DL(7)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, Western University, London, 
Canada.
(2)Parkwood Institute, St. Joseph's Health Care London, London, Canada.
(3)The Ottawa Hospital Rehabilitation Centre, Ottawa, Canada.
(4)KITE Research Institute, Toronto Rehabilitation Institute - University Health 
Network, Toronto, Canada.
(5)Spinal Cord Injury Ontario, Toronto, Canada.
(6)Hamilton Health Sciences, Hamilton, Canada.
(7)Parkwood Institute Research, Lawson Health Research Institute, London, Canada.
(8)Brain and Spinal Cord Rehabilitation Program Toronto Rehabilitation Institute 
- University Health Network, Toronto, Canada.
(9)Department of Physical Therapy, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(10)Division of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Department of Medicine,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(11)School of Health Studies, Western University, London, Canada.

CONTEXT: Dedicated implementation efforts are critical to bridging the gaps
between current practices and best practices. A quality improvement collaborative
(QIC), the Spinal Cord Injury Implementation and Evaluation Quality Care
Consortium (SCI IEQCC), was established to meet this need, bringing together a
network of clinicians and administrators to systematically improve the quality
and equity of tertiary spinal cord injury or disease (SCI/D) rehabilitation care 
in Ontario, Canada.
METHODS: Clinicians and leaders from five tertiary SCI/D rehabilitation centers
and two not-for-profit SCI/D advocacy groups comprised a network dedicated to
supporting implementation of the SCI-High quality indicators in prioritized
domains of SCI rehabilitation and related best practices by: (1) building
capacity through implementation science education of frontline clinicians; (2)
providing resources and support to empower frontline clinicians to lead quality
improvement efforts within their institutions; (3) promoting wider learning
through a network for sharing ideas, efforts, and experiences; and (4) collecting
indicator data to facilitate provincial evaluation of goal attainment.
RESULTS: Network members and sites collaborated to implement best practices
within six priority domains; in 18 months, significant progress has been made in 
emotional wellbeing, sexual health, walking, and wheeled mobility despite
disruptions due to the COVID-19 pandemic. These efforts encompass heterogeneous
challenges and strategies, ranging from developing clinical skills programs, to
streamlining processes, to manipulating physical space.
CONCLUSION: A QIC targeting SCI/D rehabilitation demonstrates promise for
advancing the implementation of best practices, building implementation science
capacity across multiple sites, and for promoting collaboration amongst SCI/D
rehabilitation centers and organizational partners.

DOI: 10.1080/10790268.2021.1936946 
PMID: 34779729  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

