
1. J Thorac Oncol. 2021 Nov 10. pii: S1556-0864(21)03309-8. doi:
10.1016/j.jtho.2021.11.001. [Epub ahead of print]

Lung Cancer and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 Infection:
Identifying Important Knowledge Gaps for Investigation.

Rolfo C(1), Meshulami N(1), Russo A(2), Krammer F(3), García-Sastre A(4), Mack
PC(1), Gomez JE(5), Bhardwaj N(6), Benyounes A(7), Sirera R(8), Moore A(9), Rohs 
N(1), Henschke CI(10), Yankelevitz D(10), King J(11), Shyr Y(12), Bunn PA Jr(13),
Minna JD(14), Hirsch FR(15).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence for Thoracic Oncology, The Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn 
School of Medicine, at Mount Sinai, New York, New York.
(2)Medical Oncology Unit, Azienda Ospedaliera Papardo (A.O. Papardo), Messina,
Italy.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York; Department of Pathology, Molecular and Cell-Based Medicine, Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York; Global Health and Emerging
Pathogens Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York;
Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine
at Mount Sinai, New York, New York.
(5)The Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York.
(7)Thoracic Oncology, Inova Schar Cancer Institute, Fairfax, Virginia.
(8)Unidad Mixta TRIAL, Centro Investigación Príncipe Felipe-Fundación
Investigación, Hospital General Universitario de Valencia, Valencia, Spain;
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Cáncer, CIBERONC, Madrid, Spain;
Department of Biotechnology, Universitat Politècnica de València, Valencia,
Spain.
(9)LUNGevity Foundation, Bethesda, Maryland.
(10)Department of Radiology, Mount Sinai Health System, New York, New York.
(11)GO(2) Foundation for Lung Cancer, Washington, District of Columbia.
(12)Department of Biostatistics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee.
(13)Division of Medical Oncology, University of Colorado Cancer Center, Aurora,
Colorado.
(14)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, The
Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research, University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical Center, Dallas, Texas; Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas.
(15)Center of Excellence for Thoracic Oncology, The Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn
School of Medicine, at Mount Sinai, New York, New York. Electronic address:
fred.hirsch@mssm.edu.

Patients with lung cancer are especially vulnerable to coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) with a greater than sevenfold higher rate of becoming infected with
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) COVID-19, a greater 
than threefold higher hospitalization rate with high complication rates, and an
estimated case fatality rate of more than 30%. The reasons for the increased
vulnerability are not known. In addition, beyond the direct impact of the
pandemic on morbidity and mortality among patients with lung cancer, COVID-19,
with its disruption of patient care, has also resulted in substantial impact on
lung cancer screening and treatment/management.COVID-19 vaccines are safe and
effective in people with lung cancer. On the basis of the available data,
patients with lung cancer should continue their course of cancer treatment and
get vaccinated against the SARS-CoV-2 virus. For unknown reasons, some patients
with lung cancer mount poor antibody responses to vaccination. Thus, boosting
vaccination seems urgently indicated in this subgroup of vulnerable patients with
lung cancer. Nevertheless, many unanswered questions regarding vaccination in
this population remain, including the magnitude, quality, and duration of
antibody response and the role of innate and acquired cellular immunities for
clinical protection. Additional important knowledge gaps also remain, including
the following: how can we best protect patients with lung cancer from developing 
COVID-19, including managing care in patient with lung cancer and the home
environment of patients with lung cancer; are there clinical/treatment
demographics and tumor molecular demographics that affect severity of COVID-19
disease in patients with lung cancer; does anticancer treatment affect antibody
production and protection; does SARS-CoV-2 infection affect the
development/progression of lung cancer; and are special measures and vaccine
strategies needed for patients with lung cancer as viral variants of concern
emerge.

Copyright © 2021 International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtho.2021.11.001 
PMCID: PMC8579698
PMID: 34774792 

