
1. J Med Microbiol. 2021 Nov;70(11). doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.001455.

Effects of intrauterine exposure to hepatitis B virus in foetuses.

Sirilert S(1), Tongsong T(1), Kumfu S(2)(3)(4), Chattipakorn SC(2)(4),
Chattipakorn N(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai
University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(2)Cardiac Electrophysiology Research and Training Center, Faculty of Medicine,
Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(3)Cardiac Electrophysiology Unit, Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine,
Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(4)Center of Excellence in Cardiac Electrophysiology Research, Chiang Mai
University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.

Foetal response to hepatitis B viral infection is still unknown. The mechanisms
of persistent infection that occurs more often in mother-to-child transmission
than adult transmission are also unclear. Various aspects of the environmental
factors that accelerate or inhibit infection and the cytokine responses are
associated with the persistence of infection. Several studies showed that the
cytokine poor immune response in immaturity causes the persistence of the
infection. However, some reports suggested that a mature immune response was the 
cause of this persistent infection. This review comprehensively summarized the
reports from in vitro, in vivo as well as clinical reports regarding the
responses of the foetuses of hepatitis B infected mothers to the micro-organism. 
The mechanism of more opportunities to be persistently infected via the
mother-to-child transmission route is also summarized and discussed. Since there 
are limited clinical reports at this time, this review will provide evidence for 
future studies regarding the intrauterine infection mechanism and foetal response
to hepatitis B virus to elucidate the mechanisms responsible for mother-to-child 
transmission. This understanding may lead to effective interventions to control
mother-to-child hepatitis B infection in the future.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.001455 
PMID: 34779762 

