
1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2021 Oct 29;9:764516. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.764516.
eCollection 2021.

How Physical Factors Coordinate Virus Infection: A Perspective From
Mechanobiology.

Liu W(1), Tang D(2)(3), Xu XX(1), Liu YJ(1), Jiu Y(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenetics, International Co-laboratory of
Medical Epigenetics and Metabolism (Ministry of Science and Technology),
Department of Systems Biology for Medicine, Zhongshan Hospital, Shanghai
Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases, Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China.
(2)The Center for Microbes, Development and Health, Key Laboratory of Molecular
Virology and Immunology, Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(3)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Pandemics caused by viruses have threatened lives of thousands of people.
Understanding the complicated process of viral infection provides significantly
directive implication to epidemic prevention and control. Viral infection is a
complex and diverse process, and substantial studies have been complemented in
exploring the biochemical and molecular interactions between viruses and hosts.
However, the physical microenvironment where infections implement is often less
considered, and the role of mechanobiology in viral infection remains elusive.
Mechanobiology focuses on sensation, transduction, and response to intracellular 
and extracellular physical factors by tissues, cells, and extracellular matrix.
The intracellular cytoskeleton and mechanosensors have been proven to be
extensively involved in the virus life cycle. Furthermore, innovative methods
based on micro- and nanofabrication techniques are being utilized to control and 
modulate the physical and chemical cell microenvironment, and to explore how
extracellular factors including stiffness, forces, and topography regulate viral 
infection. Our current review covers how physical factors in the microenvironment
coordinate viral infection. Moreover, we will discuss how this knowledge can be
harnessed in future research on cross-fields of mechanobiology and virology.

Copyright © 2021 Liu, Tang, Xu, Liu and Jiu.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.764516 
PMCID: PMC8585752
PMID: 34778236 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

