
1. J Med Internet Res. 2021 Nov 15;23(11):e24460. doi: 10.2196/24460.

Security Engineering of Patient-Centered Health Care Information Systems in
Peer-to-Peer Environments: Systematic Review.

Abdullahi Yari I(1), Dehling T(2)(3), Kluge F(1), Geck J(4), Sunyaev A(2)(3),
Eskofier B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Artificial Intelligence in Biomedical Engineering, Machine
Learning and Data Analytics Lab, Friedrich-Alexander University
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Institute of Applied Informatics and Formal Description Methods, Karlsruhe
Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany.
(3)KASTEL Security Research Labs, Karlsruhe, Germany.
(4)REFINIO GmbH, Rohr, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Patient-centered health care information systems (PHSs) enable
patients to take control and become knowledgeable about their own health,
preferably in a secure environment. Current and emerging PHSs use either a
centralized database, peer-to-peer (P2P) technology, or distributed ledger
technology for PHS deployment. The evolving COVID-19 decentralized
Bluetooth-based tracing systems are examples of disease-centric P2P PHSs.
Although using P2P technology for the provision of PHSs can be flexible,
scalable, resilient to a single point of failure, and inexpensive for patients,
the use of health information on P2P networks poses major security issues as
users must manage information security largely by themselves.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to identify the inherent security issues for PHS
deployment in P2P networks and how they can be overcome. In addition, this study 
reviews different P2P architectures and proposes a suitable architecture for P2P 
PHS deployment.
METHODS: A systematic literature review was conducted following PRISMA (Preferred
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) reporting guidelines.
Thematic analysis was used for data analysis. We searched the following
databases: IEEE Digital Library, PubMed, Science Direct, ACM Digital Library,
Scopus, and Semantic Scholar. The search was conducted on articles published
between 2008 and 2020. The Common Vulnerability Scoring System was used as a
guide for rating security issues.
RESULTS: Our findings are consolidated into 8 key security issues associated with
PHS implementation and deployment on P2P networks and 7 factors promoting them.
Moreover, we propose a suitable architecture for P2P PHSs and guidelines for the 
provision of PHSs while maintaining information security.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the clear advantages of P2P PHSs, the absence of centralized
controls and inconsistent views of the network on some P2P systems have profound 
adverse impacts in terms of security. The security issues identified in this
study need to be addressed to increase patients' intention to use PHSs on P2P
networks by making them safe to use.

©Imrana Abdullahi Yari, Tobias Dehling, Felix Kluge, Juergen Geck, Ali Sunyaev,
Bjoern Eskofier. Originally published in the Journal of Medical Internet Research
(https://www.jmir.org), 15.11.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/24460 
PMID: 34779788  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

