
1. J Bodyw Mov Ther. 2021 Oct;28:425-432. doi: 10.1016/j.jbmt.2021.07.012. Epub 2021
Aug 5.

The effect of aerobic exercise on immune biomarkers and symptoms severity and
progression in patients with COVID-19: A randomized control trial.

Mohamed AA(1), Alawna M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation, School of Health Sciences,
Istanbul Gelisim University, Istanbul, Turkey; Department of Basic Sciences,
Faculty of Physical Therapy, Beni-Suef University, Beni Suef, Egypt.
(2)Department of Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation, School of Health Sciences,
Istanbul Gelisim University, Istanbul, Turkey; Department of Physiotherapy and
Rehabilitation, Faculty of Allied Medical Sciences, Arab American University,
Jenin, Palestine. Electronic address: motaz.alawna@aaup.edu.

BACKGROUND: The World Health Organization in March 2020 has announced that
COVID-19 is a world pandemic because the number of infected cases increases
rapidly. however, there are several available vaccines, their protection is
limited to a certain period. Thus, the role of modalities that improve immune
functions should be performed to counter COVID-19 viral load and decrease
mortality rates.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of aerobic exercise on immune biomarkers,
disease severity, and progression in patients with COVID-19.
DESIGN: A randomized controlled study.
PARTICIPANTS: Thirty patients with COVID-19 participated in this study.
Participants' age ranged from 24 to 45 years old. Participants had a mild or
moderate COVID-19. Participants were assigned randomly into two groups, exercise 
and control groups. There were two main dependent variables including blood
immune markers and severity of respiratory symptoms.
INTERVENTIONS: All participants performed 2 weeks of moderate-intensity aerobic
exercise for 40 min/session, 3 sessions/week. The measurements were performed at 
baseline, and after 2-weeks.
RESULTS: At baseline measurements, there were non-significant differences between
both groups in the Wisconsin scale total score, Leucocytes, Lymphocytes,
Interleukin-6, Interleukin-10, Immunoglobulin-A, and TNF-α (P > .05). After the
intervention, the Wisconsin scale (patient-oriented illness-specific
quality-of-life) total score significantly decreased in the intervention group
(P < .05); while, Leucocytes, Lymphocytes, and Immunoglobulin-A significantly
increased in the intervention group (P < .05).
CONCLUSION: The current study indicated that 2 weeks of moderate-intensity
aerobic exercise decreased the severity and progression of COVID-19 associated
disorders and quality of life. Also, a 2-weeks of aerobic exercise positively
affected immune function by increasing the amounts of Leucocytes, Lymphocytes,
Immunoglobulin A.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbmt.2021.07.012 
PMCID: PMC8339452
PMID: 34776174  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

