
1. J Cutan Pathol. 2021 Nov 14. doi: 10.1111/cup.14169. [Epub ahead of print]

Primary cutaneous gamma/delta T-cell lymphoma in Taiwan: A series of six cases
with frequent solitary presentation and relatively indolent behavior.

Chen BJ(1)(2), Wang RC(3)(4), Jhuang JY(5), Chen SW(6), Su YZ(7), Tseng CE(8)(9),
Chiang CT(10), Wu YT(11), Chuang SS(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei Medical University, New
Taipei City, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Taichung Veterans General
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Nursing, College of Nursing, HungKuang University, Taichung,
Taiwan.
(5)Department of Pathology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Division of Hemato-Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Lioying Chi-Mei 
Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Pathology, Chi-Mei Medical Center, Tainan, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Dalin Tzu Chi Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi
Medical Foundation, Chia-Yi, Taiwan.
(9)School of Medicine, Tzu Chi University, Hualian, Taiwan.
(10)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Far Eastern Memorial Hospital, New Taipei
City, Taiwan.
(11)Department of Pathology, Chia-Yi Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung
University College of Medicine, Chia-Yi, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Primary cutaneous gamma/delta T-cell lymphoma (PCDG-TCL) is
aggressive, frequently presenting as multiple plaques, tumors, and/or
subcutaneous nodules.
METHODS: In this study, we conducted a retrospective study in a tertiary center
in Taiwan to characterize this rare tumor.
RESULTS: We identified six patients. Five presented with a solitary lesion,
including two with clinical impression of epidermal inclusion cyst or lipoma. Two
of four evaluable cases exhibited epidermotropism, with one mimicking Pautrier
microabscess. The neoplastic cells were pleomorphic and mostly medium- to
large-sized. In all cases, the neoplastic cells expressed T-cell receptor (TCR)-γ
and/or TCR-δ, with four co-expressing βF1. Two of these βF1+ cases co-expressed
TCR-γ but not TCR-δ (two different clones). All were negative for Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV), low stage, and treated with radiotherapy alone or combined
chemotherapy and radiotherapy. In two patients, lymphoma relapsed in 3 and
7 months, respectively, and one patient died of the disease in 7 months. Four
other patients were free of disease for 6 to 126 months.
CONCLUSION: PCGD-TCL cases in Taiwan are more commonly solitary, frequently with 
indolent courses. The two currently available TCR-δ clones alone might be
insufficient to detect all tumors.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cup.14169 
PMID: 34778979 

