
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 27;12:741837. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.741837. eCollection
2021.

The Host Response to Viral Infections Reveals Common and Virus-Specific
Signatures in the Peripheral Blood.

Tsalik EL(1)(2)(3), Fiorino C(1), Aqeel A(4), Liu Y(1), Henao R(1)(5), Ko
ER(1)(6), Burke TW(1), Reller ME(3), Bodinayake CK(7), Nagahawatte A(7), Arachchi
WK(8), Devasiri V(7), Kurukulasooriya R(7), McClain MT(1)(3)(9), Woods
CW(1)(3)(9), Ginsburg GS(1), Tillekeratne LG(1)(3)(9), Schughart K(10)(11)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Duke Center for Applied Genomics and Precision Medicine, Duke University
School of Medicine, Durham, NC, United States.
(2)Emergency Department Service, Durham Veterans Affairs Health Care System,
Durham, NC, United States.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Duke University
School of Medicine, Durham, NC, United States.
(4)Duke Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University School of Medicine, 
Durham, NC, United States.
(5)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University, Durham,
NC, United States.
(6)Department of Medicine, Duke Regional Hospital, Durham, NC, United States.
(7)Faculty of Medicine, University of Ruhuna, Galle, Sri Lanka.
(8)Teaching Hospital Karapitiya, Galle, Sri Lanka.
(9)Medical Service, Durham Veterans Affairs Health Care System, Durham, NC,
United States.
(10)Department of Infection Genetics, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research,
Braunschweig, Germany.
(11)University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Hannover, Germany.
(12)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Biochemistry, University of
Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, United States.

Viruses cause a wide spectrum of clinical disease, the majority being acute
respiratory infections (ARI). In most cases, ARI symptoms are similar for
different viruses although severity can be variable. The objective of this study 
was to understand the shared and unique elements of the host transcriptional
response to different viral pathogens. We identified 162 subjects in the US and
Sri Lanka with infections due to influenza, enterovirus/rhinovirus, human
metapneumovirus, dengue virus, cytomegalovirus, Epstein Barr Virus, or
adenovirus. Our dataset allowed us to identify common pathways at the molecular
level as well as virus-specific differences in the host immune response.
Conserved elements of the host response to these viral infections highlighted the
importance of interferon pathway activation. However, the magnitude of the
responses varied between pathogens. We also identified virus-specific responses
to influenza, enterovirus/rhinovirus, and dengue infections. Influenza-specific
differentially expressed genes (DEG) revealed up-regulation of pathways related
to viral defense and down-regulation of pathways related to T cell and neutrophil
responses. Functional analysis of entero/rhinovirus-specific DEGs revealed
up-regulation of pathways for neutrophil activation, negative regulation of
immune response, and p38MAPK cascade and down-regulation of virus defenses and
complement activation. Functional analysis of dengue-specific up-regulated DEGs
showed enrichment of pathways for DNA replication and cell division whereas
down-regulated DEGs were mainly associated with erythrocyte and myeloid cell
homeostasis, reactive oxygen and peroxide metabolic processes. In conclusion, our
study will contribute to a better understanding of molecular mechanisms to viral 
infections in humans and the identification of biomarkers to distinguish
different types of viral infections.

Copyright © 2021 Tsalik, Fiorino, Aqeel, Liu, Henao, Ko, Burke, Reller,
Bodinayake, Nagahawatte, Arachchi, Devasiri, Kurukulasooriya, McClain, Woods,
Ginsburg, Tillekeratne and Schughart.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.741837 
PMCID: PMC8578928
PMID: 34777354 

Conflict of interest statement: ELT, GSG, CWW, and TWB consult for and hold
equity in Biomeme, Inc. The remaining authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

