
1. J Vis Exp. 2021 Oct 30;(176). doi: 10.3791/62422.

High-throughput Antiviral Assays to Screen for Inhibitors of Zika Virus
Replication.

Fernandes RS(1), Noske GD(1), Gawriljuk VO(1), de Oliveira KIZ(1), Godoy AS(1),
Mesquita NCMR(1), Oliva G(2).

Author information: 
(1)São Carlos Institute of Physics, University of Sao Paulo.
(2)São Carlos Institute of Physics, University of Sao Paulo; oliva@ifsc.usp.br.

Antiviral drug discovery requires the development of reliable biochemical and
cellular assays that can be performed in high-throughput screening (HTS) formats.
The flavivirus non-structural (NS) proteins are thought to co-translationally
assemble on the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membranes, forming the replication
complex (RC). The NS3 and NS5 are the most studied enzymes of the RC and
constitute the main targets for drug development due to their crucial roles in
viral genome replication. NS3 protease domain, which requires NS2B as its
cofactor, is responsible for the cleavage of the immature viral polyprotein into 
the mature NS proteins, whereas NS5 RdRp domain is responsible for the RNA
replication. Herein, we describe in detail the protocols used in replicon-based
screenings and enzymatic assays to test large compound libraries for inhibitors
of the Zika virus (ZIKV) replication. Replicons are self-replicating subgenomic
systems expressed in mammalian cells, in which the viral structural genes are
replaced by a reporter gene. The inhibitory effects of compounds on viral RNA
replication can be easily evaluated by measuring the reduction in the reporter
protein activity. The replicon-based screenings were performed using a BHK-21
ZIKV replicon cell line expressing Renilla luciferase as a reporter gene. To
characterize the specific targets of identified compounds, we established
in-vitro fluorescence-based assays for recombinantly expressed NS3 protease and
NS5 RdRp. The proteolytic activity of the viral protease was measured by using
the fluorogenic peptide substrate Bz-nKRR-AMC, while the NS5 RdRp elongation
activity was directly detected by the increase of the fluorescent signal of SYBR 
Green I during RNA elongation, using the synthetic biotinylated self-priming
template 3'UTR-U30 (5'-biotin-U30-ACUGGAGAUCGAUCUCCAGU-3').

DOI: 10.3791/62422 
PMID: 34779427 

