
1. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2021 Nov 13. doi: 10.1111/acer.14740. [Epub ahead of print]

Ethanol attenuates presentation of cytotoxic T-lymphocyte epitopes on hepatocytes
of HBV-infected humanized mice.

Ganesan M(1)(2), Wang W(3), Mathews S(3), Makarov E(3), New-Aaron M(1)(4), Dagur 
RS(1)(2), Malo A(5), Protzer U(5)(6), Kharbanda KK(1)(2), Casey CA(1)(2),
Poluektova LY(3), Osna NA(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Service, Veterans Affairs Nebraska-Western Iowa Health Care System,
Omaha, Nebraska, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
Nebraska, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.
(4)Department of Environmental Health, Occupational Health and Toxicology,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.
(5)Institute of Virology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany.
(6)German Centre for Infection Research (DZIF), Munich, Hamburg, Heidelberg,
Germany.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Approximately 3.5% of the global population is chronically
infected with Hepatitis B Virus (HBV), which puts them at high risk of end-stage 
liver disease, with the risk of persistent infection potentiated by alcohol
consumption. However, the mechanisms underlying the effects of alcohol on HBV
persistence remain unclear. Here, we aimed to establish in vivo/ex vivo evidence 
that alcohol suppresses HBV peptides-major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class
I antigen display on primary human hepatocytes (PHH), which diminishes the
recognition and clearance of HBV-infected hepatocytes by cytotoxic T-lymphocytes 
(CTLs).
METHODS: We used fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase (Fah)-/-, Rag2-/-, common cytokine
receptor gamma chain knock-out (FRG-KO) humanized mice transplanted with human
leukocyte antigen-A2 (HLA-A2)-positive hepatocytes. The mice were HBV-infected
and fed control and alcohol diets. Isolated hepatocytes were exposed ex vivo to
HBV 18-27-HLA-A2-restricted CTLs to quantify cytotoxicity. For mechanistic
studies, we measured proteasome activities, unfolded protein response (UPR), and 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in hepatocytes from HBV-infected humanized
mouse livers.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: We found that alcohol feeding attenuated HBV core
18-27-HLA-A2 complex presentation on infected hepatocytes due to the suppression 
of proteasome function and ER stress induction, which diminished both the
processing of HBV peptides and trafficking of HBV-MHC class I complexes to the
hepatocyte surface. This alcohol-mediated decrease in MHC class I-restricted
antigen presentation of the CTL epitope on target hepatocytes reduced the
CTL-specific elimination of infected cells, potentially leading to HBV-infection 
persistence, which promotes end-stage liver disease outcomes.

© 2021 by the Research Society on Alcoholism.

DOI: 10.1111/acer.14740 
PMID: 34773268 

