
1. J Fish Dis. 2021 Nov 14. doi: 10.1111/jfd.13553. [Epub ahead of print]

Mass mortalities associated with viral nervous necrosis in Murray cod in China.

Wang Y(1), Xu L(2), Ma W(1), Sun H(1), Huang Z(1), Cai S(1), Jian J(1), Huang
Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Biology and Epidemiology for
Aquatic Economic Animals & Key Laboratory of Control for Diseases of Aquatic
Economic Animals of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Fisheries College of
Guangdong Ocean University, Zhanjiang, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of South China Sea Fishery Resources Exploitation &
Utilization, South China Sea Fisheries Research Institute of Chinese Academy of
Fishery Sciences, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Guangzhou, China.

In December 2019, a mass mortality among cultured Murray cod
(Maccullochella peelii peelii) fry occurred on a freshwater farm located at
Foshan city of Guangdong province, China. The cumulative mortality was up to 45% 
within 15 days. The diseased fish showed clinical signs, including abnormal
swimming behaviour, loss of appetite and dark body colouration before mass
mortality. Samples of brain and retina tissues were collected from affected fish 
and subjected to reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction detection and
virus isolation in cell culture. Approximately 430 bp product was detected from
the brain and retina tissues and culture supernatant of betanodavirus-infected
SSN-1 cells. The typical cytopathic effect of betanodavirus infection, which is
characterized by vacuolation, was observed in SSN-1 cells at three days after
inoculating with the tissue filtrate of diseased Murry cod fry, and the TCID50 of
the infected SSN-1 cell supernatant was 107.8 . Histopathological examinations
revealed vacuolation and necrosis in the brain and retina of naturally and
experimentally infected Murray cod fry. Electron microscopic observation also
showed the aggregation of numerous spherical, non-enveloped viral particles
measuring 22-28 nm in diameter in the cytoplasm of betanodavirus-infected SSN-1
cells. Sequence and phylogenetic analysis based on RdRp and Cp genes further
indicated that the betanodavirus isolated from Murray cod belonged to the RGNNV
genotype. Much higher mortality was obtained in challenged Murray cod fry
compared with the controls through immersion challenge. This study is the first
report of the natural infection of betanodavirus in freshwater fish in China.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jfd.13553 
PMID: 34778980 

