
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Oct 31;18(21). pii: 11492. doi:
10.3390/ijerph182111492.

Sense of Coherence in Managers during COVID-19 and the New World of Work: A
Mixed-Method Study.

Mayer CH(1), Wegerle C(1), Oosthuizen RM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Industrial Psychology and People Management, College of Business
and Economics, University of Johannesburg, Johannesburg 2006, South Africa.
(2)Department of Industrial and Organisational Psychology, School of Management
Sciences, College of Economic and Management Sciences, University of South
Africa, Pretoria 0003, South Africa.

During COVID-19, the working world has changed inevitably, and many managers
experience extreme strain and stress. This study determines how managers cope
with the changes during COVID-19 from a positive psychology and salutogenic
perspective. It employs a hermeneutical research design and an interpretivist
paradigm by using a mixed-method research approach in which managers' sense of
coherence (SOC) is investigated quantitatively through the 29-item
Life-Orientation scale and qualitatively through semi-structured interviews.
Purposeful and snowball sampling techniques are used. The sample consists of 17
managers. Data were collected in different organizations within South Africa and 
analysed through content analysis, linking quantitative and qualitative data in a
holistic, integrated and complex way. In terms of the quantitative findings, the 
managers scored at the medium and higher end of the SOC-scale in
comprehensibility, followed by manageability and finally meaningfulness. Male
managers in the age group 47-57 scored highest. Female and younger managers
scored lower on average. Lowest scores in comprehensibility and manageability
were scored by a young female manager, while in meaningfulness the oldest male
participant scored lowest. The qualitative findings show that high scoring SOC
managers apply complex thoughts to the present and future workplace scenario.
Individuals with lower SOC scores do not present as much knowledge, complex
thinking and argumentation structures during the interview in comprehensibility
scores as high scoring SOC managers, yet still acquire resources to manage the
workplace (manageability). High meaningfulness scores are associated with
creating meaningful workplace interaction (human-human and machine-human),
knowledge distribution through technology, impactfulness, experiencing the job as
meaningful, including helping others, and achievements. Managers have a complex
view of the world and findings show the complex connections of a high/low SOC
scores and the managers' explorations and systemic understanding regarding their 
managerial world. Conclusions and recommendations for theory and practice are
given.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182111492 
PMCID: PMC8583597
PMID: 34770006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

