
1. J Am Board Fam Med. 2021 Nov-Dec;34(6):1229-1242. doi:
10.3122/jabfm.2021.06.210254.

Addressing Post-COVID Symptoms: A Guide for Primary Care Physicians.

Vance H(1), Maslach A(2), Stoneman E(2), Harmes K(2), Ransom A(2), Seagly K(2),
Furst W(2).

Author information: 
(1)From University Health Service, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor (HV);
Primary Care Clinic, University Health Service, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
(AM); Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor (ES); Department of Family
Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor (KH); University
Health Service, University of Michigan (AR); Division of Rehabilitation
Psychology and Neuropsychology, Department of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor (KS); Department
of Family Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor (WF).
hbidgoli@med.umich.edu.
(2)From University Health Service, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor (HV);
Primary Care Clinic, University Health Service, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
(AM); Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor (ES); Department of Family
Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor (KH); University
Health Service, University of Michigan (AR); Division of Rehabilitation
Psychology and Neuropsychology, Department of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor (KS); Department
of Family Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor (WF).

BACKGROUND: Post-COVID symptoms, defined as symptoms lasting >4 weeks
postinfection, have been identified not only among those patients who were
hospitalized with severe symptoms but also among those who were asymptomatic or
with only mild symptoms. Primary care providers (PCPs) will often be the first
point of contact for patients experiencing potential complications of post-COVID 
symptoms. The aim of this article is to present a post-COVID management tool for 
PCPs to use as a quick reference and guide to the initial workup and management
of the most common post-COVID symptoms.
METHODS: Published guidance, recent literature, and expert specialist opinion
were used to create the structure outlining the outpatient evaluation and
treatment for post-COVID symptoms.
RESULTS: A quick-reference guide for management of post-COVID symptoms was
created for PCPs. Educational materials were created for clinicians to share with
patients. Our article reviews several common complaints including respiratory,
cognitive, and neurological symptoms, chronic fatigue, dysautonomia, and anosmia 
and presents recommendations for management.
CONCLUSIONS: Data on long-term effects of COVID-19 are still emerging, and rapid 
dissemination of this data to front-line PCPs is crucial. This table was our
effort to make the currently available evidence accessible for our PCPs in a
simple, easy-to-use format.

© Copyright 2021 by the American Board of Family Medicine.

DOI: 10.3122/jabfm.2021.06.210254 
PMID: 34772779  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None.

