
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2021 Nov 14. doi: 10.1111/jam.15361. [Epub ahead of print]

The use of laser-based diagnostics for the rapid identification of blood borne
viruses in human plasma samples.

Multari RA(1), Cremers DA(1), Nelson A(1), Fisher C(2), Karimi Z(3), Young
S(3)(4), Green V(5), Williamson P(5), Duncan R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Creative LIBS Solutions, Bernalillo, New Mexico, USA.
(2)Food and Drug Administration, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research,
Silver Spring, Maryland, USA.
(3)TriCore Reference Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of New Mexico HSC, Albuquerque, New
Mexico, USA.
(5)Creative Testing Solutions, Tempe, Arizona, USA.

AIMS: To demonstrate the use of a laser-based method of detection as a potential 
diagnostic test for the rapid identification of blood borne viruses in human
plasma.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In this study, using light emissions from laser sparks on
plasma samples, the successful differentiation of both human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) in both residual de-identified plasma
samples and plasma samples spiked to clinically relevant levels with each virus
were demonstrated using plasma from more than 20 individuals spanning six
different blood types (O+, O-, A+, A-, B+, B-).
CONCLUSIONS: These experiments demonstrate that mathematical analysis of spectral
data from laser sparks can provide accurate results within minutes. This
capability was demonstrated using both spiked laboratory plasma samples and
clinical plasma samples collected from infected and uninfected individuals.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: There is an ongoing need to rapidly detect 
viral infections and to screen for multiple viral infections. A laser-based
approach can achieve sensitive, multiplex detection with minimal sample
preparation and provide results within minutes. These properties along with the
flexibility to add new agent detection by adjusting the detection programming
make it a promising tool for clinical diagnosis. The potential for a laser-based 
approach has been previously demonstrated using pathogens spiked into human blood
to clinically relevant levels. This study demonstrates this same ability to
detect infections in clinical and laboratory spiked plasma samples. The ability
to differentiate between plasma samples from infected and uninfected donors and
determine the virus type using a laser-based diagnostic has not been previously
demonstrated. Furthermore, this study is the first demonstration of the
capability to differentiate viral infections in clinical plasma samples whereas
previously published work used laboratory samples spiked with a virus or dealt
with the detection of cancer in clinical plasma samples.

© 2021 Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/jam.15361 
PMID: 34775661 

