
1. Front Neural Circuits. 2021 Oct 29;15:768125. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2021.768125.
eCollection 2021.

Whole Brain Mapping of Neurons Innervating Extraorbital Lacrimal Glands in Mice
and Rats of Both Genders.

Zhai Y(1)(2), Li M(1)(3)(4), Gui Z(1), Wang Y(1)(5), Hu T(1), Liu Y(1), Xu
F(1)(6)(7)(8)(9)(10).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Magnetic Resonance and Atomic and Molecular Physics,
Key Laboratory of Magnetic Resonance in Biological Systems, Wuhan Center for
Magnetic Resonance, Innovation Academy for Precision Measurement Science and
Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.
(2)Centre for Brain Research, Department of Anatomy and Medical Imaging, Faculty 
of Medical and Health Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(3)Basic Medical Laboratory, General Hospital of Central Theater Command, Wuhan, 
China.
(4)Hubei Key Laboratory of Central Nervous System Tumor and Intervention, Wuhan, 
China.
(5)College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
(6)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Viral Vectors for Biomedicine, The Brain Cognition 
and Brain Disease Institute (BCBDI), Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China.
(7)Shenzhen-Hong Kong Institute of Brain Science-Shenzhen Fundamental Research
Institutions, NMPA Key Laboratory for Research and Evaluation of Viral Vector
Technology in Cell and Gene Therapy Medicinal Products, Key Laboratory of Quality
Control Technology for Virus-Based Therapeutics, Guangdong Provincial Medical
Products Administration, Shenzhen, China.
(8)Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(9)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(10)Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan, China.

The extraorbital lacrimal glands (ELGs) secret tears to maintain a homeostatic
environment for ocular surfaces, and pheromones to mediate social interactions.
Although its distinct gender-related differences in mice and rats have been
identified, its comprehensive histology together with whole-brain neuronal
network remain largely unknown. The primary objective of the present study was to
investigate whether sex-specific differences take place in histological and
physiological perspectives. Morphological and histological data were obtained via
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining in mice and
rats of both genders. The innervating network was visualized by a pseudorabies
virus (PRV) mediated retrograde trans-multi-synaptic tracing system for adult
C57BL6/J mice of both genders. In terms of ELGs' anatomy, mice and rats across
genders both have 7 main lobes, with one exception observed in female rats which 
have only 5 lobes. Both female rats and mice generally have relatively smaller
shape size, absolute weight, and cell size than males. Our viral tracing revealed
a similar trend of innervating patterns antero-posteriorly, but significant
gender differences were also observed in the hypothalamus (HY), olfactory areas
(OLF), and striatum (STR). Brain regions including piriform area (Pir),
post-piriform transition area (TR), central amygdalar nucleus (CEA), medial
amygdalar nucleus (MEA), lateral hypothalamic area (LHA), parasubthalamic nucleus
(PSTN), pontin reticular nucleus (caudal part) (PRNc), and parabrachial nucleus, 
(PB) were commonly labeled. In addition, chemical isotope labeling-assisted
liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (CIL-LC-MS) and nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy (NMR spectroscopy) were performed to reveal the fatty
acids and metabolism of the ELGs, reflecting the relationship between pheromone
secretion and brain network. Overall, our results revealed basic properties and
the input neural networks for ELGs in both genders of mice, providing a
structural basis to analyze the diverse functions of ELGs.

Copyright © 2021 Zhai, Li, Gui, Wang, Hu, Liu and Xu.

DOI: 10.3389/fncir.2021.768125 
PMCID: PMC8585839
PMID: 34776876 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

