
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 29;12:766534. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.766534. eCollection
2021.

In Vivo Mouse Models for Hepatitis B Virus Infection and Their Application.

Du Y(1), Broering R(2), Li X(3), Zhang X(3), Liu J(4), Yang D(4), Lu M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virology, University Hospital Essen, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital Essen,
University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Organ Failure Research, Guangdong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Viral Hepatitis Research, Department of Infectious Diseases,
Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

Despite the availability of effective vaccination, hepatitis B virus (HBV)
infection continues to be a major challenge worldwide. Research efforts are
ongoing to find an effective cure for the estimated 250 million people
chronically infected by HBV in recent years. The exceptionally limited host
spectrum of HBV has limited the research progress. Thus, different HBV mouse
models have been developed and used for studies on infection, immune responses,
pathogenesis, and antiviral therapies. However, these mouse models have great
limitations as no spread of HBV infection occurs in the mouse liver and no or
only very mild hepatitis is present. Thus, the suitability of these mouse models 
for a given issue and the interpretation of the results need to be critically
assessed. This review summarizes the currently available mouse models for HBV
research, including hydrodynamic injection, viral vector-mediated transfection,
recombinant covalently closed circular DNA (rc-cccDNA), transgenic, and liver
humanized mouse models. We systematically discuss the characteristics of each
model, with the main focus on hydrodynamic injection mouse model. The usefulness 
and limitations of each mouse model are discussed based on the published studies.
This review summarizes the facts for considerations of the use and suitability of
mouse model in future HBV studies.

Copyright © 2021 Du, Broering, Li, Zhang, Liu, Yang and Lu.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.766534 
PMCID: PMC8586444
PMID: 34777385 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

