
1. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed. 2021 Nov 15. doi: 10.1111/phpp.12754. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Podophyllotoxin-combined 5-aminolevulinic acid photodynamic therapy significantly
promotes HR-HPV-infected cell death.

Wang J(1)(2), Wang Q(1), Chen P(1), Li Q(1), Li Z(1), Xu M(1), Zeng K(1), Li
C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection and related diseases are
difficult clinical challenges. The efficacy of 5-aminolevulinic acid photodynamic
therapy (ALA-PDT) in treating condyloma acuminata is remarkable, with high virus 
clearance and low recurrence rates. Podophyllotoxin (POD) is the first-line drug 
with a significant therapeutic effect on condyloma acuminata. However, no studies
have determined whether POD-combined ALA-PDT improves high-risk (HR)-HPV-infected
cell killing. We aimed to investigate whether POD-combined ALA-PDT could promote 
HPV-infected cell death more effectively than the single treatment and explore
the underlying mechanism.
METHODS: In HeLa and SiHa cells, flow cytometry, EdU assay and LDH release test
were used to detect apoptosis, cell proliferation change and necrosis,
respectively. To investigate whether the combined therapy might activate
apoptosis and induce endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, flow cytometry was used
to determine intracellular levels of ROS and calcium, and Western blotting was
used to determine the expression of related proteins. Mitochondrial membrane
depolarization was detected by JC-1 assay. Immunofluorescence staining and
Western blotting were used to detect the activation of autophagy.
RESULTS: Podophyllotoxin -combined ALA-PDT inhibited the proliferation and
promoted apoptosis and necrosis more effectively than the single treatment at the
same intensity and concentration. The activation of the caspase-dependent
apoptosis pathway, ER stress and autophagy was more substantial in POD-combined
ALA-PDT than with single treatments.
CONCLUSION: Podophyllotoxin -combined ALA-PDT effectively promoted cell death
through several pathways in HeLa and SiHa cells. This combination might be a
promising therapeutic strategy for the HR-HPV infection.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/phpp.12754 
PMID: 34779024 

