
1. Transfus Apher Sci. 2021 Oct 29:103302. doi: 10.1016/j.transci.2021.103302. [Epub
ahead of print]

The demographic and serological characteristics of COVID-19 convalescent plasma
donors: Identification of basic criteria for optimal donor selection.

Fazeli A(1), Sharifi S(2), Mohammadi S(3), Bahraini M(4), Arabkhazaeli A(2),
Jelveh N(2), Eshghi P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Blood Transfusion Research Center, High Institute for Research and Education
in Transfusion Medicine, Tehran, Iran; Diagnostic Laboratory Sciences and
Technology Research Center, School of Paramedical Sciences, Shiraz University of 
Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(2)Blood Transfusion Research Center, High Institute for Research and Education
in Transfusion Medicine, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Blood Transfusion Research Center, High Institute for Research and Education
in Transfusion Medicine, Tehran, Iran; Hematology-Oncology and Stem Cell
Transplantation Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
Iran; Research Institute for Oncology, Hematology and Cell Therapy, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Department of Hematology, Faculty of Allied Medicine, Iran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Blood Transfusion Research Center, High Institute for Research and Education
in Transfusion Medicine, Tehran, Iran; Pediatric Congenital Hematologic Disorders
Research Center, Research Institute for Children's Health, Shahid Beheshti
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address:
p.eshghi@ibto.ir.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Convalescent plasma has attracted significant
attention as a therapeutic option against infectious agents for more than a
century. In March 2020, the use of Convalescent COVID-19 plasma (CCP) as a new
research drug for COVID-19 treatment was approved by the FDA. The development of 
SARS-CoV-2 IgG antibodies following infection or vaccination is likely to be
essential to provide adequate immunity for the population to halt the COVID19
pandemic. This study aimed to identify the criteria that would be used to
determine the most appropriate CCP donors with the highest effective antiviral
antibody titers.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this prospective cohort, univariate analyses and
multivariate regression analyses were performed to evaluate the relationship
between characteristics of 11949 CCP donors and COVID-19 disease severity prior
to donation with antibody titers estimated using ELISA technique and rapid tests.
RESULTS: The antibody titer was measured among 8206 (68.7 %) donors. Elderly male
and nulliparous female CCP donors who resided in the areas with high load of
virus had positive ELISA and rapid test results as well as high levels of
SARS-CoV-2 IgG antibodies titer. Moreover, the long hospital stay and elderly
donors were the variables associated with high levels of SARS-CoV-2 IgG
antibodies.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that nulliparous female and male donors with
positive rapid tests who resided in areas with a higher prevalence of SARS-CoV-2,
with more than 40 years of age and long hospitalization time can be the preferred
donors for CCP donation.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.transci.2021.103302 
PMCID: PMC8554042
PMID: 34774440 

