
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 28;12:754127. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.754127. eCollection
2021.

Divergent COVID-19 Disease Trajectories Predicted by a DAMP-Centered Immune
Network Model.

Day JD(1)(2), Park S(3)(4), Ranard BL(4)(5), Singh H(6)(7), Chow CC(8), Vodovotz 
Y(7)(9)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, United
States.
(2)Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, University of
Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, United States.
(3)Department of Neurology & Division of Critical Care and Hospital Neurology,
Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York Presbyterian
Hospital - Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, United
States.
(4)Program for Hospital and Intensive Care Informatics, Department of Neurology, 
Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY, United
States.
(5)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy & Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York
Presbyterian Hospital - Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, 
United States.
(6)Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United
States.
(7)Center for Systems Immunology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA,
United States.
(8)Mathematical Biology Section, Laboratory of Biological Modeling, National
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, MD, United
States.
(9)Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United
States.
(10)Center for Inflammation and Regeneration Modeling, McGowan Institute for
Regenerative Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States.

COVID-19 presentations range from mild to moderate through severe disease but
also manifest with persistent illness or viral recrudescence. We hypothesized
that the spectrum of COVID-19 disease manifestations was a consequence of
SARS-CoV-2-mediated delay in the pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP)
response, including dampened type I interferon signaling, thereby shifting the
balance of the immune response to be dominated by damage-associated molecular
pattern (DAMP) signaling. To test the hypothesis, we constructed a parsimonious
mechanistic mathematical model. After calibration of the model for initial viral 
load and then by varying a few key parameters, we show that the core model
generates four distinct viral load, immune response and associated disease
trajectories termed "patient archetypes", whose temporal dynamics are reflected
in clinical data from hospitalized COVID-19 patients. The model also accounts for
responses to corticosteroid therapy and predicts that vaccine-induced
neutralizing antibodies and cellular memory will be protective, including from
severe COVID-19 disease. This generalizable modeling framework could be used to
analyze protective and pathogenic immune responses to diverse viral infections.

Copyright © 2021 Day, Park, Ranard, Singh, Chow and Vodovotz.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.754127 
PMCID: PMC8582279
PMID: 34777366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: YV is a co-founder of, and stakeholder in,
Immunetrics, Inc. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted
in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be
construed as a potential conflict of interest.

