
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 29;12:690470. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.690470. eCollection
2021.

Machine Learning-Based Single Cell and Integrative Analysis Reveals That Baseline
mDC Predisposition Correlates With Hepatitis B Vaccine Antibody Response.

Aevermann BD(1), Shannon CP(2)(3), Novotny M(1), Ben-Othman R(4)(5), Cai B(4),
Zhang Y(1), Ye JC(2)(3), Kobor MS(4), Gladish N(4), Lee AH(6), Blimkie TM(7),
Hancock RE(7), Llibre A(8), Duffy D(8), Koff WC(9), Sadarangani M(4)(10), Tebbutt
SJ(2)(3)(11), Kollmann TR(4)(5), Scheuermann RH(1)(12)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Informatics, J. Craig Venter Institute, La Jolla, CA, United
States.
(2)Prevention of Organ Failure (PROOF) Centre of Excellence, St. Paul's Hospital,
Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(3)The University of British Columbia (UBC) Centre for Heart Lung Innovation, St.
Paul's Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada.
(5)Telethon Kids Institute, Perth Children's Hospital, University of Western
Australia, Nedlands, WA, Australia.
(6)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University,
Burnaby, BC, Canada.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Life Sciences Institute, University
of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(8)Translational Immunology Lab, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(9)Human Vaccines Project, New York, NY, United States.
(10)Vaccine Evaluation Center, BC Children's Hospital Research Institute,
Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(11)Department of Medicine, Division of Respiratory Medicine, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(12)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA, 
United States.
(13)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for Immunology, La Jolla,
CA, United States.

Vaccination to prevent infectious disease is one of the most successful public
health interventions ever developed. And yet, variability in individual vaccine
effectiveness suggests that a better mechanistic understanding of vaccine-induced
immune responses could improve vaccine design and efficacy. We have previously
shown that protective antibody levels could be elicited in a subset of recipients
with only a single dose of the hepatitis B virus (HBV) vaccine and that a wide
range of antibody levels were elicited after three doses. The immune mechanisms
responsible for this vaccine response variability is unclear. Using single cell
RNA sequencing of sorted innate immune cell subsets, we identified two distinct
myeloid dendritic cell subsets (NDRG1-expressing mDC2 and CDKN1C-expressing
mDC4), the ratio of which at baseline (pre-vaccination) correlated with the
immune response to a single dose of HBV vaccine. Our results suggest that the
participants in our vaccine study were in one of two different dendritic cell
dispositional states at baseline - an NDRG2-mDC2 state in which the vaccine
elicited an antibody response after a single immunization or a CDKN1C-mDC4 state 
in which the vaccine required two or three doses for induction of antibody
responses. To explore this correlation further, genes expressed in these mDC
subsets were used for feature selection prior to the construction of predictive
models using supervised canonical correlation machine learning. The resulting
models showed an improved correlation with serum antibody titers in response to
full vaccination. Taken together, these results suggest that the propensity of
circulating dendritic cells toward either activation or suppression, their
"dispositional endotype" at pre-vaccination baseline, could dictate response to
vaccination.

Copyright © 2021 Aevermann, Shannon, Novotny, Ben-Othman, Cai, Zhang, Ye, Kobor, 
Gladish, Lee, Blimkie, Hancock, Llibre, Duffy, Koff, Sadarangani, Tebbutt,
Kollmann and Scheuermann.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.690470 
PMCID: PMC8588842
PMID: 34777332 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

