
1. J Clin Virol. 2021 Dec;145:105025. doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2021.105025. Epub 2021 Nov 
3.

A metagenomics workflow for SARS-CoV-2 identification, co-pathogen detection, and
overall diversity.

Castañeda-Mogollón D(1), Kamaliddin C(1), Oberding L(1), Liu Y(1), Mohon AN(1),
Faridi RM(2), Khan F(2), Pillai DR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cumming School of Medicine, Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, the
University of Calgary, AB, Canada; Cumming School of Medicine, Department of
Microbiology, Immunology, and Infectious Diseases, the University of Calgary,
Canada; Calvin, Phoebe & Joan Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases, the
University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(2)Alberta Precision Laboratories, Diagnostic & Scientific Centre, Calgary, AB,
Canada; Hematology Translational Lab, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada;
Arnie Charbonneau Cancer Institute, the University of Calgary, Calgary, AB,
Canada.
(3)Cumming School of Medicine, Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, the
University of Calgary, AB, Canada; Cumming School of Medicine, Department of
Microbiology, Immunology, and Infectious Diseases, the University of Calgary,
Canada; Calvin, Phoebe & Joan Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases, the
University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada; Alberta Precision Laboratories,
Diagnostic & Scientific Centre, Calgary, AB, Canada. Electronic address:
drpillai@ucalgary.ca.

An unbiased metagenomics approach to virus identification can be essential in the
initial phase of a pandemic. Better molecular surveillance strategies are needed 
for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern and potential co-pathogens
triggering respiratory symptoms. Here, a metagenomics workflow was developed to
identify the metagenome diversity by SARS-CoV-2 diagnosis (npositive = 65;
nnegative = 60), symptomatology status (nsymptomatic = 71; nasymptomatic = 54)
and anatomical swabbing site (nnasopharyngeal = 96; nthroat = 29) in 125
individuals. Furthermore, the workflow was able to identify putative respiratory 
co-pathogens, and the SARS-CoV-2 lineage across 29 samples. The diversity
analysis showed a significant shift in the DNA-metagenome by symptomatology
status and anatomical swabbing site. Additionally, metagenomic diversity differed
between SARS-CoV-2 infected and uninfected asymptomatic individuals. While 31
co-pathogens were identified in SARS-CoV-2 infected patients, no significant
increase in pathogen or associated reads were noted when compared to SARS-CoV-2
negative patients. The Alpha SARS-CoV-2 VOC and 2 variants of interest (Zeta)
were successfully identified for the first time using a clinical metagenomics
approach. The metagenomics pipeline showed a sensitivity of 86% and a specificity
of 72% for the detection of SARS-CoV-2. Clinical metagenomics can be employed to 
identify SARS-CoV-2 variants and respiratory co-pathogens potentially
contributing to COVID-19 symptoms. The overall diversity analysis suggests a
complex set of microorganisms with different genomic abundance profiles in
SARS-CoV-2 infected patients compared to healthy controls. More studies are
needed to correlate severity of COVID-19 disease in relation to potential
disbyosis in the upper respiratory tract. A metagenomics approach is particularly
useful when novel pandemic pathogens emerge.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2021.105025 
PMCID: PMC8564975
PMID: 34775144 

