
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 28;12:733506. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.733506. eCollection
2021.

Unraveling the Effects of a Talimogene Laherparepvec (T-VEC)-Induced Tumor
Oncolysate on Myeloid Dendritic Cells.

Tijtgat J(1), De Munck J(2), Dufait I(3), Schwarze JK(1), Van Riet I(4),
Franceschini L(5), Breckpot K(5), Aerts JL(2), Neyns B(1), Tuyaerts S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology/Laboratory of Medical and Molecular Oncology
(LMMO), Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel (UZ
Brussel), Brussels, Belgium.
(2)Neuro-Aging and Viro-Immunotherapy (NAVI) Research Group, Vrije Universiteit
Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Department of Radiotherapy/Laboratory of Translational Radiation Oncology,
Supportive Care and Physics (TROP), Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel (UZ
Brussel)/Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium.
(4)Stem Cell Laboratory, Department of Hematology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel
(VUB), Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel (UZ Brussel), Brussels, Belgium.
(5)Laboratory for Molecular and Cellular Therapy (LMCT), Department of Biomedical
Sciences, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium.

T-VEC, a HSV-1 derived oncolytic virus, is approved for the treatment of advanced
melanoma. The mechanisms that underly the systemic anti-tumor effect that is seen
following intratumoral injection have not yet been studied but are likely to be
mediated by myeloid dendritic cells (myDC) that initiate an adaptive immune
response. In this study we could demonstrate that T-VEC is non-toxic for human
myDC. T-VEC and a T-VEC oncolysate of melanoma cell lines were able to mature
human myDC. myDC were able to take up lysed melanoma cells and cross-present
melanoma-derived tumor antigens to antigen-specific T cells. Our results support 
the possible role of myDC as mediators of an adaptive anti-tumor effect and
intratumoral co-administration of T-VEC plus autologous myDC could be a
complementary treatment option. A clinical trial that investigates this
hypothesis is currently ongoing.

Copyright © 2021 Tijtgat, De Munck, Dufait, Schwarze, Van Riet, Franceschini,
Breckpot, Aerts, Neyns and Tuyaerts.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.733506 
PMCID: PMC8581672
PMID: 34777344 

Conflict of interest statement: BN and JS received non-financial support from
Amgen. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.

