
1. BMJ Glob Health. 2021 Nov;6(11). pii: e006337. doi: 10.1136/bmjgh-2021-006337.

Historicising global nutrition: critical reflections on contested pasts and
reimagined futures.

Nelson EM(1), Nisbett N(2), Gillespie S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Health and Nutrition Cluster, The Institute of Development Studies, University
of Sussex, Brighton, UK e.nelson@ids.ac.uk.
(2)Health and Nutrition Cluster, The Institute of Development Studies, University
of Sussex, Brighton, UK.
(3)Poverty, Health and Nutrition Division, International Food Policy Research
Institute, Washington, District of Columbia, USA.

The COVID-19 pandemic has provoked a range of economic shocks, food systems
shocks, public health crises and political upheavals across the globe, prompting 
a rethink of associated global systems. Prepandemic anticolonial movements that
challenged hierarchies of race, space, gender and expert knowledge in global
health took on new meaning in the context of the unequal impacts of the
SARS-CoV-2 virus as it moved through different kinds of spaces and distinct
political contexts. In light of these dynamics, and the desire of many current
practitioners in global health to reimagine the future, the need for critical
analyses of the recent past have become more urgent. Here we challenge linear
understandings of progress in global health-with a focus on the field of
nutrition-by returning to consider a previous cycle of dramatic social, political
and economic change that prompted serious challenges to the dominance of Western 
powers and US-based philanthro-capitalists. With a 'global' health and nutrition 
audience in mind, we put forward considerations on why a better understanding of 
the continuities and divergences between this past and the present moment are
necessary to challenge a status quo that was, and is, highly flawed.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjgh-2021-006337 
PMCID: PMC8593273
PMID: 34772690  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: NN has a previous funding
relationship with the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF) in India and
current grants with the UK Research and Innovation (UKRI), the World Food Program
(WFP) the and International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI). EMN has a
current grant with UKRI that relates to some of the topics discussed here. SG
declares no conflict of interest.

