
1. Front Genome Ed. 2021 Oct 28;3:737632. doi: 10.3389/fgeed.2021.737632.
eCollection 2021.

Progress in Gene Editing Tools and Their Potential for Correcting Mutations
Underlying Hearing and Vision Loss.

Botto C(1), Dalkara D(1), El-Amraoui A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS, Institut de la Vision, Paris, France.
(2)Unit Progressive Sensory Disorders, Pathophysiology and Therapy, Institut
Pasteur, Institut de l'Audition, Université de Paris, INSERM-UMRS1120, Paris,
France.

Blindness and deafness are the most frequent sensory disorders in humans.
Whatever their cause - genetic, environmental, or due to toxic agents, or aging -
the deterioration of these senses is often linked to irreversible damage to the
light-sensing photoreceptor cells (blindness) and/or the mechanosensitive hair
cells (deafness). Efforts are increasingly focused on preventing disease
progression by correcting or replacing the blindness and deafness-causal
pathogenic alleles. In recent years, gene replacement therapies for rare
monogenic disorders of the retina have given positive results, leading to the
marketing of the first gene therapy product for a form of childhood hereditary
blindness. Promising results, with a partial restoration of auditory function,
have also been reported in preclinical models of human deafness. Silencing
approaches, including antisense oligonucleotides, adeno-associated virus
(AAV)-mediated microRNA delivery, and genome-editing approaches have also been
applied to various genetic forms of blindness and deafness The discovery of new
DNA- and RNA-based CRISPR/Cas nucleases, and the new generations of base, prime, 
and RNA editors offers new possibilities for directly repairing point mutations
and therapeutically restoring gene function. Thanks to easy access and
immune-privilege status of self-contained compartments, the eye and the ear
continue to be at the forefront of developing therapies for genetic diseases.
Here, we review the ongoing applications and achievements of this new class of
emerging therapeutics in the sensory organs of vision and hearing, highlighting
the challenges ahead and the solutions to be overcome for their successful
therapeutic application in vivo.

Copyright © 2021 Botto, Dalkara and El-Amraoui.

DOI: 10.3389/fgeed.2021.737632 
PMCID: PMC8581640
PMID: 34778871 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

