
1. Front Psychol. 2021 Oct 28;12:617967. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.617967. eCollection
2021.

COVID-19 Lockdown and Creativity: Exploring the Role of Emotions and Motivation
on Creative Activities From the Chinese and German Perspectives.

Hofreiter S(1), Zhou X(2), Tang M(1), Werner CH(3)(4)(5), Kaufman JC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Creativity and Innovation, University of Applied Management,
Ismaning, Germany.
(2)Department of Social Psychology, Nankai University, Tianjin, China.
(3)HSSH University Institute Schaffhausen, Schaffhausen, Switzerland.
(4)Triagon Academy, Marsa, Malta.
(5)Seeburg Castle University, Seekirchen am Wallersee, Austria.
(6)Neag School of Education, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, United
States.

For much of 2020, countries around the world fought against the COVID-19
pandemic. Many countries went into lockdown to control the fast spread of the
virus. The unusual restrictions and confinement of the lockdown brought about new
challenges for people's everyday lives. With flexibility, adaptability, and
problem-solving at the core of its nature, creativity has the potential to help
people cope with harsh and uncertain circumstances. Were people more, the same,
or less creative in their everyday life during the period of lockdown, and in
which ways? What are the emotions and motivations underlying their creative or
non-creative behaviors? The current study aims to explore these questions from a 
cross-cultural perspective. A total of 754 comparable employee samples from three
Chinese and three German cities were asked about their moods during the lockdown 
period, their self-rated level of creativity in daily lives before and during the
lockdown, and their motivations behind their creative activities. Significant
increases in creativity were observed in all everyday activities in both
countries with only two exceptions in the German sample. Despite minor
differences, a common pattern was found across cultures: whereas the activating
positive mood could directly lead to the increase in creativity in some everyday 
activities, such a direct Mood-Creativity link was limited in the activating
negative mood circumstances. In such circumstances, motivation intervened to
enable the link to creativity. It was also found that this indirect effect of
motivation between mood and creativity was more pronounced with the German
participants.

Copyright © 2021 Hofreiter, Zhou, Tang, Werner and Kaufman.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.617967 
PMCID: PMC8581294
PMID: 34777077 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

