
1. Front Pediatr. 2021 Oct 27;9:760070. doi: 10.3389/fped.2021.760070. eCollection
2021.

Hematuria as an Early Sign of Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children: A
Case Report of a Boy With Multiple Comorbidities and Review of Literature.

Generalić A(1)(2), Davidović M(1), Kos I(1), Vrljičak K(1), Lamot L(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Center Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
(2)General Hospital "Dr. Tomislav Bardek", Koprivnica, Croatia.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb,
Croatia.

Introduction: While the clinical course of SARS-CoV-2 infection seems to be
milder or asymptomatic within the pediatric population, growing attention has
been laid to the rare complication elicited by virus, multisystem inflammatory
syndrome in children temporarily associated with COVID-19 (MIS-C). Published
definition and criteria of MIS-C include persistent fever, multisystem
involvement, and elevated markers of inflammation, without obvious microbial
inflammation or other plausible diagnosis. However, the aim of this case report
is to emphasize the diversity of symptoms of MIS-C, beyond the defined criteria. 
Case Presentation: We present a 10-year-old boy with 8p23.1 microdeletion
syndrome and multiple comorbidities who initially came to our attention due to
hematuria, persistent fever, rash, and elevated markers of inflammation. Within
the next 2 days, his condition worsened despite the broad-spectrum antibiotic
therapy. Assuming his past history of SARS-CoV-2 exposure, MIS-C was suspected. A
high level of clinical suspicion was further supported by significant clinical
features (vomiting, abdominal pain, conjunctivitis, arrhythmia, and mild left
ventricular systolic dysfunction with pleural effusion) along with laboratory
findings (elevated ESR, CRP, proBNP, D-dimers and fibrinogen, positive IgG
SARS-CoV-2 antibodies, and negative microbiological cultures). The patient was
given intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) and began to show instantaneous clinical 
and laboratory improvement. Conclusion: Despite numerous reports of MIS-C cases
in children, there are still many uncertainties regarding the clinical
presentation and laboratory findings, as well as mechanisms beyond this
intriguing disorder. In our case, for the first time hematuria is reported as an 
early symptom of MIS-C. We strongly believe that reporting various manifestations
and outcomes in MIS-C patients will lead to improved diagnosis, treatment, and
overall understanding of this novel inflammatory condition.

Copyright © 2021 Generalić, Davidović, Kos, Vrljičak and Lamot.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2021.760070 
PMCID: PMC8579050
PMID: 34778150 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

