
1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2021 Nov 13;22(1):553. doi: 10.1186/s12859-021-04463-3.

cosinoRmixedeffects: an R package for mixed-effects cosinor models.

Hou R(1), Tomalin LE(1), Suárez-Fariñas M(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Population Health Science and Policy, Icahn School of Medicine
at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Population Health Science and Policy, Mount Sinai Clinical
Informatics Center, New York, NY, USA. Mayte.SuarezFarinas@mssm.edu.
(3)Department of Genetics and Genomics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, NY, USA. Mayte.SuarezFarinas@mssm.edu.

BACKGROUND: Wearable devices enable monitoring and measurement of physiological
parameters over a 24-h period, and some of which exhibit circadian rhythm
characteristics. However, the currently available R package cosinor could only
analyze daily cross-sectional data and compare the parameters between groups with
two levels. To evaluate longitudinal changes in the circadian patterns, we need
to extend the model to a mixed-effect model framework, allowing for random
effects and interaction between COSINOR parameters and time-varying covariates.
RESULTS: We developed the cosinoRmixedeffects R package for modelling
longitudinal periodic data using mixed-effects cosinor models. The model allows
for covariates and interactions with the non-linear parameters MESOR, amplitude, 
and acrophase. To facilitate ease of use, the package utilizes the syntax and
functions of the widely used emmeans package to obtain estimated marginal means
and contrasts. Estimation and hypothesis testing involving the non-linear
circadian parameters are carried out using bootstrapping. We illustrate the
package functionality by modelling daily measurements of heart rate variability
(HRV) collected among health care workers over several months. Differences in
circadian patterns of HRV between genders, BMI, and during infection with
SARS-CoV2 are evaluated to illustrate how to perform hypothesis testing.
CONCLUSION: cosinoRmixedeffects package provides the model fitting, estimation
and hypothesis testing for the mixed-effects COSINOR model, for the linear and
non-linear circadian parameters MESOR, amplitude and acrophase. The model
accommodates factors with any number of categories, as well as complex
interactions with circadian parameters and categorical factors.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-021-04463-3 
PMCID: PMC8590130
PMID: 34773978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

