
1. Addict Sci Clin Pract. 2021 Nov 13;16(1):68. doi: 10.1186/s13722-021-00275-1.

Early innovations in opioid use disorder treatment and harm reduction during the 
COVID-19 pandemic: a scoping review.

Krawczyk N(1), Fawole A(2), Yang J(3), Tofighi B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Opioid Epidemiology and Policy, Department of Population Health,
NYU Grossman School of Medicine, 180 Madison Ave, Room 4-12, New York, NY, USA.
noa.krawczyk@nyulangone.org.
(2)New York University, School of Global Public Health, New York, NY, USA.
(3)NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Population Health, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York,
NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: The COVID-19 pandemic has exerted a significant toll on the lives of 
people who use opioids (PWUOs). At the same time, more flexible regulations
around provision of opioid use disorder (OUD) services have led to new
opportunities for facilitating access to services for PWUOs. In the current
scoping review, we describe new services and service modifications implemented by
treatment and harm reduction programs serving PWUO, and discuss implications for 
policy and practice.
METHODS: Literature searches were conducted within PubMed, LitCovid, Embase, and 
PsycInfo for English-language studies published in 2020 that describe a
particular program, service, or intervention aimed at facilitating access to OUD 
treatment and/or harm reduction services during the COVID-19 pandemic. Abstracts 
were independently screened by two reviewers. Relevant studies were reviewed in
full and those that met inclusion criteria underwent final data extraction and
synthesis (n = 25). We used a narrative synthesis approach to identify major
themes around key service modifications and innovations implemented across
programs serving PWUO.
RESULTS: Reviewed OUD treatment and harm reduction services spanned five
continents and a range of settings from substance use treatment to street
outreach programs. Innovative service modifications to adapt to COVID-19
circumstances primarily involved expanded use of telehealth services (e.g.,
telemedicine visits for buprenorphine, virtual individual or group therapy
sessions, provision of donated or publicly available phones), increased take-home
medication allowances for methadone and buprenorphine, expanded uptake of
long-acting opioid medications (e.g. extended-release buprenorphine and
naltrexone), home delivery of services (e.g. MOUD, naloxone and urine drug
screening), outreach and makeshift services for delivering MOUD and naloxone, and
provision of a safe supply of opioids.
CONCLUSIONS: The COVID-19 pandemic has posed multiple challenges for PWUOs, while
simultaneously accelerating innovations in policies, care models, and
technologies to lower thresholds for life-saving treatment and harm reduction
services. Such innovations highlight novel patient-centered and feasible
approaches to mitigating OUD related harms. Further studies are needed to assess 
the long-term impact of these approaches and inform policies that improve access 
to care for PWUOs.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13722-021-00275-1 
PMCID: PMC8590133
PMID: 34774106  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

