
1. IDCases. 2021 Oct 28;26:e01324. doi: 10.1016/j.idcr.2021.e01324. eCollection
2021.

Immune recovery folliculitis: Case reports in HIV naïve and experienced patients.

Camici M(1), Scarabello A(2), Del Nonno F(3), Colombo D(3), Gagliardini R(1),
Antinori A(1).

Author information: 
(1)HIV/AIDS Clinical Unit, National Institute for Infectious Diseases Lazzaro
Spallanzani IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(2)Dermatological Clinical Unit, National Institute for Infectious Diseases
Lazzaro Spallanzani IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(3)Histology, National Institute for Infectious Diseases Lazzaro Spallanzani
IRCCS, Rome, Italy.

Immune recovery folliculitis (IRF) is defined as the development of an
inflammatory disorder of the facial pilo-sebaceous unit due to the immune
reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS). Skin lesions can be related to an
immune response against skin saprophyte bacteria (e.g. Demodex folliculorum,
Cutibacterium acnes). The rapid reconstitution of T lymphocyte, with a CD8+
predominance, is considered a key pathogenic factor for this phenomenon. IRF is
clinically similar to acne vulgaris and can be challenging to treat. Patients
with facial pustules can experience social discomfort. Here we report two cases
of IRF diagnosed at the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) clinic of the National
Institute of Infectious Diseases L. Spallanzani, in Rome, Italy. The first case
occurred in an antiretroviral therapy (ART)-experienced patient, after a
treatment simplification; the second one was registered in an ART-naïve patient, 
diagnosed with acute HIV infection shortly, after ART initiation. To date, an IRF
secondary to an ART switch, has not been described yet. IRF should be ruled out
and considered in differential diagnosis from antiretroviral drug-related skin
effects.

© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.idcr.2021.e01324 
PMCID: PMC8577432
PMID: 34777994 

Conflict of interest statement: MC, AS, FDN, DC have not any potential competing 
interests. RG received speakers’s honoraria from ViiV Healthcare, MSD and Gilead;
grants for advisory board from ViiV Healthcare and Janssen. AA has served as a
paid consultant to Gilead, Janssen, Merck, and ViiV Healthcare and received
research funding from Gilead, Janssen, and ViiV Healthcare.

