
1. J Sci Food Agric. 2021 Nov 14. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.11650. [Epub ahead of print]

Healthy eating - a modifiable contributor to optimize healthy living in the
COVID-19 pandemic: a review.

Chatterjee P(1), Nirgude A(1), Chatterjee PK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community Medicine, Yenepoya Medical College, Yenepoya (Deemed
to be University), Deralakatte, India.
(2)Department of Physiology, Kasturba Medical College, Mangalore, Manipal Academy
of Higher Education, Manipal, India.

The outbreak of the novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
infection in 2019 has posed major risks to global health and the economy. This
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has changed many of our everyday habits, 
including how we function and socialize, how we eat, and food preferences and
selection. The average intake and status of certain vitamins and minerals can
result in reduced immunity, which makes people more susceptible to illnesses and 
exacerbates malnutrition. The most critical factors in this scenario are
individual risk evaluation and management techniques. Until general therapies are
administered, the nutritional status of each infected patient should be assessed.
The differing clinical severity of COVID-19 - from asymptomatic, to mild, to
severe, to death - depends on the different metabolic status of the hosts who
have contracted the virus, which is determined by their diet, age, gender,
health, lifestyle, and environmental factors. A broad systematic exploration on
studies of this disease was steered by means of electronic databases and was
limited to articles published in English (or with an English abstract) in
publications using words like 'health', 'diet', 'food', 'nutritional status',
'COVID-19', 'pandemic', 'modifiable contributor', 'immune system',
'micronutrients', 'vitamin', and so on. Careful individual consideration of the
potential dietary, nutritional, medical, lifestyle, and environmental hazards,
along with any supplementation with micronutrients wherever required to help to
boost the body's natural defence system, with the intention to improve all levels
of immunity and the use of effective risk management techniques are appropriate
ways to handle the COVID-19 pandemic. © 2021 Society of Chemical Industry.

© 2021 Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/jsfa.11650 
PMCID: PMC8646809
PMID: 34775607 

