
1. Hepatology. 2021 Nov 15. doi: 10.1002/hep.32245. [Epub ahead of print]

Hepatitis B Virus cccDNA Minichromosomes in Distinct Epigenetic Transcriptional
States Differ in Their Vulnerability to Damage.

Wang Y(1), Li Y(1), Zai W(1), Hu K(1), Zhu Y(1), Deng Q(1)(2), Wu M(3), Li Y(1), 
Chen J(1)(2), Yuan Z(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology (MOE/NHC/CAMS), School of Basic
Medical Sciences, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Research Unit of Cure of Chronic Hepatitis B Virus Infection, Chinese Academy 
of Medical Sciences, China.
(3)Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Hepatitis B virus (HBV) covalently closed circular DNA
(cccDNA) is a major obstacle for a cure of chronic hepatitis B. Accumulating
evidence suggests that epigenetic modifications regulate the transcriptional
activity of cccDNA minichromosomes. However, it remains unclear how the
epigenetic state of cccDNA affects its stability.
APPROACHES AND RESULTS: By using HBV infection cell models, in vitro and in vivo 
recombinant cccDNA (rcccDNA) and the HBVcircle models, the reduction rate of HBV 
cccDNA and the efficacy of APOBEC3A- and CRISPR/Cas9-mediated cccDNA targeting
were compared between cccDNAs with distinct transcriptional activities.
Interferon-α treatment and HBx deletion were applied as two strategies for cccDNA
repression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and micrococcal nuclease assays were
performed to determine the epigenetic pattern of cccDNA. The HBV cccDNA levels
remained stable in non-dividing hepatocytes, however, they were significantly
reduced during cell division, and the reduction rate was similar between cccDNAs 
in transcriptionally-active and transcriptionally-repressed states. Strikingly,
HBV rcccDNA without HBx expression exhibited a significantly longer persistence
in mice. The cccDNA in low transcriptional activity exhibited an epigenetic
inactive pattern and was more difficult to access by APOBEC3A and engineered
CRISPR-Cas9. The epigenetic regulator activating cccDNA increased its
vulnerability to APOBEC3A.
CONCLUSIONS: HBV cccDNA minichromosomes in distinct epigenetic transcriptional
states showed a similar reduction rate during cell division, but significantly
differ in their accessibility and vulnerability to targeted nucleases and
antiviral agents. Epigenetic sensitization of cccDNA makes it more susceptible to
damage and may potentially contribute to an HBV cure.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.32245 
PMID: 34779008 

