
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Oct 28;11:707905. doi:
10.3389/fcimb.2021.707905. eCollection 2021.

Gene Expression Profiling of Early Acute Febrile Stage of Dengue Infection and
Its Comparative Analysis With Streptococcus pneumoniae Infection.

Bajrai LH(1)(2), Sohrab SS(1)(3), Alandijany TA(1)(3), Mobashir M(4), Reyaz M(5),
Kamal MA(6)(7)(8), Firoz A(9), Parveen S(10), Azhar EI(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Special Infectious Agents Unit - BSL-3, King Fahd Medical Research Centre,
King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Biochemistry Department, Faculty of Sciences, King Abdulaziz University,
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Medical Laboratory Technology, Faculty of Applied Medical
Sciences, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(4)SciLifeLab, Department of Oncology and Pathology Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Healthcare Management, Jamia Hamdard Hamdard Nagar, New Delhi,
India.
(6)West China School of Nursing/Institutes for Systems Genetics, Frontiers
Science Center for Disease-related Molecular Network, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
(7)King Fahd Medical Research Center, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi
Arabia.
(8)Enzymoics, Novel Global Community Educational Foundation, Hebersham, NSW,
Australia.
(9)Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, King Abdulaziz
University, Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(10)Department of Bioscience, Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi, India.

Infectious diseases are the disorders caused by organisms such as bacteria,
viruses, fungi, or parasites. Although many of them are permentantly hazardous, a
number of them live in and on our bodies and they are normally harmless or even
helpful. Under certain circumstances, some organisms may cause diseases and these
infectious diseases may be passed directly from person to person or via
intermediate vectors including insects and other animals. Dengue virus and
Streptococcus pneumoniae are the critical and common sources of infectious
diseases. So, it is critical to understand the gene expression profiling and
their inferred functions in comparison to the normal and virus infected
conditions. Here, we have analyzed the gene expression profiling for dengue
hemorrhagic fever, dengue fever, and normal human dataset. Similar to it,
streptococcus pneumoniae infectious data were analyzed and both the outcomes were
compared. Our study leads to the conclusion that the dengue hemorrhagic fever
arises in result to potential change in the gene expression pattern, and the
inferred functions obviously belong to the immune system, but also there are some
additional potential pathways which are critical signaling pathways. In the case 
of pneumoniae infection, 19 pathways were enriched, almost all these pathways are
associated with the immune system and 17 of the enriched pathways were common
with dengue infection except platelet activation and antigen processing and
presentation. In terms of the comparative study between dengue virus and
Streptococcus pneumoniae infection, we conclude that cell adhesion molecules
(CAMs), MAPK signaling pathway, natural killer cell mediated cytotoxicity,
regulation of actin cytoskeleton, and cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction are 
commonly enriched in all the three cases of dengue infection and Streptococcus
pneumoniae infection, focal adhesion was enriched between classical dengue fever 
- dengue hemorrhagic fever, dengue hemorrhagic fever-normal samples, and SP, and 
antigen processing and presentation and Leukocyte transendothelial migration were
enriched in classical dengue fever -normal samples, dengue hemorrhagic
fever-normal samples, and Streptococcus pneumoniae infection.

Copyright © 2021 Bajrai, Sohrab, Alandijany, Mobashir, Reyaz, Kamal, Firoz,
Parveen and Azhar.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.707905 
PMCID: PMC8581568
PMID: 34778101  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

