
1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2021 Nov 15. doi: 10.1111/jdv.17817. [Epub ahead of
print]

Pharmacological interventions for periorificial (perioral) dermatitis in children
and adults: a systematic review.

Gray NA(1), Tod B(1), Rohwer A(2), Fincham L(3), Visser WI(1), McCaul M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, Tygerberg Academic Hospital
and Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa.
(2)Centre for Evidence Based Health Care (CEBHC), Division of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Department of Global Health, Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa.
(3)Division of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Department of Global Health,
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town,
South Africa.

The plethora of pharmacologic treatments used for periorificial dermatitis (POD) 
makes clinical decision-making challenging. The objectives of this review were to
assess the efficacy and safety of pharmacological interventions for POD in
children and adults. The search was performed on 2 February 2021 and included
seven databases and trial registries, with no date or language restrictions Study
selection, data extraction and risk of bias assessments were performed
independently and in duplicate by two authors, in accordance with a prespecified 
protocol. Meta-analyses were performed and reported in accordance with PRISMA
guidelines. Where meta-analysis was not possible, a narrative synthesis was
performed and reported in accordance with SWiM guidelines. The certainty of
evidence was assessed using the Grading of Recommendation, Assessment,
Development and Evaluation approach. Eleven studies representing 733 participants
were included. Oral tetracycline may improve physician-reported severity of POD
from day 20 onwards (low certainty evidence). Adverse effects may include
abdominal discomfort, facial dryness and pruritus. Pimecrolimus cream may improve
physician-reported severity slightly after 4 weeks of treatment (MD -0.49, 95% CI
-1.02 to 0.04, n = 164, low certainty evidence). Adverse effects may include
erythema, herpes simplex virus infection, burning and pruritus. Azelaic acid gel 
may result in no change in either physician- or patient-reported severity after
6 weeks of treatment. The evidence is very uncertain about the effect of
praziquantel ointment on physician-reported severity and skin-related quality of 
life after 4 weeks of treatment. The evidence is also very uncertain about the
effect of topical clindamycin/benzoyl peroxide on physician-reported severity.
The body of evidence to inform treatment of POD currently consists of low and
very low certainty evidence for important outcomes. Well-designed trials are
needed to further investigate treatment options. Data are required for children
and from low-middle income countries to improve external validity. Future trials 
should also include adequate post-treatment follow-up and standardized outcome
measures.

© 2021 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

DOI: 10.1111/jdv.17817 
PMID: 34779023 

