
1. Cureus. 2021 Oct 10;13(10):e18642. doi: 10.7759/cureus.18642. eCollection 2021
Oct.

Cytomegalovirus Retinitis as a Sole Manifestation of HIV Infection.

Ferreira Tátá C(1), Ramires T(1), Piteira M(1), Matono R(1), Guz C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine Department, Hospital do Espirito Santo de Évora, Évora, PRT.

Retinitis is the most frequent manifestation of Cytomegalovirus (CMV) disease in 
patients with HIV infection. The virus reaches the retina by hematogenous spread,
therefore patients with serum CMV load are at increased risk of developing CMV
retinitis. The evolution of retinitis without specific treatment
causes irreversible visual loss. Proper treatment is essential for controlling
the disease progression, prevention of relapses, and contralateral eye
involvement. This report describes a 56-year-old white male who started a
progressive decrease in visual acuity (VA) of the right eye, without pain or
inflammatory signs. Initial fundoscopy identified a dispersed preretinal
hemorrhage and yellowish exudates. For the hypothesis of CMV retinitis, serology 
for HIV was requested and the subsequent result was positive. Other opportunistic
infections, as well as manifestations of CMV infection in other organs, were
ruled out. The patient was discharged on valganciclovir and highly active
antiretroviral therapy (HAART) with progressive improvement in retinal changes,
but without full recovery from VA due to chronic vitritis and tractional retinal 
detachment. Slow recovery of lymphocyte populations and sustained decrease in
viral load were observed. CMV retinitis as an initial and sole manifestation of
HIV infection is rare and requires screening. The importance of this case lies in
its rarity, since CMV retinitis was the only manifestation of CMV infection and
the only opportunistic infection in this patient. Early diagnosis and initiation 
of targeted therapy decrease the morbidity associated with this infection.

Copyright © 2021, Ferreira Tátá et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.18642 
PMCID: PMC8580125
PMID: 34786237 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

