
1. PLoS Biol. 2021 Nov 16;19(11):e3001424. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001424.
eCollection 2021 Nov.

Systematic exploration of Escherichia coli phage-host interactions with the BASEL
phage collection.

Maffei E(1), Shaidullina A(1), Burkolter M(1), Heyer Y(1), Estermann F(1),
Druelle V(1), Sauer P(1), Willi L(1), Michaelis S(2), Hilbi H(2), Thaler
DS(1)(3), Harms A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Medical Microbiology, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(3)Program for the Human Environment, Rockefeller University, New York City, New 
York, United States of America.

Bacteriophages, the viruses infecting bacteria, hold great potential for the
treatment of multidrug-resistant bacterial infections and other applications due 
to their unparalleled diversity and recent breakthroughs in their genetic
engineering. However, fundamental knowledge of the molecular mechanisms
underlying phage-host interactions is mostly confined to a few traditional model 
systems and did not keep pace with the recent massive expansion of the field. The
true potential of molecular biology encoded by these viruses has therefore
remained largely untapped, and phages for therapy or other applications are often
still selected empirically. We therefore sought to promote a systematic
exploration of phage-host interactions by composing a well-assorted library of 68
newly isolated phages infecting the model organism Escherichia coli that we share
with the community as the BASEL (BActeriophage SElection for your Laboratory)
collection. This collection is largely representative of natural E. coli phage
diversity and was intensively characterized phenotypically and genomically
alongside 10 well-studied traditional model phages. We experimentally determined 
essential host receptors of all phages, quantified their sensitivity to 11
defense systems across different layers of bacterial immunity, and matched these 
results to the phages' host range across a panel of pathogenic enterobacterial
strains. Clear patterns in the distribution of phage phenotypes and genomic
features highlighted systematic differences in the potency of different immunity 
systems and suggested the molecular basis of receptor specificity in several
phage groups. Our results also indicate strong trade-offs between fitness traits 
like broad host recognition and resistance to bacterial immunity that might drive
the divergent adaptation of different phage groups to specific ecological niches.
We envision that the BASEL collection will inspire future work exploring the
biology of bacteriophages and their hosts by facilitating the discovery of
underlying molecular mechanisms as the basis for an effective translation into
biotechnology or therapeutic applications.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001424 
PMCID: PMC8594841
PMID: 34784345 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

