
1. J Assoc Physicians India. 2021 Nov;69(11):11-12.

Ivermectin and Hydroxychloroquine for Chemo-Prophylaxis of COVID-19: A
Questionnaire Survey of Perception and Prescribing Practice of Physicians
vis-a-vis Outcomes.

Samajdar SS(1), Mukherjee S(2), Mondal T(3), Paul J(4), Tripathi SK(5),
Chakrbarty A(6), Saha B(7), Bhattacharrya D(8), Tripathi R(9).

Author information: 
(1)Senior Resident, Clinical Pharmacology, School of Tropical Medicine, Kolkata, 
West Bengal; Corresponding Author.
(2)PhD Scholar, Clinical & Experimental Pharmacology, School of Tropical
Medicine, Kolkata, West Bengal.
(3)Senior Resident, Department of Medicine, Kolkata, West Bengal.
(4)Professor, Department of Internal Medicine, RG Kar Medical College and
Hospital, Kolkata, West Bengal.
(5)Academic Dean & Professor of Pharmacology, Netaji Subhash Medical College &
Hospital, Patna, Bihar.
(6)The Director of Health Services, Govt. of West Bengal, Department of Health & 
Family Welfare, Govt. of West Bengal Swasthya Bhavan.
(7)Dean and Professor & Head, Department of Tropical Medicine, School of Tropical
Medicine, Kolkata, West Bengal.
(8)The Director of Medical education; Govt. of West Bengal; Department of Health 
& Family Welfare, Govt. of West Bengal Swasthya Bhavan.
(9)Founder Director, Inovocare Healthsoft Solutions, Kolkata, West Bengal.

BACKGROUND: Chemoprophylaxis (CP) along with masking and physical distancing seem
an undeniable alternative. Considering the significant but uncertain role of CP
for the current COVID-19 pandemic situation, we aimed to determine the various
aspects of CP prescribing practices among physicians across India.
METHODS: An online survey was conducted among prescribing physicians across India
where physicians were assessed for their prescribing practices on COVID-19 CP.
Responses to the questionnaire were obtained via telephone, email and WhatsApp
messages. Responses were duly analyzed thereafter.
RESULT: Ivermectin was the preffered choice in 44% individuals followed by
hydroxychloroquine in 34% individuals. Odds of COVID contact among those using
HCQ and / or IVR prophylaxis was less than 1 of which IVR was found more
protective. The present study also made a survey among 309 community dwellers,
where odds of contacted COVID among those with any prophylaxis was 0.46 times
than those without any prophylaxis.
CONCLUSION: The HCPs found IVR to have a greater risk reduction than with HCQ;
while the combination showed the greatest reduction and lack of CP use was
associated with a high risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection.

© Journal of the Association of Physicians of India 2011.


PMID: 34781604  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

