
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 17:JVI0171321. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01713-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Structure of Rift Valley fever virus RNA-dependent RNA polymerase.

Wang X(1), Hu C(2), Ye W(3), Wang J(2), Dong X(1), Xu J(2), Li X(1), Zhang M(1), 
Lu H(1), Zhang F(3), Wu W(1), Dai S(4), Wang HW(2), Chen Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology and Beijing Advanced Innovation
Center for Food Nutrition and Human Health, College of Biological Sciences, China
Agricultural University, Beijing, China, 100193.
(2)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Protein Science, Tsinghua-Peking Joint
Center for Life Sciences, Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Structural
Biology, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, 100084.
(3)Department of Microbiology, School of Preclinical Medicine, Fourth Military
Medical University, Xi'an, China.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Skaggs School of Pharmacy and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, 
CO 80045, USA.

Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV) belongs to the order Bunyavirales and is the type 
species of genus Phlebovirus, which accounts for over 50% of family Phenuiviridae
species. RVFV is mosquito-borne and causes severe diseases in both humans and
livestock, and consists of three segments (S, M, L) in the genome. The L segment 
encodes an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp, L protein) that is responsible for
facilitating the replication and transcription of the virus. It is essential for 
the virus and has multiple drug targets. Here, we established an expression
system and purification procedures for full-length L protein, which is composed
of an endonuclease domain, RdRp domain, and cap-binding domain. A cryo-EM L
protein structure was reported at 3.6 Å resolution. In this first L protein
structure of genus Phlebovirus, the priming loop of RVFV L protein is distinctly 
different from those of other L proteins and undergoes large movements related to
its replication role. Structural and biochemical analyses indicate that a single 
template can induce initiation of RNA synthesis, which is notably enhanced by 5' 
viral RNA. These findings help advance our understanding of the mechanism of RNA 
synthesis and provide an important basis for developing antiviral inhibitors.
Importance The zoonosis RVF virus (RVFV) is one of the most serious arbovirus
threats to both human and animal health. RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) is a
multifunctional enzyme catalyzing genome replication as well as viral
transcription, so the RdRp is essential for studying the virus and has multiple
drug targets. In our study, we report the structure of RVFV L protein at 3.6 Å
resolution by cryo-EM. This is the first L protein structure of genus
Phlebovirus. Strikingly, a single template can initiate RNA replication. The
structure and assays provide a comprehensive and in-depth understanding of the
catalytic and substrate recognition mechanism of RdRp.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01713-21 
PMID: 34787453 

