
1. Health Econ. 2021 Nov 17. doi: 10.1002/hec.4450. [Epub ahead of print]

Rationing of a scarce life-saving resource: Public preferences for prioritizing
COVID-19 vaccination.

Luyten J(1), Tubeuf S(2), Kessels R(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Leuven Institute for Healthcare Policy, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Faculté de Santé Publique, Institute for Health and Society (IRSS) and
Institute of Economic and Social Research (IRES), Université catholique de
Louvain (UCLouvain), Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Department of Data Analytics and Digitalization, Maastricht University,
Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Economics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.

In the face of limited COVID-19 vaccine supply, governments have had to identify 
priority groups for vaccination. In October 2020, when it was still uncertain
whether COVID-19 vaccines would be shown to work in trials, we conducted a
discrete choice experiment and a best-worst ranking exercise on a representative 
sample of 2060 Belgians in order to elicit their views on how to set fair
vaccination priorities. When asked directly, our respondents prioritized the
groups that would later receive priority: essential workers, the elderly or those
with pre-existing conditions. When priorities were elicited indirectly, through
observing choices between individuals competing for a vaccine, different
preferences emerged. The elderly were given lower priority and respondents
divided within two clusters. While both clusters wanted to vaccinate the
essential workers in the second place, one cluster (N = 1058) primarily wanted to
target virus spreaders in order to control transmission whereas the other cluster
(N = 886) wanted to prioritize those who were most at risk because of a
pre-existing health condition. Other strategies to allocate a scarce resource
such as using a "lottery", "first-come, first-served" approach or highest
willingness-to-pay received little support.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/hec.4450 
PMID: 34787925 

