
1. J Public Health Res. 2021 Nov 15. doi: 10.4081/jphr.2021.2421. [Epub ahead of
print]

Validation of rapid antibody (IgG-IgM) test kit for SARS COV-2 infection in
Qatar.

Mundodan J(1), Hasnain S(2), Khogali H(3), Al Bayat SS(4), Ali D(5), Alateeg
S(6), Al-Romaihi H(7), Al-Thani MHJ(8).

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Department, Ministry of Public Health, Doha.
jmundodan@moph.gov.qa.
(2)Public Health Department, Ministry of Public Health, Doha.
drshasnain@gmail.com.
(3)Vaccination section / National COVID Track 'n Trace Team, Public Health
Department, Ministry of Public Health, Doha. hkhogali@moph.gov.qa.
(4)Vaccination section / National COVID Track 'n Trace Team, Public Health
Department, Ministry of Public Health, Doha. salbayat@moph.gov.qa.
(5)Primary Health Care Corporation, Doha. dali@phcc.gov.qa.
(6)Contact tracing, Health Protection and Communicable Diseases Control (HP-CDC),
Public Health Department, Ministry of Public Health, Doha.
saif.alateeg@moph.gov.qa.
(7)Director of Health Protection and Communicable Diseases (HP-CDC), Public
Health Department, Ministry of Public Health, Doha. halromaihi@moph.gov.qa.
(8)Public Health Department, Ministry of Public Health, Doha.
malthani@moph.gov.qa.

BACKGROUND: In response to the growing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
pandemic and the shortage of laboratory based molecular testing capacity and
reagents, multiple diagnostic test manufacturers have developed rapid and easy to
use devices to facilitate testing outside laboratory settings. These kits are
either based on detection of proteins from SARS-CoV-2 virus or detection of
antigen or human antibodies generated in response to the infection. However, it
is important to understand their performance characteristics and they must be
validated in the local population setting.
DESIGN AND METHODS: The objective is to assess the validity of the rapid test for
IgG and IgM immunoglobulins compared to the current gold standard reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test. A total of 16951
asymptomatic individuals were tested by the Ministry of Public Health
track-and-trace team using both rapid immunodiagnostic test and RT-PCR as part of
screening across various random settings with potential risk of community
interaction prior to gradual lifting of restrictions in Qatar.  Rapid test was
considered to be posiive if both IgG and IgM are positive, while only IgG/IgM
positive was considered as rapid test negative. Sensitivity, specificity,
positive predictive value (PPV) and negative predictive value (NPV) were
calculated.
RESULTS: The sensitivity of rapid test kit was found to be 0.9%, whereas the
specificity was found to be 97.8%. the PPV was found to be 0.3% whereas the NPV
was found to be 99.4%.
CONCLUSION: Based on the outcome and results of the study, it appears that the
sensitivity and PPV of the rapid antibody test are low. As such, this test is not
recommended for use to assist in taking clinic-based decisions or decisions
related to quarantine/isolation.

DOI: 10.4081/jphr.2021.2421 
PMID: 34781629 

