
1. JMIR Public Health Surveill. 2021 Nov 16;7(11):e28956. doi: 10.2196/28956.

Designing Better Exposure Notification Apps: The Role of Persuasive Design.

Oyibo K(1), Morita PP(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health Sciences, Faculty of Health, University of Waterloo,
Waterloo, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Systems Design Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo,
ON, Canada.
(3)eHealth Innovation, Techna Institute, University Health Network, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(4)Institute of Health Policy, Management, and Evaluation, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Digital contact tracing apps have been deployed worldwide to limit
the spread of COVID-19 during this pandemic and to facilitate the lifting of
public health restrictions. However, due to privacy-, trust-, and design-related 
issues, the apps are yet to be widely adopted. This calls for an intervention to 
enable a critical mass of users to adopt them.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this paper is to provide guidelines to design contact
tracing apps as persuasive technologies to make them more appealing and
effective.
METHODS: We identified the limitations of the current contact tracing apps on the
market using the Government of Canada's official exposure notification app (COVID
Alert) as a case study. Particularly, we identified three interfaces in the COVID
Alert app where the design can be improved. The interfaces include the no
exposure status interface, exposure interface, and diagnosis report interface. We
propose persuasive technology design guidelines to make them more motivational
and effective in eliciting the desired behavior change.
RESULTS: Apart from trust and privacy concerns, we identified the minimalist and 
nonmotivational design of exposure notification apps as the key design-related
factors that contribute to the current low uptake. We proposed persuasive
strategies such as self-monitoring of daily contacts and exposure time to make
the no exposure and exposure interfaces visually appealing and motivational.
Moreover, we proposed social learning, praise, and reward to increase the
diagnosis report interface's effectiveness.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated that exposure notification apps can be designed as
persuasive technologies by incorporating key persuasive features, which have the 
potential to improve uptake, use, COVID-19 diagnosis reporting, and compliance
with social distancing guidelines.

©Kiemute Oyibo, Plinio Pelegrini Morita. Originally published in JMIR Public
Health and Surveillance (https://publichealth.jmir.org), 16.11.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/28956 
PMCID: PMC8598155
PMID: 34783673  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

