
1. mBio. 2021 Nov 16:e0271221. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02712-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Involvement of RIG-I Pathway in Neurotropic Virus-Induced Acute Flaccid Paralysis
and Subsequent Spinal Motor Neuron Death.

Bhaskar M(1), Mukherjee S(1), Basu A(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Brain Research Centregrid.250277.5, Manesar, Haryana, India.

Poliomyelitis-like illness is a common clinical manifestation of neurotropic
viral infections. Functional loss and death of motor neurons often lead to
reduced muscle tone and paralysis, causing persistent motor sequelae among
disease survivors. Despite several reports demonstrating the molecular basis of
encephalopathy, the pathogenesis behind virus-induced flaccid paralysis remained 
largely unknown. The present study for the first time aims to elucidate the
mechanism responsible for limb paralysis by studying clinical isolates of
Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) and Chandipura virus (CHPV) responsible for
causing acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) in vast regions of Southeast Asia and the
Indian subcontinent. An experimental model for studying virus-induced AFP was
generated by intraperitoneal injection of 10-day-old BALB/c mice. Progressive
decline in motor performance of infected animals was observed, with paralysis
being correlated with death of motor neurons (MNs). Furthermore, we demonstrated 
that upon infection, MNs undergo an extrinsic apoptotic pathway in a
RIG-I-dependent fashion via transcription factors pIRF-3 and pIRF-7. Both
gene-silencing experiments using specific RIG-I-short interfering RNA and in vivo
morpholino abrogated cellular apoptosis, validating the important role of pattern
recognition receptor (PRR) RIG-I in MN death. Hence, from our experimental
observations, we hypothesize that host innate response plays a significant role
in deterioration of motor functioning upon neurotropic virus infections.
IMPORTANCE Neurotropic viral infections are an increasingly common cause of
immediate or delayed neuropsychiatric sequelae, cognitive impairment, and
movement disorders or, in severe cases, death. Given the highest reported
disability-adjusted life years and mortality rate worldwide, a better
understanding of molecular mechanisms for underlying clinical manifestations like
AFP will help in development of more effective tools for therapeutic solutions.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02712-21 
PMCID: PMC8593677
PMID: 34781742 

