
1. World J Hepatol. 2021 Oct 27;13(10):1234-1268. doi: 10.4254/wjh.v13.i10.1234.

In the era of rapid mRNA-based vaccines: Why is there no effective hepatitis C
virus vaccine yet?

Echeverría N(1), Comas V(2), Aldunate F(1), Perbolianachis P(1), Moreno P(1),
Cristina J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Virología Molecular, Centro de Investigaciones Nucleares,
Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de la República, Montevideo 11400, Uruguay.
(2)Departamento de Desarrollo Biotecnológico, Instituto de Higiene, Facultad de
Medicina, Universidad de la República, Montevideo 11600, Uruguay.
(3)Laboratorio de Virología Molecular, Centro de Investigaciones Nucleares,
Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de la República, Montevideo 11400, Uruguay.
cristina@cin.edu.uy.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is responsible for no less than 71 million people
chronically infected and is one of the most frequent indications for liver
transplantation worldwide. Despite direct-acting antiviral therapies fuel
optimism in controlling HCV infections, there are several obstacles regarding
treatment accessibility and reinfection continues to remain a possibility.
Indeed, the majority of new HCV infections in developed countries occur in people
who inject drugs and are more plausible to get reinfected. To achieve global
epidemic control of this virus the development of an effective prophylactic or
therapeutic vaccine becomes a must. The coronavirus disease 19 (COVID-19)
pandemic led to auspicious vaccine development against severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) virus, which has renewed interest on fighting
HCV epidemic with vaccination. The aim of this review is to highlight the current
situation of HCV vaccine candidates designed to prevent and/or to reduce HCV
infectious cases and their complications. We will emphasize on some of the
crossroads encountered during vaccine development against this insidious virus,
together with some key aspects of HCV immunology which have, so far, hampered the
progress in this area. The main focus will be on nucleic acid-based as well as
recombinant viral vector-based vaccine candidates as the most novel vaccine
approaches, some of which have been recently and successfully employed for
SARS-CoV-2 vaccines. Finally, some ideas will be presented on which methods to
explore for the design of live-attenuated vaccines against HCV.

©The Author(s) 2021. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.4254/wjh.v13.i10.1234 
PMCID: PMC8568586
PMID: 34786164 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: Dr. Echeverría
reports grants from Comisión Sectorial de Investigación Científica (CSIC) and
from Comisión Académica de Posgrados (CAP). Dr Echeverría, Dr. Cristina and Dr.
Moreno report personal research funding from PEDECIBA. MSc Comas, MSc Aldunate
and MSc Perbolianachis declare no conflict of interest for this article.

