
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 17:JVI0148721. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01487-21. [Epub ahead of print]

The Antimalaria Drug Artesunate Inhibits Porcine Reproductive and Respiratory
Syndrome Virus Replication via Activating AMPK and Nrf2/HO-1 Signaling Pathways.

Long F(1), Zhang M(1), Yang X(1), Liang X(2), Su L(1), An T(3), Zhang G(2), Zeng 
Z(1)(2), Liu Y(1)(2), Chen W(4), Chen J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Veterinary Pharmaceutics Development
and Safety Evaluation, College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural
University, Guangzhou 510642, People's Republic of China.
(2)Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, College of Veterinary
Medicine, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, People's
Republic of China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin 150069, People's
Republic of China.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, La Trobe Institute for Molecular
Science, La Trobe University, Melbourne 3086, Australia.

Porcine Reproductive and Respiratory Syndrome virus (PRRSV) causes significant
economic losses to the pork industry worldwide. Currently, vaccine strategies
provide limited protection against PRRSV transmission, and no effective drug is
commercially available. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop novel
antiviral strategies to prevent PRRSV pandemics. This study showed that
artesunate (AS), one of the antimalarial drugs, potently suppressed PRRSV
replication in Marc-145 cells and ex vivo primary porcine alveolar macrophages
(PAMs) at micromolar concentrations. Furthermore, we demonstrated that this
suppression was closely associated with AS-activated AMPK (energy homeostasis)
and Nrf2/HO-1 (inflammation) signaling pathways. AS treatment promoted p-AMPK,
Nrf2 and HO-1 expression, and thus inhibited PRRSV replication in Marc-145 and
PAM cells in a time- and dose-dependent manner. These effects of AS were reversed
when AMPK or HO-1 gene was silenced by siRNA. In addition, we demonstrated that
AMPK works upstream of Nrf2/HO-1 as its activation by AS is AMPK-dependent.
Adenosine phosphate analysis showed that AS activates AMPK via improving
AMP/ADP:ATP ratio rather than direct interaction with AMPK. Altogether, our
findings indicate that AS could be a promising novel therapeutics for controlling
PRRSV and that its anti-PRRSV mechanism, which involves the functional link
between energy homeostasis and inflammation suppression pathways, may provide
opportunities for developing novel antiviral agents. Importance Porcine
reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) infections have been
continuously threatened the pork industry worldwide. Vaccination strategies
provide very limited protection against PRRSV infection, and no effective drug is
commercially available. We show that artesunate (AS), one of the antimalarial
drugs, is a potent inhibitor against PRRSV replication in Marc-145 cells and ex
vivo primary porcine alveolar macrophages (PAMs). Furthermore, we demonstrate
that AS inhibits PRRSV replication via activation of AMPK-dependent Nrf2/HO-1
signaling pathways, revealing a novel link between energy homeostasis (AMPK) and 
inflammation suppression (Nrf2/HO-1) during viral infection. Therefore, we
believe that AS may be a promising novel therapeutics for controlling PRRSV, and 
its anti-PRRSV mechanism may provide a potential strategy to develop novel
antiviral agents.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01487-21 
PMID: 34787456 

