
1. J Infect Dev Ctries. 2021 Oct 31;15(10):1547-1550. doi: 10.3855/jidc.12731.

Evaluating vertical transmission of sexually transmitted infections to newborns.

Oliveira D(1), Piedade J(2), Castro R(2), Lopes Â(2), Martins MDR(2), Pereira
F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Huíla Health Centre, Girassol Clinic, Lubango, Huíla, Angola.
odinamene@gmail.com.
(2)Global Health and Tropical Medicine, Institute of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, NOVA University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal.

INTRODUCTION: Sexually transmitted infections are among the most frequent
infections affecting pregnant women. We assessed the transmission of hepatitis B 
virus, human immunodeficiency virus type 1 and Treponema pallidum to newborns
from infected parturients.
METHODOLOGY: An observational, cross-sectional, analytical facility-based survey 
was conducted among 57 newborns in Irene Neto Maternity, Lubango city, Huíla
province, Angola. Hepatitis B virus DNA molecular identification was done through
nested PCR. Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 proviral DNA detection was
carried out by two successive nested PCRs. Real-time PCR was performed to examine
the presence of T. pallidum DNA. Amplicons from PCR positive samples were
sequenced for identity search and genotype assignment.
RESULTS: Hepatitis B virus DNA genotype E was detected in 3/41 (7.3%) newborns
from HBsAg (hepatitis B surface antigen) positive mothers. To analyse the
association between mothers HBeAg (hepatitis B e antigen) positivity and
hepatitis B virus vertical transmission to newborns, a Fisher's exact test was
performed, showing a highly significant association (p = 0.006). Human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 provirus or T. pallidum DNA was not detected in any
newborn.
CONCLUSIONS: To prevent hepatitis B virus vertical transmission in Angola it is
important to promote universal antenatal screening, expanding hepatitis B virus
markers (viral load and/or HBeAg), risk-based infected mothers' antiviral therapy
and newborn passive immunoprophylaxis.

Copyright (c) 2021 Dinamene Oliveira, Joao Piedade, Rita Castro, Angela Lopes,
Maria do Rosario Martins, Filomena Pereira.

DOI: 10.3855/jidc.12731 
PMID: 34780379 

Conflict of interest statement: No Conflict of Interest is declared

