
1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2021 Nov 16. doi: 10.1111/nyas.14710. [Epub ahead of print]

Synthetic biology: at the crossroads of genetic engineering and human
therapeutics-a Keystone Symposia report.

Cable J(1), Leonard JN(2), Lu TK(3)(4), Xie Z(5), Chang MW(6), Fernández LÁ(7),
Lora JM(8), Kaufman HL(9), Quintana FJ(10), Geiger R(11), F Lesser C(12), Lynch
JP(12), Hava DL(3), Cornish VW(13), Lee GK(4), DiAndreth B(14), Fero M(15),
Srivastava R(16), De Coster T(17), Roybal KT(18)(19), Rackham OJL(20), Kiani
S(21), Zhu I(22), Hernandez-Lopez RA(23), Guo T(24), Chen WCW(25).

Author information: 
(1)PhD Science Writer, New York, New York.
(2)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Center for Synthetic
Biology, Interdisciplinary Biological Sciences Program, Chemistry of Life
Processes Institute; and Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois.
(3)Research Lab of Electronics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
(4)Senti Biosciences, South San Francisco, California.
(5)MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics and Bioinformatics Division, Center for
Synthetic and System Biology, Department of Automation, Beijing National Research
Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China.
(6)Synthetic Biology Translational Research Program and Department of
Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore; 
NUS Synthetic Biology for Clinical and Technological Innovation (SynCTI),
National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(7)Department of Microbial Biotechnology, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología,
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CNB-CSIC), Madrid, Spain.
(8)Intergalactic Therapeutics, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(9)Division of Surgical Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts.
(10)Ann Romney Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston and The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(11)Institute for Research in Biomedicine, and Institute of Oncology Research,
Università della Svizzera italiana, Bellinzona, Switzerland.
(12)Department of Microbiology, Blavatnik Institute, Harvard Medical School and
Center for Bacterial Pathogenesis, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of
Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(13)Department of Chemistry, Columbia University, New York, New York.
(14)A2 Biotherapeutics, Agoura Hills, California.
(15)TeselaGen Biotechnology, San Francisco, California.
(16)Biophysics and Structural Genomics Division, Saha Institute of Nuclear
Physics, Homi Bhabha National Institute (HBNI), Kolkata, India.
(17)Laboratory of Experimental Cardiology, Department of Cardiology, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, the Netherlands.
(18)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Helen Diller Family
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, California.
(19)Chan Zuckerberg Biohub; Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy,
Gladstone-UCSF Institute for Genomic Immunology; and UCSF Cell Design Institute, 
San Francisco, California.
(20)Program in Cardiovascular and Metabolic Disorders, Duke-National University
of Singapore Medical School, Singapore.
(21)Division of Experimental Pathology, Department of Pathology, School of
Medicine; and Pittsburgh Liver Research Center, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(22)University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California.
(23)Cell Design Institute, Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology; and
Center for Cellular Construction, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, California.
(24)Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(25)Research Laboratory of Electronics and Department of Biological Engineering, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge; and Cardiovascular Research
Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.

Synthetic biology has the potential to transform cell- and gene-based therapies
for a variety of diseases. Sophisticated tools are now available for both
eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells to engineer cells to selectively achieve
therapeutic effects in response to one or more disease-related signals, thus
sparing healthy tissue from potentially cytotoxic effects. This report summarizes
the Keystone eSymposium "Synthetic Biology: At the Crossroads of Genetic
Engineering and Human Therapeutics," which took place on May 3 and 4, 2021. Given
that several therapies engineered using synthetic biology have entered clinical
trials, there was a clear need for a synthetic biology symposium that emphasizes 
the therapeutic applications of synthetic biology as opposed to the technical
aspects. Presenters discussed the use of synthetic biology to improve T cell,
gene, and viral therapies, to engineer probiotics, and to expand upon existing
modalities and functions of cell-based therapies.

© 2021 New York Academy of Sciences.

DOI: 10.1111/nyas.14710 
PMID: 34786712 

