
1. Circulation. 2021 Nov 16;144(20):1646-1655. doi:
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.121.055890. Epub 2021 Nov 15.

Inflammation and Immune Response in Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy:
State-of-the-Art Review.

Asatryan B(1), Asimaki A(2), Landstrom AP(3)(4), Khanji MY(5)(6)(7), Odening
KE(1)(8), Cooper LT(9), Marchlinski FE(10), Gelzer AR(11), Semsarian C(12)(13),
Reichlin T(1), Owens AT(14), Chahal CAA(5)(10)(15)(16).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital (B.A., K.E.O.,
T.R.), University of Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Cardiovascular and Clinical Academic Group, Molecular and Clinical Sciences
Research Institute, St George's University of London, United Kingdom (A.A.).
(3)Division of Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics (A.P.L.), Duke University
School of Medicine, Durham, NC.
(4)Department of Cell Biology (A.P.L.), Duke University School of Medicine,
Durham, NC.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Barts Heart Centre, Barts Health NHS Trust, London, 
United Kingdom (M.Y.K., A.A.C.).
(6)NIHR Biomedical Research Unit, William Harvey Research Institute, Queen Mary
University of London, United Kingdom (M.Y.K.).
(7)Department of Cardiology, Newham University Hospital, London, United Kingdom
(M.Y.K.).
(8)Department of Physiology (K.E.O.), University of Bern, Switzerland.
(9)Cardiac Electrophysiology, Cardiovascular Division, Hospital of the University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia (F.E.M., A.A.C.).
(10)Department of Clinical Sciences and Advanced Medicine, School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia (A.R.G.).
(11)Agnes Ginges Centre for Molecular Cardiology at Centenary Institute (C.S.),
The University of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(12)Sydney Medical School Faculty of Medicine and Health (C.S.), The University
of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(13)Department of Cardiology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, New South
Wales, Australia (C.S.).
(14)Center for Inherited Cardiac Disease, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia (A.T.O.).
(15)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN (A.A.C.).
(16)WellSpan Center for Inherited Cardiovascular Diseases, WellSpan Health,
Lancaster, PA (A.A.C.).

Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (ACM) is a primary disease of the myocardium,
predominantly caused by genetic defects in proteins of the cardiac intercalated
disc, particularly, desmosomes. Transmission is mostly autosomal dominant with
incomplete penetrance. ACM also has wide phenotype variability, ranging from
premature ventricular contractions to sudden cardiac death and heart failure.
Among other drivers and modulators of phenotype, inflammation in response to
viral infection and immune triggers have been postulated to be an aggravator of
cardiac myocyte damage and necrosis. This theory is supported by multiple pieces 
of evidence, including the presence of inflammatory infiltrates in more than
two-thirds of ACM hearts, detection of different cardiotropic viruses in sporadic
cases of ACM, the fact that patients with ACM often fulfill the histological
criteria of active myocarditis, and the abundance of anti-desmoglein-2,
antiheart, and anti-intercalated disk autoantibodies in patients with
arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy. In keeping with the frequent
familial occurrence of ACM, it has been proposed that, in addition to genetic
predisposition to progressive myocardial damage, a heritable susceptibility to
viral infections and immune reactions may explain familial clustering of ACM.
Moreover, considerable in vitro and in vivo evidence implicates activated
inflammatory signaling in ACM. Although the role of inflammation/immune response 
in ACM is not entirely clear, inflammation as a driver of phenotype and a
potential target for mechanism-based therapy warrants further research. This
review discusses the present evidence supporting the role of inflammatory and
immune responses in ACM pathogenesis and proposes opportunities for translational
and clinical investigation.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.121.055890 
PMID: 34780255 

