
1. Braz J Microbiol. 2021 Nov 15. doi: 10.1007/s42770-021-00653-6. [Epub ahead of
print]

Ovine gammaherpesvirus 2 infections in cattle without typical manifestations of
sheep-associated malignant catarrhal fever and concomitantly infected with bovine
coronavirus.

Headley SA(1)(2)(3), de Lemos GAA(4), Dall Agnol AM(5)(6), Xavier AAC(4), Depes
VCA(7), Yasumitsu CY(6), Oliveira TES(4), Silva LE(4), Faccin TC(4), Alfieri
AA(5)(6)(8), Lisboa JAN(5)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Pathology, Department of Veterinary Preventive Medicine, 
Universidade Estadual de Londrina, Rodovia Celso Garcia Cid, PR 445 Km 380,
Campus Universitário, PO Box 10.011, Paraná, 86057-970, Brazil.
selwyn.headley@uel.br.
(2)Multi-User Animal Health Laboratory, Tissue Processing Unit, Department of
Veterinary Preventive Medicine, Universidade Estadual de Londrina, Paraná,
Brazil. selwyn.headley@uel.br.
(3)National Institute of Science and Technology of Dairy Production Chain
(INCT-Leite), Universidade Estadual de Londrina, Paraná, Brazil.
selwyn.headley@uel.br.
(4)Laboratory of Animal Pathology, Department of Veterinary Preventive Medicine, 
Universidade Estadual de Londrina, Rodovia Celso Garcia Cid, PR 445 Km 380,
Campus Universitário, PO Box 10.011, Paraná, 86057-970, Brazil.
(5)National Institute of Science and Technology of Dairy Production Chain
(INCT-Leite), Universidade Estadual de Londrina, Paraná, Brazil.
(6)Laboratory of Animal Virology, Department of Preventive Veterinary Medicine,
Universidade Estadual de Londrina, Paraná, Brazil.
(7)Large Animal Internal Medicine, Department of Veterinary Clinics, Universidade
Estadual de Londrina, Paraná, Brazil.
(8)Multi-User Animal Health Laboratory, Molecular Biology Unit, Department of
Veterinary Preventive Medicine, Universidade Estadual de Londrina, Paraná,
Brazil.

Sheep-associated malignant catarrhal fever (SA-MCF) is a severe, frequently
fatal, lymphoproliferative disease that affects a wide variety of ruminants and
is caused by ovine gammaherpesvirus 2 (OvHV-2), a member of the MCF virus (MCFV) 
complex. The typical clinical manifestations of SA-MCF are well known and easily 
recognized by veterinarians, resulting in clinical diagnosis of MCF when
characteristic clinical signs are present. This article describes the findings
observed in cattle infected with OvHV-2 but without typical clinical
manifestations of SA-MCF. Three calves with episodes of diarrhea before death and
a yearling that died suddenly were investigated. Gross alterations were not
suggestive of SA-MCF. Histopathology revealed a combination of proliferating
vascular lesions (PVLs) and necrotizing vasculitis in three animals (two calves
and the yearling); with PVLs being identified only at the carotid rete mirabile
of two calves infected with OvHV-2. Additional significant histopathologic
lesions included atrophic enteritis, portal lymphocytic hepatitis, interstitial
pneumonia, suppurative bacterial bronchopneumonia, and pulmonary hemorrhage. An
immunohistochemical assay designed to identify only antigens of MCFV revealed,
positive, intralesional, intracytoplasmic immunoreactivity within epithelial
cells of multiple tissues of all animals with PVLs. PCR assays amplified OvHV-2
DNA from multiple tissues of the animals that contained MCFV proteins, confirming
the MCFV identified as OvHV-2. Additionally, bovine coronavirus (BCoV) nucleic
acids were amplified from tissues of all animals, including the animal not
infected by OvHV-2. Collectively, these findings confirmed the participation of
OvHV-2 in the development of the disease patterns observed in these animals that 
were concomitantly infected by BCoV and provide additional confirmation that
cattle can be subclinically infected with OvHV-2. Consequently, the real
occurrence of OvHV-2-related disease may be more elevated than reported, since
asymptomatic or subclinically infected animals are not likely to be investigated 
for OvHV-2. Furthermore, PVLs should be included as possible histologic
indicators of OvHV-2-related diseases in ruminants.

© 2021. Sociedade Brasileira de Microbiologia.

DOI: 10.1007/s42770-021-00653-6 
PMCID: PMC8590972
PMID: 34780031 

