
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Nov 17:e0069421. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.00694-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

Unveiling Ecological and Genetic Novelty within Lytic and Lysogenic Viral
Communities of Hot Spring Phototrophic Microbial Mats.

Guajardo-Leiva S(1), Santos F(2), Salgado O(1)(3), Regeard C(4), Quillet L(5),
Díez B(1)(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Pontificia Universidad
Católica de Chilegrid.7870.8, Santiago, Chile.
(2)Department of Physiology, Genetics, and Microbiology, University of Alicante, 
Alicante, Spain.
(3)Laboratorio de Bioinformática, Facultad de Educación, Universidad Adventista
de Chile, Chillán, Chile.
(4)Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, CNRS, Institute for Integrative Biology of the
Cell (I2BC), Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(5)Laboratoire Glyco-MEV EA 4358, Université de Rouen, Mont Saint Aignan, France.
(6)Center for Climate and Resilience Research (CR)2, Santiago, Chile.
(7)Center for Genome Regulation (CGR), Santiago, Chile.

Viruses exert diverse ecosystem impacts by controlling their host community
through lytic predator-prey dynamics. However, the mechanisms by which lysogenic 
viruses influence their host-microbial community are less clear. In hot springs, 
lysogeny is considered an active lifestyle, yet it has not been systematically
studied in all habitats, with phototrophic microbial mats (PMMs) being
particularly not studied. We carried out viral metagenomics following in situ
mitomycin C induction experiments in PMMs from Porcelana hot spring (Northern
Patagonia, Chile). The compositional changes of viral communities at two
different sites were analyzed at the genomic and gene levels. Furthermore, the
presence of integrated prophage sequences in environmental metagenome-assembled
genomes from published Porcelana PMM metagenomes was analyzed. Our results
suggest that virus-specific replicative cycles (lytic and lysogenic) were
associated with specific host taxa with different metabolic capacities. One of
the most abundant lytic viral groups corresponded to cyanophages, which would
infect the cyanobacteria Fischerella, the most active and dominant primary
producer in thermophilic PMMs. Likewise, lysogenic viruses were related
exclusively to chemoheterotrophic bacteria from the phyla Proteobacteria,
Firmicutes, and Actinobacteria. These temperate viruses possess accessory genes
to sense or control stress-related processes in their hosts, such as sporulation 
and biofilm formation. Taken together, these observations suggest a nexus between
the ecological role of the host (metabolism) and the type of viral lifestyle in
thermophilic PMMs. This has direct implications in viral ecology, where the
lysogenic-lytic switch is determined by nutrient abundance and microbial density 
but also by the metabolism type that prevails in the host community. IMPORTANCE
Hot springs harbor microbial communities dominated by a limited variety of
microorganisms and, as such, have become a model for studying community ecology
and understanding how biotic and abiotic interactions shape their structure.
Viruses in hot springs are shown to be ubiquitous, numerous, and active
components of these communities. However, lytic and lysogenic viral communities
of thermophilic phototrophic microbial mats (PMMs) remain largely unexplored. In 
this work, we use the power of viral metagenomics to reveal changes in the viral 
community following a mitomycin C induction experiment in PMMs. The importance of
our research is that it will improve our understanding of viral lifestyles in
PMMs via exploring the differences in the composition of natural and induced
viral communities at the genome and gene levels. This novel information will
contribute to deciphering which biotic and abiotic factors may control the
transitions between lytic and lysogenic cycles in these extreme environments.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.00694-21 
PMCID: PMC8597652
PMID: 34787442 

