
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 17:JVI0194921. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01949-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Short-stalk isoforms of CADM1 and CADM2 trigger neuropathogenic measles
virus-mediated membrane fusion by interacting with the viral hemagglutinin.

Takemoto R(1), Suzuki T(1), Hashiguchi T(1), Yanagi Y(1)(2), Shirogane Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Faculty of Medicine, Kyushu University, Fukuoka,
Japan.
(2)National Research Center for the Control and Prevention of Infectious
Diseases, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan.

Measles virus (MeV), an enveloped RNA virus in the family Paramyxoviridae,
usually causes acute febrile illness with skin rash, but in rare cases persists
in the brain, causing a progressive neurological disorder, subacute sclerosing
panencephalitis (SSPE). MeV bears two envelope glycoproteins, the hemagglutinin
(H) and fusion (F) proteins. The H protein possesses a head domain that initially
mediates receptor binding and a stalk domain that subsequently transmits the
fusion-triggering signal to the F protein. We have recently shown that cell
adhesion molecule 1 (CADM1, also known as IGSF4A, Necl-2, SynCAM1) and CADM2
(also known as IGSF4D, Necl-3, SynCAM2) are host factors enabling cell-cell
membrane fusion mediated by hyperfusogenic F proteins of neuropathogenic MeVs as 
well as MeV spread between neurons lacking the known receptors. CADM1 and CADM2
interact in cis with the H protein on the same cell membrane, triggering
hyperfusogenic F protein-mediated membrane fusion. Multiple isoforms of CADM1 and
CADM2 containing various lengths of their stalk regions are generated by
alternative splicing. Here we show that only short-stalk isoforms of CADM1 and
CADM2 predominantly expressed in the brain induce hyperfusogenic F
protein-mediated membrane fusion. While the known receptors interact in trans
with the H protein through its head domain, these isoforms can interact in cis
even with the H protein lacking the head domain and trigger membrane fusion,
presumably through its stalk domain. Thus, our results unveil a new mechanism of 
viral fusion triggering by host factors. Importance Measles, an acute febrile
illness with skin rash, is still an important cause of childhood morbidity and
mortality worldwide. Measles virus (MeV), the causative agent of measles, may
also cause a progressive neurological disorder, subacute sclerosing
panencephalitis (SSPE), several years after acute infection. The disease is
fatal, and no effective therapy is available. Recently, we have reported that
cell adhesion molecule 1 (CADM1) and CADM2 are host factors enabling MeV
cell-to-cell spread in neurons. These molecules interact in cis with the MeV
attachment protein on the same cell membrane, triggering the fusion protein and
causing membrane fusion. CADM1 and CADM2 are known to exist in multiple splice
isoforms. In this study, we report that their short-stalk isoforms can induce
membrane fusion by interacting in cis with the viral attachment protein
independently of its receptor-binding head domain. This finding may have
important implications for cis-acting fusion triggering by host factors.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01949-21 
PMID: 34788082 

