
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021 Nov 16. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14391. [Epub ahead of print]

Health assessments uncover novel viral sequences in five species of Galapagos
tortoises.

Nieto-Claudin A(1)(2)(3), Esperón F(2)(4)(5), Apakupakul K(3), Peña I(1), Deem
SL(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Charles Darwin Research Station, Charles Darwin Foundation, Santa Cruz,
Galapagos, Ecuador.
(2)Veterinary Faculty, Complutense University of Madrid, Puerta de Hierro Av,
Madrid, Spain.
(3)Saint Louis Zoo Institute for Conservation Medicine, One Government Drive,
Saint Louis, Missouri.
(4)INIA, CISA, Algete-El Casar Road, Valdeolmos, Spain.
(5)Veterinary Department, School of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Universidad
Europea de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

Emerging infectious diseases (EIDs) have been reported as causes of morbidity and
mortality in free-living animal populations, including turtles and tortoises, and
they have even resulted in species extinctions, with human activities
contributing to the spread of many of these diseases. In the Galapagos, giant
tortoises are endangered due to habitat change, invasive species, and other human
impacts; however, the impact of EIDs on Galapagos tortoise conservation remains
understudied. To fill this gap, we conducted health assessments of five tortoise 
species from the islands of Santa Cruz, Isabela and Española. We performed health
evaluations of 454 animals and PCR testing for pathogens known to be relevant in 
other tortoise species. We identified two novel sequences of adenoviruses and
four of herpesviruses. Based on alignments of the DNA polymerase gene and maximum
likelihood phylogenetic analyses, we found both novel adenoviruses to be most
closely related to red footed tortoise adenovirus 2, by nucleotide sequence and
red footed tortoise adenovirus 1, based on amino acid sequence. Three of the
herpesvirus sequences translated into the same deduced amino acid sequence;
therefore, they may be considered the same viral species, closely related to
terrapene herpesvirus 2. The fourth herpesvirus sequence was highly divergent
from any sequence previously detected and is related to an eagle owl herpesvirus 
based on nucleotide sequence and to loggerhead oro-cutaneous herpesvirus based on
amino acids. These novel viruses may be pathogenic for giant tortoises under
specific conditions (e.g., stress). Continued screening is crucial to determine
if these viruses play a role in tortoise fitness, morbidity and survival. This
information allows us to provide recommendations to the Galapagos National Park
Directorate and other institutions to improve the management of these unique
species both in Galapagos and globally, and for tortoise reintroduction plans
throughout the archipelago.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14391 
PMID: 34784447 

