
1. BMC Geriatr. 2021 Nov 15;21(1):643. doi: 10.1186/s12877-021-02436-y.

Digital personal assistants are smart ways for assistive technology to aid the
health and wellbeing of patients and carers.

Balasubramanian GV(1), Beaney P(2), Chambers R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biomechanics and Rehabilitation Technologies, Faculty of Health,
Staffordshire University, Stoke-on-Trent, UK.
Gayathri.balasubramanian@research.staffs.ac.uk.
(2)Keele University Medical School, Keele, Newcastle-under-Lyme, UK.
(3)Digital Workstream, Staffordshire and Stoke-on-Trent Sustainability and
Transformation Partnership (STP), Staffordshire, UK.

BACKGROUND: Digital health solutions such as assistive technologies create
significant opportunities to optimise the effectiveness of both health and social
care delivery. Assistive technologies include 'low-tech' items, such as memory
aids and digital calendars or 'high-tech' items, like health tracking devices and
wearables. Depending on the type of assistive devices, they can be used to
improve quality of life, effect lifestyle improvements and increase levels of
independence. Acceptance of technology among patients and carers depends on
various factors such as perceived skills and competencies in using the device,
expectations, trust and reliability. This service evaluation explored the impact 
of a pilot service redesign focused on improving health and wellbeing by the use 
of a voice-activated device 'smart speaker', Alexa Echo Show 8.
METHODS: A service evaluation/market research was conducted for a pilot service
redesign programme. Data were collected via a survey in person or telephone and
from two focus groups of patients (n = 44) and informal carers (n = 7). The age
of the study participants ranged from 50 to 90 years. Also, the participants
belonged to two types of cohort: one specifically focused on diabetes and the
other on a range of long-term health conditions such as multiple sclerosis,
dementia, depression and others.
RESULTS: The device had a positive impact on the health and social well-being of 
the users; many direct and indirect benefits were identified. Both patients and
carers had positive attitudes towards using the device. Self-reported benefits
included: reminders for medications and appointments improved adherence and
disease control; increased independence and productivity; and for those living
alone, the device helped combat their loneliness and low mood.
CONCLUSION: The findings from the study help to realise the potential of
assistive technology for empowering supporting health/social care. Especially,
the season of COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the need for remote management of
health, the use of assistive technology could have a pivotal role to play with
the sustainability of health/social care provision by promoting shared care
between the care provider and service user. Further evaluation can explore the
key drivers and barriers for implementing assistive technologies, especially in
people who are ageing and with long-term health conditions.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12877-021-02436-y 
PMCID: PMC8591585
PMID: 34781881  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

