
1. CMAJ Open. 2021 Nov 16;9(4):E1013-E1020. doi: 10.9778/cmajo.20210042. Print 2021 
Oct-Dec.

The mental well-being and coping strategies of Canadian adolescents during the
COVID-19 pandemic: a qualitative, cross-sectional study.

Ferguson KN(1), Coen SE(1), Tobin D(1), Martin G(1), Seabrook JA(1), Gilliland
JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Human Environments Analysis Laboratory (Ferguson, Coen, Tobin, Martin,
Seabrook, Gilliland), and Department of Geography and Environment (Ferguson,
Tobin, Gilliland), Western University; Children's Health Research Institute
(Ferguson, Martin, Seabrook, Gilliland), Lawson Health Research Institute,
London, Ont.; School of Geography (Coen), University of Nottingham, Nottingham,
UK; Faculty of Health Disciplines (Martin), Athabasca University, Athabasca,
Alta.; School of Food and Nutritional Sciences (Seabrook), Brescia University
College at Western University, London, Ont.
(2)Human Environments Analysis Laboratory (Ferguson, Coen, Tobin, Martin,
Seabrook, Gilliland), and Department of Geography and Environment (Ferguson,
Tobin, Gilliland), Western University; Children's Health Research Institute
(Ferguson, Martin, Seabrook, Gilliland), Lawson Health Research Institute,
London, Ont.; School of Geography (Coen), University of Nottingham, Nottingham,
UK; Faculty of Health Disciplines (Martin), Athabasca University, Athabasca,
Alta.; School of Food and Nutritional Sciences (Seabrook), Brescia University
College at Western University, London, Ont. jgillila@uwo.ca.

BACKGROUND: Qualitative research is lacking on the mental well-being of
adolescents during the COVID-19 pandemic. The aim of this study was to explore
the feelings and emotions adolescents experienced during the first wave of the
COVID-19 pandemic and the coping strategies they identified and employed to
manage those emotions.
METHODS: Participants living in Canada aged 13-19 years were recruited through
social media platforms and youth-serving organizations. Qualitative data were
gathered from 2 open-ended questions included in a youth-informed cross-sectional
online survey: "What feelings and emotions have you experienced around the
pandemic?" and "What coping strategies have you used during the pandemic?" We
collected data from June 2020 to September 2020. A summative content analysis was
undertaken to analyze survey responses inductively.
RESULTS: A total of 1164 open-ended responses from Canadian adolescents (n = 851;
mean age 15.6, standard deviation 1.7, yr) were analyzed. We identified 3 major
themes within the category of feelings and emotions associated with the pandemic:
sociospatial and temporal disconnections, emotional toll of the pandemic and
positives amid the pandemic. Within the category of coping strategies used during
the pandemic, 2 major themes were identified: connecting online and outdoors, and
leisure and health-promoting activities.
INTERPRETATION: Although the emotional toll of the first wave of the COVID-19
pandemic is evident, participants in our study adopted various positive coping
strategies to mitigate their distress, including physical activity, safe peer
interactions and hobbies. The results have important implications for public
health policy and practice during pandemic times, emphasizing the importance of
accessible mental health resources for those experiencing psychological distress.

© 2021 CMA Joule Inc. or its licensors.

DOI: 10.9778/cmajo.20210042 
PMCID: PMC8598240
PMID: 34785531  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: Kendra Nelson Ferguson and
Gina Martin received postdoctoral trainee support from the Children’s Health
Foundation through the Children’s Health Research Institute. No other competing
interests were declared.

