
1. BMJ Open. 2021 Nov 16;11(11):e045718. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2020-045718.

Epidemiology, management and the associated burden of mental health illness,
atopic and autoimmune conditions, and common infections in alopecia areata:
protocol for an observational study series.

Harries M(1), Macbeth AE(2), Holmes S(3), Thompson AR(4), Chiu WS(5), Gallardo
WR(5), Messenger AG(6), Tziotzios C(7), de Lusignan S(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)The Dermatology Centre, Salford Royal Hospital, Northern Care Alliance NHS
Foundation Trust, Greater Manchester, UK.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Norfolk and Norwich University Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Norwich, UK.
(3)Alan Lyell Centre for Dermatology, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital,
Glasgow, UK.
(4)South Wales Clinical Psychology Training Programme, Department of Psychology, 
Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.
(5)Pfizer, Tadworth, UK.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield, UK.
(7)St John's Institute of Dermatology, King's College London, London, UK.
(8)Nuffield Department of Primary Care Health Sciences, University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK simon.delusignan@phc.ox.ac.uk.
(9)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Surrey,
Guildford, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Alopecia areata (AA) is a common cause of immune-mediated
non-scarring hair loss. Links between AA and common mental health, autoimmune and
atopic conditions, and common infections have previously been described but
remain incompletely elucidated and contemporary descriptions of the epidemiology 
of AA in the UK are lacking.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: Retrospective study series using a large population-based
cohort (5.2 million) from the Oxford Royal College of General Practitioners
(RCGP) Research and Surveillance Centre (RSC) database, exploring four themes: AA
epidemiology, mental health comorbidities, autoimmune/atopic associations and
common infections.In the epidemiology theme, we will describe the incidence and
point prevalence of AA overall and by age, sex and sociodemographic factors.
Healthcare utilisation (primary care visits and secondary care referrals) and
treatments for AA will also be assessed. In the mental health theme, we will
explore the prevalence and incidence of mental health conditions (anxiety,
depressive episodes, recurrent depressive disorder, adjustment disorder,
agoraphobia, self-harm and parasuicide) in people with AA compared with matched
controls. We will also explore the mental health treatment patterns (medication
and psychological interventions), time off work and unemployment rates. Within
the autoimmune/atopic associations theme, we will examine the prevalence of
atopic (atopic dermatitis, allergic rhinitis, asthma) and autoimmune conditions
(Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, coeliac disease, type 1 diabetes,
Hashimoto's thyroiditis, Graves' disease, rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic
arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE),
polymyalgia rheumatica, Sjögren's syndrome, psoriasis, vitiligo, multiple
sclerosis, pernicious anaemia) in people with AA compared with matched controls. 
We will also estimate the incidence of new-onset atopic and autoimmune conditions
after AA diagnosis. Within the common infections theme, we will examine the
incidence of common infections (respiratory tract infection, pneumonia, acute
bronchitis, influenza, skin infection, urinary tract infection, genital
infections, gastrointestinal infection, herpes simplex, herpes zoster,
meningitis, COVID-19) in people with AA compared with matched controls.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: The Health Research Authority decision tool classed
this a study of usual practice, ethics approval was not required. Study approval 
was granted by the RCGP RSC Study Approval Committee. Results will be
disseminated through peer-reviewed publications.
OBSERVATIONAL STUDY REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT04239521.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2020-045718 
PMCID: PMC8596050
PMID: 34785540  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: SdL is Director of RCGP RSC.
He has received funding for projects from Eli Lilly, AstraZeneca, GSK, Seqirus
and Takeda—all through his universities and none related to this study. WSC and
WRG are employees of Pfizer. SH and CT are investigators on the Pfizer-funded
Allegro clinical trial.

