
1. Vertex. 2021 Sep;XXXII(153):40-44.

[Adaptation of psychiatric practice in public and private mental health
institutions of the City of Buenos Aires during the COVID-19 pandemic].

[Article in Spanish]

Oppel M(1), Camino S(2), Smith JM(3), Godoy A(4), Strejilevich S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Médica especialista en Psiquiatría. Magister. Área, Asistencia e investigación
en trastornos del ánimo, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Médico especialista en Psiquiatría. Área, Asistencia e investigación en
trastornos del ánimo, Buenos Aires, Argentina. E-mail: dr.scamino@gmail.com.
(3)Médico especialista en Psiquiatría. Área, Asistencia e investigación en
trastornos del ánimo, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(4)Médica especialista en Psiquiatría. Área, Asistencia e investigación en
trastornos del ánimo, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

BACKGROUND: One of the most significant indirect impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic
will be seen on the mental health of the population. On this study, we will take 
into account the adapting capacity that the most representative mental health
services (MHS) of Buenos Aires (BA) City have had as to this new situation.
METHODS: We designed an online survey including 10 self-administered closed
questions, strictly anonymous. It has been sent to targeted professionals who
work in public and private MHS of BA after 2 months of the beginning of the
lockdown.
RESULTS: We got 38 answers. 2 professionals rejected to answer. 34% belonged to
private institutions and 66% to public ones. 81% of the total were able to
implement online assistance but only 24% had been trained on how to treat
patients in this context. 69% of the private and 12% of the public sector
professionals informed to have been trained on telemedicine tools. 69% of the
private and 36% of the public sector professionals informed to have prepared
materials for the users on telemedicine resources. 68% mentioned that their
service was properly organized. 40% of the public sector professionals may have
been reassigned to work on tasks related to the pandemic. 40% of the total
informed a reduced capacity of assistance.
CONCLUSIONS: The MHS of BA may have been able to migrate their assistance to
telemedicine, however we have noticed differences in the training levels. A
better capacity of training on this modality might be needed.


PMID: 34783785  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

