
1. Am J Occup Ther. 2021 Nov 1;75(6). pii: 7506205130. doi:
10.5014/ajot.2021.049050.

Limitations on Participation and Their Relation to Social Determinants of Health 
Among Occupational Therapists and Occupational Therapy Students During
Coronavirus Lockdown.

Álvarez NM(1), Villoria ED(2), Arberas EJ(3), Pérez AMC(4), Izquierdo ALG(5).

Author information: 
(1)Nuria Menéndez Álvarez, MS, is PhD Student, Occupational Therapy, Universidad 
de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain; nuria_proaza@hotmail.com.
(2)Emiliano Diez Villoria, PhD, is Associate Professor and Researcher, Instituto 
Universitario de Integración en la Comunidad, Universidad de Salamanca,
Salamanca, Spain.
(3)Estíbaliz Jimenez Arberas, PhD, is Coordinator, Occupational Therapy, Facultad
Padre Ossó, Universidad de Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain.
(4)Ana María Castaño Pérez, PhD, is Adjunct Professor of Psychology, Universidad 
de Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain.
(5)Antonio León García Izquierdo, PhD, is Senior Lecturer in Psychology and
Director, Cátedra Asturias Prevencion, Universidad de Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain.

IMPORTANCE: For the first time in recent history, people worldwide have faced
severe restrictions in occupations because of the measures adopted by governments
to contain the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) crisis.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the limitations on participation of occupational
therapists and occupational therapy students during "lockdown" and their impact
on social determinants of health.
DESIGN: A cross-sectional, descriptive study conducted via an online survey.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 488 occupational therapists and occupational therapy
students in North America, South America, and Europe. Outcomes and Measures: A
questionnaire consisting of the World Health Organization Disability Assessment
Schedule 2.0 of the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and
Health and items developed to assess the impact of lockdown on daily life was
emailed to occupational therapy professional associations, organizations, and
universities between April and June 2020. It was available in English, Spanish,
and Portuguese and met all the parameters listed in the Declaration of Helsinki.
RESULTS: The roles and routines of people across the developed world have been
affected by lockdown measures. The study shows marked differences between
participants in the domains of getting along and life activities, as well as
influence on the environment. Moreover, South American participants experienced
these difficulties to a greater extent than European participants.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This study quantifies the limitations in the
participation of occupational therapists and occupational therapy students and
the relationship of occupation to social determinants of health. What This
Article Adds: The results of this research corroborate the relationship between
health and occupation and highlight elements, such as the environment and
context, that are important in occupational therapy. Therapists' ability to
analyze occupation in relation to contextual and cultural factors will benefit
clients.

Copyright © 2021 by the American Occupational Therapy Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.5014/ajot.2021.049050 
PMID: 34788372  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

