
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 17:JVI0192321. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01923-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Akt plays differential roles during the life cycles of acute and persistent
murine norovirus strains in macrophages.

Owusu IA(1)(2), Passalacqua KD(1)(3), Mirabelli C(1), Lu J(4), Young V(5),
Hosmillo M(4), Quaye O(2), Goodfellow I(4), Ward V(5), Wobus CE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)West African Center for Cell Biology of Infectious Pathogens, Department of
Biochemistry, Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Ghana, Legon, Accra,
Ghana.
(3)Henry Ford Hospital, Department of Graduate Medical Education, 2799 W. Grand
Blvd., Detroit, MI 48202.
(4)Division of Virology, Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, School of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Otago, PO Box 56, Dunedin, 9054, New Zealand.

Akt (Protein kinase B) is a key signaling protein in eukaryotic cells that
controls many cellular processes such as glucose metabolism and cell
proliferation for survival. As obligate intracellular pathogens, viruses modulate
host cellular processes, including Akt signaling, for optimal replication. The
mechanisms by which viruses modulate Akt and the resulting effects on the
infectious cycle differ widely depending on the virus. In this study, we explored
the effect of Akt serine 473 phosphorylation (p-Akt) during murine norovirus
(MNV) infection. p-Akt increased during infection of murine macrophages with
acute MNV-1 and persistent CR3 and CR6 strains. Inhibition of Akt with MK2206, an
inhibitor of all three isoforms of Akt (Akt1/2/3), reduced infectious virus
progeny of all three virus strains. This reduction was due to decreased viral
genome replication (CR3), defective virus assembly (MNV-1), or diminished
cellular egress (CR3 and CR6) in a virus strain-dependent manner. Collectively,
our data demonstrate that Akt activation increases in macrophages during the
later stages of the MNV infectious cycle, which may enhance viral infection in
unique ways for different virus strains. The data, for the first time, indicate a
role for Akt signaling in viral assembly and highlight additional phenotypic
differences between closely related MNV strains. Importance Human noroviruses
(HNoV) are a leading cause of viral gastroenteritis, resulting in high annual
economic burden and morbidity; yet there are no small animal models supporting
productive HNoV infection, or robust culture systems producing cell
culture-derived virus stocks. As a result, research on drug discovery and vaccine
development against norovirus infection has been challenging, and no targeted
antivirals or vaccines against HNoV are approved. On the other hand, murine
norovirus (MNV) replicates to high titers in cell culture and is a convenient and
widespread model in norovirus research. Our data demonstrate the importance of
Akt signaling during the late stage of the MNV life cycle. Notably, the effect of
Akt signaling on genome replication, virus assembly and cellular egress is virus 
strain specific, highlighting the diversity of biological phenotypes despite
small genetic variability among norovirus strains. This study is the first to
demonstrate a role for Akt in viral assembly.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01923-21 
PMID: 34787460 

