
1. J Assoc Physicians India. 2021 Oct;69(10):11-12.

Evaluation of Allergic Reactions following COVID - 19 Vaccination in Patients
with Documented Allergies.

Shukla SC(1), Pandit S(2), Soni D(2), Gogtay NJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Director, Mumbai Allergy Center and Honorary Visiting Allergist,Seth GS
Medical College and KEM Hospital, Mumbai, Maharashtra.
(2)DM Resident, Seth GS Medical College and KEM Hospital, Mumbai, Maharashtra.
(3)Professor and Head, Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Seth GS Medical
College and KEM Hospital, Mumbai, Maharashtra.

BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE: The government guidance regarding COVID-19 vaccination 
lists food allergy, drug allergy and history of anaphylaxis as contraindications 
for receiving vaccination. This study was planned to evaluate such patients
listed in the database of an allergy center and who took any COVID-19 vaccine.
METHODS: Data on n=255 patients was mined. Inclusions were those over 18 years,
any allergic diathesis and receipt of at least one dose of any COVID-19 vaccine. 
Age, gender, nature of allergy and type of COVID vaccine taken along with outcome
of interest [occurrence or otherwise of all allergic reaction post vaccination]
was collated.
RESULTS: Data of 227 patients were finally analysed. Eighty one took the first
dose and 33 took both doses. None with food and/or drug allergy and/or a history 
of anaphylaxis developed any adverse event (AE) post vaccination. Three AEs were 
seen in those with other allergic diathesis. Two AEs [One to COVAXIN™ and one to 
COVISHIELD™] were only generalized itching that were self-limiting. A female
patient had itching with palmar erythema [post COVISHIELD™] which subsided after 
a week's treatment with an antihistamine. She had a history of allergy to
radiocontrast media containing polyethylene glycol/PEG] indicating possible
allergy to polysorbate 80 [PEG related compound contained in COVISHIELD™].
CONCLUSION: No patient fitting contraindications for COVID-19 vaccination laid
down by the Indian government developed any allergic reaction post vaccination.
The guidelines for vaccination may be revisited to make them more inclusive with 
appropriate training of the vaccination centre staff.

© Journal of the Association of Physicians of India 2011.


PMID: 34781647  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

