
1. Transplant Cell Ther. 2021 Nov 13. pii: S2666-6367(21)01366-X. doi:
10.1016/j.jtct.2021.11.005. [Epub ahead of print]

Off the Shelf Third Party Virus Specific T-Cell Therapy to Treat JC Polyomavirus 
Infection in Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant Recipients.

Rubinstein JD(1), Jodele S(2), Heyenbruch D(3), Wilhelm J(4), Thomas S(4), Lutzko
C(5), Zhu X(6), Leemhuis T(3), Cancelas JA(7), Keller M(8), Bollard CM(8), Hanley
PJ(8), Boghdadly ZE(9), Mims A(10), Davies SM(2), Grimley MS(2), Nelson AS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital, OH; Department of
Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH.
Electronic address: Jeremy.rubinstein@cchmc.org.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, OH; Division of Bone Marrow Transplant and Immune Deficiency,
Cincinnati Children's Hospital, Cincinnati OH.
(3)Hoxworth Blood Center, Cincinnati, OH.
(4)Division of Bone Marrow Transplant and Immune Deficiency, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital, Cincinnati OH.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, OH; Experimental Hematology and Cancer biology, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital, OH.
(6)Experimental Hematology and Cancer biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital,
OH.
(7)Hoxworth Blood Center, Cincinnati, OH; Experimental Hematology and Cancer
biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital, OH.
(8)Program for Cell Enhancement and Technologies for Immunotherapy, Children's
National Health System and The George Washington University.
(9)Division of Infectious Diseases, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.
(10)Division of Hematology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.

BACKGROUND: Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is a progressive and
generally fatal demyelinating neurological disease that occurs in profoundly
immunocompromised patients due to infection with the human polyomavirus JC virus 
(JCPyV). Treatment options are limited and are largely focused on restoring
T-cell immunity and outcomes are historically poor. Control of JCPyV in the
setting of an immunocompromised patient by adoptive transfer of third-party virus
specific T-cells (VSTs) has been described in a small number of cases.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate treatment response and outcomes in recipients of
hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) with PML treated with third-party VSTs 
directed against BK virus, a highly homologous polyoma virus that shares
immunogenic epitopes with JCPyV.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective chart review was performed on four patients who
received VSTs for the treatment of PML at Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center since 2019 RESULTS: VSTs were safely administered with no cases of
graft-vs-host disease and no infusion reactions. One patient, who was treated
almost immediately after diagnosis, was able to clear JCPyV from blood and CSF
with resultant stabilization of neurologic decline. Interferon-gamma ELISpot
demonstrated virus specific T-cells in the peripheral blood following infusion.
Response was maintained through repeat infusions. Three other patients, all of
whom had a longer delay between diagnosis and infusion, had progressive
neurologic decline despite varying degree of improvement in viral load.
CONCLUSION: PML is a rare but often fatal complication following HSCT for which
few treatment options are available. BK directed, JCPyV cross-reactive VSTs are a
safe and viable therapeutic option and prompt administration should be considered
after a diagnosis of PML is made. Key points • Virus specific T cells targeting
JCPyV virus are safe with no infusional toxicity or de-novo graft versus host
disease. • Virus specific T-cells have evidence of efficacy in some cases of PML,
but further studies are needed to determine factors that will optimize response.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtct.2021.11.005 
PMID: 34785398 

