
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 17;16(11):e0259700. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259700.
eCollection 2021.

Evaluation of the United States COVID-19 vaccine allocation strategy.

Islam MR(1), Oraby T(2), McCombs A(3), Chowdhury MM(4), Al-Mamun M(5), Tyshenko
MG(6), Kadelka C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, United States of
America.
(2)School of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences, The University of Texas Rio
Grande Valley, Edinburg, TX, United States of America.
(3)Department of Statistics, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, United States of
America.
(4)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX, 
United States of America.
(5)Department of Pharmaceutical Systems and Policy, West Virginia University,
Morgantown, WV, United States of America.
(6)McLaughlin Centre for Population Health Risk Assessment, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Anticipating an initial shortage of vaccines for COVID-19, the
Centers for Disease Control (CDC) in the United States developed priority vaccine
allocations for specific demographic groups in the population. This study
evaluates the performance of the CDC vaccine allocation strategy with respect to 
multiple potentially competing vaccination goals (minimizing mortality, cases,
infections, and years of life lost (YLL)), under the same framework as the CDC
allocation: four priority vaccination groups and population demographics
stratified by age, comorbidities, occupation and living condition (congested or
non-congested).
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We developed a compartmental disease model that
incorporates key elements of the current pandemic including age-varying
susceptibility to infection, age-varying clinical fraction, an active case-count 
dependent social distancing level, and time-varying infectivity (accounting for
the emergence of more infectious virus strains). The CDC allocation strategy is
compared to all other possibly optimal allocations that stagger vaccine roll-out 
in up to four phases (17.5 million strategies). The CDC allocation strategy
performed well in all vaccination goals but never optimally. Under the developed 
model, the CDC allocation deviated from the optimal allocations by small amounts,
with 0.19% more deaths, 4.0% more cases, 4.07% more infections, and 0.97% higher 
YLL, than the respective optimal strategies. The CDC decision to not prioritize
the vaccination of individuals under the age of 16 was optimal, as was the
prioritization of health-care workers and other essential workers over
non-essential workers. Finally, a higher prioritization of individuals with
comorbidities in all age groups improved outcomes compared to the CDC allocation.
CONCLUSION: The developed approach can be used to inform the design of future
vaccine allocation strategies in the United States, or adapted for use by other
countries seeking to optimize the effectiveness of their vaccine allocation
strategies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259700 
PMCID: PMC8598051
PMID: 34788345  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

