
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 17:JVI0165321. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01653-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Pathogenesis of wild-type-like rhesus cytomegalovirus strains following oral
exposure of immune-competent rhesus macaques.

Yue Y(1), Chang WLW(1), Li J(2), Nguyen N(1), Schmidt KA(1), Dormitzer PR(2),
Yang X(2), Barry PA(1)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology and Infectious Diseases, University of California,
Davis, California, USA.
(2)Vaccine Research and Development, Pfizer Inc., Pearl River, New York, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California,
Davis, California, USA.
(4)California National Primate Research Center, University of California, Davis, 
California, USA.

Rhesus cytomegalovirus (RhCMV) infection of rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta) is a
valuable nonhuman primate model of human CMV (HCMV) persistence and pathogenesis.
In vivo studies predominantly use tissue culture-adapted variants of RhCMV that
contain multiple genetic mutations compared to wild-type (WT) RhCMV. In many
studies, animals have been inoculated by non-natural routes (e.g., subcutaneous, 
intravenous) that do not recapitulate disease progression via the normative route
of mucosal exposure. Accordingly, the natural history of RhCMV would be more
accurately reproduced by infecting macaques with strains of RhCMV that reflect
the WT genome using natural routes of mucosal transmission. Herein, we tested two
WT-like RhCMV strains, UCD52 and UCD59, and demonstrated that systemic infection 
and frequent, high-titer viral shedding in bodily fluids occurred following oral 
inoculation. RhCMV disseminated to a broad range of tissues, including the
central nervous system and reproductive organs. Commonly infected tissues
included the thymus, spleen, lymph nodes, kidneys, bladder, and salivary glands. 
Histological examination revealed prominent nodular hyperplasia in spleens and
variable levels of lymphoid lymphofollicular hyperplasia in lymph nodes. One of
six inoculated animals had limited viral dissemination and shedding, with
commensurately weak antibody responses to RhCMV antigens. These data suggest that
long-term RhCMV infection parameters might be restricted by local innate factors 
and/or de novo host immune responses in a minority of primary infections.
Together, we have established an oral RhCMV infection model that mimics natural
HCMV infection. The virological and immunological parameters characterized in
this study will greatly inform HCMV vaccine designs for human immunization.
IMPORTANCE Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is globally ubiquitous with high
seroprevalence rates in all communities. HCMV infections can occur vertically
following mother-to-fetus transmission across the placenta and horizontally
following shedding of virus in bodily fluids in HCMV infected hosts and
subsequent exposure of susceptible individuals to virus-laden fluids.
Intrauterine HCMV has long been recognized as an infectious threat to fetal
growth and development. Since vertical HCMV infections occur following horizontal
HCMV transmission to the pregnant mother, the nonhuman primate model of HCMV
pathogenesis was used to characterize the virological and immunological
parameters of infection following primary mucosal exposures to rhesus
cytomegalovirus.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01653-21 
PMID: 34788083 

