
1. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2021 Nov 17:e0012321. doi: 10.1128/CMR.00123-21. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Bioengineering Strategies for Developing Vaccines against Respiratory Viral
Diseases.

Iyer S(#)(1), Yadav R(#)(1), Agarwal S(#)(1), Tripathi S(2), Agarwal R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for BioSystems Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Science,
Bengaluru, India.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Center for Infectious Disease
Research, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, India.
(#)Contributed equally

Respiratory viral pathogens like influenza and coronaviruses such as severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) have caused outbreaks leading to 
millions of deaths. Vaccinations are, to date, the best and most economical way
to control such outbreaks and have been highly successful for several pathogens. 
Currently used vaccines for respiratory viral pathogens are primarily live
attenuated or inactivated and can risk reversion to virulence or confer
inadequate immunity. The recent trend of using potent biomolecules like DNA, RNA,
and protein antigenic components to synthesize vaccines for diseases has shown
promising results. Still, it remains challenging to translate due to their high
susceptibility to degradation during storage and after delivery. Advances in
bioengineering technology for vaccine design have made it possible to control the
physicochemical properties of the vaccines for rapid synthesis, heightened
antigen presentation, safer formulations, and more robust immunogenicity.
Bioengineering techniques and materials have been used to synthesize several
potent vaccines, approved or in trials, against coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) and are being explored for influenza, SARS, and Middle East
respiratory syndrome (MERS) vaccines as well. Here, we review bioengineering
strategies such as the use of polymeric particles, liposomes, and virus-like
particles in vaccine development against influenza and coronaviruses and the
feasibility of adopting these technologies for clinical use.

DOI: 10.1128/CMR.00123-21 
PMCID: PMC8597982
PMID: 34788128 

