
1. Health Secur. 2021 Nov 15. doi: 10.1089/hs.2020.0246. [Epub ahead of print]

Registered Nurses' Perceptions After a Patient with Ebola Virus Disease is
Admitted to Their Hospital.

Nagel N(1), Salisbury H(2), Hinson H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Nanci Nagel, DHSc, MSN-ACNP, is an Assistant Professor, Anesthesia and
Perioperative Medicine.
(2)Helen Salisbury, PhD, is an Assistant Professor, Doctor of Health Sciences
Program, A.T. Still University, Mesa, AZ.

Emerging diseases affect the nursing workforce, but little is known about the
willingness of registered nurses (RNs) to work during outbreaks (eg, Ebola virus 
disease, COVID-19). The objective of our study was to examine the perceptions and
attitudes of RNs in the United States regarding their duty to care and
willingness to work after a patient infected with the Ebola virus was admitted to
their hospital. We performed a quantitative, descriptive study using social media
to recruit critical care RNs to complete an online survey. A total of 72 RNs
completed the survey. While only 20 respondents reported providing direct care,
more than half (n = 38) reported that family members asked them not to work with 
patients infected with the Ebola virus. A majority of respondents (n = 63) agreed
that healthcare workers have a duty to help sick people despite high risks to
themselves or their families; however, 59 agreed that family responsibilities
would take priority. Respondents were less likely to work if their partners
(n = 11) or children (n = 7) were ill but more likely to work if colleagues were 
infected (n = 48) or dying (n = 40). Shunning was experienced by 32 respondents, 
and 25 knew of others who were shunned. We observed several factors that affect
RNs' willingness to provide care when patients are admitted, including moral
conflict between their duty to treat sick people and their duty to protect their 
family. As part of infectious disease emergency planning, health policy managers 
should consider these complex factors, which may modulate effective patient care.
While this study was limited to RNs in the United States during an Ebola virus
disease outbreak, the results signal a need for similar research on other
emerging infections such as COVID-19.

DOI: 10.1089/hs.2020.0246 
PMID: 34780288 

