
1. mBio. 2021 Nov 16:e0231521. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02315-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Evolutionary and Phenotypic Characterization of Two Spike Mutations in European
Lineage 20E of SARS-CoV-2.

Ruiz-Rodriguez P(#)(1), Francés-Gómez C(#)(1), Chiner-Oms Á(2), López MG(2),
Jiménez-Serrano S(2), Cancino-Muñoz I(2), Ruiz-Hueso P(3), Torres-Puente M(2),
Bracho MA(1)(4), D'Auria G(1)(3)(4), Martinez-Priego L(3), Guerreiro M(5)(6),
Montero-Alonso M(7), Gómez MD(8), Piñana JL(9); SeqCOVID-SPAIN Consortium,
González-Candelas F(1)(4), Comas I(2)(4), Marina A(2)(10), Geller R(1), Coscolla 
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)I2SysBio, University of Valenciagrid.5338.d-CSIC, FISABIO Joint Research Unit 
Infection and Public Health, Valencia, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas, Valencia, Spain.
(3)Sequencing and Bioinformatics Service of Valencian Region Foundation for the
Promotion of Health and Biomedical Research, Valencia, Spain.
(4)CIBER in Epidemiology and Public Health, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Hematology Department, Hospital Universitari i Politècnic la Fe, Valencia,
Spain.
(6)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria La Fe, Valencia, Spain.
(7)Infectious Diseases Unit, Hospital Universitari i Politècnic la Fe, Valencia, 
Spain.
(8)Microbiology Department, Hospital Universitari i Politècnic La Fe, Valencia,
Spain.
(9)Hematology Service, Hospital Clínico Universitario, Institute for Research
INCLIVA, Valencia, Spain.
(10)CIBER in Rare Diseases, Madrid, Spain.
(#)Contributed equally

We have detected two mutations in the spike protein of severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) at amino acid positions 1163 and 1167 that
appeared independently in multiple transmission clusters and different genetic
backgrounds. Furthermore, both mutations appeared together in a cluster of 1,627 
sequences belonging to clade 20E. This cluster is characterized by 12 additional 
single nucleotide polymorphisms but no deletions. The available structural
information on the S protein in the pre- and postfusion conformations predicts
that both mutations confer rigidity, which could potentially decrease viral
fitness. Accordingly, we observed reduced infectivity of this spike genotype
relative to the ancestral 20E sequence in vitro, and the levels of viral RNA in
nasopharyngeal swabs were not significantly higher. Furthermore, the mutations
did not impact thermal stability or antibody neutralization by sera from
vaccinated individuals but moderately reduce neutralization by convalescent-phase
sera from the early stages of the pandemic. Despite multiple successful
appearances of the two spike mutations during the first year of SARS-CoV-2
evolution, the genotype with both mutations was displaced upon the expansion of
the 20I (Alpha) variant. The midterm fate of the genotype investigated was
consistent with the lack of advantage observed in the clinical and experimental
data. IMPORTANCE We observed repeated, independent emergence of mutations in the 
SARS-CoV-2 spike involving amino acids 1163 and 1167, within the HR2 functional
motif. Conclusions derived from evolutionary and genomic diversity analysis
suggest that the co-occurrence of both mutations might pose an advantage for the 
virus and therefore a threat to effective control of the epidemic. However,
biological characterization, including in vitro experiments and analysis of
clinical data, indicated no clear benefit in terms of stability or infectivity.
In agreement with this, continuous epidemiological surveillance conducted months 
after the first observations revealed that both mutations did not successfully
outcompete other variants and stopped circulating 9 months after their initial
detection. Additionally, we evaluated the potential of both mutations to escape
neutralizing antibodies, finding that the presence of these two mutations on
their own is not likely to confer antibody escape. Our results provide an example
of how newly emerged spike mutations can be assessed to better understand the
risk posed by new variants and indicate that some spike mutations confer no clear
advantage to the virus despite independently emerging multiple times and are
eventually displaced by fitter variants.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02315-21 
PMCID: PMC8593680
PMID: 34781748 

