
1. BMJ Open. 2021 Nov 16;11(11):e054900. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-054900.

Virtual team-based care planning with older persons in formal care settings: a
scoping review protocol.

Gao H(1), Yous ML(2), Connelly D(3), Hung L(4), Garnett A(5), Hay ME(6), Snobelen
N(7), Salatino S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Science, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.
(2)McMaster University School of Nursing, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(3)School of Physical Therapy, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada
dconnell@uwo.ca.
(4)School of Nursing, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.
(5)Arthur Labatt Family School of Nursing, Western University, London, Ontario,
Canada.
(6)School of Physical Therapy, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada.
(7)Registered Practical Nurses Association of Ontario, Mississauga, Ontario,
Canada.
(8)Markham Stouffville Hospital, Markham, Ontario, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: COVID-19 has necessitated greater adoption of virtual care (eg,
telephone (audio), videoconference) delivery models. Virtual care provides
opportunities for innovative practice in care planning with older persons and
meaningful family engagement by synchronously involving multiple care providers. 
Nevertheless, there remains a paucity of summarising evidence regarding virtual
team-based care planning for older persons. The purpose of this scoping review is
to summarise evidence on the utilisation of virtual team-based care planning for 
older persons in formal care settings. Specifically, (1) what has been reported
in the literature on the impact or outcomes of virtual team-based care planning? 
(2) What are the facilitators and barriers to implementation?
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: This scoping review will follow a rigorous and
well-established methodology by the Joanna Briggs Institute, supplemented by the 
Arksey & O'Malley and Levac, Colquhoun, & O'Brien frameworks. A three-step search
strategy will be used to conduct a search on virtual team-based care planning for
older persons in formal care settings. Keywords and index terms will be
identified from an initial search in PubMed and AgeLine, and used to conduct the 
full search in the databases PubMed, EMBASE, CINAHL, AgeLine, PsycInfo and
Scopus. Reference lists of included articles and grey literature retrieved
through Google and Google Scholar will also be reviewed. Three researchers will
screen titles and abstracts, and will conduct full-text review for inclusion.
Extracted data will be mapped in a table.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: Research ethics approval is not required for data
collection from publicly accessible information. Findings will be presented at
conferences, submitted for open-access publication in a peer-reviewed journal and
made accessible to multiple stakeholders. The scoping review will summarise the
literature on virtual team-based care planning for the purpose of informing the
implementation of a virtual PIECES™ intervention (Physical/Intellectual/Emotional
health, Capabilities, Environment, and Social).

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-054900 
PMCID: PMC8595297
PMID: 34785560  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

