
1. Ecol Appl. 2021 Nov 16:e02497. doi: 10.1002/eap.2497. [Epub ahead of print]

Age and season predict influenza A virus dynamics in urban gulls: consequences
for natural hosts in unnatural landscapes.

Ineson KM(1), Hill NJ(2), Clark DE(3), MacKenzie KG(3), Whitney JJ(3), Laskaris
Y(4), Ronconi RA(5), Ellis JC(6), Giroux JF(7), Lair S(8), Stevens S(9), Puryear 
WB(2), Runstadler JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Natural Resources & the Environment, University of New
Hampshire, Durham, NH, 03824, USA.
(2)Department of Infectious Disease and Global Health, Tufts University, North
Grafton, MA, 01536, USA.
(3)Division of Water Supply Protection, Massachusetts Department of Conservation 
and Recreation, West Boylston, MA, 01583, USA.
(4)US Fish and Wildlife Service, Galloway, NJ, 08205, USA.
(5)Canadian Wildlife Service, Environment and Climate Change Canada, Dartmouth,
NS, B2Y 2N6, Canada.
(6)University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine, Philadelphia, PA,
19104, USA.
(7)Département des sciences biologiques, Université du Québec à Montréal,
Montréal, QC, H3C 3P8, Canada.
(8)Centre québécois sur la santé des animaux sauvages / Canadian Wildlife Health 
Cooperative, Faculté de médecine vétérinaire, Université de Montréal,
Saint-Hyacinthe, QC, J2S 2M2, Canada.
(9)Division of Mathematics, Physical, and Natural Sciences, University of New
Mexico, Gallup, NM, 87301, USA.

Gulls are ubiquitous in urban areas due to a growing reliance on anthropogenic
feeding sites, which has led to changes in their abundance, distribution, and
migration ecology, with implications for disease transmission. Gulls offer a
valuable model for testing hypotheses regarding the dynamics of influenza A virus
(IAV) - for which gulls are a natural reservoir in urban areas. We sampled
sympatric populations of Ring-billed (Larus delawarensis), Herring (L.
argentatus), and Great Black-backed Gulls (L. marinus) along the
densely-populated Atlantic rim of North America to understand how IAV
transmission is influenced by drivers such as annual cycle, host species, age,
habitat type, and their interplay. We found that horizontal transmission, rather 
than vertical transmission, played an outsized role in the amplification of IAV
due to the convergence of gulls from different breeding grounds and age classes. 
We detected overlapping effects of age and season in our prevalence model,
identifying juveniles during autumn as the primary drivers of the seasonal
epidemic in gulls. Gulls accumulated immunity over their lifespan, however,
short-term fluctuations in seroprevalence were observed, suggesting that
migration may impose limits on the immune system to maintain circulating
antibodies. We found that gulls in coastal urban habitats had higher viral
prevalence than gulls captured inland, correlating with higher richness of
waterbird species along the coast, a mechanism supported by our movement data.
The peak in viral prevalence in newly-fledged gulls that are capable of
long-distance movement has important implications for the spread of pathogens to 
novel hosts during the migratory season as well as for human health as gulls
increasingly utilize urban habitats.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1002/eap.2497 
PMID: 34783416 

