
1. mBio. 2021 Nov 16:e0298421. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02984-21. [Epub ahead of print]

A Previously Undiscovered Circular RNA, circTNFAIP3, and Its Role in Coronavirus 
Replication.

Du L(1)(2), Wang X(2), Liu J(1), Li J(2), Wang S(2), Lei J(1), Zhou J(2)(3), Gu
J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural 
University, Nanjing, China.
(2)MOA Key Laboratory of Animal Virology, Zhejiang Universitygrid.13402.34 Center
for Veterinary Sciences, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Collaborative Innovation Center and State Key laboratory for Diagnosis and
Treatment of Infectious Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang
Universitygrid.13402.34, Hangzhou, China.

Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are a newly discovered class of noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) 
present in various tissues and cells. However, the functions of most circRNAs
have not been verified experimentally. Here, using deltacoronavirus as a model,
differentially expressed circRNAs in cells with or without deltacoronavirus
infection were analyzed by RNA sequencing to characterize the cellular responses 
to RNA virus infection. More than 57,000 circRNA candidates were detected, and
seven significantly dysregulated circRNAs were quantitated by real-time reverse
transcription-PCR. We discovered a previously unidentified circRNA derived from
the TNFAIP3 gene, named circTNFAIP3, which is distributed and expressed widely in
various tissues. RNA viruses, including deltacoronaviruses, rather than DNA
viruses tend to activate the expression of endogenous circTNFAIP3. Overexpression
of circTNFAIP3 promoted deltacoronavirus replication by reducing the apoptosis,
while silencing of circTNFAIP3 inhibited deltacoronavirus replication by
enhancing the apoptosis. In summary, our work provides useful circRNA-related
information to facilitate investigation of the underlying mechanism of
deltacoronavirus infection and identifies a novel circTNFAIP3 that promotes
deltacoronavirus replication via regulating apoptosis. IMPORTANCE CircRNAs, a new
class of ncRNAs, play important roles in cell growth, neural development,
carcinogenesis, and anticarcinogenesis. Porcine deltacoronavirus is an emerging
enteropathogenic coronavirus that causes diarrhea, but the role of host circRNAs 
in regulating its infection is unknown. Here, we performed expression profiling
of circRNAs in mock- and deltacoronavirus- infected cells and identified the
novel differentially expressed circular RNA circTNFAIP3. We demonstrate that
circTNFAIP3 promotes deltacoronavirus replication by inhibiting apoptosis. Our
findings first illustrate that circRNA can act as an apoptosis negative regulator
during RNA virus infection and help to explore the underlying mechanism of
deltacoronavirus infection.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02984-21 
PMCID: PMC8593679
PMID: 34781747 

