
1. Leadersh Health Serv (Bradf Engl). 2021 Nov 19;ahead-of-print(ahead-of-print).
doi: 10.1108/LHS-05-2021-0045.

Vaccinating a billion people against COVID-19: India's quest for systems
leadership in exceptional times.

Gulati K(1), Busari J(2).

Author information: 
(1)All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Educational Development and Research, Faculty of Health Medicine
and Life Sciences, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands and
Department of Pediatrics, Dr Horacio E Oduber Hospital, Oranjestad, Aruba.

PURPOSE: In January 2021, India launched the world's most extensive vaccination
campaign against COVID-19. It is estimated that India would need to vaccinate
over a billion people to achieve herd immunity. Even though the Indian Government
focuses on improving and delivering its vaccination programme, significant
challenges still exist. This paper aims to discuss current challenges to scale up
India's vaccination campaign and addresses strategies for achieving this.
DESIGN/METHODOLOGY/APPROACH: The paper is based on a review of secondary sources,
including journal articles from scholarly and grey literature and information
available in the public domain. The search focused explicitly on the COVID-19
scenario, vaccination programme, public health management and systems leadership 
in the Indian health care system.
FINDINGS: The analysis revealed that various factors have disrupted India's
vaccination campaign, including shortage of vaccine doses, mandatory prior online
registration, lack of infrastructure, safety concerns for older people, untrained
workforce and absence of a solid public health framework. Furthermore, India
appears to have struggled to reduce tensions and instill trust in its ability to 
effectively manage the COVID-19 pandemic and vaccination programme due to a lack 
of cooperation between union government, state governments and other
stakeholders, namely, policymakers, hospitals, industry and community.
ORIGINALITY/VALUE: The findings indicate that scaling up India's anti-COVID
vaccination programme would require system-level leadership strategies that work 
within the country's limited resources. Deeper reforms in vaccine development,
storage, delivery, training and regulatory frameworks are also needed to extend
the world's largest anti-COVID-19 vaccination campaign.

© Emerald Publishing Limited.

DOI: 10.1108/LHS-05-2021-0045 
PMID: 34787981  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

