
1. Am J Perinatol. 2021 Nov 16. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1739356. [Epub ahead of print]

Group B Streptococcus Rectovaginal Colonization and Resistance Patterns in
HIV-Positive Compared to HIV-Negative Pregnant Patients.

Morgan JA(1), Hankins ME(1), Callais NA(1), Albritton CW(1), Vanchiere JA(1),
Betcher RE(1), Lewis DF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center, Shreveport, Louisiana.

OBJECTIVE:  The objective of our study is to determine if human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV)-positive pregnant patients have a higher rate of group B
streptococcus (GBS) rectovaginal colonization compared with HIV-negative pregnant
patients.
METHODS:  Our study is a multi-site retrospective study performed at Ochsner
Louisiana State University-Health Shreveport and Monroe campuses including
patients who delivered between December 2011and June 2019. Rates of GBS
rectovaginal colonization between HIV-positive pregnant patients were compared
with a control group of HIV-negative patients. The control group was age and race
matched in a 2:1 fashion. The primary outcome was to investigate rates of GBS
rectovaginal colonization. Secondary outcomes included GBS culture antibiotic
sensitivities, presence of GBS urinary tract infection, GBS positivity based on
HIV viral load, and GBS positivity based on new vs established diagnosis of HIV. 
Continuous data were analyzed using an unpaired t-test, and categorical data were
analyzed using a Chi-squared test. The probability level of <0.05 was set as
statistically significant.
RESULTS:  A total of 225 patients were included in the final analysis, 75
HIV-positive and 150 HIV-negative controls. Demographic differences were noted.
HIV-positive patients were more likely to deliver preterm and were more likely to
deliver via cesarean section. Our primary outcome showed no significant
differences in incidence of GBS colonization between HIV-positive patients and
control group (n = 31, 41.3% vs n = 46, 30.6%, p = 0.136). Antibiotic resistance 
patterns showed no significant difference between the two groups. There were no
significant differences in GBS positivity based on HIV viral load.
CONCLUSION:  Our study does not show a statistically significant difference in
the incidence of GBS colonization between HIV-positive patients and HIV-negative 
controls.
KEY POINTS: · HIV-positive pregnant patients do not have an increased risk of GBS
rectovaginal colonization.. · HIV-positive pregnant patients have similar rates
of GBS colonization regardless of viral load.. · GBS antibiotic sensitivities are
similar in HIV-positive and HIV-negative pregnant patients..

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-1739356 
PMID: 34784616 

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.

