
1. J Mol Struct. 2021 Nov 11:131879. doi: 10.1016/j.molstruc.2021.131879. [Epub
ahead of print]

Dietary polyphenols mitigate SARS-CoV-2 main protease (Mpro) - Molecular
Dynamics, Molecular Mechanics, and Density Functional Theory Investigations.

Adelusi TI(1), Oyedele AK(1), Monday OE(1), Boyenle ID(1), Idris MO(2), Ogunlana 
AT(1), Ayoola AM(3), Fatoki JO(4), Kolawole OE(5), David KB(6), Olayemi AA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Computational biology/Drug Discovery Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry,
Ladoke Akintola University of Technology, Ogbomosho, Nigeria.
(2)School of Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei,
Anhui, China.
(3)Department of Chemical Sciences, Biochemistry Unit, College of natural and
applied science, Fountain University.
(4)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Faculty of Basic Medical Sciences, College
of Health Sciences, Osun State University, Osogbo, Nigeria.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Immunology and
Bioinformatics, Adeleke University, Ede, Osun State, Nigeria.
(6)Department of Nursing, Faculty of Medical Science, Littoral University, Porto 
Novo, Benin Republic.
(7)Department of Science laboratory technology, Ladoke Akintola University of
Technology.

The recent evolution of SARS-like Corona virus has ravaged the world. The deadly 
virus has claimed over millions of lives across the world and hence highlights
the need to develop effective therapeutic drugs to contain the disease posed by
this parasite. In this study, the inhibitory potential of fifty (50) dietary
polyphenols against Coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) main protease (Mpro) was conducted
using Autodock Vina Molecular docking tool. In the virtual screening process, the
binding affinity of Remdesivir (-7.7kcal/mol) currently used to treat COVID-19
patients was set as the cut-off value to screen out less probable inhibitors.
Ellagic acid, Kievitone and Punicalin were the only promising ligands with
binding affinity (-8.9kcal/mol, -8.0kcal/mol and -7.9kcal/mol respectively) lower
than the set cut-off value. Furthermore, we validated Ellagic acid and Kievitone 
efficacy by subjecting them to molecular dynamics simulation and further
stability was assessed at the molecular mechanics and quantum levels. The overall
analysis indicates both compounds demonstrate higher stability and inhibitory
potential to bind to the crucial His41 and Cys145 catalytic dyad of Mpro than the
standard drug. However, further analysis of punicalin after evaluating its
docking score was not conducted as the ligand pharmacokinetics properties
suggests it could pose serious adverse effect to the health of participants in
clinical trials. Hence, we employed a more safety approach by filtering out the
compound during this study. Conclusively, while Ellagic acid and kievitone
polyphenolic compounds have demonstrated to be promising under this in silico
research, further studies are needed to substantiate their clinical relevance.

© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molstruc.2021.131879 
PMCID: PMC8581770
PMID: 34785822 

Conflict of interest statement: Authors declare no area of competing interest

