
1. BMC Public Health. 2021 Nov 17;21(1):2110. doi: 10.1186/s12889-021-12148-y.

The impact of behavioural risk factors on communicable diseases: a systematic
review of reviews.

Wood S(1), Harrison SE(2)(3), Judd N(1)(2), Bellis MA(4)(5), Hughes K(1)(2),
Jones A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Policy and International Health, World Health Organization Collaborating
Centre on Investment for Health and Well-being, Public Health Wales, Wrexham, UK.
(2)Public Health Collaborating Unit, School of Medical and Health Sciences,
Bangor University, Wrexham, UK.
(3)Institute for Applied Human Physiology, School of Human and Behavioural
Sciences, Bangor University, Bangor, UK.
(4)Policy and International Health, World Health Organization Collaborating
Centre on Investment for Health and Well-being, Public Health Wales, Wrexham, UK.
m.a.bellis@bangor.ac.uk.
(5)Public Health Collaborating Unit, School of Medical and Health Sciences,
Bangor University, Wrexham, UK. m.a.bellis@bangor.ac.uk.
(6)Health Protection and Screening Services, Public Health Wales, Cardiff, UK.

BACKGROUND: The coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has highlighted that individuals 
with behavioural risk factors commonly associated with non-communicable diseases 
(NCDs), such as smoking, harmful alcohol use, obesity, and physical inactivity,
are more likely to experience severe symptoms from COVID-19. These risk factors
have been shown to increase the risk of NCDs, but less is known about their
broader influence on communicable diseases. Taking a wide focus on a range of
common communicable diseases, this review aimed to synthesise research examining 
the impact of behavioural risk factors commonly associated with NCDs on risks of 
contracting, or having more severe outcomes from, communicable diseases.
METHODS: Literature searches identified systematic reviews and meta-analyses that
examined the association between behavioural risk factors (alcohol, smoking,
illicit drug use, physical inactivity, obesity and poor diet) and the
contraction/severity of common communicable diseases, including infection or
associated pathogens. An a priori, prospectively registered protocol was followed
(PROSPERO; registration number CRD42020223890).
RESULTS: Fifty-three systematic reviews were included, of which 36 were also
meta-analyses. Reviews focused on: tuberculosis, human immunodeficiency virus,
hepatitis C virus, hepatitis B virus, invasive bacterial diseases, pneumonia,
influenza, and COVID-19. Twenty-one reviews examined the association between
behavioural risk factors and communicable disease contraction and 35 examined
their association with communicable disease outcomes (three examined their
association with both contraction and outcomes). Fifty out of 53 reviews (94%)
concluded that at least one of the behavioural risk factors studied increased the
risk of contracting or experiencing worse health outcomes from a communicable
disease. Across all reviews, effect sizes, where calculated, ranged from 0.83 to 
8.22.
CONCLUSIONS: Behavioural risk factors play a significant role in the risk of
contracting and experiencing more severe outcomes from communicable diseases.
Prevention of communicable diseases is likely to be most successful if it
involves the prevention of behavioural risk factors commonly associated with
NCDs. These findings are important for understanding risks associated with
communicable disease, and timely, given the COVID-19 pandemic and the need for
improvements in future pandemic preparedness. Addressing behavioural risk factors
should be an important part of work to build resilience against any emerging and 
future epidemics and pandemics.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12889-021-12148-y 
PMCID: PMC8596356
PMID: 34789209  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

