
1. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2021 Nov 1;22(S2):51-57. doi:
10.31557/APJCP.2021.22.S2.51.

Banning Loose Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products in India: A Policy Analysis.

Kapoor S(1), Mehra R(2), Yadav A(1), Lal P(1), Singh RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease (The Union),
South-East Asia Office, New Delhi, India.
(2)Independent Researcher, New Delhi, India.

BACKGROUND: Sale of single cigarettes (also known as singles or loosies) is a key
driver for early initiation of smoking and is a leading contributor to the
smoking epidemic in India. Sale of singles additionally deter implementation of
tobacco control strategies of pictorial health warnings including plain packaging
and defeat effective taxation and promote illicit trade. We review India's
tobacco control policy responses towards banning singles and other products sold 
as loose tobacco and identify opportunities for future policy intervention
especially in the context of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
METHODS: Existing national and sub-national policy documents were analyzed for
their content since the inception of the tobacco control laws in the country.
RESULTS: There are no effective provisions at national level to ban loose tobacco
products in India. However, the implementation of multiple legislative and
regulatory measures (Acts/circulars/letters/notifications/orders/court
judgements) in 16 Indian states and jurisdictions provide sufficient legal
framework to substantiate its complete ban pan India. While the majority of state
governments have adopted state level measures, Rajasthan had issued specific
directive to all the 33 districts banning loose cigarettes and other tobacco
products. Himachal Pradesh introduced the most unique and comprehensive
legislation, for banning the sale of cigarettes and beedis (Dated November 7,
2016). The most recent notification in the state of Maharashtra (September 24,
2020) is the first to leverage powers using a mix of national and state
legislations including the legislation addressing the rapidly emerging challenge 
of managing COVID-19.
CONCLUSION: A robust national policy which supports strong provision to deter
tobacco companies, their distribution network and vendors from selling singles or
loose tobacco products is urgently needed. Such policy should be backed by
cautionary messaging for consumers as well. Eliminating singles and loose tobacco
sale will help in blunting tobacco use prevalence besides curbing spread of
infectious diseases like COVID-19 pandemic.

DOI: 10.31557/APJCP.2021.22.S2.51 
PMID: 34780138  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

