
1. Mini Rev Med Chem. 2021 Nov 16. doi: 10.2174/1389557521666211116120823. [Epub
ahead of print]

Therapeutic Journey and Recent Advances in the Synthesis of Coumarin Derivatives.

Sinha S(1), Singh K(1), Ved A(2), Hasan SM(1), Mujeeb S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, Integral University, Kursi road, Lucknow-226026 (U.P.).
India.
(2)Goel Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Lucknow -226028 (U.P.). India.
(3)Hygia Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Lucknow. India.

BACKGROUND: Coumarin is an oxygen-containing compound in medicinal chemistry.
Coumarin plays an important role in both natural systems like plants and also in 
synthetic medicinal applications as drug molecules. Many structurally different
coumarin compounds were found to show a big range of similarity with the vital
molecular targets for their pharmacological action and small modifications in
their structures resulted insignificant changes in their biological activities.
OBJECTIVE: This review gives detailed information about the studies of the recent
advances in various pharmacological aspects of coumarins.
METHOD: Various oxygen-containing heterocyclic compounds represented remarkable
biological significances. The fused aromatic oxygen-heterocyclic nucleus is able 
to change its electron density; thus changing the chemical, physical and
biological properties respectively due to its multiple binding modes with the
receptors, which play crucial role in pharmacological screening of drugs. A
number of heterocyclic compounds have been synthesized which have their nucleus
derived from various plants and animals. In coumarins, benzene ring is fused with
pyrone nucleus which provides stability to the nucleus. Coumarins have shown a
wide range of pharmacological activities such as anti-tumour, anti-coagulant,
anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidant, antiviral, anti-malarial, anti-HIV and
antimicrobial activity etc. Results: Reactive oxygen species like superoxide
anion, hydroxyl radical and hydrogen peroxide are a type of unstable molecule
that contains oxygen, which reacts with other molecules in the cell during the
metabolism process but it may produce cytotoxicity when reactive oxygen species
increase in number, by the damage of biological macromolecules. Hydroxyl radical 
(˙OH), is a strong oxidizing agent and it is responsible for the cytotoxicity by 
oxygen in different plants, animals and other microbes. coumarin is the oldest
and effective compound having antimicrobial activity, anti-inflammatory,
antioxidant, antidepressant activity, analgesic, anticonvulsant activity, etc.
Naturally existing coumarin compounds act against SARS-CoV-2 by preventing viral 
replication through the targeting on active site against the Mpro target protein.
CONCLUSION: This review highlights the different biological activities of
coumarin derivatives. In this review we provide an updated summary of the
researches which are related to recent advances in biological activities of
coumarins analogue and their most recent activities against COVID -19. Natural
compounds act as a rich resource for novel drug development against various
SARS-CoV-2 viral strains including viruses like herpes simplex virus, influenza
virus, human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B and C viruses, middle east
respiratory syndrome and severe acute respiratory syndrome.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1389557521666211116120823 
PMID: 34784861 

