
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Nov 15;17(11):e1010019. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010019.
eCollection 2021 Nov.

The gammaherpesvirus 68 viral cyclin facilitates expression of LANA.

Niemeyer BF(1), Sanford B(2), Gibson JE(2), Berger JN(1), Oko LM(1), Medina E(1),
Clambey ET(3), van Dyk LF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology and Microbiology Department, University of Colorado Denver School
of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, United States of America.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
Colorado, United States of America.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 
Aurora, Colorado, United States of America.

Gammaherpesviruses establish life-long infections within their host and have been
shown to be the causative agents of devastating malignancies. Chronic infection
within the host is mediated through cycles of transcriptionally quiescent stages 
of latency with periods of reactivation into detectable lytic and productive
infection. The mechanisms that regulate reactivation from latency remain poorly
understood. Previously, we defined a critical role for the viral cyclin in
promoting reactivation from latency. Disruption of the viral cyclin had no impact
on the frequency of cells containing viral genome during latency, yet it remains 
unclear whether the viral cyclin influences latently infected cells in a
qualitative manner. To define the impact of the viral cyclin on properties of
latent infection, we utilized a viral cyclin deficient variant expressing a
LANA-beta-lactamase fusion protein (LANA::βla), to enumerate both the cellular
distribution and frequency of LANA gene expression. Disruption of the viral
cyclin did not affect the cellular distribution of latently infected cells, but
did result in a significant decrease in the frequency of cells that expressed
LANA::βla across multiple tissues and in both immunocompetent and immunodeficient
hosts. Strikingly, whereas the cyclin-deficient virus had a reactivation defect
in bulk culture, sort purified cyclin-deficient LANA::βla expressing cells were
fully capable of reactivation. These data emphasize that the γHV68 latent
reservoir is comprised of at least two distinct stages of infection characterized
by differential LANA expression, and that a primary function of the viral cyclin 
is to promote LANA expression during latency, a state associated with ex vivo
reactivation competence.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010019 
PMCID: PMC8629379
PMID: 34780571 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

