
1. Vertex. 2021 Sep;XXXII(153):21-28.

[Working conditions among Mental Healthcare workers at the beginning of COVID-19 
pandemic in Argentina].

[Article in Spanish]

Cesoni M(1), Peskin VA(2), Berrio Cuartas DM(3), Luguercho C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Médico del Hospital "José T. Borda". Prosecretario de la Asociación de
Psiquiatras Argentinos (APSA). E-mail: maxcesoni@gmail.com.
(2)Médica Especialista en Psiquiatría (UBA). Capítulo Investigación en
Psiquiatría de la Asociación de Psiquiatras Argentinos (APSA).
(3)Médico Psiquiatra (APSA).
(4)Médica especialista en psiquiatría. Secretaria de la Asociación de Psiquiatras
Argentinos (APSA).

INTRODUCTION: The current COVID-19 pandemic highlights the different difficulties
that healthcare workers have to face in this context. In order to quantify some
aspects of the current working situation, the Asociación de Psiquiatras
Argentinos (APSA) designed a survey for Mental Healthcare workers. The goal was
to: measure and know what are the working conditions of those working in Mental
Health in Argentina, in this pandemic context.
METHODS: Cross sectional descriptive study. Convenience sample. The survey was
designed and sent in a digital format, thru APSA means of communication. The
survey had 27 questions and one comments option. Questions explored
sociodemographic variables, worked related aspects and discrimination suffered by
participants.
RESULTS: The survey, in its digital format, was answered by 710 participants. 32%
of those in the public sector pointed out that people needed to bring their own
personal protective equipment, compared to 56% in the private sector. For
protocols in place, nearly 82% of public sector responses said there is a
protocol for COVID-19 compatible symptoms in patients, compared to 58% in the
private sector. And for new patients in an inpatient facility, responses showed
that more than 50% had a protocol in the public sector, vs less than half in the 
private setting.
CONCLUSIONS: This survey and the results allows to know and have evidence on
which were the working conditions at the beginning of the pandemic. Having a plan
considering what is known and what is available, allows a more appropriate
approach, for both the workers and those who depend on them for care.


PMID: 34783783  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

