
1. mBio. 2021 Nov 16:e0293621. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02936-21. [Epub ahead of print]

A Bacterial Cell-Based Assay To Study SARS-CoV-2 Protein-Protein Interactions.

Springstein BL(1), Deighan P(1), Grabe GJ(1), Hochschild A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Harvard Medical Schoolgrid.471403.5, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

Methods for detecting and dissecting the interactions of virally encoded proteins
are essential for probing basic viral biology and providing a foundation for
therapeutic advances. The dearth of targeted therapeutics for the treatment of
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), an ongoing global health crisis, underscores
the importance of gaining a deeper understanding of the interactions of proteins 
encoded by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Here, we
describe the use of a convenient bacterial cell-based two-hybrid (B2H) system to 
analyze the SARS-CoV-2 proteome. We identified 16 distinct intraviral
protein-protein interactions (PPIs), involving 16 proteins. We found that many of
the identified proteins interact with more than one partner. Further, our system 
facilitates the genetic dissection of these interactions, enabling the
identification of selectively disruptive mutations. We also describe a modified
B2H system that permits the detection of disulfide bond-dependent PPIs in the
normally reducing Escherichia coli cytoplasm, and we used this system to detect
the interaction of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein receptor-binding domain (RBD)
with its cognate cell surface receptor ACE2. We then examined how the RBD-ACE2
interaction is perturbed by several RBD amino acid substitutions found in
currently circulating SARS-CoV-2 variants. Our findings illustrate the utility of
a genetically tractable bacterial system for probing the interactions of viral
proteins and investigating the effects of emerging mutations. In principle, the
system could also facilitate the identification of potential therapeutics that
disrupt specific interactions of virally encoded proteins. More generally, our
findings establish the feasibility of using a B2H system to detect and dissect
disulfide bond-dependent interactions of eukaryotic proteins. IMPORTANCE
Understanding how virally encoded proteins interact with one another is essential
in elucidating basic viral biology, providing a foundation for therapeutic
discovery. Here, we describe the use of a versatile bacterial cell-based system
to investigate the interactions of the protein set encoded by SARS-CoV-2, the
virus responsible for the current COVID-19 pandemic. We identified 16 distinct
intraviral protein-protein interactions, involving 16 proteins, many of which
interact with more than one partner. Our system facilitates the genetic
dissection of these interactions, enabling the identification of selectively
disruptive mutations. We also describe a modified version of our bacterial
cell-based system that permits detection of the interaction between the
SARS-CoV-2 spike protein (specifically, its receptor-binding domain) and its
cognate human cell surface receptor ACE2, and we investigated the effects of
spike mutations found in currently circulating SARS-CoV-2 variants. Our findings 
illustrate the general utility of our system for probing the interactions of
virally encoded proteins.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02936-21 
PMCID: PMC8593686
PMID: 34781739 

