
1. J Assoc Physicians India. 2021 Oct;69(10):11-12.

COVID Associated Mucormycosis: A Study on the Spectrum of Clinical, Biochemical
and Radiological Findings in A Series of Ten Patients.

Pal P(1), Chatterjee N(2), Ghosh S(3), Ray BK(4), Mukhopadhyay P(5), Bhunia K(6),
Srivastava SR(7), Adhikari S(8), Barman D(9), Banerjee B(10), Mukhopadhyay M(11),
Pal J(12).

Author information: 
(1)PGT, IPGMER, Kolkata, West Bengal Corresponding Author.
(2)Professor, IPGMER, Kolkata, West Bengal.
(3)Professor and HOD, Dept. of Medicine, IPGMER, Kolkata, West Bengal.
(4)Professor, Dept. of Neuromedicine,IPGMER, Kolkata, West Bengal.
(5)Professor, Dept. of Endocrinology, IPGMER, Kolkata, West Bengal.
(6)PGT,IPGMER, Kolkata, West Bengal.
(7)Asst. Professor, Dept. of Ophthalmology, IPGMER, Kolkata, West Bengal.
(8)Asst. Professor, Dept. of Plastic Surgery, IPGMER, Kolkata, West Bengal.
(9)Professor and HOD, Dept. of ENT,IPGMER, Kolkata, West Bengal.
(10)PGT, Dept. of Pathology, IPGMER, Kolkata, West Bengal.
(11)Professor, Dept. of Pathology, IPGMER, Kolkata, West Bengal.
(12)Professor, Dept. of Medicine, RG Kar Medical College, Kolkata, West Bengal.

BACKGROUND: There is more than twofold rise in prevalence of mucormycosis cases
in India during the COVID-19 pandemic which needs to be evaluated.
AIMS: The study aimed to document the spectrum of cases of mucormycosis seen at
our Institute during COVID-19 times.
METHODS: The study is a retrospective observational study carried out at our
Institute from May 2021 to mid-June 2021. All patients with biopsy-proven
mucormycosis were enrolled in the study. The patients were subjected to complete 
history taking, ophthalmological examination, and imaging studies. The patients
were treated with a multidisciplinary approach with antifungal therapy as well as
surgical intervention when needed.
RESULTS: Ten patients (n=10) were seen, with a mean age of 50.3 years. The major 
risk factors included recent use of steroids, uncontrolled diabetes, and CKD. The
most common presentation was swelling of unilateral eye and ptosis, followed by
loss of vision. Inflammatory marker (CRP) and d-dimer were raised at presentation
in all cases. Imaging showed the spread of infection from paranasal sinus to
orbit and brain via cavernous sinus, which was a poor prognostic factor.
Intravenous Amphotericin-B was given to all patients for at least 4 weeks. Two
patients were discharged after completion of treatment and mortality was seen in 
three patients.
CONCLUSION: We present an array of COVID-associated-mucormycosis (CAM) cases from
Eastern India. CAM is presenting with rhino-orbito-cerebral involvement. There is
poor outcome with cerebral involvement and high incidence of adverse effects with
deoxycholate formulation of amphotericin-B. The causal association of COVID-19
with mucormycosis needs to be unearthed but possible preventive role of
anticoagulation should be evaluated.

© Journal of the Association of Physicians of India 2011.


PMID: 34781648  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

