
1. BMC Genomics. 2021 Nov 16;22(Suppl 5):518. doi: 10.1186/s12864-021-07660-9.

A common methodological phylogenomics framework for intra-patient heteroplasmies 
to infer SARS-CoV-2 sublineages and tumor clones.

Utro F(1), Levovitz C(2), Rhrissorrakrai K(2), Parida L(3).

Author information: 
(1)IBM Research, T.J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, USA.
futro@us.ibm.com.
(2)IBM Research, T.J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, USA.
(3)IBM Research, T.J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, USA.
parida@us.ibm.com.

BACKGROUND: All diseases containing genetic material undergo genetic evolution
and give rise to heterogeneity including cancer and infection. Although these
illnesses are biologically very different, the ability for phylogenetic
retrodiction based on the genomic reads is common between them and thus
tree-based principles and assumptions are shared. Just as the different
frequencies of tumor genomic variants presupposes the existence of multiple tumor
clones and provides a handle to computationally infer them, we postulate that the
different variant frequencies in viral reads offers the means to infer multiple
co-infecting sublineages.
RESULTS: We present a common methodological framework to infer the phylogenomics 
from genomic data, be it reads of SARS-CoV-2 of multiple COVID-19 patients or
bulk DNAseq of the tumor of a cancer patient. We describe the Concerti
computational framework for inferring phylogenies in each of the two scenarios.To
demonstrate the accuracy of the method, we reproduce some known results in both
scenarios. We also make some additional discoveries.
CONCLUSIONS: Concerti successfully extracts and integrates information from
multi-point samples, enabling the discovery of clinically plausible phylogenetic 
trees that capture the heterogeneity known to exist both spatially and
temporally. These models can have direct therapeutic implications by highlighting
"birth" of clones that may harbor resistance mechanisms to treatment, "death" of 
subclones with drug targets, and acquisition of functionally pertinent mutations 
in clones that may have seemed clinically irrelevant. Specifically in this paper 
we uncover new potential parallel mutations in the evolution of the SARS-CoV-2
virus. In the context of cancer, we identify new clones harboring resistant
mutations to therapy.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-021-07660-9 
PMCID: PMC8596094
PMID: 34789161  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

