
1. Am J Case Rep. 2021 Nov 17;22:e934658. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.934658.

Zoster Cranial Polyneuropathy in a COVID-19 Patient.

Antonescu F(1)(2), Butnariu I(1), Cojocaru FM(1), Anghel DN(1), Mihai ED(3), Tuță
S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, National Institute of Neurology and Neurovascular
Diseases, University of Medicine and Pharmacy "Carol Davila", Bucharest, Romania.
(2)Department of Neurology, "Carol Davila" University of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Bucharest, Romania.
(3)Department of Neurology, Ponderas Academic Hospital, Bucharest, Romania.

BACKGROUND Ramsay Hunt syndrome is a rare form of herpes zoster caused by the
reactivation of the varicella-zoster virus in the geniculate ganglion. The main
clinical manifestations are peripheral facial palsy, vesicular rash in the ear,
and ipsilateral auricular pain, and sometimes vertigo. COVID-19 is a new
multisystemic infectious disease that, in addition to common respiratory
manifestations, it is known to affect the immune system, primarily depressing
cellular immunity. CASE REPORT A 54-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital
with an acute vestibular syndrome and diplopia. She had been diagnosed 3 years
prior with interstitial lung disease for which she was taking methylprednisolone.
At admission, she tested positive for SARS-CoV-2. In the following days, she
developed a sixth nerve palsy on the left side and a right peripheral facial
palsy on the right side, followed by a typical zoster rash on the ipsilateral
ear. One month later, she developed acute severe hearing loss on the right side. 
There were no COVID-19 symptoms during her stay in our hospital. The MRI showed
Gd enhancement of both facial nerves. Under antiviral and corticoid treatment,
the evolution was favorable, with marked improvement at 6 months. CONCLUSIONS
COVID-19 increases the risk for herpes zoster infection, probably through induced
depression of the cellular immunity. Our case suggests Ramsay Hunt syndrome can
be the presenting symptom and sometimes the only symptom of COVID-19. This also
seems to be true for other cranial neuropathies, and we recommend testing these
patients even if there are no other manifestations.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.934658 
PMID: 34788266  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

