
1. Cell Host Microbe. 2021 Nov 10. pii: S1931-3128(21)00473-X. doi:
10.1016/j.chom.2021.10.009. [Epub ahead of print]

Human influenza virus challenge identifies cellular correlates of protection for 
oral vaccination.

McIlwain DR(1), Chen H(2), Rahil Z(2), Bidoki NH(3), Jiang S(4), Bjornson Z(2),
Kolhatkar NS(5), Martinez CJ(5), Gaudillière B(6), Hedou J(6), Mukherjee N(2),
Schürch CM(7), Trejo A(2), Affrime M(8), Bock B(8), Kim K(9), Liebowitz D(5),
Aghaeepour N(10), Tucker SN(5), Nolan GP(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA; WCCT Global, Cypress, CA, USA. Electronic address:
mcilwain@stanford.edu.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA; Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain
Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA; Department
of Biomedical Informatics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, 
USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA; Center for Virology and Vaccine Research, Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Vaxart, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain Medicine, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA; Department of Pathology and Neuropathology,
University Hospital and Comprehensive Cancer Center Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(8)WCCT Global, Cypress, CA, USA.
(9)Ark Clinical Research, LLC, Long Beach, CA, USA.
(10)Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain Medicine, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA; Department of Biomedical
Informatics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA;
Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA,
USA.
(11)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA, USA.

Developing new influenza vaccines with improved performance and easier
administration routes hinges on defining correlates of protection.
Vaccine-elicited cellular correlates of protection for influenza in humans have
not yet been demonstrated. A phase-2 double-blind randomized placebo and active
(inactivated influenza vaccine) controlled study provides evidence that a
human-adenovirus-5-based oral influenza vaccine tablet (VXA-A1.1) can protect
from H1N1 virus challenge in humans. Mass cytometry characterization of
vaccine-elicited cellular immune responses identified shared and
vaccine-type-specific responses across B and T cells. For VXA-A1.1, the abundance
of hemagglutinin-specific plasmablasts and plasmablasts positive for integrin
α4β7, phosphorylated STAT5, or lacking expression of CD62L at day 8 were
significantly correlated with protection from developing viral shedding following
virus challenge at day 90 and contributed to an effective machine learning model 
of protection. These findings reveal the characteristics of vaccine-elicited
cellular correlates of protection for an oral influenza vaccine.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2021.10.009 
PMID: 34784508 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare the 
following competing interests: S.N.T., D.L., N.S.K., and C.J.M. are current or
former employees of Vaxart Inc. G.P.N. and D.R.M. have received research funding 
support from Vaxart Inc. M.A., K.K., and B.B. are current or former employees of 
WCCT Global. D.R.M. is an unpaid advisor for WCCT Global. Z.B. is an employee of 
CellCarta. CMS is a scientific advisor to and has received research funding from 
Enable Medicine, Inc., all outside of this work.

