
1. mSystems. 2021 Nov 16:e0104521. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.01045-21. [Epub ahead of
print]

Short-Chain Fatty Acids Reduced Renal Calcium Oxalate Stones by Regulating the
Expression of Intestinal Oxalate Transporter SLC26A6.

Liu Y(#)(1), Jin X(#)(1), Ma Y(1), Jian Z(1), Wei Z(1), Xiang L(1), Sun Q(2), Qi 
S(3), Wang K(1), Li H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Institute of Urology (Laboratory of Reconstructive
Urology), West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, People's
Republic of China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Bio-resources and Eco-environment of the Ministry of
Education, College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan,
People's Republic of China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

Renal calcium oxalate (CaOx) stone is a common urologic disease with a high
prevalence and recurrence rate. However, short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) are less
often reported in the prevention of urolithiasis. This study aimed to explore the
effect of SCFAs on the renal CaOx stone formation and the underlying mechanisms. 
Ethylene glycol was used to induce renal CaOx crystals in rats. SCFAs (acetate,
propionate, or butyrate) were added as supplements to the drinking water with or 
without antibiotics. Because intestinal oxalate transporters SLC26A6 and SLC26A3 
regulate the excretion and absorption of oxalate in the intestine, we injected
adeno-associated virus 9 (AAV9)-SLC26A6-shRNA (short hairpin RNA) and
AAV9-SLC26A3 into the tail vein of rats to suppress SLC26A6 and overexpress
SLC26A3 expression in the intestine, respectively, to explore the role of SLC26A3
and SLC26A6 (SLC26A3/6) in the reduction of renal CaOx crystals induced by SCFAs.
Results showed that SCFAs reduced renal CaOx crystals and urinary oxalate levels 
but, however, increased the abundance of SCFA-producing bacteria and cecum SCFA
levels. SCFA supplements still reduced renal crystals and urinary oxalate after
gut microbiota depletion. Propionate and butyrate downregulated intestinal
oxalate transporter SLC26A3 expression, while acetate and propionate upregulated 
SLC26A6 expression, both in vivo and in vitro. AAV9-SLC26A3 exerted a protective 
effect against renal crystals, while AAV9-SLC26A6-shRNA contributed to the renal 
crystal formation even though the SCFAs were supplemented. In conclusion, SCFAs
could reduce urinary oxalate and renal CaOx stones through the oxalate
transporter SLC26A6 in the intestine. SCFAs may be new supplements for preventing
the formation of renal CaOx stones. IMPORTANCE Some studies found that the
relative abundances of short-chain-fatty-acid (SCFA)-producing bacteria were
lower in the gut microbiota of renal stone patients than healthy controls. Our
previous study demonstrated that SCFAs could reduce the formation of renal
calcium oxalate (CaOx) stones, but the mechanism is still unknown. In this study,
we found that SCFAs (acetate, propionate, and butyrate) reduced the formation of 
renal calcium oxalate (CaOx) crystals and the level of urinary oxalate. Depleting
gut microbiota increased the amount of renal crystals in model rats, and SCFA
supplements reduced renal crystals and urinary oxalate after gut microbiota
depletion. Intestinal oxalate transporter SLC26A6 was a direct target of SCFAs.
Our findings suggested that SCFAs could reduce urinary oxalate and renal CaOx
stones through the oxalate transporter SLC26A6 in the intestine. SCFAs may be new
supplements for preventing the formation of renal CaOx stones.

DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.01045-21 
PMCID: PMC8594443
PMID: 34783577 

