
1. Glob Health Med. 2021 Oct 31;3(5):335-342. doi: 10.35772/ghm.2021.01079.

Seamless support from screening to anti-HCV treatment and HCC/ decompensated
cirrhosis: Subsidy programs for HCV elimination.

Setoyama H(1)(2), Tanaka Y(1), Kanto T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Faculty of Life Sciences,
Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.
(2)Hepatitis Information Center, The Research Center for Hepatitis and
Immunology, National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Ichikawa, Japan.

Viral hepatitis poses a major public health problem in Japan. Chronic viral
hepatitis is a progressive liver disease that eventually develops into liver
cirrhosis and liver cancer. Since nucleic acid analog therapy for hepatitis B and
interferon-free therapy for hepatitis C have made it possible to control the
disease status or eliminate the viruses, it is very important that more people
receive hepatitis virus tests to confirm the presence of infection at an early
stage, and that patients with hepatitis detected by the tests receive appropriate
medical care. Currently, the government of Japan is implementing comprehensive
measures for hepatitis control based on five key strategies. Moreover, the goal
listed in the Basic Guidelines on Hepatitis Measures is to reduce the frequency
of progression of hepatitis to cirrhosis or liver cancer through a scheme
consisting of testing people for hepatitis, getting those who test positive to
visit a medical institution and receive treatment, and providing appropriate and 
high-quality hepatitis care through specialized medical institutions and regional
core centers for the management of liver disease. To achieve the goal, various
subsidy programs including an expense subsidy system for hepatitis treatment have
been implemented in Japan. It is important for healthcare professionals to have
sufficient knowledge of public support for efficient hepatitis C virus
(HCV)-related liver disease detection and care.

2021, National Center for Global Health and Medicine.

DOI: 10.35772/ghm.2021.01079 
PMCID: PMC8562098
PMID: 34782877 

Conflict of interest statement: Tatsuya Kanto receives lecture fees from Gilead
Sciences and Abbvie. Yasuhito Tanaka is currently conducting research sponsored
by Fujifilim Corp., Janssen Pharmaceutical K.K, Gilead Sciences, GlaxoSmithKline 
Pharmaceuticals Ltd, and Stanford University. Lecture fees are as follows:
Fujirebio Inc., Abbvie. and Gilead Sciences. Scholarship Donations from Abbvie.
The other authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.

