
1. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2021 Nov 18. doi: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.cn-001622. [Epub
ahead of print]

[Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy in a patient with rheumatoid
arthritis under salazosulfapyridine treatment].

[Article in Japanese]

Okazaki T(1), Kodama D(1), Yamadera M(2), Sugiyama Y(1), Tsuji H(2), Nishida
F(1), Ooka Y(1), Nakamichi K(3), Hashikawa K(1), Yanagihara T(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Osaka Police Hospital.
(2)Department of Pathology, Osaka Police Hospital.
(3)Department of Virology 1, National Institute of Infectious Diseases.
(4)Osaka Neurological Research Institute.

Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is a rare opportunistic
infection caused by JC virus (JCV) activation. We report an 85-years old man who 
had been diagnosed to have rheumatoid arthritis (RA) 1.5 years prior to diagnosis
of PML, and had been treated with salazosulfapyridine (SASP). He developed
weakness of the left upper limb, which progressed gradually for two months. A
neurological examination on admission revealed severe palsy of the left upper
limb without sensory disturbance, cognitive decline or gait disturbance. Brain
MRI revealed white matter lesions in the right frontal lobe around the precentral
gyrus. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination and peripheral lymphocyte counts
were normal. HIV was ruled out serologically. There were no findings suggestive
of malignancy. We suspected PML and stopped SASP. JCV-DNA was detected in CSF.
There were enlarged nuclei positive with VP-1 immunostaining in the brain biopsy 
materials. Thus, the diagnosis of PML was definitive. Paralysis of the left upper
limb began to improve one week after discontinuing SASP. Treatment with
mefloquine and mirtazapine was initiated, but he developed severe interstitial
pneumonia, which might be caused by mefloquine. Therefore, he underwent
rehabilitation without medication. JCV-DNA became undetectable and white matter
lesions decreased 6 months later. Paralysis improved and he had no problem with
activities of daily living a year later. The risk factor for PML has changed over
the last decade, and drugs such as biologics became significant risk factors for 
patients with autoimmune diseases. There are reports suggesting that systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE) and RA themselves might be independent risk factors for
PML. Although there is no previous report of SASP inducing PML, SASP might be the
culprit in our case. However, there is another possibility that SAPS and RA
worked synergistically for the onset of PML.

DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.cn-001622 
PMID: 34789625 

