
1. J Cell Biochem. 2021 Nov 15. doi: 10.1002/jcb.30181. [Epub ahead of print]

SARS-CoV-2 spike evolutionary behaviors; simulation of N501Y mutation outcomes in
terms of immunogenicity and structural characteristic.

Rostami N(1), Choupani E(2), Hernandez Y(3), Arab SS(4), Jazayeri SM(5), Gomari
MM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Arak University,
Arak, Iran.
(2)Department of Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Allied Medicine, Iran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
Arizona, USA.
(4)Department of Biophysics, School of Biological Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Department of Virology, School of Public Health, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Since the emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2), a large number of mutations in its genome have been reported. Some 
of the mutations occur in noncoding regions without affecting the pathobiology of
the virus, while mutations in coding regions are significant. One of the regions 
where a mutation can occur, affecting the function of the virus is at the
receptor-binding domain (RBD) of the spike protein. RBD interacts with
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) and facilitates the entry of the virus
into the host cells. There is a lot of focus on RBD mutations, especially the
displacement of N501Y which is observed in the UK/Kent, South Africa, and
Brazilian lineages of SARS-CoV-2. Our group utilizes computational biology
approaches such as immunoinformatics, protein-protein interaction analysis,
molecular dynamics, free energy computation, and tertiary structure analysis to
disclose the consequences of N501Y mutation at the molecular level. Surprisingly,
we discovered that this mutation reduces the immunogenicity of the spike protein;
also, displacement of Asn with Tyr reduces protein compactness and significantly 
increases the stability of the spike protein and its affinity to ACE2. Moreover, 
following the N501Y mutation secondary structure and folding of the spike protein
changed dramatically.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.30181 
PMID: 34783057 

