
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 17:JVI0173221. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01732-21. [Epub ahead of print]

In-depth characterization of the chikungunya virus replication cycle.

Reis EVS(1), Damas BM(1), Mendonça DC(1), Abrahão JS(1), Bonjardim CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de vírus, Departamento de Microbiologia, Instituto de Ciências
Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais,
Brazil.

The chikungunya virus has spread globally with a remarkably high attack rate.
Infection causes arthralgic sequelae that can last for years. Nevertheless, there
are no specific drugs or vaccines to contain the virus. Understanding the biology
of the virus, such as its replication cycle, is a powerful tool to identify new
drugs and comprehend virus-host interactions. Even though the chikungunya virus
has been known for a long time (first described in 1952), many aspects of the
replication cycle remain unclear. Furthermore, part of the cycle is based on
observations of other alphaviruses. In this study, we used electron and scanning 
microscopy, as well as biological assays, to analyze and investigate the stages
of the chikungunya virus replication cycle. Based on our data, we found other
infection cellular activities than those usually described for the chikungunya
virus replication cycle, i.e. we show particles enveloping intracellularly
without budding in a membrane-delimited morphogenesis area; and we also observed 
virion release by membrane protrusions. Our work provides novel details regarding
the biology of chikungunya virus and fills gaps in our knowledge of its
replication cycle. These findings may contribute to a better understanding of
virus-host interactions and support the development of antivirals. IMPORTANCE The
understanding of virus biology is essential to containing virus dissemination,
and exploring the virus replication cycle is a powerful tool to do this. There
are many points in the biology of the chikungunya virus that need to be
clarified, especially regarding its replication cycle. Our incomplete
understanding of chikungunya virus infection stages is based on studies with
other alphaviruses. We systematized the chikungunya virus replication cycle using
microscopic imaging in the order of infection stages: entry, replication, protein
synthesis, assembly/morphogenesis, and release. The imaging evidence shows novel 
points in the replication cycle of enveloping without budding, as well as
particle release by cell membrane protrusion.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01732-21 
PMID: 34787452 

