
1. CMAJ Open. 2021 Nov 16;9(4):E988-E997. doi: 10.9778/cmajo.20210100. Print 2021
Oct-Dec.

Acute mental health service use following onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in
Ontario, Canada: a trend analysis.

Saunders NR(1), Toulany A(2), Deb B(2), Strauss R(2), Vigod SN(2), Guttmann A(2),
Chiu M(2), Huang A(2), Fung K(2), Chen S(2), Kurdyak P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics (Saunders, Toulany, Guttmann), University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ont.; The Hospital for Sick Children (Toulany), Toronto, Ont.; 
Child Health Evaluative Sciences (Saunders, Toulany), SickKids Research
Institute, Toronto, Ont.; ICES (Saunders, Deb, Strauss, Vigod, Guttmann, Chiu,
Huang, Fung, Chen), Toronto, Ont.; Institute of Health Policy, Management and
Evaluation (Vigod, Chiu, Kurdyak), University of Toronto, Toronto, Ont.; Edwin
S.H. Leong Centre for Healthy Children (Guttmann), University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ont.; Women's College Hospital and Women's College Research Institute
(Vigod, Kurdyak), Toronto, Ont.; Department of Psychiatry (Vigod, Kurdyak),
Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ont.; Centre for
Addiction and Mental Health (Kurdyak), Toronto, Ont.
Natasha.saunders@sickkids.ca.
(2)Department of Paediatrics (Saunders, Toulany, Guttmann), University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ont.; The Hospital for Sick Children (Toulany), Toronto, Ont.; 
Child Health Evaluative Sciences (Saunders, Toulany), SickKids Research
Institute, Toronto, Ont.; ICES (Saunders, Deb, Strauss, Vigod, Guttmann, Chiu,
Huang, Fung, Chen), Toronto, Ont.; Institute of Health Policy, Management and
Evaluation (Vigod, Chiu, Kurdyak), University of Toronto, Toronto, Ont.; Edwin
S.H. Leong Centre for Healthy Children (Guttmann), University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ont.; Women's College Hospital and Women's College Research Institute
(Vigod, Kurdyak), Toronto, Ont.; Department of Psychiatry (Vigod, Kurdyak),
Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ont.; Centre for
Addiction and Mental Health (Kurdyak), Toronto, Ont.

BACKGROUND: The extent to which heightened distress during the COVID-19 pandemic 
translated to increases in severe mental health outcomes is unknown. We examined 
trends in psychiatric presentations to acute care settings in the first 12 months
after onset of the pandemic.
METHODS: This was a trends analysis of administrative population data in Ontario,
Canada. We examined rates of hospitalizations and emergency department visits for
mental health diagnoses overall and stratified by sex, age and diagnostic
grouping (e.g., mood disorders, anxiety disorders, psychotic disorders), as well 
as visits for intentional self-injury for people aged 10 to 105 years, from
January 2019 to March 2021. We used Joinpoint regression to identify significant 
inflection points after the onset of the pandemic in March 2020.
RESULTS: Among the 12 968 100 people included in our analysis, rates of mental
health-related hospitalizations and emergency department visits declined
immediately after the onset of the pandemic (peak overall decline of 30%
[hospitalizations] and 37% [emergency department visits] compared to April 2019) 
and returned to near prepandemic levels by March 2021. Compared to April 2019,
visits for intentional self-injury declined by 33% and remained below prepandemic
levels until March 2021. We observed the largest declines in service use among
adolescents aged 14 to 17 years (55% decline in hospitalizations, 58% decline in 
emergency department visits) and 10 to 13 years (56% decline in self-injury), and
for those with substance-related disorders (33% decline in emergency department
visits) and anxiety disorders (61% decline in hospitalizations).
INTERPRETATION: Contrary to expectations, the abrupt decline in acute mental
health service use immediately after the onset of the pandemic and the return to 
near prepandemic levels that we observed suggest that changes and stressors in
the first 12 months of the pandemic did not translate to increased service use.
Continued surveillance of acute mental health service use is warranted.

© 2021 CMA Joule Inc. or its licensors.

DOI: 10.9778/cmajo.20210100 
PMCID: PMC8598241
PMID: 34785528  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: Natasha Saunders reports
receiving an editorial honorarium from Archives of Diseases in Childhood and an
honorarium from the M.S.I. Foundation, outside the submitted work. Simone Vigod
reports receiving royalties from Up To Date, outside the submitted work.

