
1. Microb Biotechnol. 2021 Nov 17. doi: 10.1111/1751-7915.13974. [Epub ahead of
print]

mRNA vaccines against COVID-19: a showcase for the importance of microbial
biotechnology.

Brüssow H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Technology, Department of Biosystems, KU Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium.

Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna developed in record time mRNA vaccines against
COVID-19 of high efficacy. The modest protection achieved with a similarly
designed mRNA from CureVac underlines the importance of biotechnological details 
in formulation such as replacement of uridine by pseudouridine in the mRNA
encoding the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein or the lipid composition of the
nanoparticle coating the mRNA. Phase 3 vaccine trials and vaccine studies in
special subject groups as well observational studies in whole populations
confirmed the real-world vaccine efficacy against symptomatic disease,
particularly against severe COVID-19 cases and to a lesser extent against mild
SARS-CoV-2 infections. mRNA vaccine protection extended also to the alpha and
beta variant viruses. The surge of delta variants led to an increase of
infections and cases even in populations which achieved high vaccine coverage.
This efficacy decline resulted to a lesser extent from a weaker neutralization of
the delta variant but mostly from a waning vaccine protection over time. Data
from Israel documented the efficacy of a third 'booster' injection 5 months after
the second injection in older segments of the population. Adverse reactions
consisted of transient injection site pain, headache, muscle pain, fatigue, fever
and chills. Extensive surveillance studies documented a good safety profile
revealing only a non-significant increase in transient facial nerve paralysis and
a significant, but modest increase in myocarditis in vaccinated young males that 
was lower than the myocarditis risk induced by SARS-CoV-2 infection.

© 2021 The Authors. Microbial Biotechnology published by Society for Applied
Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1751-7915.13974 
PMID: 34788497 

