
1. Vertex. 2021 Sep;XXXII(153):53-69.

[Association of COVID-19 dissemination with symptoms of anxiety and depression
among university students].

[Article in Spanish]

Vigo D(1), Jones L(2), Munthali R(2), Pei J(2), Westenberg J(2), Munro L(2),
Judkowicz C(2), Wang AY(2), Van den Adel B(2), Dulai J(2), Krausz M(2), Auerbach 
RP(3), Bruffaerts R(4), Yatham L(2), Gadermann A(5), Rush B(6), Xie H(7),
Pendakur K(8), Richardson C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of British Columbia, Canada. E-mail:
daniel.vigo@ubc.ca.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of British Columbia, Canada.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University, New York, United States.
(4)Center for Public Health Psychiatry, Universitair Psychiatrisch Centrum KU
Leuven, Belgium.
(5)School of Population and Public Health, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(6)Department of Psychiatry & School of Public Health, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada.
(7)Faculty of Health Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British
Columbia, Canada.
(8)Department of Economics, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia,
Canada.

BACKGROUND: Evidence about the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the mental
health of specific subpopulations- such as university students-is needed as
communities prepare for future waves.
AIMS: To study the association of proximity of COVID-19 with symptoms of anxiety 
and depression in university students.
METHODS: This trend study analyzed weekly cross-sectional surveys of
probabilistic samples of students from the University of British Columbia for 13 
weeks through the first wave of COVID-19. The main variable assessed was
propinquity of COVID-19, defined as "knowing someone who tested positive for
COVID-19", which was specified at different levels: knowing someone anywhere
globally, in Canada, in Vancouver, in their course, or at home. Proximity was
included in multivariable linear regressions to assess its association with
primary outcomes, including 30-day symptoms of anxiety and/or depression.
RESULTS: Of 1,388 respondents (adjusted response rate=50%), 5.6% knew someone
with COVID-19 in Vancouver, 0.8% in their course, and 0.3% at home. Ten percent
were overwhelmed and unable to access help. Knowing someone in Vancouver was
associated with an 11 percentage-point increase in the probability of 30-day
anxiety symptoms (SE=0,05; p≤0,05), moderated by gender, with a significant
interaction of the exposure and being female (coefficient= 20(SE=0,09), p≤0,05). 
No association was found with depressive symptoms.
CONCLUSION: Propinquity of COVID-19 cases may increase the likelihood of anxiety 
symptoms in students, particularly amongst men. Most students report coping well,
but additional supports are needed for an emotionally overwhelmed minority who
report being unable to access help.


PMID: 34783787  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

