
1. J Immunother Cancer. 2021 Nov;9(11). pii: e003743. doi: 10.1136/jitc-2021-003743.

Treatment-free survival over extended follow-up of patients with advanced
melanoma treated with immune checkpoint inhibitors in CheckMate 067.

Regan MM(1)(2), Mantia CM(3)(2), Werner L(3), Tarhini AA(4), Larkin J(5), Stephen
Hodi F(3)(2), Wolchok J(6)(7), Postow MA(6)(7), Stwalley B(8), Moshyk A(8),
Ritchings C(8), Re S(8), van Dijck W(9), McDermott DF(2)(10), Atkins MB(11).

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
mregan@jimmy.harvard.edu.
(2)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)H Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, Florida, USA.
(5)The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(6)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA.
(7)Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, USA.
(8)Bristol Myers Squibb, Princeton, New Jersey, USA.
(9)Bristol Myers Squibb, Braine-l'Alleud, Belgium.
(10)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(11)Georgetown Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Washington, District of
Columbia, USA.

BACKGROUND: Treatment-free survival (TFS) characterizes disease control after
discontinuation of immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) until subsequent therapy
or death. We previously evaluated TFS in a pooled analysis of the CheckMate 067
and CheckMate 069 trials of the ICIs nivolumab and ipilimumab, alone or in
combination, in patients with advanced melanoma after minimum follow-up of 36
months. This analysis investigated TFS differences between treatments in
CheckMate 067 after a minimum follow-up of 60 months, and their relation to
overall survival (OS) differences.
METHODS: Data were from 937 patients who initiated treatment (nivolumab plus
ipilimumab, nivolumab, or ipilimumab) in CheckMate 067 (NCT01844505). TFS was
defined as the area between the Kaplan-Meier curves for time to protocol therapy 
cessation and time to subsequent systemic therapy initiation or death, each
measured from randomization. TFS was partitioned as time with and without
toxicity. Toxicity included persistent and late-onset grade ≥2 select
treatment-related adverse events (ie, those of potential immunologic etiology).
The area between Kaplan-Meier curves was estimated by the difference in 60-month 
restricted-mean times of the endpoints. Between-group differences were estimated 
with bootstrapped 95% CIs.
RESULTS: At 60 months from randomization, 39%, 24%, and 11% of patients assigned 
to treatment with nivolumab plus ipilimumab, nivolumab, and ipilimumab,
respectively, had survived and were treatment-free. The 60-month mean TFS was
approximately twice as long with the combination (19.7 months) than with
nivolumab (9.9 months; absolute difference, 9.8 (95% CI 6.7 to 12.8)) or
ipilimumab (11.9 months; absolute difference, 7.8 (95% CI 4.6 to 11.0)). In the
respective groups, mean TFS represented 33% (8% with and 25% without toxicity),
17% (2% and 14%), and 20% (3% and 17%) of the 60-month period. Compared with
36-month estimates, mean TFS over the 60-month period represented slightly
greater percentages of time in the nivolumab-containing regimen groups and a
lesser percentage in the ipilimumab group. TFS differences between the
combination and either monotherapy increased with longer follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: Along with improved long-term OS with the nivolumab-containing
regimens versus ipilimumab, TFS without toxicity was sustained with nivolumab
plus ipilimumab versus either monotherapy, demonstrating larger between-group
differences with extended follow-up.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jitc-2021-003743 
PMCID: PMC8606772
PMID: 34799400 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: MMR reports receiving grants
and non-financial support from Bristol Myers Squibb for the work in this
publication; grants and non-financial support (to her institution) for clinical
trials from AstraZeneca, Ferring, Ipsen, Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, Pierre Fabre,
Roche, and TerSera; grants from Bayer and Bristol Myers Squibb;
consulting/advisory fees from Ipsen/Debiopharm; personal fees from Bristol Myers 
Squibb and Tolmar Pharmaceuticals; and non-financial support from Bristol Myers
Squibb. CMM reports institutional support for statistical analysis and writing
assistance from Bristol Myers Squibb for the work in this publication. LW reports
receiving grants from Bristol Myers Squibb for the work in this publication. AAT 
reports receiving institutional grants from Bristol Myers Squibb,
Genentech-Roche, Merck, and OncoSec; personal fees for advisory/consulting roles 
from Array Biopharma, BioNTech, Bristol Myers Squibb, Clinigen, EMD Serono,
Genentech-Roche, Immunocore, Merck, NewLink Genetics, Novartis, Partner
Therapeutics, Pfizer, and Sanofi-Genzyme/Regeneron. JL reports receiving personal
fees from AIM, AstraZeneca, Bioevents, Bristol Myers Squibb, BUG, ESMO, EUSA
Pharma, Incyte, KCA, MedConcept, Merck, NCRI, Novartis, Pfizer, Pierre Fabre,
Roche, RVMais, and Syneos Health; consultancy fees from Aptitude, Bristol Myers
Squibb, Calithera, Ervaxx, Immunocore, Ipsen, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Novartis,
Pfizer, Roche, Seagen, and Ultimovacs; and research support from Achilles, Aveo, 
Bristol Myers Squibb, Convance, Immunocore, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Nektar,
Novartis, Pfizer, Pharmacyclics, and Roche. FSH reports receiving non-financial
support from Bristol Myers Squibb for the work in this publication; receiving
grants/royalties to his institution from Novartis; personal fees for
consultant/advisory roles from Aduro, Apricity, Bicara, Bioentre, Checkpoint
Therapeutics, Compass Therapeutics, Eisai, Genentech/Roche, Idera, Immunocore,
Iovance, Novartis, Pionyr, Psioxus Therapeutics, Sanofi, Surface, Takeda, and
Trillium; receiving equity from Apricity, Bicara, and Pionyr; receiving other
fees from Gossamer; having pending patents and receiving royalties for methods
for treating MICA-related disorders (#20100111973); having pending patents for
angiopoiten-2 biomarkers predictive of anti-immune checkpoint response
(#20170248603), compositions and methods for identification, assessment,
prevention, and treatment of melanoma using PD-L1 isoforms (#20160340407),
therapeutic peptides (#20160046716; #20140004112; #20170022275; #20170008962),
and anti-galectin antibody biomarkers predictive of anti-immune checkpoint and
anti-angiogenesis responses (#20170343552); and holding issued patents for tumor 
antigens and uses thereof (#7250291), therapeutic peptides (#9402905), vaccine
compositions and methods for restoring NKG2D pathway function against cancers
(#10279021), antibodies that bind to MHC class I polypeptide-related sequence A
(#10106611). JDW reports receiving grants and consultancy fees from Bristol Myers
Squibb for the work in this publication; consultancy fees from Adaptive Biotech, 
Amgen, Apricity, Ascentage Pharma, Astellas, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Beigene,
Boehringer Ingelheim, Chugai, Daiichi Sankyo, Dragonfly, Eli Lilly, Elucida, F
Star, Georgiamune, Idera, Imvaq, Kyowa Hakko Kirin, Linneaus, Merck, Polynoma,
Psioxus, Recepta, Sellas, Serametrix, Surface Oncology, Syndax, Syntalogic,
Takara Bio, Trieza, Trishula, Truvax, and Werewolf Therapeutics; equity from
Adaptive Biotech, Apricity, Arsenal IO, Beigene, Georgiamune, Imvaq, Linneaus,
Serametrix, and Tizona Pharmaceuticals; patents pending for anti-CD40 agonist
monoclonal antibody fused to monophosphoryl lipid A for cancer therapy, CAR+ T
cells targeting differentiation antigens as means to treat cancer, engineered
vaccinia viruses for cancer immunotherapy, heteroclitic cancer vaccines,
identifying and treating subjects at risk for checkpoint blockade therapy
associated colitis, immunosuppressive follicular helper-like T cells modulated by
immune checkpoint blockade, phosphatidylserine targeting agents and uses thereof 
for adoptive T-cell therapies, and recombinant poxviruses for cancer
immunotherapy; patents issued for alphavirus replicon particles expressing TRP2, 
anti-CTLA4 antibodies, anti-GITR antibodies and methods of use thereof, anti-PD1 
antibody, myeloid-derived suppressor cell assay, Newcastle disease viruses for
cancer therapy, and xenogeneic DNA vaccines; patents licensed for anti-CTLA-4
antibodies (licensee: Agenus), anti-GITR antibodies and methods of use thereof
(licensee: Agenus/Incyte), anti-PD1 antibody (licensee: Agenus), myeloid-derived 
suppressor cell assay (licensee: Serametrix), and xenogeneic DNA vaccines
(licensee: Meriel); patent royalties for myeloid-derived suppressor cell assay
and xenogeneic DNA vaccines. MAP reports receiving personal fees from Aduro,
Array BioPharma, Bristol Myers Squibb, Eisai, Incyte, Merck, NewLink Genetics,
Novartis, and Pfizer; grants from Array BioPharma, AstraZeneca, Bristol Myers
Squibb, Infinity, Merck, Novartis, and RGenix. BS, AM, and SR report being an
employee of and holding shares in Bristol Myers Squibb. CR and WvD report being
an employee of Bristol Myers Squibb. DFM reports receiving honoraria for
consulting from Bristol Myers Squibb, Alkermes, Calithera Biosciences, Eisai, Eli
Lilly, EMD Serono, Iovance, Merck, Pfizer, and Werewolf Therapeutics; and
research support from Alkermes, Bristol Myers Squibb, Exelixis, Genentech, Merck,
Pfizer, and X4 Pharma. MBA reports receiving grants from Bristol Myers Squibb and
Merck; personal fees for consulting/advisory roles from Adagene, Agenus,
Apexigen, Arrowhead, Asher Bio, AstraZeneca, Aveo, Bristol Myers Squibb,
Calithera, Eisai, Elpis, Exelixis, Genetech-Roche, Idera, Iovance, Leads Bio,
Merck, Neoleukin, Novartis, Pfizer, Pyxis Oncology, Scholar Rock, Surface, and
Werewolf; and equity from Pyxis Oncology and Werewolf Therapeutics.

