
1. J Photochem Photobiol B. 2021 Nov 13;226:112357. doi:
10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2021.112357. [Epub ahead of print]

Ultraviolet-A light increases mitochondrial anti-viral signaling protein in
confluent human tracheal cells via cell-cell signaling.

Leite G(1), Rezaie A(2), Mathur R(3), Barlow GM(1), Melmed GY(4), Pimentel M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Medically Associated Science and Technology (MAST) Program, Cedars-Sinai, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Medically Associated Science and Technology (MAST) Program, Cedars-Sinai, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA; Karsh Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology,
Cedars-Sinai, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Medically Associated Science and Technology (MAST) Program, Cedars-Sinai, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA; Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Department 
of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Karsh Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Cedars-Sinai, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(5)Medically Associated Science and Technology (MAST) Program, Cedars-Sinai, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA; Karsh Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology,
Cedars-Sinai, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic address: mark.pimentel@cshs.org.

Mitochondrial antiviral signaling (MAVS) protein mediates innate antiviral
responses, including responses to certain coronaviruses such as severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2). We have previously shown that
ultraviolet-A (UVA) therapy can prevent virus-induced cell death in human
ciliated tracheal epithelial cells (HTEpC) infected with coronavirus-229E
(CoV-229E), and results in increased intracellular levels of MAVS. In this study,
we explored the mechanisms by which UVA light can activate MAVS, and whether
local UVA light application can activate MAVS at locations distant from the light
source (e.g. via cell-to-cell communication). MAVS levels were compared in HTEpC 
exposed to 2 mW/cm2 narrow band (NB)-UVA for 20 min and in unexposed controls at 
30-40% and at 100% confluency, and in unexposed HTEpC treated with supernatants
or lysates from UVA-exposed cells or from unexposed controls. MAVS was also
assessed in different sections of confluent monolayer plates where only one
section was exposed to NB-UVA. Our results showed that UVA increases the
expression of MAVS protein. Further, cells in a confluent monolayer exposed to
UVA conferred an elevation in MAVS in cells adjacent to the exposed section, and 
also in cells in the most distant sections which were not exposed to UVA. In this
study, human ciliated tracheal epithelial cells exposed to UVA demonstrate
increased MAVS protein, and also appear to transmit this influence to confluent
cells not exposed to UVA, likely via cell-cell signaling.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2021.112357 
PMCID: PMC8590474
PMID: 34798503 

