
1. Vaccine. 2021 Nov 16. pii: S0264-410X(21)01382-7. doi:
10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.048. [Epub ahead of print]

Meeting report: CEPI consultation on accelerating access to novel vaccines
against emerging infectious diseases for pregnant and lactating women, London,
12-13 February 2020.

Voss G(1), Jacquet JM(2), Tornieporth N(3), Kampmann B(4), Karron R(5), Meulen
AS(6), Chen R(7), Gruber M(8), Lurie N(2), Weller C(9), Cramer JP(2), Saville
M(2), Darko M(10).

Author information: 
(1)Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness and Innovation, London, UK. Electronic
address: Gerald.voss@cepi.net.
(2)Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness and Innovation, London, UK.
(3)University of Applied Sciences and Arts, Hanover, Germany.
(4)The Vaccine Centre, Faculty of Infectious Diseases, London School of Hygiene
and Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(5)Center for Immunization Research, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public
Health, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(6)Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Seattle, WA, USA.
(7)Brighton Collaboration, Task Force for Global Health, Decatur, GA, USA.
(8)Office of Vaccines Research and Review, Center for Biologics Evaluation and
Research, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA.
(9)Vaccines Programme, Wellcome Trust, London, UK.
(10)Food and Drugs Authority, Cantonments, Accra, Ghana.

Infectious diseases may cause serious morbidity and mortality in pregnant women, 
their foetuses, and infants; the risk associated with any newly emerging
infectious disease (EID) is likely unknown at the time of its emergence. While
the ongoing SARS-CoV-2 pandemic shows that the development of vaccines against
new pathogens can be considerably accelerated, the immunization of pregnant women
generally lags behind the general population. Guided by the priority pathogen
list for WHO's R&D Blueprint for Action to Prevent Epidemics, this workshop
sought to define the evidence needed for use of vaccines against EIDs in pregnant
and lactating women, using Lassa fever as a model. Close to 60 maternal
immunization (MI) and vaccine safety experts, regulators, vaccine developers,
Lassa fever experts, and investigators from Lassa-affected countries examined the
critical steps for vaccine development and immunization decisions for pregnant
and lactating women. This paper reports on key themes and recommendations from
the workshop. Current practice still assumes the exclusion of pregnant women from
early vaccine trials. A shift in paradigm is needed to progress towards initial
inclusion of pregnant women in Phase 2 and 3 trials. Several practical avenues
were delineated. Participants agreed that vaccine platforms should be assessed
early for their suitability for maternal immunization. It was noted that, in some
cases, nonclinical data derived from assessing a given platform using other
antigens may be adequate evidence to proceed to a first clinical evaluation and
that concurrence from regulators may be sought with supporting rationale. For
clinical trials, essential prerequisites such as documenting the disease burden
in pregnant women, study site infrastructure, capabilities, and staff experience 
were noted. Early and sustained communication with the local community was
considered paramount in any program for the conduct of MI trials and planned
vaccine introduction.

Copyright © 2021.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.048 
PMCID: PMC8595925
PMID: 34799142 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

