
1. Acta Virol. 2021 Nov 19. doi: 10.4149/av_2021_405. [Epub ahead of print]

Detection of hepatitis through proteases and protease inhibitors genes expression
and identification of HCV untypable genotype in Abbottabad, Pakistan.

Zahid N, Ahmad R, Iqbal MS, Khan SA, Asghar SY, Shah MM.

Liver cancer is the 5th most common cancer caused mainly due to the late
detection of hepatitis. Therefore, the early detection of hepatitis through
genetic markers boosts effective and remedial management. In addition, to
determine the occurrence of hepatitis C virus (HCV), genotyping is indispensable 
as majority of hepatitis cases remain undiagnosed. The current study was designed
to find the gene expression of proteases and proteases inhibitors in different
hepatitis patients and to determine HCV genotypes mainly focusing on untypeable
genotypes of HCV in Abbottabad, Pakistan. PCR was conducted to find the
expression of proteases and protease inhibitors genes in hepatitis patients and
healthy individuals. HCV genotyping was done by PCR based method and untypeable
genotypes were sequenced and verified using online tools. Controlled individuals 
showed normal expression of cystatin C and leptin, low expression of cathepsin B 
while high expression of other studied genes including cathepsin D and G, TPP1
and serpin B1 could be seen. Hepatitis A patients showed high expression of
leptin while other genes showed low expression. Hepatitis B patients revealed
considerable variations in the cathepsin and cystatin C gene expression.
Therefore, low cystatin C (high cathepsin B) and/or high cystatin C (low
cathepsin B) levels can be regarded as a potential marker for hepatitis B.
Hepatitis C infected patients showed high gene expression of cystatin C and
leptin, so they could be useful markers for the diagnostics and prediction of the
severity of HCV infections. While genotyping findings showed that about 45% of
total PCR positive samples (110) were found to be of 3a genotype followed by 3b
in 18%, 1a in 13.6% and 1b in 10%. About 9% of infections turned out to be mixed 
infections, whereas only 4.5% were untraceable by our genotyping system.
Sequencing of untypeable genotypes and applying online tools revealed that the
described untypeable genotypes of HCV were in fact variants of 3a genotype.
Furthermore, full length characterization of these variants could help to
classify them into types and subtypes. Keywords: hepatitis; genotyping; genes
expression; proteases and protease inhibitors; ML; NJ.

DOI: 10.4149/av_2021_405 
PMID: 34796714 

