
1. BMJ Open. 2021 Nov 18;11(11):e053281. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-053281.

Stratification of the risk of developing severe or lethal Covid-19 using a new
score from a large Italian population: a population-based cohort study.

Corrao G(1)(2), Rea F(3)(2), Carle F(2)(4), Scondotto S(2)(5), Allotta A(5),
Lepore V(6), D'Ettorre A(6), Tanzarella C(6), Vittori P(7), Abena S(7), Iommi
M(4), Spazzafumo L(2)(8), Ercolanoni M(9), Blaco R(9), Carbone S(10), Giordani
C(10), Manfellotto D(11), Galli M(12), Mancia G(13)(14); 'Monitoring and
Assessing care Pathways (MAP)' working group of the Italian Ministry of Health.

Collaborators: Bellentani D, Carbone S, Ceccolini C, Feo A, Giordani C,
Mariniello R, Visca M, Magliocchetti N, Romano G, Lora A, Pisanti P, Zanini R,
Carle F, Iommi M, Skrami E, Cantarutti A, Corrao G, Compagnoni MM, Pugni P, Rea
F, Davoli M, Martino MD, Lallo A, Vittori P, Vuillermin G, Bernardo A, Frusciante
A, Belotti L, Palma R, Lenarda AD, Prezza M, Fusco D, Marinacci C, Leoni O,
Spazzafumo L, Pizzi S, Gallo L, Attolini E, Lepore V, Scondotto S, Luca G,
Francesconi P, Rizzuti C, Avossa F, Vigna S, Dondi L, Martini N, Pedrini A,
Piccinni C, Cosentino M, Marvulli MG, Maggioni A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics and Quantitative Methods, University of
Milan-Bicocca, Milan, Italy giovanni.corrao@unimib.it.
(2)National Centre for Healthcare Research and Pharmacoepidemiology, University
of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Statistics and Quantitative Methods, University of
Milan-Bicocca, Milan, Italy.
(4)Center of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Polytechnic University of Marche,
Ancona, Italy.
(5)Department of Health Services and Epidemiological Observatory, Regional Health
Authority of Sicily, Palermo, Italy.
(6)Regional Health Agency of Puglia, Bari, Italy.
(7)Regional Health Authority, Aosta, Italy.
(8)Regional Health Agency of Marche, Ancona, Italy.
(9)Regional Welfare Service, Milan, Italy.
(10)Department of Health Planning, Italian Health Ministry, Rome, Italy.
(11)Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Fatebenefratelli, Rome, Italy.
(12)Institute of Tropical and Infectious Diseases, University of Milan L Sacco
Hospital, Milan, Italy.
(13)University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy.
(14)Policlinico di Monza, Monza, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: To develop a population-based risk stratification model (COVID-19
Vulnerability Score) for predicting severe/fatal clinical manifestations of
SARS-CoV-2 infection, using the multiple source information provided by the
healthcare utilisation databases of the Italian National Health Service.
DESIGN: Retrospective observational cohort study.
SETTING: Population-based study using the healthcare utilisation database from
five Italian regions.
PARTICIPANTS: Beneficiaries of the National Health Service, aged 18-79 years, who
had the residentship in the five participating regions. Residents in a nursing
home were not included. The model was built from the 7 655 502 residents of
Lombardy region.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: The score included gender, age and 29 conditions/diseases
selected from a list of 61 conditions which independently predicted the primary
outcome, that is, severe (intensive care unit admission) or fatal manifestation
of COVID-19 experienced during the first epidemic wave (until June 2020). The
score performance was validated by applying the model to several validation sets,
that is, Lombardy population (second epidemic wave), and the other four Italian
regions (entire 2020) for a total of about 15.4 million individuals and 7031
outcomes. Predictive performance was assessed by discrimination (areas under the 
receiver operating characteristic curve) and calibration (plot of observed vs
predicted outcomes).
RESULTS: We observed a clear positive trend towards increasing outcome incidence 
as the score increased. The areas under the receiver operating characteristic
curve of the COVID-19 Vulnerability Score ranged from 0.85 to 0.88, which
compared favourably with the areas of generic scores such as the Charlson
Comorbidity Score (0.60). A remarkable performance of the score on the
calibration of observed and predicted outcome probability was also observed.
CONCLUSIONS: A score based on data used for public health management accurately
predicted the occurrence of severe/fatal manifestations of COVID-19. Use of this 
score may help health decision-makers to more accurately identify high-risk
citizens who need early preventive or treatment interventions.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-053281 
PMCID: PMC8602929
PMID: 34794995  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: GC received research support
from the European Community (EC), the Italian Agency of Drug (AIFA), the Italian 
Ministry of Education, University and Research (MIUR), and the Italian Health
Ministry. He took part in a variety of projects that were funded by
pharmaceutical companies (ie, Novartis, GSK, Roche, AMGEN and BMS). He also
received honoraria as member of Advisory Board from Roche. GM received honoraria 
for participation as speaker/chairman in national/international meetings from
Boehringer Ingelheim, Ferrer, Medtronic, Menarini, Merck Serono, Recordati and
Servier.

