
1. BMJ. 2021 Nov 18;375:e066965. doi: 10.1136/bmj-2021-066965.

Prescription opioid treatment for non-cancer pain and initiation of injection
drug use: large retrospective cohort study.

Wilton J(1), Abdia Y(1)(2), Chong M(1), Karim ME(2)(3), Wong S(1), MacInnes
A(4)(5), Balshaw R(6), Zhao B(1), Gomes T(7)(8)(9), Yu A(1), Alvarez M(1), Dart
RC(10)(11), Krajden M(1)(12), Buxton JA(13)(2), Janjua NZ(1)(2), Purssell
R(1)(14).

Author information: 
(1)British Columbia Centre for Disease Control, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(2)School of Population and Public Health, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(3)Centre for Health Evaluation and Outcome Sciences, St Paul's Hospital
Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(4)Pain Management Clinic, JPOCSC, Fraser Health Authority, Surrey, BC, Canada.
(5)Department of Anaesthesiology, Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Faculty of
Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(6)George and Fay Yee Centre for Healthcare Innovation, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
(7)Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(8)Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St Michael's Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(9)ICES, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(10)Rocky Mountain Poison and Drug Safety, Denver Health and Hospital Authority, 
Denver, CO, USA.
(11)Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences
Center, Denver, CO, USA.
(12)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(13)British Columbia Centre for Disease Control, Vancouver, BC, Canada
jane.buxton@bccdc.ca.
(14)Department of Emergency Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
BC, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the association between long term prescription opioid
treatment medically dispensed for non-cancer pain and the initiation of injection
drug use (IDU) among individuals without a history of substance use.
DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study.
SETTING: Large administrative data source (containing information for about 1.7
million individuals tested for hepatitis C virus or HIV in British Columbia,
Canada) with linkage to administrative health databases, including dispensations 
from community pharmacies.
PARTICIPANTS: Individuals age 11-65 years and without a history of substance use 
(except alcohol) at baseline.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Episodes of prescription opioid use for non-cancer pain
were identified based on drugs dispensed between 2000 and 2015. Episodes were
classified by the increasing length and intensity of opioid use (acute (lasting
<90 episode days), episodic (lasting ≥90 episode days; with <90 days' drug supply
and/or <50% episode intensity), and chronic (lasting ≥90 episode days; with ≥90
days' drug supply and ≥50% episode intensity)). People with a chronic episode
were matched 1:1:1:1 on socioeconomic variables to those with episodic or acute
episodes and to those who were opioid naive. IDU initiation was identified by a
validated administrative algorithm with high specificity. Cox models weighted by 
inverse probability of treatment weights assessed the association between opioid 
use category (chronic, episodic, acute, opioid naive) and IDU initiation.
RESULTS: 59 804 participants (14 951 people from each opioid use category) were
included in the matched cohort, and followed for a median of 5.8 years. 1149
participants initiated IDU. Cumulative probability of IDU initiation at five
years was highest for participants with chronic opioid use (4.0%), followed by
those with episodic use (1.3%) and acute use (0.7%), and those who were opioid
naive (0.4%). In the inverse probability of treatment weighted Cox model, risk of
IDU initiation was 8.4 times higher for those with chronic opioid use versus
those who were opioid naive (95% confidence interval 6.4 to 10.9). In a
sensitivity analysis limited to individuals with a history of chronic pain,
cumulative risk for those with chronic use (3.4% within five years) was lower
than the primary results, but the relative risk was not (hazard ratio 9.7 (95%
confidence interval 6.5 to 14.5)). IDU initiation was more frequent at higher
opioid doses and younger ages.
CONCLUSIONS: The rate of IDU initiation among individuals who received chronic
prescription opioid treatment for non-cancer pain was infrequent overall (3-4%
within five years) but about eight times higher than among opioid naive
individuals. These findings could have implications for strategies to prevent IDU
initiation, but should not be used as a reason to support involuntary tapering or
discontinuation of long term prescription opioid treatment.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj-2021-066965 
PMCID: PMC8600402
PMID: 34794949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: All authors have completed
the ICMJE uniform disclosure form at www.icmje.org/disclosure-of-interest/ and
declare: support from British Columbia Centre for Disease Control and the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research for the submitted work; outside of the
submitted work, MK has received research grant funding via his institution from
Roche Molecular Systems, Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics, and Hologic; MEK has
received consulting fees from Biogen; and RCD has performed research and
consulted on the over-the-counter product Tylenol for the consumer division of
Johnson & Johnson. RCD is executive director of the RADARS System, which performs
post-marketing surveillance of prescription drugs. This information is primarily 
used for regulatory purposes. Subscribers to the RADARS System include the US
Food and Drug Administration and some manufacturers of prescription analgesics or
treatment for opioid addiction. These companies include Collegium, Purdue Pharma,
and Indivior. All other authors report no financial relationships with any
organisations that might have an interest in the submitted work in the previous
three years. All authors report no other relationships or activities that could
appear to have influenced the submitted work.

