
1. Vet Med Sci. 2021 Nov 17. doi: 10.1002/vms3.665. [Epub ahead of print]

Health status of free-ranging pure and cross-mixed miniature swine population
from Northeast Spain.

Soler V(1), Casas E(2), Closa-Sebastià F(2), Sanz A(3), Martorell J(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Servei d´Animals Exòtics, Fundació Hospital Clínic Veterinari, Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Vets and Wildlife, Terrasa, Spain.
(3)Servei de Prevenció en Salut Animal, Departament d´Agricultura, Ramaderia,
Pesca i Alimentació, Generalitat de Catalunya, Gran Vía de les Corts Catalanes,
Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Departament de Medicina i Cirurgía Animals, Facultat de Veterinaria,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Miniature pigs have gained popularity as companion animals in the
recent years in Spain. Due to the fact that their abandonment and crossing breeds
with wild boars can cause severe problems, investigation about the health status 
is needed.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to determine their health status according 
to the clinical findings during physical examination and the results of antibody 
serology tests against selected infectious diseases.
METHODS: Two-hundred and eleven miniature pigs (Sus scrofa) were included in the 
study. Their origin, age, sex, housing conditions and diet were recorded.
RESULTS: The housing of the animals ranged from wild animals to ones living in
animal sanctuaries. The diet varied from a natural one in the wild to commercial 
and homemade food. Thirty animals out of two-hundred and eleven were hybrids
between miniature pigs and wild boars according to morphological characteristics.
Antibody serology techniques of Influenza A virus, Hepatitis E virus,
brucellosis, tuberculosis, African swine fever, Classical swine fever and
Aujeszky's disease was performed. The prevalence for Influenza A was 5.30%, for
Hepatitis E was 5.35% and the rest tested negative. It is important to control
and monitor these zoonotic infections to prevent Public Health problems.
CONCLUSIONS: The results obtained from this investigation demonstrated that the
animals' health status in this study is optimal and the diseases prevalence is
similar or minor when compared to previous studies. This study confirms the
hybridization of miniature pig and wild boar in Catalonia.

© 2021 The Authors. Veterinary Medicine and Science published by John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/vms3.665 
PMID: 34791799 

