
1. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2021 Nov 20. doi: 10.1007/s10096-021-04375-3.
[Epub ahead of print]

Impact of multiplexed respiratory viral panels on infection control measures and 
antimicrobial stewardship: a review of the literature.

Wils J(1), Saegeman V(2), Schuermans A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection Control, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
jensewils1987@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Infection Control, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Multiplexed respiratory viral panels (MRVP) have recently been added to the
diagnostic work-up of respiratory infections. This review provides a summary of
the main literature of MRVP for patients with regard to 3 different topics. Can
the results of MRVP reduce the inappropriate use of antibiotics, can they guide
the use of appropriate antiviral therapy and do they have an added value with
respect to infection control measures? Literature was searched for based on a
defined search string using both the PubMed and Embase database. Twenty-five
articles report on the impact of MRVP on antibiotic therapy. In all the articles 
where active antimicrobial stewardship was performed (e.g., education/advice on
interpreting results of MRVP) (N = 9), a reduction in antibiotic therapy was
shown (with exception of 2 studies). Three studies evaluating the effect of MRVP 
on antimicrobial use in a population that is not suspected of having bacterial
pneumonia (e.g., absence of radiology suggestive for bacterial infection or low
PCT) found a positive impact on antibiotic therapy. Eight studies with a short
TAT (< 7 h) had a positive impact on use of antibiotic therapy. Eleven studies
focused on the impact of MRVP on antiviral use. In contrast to antibiotic
reduction, all studies systematically objectified improved antiviral use as a
consequence of MRVP results. With regard to the impact of MRVP on infection
control, eleven articles were withheld. All these studies led to a more accurate 
use of infection control measures by detecting unidentified pathogens or stopping
isolation precautions in case of a negative MRVP result. MRVP don't reduce
antibiotic therapy in all populations. Reduction seems more likely if the
following factors are present: active antimicrobial stewardship, low likelihood
of a bacterial infection, and a short turnaround time to result. With respect to 
antiviral therapy, all studies have an impact but the targeted use of antivirals 
is so far not that evidence based for all viral respiratory pathogens. Regarding 
infection control measures, the potential impact of MRVP is high because of the
need of additional isolation precautions for many respiratory viruses, although
logistical problems can occur.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10096-021-04375-3 
PMCID: PMC8604699
PMID: 34799754 

