
1. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2021 Apr 28;8(11):ofab217. doi: 10.1093/ofid/ofab217.
eCollection 2021 Nov.

The Longest Persistence of Viable SARS-CoV-2 With Recurrence of Viremia and
Relapsing Symptomatic COVID-19 in an Immunocompromised Patient-A Case Study.

Sepulcri C(1), Dentone C(2), Mikulska M(1)(2), Bruzzone B(3), Lai A(4), Fenoglio 
D(5)(6), Bozzano F(2), Bergna A(4), Parodi A(6), Altosole T(5), Delfino E(2),
Bartalucci G(7), Orsi A(3)(8), Di Biagio A(1)(2), Zehender G(9), Ballerini F(10),
Bonora S(11), Sette A(12)(13), De Palma R(6)(14), Silvestri G(15)(16), De Maria
A(1)(2), Bassetti M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Unit, Department of Health Sciences (DISSAL), University
of Genoa, Genoa, Italy.
(2)Infectious Diseases Unit, Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, IRCCS for Oncology
and Neurosciences, Genoa, Italy.
(3)Hygiene Unit, Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, IRCCS for Oncology and
Neurosciences, Genoa, Italy.
(4)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences Luigi Sacco, University of
Milan, Milan, Italy.
(5)Center of Excellence for Biomedical Research, Cytofluorimetry Unit, University
of Genoa, Genoa, Italy.
(6)Biotherapy Unit, Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, IRCCS for Oncology and
Neurosciences, Genoa, Italy.
(7)Clinic of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine (DiMI), University of
Genoa, Genoa, Italy.
(8)Hygiene Unit, Department of Health Sciences (DISSAL), University of Genoa,
Genoa, Italy.
(9)Hygiene Unit, Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences Luigi Sacco,
University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(10)Hematology Unit, Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, IRCCS for Oncology and
Neurosciences, Genoa, Italy.
(11)Infectious Diseases Unit, Ospedale Amedeo di Savoia, University of Turin,
Turin, Italy.
(12)Center for Infectious Disease and Vaccine Research, La Jolla Institute for
Immunology, La Jolla, California, USA.
(13)Division of Infectious Diseases and Global Public Health, Department of
Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.
(14)Immunology Unit, Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, IRCCS for Oncology and
Neurosciences, Genoa, Italy.
(15)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(16)Division of Microbiology and Immunology, Yerkes National Primate Research
Center, Emory Vaccine Center, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

Background: Immunocompromised patients show prolonged shedding of severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) in nasopharyngeal swabs. We
report a case of prolonged persistence of viable SARS-CoV-2 associated with
clinical relapses of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in a patient with mantle
cell lymphoma who underwent treatment with rituximab, bendamustine, cytarabine
with consequent lymphopenia and hypogammaglobulinemia.
Methods: Nasopharyngeal swabs and blood samples were tested for SARS-CoV-2 by
real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). On 5 positive nasopharyngeal swabs,
we performed viral culture and next-generation sequencing. We analyzed the
patient's adaptive and innate immunity to characterize T- and NK-cell subsets.
Results: SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR on nasopharyngeal swabs samples remained positive for 
268 days. All 5 performed viral cultures were positive, and genomic analysis
confirmed a persistent infection with the same strain. Viremia resulted positive 
in 3 out of 4 COVID-19 clinical relapses and cleared each time after remdesivir
treatment. The T- and NK-cell dynamic was different in aviremic and viremic
samples, and no SARS-CoV-2-specific antibodies were detected throughout the
disease course.
Conclusions: In our patient, SARS-CoV-2 persisted with proven infectivity for >8 
months. Viremia was associated with COVID-19 relapses, and remdesivir treatment
was effective in viremia clearance and symptom remission, although it was unable 
to clear the virus from the upper respiratory airways. During the viremic phase, 
we observed a low frequency of terminal effector CD8+ T lymphocytes in peripheral
blood; these are probably recruited in inflammatory tissue for viral eradication.
In addition, we found a high level of NK-cell repertoire perturbation with
relevant involvement during SARS-CoV-2 viremia.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
Infectious Diseases Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/ofid/ofab217 
PMCID: PMC8135455
PMID: 34796242 

