
1. BMJ Open. 2021 Nov 18;11(11):e051094. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-051094.

Factors related to educational adaptations and social life at school experienced 
by young people with CFS/ME: a qualitative study.

Similä WA(1)(2), Nøst TH(3), Helland IB(4), Rø TB(5)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Clinic, St Olav's Hospital,Trondheim University Hospital,
Trondheim, Norway wenche.a.simila@ntnu.no.
(2)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science
and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.
(3)Department of Mental Health, Norwegian University of Science and Technology,
Trondheim, Norway.
(4)Division of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo,
Norway.
(5)Children's Clinic, St Olav's Hospital,Trondheim University Hospital,
Trondheim, Norway.

OBJECTIVES: To explore factors perceived as positive or negative among young
people with chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis (CFS/ME) in
relation to school and everyday life.
DESIGN: A qualitative study with semistructured individual interviews performed
at the local hospital or at the informants' homes between September 2017 and
January 2018, with an additional telephone interview to collect data on
experiences from the COVID-19 pandemic, conducted in September 2020. Data were
analysed using a grounded theory approach.
SETTING: The informants were recruited from two university hospitals that offer
interdisciplinary assessments of young people with CFS/ME from various parts of
Norway.
PARTICIPANTS: Five males and 13 females aged 13-21 years with CFS/ME diagnosed
3-56 months prior to the interviews participated.
RESULTS: The informants were concerned about a lack of educational adaptations
and missed social life at school. Educational and social adaptations could
improve schooling and health among young people with CFS/ME. Negative experiences
were related to a lack of knowledge about CFS/ME among school personnel and young
people's difficulties to limit activities. Online teaching as experienced during 
the COVID-19 pandemic was described as positive both for education and social
life.
CONCLUSIONS: Young people with CFS/ME can benefit from better educational
adaptations and increased social interaction with peers. From the participants'
view, factors that limit learning and socialisation include a lack of knowledge
about CFS/ME among teachers and school personnel, expectations from teachers of
doing more than they could manage at school, feeling alone coping with the
disease and not recognising their own limitations regarding what they are able to
do. Suggested factors perceived to enhance learning and socialisation were a
better understanding of the disease among school personnel and peers, suitable
educational adaptations and being able to socialise with peers.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-051094 
PMCID: PMC8603284
PMID: 34794992  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

