
1. Afr Health Sci. 2021 Jun;21(2):538-546. doi: 10.4314/ahs.v21i2.8.

Application of Integrated Behavioral Model (IBM) to measure intention to get
early screening and treatment of Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs) among HIV
at- risk sub-populations in Ethiopia.

Alemayehu WA(1), Maritz J(1), Roets L(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of South Africa.

Background: Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs) increase the risk of
contracting Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV). Hence, early screening and
treatment of STIs as a behavioral practice will reduce the odds of HIV infection 
among at risk and vulnerable sub-populations. To that end, HIV prevention
strategies need to design evidence-based interventions using behavioral models or
theories to help at-risk individuals adopt early screening and treatment of STI
as preventive health behavior. In this study, commercial sex workers were
considered as HIV at-risk sub-populations.
Objective: Measuring to what extent that Integrated Behavioral Model constructs
explain individuals' intention to practice early screening and treatment of
sexually transmitted infections as healthy behavior of interest in HIV
prevention.
Design: Integrated Behavioral Model (IBM) measurement survey was conducted using 
Respondent Driven Sampling (RDS) in six towns located in the main transport
corridors of Ethiopia. Respondents' answers to model construct-based questions
and intention to practice the health behavior of interest were measured using
Likert Scale. Analysis was done to assess the correlation and level of
association of model construct-based questions with intention to practice the
preventive health behavior.
Results: Respondents' attitude explained 32%, perceived control 2%, normative
influence 21%, and self-efficacy 53 % of their intention to get early screening
and treatment of sexually transmitted infections.
Conclusion: Self-efficacy explained the variability of respondents' intention to 
get early screening and treatment of STIs most, while perceived control was the
least. Hence, HIV prevention behavioral interventions targeting early screening
and treatment of STIs should give high emphasis to self-efficacy.

© 2021 Alemayehu WA et al.

DOI: 10.4314/ahs.v21i2.8 
PMCID: PMC8568205
PMID: 34795706 

