
1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Nov 2;12:686287. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.686287.
eCollection 2021.

Raman Microspectroscopy Goes Viral: Infection Dynamics in the Cosmopolitan
Microalga, Emiliania huxleyi.

Yakubovskaya E(1), Zaliznyak T(1), Martínez JM(2), Taylor GT(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Marine and Atmospheric Sciences, Stony Brook University, Stony
Brook, NY, United States.
(2)Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences, Boothbay, ME, United States.

Emiliania huxleyi is a cosmopolitan member of the marine phytoplankton. This
species' capacities for carbon sequestration and sulfur mobilization make it a
key player in oceanic biogeochemical cycles that influence climate on a planetary
scale. Seasonal E. huxleyi blooms are abruptly terminated by viral epidemics
caused by a clade of large DNA viruses collectively known as coccolithoviruses
(EhVs). EhVs thereby mediate a significant part of material and energy fluxes
associated with E. huxleyi population dynamics. In this study, we use spontaneous
Raman microspectroscopy to perform label-free and non-invasive measurements of
the macromolecular composition of individual virions and E. huxleyi host cells.
Our novel autofluorescence suppression protocol enabled spectroscopic
visualization of evolving macromolecular redistributions in individual E. huxleyi
cells at different stages of EhV infection. Material transfer from E. huxleyi
hosts to single EhV-163 virions was confirmed by combining stable isotope probing
(SIP) experiments with Raman microspectroscopy. Inheritance of the host cells'
13C-enriched isotopic signature was quantified based on red shifts of Raman peaks
characteristic of phenylalanine's phenyl ring. Two-dimensional Raman mapping of
EhV-infected E. huxleyi cells revealed that the compact region producing an
intense Raman DNA signal (i.e., the nucleus) in healthy E. huxleyi cells becomes 
diffuse during the first hours of infection. Raman DNA emissions integrated
throughout individual cells decreased during the infection cycle. Our
observations are consistent with EhV-163 degrading the host's nuclear DNA,
scavenging released nucleotides for its own genome replication, and shedding
newly-produced virions prior to host lysis via budding.

Copyright © 2021 Yakubovskaya, Zaliznyak, Martínez and Taylor.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.686287 
PMCID: PMC8593419
PMID: 34795644 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

