
1. Eur J Pharm Biopharm. 2021 Dec;169:309-318. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpb.2021.11.003. Epub
2021 Nov 15.

Modified cyclodextrin-based nanoparticles mediated delivery of siRNA for
huntingtin gene silencing across an in vitro BBB model.

Mendonça MCP(1), Cronin MF(1), Cryan JF(2), O'Driscoll CM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacodelivery Group, School of Pharmacy, University College Cork, Ireland.
(2)APC Microbiome Ireland, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland; Department of 
Anatomy and Neuroscience, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
(3)Pharmacodelivery Group, School of Pharmacy, University College Cork, Ireland. 
Electronic address: caitriona.odriscoll@ucc.ie.

Huntington's disease (HD) is a neurodegenerative disorder caused by a mutation in
the huntingtin (HTT) gene, leading to a toxic version of the HTT protein. There
are currently no disease-modifying therapies available. In this scenario,
gene-based treatments for HD aimed at lowering HTT levels have become one of the 
most promising emerging therapeutic options. To date, however, promising results 
have only been achieved following direct intrathecal or intracranial injections
designed to circumvent the blood-brain barrier (BBB). Consequently, efforts to
develop less invasive delivery platforms are highly desirable. Here, we described
a novel delivery system based on modified cyclodextrin nanoparticles (CDs) loaded
with small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) targeting HTT andcomplexed with the rabies
virus glycoprotein(RVG), a BBB-shuttle peptide. Results using an in vitro BBB
model, indicate the formulation successfully crosses the brain endothelial cells,
releases the encapsulated siRNAs into the cytoplasm of neuronal cells, and
mediates downregulation of HTT. In conclusion, the CD platform is a promising
option for delivery of siRNA-based therapeutics for HD with wider potential to
treat other diseases with a genetically validated target in the central nervous
system.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejpb.2021.11.003 
PMID: 34793942 

