
1. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2021 Nov 18;55(6):679-703. doi: 10.33594/000000470.

Virus-Host Interactions of Enteroviruses and Parvovirus B19 in Myocarditis.

Ho HT(1), Peischard S(1), Strutz-Seebohm N(2), Seebohm G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Electrophysiology and Molecular Biology, Institute for Genetics of
Heart Diseases (IfGH), University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany.
(2)Cellular Electrophysiology and Molecular Biology, Institute for Genetics of
Heart Diseases (IfGH), University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany,
nathalie.strutz-seebohm@ukmuenster.de.
(3)Cellular Electrophysiology and Molecular Biology, Institute for Genetics of
Heart Diseases (IfGH), University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany,
guiscard.seebohm@ukmuenster.de.

Viral diseases are a major threat to modern society and the global health system.
It is therefore of utter relevance to understand the way viruses affect the host 
as a basis to find new treatment solutions. The understanding of viral
myocarditis (VMC) is incomplete and effective treatment options are lacking. This
review will discuss the mechanism, effects, and treatment options of the most
frequent myocarditis-causing viruses namely enteroviruses such as Coxsackievirus 
B3 (CVB3) and Parvovirus B19 (PVB19) on the human heart. Thereby, we focus on: 1.
Viral entry: CVB3 use Coxsackievirus-Adenovirus-Receptor (CAR) and Decay
Accelerating Factor (DAF) to enter cardiac myocytes while PVB19 use the receptor 
globoside (Gb4) to enter cardiac endothelial cells. 2. Immune system responses:
The innate immune system mediated by activated cardiac toll-like receptors (TLRs)
worsen inflammation in CVB3-infected mouse hearts. Different types of cells of
the adaptive immune system are recruited to the site of inflammation that have
either protective or adverse effects during VMC. 3. Autophagy: CVB3 evades
autophagosomal degradation and misuses the autophasomal pathway for viral
replication and release. 4. Viral replication sites: CVB3 promotes the formation 
of double membrane vesicles (DMVs), which it uses as replication sites. PVB19
uses the host cell nucleus as the replication site and uses the host cell DNA
replication system. 5. Cell cycle manipulation: CVB3 attenuates the cell cycle at
the G1/S phase, which promotes viral transcription and replication. PVB19 exerts 
cell cycle arrest in the S phase using its viral endonuclease activity. 6.
Regulation of apoptosis: Enteroviruses prevent apoptosis during early stages of
infection and promote cell death during later stages by using the viral proteases
2A and 3C, and viroporin 2B. PVB19 promotes apoptosis using the non-structural
proteins NS1 and the 11 kDa protein. 7. Energy metabolism: Dysregulation of
respiratory chain complex expression, activity and ROS production may be altered 
in CVB3- and PVB19-mediated myocarditis. 8. Ion channel modulation:
CVB3-expression was indicated to alter calcium and potassium currents in Xenopus 
laevis oocytes and rodent cardiomyocytes. The phospholipase 2-like activity of
PVB19 may alter several calcium, potassium and sodium channels. By understanding 
the general pathophysiological mechanisms of well-studied myocarditis-linked
viruses, we might be provided with a guideline to handle other less-studied human
viruses.

© Copyright by the Author(s). Published by Cell Physiol Biochem Press.

DOI: 10.33594/000000470 
PMID: 34791861 

