
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Nov 19;17(11):e1009743. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009743.
eCollection 2021 Nov.

Phosphatidylserine receptors enhance SARS-CoV-2 infection.

Bohan D(1), Van Ert H(1), Ruggio N(1), Rogers KJ(1), Badreddine M(1), Aguilar
Briseño JA(1), Elliff JM(1), Rojas Chavez RA(1), Gao B(2), Stokowy T(3),
Christakou E(3)(4), Kursula P(3)(5), Micklem D(4), Gausdal G(4), Haim H(1), Minna
J(2), Lorens JB(3), Maury W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Iowa, Iowa City,
Iowa, United States of America.
(2)Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, United States of America.
(3)Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(4)BerGenBio ASA, Bergen, Norway.
(5)Biocenter Oulu & Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University of
Oulu, Oulu, Finland.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2021 Jun 24;:.

Phosphatidylserine (PS) receptors enhance infection of many enveloped viruses
through virion-associated PS binding that is termed apoptotic mimicry. Here we
show that this broadly shared uptake mechanism is utilized by SARS-CoV-2 in cells
that express low surface levels of ACE2. Expression of members of the TIM (TIM-1 
and TIM-4) and TAM (AXL) families of PS receptors enhance SARS-CoV-2 binding to
cells, facilitate internalization of fluorescently-labeled virions and increase
ACE2-dependent infection of SARS-CoV-2; however, PS receptors alone did not
mediate infection. We were unable to detect direct interactions of the PS
receptor AXL with purified SARS-CoV-2 spike, contrary to a previous report.
Instead, our studies indicate that the PS receptors interact with PS on the
surface of SARS-CoV-2 virions. In support of this, we demonstrate that: 1)
significant quantities of PS are located on the outer leaflet of SARS-CoV-2
virions, 2) PS liposomes, but not phosphatidylcholine liposomes, reduced entry of
VSV/Spike pseudovirions and 3) an established mutant of TIM-1 which does not bind
to PS is unable to facilitate entry of SARS-CoV-2. As AXL is an abundant PS
receptor on a number of airway lines, we evaluated small molecule inhibitors of
AXL signaling such as bemcentinib for their ability to inhibit SARS-CoV-2
infection. Bemcentinib robustly inhibited virus infection of Vero E6 cells as
well as multiple human lung cell lines that expressed AXL. This inhibition
correlated well with inhibitors that block endosomal acidification and cathepsin 
activity, consistent with AXL-mediated uptake of SARS-CoV-2 into the endosomal
compartment. We extended our observations to the related betacoronavirus mouse
hepatitis virus (MHV), showing that inhibition or ablation of AXL reduces MHV
infection of murine cells. In total, our findings provide evidence that PS
receptors facilitate infection of the pandemic coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 and suggest
that inhibition of the PS receptor AXL has therapeutic potential against
SARS-CoV-2.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009743 
PMCID: PMC8641883
PMID: 34797899 

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal’s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: GG, DM, and EC are
employees of BerGenBio ASA, a company with financial interests in this field. JBL
is a former employee of BerGenBio ASA. Partial funding was provided by BerGenBio 
ASA. JM receives licensing royalties from the NIH and UTSW for distribution of
human tumor lines. No other authors have competing interests to declare.

