
1. J Med Entomol. 2021 Nov 13. pii: tjab192. doi: 10.1093/jme/tjab192. [Epub ahead
of print]

Involvement of Follicular Patency in the Ovarian Developmental Block in
Virus-infected, MdSGHV, House Flies, Musca domestica (Diptera: Muscidae).

Fagan S(1), Ramirez A(2), Serdy S(3), Stoffolano JG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stockbridge School of Agriculture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA,
USA.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst, MA, USA.

The Musca domestica salivary gland hypertrophy virus (MdSGHV) is known to have
marked effects on the female Musca domestica L. (or common house fly)
reproductive system, particularly regarding the size and functionality of the
ovaries. Examination of the terminal ovarian follicles can help determine if and 
how MdSGHV mechanistically causes the block in ovarian development. In this
study, terminal ovarian follicle lengths were measured and monitored for patency 
using Trypan blue dye staining. We examined the effect of MdSGHV infection on
female house fly ovarian follicles and attempted to rescue the diminished ovarian
follicles in MdSGHV-infected house flies through the application of a hormonal
treatment (i.e., methoprene). Comparison of patency in control saline-injected
females, virus-injected females with no methoprene application, and
virus-injected females with topical methoprene application revealed that none of 
the virus-infected flies showed an increase in terminal follicular length beyond 
stage 3 follicles (staging according to Adams 1974). Additionally, none showed
evidence of patency. In control, saline-injected females, we found the threshold 
length of the terminal follicles for the onset of patency to be 600 µm. When
examined at 48, 72, and 96 h post-eclosion, average follicle length for infected 
females seldom reached 250 µm and they also failed to display patency. Thus, the 
virus is somehow involved in shutting down the mechanism involved in follicular
patency. The lack of patency in infected follicles may also be one of the
determining factors preventing vertical transmission of the pathogen.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
Entomological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jme/tjab192 
PMID: 34791321 

