
1. Int J Cell Biol Physiol. 2021;4(1-2):1-12. Epub 2021 Oct 13.

Vaccine efficacy in mutant SARS-CoV-2 variants.

Kandikattu HK(1), Yadavalli CS(1), Venkateshaiah SU(1), Mishra A(1).

Author information: 
(1)John W. Deming Department of Medicine, Section of Pulmonary Diseases, Tulane
Eosinophilic Disorder Center (TEDC), Tulane University School of Medicine, New
Orleans, LA, USA.

Many aspects of the SARS-CoV-2 virus remain poorly understood, including its
rapid mutation and its effects on populations of different ages. The present
literature of review is focused on the effectiveness of current available
vaccines in view of immerging several SARS-CoV-2 variants. The most dangerous and
infectious SARS-CoV-2 strain, B117, was recently discovered in the United
Kingdom, and another new variant, 501.V2, was discovered in South Africa. In
countries such as the United States, Japan, India, and Brazil, the variant B117
spread far more quickly than the original strain. The new SARS-CoV-2 mutations
have made producing a universal and effective vaccine more difficult.
SARS-CoV-2's S protein, which aids in receptor identification and membrane
fusion, is a primary target for vaccine development using its mRNA or inactivated
virus. Currently, in the interval of few days new more infectious SARS-CoV-2
mutant is detected, started from SARS-CoV-2 Alpha (B.1.1.7), beta (B.1.351),
delta (B.1.617.2), delta plus, gamma (P.1) and now variant lamda. The variant
detected first in Peru and spread almost 27 countries including UK that accounts 
for 82% of new infections. These mutant variants are posing new challenge even to
the fully vaccinated individuals and a challenge for the public health. Thus, a
need to review current treatment vaccination guideline and strategy as early as
possible. Reporting all new SARS-CoV-2 variants and their effectiveness in
response to several available vaccines, we would like to draw the attention of
health care provider, and all developed countries health care agencies including 
WHO to frame new guidelines for vaccination and immediate intervention to control
the development of new SARS-CoV-2 variants from the third world countries by
providing vaccines to the poor countries as early as possible.


PMCID: PMC8594908
PMID: 34790972 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The author has no conflicts 
of interest associated with the material presented in this paper.

