
1. Psychiatr Danub. 2021 Fall;33(3):402-410. doi: 10.24869/psyd.2021.402.

Feelings, Thoughts and Experiences of Healthcare Professionals Who Recovered
after Being Diagnosed with COVID-19, a Phenomenological Study.

Ozcan S(1), Kirca N.

Author information: 
(1)Yalova University Faculty of Health Sciences, Department of Obstetrics &
Gynecological Nursing, Yalova, Turkey, sadiyeozcan24@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: It is very important to protect the physical, mental and social
health of healthcare workers who are at risk, are faced with a difficult pandemic
process, and have been infected with the disease. In previous studies, the
thoughts of healthcare professionals who gave care to coronavirus patients were
investigated. The present study is the first study in which experiences and
thoughts of healthcare professionals who had coronavirus disease were
investigated, and unlike other studies, data were collected through one-to-one,
face-to-face interviews. This study was conducted to determine the feelings,
thoughts and experiences of healthcare professionals who recovered after being
diagnosed with COVID-19.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: This qualitative study was designed based on Husserlian's
phenomenological approach. The participants were selected from healthcare
professionals receiving COVID-19 treatment through the purposive sampling method.
The interviews were held between September 2020 and February 2021. Colaizzi's
qualitative analysis method was used.
RESULTS: After the analysis of the interviews, three themes and seven sub-themes 
emerged. The theme "fear" has three sub-themes: "fear of the unknown", "fear of
being infected again" and "fear of transmitting the disease". The theme "social
isolation" has two sub-themes: "Unhappiness" and "stigma". Finally, the theme
"lack of motivation" has two sub-themes: "excessive workload" and "Inadequate
number of employees".
CONCLUSIONS: In order to help healthcare workers manage these psychosocial
problems they experience, managers should make appropriate planning and should
give them psychosocial support. It is recommended that the criteria regarding
healthcare professionals' starting work again after they survive the COVID-19
should be reviewed and revised. In particular, healthcare workers who survive
illness but cannot fully recover should be evaluated physically and
psychologically before going back to work.

DOI: 10.24869/psyd.2021.402 
PMID: 34795190  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

