
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 1;12:693938. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.693938. eCollection 
2021.

COVID-19 Mechanisms in the Human Body-What We Know So Far.

Kumar A(1)(2), Narayan RK(1)(3), Prasoon P(1)(4), Kumari C(1)(5), Kaur G(1)(6),
Kumar S(1)(7), Kulandhasamy M(1)(8), Sesham K(1)(9), Pareek V(1)(10), Faiq
MA(1)(11), Pandey SN(1)(12), Singh HN(1)(13), Kant K(1)(14), Shekhawat PS(1)(15),
Raza K(1)(16), Kumar S(1)(17).

Author information: 
(1)Etiologically Elusive Disorders Research Network (EEDRN), New Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Anatomy, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Patna,
India.
(3)Department of Anatomy, Andaman and Nicobar Islands Institute of Medical
Sciences, Port Blair, India.
(4)Pittsburgh Center for Pain Research, School of Medicine, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States.
(5)Department of Anatomy, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and
Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh, India.
(6)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shoolini University, Solan, India.
(7)Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, School of Medicine,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(8)Department of Biochemistry, Maulana Azad Medical College (MAMC), New Delhi,
India.
(9)Department of Anatomy, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS),
Mangalagiri, Vijayawada, India.
(10)Center for Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology
Gandhinagar, Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India.
(11)New York University (NYU) Langone Health Center, NYU Robert I. Grossman
School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States.
(12)Department of Zoology, Banaras Hindu University (BHU), Varanasi, India.
(13)Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New
York, NY, United States.
(14)Department of Microbiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), 
Bathinda, India.
(15)Department of Clinical Hematology, National Institute of Medical Sciences,
Jaipur, India.
(16)Department of Anatomy, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS),
Deoghar, India.
(17)Center for Proteomics and Drug Discovery, Amity Institute of Biotechnology,
Amity University, Maharashtra, India.

More than one and a half years have elapsed since the commencement of the
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, and the world is struggling to
contain it. Being caused by a previously unknown virus, in the initial period,
there had been an extreme paucity of knowledge about the disease mechanisms,
which hampered preventive and therapeutic measures against COVID-19. In an
endeavor to understand the pathogenic mechanisms, extensive experimental studies 
have been conducted across the globe involving cell culture-based experiments,
human tissue organoids, and animal models, targeted to various aspects of the
disease, viz., viral properties, tissue tropism and organ-specific pathogenesis, 
involvement of physiological systems, and the human immune response against the
infection. The vastly accumulated scientific knowledge on all aspects of COVID-19
has currently changed the scenario from great despair to hope. Even though
spectacular progress has been made in all of these aspects, multiple knowledge
gaps are remaining that need to be addressed in future studies. Moreover,
multiple severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) variants
have emerged across the globe since the onset of the first COVID-19 wave, with
seemingly greater transmissibility/virulence and immune escape capabilities than 
the wild-type strain. In this review, we narrate the progress made since the
commencement of the pandemic regarding the knowledge on COVID-19 mechanisms in
the human body, including virus-host interactions, pulmonary and other systemic
manifestations, immunological dysregulations, complications, host-specific
vulnerability, and long-term health consequences in the survivors. Additionally, 
we provide a brief review of the current evidence explaining molecular mechanisms
imparting greater transmissibility and virulence and immune escape capabilities
to the emerging SARS-CoV-2 variants.

Copyright © 2021 Kumar, Narayan, Prasoon, Kumari, Kaur, Kumar, Kulandhasamy,
Sesham, Pareek, Faiq, Pandey, Singh, Kant, Shekhawat, Raza and Kumar.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.693938 
PMCID: PMC8592035
PMID: 34790191 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

