
1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 18;11(1):22480. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00616-9.

Community psychological and behavioural responses to coronavirus disease 2019
over one year of the pandemic in 2020 in Hong Kong.

Liao Q(1)(2), Xiao J(1)(2), Cheung J(1)(2), Ng TWY(1)(2), Lam WWT(1)(3), Ni
MY(1)(4)(5), Cowling BJ(6)(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong,
Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China.
(2)World Health Organization Collaborating Centre for Infectious Disease
Epidemiology and Control, School of Public Health, The University of Hong Kong,
Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China.
(3)Jockey Club Institute of Cancer Care, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University 
of Hong Kong, Pok Fu Lam, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, The University of Hong
Kong, Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China.
(5)Healthy High Density Cities Lab, HKUrbanLab, The University of Hong Kong, Pok 
Fu Lam, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China.
(6)School of Public Health, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong,
Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China. bcowling@hku.hk.
(7)World Health Organization Collaborating Centre for Infectious Disease
Epidemiology and Control, School of Public Health, The University of Hong Kong,
Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China. bcowling@hku.hk.
(8)Laboratory of Data Discovery for Health, Hong Kong Science and Technology
Park, Sha Tin, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China. bcowling@hku.hk.

Monitoring community psychological and behavioural responses to coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19) is important for informing policy making and risk
communication to sustain public compliance with challenging precautionary
behaviours and mitigating the psychological impacts. Monthly telephone-based
cross-sectional surveys in January-April 2020 and then weekly surveys from May
through December 2020 were conducted to monitor changes in public risk perception
of COVID-19, personal efficacy in self-protection, confidence in government's
ability to control the pandemic, precautionary behaviours, perceived impact of
precautionary behaviours, psychological fatigue and distress in Hong Kong, and
examine their inter-relationships. While worry about contracting COVID-19
increased, personal efficacy and confidence in government declined as the
community incidence of COVID-19 increased. The public maintained high compliance 
with most precautionary behaviours throughout but relaxed behaviours that were
more challenging when disease incidence declined. Public confidence in government
was persistently low throughout, of which, a lower level was associated with more
psychological fatigue, lower compliance with precautionary behaviours and greater
psychological distress. Perceived greater negative impact of precautionary
behaviours was also associated with more psychological fatigue which in turn was 
associated with relaxation of precautionary behaviours. Female, younger and
unemployed individuals reported greater psychological distress throughout
different stages of the pandemic. Risk communication should focus on promoting
confidence in self-protection and pandemic control to avoid helplessness to act
when the pandemic resurges. Policy making should prioritize building public
trust, enhancing support for sustaining precautionary behaviours, and helping
vulnerable groups to adapt to the stress during the pandemic.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-00616-9 
PMCID: PMC8602294
PMID: 34795312  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

