
1. Pak J Pharm Sci. 2021 Jul;34(4):1469-1484.

Review-Insights into Off-Label therapeutic strategies against mild and severe
COVID-19 infection.

Arshad B(1), Iqbal T(2), Bhatti KP(3), Ahmed S(4), Zaman W(5), Ullah F(5), Nazeer
A(6), Saqib S(7).

Author information: 
(1)Pakistan Council for Science and Technology, Ministry of Science and
Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan/ Department of Biochemistry, University of
Agriculture, Faisalabad, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Agriculture, Faisalabad, Pakistan.
(3)Pakistan Council for Science and Technology, Ministry of Science and
Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, University of Agriculture, Faisalabad, Pakistan/
Department of Food Sciences, Cholistan University of Veterinary and Animal
Sciences, Bahawalpur, Pakistan.
(5)Department of Plant Sciences, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(6)Department of Biotechnology, Mohi-Ud-Din Islamic University, Nerian Sharif,
AJ&K.
(7)Department of Biotechnology, Mohi-Ud-Din Islamic University, Nerian Sharif,
AJ&K/ Department of Plant Sciences, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan.

Currently, prevention and control of the coronavirus disease pneumonia epidemic
situation are grim globally. To cope with total sheer carriers and patients of
COVID-19 requires intensive medical support and adjunctive therapies to overcome 
the disease. The epidemic can be controlled with the help of both, disease
suppression via community health measures and adjunctive therapies for patients
suffering from infection. Till date, we do not have any proper anti-COVID-19
therapy. In order to achieve the overall realization of this pandemic, there is a
need to identify treatments depending upon their direct or indirect targets; like
inhibition of polyprotein synthesis, transmembrane serine protease, inhibition of
viral entry and endocytosis. This could be possible by turning the focus in the
direction towards the development of numerous tentative drugs, particularly in
the severe to badly ill. Though, majority of these off-label adjunctive medicines
are being inspected in a lot of clinical trials at different stages, scientific
organizations have endeavored to elucidate the situation where these adjunctive
drugs might be practiced as off-label, open- label or compassionate. Our review
compiles the adjunctive therapies adopted in COVID-19 infected patients according
to clinical severity in conjugation with practicing recommendations from existing
guidance rules issued by global professional bodies in healthcare.


PMID: 34799323  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

