
1. Curationis. 2021 Oct 28;44(1):e1-e9. doi: 10.4102/curationis.v44i1.2152.

When online learning becomes compulsory: Student nurses' adoption of information 
communication technology in a private nursing education institution.

Bester P(1), Smit K, De Beer M, Myburgh PH.

Author information: 
(1)Africa Unit for Transdisciplinary Health Research, Faculty of Health Sciences,
North-West University, Potchefstroom. betra.bester@nwu.ac.za.

BACKGROUND: Integrating the use of information communication technology (ICT) in 
nursing curricula when preparing student nurses for the digital health future
such as the sudden online learning as a result of the coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) pandemic is vital. However, when student nurses in a South African
private nursing education institution, struggled to complete obligatory online
learning courses, nurse educators had to search for solutions.
OBJECTIVES: To explore the barriers and enablers for ICT adoption by a diverse
group of student nurses in a private nursing education institution in the Free
State Province.
METHOD: Following a qualitative, explorative, interpretive-descriptive design,
student nurses were invited to participate. Based on all-inclusive, purposive
sampling with inclusion criteria enabled selecting, a total of 17 participants
who took part in three focus groups and written narratives. Transcribed
interviews underwent thematic analysis with co-coder consensus. The study adhered
to strategies to enhance trustworthiness.
RESULTS: Students shared their views related to ICT and online learning within
their theory and practice training. Student nurses held positive, negative and
contrasting views of ICT adoption and online learning. Actions to master ICT
adoption and online learning are highlighted. Information communication
technology brings a challenging interdependence between nurses and technology.
CONCLUSION: Integration of ICT into nursing programmes is important. The enablers
and barriers to ICT are described. Expose students to different technologies,
especially using smart phones to search for (academic/non-academic) information. 
The adoption of ICT should enhance the learning process and facilitate deep
learning. Students preferred online learning for self-assessment and described
how they tried to master ICT and online learning. Information communication
technologies in the clinical setting highlight the challenged interdependence
between nurses and technology. Context-specific recommendations are proposed.

DOI: 10.4102/curationis.v44i1.2152 
PMCID: PMC8603156
PMID: 34797105  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

