
1. J Pak Med Assoc. 2021 Nov;71(Suppl 7)(11):S78-S82.

Uptake, satisfaction, and quality of family planning services in Pakistan: before
and during Covid-19 outbreak: Stocktaking with clients of a private sector
organisation.

Awan MA(1), Azmat SK(1), Hussain W(2), Ahmed A(3), Balal A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Marie Stopes Society, Pakistan, AAPNA - Institute of Public Health, Jinnah
Sindh Medical University, Pakistan.
(2)Marie Stopes Society, Pakistan.
(3)Marie Stopes Society Pakistan, Pakistan.

OBJECTIVE: To report the uptake, satisfaction, and quality of family planning
services in the clients of a private sector organisation during Covid-19 in
Pakistan and compare it with the situation before Covid-19 pandemic.
METHODS: This paper is based on the client exit interview data collected before
and then after the outbreak of Covid-19, using a structured questionnaire.
Clients were chosen at the exit of the social franchise (SF) clinics, situated in
rural and peri-urban areas, and beneficiaries of the outreach services delivery
channel in the remote rural area. Descriptive analysis was carried out in SPSS,
and frequencies and percentages were computed.
RESULTS: All respondents were married women of reproductive age (MWRA) with an
average age of 30 years, with either no or very low literacy levels. During the
pandemic, overall utilization of the intrauterine contraceptive devices (IUCDs)
declined, while the condom remained popular. Client satisfaction remained high in
both service delivery channels during a pandemic. However, some results varied
vis-à-vis the residence of the client.
CONCLUSIONS: All respondents were married women of reproductive age (MWRA) with
an average age of 30 years, with either no or very low literacy levels. During
the pandemic, overall utilization of the intrauterine contraceptive devices
(IUCDs) declined, while the condom remained popular. Client satisfaction remained
high in both service delivery channels during a pandemic. However, some results
varied vis-à-vis the residence of the client.


PMID: 34793434  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

