
1. S Afr Fam Pract (2004). 2021 Nov 16;63(1):e1-e9. doi: 10.4102/safp.v63i1.5346.

The development of an explanatory model for voluntary medical male circumcision
in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa.

Nxumalo CT(1), Mchunu GG.

Author information: 
(1)College of Health Sciences, School of Nursing and Public Health, University of
KwaZulu-Natal. thembz92@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: KwaZulu-Natal (KZN) remains the epicentre of the human
immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) epidemic in 
South Africa. The incidence of HIV infection in KZN necessitates cost-effective
strategies to curb the spread of infection. Voluntary medical male circumcision
(VMMC) has been adopted as an additional biomedical preventive strategy since
2010 in line with recommendations from the World Health Organization. Despite
several attempts to scale-up VMMC to reach age specific targets to achieve
immediate aversion of infections, the uptake of VMMC remains sub-optimal,
particularly in KZN. The purpose of this study is to describe the processes that 
were followed in developing, describing and evaluating an explanatory model for
VMMC in KZN, South Africa.
METHODS: A qualitative theory-generative phenomenographic study design was used
to analyse the qualitative differences in primary healthcare stakeholders'
experiences, understanding and conceptions of VMMC in KZN, South Africa. The
emerging results informed the development of the VMMC explanatory model for KZN, 
South Africa. The model development process followed four steps, namely (1)
concept analysis, (2) construction of relational statements, (3) model
description and (4) model evaluation. The criteria of relevance for the target
audience - applicability, clarity, user friendliness and originality of work -
were used to evaluate the model.
RESULTS: The model's central premise is that the decision to undergo VMMC is
shaped by a complex interplay of factors in the context or external environment
of males (the extrinsic variable), which influences specific experiences,
conceptions and understanding regarding VMMC (the influential/intrinsic
variables). These collectively determine men's responses to VMMC (the outcome
variable).
CONCLUSION: The model describes the process by which contextual, extrinsic and
intrinsic variables interact to determine an individual male's response to VMMC, 
thus providing a guide to primary healthcare providers on care, practice and
policy interventions to support the uptake of VMMC in the rural primary
healthcare context of KZN, South Africa.

DOI: 10.4102/safp.v63i1.5346 
PMID: 34797095 

