
1. Lancet. 2021 Nov 15. pii: S0140-6736(21)02507-1. doi:
10.1016/S0140-6736(21)02507-1. [Epub ahead of print]

Promoting COVID-19 vaccine acceptance: recommendations from the Lancet Commission
on Vaccine Refusal, Acceptance, and Demand in the USA.

Omer SB(1), Benjamin RM(2), Brewer NT(3), Buttenheim AM(4), Callaghan T(5),
Caplan A(6), Carpiano RM(7), Clinton C(8), DiResta R(9), Elharake JA(10), Flowers
LC(11), Galvani AP(12), Lakshmanan R(13), Maldonado YA(14), McFadden SM(10),
Mello MM(15), Opel DJ(16), Reiss DR(17), Salmon DA(18), Schwartz JL(19),
Sharfstein JM(20), Hotez PJ(21).

Author information: 
(1)Yale Institute for Global Health, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA;
Infectious Diseases Section, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale School of
Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA; Department of Epidemiology of
Microbial Diseases, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA; Yale School of Nursing, 
Yale University, Orange, CT, USA. Electronic address: saad.omer@yale.edu.
(2)Gulf States Health Policy Center, Bayou La Batre, AL, USA.
(3)Department of Health Behavior, Gillings School of Global Public Health, and
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, NC, USA.
(4)Department of Family and Community Health, University of Pennsylvania School
of Nursing, and Center for Health Incentives and Behavioral Economics, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Department of Health Policy and Management, School of Public Health, A&M
University, College Station, TX, USA.
(6)Langone School of Medicine, New York University, New York, NY, USA.
(7)School of Public Policy, University of California, Riverside, CA, USA.
(8)Clinton Foundation, New York, NY, USA; Mailman School of Public Health,
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(9)Stanford Internet Observatory, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(10)Yale Institute for Global Health, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA;
Infectious Diseases Section, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale School of
Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
(11)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(12)Center for Infectious Disease Modeling and Analysis, Yale University, New
Haven, CT, USA.
(13)The Immunization Partnership, Houston, TX, USA.
(14)School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(15)School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA; Stanford Law
School, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA; Freeman Spogli Institute for
International Studies, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, WA, USA; Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, WA, USA; UC
Hastings College of Law, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(17)UC Hastings College of Law, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(18)Institute for Vaccine Safety, Department of International Health, Johns
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
MD, USA.
(19)Department of Health Policy and Management, Yale School of Public Health,
Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
(20)Department of Health Policy and Management, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of
Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(21)Hagler Institute for Advanced Study at Texas A&M University, A&M University, 
College Station, TX, USA; Scowcroft Institute of International Affairs, Bush
School of Government and Public Service Texas, A&M University, College Station,
TX, USA; Texas Children's Center for Vaccine Development, Departments of
Pediatrics and Molecular Virology & Microbiology, National School of Tropical
Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA; Department of Biology,
Baylor University, Waco, TX, USA; James A Baker III Institute for Public Policy, 
Rice University, Houston, TX, USA.

Since the first case of COVID-19 was identified in the USA in January, 2020, over
46 million people in the country have tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Several COVID-19 vaccines have received emergency use authorisations from the US 
Food and Drug Administration, with the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine receiving full
approval on Aug 23, 2021. When paired with masking, physical distancing, and
ventilation, COVID-19 vaccines are the best intervention to sustainably control
the pandemic. However, surveys have consistently found that a sizeable minority
of US residents do not plan to get a COVID-19 vaccine. The most severe
consequence of an inadequate uptake of COVID-19 vaccines has been sustained
community transmission (including of the delta [B.1.617.2] variant, a surge of
which began in July, 2021). Exacerbating the direct impact of the virus, a low
uptake of COVID-19 vaccines will prolong the social and economic repercussions of
the pandemic on families and communities, especially low-income and minority
ethnic groups, into 2022, or even longer. The scale and challenges of the
COVID-19 vaccination campaign are unprecedented. Therefore, through a series of
recommendations, we present a coordinated, evidence-based education,
communication, and behavioural intervention strategy that is likely to improve
the success of COVID-19 vaccine programmes across the USA.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)02507-1 
PMCID: PMC8592561
PMID: 34793741 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The Lancet Commission on
Vaccine Refusal, Acceptance, and Demand in the USA is co-hosted by the Yale
Institute for Global Health (New Haven, CT) and the Baylor College of Medicine
(Houston, TX). PJH is a developer of a COVID-19 vaccine construct that was
licensed by the Baylor College of Medicine to Biological E, a commercial vaccine 
manufacturer, for scale-up, production, testing, and licensing. NTB reports
personal fees from WHO, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and Merck,
outside the submitted work. RMC reports research grant funding from the Novo
Nordisk Foundation outside the submitted work. RL reports grants from Pfizer,
GlaxoSmithKline, Sanofi Pasteur, and Merck; and personal fees from Biotechnology 
Innovation Organization, outside the submitted work. YAM is a member of a Data
Safety Monitoring Board for Pfizer and a site principal investigator for a Pfizer
vaccine trial unrelated to the submitted work. MMM reports personal fees from law
firms representing retail pharmacies and generic drug companies that have sued
other drug companies for anti-trust law violations, outside the submitted work.
DJO reports grants from the US National Institutes of Health outside the
submitted work. DRR reports that herself, her spouse, and her children own stocks
in GlaxoSmithKline, a vaccine manufacturer. DRR also reports serving in an unpaid
volunteer capacity on Moderna's ethics allocation committee. DAS reports grants
from Merck and personal fees from Pfizer, outside the submitted work. All other
authors declare no competing interests.

