
1. J Public Health Manag Pract. 2022 Jan-Feb 01;28(1):E1-E8. doi:
10.1097/PHH.0000000000001466.

The Power of Connections: AAP COVID-19 ECHO Accelerates Responses During a Public
Health Emergency.

Bernstein HH(1), Calabrese T, Corcoran P, Flint LE, Munoz FM; COVID-19 ECHO
Workgroup; In addition to the authors, the COVID-19 ECHO Workgroup included Laura
Aird, MS; James F. Bale Jr, MD, FAAP; H. Dele Davies, MD, MS, MHCM, FAAP; Jessica
Leffelman, BS; Shannon Limjuco, MPH..

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Cohen Children's Medical Center, New Hyde Park, New 
York (Dr Bernstein); Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell, Hempstead,
New York (Dr Bernstein); Department of Healthy Resilient Children, Youth, and
Families, Pediatric Population Health, American Academy of Pediatrics, Itasca,
Illinois (Mss Calabrese, Aird, Leffelman, and Limjuco and Mr Corcoran);
Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah Health, Salt Lake City, Utah (Dr
Bale); Department of Pediatrics, Newton Medical Center, Newton, New Jersey (Dr
Flint); Department of Pediatrics, Section of Infectious Diseases, Baylor College 
of Medicine, Houston, Texas (Dr Munoz); and University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, Nebraska (Dr Davies).

CONTEXT: Pediatric providers across the United States have sought guidance on how
to care for the nation's children during the uncertain historic times of the
COVID-19 pandemic. The health care community has been challenged by the
unprecedented burden of caring for patients when they have evolving guidelines
and limited information about the effects of the virus on children.
PROGRAM: In response, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) rapidly launched a
national initiative to increase child health professionals' knowledge, skills,
and self-efficacy. This COVID-19 ECHO (Extension for Community Healthcare
Outcomes) program created communities of learners among child health
professionals and subject matter expert faculty using didactic and case-based
presentations that foster an "all-teach, all-learn" approach.
IMPLEMENTATION: The initial AAP COVID-19 ECHO program hosted more than 900
participants in 127 individual virtual sessions, with approximately 25
participants per session. The evolving nature of the pandemic necessitated
dynamic and continuous bidirectional flow of concerns and information relevant to
participants. Session topics were selected in a "just-in-time" fashion based on
participant feedback from the prospective postsession surveys and faculty
recommendations; speakers brought data and expert recommendations.
EVALUATION: To assess impact, the AAP used a mixed-methods approach to evaluate
the program's effectiveness in meeting its educational objectives. The 2-phase
evaluation collected quantitative and qualitative data through an integrated
feedback structure that utilized prospective postsession and retrospective
postprogram surveys, along with postprogram focus groups.
DISCUSSION: As the COVID-19 pandemic surges and another influenza season is upon 
us, the ECHO model is an effective strategy for facilitating bidirectional
communication and education to build child health professionals' knowledge,
skills, and self-efficacy during an unprecedented and ongoing public health
emergency.
KEY POINTS: The ECHO model is an effective strategy for health care organizations
to facilitate bidirectional communication and education in building health
professionals' clinical knowledge, skills, and self-efficacy during the
unprecedented and ongoing public health emergency of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/PHH.0000000000001466 
PMID: 34797247  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures:Flor M. Munoz,
MD, MSc, FAAP: Member—Committee on Infectious Diseases/AAP;Henry H. Bernstein,
DO, MHCM, FAAP: Member—Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices/CDC;
Editor—Office Pediatrics Series, Current Opinion in Pediatrics; Faculty, Master's
Program in Healthcare Management/TH Chan Harvard School of Public Health; Data
and Safety Monitoring Board member—Takeda; PI—Breastfeeding Promotion grant, New 
York State Department of Health; Remaining authors have indicated they have no
potential conflicts of interest to disclose.

