
1. BMJ Open. 2021 Nov 18;11(11):e052259. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-052259.

Supporting population mental health and wellness during the COVID-19 pandemic in 
Canada: protocol for a sequential mixed-method study.

Risling T(1), Carlberg C(1), Kassam I(2), Moss T(1), Janssen P(3), Iduye S(1),
Strudwick G(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)College of Nursing, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan,
Canada.
(2)Campbell Family Mental Health Research Institute, Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)School of Population and Public Health, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(4)Campbell Family Mental Health Research Institute, Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada gillian.strudwick@camh.ca.
(5)Institute of Health Policy, Management and Evaluation, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: The global COVID-19 pandemic has reported to have a negative impact
on the mental health and well-being of individuals around the world. Mental
health system infrastructure, primarily developed to support individuals through 
in-person care, struggled to meet rising demand for services even prior to
COVID-19. With public health guidelines requiring the use of physical distancing 
during the pandemic, digital mental health supports may be one way to address the
needs of the population. Despite this, barriers exist in promoting and supporting
access to existing and emerging digital resources. Text messaging may address
some of these barriers, extending the potential reach of these digital
interventions across divides that may separate some vulnerable or disadvantaged
groups from essential mental health supports. Building on an existing knowledge
synthesis project identifying key digital resources for improved mental health,
this research will establish low-tech connections to assess need and better match
access to services for those who need it most. The aim of this study is to
codesign a customised two-way texting service to explore need and better align
access to mental health supports for Canadians located in Saskatchewan during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: This study will be completed in Saskatchewan, Canada. For
this project, the RE-AIM (reach, effectiveness, adoption, implementation,
maintenance) framework will be used to support three phases of a sequential
mixed-method study. An advisory committee of Saskatchewan residents will guide
this work with the study team. A 10-week service will be launched to connect
individuals with appropriately suited digital mental health interventions through
the use of text messaging. In phase 1, implementation and prototyping will be
conducted with collaborative codesign for key elements related to features of an 
enrolment survey and initial messaging content. Phase 2 will focus on advancing
the effectiveness of the service using quantitative user data. In phase 3, an
embedding approach will be used to integrate both qualitative and quantitative
data collected to understand the overall acceptability, satisfaction and
perceived benefit of the text messaging service. Thematic analysis and
descriptive statistics will be used as analytic methods.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: This study has received approval from the Research
Ethics Board at the University of Saskatchewan. A knowledge dissemination plan
has been developed that includes traditional academic approaches such as
conference presentations, and academic publications, as well as mainstream
approaches such as social media, radio and dissemination through the advisory
committee.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-052259 
PMCID: PMC8602926
PMID: 34794993  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

