
1. J Public Health Manag Pract. 2022 Jan-Feb 01;28(1):86-94. doi:
10.1097/PHH.0000000000001471.

Using Public Deliberation to Set Priorities: The Case of COVID-19 Vaccine Access 
in New York City.

Scherer M(1), Kamler A, Weiss L, Blacksher E, Jeavons J, Gold MR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Evaluation and Applied Research, The New York Academy of Medicine, 
New York City, New York (Mss Scherer and Kamler and Dr Weiss); Center for
Practical Bioethics, University of Kansas School of Medicine, Kansas City, Kansas
(Dr Blacksher); Vaccine Operations Center, COVID-19 Emergency Response, New York 
City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, Queens, New York (Dr Jeavons); and 
The CUNY School of Medicine, New York City, New York (Dr Gold).

CONTEXT: The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in a record number of deaths in the
United States and tremendous economic and personal strain. During 2020, in
anticipation of a vaccine to slow the spread of disease, local and state
governments in the United States developed plans for vaccine prioritization,
given a limited initial supply. Recognizing the challenges inherent in
prioritization, the New York City (NYC) health department sought guidance from
members of the public about the fairest approach to early-stage vaccine
distribution.
OBJECTIVE: To solicit recommendations from NYC residents on priorities regarding 
vaccine access for essential worker occupations, considering risk factors and
preferred approaches to fairness.
IMPLEMENTATION: Five public deliberations were conducted with NYC residents (N = 
91). Participants heard presentations on the COVID-19 vaccine, the local
distribution of illness and death, and approaches to fairness in the context of
deliberating on priorities for 6 essential worker occupations and 4 risk factors.
Discussions were transcribed, and transcriptions were coded and analyzed using
preidentified and emergent themes. Pre- and post-surveys, focused on factors
relevant to prioritization, were administered during each public deliberation.
RESULTS: Recommendations for prioritization emphasized risk of severe morbidity
and mortality, and work and neighborhood conditions with fewer protections (eg,
in-person work, exposure to many people). Participants prioritized elementary
schoolteachers, grocery store workers, and bus drivers, underlying health
conditions, and neighborhood of residence. Participants focused on equity,
recognizing that those at highest risk were largely low-income populations of
color and individuals living in low-resourced neighborhoods.
CONCLUSIONS: Participants' focus on equity, and acknowledgment of racial and
ethnic disparities, revealed a nuanced understanding of the broader determinants 
of health. Recommendations reinforced the NYC health department's approach to
vaccine distribution.
PUBLIC HEALTH IMPLICATIONS: Results from these public deliberations confirmed
community support for approaches prioritizing health equity, recognizing both
societal and personal factors affecting vulnerability to poor health.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/PHH.0000000000001471 
PMID: 34797242  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interests to
disclose.

