
1. Pest Manag Sci. 2021 Nov 19. doi: 10.1002/ps.6728. [Epub ahead of print]

Synthesis of novel N-(2-phenyl-3-pyridyl) thiadiazole/isothiazole carboxamide
analogs as potent plant elicitors.

Yang D(1)(2), Qi X(1)(3), Kalinina TA(4), Glukhareva TV(4), Tang L(1)(3), Li
Z(1)(3), Fan Z(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Elemento-Organic Chemistry, College of Chemistry,
Nankai University, Tianjin, P. R. China.
(2)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Zhongkai University of
Agriculture and Engineering, Guangzhou, P. R. China.
(3)Frontiers Science Center for New Organic Matter, College of Chemistry, Nankai 
University, Tianjin, P. R. China.
(4)Department of Technology for Organic Synthesis, Institute of Chemical
Technology, Ural Federal University Named after the First President of Russia B. 
N. Yeltsin, Ekaterinburg, Russia.

BACKGROUND: Plant elicitors are a class of plant protection agents that can
stimulate plant immunity against phytopathogen without a potential resistance
problem. In searching for novel plant elicitor candidates, a series of novel
N-(2-phenyl-3-pyridyl) thiadiazole/isothiazole carboxamide analogs were designed 
and synthesized.
RESULTS: In vitro bioassay showed that all new compounds exhibited weak direct
fungicidal activity. However, compounds 3b, 3g, 3n and 3o showed broad spectrum
of in vivo activity against four plant fungi tested. In particularly, 3g showed
80% activity against Rhizoctonia solani in a glasshouse at a concentration of
1 μg mL-1 . For induction activity of tobacco against tobacco mosaic virus (TMV),
compounds 3c and 3v showed 67% and 68% inhibitory activity, respectively, which
were superior to the positive controls ribavirin and ningnanmycin. Compound 3g
showed moderate induction activity (41%). Reverse transcription quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) analysis found that, 3g could up-regulate
expression of genes that are related to reactive oxygen species (ROS),
pathogenesis-related protein (PRP) and salicylic acid (SA) signalling.
CONCLUSION: These results indicated that 3g as an elicitor candidate might act on
the SA signalling pathway. According to our findings, N-(2-phenyl-3-pyridyl)
thiadiazole/isothiazole carboxamide analogs might be promising lead scaffolds as 
a novel plant elicitor for further investigation.

© 2021 Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/ps.6728 
PMID: 34799969 

