
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 18;16(11):e0255262. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0255262.
eCollection 2021.

Genomic diversity of bacteriophages infecting Rhodobacter capsulatus and their
relatedness to its gene transfer agent RcGTA.

Rapala J(1), Miller B(1), Garcia M(1), Dolan M(1), Bockman M(1), Hansson M(2),
Russell DA(3), Garlena RA(3), Cresawn SG(4), Westbye AB(5), Beatty JT(5), Alvey
RM(1), Bollivar DW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Illinois Wesleyan University, Bloomington, Illinois,
United States of America.
(2)Department of Biology, Lund University, Sölvegatan 35B, Lund, Sweden.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA,
United States of America.
(4)Department of Biology, James Madison University, Harrisonburg, Virginia,
United States of America.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, Canada.

The diversity of bacteriophages is likely unparalleled in the biome due to the
immense variety of hosts and the multitude of viruses that infect them. Recent
efforts have led to description at the genomic level of numerous bacteriophages
that infect the Actinobacteria, but relatively little is known about those
infecting other prokaryotic phyla, such as the purple non-sulfur photosynthetic
α-proteobacterium Rhodobacter capsulatus. This species is a common inhabitant of 
freshwater ecosystems and has been an important model system for the study of
photosynthesis. Additionally, it is notable for its utilization of a unique form 
of horizontal gene transfer via a bacteriophage-like element known as the gene
transfer agent (RcGTA). Only three bacteriophages of R. capsulatus had been
sequenced prior to this report. Isolation and characterization at the genomic
level of 26 new bacteriophages infecting this host advances the understanding of 
bacteriophage diversity and the origins of RcGTA. These newly discovered isolates
can be grouped along with three that were previously sequenced to form six
clusters with four remaining as single representatives. These bacteriophages
share genes with RcGTA that seem to be related to host recognition. One isolate
was found to cause lysis of a marine bacterium when exposed to high-titer lysate.
Although some clusters are more highly represented in the sequenced genomes, it
is evident that many more bacteriophage types that infect R. capsulatus are
likely to be found in the future.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0255262 
PMCID: PMC8601537
PMID: 34793465 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

