
1. Healthc Q. 2021 Oct;24(3):42-47. doi: 10.12927/hcq.2021.26620.

Impactful Approaches to Leadership on the Front Lines of the COVID-19 Pandemic:
Lived Experiences of Canadian Paramedics.

Boechler L(1), Cameron C(2), Smith JC(3), Ford-Jones P(4), Suthers P(5).

Author information: 
(1)A research chair with the Centre of Health Research, Improvement and
Scholarship, Saskatchewan Polytechnic in Moose Jaw, SK. She is an advanced care
paramedic and a qualitative researcher focusing on the experiences of front-line 
personnel during the COVID-19 pandemic, healthcare accessibility for marginalized
populations and virtual health supports. Lindsey can be reached by e-mail at
lindsey.boechler@saskpolytech.ca.
(2)An advanced care paramedic and educator from Edmonton, AB. She is currently
the director of operations with Canadian Virtual Hospice in Winnipeg, MB, and a
fellow with the McNally Project for Paramedicine Research.
(3)A full-time advanced care paramedic with Peterborough Paramedics as well as a 
graduate student at Trent University in Oshawa, ON, where his research focuses on
the application of data science to paramedic records. He is currently exploring
the modelling and monitoring of the opioid crisis using paramedic data.
(4)A professor in Allied Health at the Humber College Institute of Technology &
Advanced Learning in Toronto, ON. She is a practising primary care paramedic and 
a qualitative researcher focusing on issues of health equity, the social
determinants of health and prehospital mental health and psychosocial care.
(5)A primary care paramedic with the County of Simcoe, ON. He is a member of the 
McNally Project for Paramedic Research and a third-year undergraduate student
studying health sciences at Queen's University in Kingston, ON.

The COVID-19 outbreak offered a unique opportunity to capture the experiences of 
front-line practitioners during substantial and rapid changes to their daily
work, including workplace policy, protocols, environment and culture, as well as 
changes to their overall professional role in the healthcare system. Our team of 
paramedic researchers collected data throughout the first wave of the COVID-19
outbreak, exploring the lived experiences from a paramedic viewpoint. This
article will discuss impactful approaches to leadership in paramedicine -
differentiating between successful and failed strategies to leading and
supporting teams amid rapid change on the front lines of the fight against
COVID-19.

Copyright © 2021 Longwoods Publishing.

DOI: 10.12927/hcq.2021.26620 
PMID: 34792447  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

