
1. BMJ Open. 2021 Nov 19;11(11):e054861. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-054861.

Retrospective cohort study to evaluate medication use in patients hospitalised
with COVID-19 in Scotland: protocol for a national observational study.

Mueller T(1)(2), Kerr S(3), McTaggart S(4), Kurdi A(5)(2), Vasileiou E(3),
Docherty A(3), Fraser K(6), Shi T(3), Simpson CR(3)(7), Bennie M(4)(8), Sheikh
A(3)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Strathclyde Institute of Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences, University of
Strathclyde, Glasgow, UK tanja.muller@strath.ac.uk.
(2)Public Health Scotland Glasgow Office, Glasgow, UK.
(3)Usher Institute, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(4)Public Health Scotland, Edinburgh, UK.
(5)Strathclyde Institute of Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences, University of
Strathclyde, Glasgow, UK.
(6)Triscribe Limited, Glasgow, UK.
(7)School of Health, Wellington Faculty of Health, Victoria University of
Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand.
(8)Institute of Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences, University of Strathclyde,
Glasgow, UK.
(9)BREATHE Hub, HDR UK, Edinburgh, UK.

INTRODUCTION: COVID-19 has caused millions of hospitalisations and deaths
globally. A range of vaccines have been developed and are being deployed at scale
in the UK to prevent SARS-CoV-2 infection, which have reduced risk of infection
and severe COVID-19 outcomes. Those with COVID-19 are now being treated with
several repurposed drugs based on evidence emerging from recent clinical trials. 
However, there is currently limited real-world data available related to the use 
of these drugs in routine clinical practice. The purpose of this study is to
address the prevailing knowledge gaps regarding the use of dexamethasone,
remdesivir and tocilizumab by conducting an exploratory drug utilisation study,
aimed at providing in-depth descriptions of patients receiving these drugs as
well as the treatment patterns observed in Scotland.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: Retrospective cohort study, comprising adult patients
admitted to hospital with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 across five Scottish
Health Boards using data from in-hospital ePrescribing linked to the Early
Estimation of Vaccine and Anti-Viral Effectiveness (EAVE II) COVID-19
surveillance platform. The primary outcome will be exposure to the medicines of
interest (dexamethasone, remdesivir, tocilizumab), either alone or in
combination; exposure will be described in terms of drug(s) of choice; prescribed
and administered dose; treatment duration; and any changes in treatment, for
example, dose escalation and/or switching to an alternative drug. Analyses will
primarily be descriptive in nature.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: Ethical and information governance approvals have been 
obtained by the National Research Ethics Service Committee, South East Scotland
02 and the Public Benefit and Privacy Panel for Health and Social Care,
respectively. Findings from this study will be presented at academic and clinical
conferences, and to the funders and other interested parties as appropriate;
study findings will also be published in peer-reviewed journals. Publications
will be available on the EAVE II website
(https://www.ed.ac.uk/usher/eave-ii/key-outputs/our-publications), alongside lay 
summaries and infographics aimed at the general public. Press releases will also 
be considered, if appropriate.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-054861 
PMCID: PMC8609490
PMID: 34799365  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: AS reports grants from NIHR,
grants from MRC, grants from HDR UK, during the conduct of the study. CRS reports
funding from NIHR (UK), MRC (UK), CSO (UK), Health Research Council (NZ) and
Ministry for Business, Innovation and Employment (NZ) during the conduct of this 
study. KF is Director of Triscribe, a company providing data quality services and
software support. All other authors report no conflicts of interest.

