
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 1;12:735866. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.735866. eCollection 
2021.

Constitutive IFNα Protein Production in Bats.

Bondet V(1), Le Baut M(2), Le Poder S(2)(3), Lécu A(4), Petit T(5), Wedlarski
R(6), Duffy D(1), Le Roux D(2)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Immunology Lab, Institut Pasteur, Université de Paris, Paris,
France.
(2)BioPôle Alfort, Ecole Nationale Vétérinaire d'Alfort, Maisons-Alfort, France.
(3)Anses, INRAE, Ecole Nationale Vétérinaire d'Alfort, UMR VIROLOGIE, Laboratoire
de Santé Animale, Maisons-Alfort, France.
(4)Parc Zoologique de Paris, Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France.
(5)Parc Zoologique de La Palmyre, Les Mathes, France.
(6)Bioparc Zoo de Doué La Fontaine, Doué-la-Fontaine, France.
(7)Anses, INRAE, Ecole Nationale Vétérinaire d'Alfort, UMR BIPAR, Laboratoire de 
Santé Animale, Maisons-Alfort, France.

Bats are the only mammals with self-powered flight and account for 20% of all
extant mammalian diversity. In addition, they harbor many emerging and reemerging
viruses, including multiple coronaviruses, several of which are highly pathogenic
in other mammals, but cause no disease in bats. How this symbiotic relationship
between bats and viruses exists is not yet fully understood. Existing evidence
supports a specific role for the innate immune system, in particular type I
interferon (IFN) responses, a major component of antiviral immunity. Previous
studies in bats have shown that components of the IFN pathway are constitutively 
activated at the transcriptional level. In this study, we tested the hypothesis
that the type I IFN response in bats is also constitutively activated at the
protein level. For this, we utilized highly sensitive Single Molecule (Simoa)
digital ELISA assays, previously developed for humans that we adapted to bat
samples. We prospectively sampled four non-native chiroptera species from French 
zoos. We identified a constitutive expression of IFNα protein in the circulation 
of healthy bats, and concentrations that are physiologically active in humans.
Expression levels differed according to the species examined, but were not
associated with age, sex, or health status suggesting constitutive IFNα protein
expression independent of disease. These results confirm a unique IFN response in
bat species that may explain their ability to coexist with multiple viruses in
the absence of pathology. These results may help to manage potential zoonotic
viral reservoirs and potentially identify new anti-viral strategies.

Copyright © 2021 Bondet, Le Baut, Le Poder, Lécu, Petit, Wedlarski, Duffy and Le 
Roux.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.735866 
PMCID: PMC8591296
PMID: 34790193 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

