
1. J Public Health Manag Pract. 2022 Jan-Feb 01;28(1):E9-E15. doi:
10.1097/PHH.0000000000001447.

Navigating the Storm of COVID-19 Literature Through Academic-Practice Partnership
in Washington State: The COVID-19 Literature Situation Report.

Simckes M(1), Shah A, Guthrie BL, Ross JM, Wasserheit J, Wickersham K, Wasserman 
C.

Author information: 
(1)Washington State Department of Health, Tumwater, Washington (Drs Simckes and
Wasserman, Ms Shah, and Mr Wickersham); Departments of Epidemiology (Drs Guthrie,
Wasserheit, and Wasserman), Global Health (Drs Guthrie, Ross, and Wasserheit),
and Medicine (Drs Ross and Wasserheit), University of Washington, Washington,
Seattle; and University of Washington Alliance for Pandemic Preparedness,
Washington, Seattle (Drs Guthrie, Ross, and Wasserheit).

CONTEXT: Shortly after the first COVID-19 case in the United States was
identified in Washington, the Washington State Department of Health (WA DOH)
determined that real-time knowledge of scientific findings related to SARS-CoV-2 
was critical for an effective response. Epidemiologists at the WA DOH established
the Daily Literature Situation Report (Lit Rep), within the agency's incident
management team, to support public health and state leaders in evidence-based
decision making. However, from January to May, the scale of the pandemic response
and daily volume of emerging information grew beyond the capacity of the WA DOH
epidemiology team tasked with gathering, reviewing, summarizing, and
disseminating it daily.
OBJECTIVE: To ensure public health leaders maintained awareness of the rapidly
evolving scientific literature during the pandemic to support evidence-based
practice.
DESIGN: The WA DOH contracted the University of Washington (UW) Alliance for
Pandemic Preparedness to assemble a team of faculty and students to continue
producing the Lit Rep.
MAIN OUTCOME: In addition to the daily Lit Rep, the UW team developed in-depth
reports addressing questions from public health leadership and further evolved
the methodology for the daily reports to support long-term sustainability and
broader accessibility.
RESULTS: Throughout its existence, the Lit Rep had summarized more than 4300
articles from more than 150 000 citations and had more than 5600 subscribers from
public health practice, academia, and the general public, both domestic and
international.
CONCLUSIONS: The flexible Lit Rep model sets a standard for responding to
emerging public health threats and communicating complex scientific information
to government leaders, public health staff, and other interested parties. The WA 
DOH and the UW have exemplified how a mutually beneficial partnership can be
established to support more effective public health practice based on real-time
evidence both during a crisis and potentially for future public health
challenges.

Copyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/PHH.0000000000001447 
PMID: 34797248  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

