
1. Cell. 2021 Nov 24;184(24):5932-5949.e15. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2021.10.027. Epub
2021 Nov 3.

Visualizing in deceased COVID-19 patients how SARS-CoV-2 attacks the respiratory 
and olfactory mucosae but spares the olfactory bulb.

Khan M(1), Yoo SJ(1), Clijsters M(2), Backaert W(3), Vanstapel A(4), Speleman
K(5), Lietaer C(5), Choi S(1), Hether TD(6), Marcelis L(4), Nam A(6), Pan L(6),
Reeves JW(6), Van Bulck P(7), Zhou H(1), Bourgeois M(8), Debaveye Y(9), De Munter
P(10), Gunst J(9), Jorissen M(11), Lagrou K(12), Lorent N(13), Neyrinck A(14),
Peetermans M(10), Thal DR(15), Vandenbriele C(16), Wauters J(10), Mombaerts
P(17), Van Gerven L(18).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Research Unit for Neurogenetics, Frankfurt, Germany.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, Experimental Otorhinolaryngology, Rhinology
Research, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospitals
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; Department of Microbiology, Immunology and
Transplantation, Allergy and Clinical Immunology Research Unit, KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Department of Pathology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, AZ Sint-Jan
Brugge-Oostende AV, Bruges, Belgium.
(6)NanoString Technologies Inc., Seattle, WA, USA.
(7)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospitals
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(8)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, AZ Sint-Jan
Brugge-Oostende AV, Bruges, Belgium.
(9)Intensive Care Medicine, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium;
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Laboratory of Intensive Care
Medicine, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(10)Department of General Internal Medicine, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium; Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Laboratory
for Clinical Infectious and Inflammatory Disorders, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(11)Department of Neurosciences, Experimental Otorhinolaryngology, Rhinology
Research, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and
Neck Surgery, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(12)Department of Laboratory Medicine and National Reference Centre for
Respiratory Pathogens, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; Department
of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Laboratory of Clinical
Bacteriology and Mycology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(13)Department of Respiratory Diseases, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium.
(14)Department of Anesthesia, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium;
Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(15)Department of Pathology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium;
Department of Imaging and Pathology, Laboratory of Neuropathology and Leuven
Brain Institute, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(16)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; Department
of Cardiovascular Diseases, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(17)Max Planck Research Unit for Neurogenetics, Frankfurt, Germany. Electronic
address: peter.mombaerts@gen.mpg.de.
(18)Department of Neurosciences, Experimental Otorhinolaryngology, Rhinology
Research, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and
Neck Surgery, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; Department of
Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Allergy and Clinical Immunology
Research Unit, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address:
laura.vangerven@uzleuven.be.

Anosmia, the loss of smell, is a common and often the sole symptom of COVID-19.
The onset of the sequence of pathobiological events leading to olfactory
dysfunction remains obscure. Here, we have developed a postmortem bedside
surgical procedure to harvest endoscopically samples of respiratory and olfactory
mucosae and whole olfactory bulbs. Our cohort of 85 cases included COVID-19
patients who died a few days after infection with SARS-CoV-2, enabling us to
catch the virus while it was still replicating. We found that sustentacular cells
are the major target cell type in the olfactory mucosa. We failed to find
evidence for infection of olfactory sensory neurons, and the parenchyma of the
olfactory bulb is spared as well. Thus, SARS-CoV-2 does not appear to be a
neurotropic virus. We postulate that transient insufficient support from
sustentacular cells triggers transient olfactory dysfunction in COVID-19.
Olfactory sensory neurons would become affected without getting infected.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2021.10.027 
PMCID: PMC8564600
PMID: 34798069 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests T.D.H., A.N., L.P., and 
J.W.R. are employees and stockholders at NanoString Technologies, Inc.

