
1. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2021 Nov 17. doi: 10.1111/jocd.14613. [Epub ahead of print]

Cutaneous and Allergic reactions due to COVID-19 vaccinations: A review.

Temiz SA(1), Abdelmaksoud A(2), Wollina U(3), Kutlu O(4), Dursun R(5), Patil
A(6), Lotti T(7)(8), Goldust M(9), Vestita M(10)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Konya Ereğli State Hospital, Konya, Turkey.
(2)Mansoura Dermatology, Venerology and Leprology Hospital, Mansoura, Egypt.
(3)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, Städtisches Klinikum Dresden,
Academic Teaching Hospital, Dresden, Germany.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Tokat Gaziosmanpsa University, Tokat, Turkey.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Necmettin Erbakan University Meram Medical Faculty,
Konya, Turkey.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, Dr. DY Patil Medical College, Navi Mumbai, India.
(7)University of Rome G. Marconi, Rome, Italy.
(8)Department of Dermatology and Communicable Diseases, First Medical State
Moscow University I. M. Sechenev, Moscow, Russia.
(9)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
(10)Unit of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Department of Emergency and Organ
Transplantation, University of Bari, Bari, Italy.
(11)Department of Dermatology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The pandemic caused by the novel coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) has had an unprecedented impact on the overall health and the global
economy. Vaccination is currently the most dependable strategy to end the
pandemic, despite the slower-than-hoped-for rollout, particularly for
low-to-middle-income countries, and the uncertain duration of protection afforded
by vaccination. The spike protein of the virus (immunodominant antigen of the
virus) is the main target of the approved and candidate SARS-CoV-2 vaccines. This
protein binds to the ACE2 receptor of the host cell, initiating the entry of the 
virus into the cell and the chain of subsequent events ending to Acute
Respiratory Distress Syndrome. The safety profile of these vaccines needs is
closely assessed.
METHODS: This comprehensive review includes searching the PubMed, EMBASE, and Web
of Science databases using the keywords "coronavirus", "COVID-19", "vaccine",
"cutaneous reactions", "allergic reactions", and "SARS-CoV-2". Manual searching
of reference lists of included articles augmented the research. The research was 
updated in June 2021.
RESULTS: In this narrative review, we tried to investigate and discuss the
cutaneous and allergic reactions related to SARS-CoV-2 vaccines currently
available in the literature. As a result, although COVID-19 vaccines can be
reported to develop allergic and anaphylactic reactions, especially after m-RNA
vaccines, they remain at a low rate, and it is observed that these reactions may 
develop more frequently, especially in patients with previous allergies and mast 
cell disorders. Fortunately, these reactions are generally transient, benign,
self-limited.
CONCLUSION: Although there is still no definitive evidence, as dermatologists, we
must be aware of the possibility of cutaneous reactions, newly diagnosed
dermatoses, or exacerbation of existing dermatoses that may develop after the
COVID-19 vaccinations.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/jocd.14613 
PMID: 34791757 

