
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 2;12:698808. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.698808. eCollection 
2021.

Herpes DNAemia and TTV Viraemia in Intensive Care Unit Critically Ill Patients: A
Single-Centre Prospective Longitudinal Study.

Mallet F(1), Diouf L(1)(2), Meunier B(1)(3), Perret M(4), Reynier F(4), Leissner 
P(4), Quemeneur L(5), Griffiths AD(6), Moucadel V(1), Pachot A(1), Venet F(1),
Monneret G(1), Lepape A(1), Rimmelé T(1), Tan LK(7), Brengel-Pesce K(1), Textoris
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)EA 7426 "Pathophysiology of Injury-Induced Immunosuppression" (Université
Claude Bernard Lyon 1-Hospices Civils de Lyon-bioMérieux), Joint Research Unit
HCL-bioMérieux, Immunology Laboratory & Anesthesia and Critical Care Medicine
Department, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Edouard Herriot Hospital, Lyon, France.
(2)IVIDATA, Levallois-Perret, France.
(3)Soladis Inc., Cambridge, MA, United States.
(4)BIOASTER Technology Research Institute, Lyon, France.
(5)Sanofi Pasteur, Sanofi, Marcy l'Etoile, France.
(6)Laboratoire de Biochimie (LBC), École Supérieure de Physique et de Chimie
Industrielles de la ville de Paris (ESPCI) Paris, Paris Sciences & Lettres (PSL) 
Université, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) UMR8231, Paris,
France.
(7)GlaxoSmithKline, Brentford, United Kingdom.

Introduction: We analysed blood DNAemia of TTV and four herpesviruses (CMV, EBV, 
HHV6, and HSV-1) in the REAnimation Low Immune Status Marker (REALISM) cohort of 
critically ill patients who had presented with either sepsis, burns, severe
trauma, or major surgery. The aim was to identify common features related to
virus and injury-associated pathologies and specific features linking one or
several viruses to a particular pathological context.
Methods: Overall and individual viral DNAemia were measured over a month using
quantitative PCR assays from the 377 patients in the REALISM cohort. These
patients were characterised by clinical outcomes [severity scores, mortality,
Intensive Care Unit (ICU)-acquired infection (IAI)] and 48 parameters defining
their host response after injury (cell populations, immune functional assays, and
biomarkers). Association between viraemic event and clinical outcomes or immune
markers was assessed using χ2-test or exact Fisher's test for qualitative
variables and Wilcoxon test for continuous variables.
Results: The cumulative incidence of viral DNAemia increased from below 4% at ICU
admission to 35% for each herpesvirus during the first month. EBV, HSV1, HHV6,
and CMV were detected in 18%, 12%, 10%, and 9% of patients, respectively. The
incidence of high TTV viraemia (>10,000 copies/ml) increased from 11% to 15%
during the same period. Herpesvirus viraemia was associated with severity at
admission; CMV and HHV6 viraemia correlated with mortality during the first week 
and over the month. The presence of individual herpesvirus during the first month
was significantly associated (p < 0.001) with the occurrence of IAI, whilst
herpesvirus DNAemia coupled with high TTV viraemia during the very first week was
associated with IAI. Herpesvirus viraemia was associated with a lasting
exacerbated host immune response, with concurrent profound immune suppression and
hyper inflammation, and delayed return to immune homeostasis. The percentage of
patients presenting with herpesvirus DNAemia was significantly higher in sepsis
than in all other groups. Primary infection in the hospital and high IL10 levels 
might favour EBV and CMV reactivation.
Conclusion: In this cohort of ICU patients, phenotypic differences were observed 
between TTV and herpesviruses DNAemia. The higher prevalence of herpesvirus
DNAemia in sepsis hints at further studies that may enable a better in vivo
understanding of host determinants of herpesvirus viral reactivation.
Furthermore, our data suggest that EBV and TTV may be useful as additional
markers to predict clinical deterioration in ICU patients.

Copyright © 2021 Mallet, Diouf, Meunier, Perret, Reynier, Leissner, Quemeneur,
Griffiths, Moucadel, Pachot, Venet, Monneret, Lepape, Rimmelé, Tan, Brengel-Pesce
and Textoris.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.698808 
PMCID: PMC8593420
PMID: 34795661 

Conflict of interest statement: FM, VM, AP, KB-P, and JT are employees of
bioMérieux SA, an in vitro diagnostic company. LD was employed by IVIDATA. BM was
employed by company Soladis Inc. FV, GM, AP, TR, and JT are employees of Hospices
Civils de Lyon. FM, LD, BM, VM, AP, FV, GM, AL, TR, KB-P, and JT work in a joint 
research unit, co-funded by the Hospices Civils de Lyon and bioMérieux. LT is an 
employee of and hold stock and shares in GlaxoSmithKline. LQ is an employee of
Sanofi Pasteur. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in 
the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed 
as a potential conflict of interest.

