
1. Brain. 2021 Nov 16. pii: awab419. doi: 10.1093/brain/awab419. [Epub ahead of
print]

The neuroradiology of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy: a clinical
trial perspective.

Baldassari LE(1), Wattjes MP(2), Cortese ICM(3), Gass A(4), Metz I(5), Yousry
T(6), Reich DS(7), Richert N(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurology 2, Office of Neuroscience, Office of New Drugs, Center
for Drug Evaluation and Research, United States Food and Drug Administration,
Silver Spring, Maryland, 20993, USA.
(2)Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Neuroradiology, Hannover Medical
School, 30625 Hannover, Germany.
(3)Neuroimmunology Clinic, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, 20892, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology/Neuroimaging, Mannheim Center of Translational
Neuroscience, University Medical Centre Mannheim, Medical Faculty Mannheim,
Heidelberg University, 68167 Mannheim, Germany.
(5)Institute of Neuropathology, University Medical Center Göttingen,
37075 Göttingen, Germany.
(6)Neuroradiological Academic Unit, UCL IoN; Lysholm Department of
Neuroradiology, UCLH National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, London,
UK.
(7)Translational Neuroradiology Section, National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, 20892,
USA.
(8)NeuroRx Research, Montreal QC H2X 3P9, Canada.

Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is an opportunistic infection of
the central nervous system caused by the JC virus, which infects white and grey
matter cells and leads to irreversible demyelination and neuroaxonal damage.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), in addition to the clinical presentation 
and demonstration of JC virus DNA either in the CSF or by histopathology, is an
important tool in the detection of PML. In clinical practice, standard MRI pulse 
sequences are utilized for screening, diagnosis, and monitoring of PML, but
validated imaging-based outcome measures for use in prospective, interventional
clinical trials for PML have yet to be established. We review the existing
literature regarding the use of MRI and positron emission tomography imaging in
PML and discuss the implications of PML histopathology for neuroradiology. MRI
not only demonstrates the localization and extent of PML lesions, but also
mirrors the tissue destruction, ongoing viral spread, and resulting inflammation.
Finally, we explore the potential for imaging measures to serve as an outcome in 
PML clinical trials and provide recommendations for current and future imaging
outcome measure development in this area.

© The Author(s) (2021). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Guarantors of Brain. All rights reserved. for permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awab419 
PMID: 34791056 

