
1. BMJ Open. 2021 Nov 19;11(11):e055024. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-055024.

How has COVID-19 impacted the civil registration and vital statistics system in
Loreto, Perú? Evidence using process mapping and qualitative analysis.

Silva-Valencia J(1), Adair T(2), Hart J(3), Meza G(4), Vargas Herrera J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Telehealth Unit, School of Medicine, Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos,
Lima, Peru.
(2)Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, The University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia timothy.adair@unimelb.edu.au.
(3)Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, The University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(4)School of Medicine, Universidad Nacional de la Amazonía Peruana, Iquitos,
Peru.

OBJECTIVES: Accurate civil registration and vital statistics (CRVS) systems are
the primary data source to measure the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on
mortality. This study assesses how the pandemic impacted CRVS system processes in
Loreto region of Peru, one of the worst affected countries globally.
DESIGN: Qualitative study.
SETTING: Loreto, a remote region, which had the highest reported mortality rate
in Peru during the pandemic.
PARTICIPANTS: Semistructured individual interviews and documentary analysis were 
conducted between September 2020 and May 2021 with 28 key informants from eight
institutions involved in death certification. Key informants were identified
using a purposive sampling strategy commencing at the Health Directorate of
Loreto, and the snowball method was used where a participant suggested another
organisation or person. Information from key informants was used to compare
business process maps of the CRVS system before and during the pandemic.
RESULTS: During early May 2020, there were seven times more registered deaths
than in earlier years, but key informants believed this underestimated mortality 
by 20%-30%. During the pandemic, families had to interact with more institutions 
during the death certification process. Several issues disrupted death
certification processes, including the burden of increased deaths, the
Environmental Health Directorate often removing a body without the family's
express agreement, the creation of COVID-19 cemeteries where no death certificate
was needed for burial, greater participation of funeral homes that often used
outdated paper forms, and closure of civil registry offices. There was increased 
use of the online National Death System (SINADEF) but many users had problems
with access.
CONCLUSIONS: The pandemic substantially disrupted CRVS processes in Loreto,
making death certification more difficult, placing greater burden on the family
and leading to more participation from unregulated organisations such as funeral 
homes or cemeteries. These disruptions were impacted by limitations of the CRVS
system's processes before the pandemic.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-055024 
PMCID: PMC8609502
PMID: 34799366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

