
1. Brief Bioinform. 2021 Nov 12. pii: bbab455. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbab455. [Epub ahead
of print]

Integrative COVID-19 biological network inference with probabilistic core
decomposition.

Guo Y(1), Esfahani F(2), Shao X(3), Srinivasan V(2), Thomo A(2), Xing L(4), Zhang
X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Victoria, 3800
Finnerty Road, V8P 5C2, Victoria, BC, Canada.
(2)Department of Computer Science, University of Victoria, 3800 Finnerty Road,
V8P 5C2, Victoria, BC, Canada.
(3)Digital Technologies Research Centre, National Research Council Canada, 1200
Montreal Road, K1A 0R6, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(4)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Saskatchewan, 110
Science Place, S7N 5A2, Saskatoon, SK, Canada.

The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is responsible
for millions of deaths around the world. To help contribute to the understanding 
of crucial knowledge and to further generate new hypotheses relevant to
SARS-CoV-2 and human protein interactions, we make use of the information
abundant Biomine probabilistic database and extend the experimentally identified 
SARS-CoV-2-human protein-protein interaction (PPI) network in silico. We generate
an extended network by integrating information from the Biomine database, the PPI
network and other experimentally validated results. To generate novel hypotheses,
we focus on the high-connectivity sub-communities that overlap most with the
integrated experimentally validated results in the extended network. Therefore,
we propose a new data analysis pipeline that can efficiently compute core
decomposition on the extended network and identify dense subgraphs. We then
evaluate the identified dense subgraph and the generated hypotheses in three
contexts: literature validation for uncovered virus targeting genes and proteins,
gene function enrichment analysis on subgraphs and literature support on drug
repurposing for identified tissues and diseases related to COVID-19. The major
types of the generated hypotheses are proteins with their encoding genes and we
rank them by sorting their connections to the integrated experimentally validated
nodes. In addition, we compile a comprehensive list of novel genes, and proteins 
potentially related to COVID-19, as well as novel diseases which might be
comorbidities. Together with the generated hypotheses, our results provide novel 
knowledge relevant to COVID-19 for further validation.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbab455 
PMID: 34791019 

