
1. Oral Oncol. 2021 Nov 17;123:105620. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2021.105620.
[Epub ahead of print]

De-escalation studies in HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer: How should we
proceed?

Golusinski P(1), Corry J(2), Poorten VV(3), Simo R(4), Sjögren E(5), Mäkitie
A(6), Kowalski LP(7), Langendijk J(8), Braakhuis BJM(9), Takes RP(10), Coca-Pelaz
A(11), Rodrigo JP(12), Willems SM(13), Forastiere AA(14), De Bree R(15), Saba
NF(16), Teng Y(17), Sanabria A(18), Di Maio P(19), Szewczyk M(20), Ferlito A(21).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology and Maxillofacial Surgery, University of Zielona 
Gora; Department of Maxillofacial Surgery Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 
Poland. Electronic address: pgolusinski@uz.zgora.pl.
(2)Department Radiation Oncology, GenesisCare St Vincent's Hospital, Melbourne,
Australia.
(3)Surgery and Department of Oncology, University Hospitals Leuven, KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Head & Neck Surgery, Guy's & St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(5)Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery Department, Leidse Universitaire Medisch
Centrum (LUMC), University of Leiden, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, HUS Helsinki
University Hospital and University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; Research
Program in Systems Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki,
Finland; Division of Ear, Nose, Finland.
(7)Head and Neck Surgery Department, AC Camargo Cancer Center, São Paulo, Brazil.
(8)Department of Radiation Oncology, University Medical Center Groningen,
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(9)International Head and Neck Scientific Group, Italy.
(10)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Radboud University
Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(11)Department of Otolaryngology, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias,
Oviedo, Spain.
(12)Department of Otolaryngology, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias,
Oviedo, Spain, Instituto Universitario de Oncología del Principado de Asturias,
Oviedo, Spain.
(13)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.
(14)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(15)Department of Head and Neck Surgical Oncology, University Medical Center
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(16)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(17)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology Emory University School of
Medicine; Winship Cancer Institute of Emory University, Georgia.
(18)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, Universidad de Antioquia, Centro
de Excelencia en Cirugia de Cabeza y Cuello-CEXCA, Medellin, Colombia.
(19)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Giovanni Borea Civil
Hospital, San Remo, Italy.
(20)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Poznan University of Medical Sciences,
Greater Poland Cancer Center, Poznan, Poland.
(21)Coordinator of the International Head and Neck Scientific Group, Padua,
Italy.

Human papilloma virus (HPV) is a well-established causative factor in a subset of
squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck (HNSCC). Although HPV can be
detected in various anatomical subsites, HPV-positive oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinoma (OPSCC) is the most common HPV-related malignancy of the head and neck,
and its worldwide incidence is constantly rising. Patients with OPSCC are
generally younger, have less co-morbidities and generally have better prognosis
due to different biological mechanisms of carcinogenesis. These facts have
generated hypotheses on potential treatment modifications, aiming to minimize
treatment-related toxicities without compromising therapy efficacy. Numerous
randomized clinical trials have been designed to verify this strategy and
increasingly real-world evidence data from retrospective, observational studies
is becoming available. Until now, the data do not support any modification in
contemporary treatment protocols. In this narrative review, we outline recent
data provided by both randomized controlled trials and real-world evidence of
HPV-positive OPSCC in terms of clinical value. We critically analyze the
potential value and drawbacks of the available data and highlight future research
directions. This article was written by members and invitees of the International
Head and Neck Scientific Group.(www.IHNSG.com).

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2021.105620 
PMID: 34798575 

