
1. World J Gastroenterol. 2021 Oct 28;27(40):6737-6749. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v27.i40.6737.

Hepatocellular carcinoma risk after viral response in hepatitis C virus-advanced 
fibrosis: Who to screen and for how long?

Ahumada A(1), Rayón L(1), Usón C(1), Bañares R(1), Alonso Lopez S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Liver Unit, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Madrid 28007,
Spain.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) chronic infection is associated with fibrosis
progression, end-stage liver complications and HCC. Not surprisingly, HCV
infection is a leading cause of liver-related morbidity and mortality worldwide. 
After sustained virological response (SVR), the risk of developing hepatocellular
carcinoma is not completely eliminated in patients with established cirrhosis or 
with advanced fibrosis. Therefore, lifelong surveillance is currently
recommended. This strategy is likely not universally cost-effective and harmless,
considering that not all patients with advanced fibrosis have the same risk of
developing HCC. Factors related to the severity of liver disease and its
potential to improve after SVR, the molecular and epigenetic changes that occur
during infection and other associated comorbidities might account for different
risk levels and are likely essential for identifying patients who would benefit
from screening programs after SVR. Efforts to develop predictive models and risk 
calculators, biomarkers and genetic panels and even deep learning models to
estimate the individual risk of HCC have been made in the direct-acting antiviral
agents era, when thousands of patients with advanced fibrosis and cirrhosis have 
reached SVR. These tools could help to identify patients with very low HCC risk
in whom surveillance might not be justified. In this review, factors affecting
the probability of HCC development after SVR, the benefits and risks of
surveillance, suggested strategies to estimate individualized HCC risk and the
current evidence to recommend lifelong surveillance are discussed.

©The Author(s) 2021. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v27.i40.6737 
PMCID: PMC8567476
PMID: 34790004  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: Adriana Ahumada
has received fees for serving as a speaker and a grant from Abbvie and personal
fees for serving as a speaker and for Gilead. Laura Rayón, Clara Usón and Rafael 
Bañares have nothing to disclose. Sonia Alonso has received fees for serving as a
speaker and consultant from Abbvie and Gilead.

