
1. J Gen Virol. 2021 Nov;102(11). doi: 10.1099/jgv.0.001674.

Field surveys in Croatia and North Macedonia reveal two novel phleboviruses
circulating in sandflies.

Ayhan N(1), Alten B(2), Ivovic V(3), Cvetkovikj A(4), Stefanovska J(4),
Martinkovic F(5), Piorkowski G(1), Moureau G(1), Gould EA(1), Pettersson
JH(6)(7), de Lamballerie X(1), Charrel RN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unite des Virus Emergents (Aix-Marseille Univ - IRD 190 - Inserm 1207 - IHU
Mediterranee Infection), Marseille, France.
(2)Faculty of Science, Department of Biology, Ecology Division, VERG Labs,
Hacettepe University, Beytepe, Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Faculty of Mathematics, Natural Sciences and Information Technologies
(FAMNIT), University of Primorska, Koper, Slovenia.
(4)Department of Parasitology and Parasitic Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Ss. Cyril and Methodius University in Skopje, Lazar Pop-Trajkov 5-7,
1000 Skopje, Republic of North Macedonia.
(5)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Parasitology and Parasitic
Diseases with Clinics, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
(6)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology (IMBIM), Zoonosis Science 
Center, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(7)Marie Bashir Institute for Infectious Diseases and Biosecurity, Charles
Perkins Centre, School of Life and Environmental Sciences and Sydney Medical
School, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia.

Sandfly-borne phleboviruses are distributed widely throughout the Mediterranean
Basin, presenting a threat to public health in areas where they circulate.
However, the true diversity and distribution of pathogenic and apathogenic
sandfly-borne phleboviruses remains a key issue to be studied. In the Balkans,
most published data rely on serology-based studies although virus isolation has
occasionally been reported. Here, we report the discovery of two novel
sandfly-borne phleboviruses, provisionally named Zaba virus (ZABAV) and Bregalaka
virus (BREV), which were isolated in Croatia and North Macedonia, respectively.
This constitutes the first isolation of phleboviruses in both countries. Genetic 
analysis based on complete coding sequences indicated that ZABAV and BREV are
distinct from each other and belong to the genus Phlebovirus, family
Phenuiviridae. Phylogenetic and amino acid modelling of viral polymerase shows
that ZABAV and BREV are new members of the Salehabad phlebovirus species and the 
Adana phlebovirus species, respectively. Moreover, sequence-based vector
identification suggests that ZABAV is mainly transmitted by Phlebotomus neglectus
and BREV is mainly transmitted by Phlebotomus perfiliewi. BREV neutralizing
antibodies were detected in 3.3% of human sera with rates up to 16.7% in certain 
districts, demonstrating that BREV frequently infects humans in North Macedonia. 
In vitro viral growth kinetics experiments demonstrated viral replication of both
viruses in mammalian and mosquito cells. In vivo experimental studies in mice
suggest that ZABAV and BREV exhibit characteristics making them possible human
pathogens.

DOI: 10.1099/jgv.0.001674 
PMID: 34797756 

