
1. Infect Drug Resist. 2021 Nov 9;14:4701-4715. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S335666.
eCollection 2021.

Comparative Analysis of Serum Proteins Between Hepatitis B Virus Genotypes B and 
C Infection by DIA-Based Quantitative Proteomics.

Chen Y(1)(2), Wei D(1)(2)(3), Deng M(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Affiliated Hospital of Jiaxing University, 
Jiaxing, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, First Hospital of Jiaxing, Jiaxing,
People's Republic of China.
(3)Institute of Hepatology, Affiliated Hospital of Jiaxing University, Jiaxing,
People's Republic of China.

Purpose: In clinical practice, the clinicopathological profiles and outcomes of
patients infected with hepatitis B virus (HBV) are different between genotypes B 
and C. However, little is known about the potential mechanism and differences in 
specific biological pathways associated with the different genotype. This study
aimed to compare the serum protein profile between patients infected with HBV
genotype B and those infected with HBV genotype C.
Patients and Methods: A total of 54 serum samples from patients with chronic HBV 
genotype B infection and those with chronic HBV genotype C infection, and healthy
controls were used for the proteomic analysis (n = 18 samples in per group).
Serum proteomic profiles were analyzed using data-independent acquisition
(DIA)-based liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry to identify differentially
expressed proteins (up- or downregulation of at least 1.5-fold) between serum
samples from HBV patients infected with HBV genotype B and those infected with
genotype C.
Results: We identified 1010 proteins, 53 of which were differentially expressed
between the serum samples of the healthy controls and those of HBV genotype B
infected patients, and 59 that were differentially expressed between the samples 
of the healthy controls and those of HBV genotype C infected patients.
Furthermore, our results indicated that two proteins identified as being
differentially expressed (VWF and C8B) have potential as biomarkers for
distinguishing genotype B infected HBV patients from those infected with genotype
C.
Conclusion: The results of our DIA-based quantitative proteomic analysis revealed
that HBV genotypes B and C are associated with different molecular profiles and
may provide fundamental information for further detailed investigations of the
molecular mechanism underlying these differences.

© 2021 Chen et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S335666 
PMCID: PMC8592397
PMID: 34795487 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.

