
1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2021 Nov 15;27(Supplement_2):S25-S32. doi:
10.1093/ibd/izab180.

Colon Capsule Endoscopy in the Assessment of Mucosal Healing in Crohn's Disease.

Papalia I(1)(2), Tjandra D(2), Quah S(2), Tan C(2), Gorelik A(2), Sivanesan S(2),
Macrae F(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(2)Department of Colorectal Medicine and Genetics, The Royal Melbourne Hospital, 
Parkville, VIC, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Patients with Crohn's disease (CD) undergo frequent endoscopic
procedures, with visualization of the gastrointestinal mucosa central to
treatment decision-making. Subsequently, a noninvasive alternative to optical
colonoscopy (OC) would be welcomed. One such technology is capsule endoscopy,
including the PillCam COLON 2 (PCC2), though research validating its use in
ileocolonic CD is limited. This study aims to compare PCC2 with ileocolonoscopy
(OC) in assessing mucosal CD through use of a standardized scoring system.
METHODS: At an Australian tertiary hospital, same-day PCC2 and ileocolonoscopy
results of 47 CD patients, with known nonstricturing disease, were prospectively 
collected and analyzed for correlation and agreement. Deidentified recordings
were reported by a single expert gastroenterologist. Mucosal disease was
quantified using the Simple Endoscopic Score for Crohn's Disease (SES-CD). The
SES-CD results of paired endoscopic modalities were compared in total per bowel
segment and per SES-CD variable.
RESULTS: Of 47 PCC2 recordings, 68% were complete, fully assessing terminal ileum
to rectum, and OC was complete in 89%. Correlation (r) between total SES-CD
scores was strongest in the terminal ileum (r = 0.77, P < .001), with the SES-CD 
variable of "ulcer detection" showing the strongest agreement. The PCC2 (vs OC)
identified additional ulcers in the terminal ileum; ascending, transverse, and
descending colon; and rectum; scores were 5 (1), 5 (3), 1 (1), 2 (1), and 2 (2), 
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The PCC2 shows promise in assessing ileocolonic mucosa, especially
in proximal bowel segments, with greater reach of visualization in the small
bowel. Given the resource and safety considerations raised by the Coronavirus
disease 2019 pandemic, capsule endoscopy has particular significance.This article
aims to contribute to the limited body of research surrounding the validity of
capsule endoscopy technology in assessing ileocolonic mucosa in Crohn's Disease
patients. In doing so, an alternative option for patients enduring frequent
endoscopies is given potential.

© 2021 Crohn’s & Colitis Foundation. Published by Oxford University Press. All
rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ibd/izab180 
PMID: 34791289  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

