
1. J Addict Med. 2021 Nov 18. doi: 10.1097/ADM.0000000000000937. [Epub ahead of
print]

Sex-specific Risk Factors and Health Disparity Among Hepatitis C Positive
Patients Receiving Pharmacotherapy for Opioid Use Disorder: Findings From a
Propensity Matched Analysis.

Dennis BB(1), Martin LJ, Naji L, Akhtar D, Cholankeril G, Kim D, Sanger N,
Hillmer A, Chawar C, D'Elia A, Panesar B, Worster A, Marsh DC, O'Shea T, Bawor M,
Thabane L, Samaan Z, Ahmed A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Michael G. DeGroote School of Medicine, McMaster
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada (BBD, LJM, AW, TO); Department of Family
Medicine, Michael DeGroote School of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON,
Canada (LN); Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford University, CA (BBD, GC, DK, AA); Department of
Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver Costal Health, Vancouver,
Canada (DA); Department of Psychiatry and Behavioural Neurosciences, McMaster
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada (NS, AH, CC, AD, BP, ZS); Department of Health
Research Evaluation and Impact (Formerly Department of Clinical Epidemiology and 
Biostatistics), McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada (LN, AW, LT, ZS);
Northern Ontario School of Medicine, Sudbury ON, Canada (DCM); Canadian Addiction
Treatment Centres, Markham ON, Canada (DCM); Guys and St. Thomas Hospital NHS
Trust, London, United Kingdom (MB); Centre for Evaluation of Medicine, Hamilton, 
ON, Canada (LT); System Linked Research Unit, Hamilton, ON, Canada (LT);
Population Genomics Program, Chanchlani Research Centre, McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON, Canada (ZS).

BACKGROUND: The incidence of opioid-related fatality has reached unparalleled
levels across North America. Patients with comorbid hepatitis C virus (HCV)
remain the most vulnerable and difficult to treat. Considering the unique
challenges associated with this population, we aimed to re-examine the impact of 
HCV on response to medication assistant treatment for opioid use disorder and
establish sex-specific risk factors affecting care.
METHODS: This study employs a multi-center prospective cohort design, with 1-year
follow-up. Patients aged ≥18, receiving methadone for opioid use disorder were
recruited from a network of out-patient opioid addiction treatment centers across
Southern Ontario, Canada. Patients with ≥50% positive opioid urine screens over 1
year of follow-up were classified as poor responders. The prognostic impact of
HCV on response was established using a propensity score matched analysis.
Sex-specific regression models were constructed to evaluate risk factors for
treatment response.
RESULTS: Among participants eligible for inclusion (n = 1234), HCV was prevalent 
in 25% (n = 307). HCV patients exhibited significantly higher rates of high-risk 
opioid consumption patterns 35.29% (standard deviation 0.478). Sex-specific
examination revealed females with HCV incur a 2 times increased risk for
high-risk opioid consumption behaviors (female odds ratio: 1.95, 95% confidence
interval 1.23, 3.10; P = 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Findings from this study establish the link between HCV and poor
treatment response, with differentially higher risk among female patients. In
light of the high potential for overdose among this population, concerted efforts
are required for distinguishing the source for sex-based disparities, in addition
to establishing trauma and gender informed treatment protocols.

Copyright © 2021 American Society of Addiction Medicine.

DOI: 10.1097/ADM.0000000000000937 
PMID: 34799492 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest.

