
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 1;12:768695. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.768695. eCollection 
2021.

Targeting Macrophage Dysregulation for Viral Infections: Novel Targets for
Immunomodulators.

Reece MD(1), Taylor RR(2), Song C(3), Gavegnano C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta,
GA, United States.
(2)Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, United States.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United States.

A major barrier to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) cure is the latent viral 
reservoir, which persists despite antiretroviral therapy (ART), including across 
the non-dividing myeloid reservoir which is found systemically in sanctuary sites
across tissues and the central nervous system (CNS). Unlike activated CD4+ T
cells that undergo rapid cell death during initial infection (due to rapid viral 
replication kinetics), viral replication kinetics are delayed in non-dividing
myeloid cells, resulting in long-lived survival of infected macrophages and
macrophage-like cells. Simultaneously, persistent inflammation in macrophages
confers immune dysregulation that is a key driver of co-morbidities including
cardiovascular disease (CVD) and neurological deficits in people living with
HIV-1 (PLWH). Macrophage activation and dysregulation is also a key driver of
disease progression across other viral infections including SARS-CoV-2,
influenza, and chikungunya viruses, underscoring the interplay between
macrophages and disease progression, pathogenesis, and comorbidity in the viral
infection setting. This review discusses the role of macrophages in persistence
and pathogenesis of HIV-1 and related comorbidities, SARS-CoV-2 and other
viruses. A special focus is given to novel immunomodulatory targets for key
events driving myeloid cell dysregulation and reservoir maintenance across a
diverse array of viral infections.

Copyright © 2021 Reece, Taylor, Song and Gavegnano.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.768695 
PMCID: PMC8591232
PMID: 34790202 

Conflict of interest statement: CG is the co-inventor of the internationally
issued patent on Jak inhibitors for the treatment or prevention of HIV-1 and
other viral infections; CG and Emory University receives royalties from Eli Lilly
and Company for the sales of baricitinib for COVID-19. The remaining authors
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of
interest.

