
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 1;12:757302. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.757302. eCollection 
2021.

Cumulative Roles for Epstein-Barr Virus, Human Endogenous Retroviruses, and Human
Herpes Virus-6 in Driving an Inflammatory Cascade Underlying MS Pathogenesis.

Meier UC(1)(2), Cipian RC(3), Karimi A(4), Ramasamy R(5), Middeldorp JM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Laboratoriumsmedizin, Klinikum der Universität München, München, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Psychological Medicine, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Biology, Crafton Hills College, Yucaipa, CA, United States.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Advanced Medical Sciences, Tabriz
University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(5)ID-FISH Technology Inc., Miltipas, CA, United States.
(6)Department of Pathology, Amsterdam University Medical Center, VUMC, Amsterdam,
Netherlands.

Roles for viral infections and aberrant immune responses in driving localized
neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration in multiple sclerosis (MS) are the focus 
of intense research. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), as a persistent and frequently
reactivating virus with major immunogenic influences and a near 100%
epidemiological association with MS, is considered to play a leading role in MS
pathogenesis, triggering localized inflammation near or within the central
nervous system (CNS). This triggering may occur directly via viral products (RNA 
and protein) and/or indirectly via antigenic mimicry involving B-cells, T-cells
and cytokine-activated astrocytes and microglia cells damaging the myelin sheath 
of neurons. The genetic MS-risk factor HLA-DR2b (DRB1*1501β, DRA1*0101α) may
contribute to aberrant EBV antigen-presentation and anti-EBV reactivity but also 
to mimicry-induced autoimmune responses characteristic of MS. A central role is
proposed for inflammatory EBER1, EBV-miRNA and LMP1 containing exosomes secreted 
by viable reactivating EBV+ B-cells and repetitive release of EBNA1-DNA complexes
from apoptotic EBV+ B-cells, forming reactive immune complexes with EBNA1-IgG and
complement. This may be accompanied by cytokine- or EBV-induced expression of
human endogenous retrovirus-W/-K (HERV-W/-K) elements and possibly by activation 
of human herpesvirus-6A (HHV-6A) in early-stage CNS lesions, each contributing to
an inflammatory cascade causing the relapsing-remitting neuro-inflammatory and/or
progressive features characteristic of MS. Elimination of EBV-carrying B-cells by
antibody- and EBV-specific T-cell therapy may hold the promise of reducing EBV
activity in the CNS, thereby limiting CNS inflammation, MS symptoms and possibly 
reversing disease. Other approaches targeting HHV-6 and HERV-W and limiting
inflammatory kinase-signaling to treat MS are also being tested with promising
results. This article presents an overview of the evidence that EBV, HHV-6, and
HERV-W may have a pathogenic role in initiating and promoting MS and possible
approaches to mitigate development of the disease.

Copyright © 2021 Meier, Cipian, Karimi, Ramasamy and Middeldorp.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.757302 
PMCID: PMC8592026
PMID: 34790199 

Conflict of interest statement: RR is a scientific advisor to IDFISH Technology
Inc. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence
of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.

