
1. Electrophoresis. 2021 Nov 18. doi: 10.1002/elps.202100124. [Epub ahead of print]

Biological nanoparticles: Relevance as novel target drug delivery systems and
leading chromatographic isolation approaches.

González-Félix MA(1), Mejía-Manzano LA(1), González-Valdez J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tecnologico de Monterrey, School of Engineering and Science, Monterrey,
Mexico.

Nanotechnology is one of the most promising technologies of the 21st century, and
it is now presenting an enormous impact on target drug delivery. In this context,
the recent use of natural vesicle-like nanoparticles such as extracellular
vesicles (i.e., exosomes, microvesicles, and apoptotic bodies) and virus-like
particles is rendering encouraging results mostly because these delivery systems 
present cargo versatility, favorable body circulating advantages,
biocompatibility, immunogenicity, and the capacity to be modified superficially
to increase their affinity to a certain target or to control their entrance to
the cell. However, some of the biggest challenges toward their clinical
implementation are poorly standardized processing operations due to their
inherent heterogeneity and expensive, long-lasting, and difficult to scale
isolation procedures that can also affect the stability of the particles. Under
these circumstances, chromatographic procedures represent an attractive and
favorable alternative to overcome their downstream processing. Moreover, even
when standardized chromatographic purification protocols are still in
development, great achievements have been made using size exclusion, ionic
exchange, hydrophobic interaction, and affinity protocols, mostly because of the 
correct harnessing of the nanovesicle membrane properties. In this sense, this
review focuses on presenting the current understanding on the most promising
therapeutic biological nanoparticles and the chromatographic isolation approaches
employed in their recovery, providing at the same time recent findings and a
general overview of the aspects that might impact the outcome of chromatographic 
techniques for this application.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/elps.202100124 
PMID: 34791693 

