
1. Med J Malaysia. 2021 Nov;76(6):876-880.

Impact of virtual brief wellness based psychosocial intervention on mental
wellbeing of stable hospitalised COVID-19 patients - A pilot study.

Thong KS(1), Seed HF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Selangor, Malaysia. seed_tabo@yahoo.com.

INTRODUCTION: The Optimal Health Program (OHP) is a collaborative self-management
program that promotes clients to be actively involved in their own healthcare and
overall wellbeing. Program Kesihatan Optimum (SANUBARI) is a Malay version of the
OHP after a translational process and cultural adaptation by psychiatrists,
clinical psychologist and family medicine specialists in 2017. The program is of 
a low intensity, patient-centred program, advocating self-health management to
improve health literacy by enhancing self-efficacy, building strengths and
values, and initiating change and planning, ultimately enhancing wellbeing of
people. The programme can be used as a form of early psychosocial intervention
during the current pandemic in maintaining the general mental wellbeing of
COVID-19 patients.
METHODS: This is an open labelled interventional study of a virtual brief
psychosocial intervention, called SANUBARI. The program was conducted among
COVID-19 patients hospitalized in the COVID-19 wards of two centres from May 2020
until August 2020. Inclusion criteria include patients aged eighteen years and
above, diagnosed with COVID-19, medically stable, speaking and reading Bahasa
Melayu or English. All study subjects attended two sessions on OHP via
telecommunication method and answered questionnaires (General Self-Efficacy (GSE)
Scale, Patient Health Questionnaire and Generalized Anxiety Disorder
Questionnaire) via computer-assisted self-interview. Data collection was done
before the start of the intervention, at the end of the intervention and a month 
post-intervention.
RESULTS: A total of 37 patients were recruited and more than half of the subjects
were males (62.2%), single (75.5%) and from the Malay ethnicity (78.4%).
Seventy-three per cent of subjects had received tertiary education, and most of
them were students reflecting a higher unemployment status (73%). Most subjects
have no comorbid chronic medical illness (89.2%), and none has a comorbid
psychiatric illness. Comparison of the GSE score across 3-time points
(preintervention, immediate post-intervention and a month postintervention)
showed statistically significant improvement in the mean total GSE score
immediate and a month postintervention as compared to the pre-intervention; from 
mean total GSE score of 29.78 pre-intervention to 34.73 (mean difference 4.946,
95% Confidence Interval 95%CI: 3.361, 6.531) immediate post-intervention and
33.08 (mean difference 3.297, 95%CI: 1.211, 5.348) a month post intervention.
There was no significant association between the socio-demographic or clinical
data, depressive and anxiety symptoms, and changes in GSE scores over three time 
points.
CONCLUSION: COVID-19 patients improved their self-efficacy levels after the
virtual brief OHP intervention, and it maintained a month post-intervention,
protecting them from psychological stress and ultimately enhances wellbeing
during this coronavirus pandemic.


PMID: 34806676  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

