
1. Int Ophthalmol. 2021 Nov 21. doi: 10.1007/s10792-021-02058-8. [Epub ahead of
print]

Natural and iatrogenic ocular manifestations of rheumatoid arthritis: a
systematic review.

Dammacco R(1), Guerriero S(1), Alessio G(1), Dammacco F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Neuroscience, University of Bari "Aldo Moro", 
Medical School, Bari, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Human Oncology, University of Bari "Aldo
Moro", Medical School, Polyclinic, Piazza Giulio Cesare 11, 70124, Bari, Italy.
francesco.dammacco@uniba.it.

PURPOSE: To provide an overview of the ocular features of rheumatoid arthritis
(RA) and of the ophthalmic adverse drug reactions (ADRs) that may be associated
with the administration of antirheumatic drugs.
METHODS: A systematic literature search was performed using the PubMed, MEDLINE, 
and EMBASE databases. In addition, a cohort of 489 RA patients who attended the
Authors' departments were examined.
RESULTS: Keratoconjunctivitis sicca, episcleritis, scleritis, peripheral
ulcerative keratitis (PUK), and anterior uveitis were diagnosed in 29%, 6%, 5%,
2%, and 10%, respectively, of the mentioned cohort. Ocular ADRs to non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs are rarely reported and include subconjunctival
hemorrhages and hemorrhagic retinopathy. In patients taking indomethacin,
whorl-like corneal deposits and pigmentary retinopathy have been observed.
Glucocorticoids are frequently responsible for posterior subcapsular cataracts
and open-angle glaucoma. Methotrexate, the prototype of disease-modifying
antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs), has been associated with the onset of ischemic
optic neuropathy, retinal cotton-wool spots, and orbital non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. 
Mild cystoid macular edema and punctate keratitis in patients treated with
leflunomide have been occasionally reported. The most frequently occurring ADR of
hydroxychloroquine is vortex keratopathy, which may progress to "bull's eye"
maculopathy. Patients taking tofacitinib, a synthetic DMARD, more frequently
suffer herpes zoster virus (HZV) reactivation, including ophthalmic HZ. Tumor
necrosis factor inhibitors have been associated with the paradoxical onset or
recurrence of uveitis or sarcoidosis, as well as optic neuritis, demyelinating
optic neuropathy, chiasmopathy, and oculomotor palsy. Recurrent episodes of PUK, 
multiple cotton-wool spots, and retinal hemorrhages have occasionally been
reported in patients given tocilizumab, that may also be associated with HZV
reactivation, possibly involving the eye. Finally, rituximab, an anti-CD20
monoclonal antibody, has rarely been associated with necrotizing scleritis,
macular edema, and visual impairment.
CONCLUSION: The level of evidence for most of the drug reactions described herein
is restricted to the "likely" or "possible" rather than to the "certain"
category. However, the lack of biomarkers indicative of the potential risk of
ocular ADRs hinders their prevention and emphasizes the need for an accurate risk
vs. benefit assessment of these therapies for each patient.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10792-021-02058-8 
PMID: 34802085 

