
1. Turk J Biol. 2021 Aug 30;45(4):570-587. doi: 10.3906/biy-2105-73. eCollection
2021.

Cannabinoids for SARS-CoV-2 and is there evidence of their therapeutic efficacy?

Onay A(1), Ertaş A(2), Süzerer V(3), Yener İ(4), Yilmaz MA(5), Ayaz-Tilkat E(6), 
Ekinci R(7), Bozhan N(1), Irtegün-Kandemir S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Dicle University, Diyarbakır
Turkey.
(2)Department of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Dicle University, Diyarbakır
Turkey.
(3)Department of Pharmacy Services, Vocational School of Health, Bingöl
University, Bingöl Turkey.
(4)Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Dicle University,
Diyarbakır Turkey.
(5)Dicle University Science and Technology Research and Application Center,
Diyarbakır Turkey.
(6)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science and Literature, Batman University,
Batman Turkey.
(7)Department of Field Crops, Faculty of Agriculture, Dicle University,
Diyarbakır Turkey.
(8)Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Dicle University,
Diyarbakır Turkey.

To combat the coronaviruses and their novel variants, therapeutic drugs and the
development of vaccines that are to be effective throughout human life are
urgently needed. The endocannabinoid system (ECS) acts as a modulator in the
activation of the microcirculation, immune system, and autonomic nervous system, 
along with controlling pharmacological functions such as emotional responses,
homeostasis, motor functions, cognition, and motivation. The ECS contains
endogenous cannabinoids, cannabinoid receptor (CBRs), and enzymes that regulate
their biosynthesis, transport, and degradation. Moreover, phytocannabinoids and
synthetic cannabinoids that mimic the action of endocannabinoids also play an
essential role in the modulation of the ECS. Cannabinoids, the main constituents 
of cannabis (Cannabis sativa L.), are therapeutic compounds that have received
international attention in the health field due to their therapeutic properties. 
Recently, they have been tested for the treatment of COVID-19 due to their
antiviral properties. Indeed, cannabinoid-type compounds, and in particular
cannabidiol (CBD), isolated from glandular trichomes found in the calyx of
cannabis flowers with reported antiviral properties is hypothesized to be a
therapeutic option in the ministration of SARS-CoV-2 consorted with COVID-19
disease. The relevant articles were determined from the database search published
mainly in Web of Science, Google scholar, PubMed, Crossref, and
ClinicalTrials.gov database during the pandemic period. The articles were
evaluated for the therapeutic potentials, mechanisms of action of cannabinoids,
the roles of the ECS in the immune system, impact of cannabinoids in SARS-CoV-2
septic, especially if they address the application of cannabinoids as drugs for
the curability and management of SARS-CoV-2 and its novel variants. Although the 
evidence needed to be considered using cannabinoids in the control and treatment 
of viral diseases is currently in its infancy, they already offer an opportunity 
for clinicians due to their effects in relieving pain, improving appetite, and
improving childhood epilepsy, especially in cancer and human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV/AIDS) patients. In addition to these, the most recent scientific
evidence emphasizes their use in the treatment of the coronavirus infected
patients. In brief, all preclinic and clinic studies that have been reported show
that, through the cannabinoid system, cannabinoids, particularly CBD, have many
mechanisms that are effective in the treatment of patients infected by
SARS-CoV-2. Thus, more extensive studies are necessary in this area to fully
identify the effects of cannabinoids on SARS-CoV-2.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.3906/biy-2105-73 
PMCID: PMC8573844
PMID: 34803455 

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: none declared

