
1. mBio. 2021 Nov 23:e0295921. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02959-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Influenza A Virus Defective Viral Genomes Are Inefficiently Packaged into Virions
Relative to Wild-Type Genomic RNAs.

Alnaji FG(1), Reiser WK(1), Rivera-Cardona J(1), Te Velthuis AJW(2), Brooke
CB(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaigngrid.35403.31, Champaign, Illinois, USA.
(2)Lewis Thomas Laboratory, Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton
Universitygrid.16750.35, Princeton, New Jersey, USA.
(3)Carl R. Woese Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaigngrid.35403.31, Champaign, Illinois, USA.

Deletion-containing viral genomes (DelVGs) are commonly produced during influenza
A virus infection and have been implicated in influencing clinical infection
outcomes. Despite their ubiquity, the specific molecular mechanisms that govern
DelVG formation and their packaging into defective interfering particles (DIPs)
remain poorly understood. Here, we utilized next-generation sequencing to analyze
DelVGs that form de novo early during infection, prior to packaging. Analysis of 
these early DelVGs revealed that deletion formation occurs in clearly defined hot
spots and is significantly associated with both direct sequence repeats and
enrichment of adenosine and uridine bases. By comparing intracellular DelVGs with
those packaged into extracellular virions, we discovered that DelVGs face a
significant bottleneck during genome packaging relative to wild-type genomic
RNAs. Interestingly, packaged DelVGs exhibited signs of enrichment for larger
DelVGs suggesting that size is an important determinant of packaging efficiency. 
Our data provide the first unbiased, high-resolution portrait of the diversity of
DelVGs that are generated by the influenza A virus replication machinery and shed
light on the mechanisms that underly DelVG formation and packaging. IMPORTANCE
Defective interfering particles (DIPs) are commonly produced by RNA viruses and
have been implicated in modulating clinical infection outcomes; hence, there is
increasing interest in the potential of DIPs as antiviral therapeutics. For
influenza viruses, DIPs are formed by the packaging of genomic RNAs harboring
internal deletions. Despite decades of study, the mechanisms that drive the
formation of these deletion-containing viral genomes (DelVGs) remain elusive.
Here, we used a specialized sequencing pipeline to characterize the first wave of
DelVGs that form during influenza virus infection. This data set provides an
unbiased profile of the deletion-forming preferences of the influenza virus
replicase. In addition, by comparing the early intracellular DelVGs to those that
get packaged into extracellular virions, we described a significant
segment-specific bottleneck that limits DelVG packaging relative to wild-type
viral RNAs. Altogether, these findings reveal factors that govern the production 
of both DelVGs and DIPs during influenza virus infection.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02959-21 
PMCID: PMC8609359
PMID: 34809454 

