
1. Turk J Biol. 2021 Aug 30;45(4):358-371. doi: 10.3906/biy-2105-45. eCollection
2021.

Novel approaches for COVID-19 diagnosis and treatment: a nonsystematic review.

Garip Ustaoğlu Ş(1), Kaygusuz H(2)(3), Bilgin MD(4), Severcan F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Altınbaş University, 
İstanbul Turkey.
(2)Department of Basic Sciences, Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences,
Altınbaş University, İstanbul Turkey.
(3)Sabanci University SUNUM Nanotechnology Research Center, İstanbul Turkey.
(4)Department of Biophysics, Faculty of Medicine, Aydın Adnan Menderes
University, Aydın Turkey.
(5)Department of Biophysics, Faculty of Medicine, Altınbaş University, İstanbul
Turkey.

Since COVID-19 pandemic has been continuously rising and spreading, several
original contributions and review articles on COVID-19 started to appear in the
literature. The review articles are mainly focus on the current status of the
pandemic along with current status of the corona diagnosis and treatment process.
Due to some disadvantages of the currently used methods, the improvement on the
novel promising diagnosis and treatment methods of corona virus is very important
issue. In this review, after briefly discussing the status of current diagnosis
and treatment methods, we present to the scientific community, novel promising
methods in the diagnosis and treatment of COVID-19. As with other novel
approaches, first, the diagnosis potential of mass spectroscopy and optical
spectroscopic methods such as UV/visible, infrared, and Raman spectroscopy
coupled with chemometrics will be discussed for the corona virus infected samples
based on the relevant literature. In vibrational spectroscopy studies, due to
complexity of the data, multivariate analysis methods are also applied to data.
The application of multivariate analysis tools that can be used to extract useful
information from the data for diagnostic and characterisation purposes is also
included in this review. The reviewed methods include hierarchical cluster
analysis, principal component analysis, linear and quadratic discriminant
analysis, support vector machine algorithm, and one form of neural networks
namely deep learning method. Second, novel treatment methods such as photodynamic
therapy and the use of nanoparticles in the in-corona virus therapy will be
discussed. Finally, the advantages of novel promising diagnosis and treatment
methods in COVID-19, over standard methods will be discussed. One of the main
aims of this paper is to encourage the scientific community to explore the
potential of this novel tools for their use in corona virus characterization,
diagnosis, and treatment.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.3906/biy-2105-45 
PMCID: PMC8573842
PMID: 34803440 

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The authors declare no
conflict of interest.

