
1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2021 Nov 4;9:5. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.761073.
eCollection 2021.

Robust Agrobacterium-Mediated Transient Expression in Two Duckweed Species
(Lemnaceae) Directed by Non-replicating, Replicating, and Cell-to-Cell Spreading 
Vectors.

Peterson A(1)(2), Kishchenko O(1)(2), Zhou Y(1), Vasylenko M(2), Giritch A(3),
Sun J(4), Borisjuk N(1), Kuchuk M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Eco-Agricultural Biotechnology Around Hongze Lake, 
Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Centre of Regional Modern Agriculture and
Environmental Protection, School of Life Sciences, Huaiyin Normal University,
Huai'an, China.
(2)Institute of Cell Biology and Genetic Engineering, National Academy of Science
of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine.
(3)Nomad Bioscience GmbH, Halle, Germany.
(4)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Phylogenomics and Comparative Genomics, School of
Life Sciences, Jiangsu Normal University, Xuzhou, China.

Plant-based transient expression systems have recognized potential for use as
rapid and cost-effective alternatives to expression systems based on bacteria,
yeast, insect, or mammalian cells. The free-floating aquatic plants of the
Lemnaceae family (duckweed) have compact architecture and can be vegetatively
propagated on low-cost nutrient solutions in aseptic conditions. These features
provide an economically feasible opportunity for duckweed-based production of
high-value products via transient expression of recombinant products in fully
contained, controlled, aseptic and bio-safe conditions in accordance with the
requirements for pharmaceutical manufacturing and environmental biosafety. Here, 
we demonstrated Agrobacterium-mediated high-yield transient expression of a
reporter green fluorescent protein using deconstructed vectors based on potato
virus X and sweet potato leaf curl virus, as well as conventional binary vectors,
in two representatives of the Lemnaceae (Spirodela polyrhiza and Landoltia
punctata). Aseptically cultivated duckweed populations yielded reporter protein
accumulation of >1 mg/g fresh biomass, when the protein was expressed from a
deconstructed potato virus X-based vector, which is capable of replication and
cell-to-cell movement of the replicons in duckweed. The expression efficiency
demonstrated here places duckweed among the most efficient host organisms for
plant-based transient expression systems, with the additional benefits of easy
scale-up and full containment.

Copyright © 2021 Peterson, Kishchenko, Zhou, Vasylenko, Giritch, Sun, Borisjuk
and Kuchuk.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.761073 
PMCID: PMC8600122
PMID: 34805101 

Conflict of interest statement: AG is employed by Nomad Bioscience GmbH. The
remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conflict of interest.

