
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 22;16(11):e0260237. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260237.
eCollection 2021.

Modelling aerosol-based exposure to SARS-CoV-2 by an agent based Monte Carlo
method: Risk estimates in a shop and bar.

Salmenjoki H(1), Korhonen M(2), Puisto A(1), Vuorinen V(2), Alava MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Physics, Aalto University, Espoo, Finland.
(2)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Aalto University, Espoo, Finland.

Present day risk assessment on the spreading of airborne viruses is often based
on the classical Wells-Riley model assuming immediate mixing of the aerosol into 
the studied environment. Here, we improve on this approach and the underlying
assumptions by modeling the space-time dependency of the aerosol concentration
via a transport equation with a dynamic source term introduced by the infected
individual(s). In the present agent-based methodology, we study the viral aerosol
inhalation exposure risk in two scenarios including a low/high risk scenario of a
"supermarket"/"bar". The model takes into account typical behavioral patterns for
determining the rules of motion for the agents. We solve a diffusion model for
aerosol concentration in the prescribed environments in order to account for
local exposure to aerosol inhalation. We assess the infection risk using the
Wells-Riley model formula using a space-time dependent aerosol concentration. The
results are compared against the classical Wells-Riley model. The results
indicate features that explain individual cases of high risk with repeated
sampling of a heterogeneous environment occupied by non-equilibrium concentration
clouds. An example is the relative frequency of cases that might be called
superspreading events depending on the model parameters. A simple interpretation 
is that averages of infection risk are often misleading. They also point out and 
explain the qualitative and quantitative difference between the two
cases-shopping is typically safer for a single individual person.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260237 
PMCID: PMC8608316
PMID: 34807943 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

