
1. Lancet Microbe. 2021 Nov 15. doi: 10.1016/S2666-5247(21)00267-6. [Epub ahead of
print]

Neutralising antibody titres as predictors of protection against SARS-CoV-2
variants and the impact of boosting: a meta-analysis.

Cromer D(1), Steain M(2)(3), Reynaldi A(1), Schlub TE(1)(4), Wheatley AK(5), Juno
JA(5), Kent SJ(5)(6), Triccas JA(2)(3), Khoury DS(1), Davenport MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Kirby Institute, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(2)Sydney Institute of Infectious Diseases and Charles Perkins Centre, The
University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW, Australia.
(3)School of Medical Sciences, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(4)Sydney School of Public Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the
Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(6)Melbourne Sexual Health Centre and Department of Infectious Diseases, Alfred
Hospital and Central Clinical School, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC,
Australia.

Background: Several SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern have been identified that
partly escape serum neutralisation elicited by current vaccines. Studies have
also shown that vaccines demonstrate reduced protection against symptomatic
infection with SARS-CoV-2 variants. We explored whether in-vitro neutralisation
titres remain predictive of vaccine protection from infection with SARS-CoV-2
variants.
Methods: In this meta-analysis, we analysed published data from 24 identified
studies on in-vitro neutralisation and clinical protection to understand the loss
of neutralisation to existing SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern. We integrated the
results of this analysis into our existing statistical model relating in-vitro
neutralisation to protection (parameterised on data from ancestral virus
infection) to estimate vaccine efficacy against SARS-CoV-2 variants. We also
analysed data on boosting of vaccine responses and use the model to predict the
impact of booster vaccination on protection against SARS-CoV-2 variants.
Findings: The neutralising activity against the ancestral SARS-CoV-2 was highly
predictive of neutralisation of variants of concern. Decreases in neutralisation 
titre to the alpha (1·6-fold), beta (8·8-fold), gamma (3·5-fold), and delta
(3·9-fold) variants (compared to the ancestral virus) were not significantly
different between different vaccines. Neutralisation remained strongly correlated
with protection from symptomatic infection with SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern (r
S=0·81, p=0·0005) and the existing model remained predictive of vaccine efficacy 
against variants of concern once decreases in neutralisation to the variants of
concern were incorporated. Modelling of predicted vaccine efficacy against
variants over time suggested that protection against symptomatic infection might 
decrease below 50% within the first year after vaccination for some vaccines.
Boosting of previously infected individuals with existing vaccines (which target 
ancestral virus) is predicted to provide a higher degree of protection from
infection with variants of concern than primary vaccination schedules alone.
Interpretation: In-vitro neutralisation titres remain a correlate of protection
from SARS-CoV-2 variants and modelling of the effects of waning immunity predicts
a loss of protection to the variants after vaccination. However, booster
vaccination with current vaccines should enable higher neutralisation to
SARS-CoV-2 variants than is achieved with primary vaccination, which is predicted
to provide robust protection from severe infection outcomes with the current
SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern, at least in the medium term.
Funding: The National Health and Medical Research Council (Australia), the
Medical Research Future Fund (Australia), and the Victorian Government.

© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open Access article
under the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.1016/S2666-5247(21)00267-6 
PMCID: PMC8592563
PMID: 34806056 

Conflict of interest statement: DSK is elected executive committee member of the 
New South Wales branch of the Australian and New Zealand Industrial and Applied
Mathematics society. MPD is senior editor for eLife, for which he receives an
annual retainer. All other authors declare no competing interests.

