
1. J Int AIDS Soc. 2021 Nov;24 Suppl 7:e25829. doi: 10.1002/jia2.25829.

Broadly neutralizing monoclonal antibodies for HIV prevention.

Miner MD(1), Corey L(1), Montefiori D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(2)Department of Surgery and Duke Human Vaccine Institute, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The last 12 years have seen remarkable progress in the isolation
and characterization of at least five different epitope classes of HIV-specific
broadly neutralizing antibodies (bnAbs). Detailed analyses of these bnAb
lineages, maturation pathways and epitopes have created new opportunities for
vaccine development. In addition, interest exists in passive administration of
monoclonal antibodies as a viable option for HIV prevention.
DISCUSSION: Recently, two antibody-mediated prevention (AMP) trials of a
passively administered monoclonal antibody targeting the HIV envelope CD4 binding
site, called VRC01, provided proof-of-concept that monoclonal antibody infusion
could offer protection against HIV acquisition. While the trials failed to show
overall protection against HIV acquisition, sub-analyses revealed that VRC01
infusion provided a 75% prevention efficacy against HIV strains that were
susceptible to the antibody. The study also demonstrated that in vitro
neutralizing activity, measured by the TZM-bl/pseudovirus assay, was able to
predict HIV prevention efficacy in humans. In addition, the AMP trials defined a 
threshold protective concentration, or neutralization titer, for the VRC01 class 
of bnAbs, explaining the observed low overall efficacy and serving as a benchmark
for the clinical testing of new bnAbs, bnAb cocktails and neutralizing
antibody-inducing vaccines. Newer bnAbs that exhibit greater potency and breadth 
of neutralization in vitro than VRC01 are available for clinical testing.
Combinations of best-in-class bnAbs with complementary magnitude, breadth and
extent of complete neutralization are predicted to far exceed the prevention
efficacy of VRC01. Some engineered bi- and trispecific mAbs exhibit similar
desirable neutralizing activity and afford advantages for manufacturing and
delivery. Modifications that prolong the serum half-life and improve genital
tissue persistence offer additional advantages.
CONCLUSIONS: Iterative phase 1 trials are acquiring safety and pharmacokinetic
data on dual and triple bnAbs and bi- and trispecific antibodies in preparation
for future AMP studies that seek to translate findings from the VRC01 efficacy
trials and achieve acceptable levels of overall prevention efficacy.

© 2021 The Authors. Journal of the International AIDS Society published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of the International AIDS Society.

DOI: 10.1002/jia2.25829 
PMCID: PMC8606861
PMID: 34806308  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

