
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 5;12:744358. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.744358. eCollection 
2021.

HIVEP1 Is a Negative Regulator of NF-κB That Inhibits Systemic Inflammation in
Sepsis.

Matsumoto H(1), Scicluna BP(1)(2), Jim KK(3)(4), Falahi F(1), Qin W(1), Gürkan
B(1), Malmström E(1), Meijer MT(1), Butler JM(1), Khan HN(1), Takagi T(5), Ishii 
S(6), Schultz MJ(7)(8)(9), van de Beek D(4), de Vos AF(1), van 't Veer C(1), van 
der Poll T(1)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Amsterdam University Medical
Centers, Location Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Bioinformatics,
Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Location Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infection Prevention, Amsterdam
University Medical Centers, Location Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(4)Department of Neurology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Location
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(5)Department of Disease Model, Institute for Developmental Research, Aichi
Developmental Disability Center, Kasugai, Aichi, Japan.
(6)Cluster for Pioneering Research, RIKEN, Tsukuba, Japan.
(7)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Laboratory of Experimental Intensive
Care and Anesthesiology (L·E·I·C·A), Amsterdam University Medical Centers,
Location Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
Netherlands.
(8)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit (MORU), Mahidol University,
Bangkok, Thailand.
(9)Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(10)Division of Infectious Diseases, Amsterdam University Medical Centers,
Location Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
Netherlands.

Our previous work identified human immunodeficiency virus type I enhancer binding
protein 1 (HIVEP1) as a putative driver of LPS-induced NF-κB signaling in humans 
in vivo. While HIVEP1 is known to interact with NF-ĸB binding DNA motifs, its
function in mammalian cells is unknown. We report increased HIVEP1 mRNA
expression in monocytes from patients with sepsis and monocytes stimulated by
Toll-like receptor agonists and bacteria. In complementary overexpression and
gene deletion experiments HIVEP1 was shown to inhibit NF-ĸB activity and
induction of NF-ĸB responsive genes. RNA sequencing demonstrated profound
transcriptomic changes in HIVEP1 deficient monocytic cells and transcription
factor binding site analysis showed enrichment for κB site regions. HIVEP1 bound 
to the promoter regions of NF-ĸB responsive genes. Inhibition of cytokine
production by HIVEP1 was confirmed in LPS-stimulated murine Hivep1-/- macrophages
and HIVEP1 knockdown zebrafish exposed to the common sepsis pathogen
Streptococcus pneumoniae. These results identify HIVEP1 as a negative regulator
of NF-κB in monocytes/macrophages that inhibits proinflammatory reactions in
response to bacterial agonists in vitro and in vivo.

Copyright © 2021 Matsumoto, Scicluna, Jim, Falahi, Qin, Gürkan, Malmström,
Meijer, Butler, Khan, Takagi, Ishii, Schultz, van de Beek, de Vos, van ‘t Veer
and van der Poll.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.744358 
PMCID: PMC8602905
PMID: 34804025 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

