
1. Dalton Trans. 2021 Nov 22. doi: 10.1039/d1dt03501k. [Epub ahead of print]

Concanavalin A: coordination diversity to xenobiotic metal ions and biological
consequences.

Jang H(1), Lee C(1), Hwang Y(1), Lee SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Institute for Molecular Biology and Genetics,
Jeonbuk National University, Jeonju 54896, Republic of Korea. slee026@jbnu.ac.kr.

The binding ability of lectins has gained attention owing to the
carbohydrate-specific interactions of these proteins. Such interactions can be
applied to diverse fields of biotechnology, including the detection, isolation,
and concentration of biological target molecules. The physiological aspects of
the lectin concanavalin A (ConA) have been intensively studied through structural
and functional investigations. X-ray crystallography studies have proven that
ConA has two β-sheets and a short α-helix and that it exists in the form of a
metalloprotein containing Mn2+ and Ca2+. These heterometals are coordinated with 
side chains located in a metal-coordinated domain (MCD), and they affect the
structural environment in the carbohydrate-binding domain (CBD), which interacts 
with carbohydrates through hydrogen bonds. Recent studies have shown that ConA
can regulate biophysical interactions with glycoproteins in virus envelopes
because it specifically interacts with diverse polysaccharides through its CBD
(Tyr, Asn, Asp, and Arg residues positioned next to the MCD). Owing to their
protein-protein interaction abilities, ConA can form diverse self-assembled
complexes including monomers, dimers, trimers, and tetramers, thus affording
unique results in different applications. In this regard, herein, we present a
review of the structural modifications in ConA through metal-ion coordination and
their effect on complex formation. In recent approaches, ConA has been applied
for viral protein detection, on the basis of the interactions of ConA. These
aspects indicate that lectins should be thoroughly investigated with respect to
their biophysical interactions, for avoiding unexpected changes in their
interaction abilities.

DOI: 10.1039/d1dt03501k 
PMID: 34806716 

