
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 5;12:767347. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.767347. eCollection 
2021.

SARS-CoV-2 Exacerbates COVID-19 Pathology Through Activation of the Complement
and Kinin Systems.

Savitt AG(1)(2), Manimala S(2), White T(1)(2), Fandaros M(3), Yin W(3), Duan
H(4), Xu X(4), Geisbrecht BV(4), Rubenstein DA(3), Kaplan AP(5), Peerschke EI(6),
Ghebrehiwet B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Renaissance School of Medicine of
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, United States.
(2)Department of Medicine, Renaissance School of Medicine of Stony Brook
University, Stony Brook, NY, United States.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY,
United States.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Kansas State University, 
Manhattan, KS, United States.
(5)Pulmonary and Critical Care Division, The Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC, United States.
(6)The Department of Laboratory Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, NY, United States.

Infection with SARS-CoV-2 triggers the simultaneous activation of innate
inflammatory pathways including the complement system and the kallikrein-kinin
system (KKS) generating in the process potent vasoactive peptides that contribute
to severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and multi-organ failure. The genome
of SARS-CoV-2 encodes four major structural proteins - the spike (S) protein,
nucleocapsid (N) protein, membrane (M) protein, and the envelope (E) protein.
However, the role of these proteins in either binding to or activation of the
complement system and/or the KKS is still incompletely understood. In these
studies, we used: solid phase ELISA, hemolytic assay and surface plasmon
resonance (SPR) techniques to examine if recombinant proteins corresponding to
S1, N, M and E: (a) bind to C1q, gC1qR, FXII and high molecular weight kininogen 
(HK), and (b) activate complement and/or the KKS. Our data show that the viral
proteins: (a) bind C1q and activate the classical pathway of complement, (b) bind
FXII and HK, and activate the KKS in normal human plasma to generate bradykinin
and (c) bind to gC1qR, the receptor for the globular heads of C1q (gC1q) which in
turn could serve as a platform for the activation of both the complement system
and KKS. Collectively, our data indicate that the SARS-CoV-2 viral particle can
independently activate major innate inflammatory pathways for maximal damage and 
efficiency. Therefore, if efficient therapeutic modalities for the treatment of
COVID-19 are to be designed, a strategy that includes blockade of the four major 
structural proteins may provide the best option.

Copyright © 2021 Savitt, Manimala, White, Fandaros, Yin, Duan, Xu, Geisbrecht,
Rubenstein, Kaplan, Peerschke and Ghebrehiwet.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.767347 
PMCID: PMC8602850
PMID: 34804054  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: BG and EP receive royalties from the sale of
anti-gC1qR mAbs and gC1qR detection assay kit. The remaining authors declare that
the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial
relationships that could be constructed as a potential conflict of interest.

