
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Nov 5;11:761074. doi:
10.3389/fcimb.2021.761074. eCollection 2021.

Transcriptome Profile During Rabies Virus Infection: Identification of Human
CXCL16 as a Potential New Viral Target.

Feige L(1), Sáenz-de-Santa-María I(2), Regnault B(3), Lavenir R(1), Lepelletier
A(1), Halacu A(4), Rajerison R(5), Diop S(6), Nareth C(7), Reynes JM(8), Buchy
P(9), Bourhy H(1), Dacheux L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Université de Paris, Lyssavirus Epidemiology and
Neuropathology Unit, National Reference Center for Rabies, WHO Collaborating
Center for Reference and Research on Rabies, Department of Global Health, Paris, 
France.
(2)Institut Pasteur, Université de Paris, Membrane Traffic and Pathogenesis Unit,
Paris, France.
(3)Institut Pasteur, Université de Paris, Genopole, Paris, France.
(4)National Agency for Public Health, Chișinău, Moldova.
(5)University Hospital Center of Befelatanana, Antananarivo, Madagascar.
(6)Infectious Diseases Department, National and University Hospital Center of
Fann-Dakar, Dakar, Senegal.
(7)Calmette Hospital, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
(8)Virology Unit, Institut Pasteur de Madagascar, Tananarive, Madagascar.
(9)Virology Unit, Institut Pasteur in Cambodia, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.

Rabies virus (RABV), the causative agent for rabies disease is still presenting a
major public health concern causing approximately 60,000 deaths annually. This
neurotropic virus (genus Lyssavirus, family Rhabdoviridae) induces an acute and
almost always fatal form of encephalomyelitis in humans. Despite the lethal
consequences associated with clinical symptoms of rabies, RABV limits
neuro-inflammation without causing major histopathological lesions in humans.
Nevertheless, information about the mechanisms of infection and cellular response
in the central nervous system (CNS) remain scarce. Here, we investigated the
expression of inflammatory genes involved in immune response to RABV (dog-adapted
strain Tha) in mice, the most common animal model used to study rabies. To better
elucidate the pathophysiological mechanisms during natural RABV infection, we
compared the inflammatory transcriptome profile observed at the late stage of
infection in the mouse brain (cortex and brain stem/cerebellum) with the ortholog
gene expression in post-mortem brain biopsies of rabid patients. Our data
indicate that the inflammatory response associated with rabies is more pronounced
in the murine brain compared to the human brain. In contrast to murine
transcription profiles, we identified CXC motif chemokine ligand 16 (CXCL16) as
the only significant differentially expressed gene in post-mortem brains of rabid
patients. This result was confirmed in vitro, in which Tha suppressed interferon 
alpha (IFN-α)-induced CXCL16 expression in human CNS cell lines but induced
CXCL16 expression in IFN-α-stimulated murine astrocytes. We hypothesize that
RABV-induced modulation of the CXCL16 pathway in the brain possibly affects
neurotransmission, natural killer (NK) and T cell recruitment and activation.
Overall, we show species-specific differences in the inflammatory response of the
brain, highlighted the importance of understanding the potential limitations of
extrapolating data from animal models to humans.

Copyright © 2021 Feige, Sáenz-de-Santa-María, Regnault, Lavenir, Lepelletier,
Halacu, Rajerison, Diop, Nareth, Reynes, Buchy, Bourhy and Dacheux.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.761074 
PMCID: PMC8602097
PMID: 34804996  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author PB is employed by GSK Vaccines. The
remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conflict of interest.

