
1. J Int AIDS Soc. 2021 Nov;24 Suppl 7:e25797. doi: 10.1002/jia2.25797.

Structure-guided envelope trimer design in HIV-1 vaccine development: a narrative
review.

Derking R(1), Sanders RW(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Amsterdam Infection & Immunity Institute, 
Amsterdam UMC, AMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, New York, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The development of a human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) vaccine
remains a formidable challenge. An effective vaccine likely requires the
induction of broadly neutralizing antibodies (bNAbs), which likely involves the
use of native-like HIV-1 envelope (Env) trimers at some or all stages of
vaccination. Development of such trimers has been very difficult, but much
progress has been made in the past decade, starting with the BG505 SOSIP trimer, 
elucidation of its atomic structure and implementing subsequent design
iterations. This progress facilitated understanding the weaknesses of the Env
trimer, fuelled structure-guided HIV-1 vaccine design and assisted in the
development of new vaccine designs. This review summarizes the relevant
literature focusing on studies using structural biology to reveal and define
HIV-1 Env sites of vulnerability; to improve Env trimers, by creating more stable
versions; understanding antibody responses in preclinical vaccination studies at 
the atomic level; understanding the glycan shield; and to improve "on-target"
antibody responses versus "off-target" responses.
METHODS: The authors conducted a narrative review of recently published articles 
that made a major contribution to HIV-1 structural biology and vaccine design
efforts between the years 2000 and 2021.
DISCUSSION: The field of structural biology is evolving at an unprecedented pace,
where cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) and X-ray crystallography provide
complementary information. Resolving protein structures is necessary for defining
which Env surfaces are accessible for the immune system and can be targeted by
neutralizing antibodies. Recently developed techniques, such as electron
microscopy-based polyclonal epitope mapping (EMPEM) are revolutionizing the way
we are analysing immune responses and shed light on the immunodominant targets on
new vaccine immunogens. Such information accelerates iterative vaccine design;
for example, by reducing undesirable off-target responses, while improving
immunogens to drive the more desirable on-target responses.
CONCLUSIONS: Resolving high-resolution structures of the HIV-1 Env trimer was
instrumental in understanding and improving recombinant HIV-1 Env trimers that
mimic the structure of viral HIV-1 Env spikes. Newly emerging techniques in
structural biology are aiding vaccine design efforts and improving immunogens.
The role of structural biology in HIV-1 vaccine design has indeed become very
prominent and is unlikely to diminish any time soon.

© 2021 The Authors. Journal of the International AIDS Society published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of the International AIDS Society.

DOI: 10.1002/jia2.25797 
PMCID: PMC8606863
PMID: 34806305  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

