
1. mBio. 2021 Nov 23:e0224121. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02241-21. [Epub ahead of print]

A Novel Recombinant Influenza Virus Neuraminidase Vaccine Candidate Stabilized by
a Measles Virus Phosphoprotein Tetramerization Domain Provides Robust Protection 
from Virus Challenge in the Mouse Model.

Strohmeier S(1)(2), Amanat F(1)(3), Zhu X(4), McMahon M(1), Deming ME(5), Pasetti
MF(5), Neuzil KM(5), Wilson IA(4)(6), Krammer F(1)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinaigrid.59734.3c, New York, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, University of Natural Resources and Life
Sciences, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinaigrid.59734.3c, New York, New York, USA.
(4)Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, The Scripps
Research Institute, La Jolla, California, USA.
(5)Center for Vaccine Development and Global Health, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(6)Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La
Jolla, California, USA.
(7)Department of Pathology, Molecular and Cell Based Medicine, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinaigrid.59734.3c, New York, New York, USA.

Current seasonal influenza virus vaccines do not induce robust immune responses
to neuraminidase. Several factors, including immunodominance of hemagglutinin
over neuraminidase, instability of neuraminidase in vaccine formulations, and
variable, nonstandardized amounts of neuraminidase in the vaccines, may
contribute to this effect. However, vaccines that induce strong antineuraminidase
immune responses would be beneficial, as they are highly protective. Furthermore,
antigenic drift is slower for neuraminidase than for hemagglutinin, potentially
providing broader coverage. Here, we designed stabilized recombinant versions of 
neuraminidase by replacing the N-terminal cytoplasmic domain, transmembrane, and 
extracellular stalk with tetramerization domains from the measles or Sendai virus
phosphoprotein or from an Arabidopsis thaliana transcription factor. The measles 
virus tetramerization domain-based construct, termed N1-MPP, was chosen for
further evaluation, as it retained antigenicity, neuraminidase activity, and
structural integrity and provided robust protection in vivo against lethal virus 
challenge in the mouse model. We tested N1-MPP as a standalone vaccine, admixed
with seasonal influenza virus vaccines, or given with seasonal influenza virus
vaccines but in the other leg of the mouse. Admixture with different formulations
of seasonal vaccines led to a weak neuraminidase response, suggesting a dominant 
effect of hemagglutinin over neuraminidase when administered in the same
formulation. However, administration of neuraminidase alone or with seasonal
vaccine administered in the alternate leg of the mouse induced robust antibody
responses. Thus, this recombinant neuraminidase construct is a promising vaccine 
antigen that may enhance and broaden protection against seasonal influenza
viruses. IMPORTANCE Influenza virus infections remain a high risk to human
health, causing up to 650,000 deaths worldwide every year, with an enormous
burden on the health care system. Since currently available seasonal vaccines are
only partially effective and often mismatched to the circulating strains, a
broader protective influenza virus vaccine is needed. Here, we generated a
recombinant influenza virus vaccine candidate based on the more conserved
neuraminidase surface glycoprotein in order to induce a robust and broader
protective immune response against a variety of circulating influenza virus
strains.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02241-21 
PMCID: PMC8609353
PMID: 34809451 

