
1. Pak J Pharm Sci. 2021 Sep;34(5):1821-1836.

REVIEW-Novel corona virus disease (COVID-19): An updated review on epidemiology, 
pathogenicity, clinical course, treatments, migrant health concerns and risk
factors predictions.

Anis S(1), Masood Khan M(2), Ali Z(3), Khan A(4), Arsalan HM(5), Naeem S(6),
Saleem I(7), Qamar S(8), Mehmood Khan M(2), Ahmad A(9), Ahmed N(10).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan/ School of
Pharmacy, Hajvery University, Lahore, Pakistan.
(2)School of Chemical Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian,
Liaoning, China.
(3)Faculty of Biosciences, COMSATS University sub campus Sahiwal, Sahiwal,
Pakistan.
(4)Rashid Latif College of Pharmacy, Lahore, Pakistan.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Health Sciences, Green International
University, Abu Umara Medical College, Lahore, Pakistan.
(6)College of Pharmacy, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan.
(7)Departmentof Homeopathy, Pakistan Homoeopath, Lahore, Pakistan.
(8)Department of Pharmacy, Superior University, Lahore, Pakistan.
(9)School of Chemical Engineering, Minhaj University, Lahore, Pakistan.
(10)Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, School of Medical
Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kubang Kerian, Malaysia.

The COVID-19 epidemic is considered the most important health disaster of the
century and the largest humanitarian crisis since World War II. In December 2019,
a new respiratory disease/disorder was discovered in Wuhan, Hubei province, China
and World Health Organization named it COVID-19 (coronavirus 2019). It has been
diagnosed with a new class of corona virus, called SARS-CoV-2 (a serious
respiratory disease). According to the history of human civilization it is
affected by the incidence of disease outbreaks caused by the number of viruses.
Covid-19 is rapidly spreading across the globe, due to which mankind faces major 
health, economic, environmental and social challenges. The outbreak of
coronavirus is seriously affecting the global economy. Almost all nations have
problems limiting the spread of the disease by screening and treating patients,
setting up suspects by keeping in touch, blocking large gatherings, maintaining
full or partial closure etc. This paper describes the impact of COVID-19 on
society and the global environment, and the ways in which the disease is likely
to be controlled have been discussed.


PMID: 34803021  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

