
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 22;16(11):e0259419. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259419.
eCollection 2021.

Emergence potential of mosquito-borne arboviruses from the Florida Everglades.

Fish D(1), Tesh RB(2), Guzman H(2), Travassos da Rosa APA(2), Balta V(3),
Underwood J(3), Sither C(4), Vasilakis N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology of Microbial Diseases, Yale School of Public
Health, Yale School of the Environment, New Haven, Connecticut, United States of 
America.
(2)Department of Pathology, Center for Tropical Diseases and Institute for Human 
Infection and Immunity, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas,
United States of America.
(3)Environmental Studies Program, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, United
States of America.
(4)Department of Entomology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North
Carolina, United States of America.

The Greater Everglades Region of South Florida is one of the largest natural
wetlands and the only subtropical ecosystem found in the continental United
States. Mosquitoes are seasonally abundant in the Everglades where several
potentially pathogenic mosquito-borne arboviruses are maintained in natural
transmission cycles involving vector-competent mosquitoes and reservoir-competent
vertebrate hosts. The fragile nature of this ecosystem is vulnerable to many
sources of environmental change, including a wetlands restoration project,
climate change, invasive species and residential development. In this study, we
obtained baseline data on the distribution and abundance of both mosquitos and
arboviruses occurring in the southern Everglades region during the summer months 
of 2013, when water levels were high, and in 2014, when water levels were low. A 
total of 367,060 mosquitoes were collected with CO2-baited CDC light traps at 105
collection sites stratified among the major landscape features found in
Everglades National Park, Big Cypress National Preserve, Fakahatchee State Park
Preserve and Picayune State Forest, an area already undergoing restoration. A
total of 2,010 pools of taxonomically identified mosquitoes were cultured for
arbovirus isolation and identification. Seven vertebrate arboviruses were
isolated: Everglades virus, Tensaw virus, Shark River virus, Gumbo Limbo virus,
Mahogany Hammock virus, Keystone virus, and St. Louis encephalitis virus. Except 
for Tensaw virus, which was absent in 2013, the remaining viruses were found to
be most prevalent in hardwood hammocks and in Fakahatchee, less prevalent in
mangroves and pinelands, and absent in cypress and sawgrass. In contrast, in the 
summer of 2014 when water levels were lower, these arboviruses were far less
prevalent and only found in hardwood hammocks, but Tensaw virus was present in
cypress, sawgrass, pinelands, and a recently burned site. Major environmental
changes are anticipated in the Everglades, many of which will result in increased
water levels. How these might lead to the emergence of arboviruses potentially
pathogenic to both humans and wildlife is discussed.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259419 
PMCID: PMC8608345
PMID: 34807932 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

