
1. Biomed Pharmacother. 2021 Nov 12;145:112420. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2021.112420.
[Epub ahead of print]

Molecular pathways involved in COVID-19 and potential pathway-based therapeutic
targets.

Farahani M(1), Niknam Z(1), Mohammadi Amirabad L(2), Amiri-Dashatan N(3), Koushki
M(4), Nemati M(5), Danesh Pouya F(5), Rezaei-Tavirani M(6), Rasmi Y(7), Tayebi
L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Proteomics Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran.
(2)Marquette University School of Dentistry, Milwaukee, WI 53233, USA.
(3)Proteomics Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran; Zanjan Metabolic Diseases Research Center, Zanjan University of
Medical Sciences, Zanjan, Iran.
(4)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Zanjan University of 
Medical Sciences, Zanjan, Iran.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Urmia University of Medical
Sciences, Urmia, Iran.
(6)Proteomics Research Center, Faculty of Paramedical Sciences, Shahid Beheshti
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address:
tavirani@sbmu.ac.ir.
(7)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Urmia University of Medical
Sciences, Urmia, Iran; Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Urmia University
of Medical Sciences, Urmia, Iran. Electronic address: yrasmi@gmail.com.

Deciphering the molecular downstream consequences of severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV)- 2 infection is important for a greater
understanding of the disease and treatment planning. Furthermore, greater
understanding of the underlying mechanisms of diagnostic and therapeutic
strategies can help in the development of vaccines and drugs against COVID-19. At
present, the molecular mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 in the host cells are not
sufficiently comprehended. Some of the mechanisms are proposed considering the
existing similarities between SARS-CoV-2 and the other members of the β-CoVs, and
others are explained based on studies advanced in the structure and function of
SARS-CoV-2. In this review, we endeavored to map the possible mechanisms of the
host response following SARS-CoV-2 infection and surveyed current research
conducted by in vitro, in vivo and human observations, as well as existing
suggestions. We addressed the specific signaling events that can cause cytokine
storm and demonstrated three forms of cell death signaling following virus
infection, including apoptosis, pyroptosis, and necroptosis. Given the elicited
signaling pathways, we introduced possible pathway-based therapeutic targets;
ADAM17 was especially highlighted as one of the most important elements of
several signaling pathways involved in the immunopathogenesis of COVID-19. We
also provided the possible drug candidates against these targets. Moreover, the
cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction pathway was found as one of the important 
cross-talk pathways through a pathway-pathway interaction analysis for SARS-CoV-2
infection.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2021.112420 
PMCID: PMC8585639
PMID: 34801852 

