
1. JCI Insight. 2021 Nov 22. pii: e153165. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.153165. [Epub
ahead of print]

Sangivamycin is highly effective against SARS-CoV-2 in vitro and has favorable
drug properties.

Bennett RP(1), Postnikova EN(2), Eaton BP(2), Cai Y(2), Yu S(2), Smith CO(3),
Liang J(2), Zhou H(2), Kocher GA(2), Murphy MJ(2), Smith HC(1), Kuhn JH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery, OyaGen, Inc, Rochester, United States of America.
(2)Drug Discovery, Inegrated Research Facility NIH/NIAID, Frederick, United
States of America.
(3)Center for Musculoskeletal Research, University of Rochester, Rochester,
United States of America.

Sangivamycin is a nucleoside analog that is well-tolerated by humans and broadly 
active against phylogenetically distinct viruses, including arenaviruses,
filoviruses, and orthopoxviruses. Here, we show that sangivamycin is a potent
antiviral against multiple variants of replicative severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) with half-maximal inhibitory concentration
(IC50) in the nanomolar range in several cell types. Sangivamycin suppressed
SARS-CoV-2 replication with greater efficacy than remdesivir (another
broad-spectrum nucleoside analog). When we investigated sangivamycin's potential 
for clinical administration, pharmacokinetic, ADME (absorption, distribution,
metabolism, and excretion), and toxicity properties were found to be favorable.
When tested in combination with remdesivir, efficacy was additive rather than
competitive against SARS-CoV-2. The proven safety in humans, long half-life,
potent antiviral activity (compared to remdesivir), and combinatorial potential
suggest that sangivamycin is likely to be efficacious alone or in combination
therapy to suppress viremia in patients. Sangivamycin may also have the ability
to help combat drug-resistant or vaccine-escaping SARS-CoV-2 variants since it is
antivirally active against several tested variants. Our results support the
pursuit of sangivamycin for further preclinical and clinical development as a
potential coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) therapeutic.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.153165 
PMID: 34807849 

