
1. Vaccine. 2021 Nov 18. pii: S0264-410X(21)01445-6. doi:
10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.11.011. [Epub ahead of print]

Cost-effectiveness of seasonal influenza vaccination in pregnant women,
healthcare workers and adults >= 60 years of age in Lao People's Democratic
Republic.

Ortega-Sanchez IR(1), Mott JA(2), Kittikraisak W(3), Khanthamaly V(4), McCarron
M(5), Keokhonenang S(6), Ounaphom P(7), Pathammavong C(6), Phounphenghack K(6),
Sayamoungkhoun P(6), Chanthavilay P(8), Bresee J(9), Tengbriacheu C(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Viral Diseases, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory
Diseases, U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, United
States.
(2)Influenza Division, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases,
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Nonthaburi, Thailand. Electronic
address: jmott@cdc.gov.
(3)Influenza Division, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases,
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Nonthaburi, Thailand.
(4)Influenza Division, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases,
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Vientiane, Lao PDR.
(5)Influenza Division, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases,
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, United States.
(6)Maternal and Child Health Center, Ministry of Health, Vientiane, Lao PDR.
(7)Department of Hygiene and Health Promotion, Ministry of Health, Vientiane, Lao
PDR.
(8)University of Health Sciences, Ministry of Health, Vientiane, Lao PDR.
(9)Task Force for Global Health and Influenza Division, National Center for
Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, U.S. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, GA, United States.

BACKGROUND: Pregnant women, healthcare workers (HW), and adults >= 60 years have 
shown an increased vulnerability to seasonal influenza virus infections and/or
complications. In 2012, the Lao People's Democratic Republic (Lao PDR) initiated 
a national influenza vaccination program for these target groups. A
cost-effectiveness evaluation of this program was undertaken to inform program
sustainability.
METHODS: We designed a decision-analytical model and collected influenza-related 
medical resource utilization and cost data, including indirect costs. Model
inputs were obtained from medical record abstraction, interviews of patients and 
staff at hospitals in the national influenza sentinel surveillance system and/or 
from literature reviews. We compared the annual disease and economic impact of
influenza illnesses in each of the target groups in Lao PDR under scenarios of no
vaccination and vaccination, and then estimated the cost-effectiveness of the
vaccination program. We performed sensitivity analyses to identify influential
variables.
RESULTS: Overall, the vaccination of pregnant women, HWs, and adults >= 60 years 
could annually save 11,474 doctor visits, 1,961 days of hospitalizations,
43,027 days of work, and 1,416 life-years due to laboratory-confirmed influenza
illness. After comparing the total vaccination program costs of 23.4 billion Kip,
to the 18.4 billion Kip saved through vaccination, we estimated the vaccination
program to incur a net cost of five billion Kip (599,391 USD) annually. The
incremental cost per life-year saved (ICER) was 44 million Kip (5,295 USD) and
6.9 million Kip (825 USD) for pregnant women and adults >= 60 years,
respectively. However, vaccinating HWs provided societal cost-savings, returning 
2.88 Kip for every single Kip invested. Influenza vaccine effectiveness, attack
rate and illness duration were the most influential variables to the model.
CONCLUSION: Providing influenza vaccination to HWs in Lao PDR is cost-saving
while vaccinating pregnant women and adults >= 60 is cost-effective and highly
cost-effective, respectively, per WHO standards.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.11.011 
PMID: 34802790 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

