
1. Trials. 2021 Nov 22;22(1):828. doi: 10.1186/s13063-021-05788-3.

Statistical analysis plan for the Steppedwedge Cluster Randomized trial of
Electronic Early Notification of sepsis in hospitalized ward patients (SCREEN).

Arabi YM(1), Vishwakarma RK(2)(3), Al-Dorzi HM(4), Al Qasim E(4), Abdukahil
SA(4), Al-Rabeah FK(5), Al Ghamdi H(5), Al Ghamdi E(5); SCREEN Trial Group.

Collaborators: Arabi YM, Alsaawi A, Al Khathaami AM, AlHazme RH, Al Mutrafy A, Al
Qasim E, Abdukahil SA, Al-Rabeah FK, Al Ghamdi H, Al Ghamdi E, Abuelgasim KA,
Alatassi A, Nammour G, Caswell A, Alchin J, Al-Dorzi HM, AlKatheri ME, Alharbi A,
Al Almoodi R, Jones J, Al-Qahtani S, Salih SB, Alselaim N, Tashkandi N,
Vishwakarma RK, Alyousef Z, Al Moammary MS, Rasheed S, Matroud A, Al Anazi RE, Al
Shammari H, Alshamrani MM, Qasim S, Obbed S, Al Qarni M, Jazieh AR, Al Zahrani M,
Al-Hameed F, Munshi AA, Jastaniah W, AlMarhabi H, AlWafi E, Alyami AH, Yamani AO,
Al Tabsh H, Banat BR, Abuskout O, Marcelo AL, Alhabshi MM, Al Hamdan A, Al Qarni 
A, Al Arfaj A, Mustafa HT, Shahin M, Ghamdi AA, Yaakob J, Chalabi J, Greyvenstein
JE, Al Qasem A, Esilan H, Aliyyen SM, Sian CM, Alwasaidi T, Alhasani AM, Jaber
IJ, Omaish N, Abdrabo M, Qureshi AS, Abdrahim A, Almughamisi N, Rahim AA, Al
Shouabi A, Qahtani S, Alansari M, Al Somali H, Masala C, Madram G, Nasser W,
Talaqof F, Almulhim M.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine, King Saud Bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences,
King Abdullah International Medical Research Center, Intensive Care Department,
King Abdulaziz Medical City, Ministry of National Guard Health Affairs, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia. yaseenarabi@yahoo.com.
(2)Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Department, King Saud Bin Abdulaziz
University for Health Sciences, King Abdullah International Medical Research
Center, King Abdulaziz Medical City, Ministry of National Guard Health Affairs,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Statistics Department, European Organisation for Research and Treatment of
Cancer (EORTC) Headquarters, Brussels, Belgium.
(4)College of Medicine, King Saud Bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences,
King Abdullah International Medical Research Center, Intensive Care Department,
King Abdulaziz Medical City, Ministry of National Guard Health Affairs, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia.
(5)College of Health Informatics, King Saud Bin Abdulaziz University for Health
Sciences, King Abdullah International Medical Research Center, Information
Systems and Informatics Division, King Abdulaziz Medical City, Ministry of
National Guard Health Affairs, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: It is unclear whether screening for sepsis using an electronic alert 
in hospitalized ward patients improves outcomes. The objective of the
Stepped-wedge Cluster Randomized Trial of Electronic Early Notification of Sepsis
in Hospitalized Ward Patients (SCREEN) trial is to evaluate whether an electronic
screening for sepsis compared to no screening among hospitalized ward patients
reduces all-cause 90-day in-hospital mortality.
METHODS AND DESIGN: This study is designed as a stepped-wedge cluster randomized 
trial in which the unit of randomization or cluster is the hospital ward. An
electronic alert for sepsis was developed in the electronic medical record (EMR),
with the feature of being active (visible to treating team) or masked (inactive
in EMR frontend for the treating team but active in the backend of the EMR).
Forty-five clusters in 5 hospitals are randomized into 9 sequences of 5 clusters 
each to receive the intervention (active alert) over 10 periods, 2 months each,
the first being the baseline period. Data are extracted from EMR and are compared
between the intervention (active alert) and control group (masked alert). During 
the study period, some of the hospital wards were allocated to manage patients
with COVID-19. The primary outcome of all-cause hospital mortality by day 90 will
be compared using a generalized linear mixed model with a binary distribution and
a log-link function to estimate the relative risk as a measure of effect. We will
include two levels of random effects to account for nested clustering within
wards and periods and two levels of fixed effects: hospitals and COVID-19 ward
status in addition to the intervention. Results will be expressed as relative
risk with a 95% confidence interval.
CONCLUSION: The SCREEN trial provides an opportunity for a novel trial design and
analysis of routinely collected and entered data to evaluate the effectiveness of
an intervention (alert) for a common medical problem (sepsis in ward patients).
In this statistical analysis plan, we outline details of the planned analyses in 
advance of trial completion. Prior specification of the statistical methods and
outcome analysis will facilitate unbiased analyses of these important clinical
data.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT04078594 . Registered on September 6,
2019.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13063-021-05788-3 
PMCID: PMC8607063
PMID: 34809672  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

