
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 22;16(11):e0260143. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260143.
eCollection 2021.

A novel approach for the purification of aggregation prone proteins.

Royster A(1), Mir S(1), Mir MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, California, United States of
America.

The protein aggregation is one of the major challenges of the biotechnological
industry, especially in the areas of development and commercialization of
successful protein-based drug products. The inherent high aggregation tendency of
proteins during various manufacturing processes, storage, and administration has 
significant impact upon the product quality, safety and efficacy. We have
developed an interesting protein purification approach that separates the
functionally active protein from inactive aggregates using a detergent
concentration gradient. The C-terminally His tagged nucleocapsid protein of
Crimean Congo Hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV) has high aggregation tendency and
rapidly precipitates upon purification by NiNTA chromatography. Using the new
purification approach reported here, the freshly purified protein by NiNTA
chromatography was further processed using a detergent gradient. In this new
purification approach the active protein is retained in the low detergent
concentration zone while the inactive aggregates are promptly removed by their
rapid migration to the high detergent concentration zone. The method prevented
further aggregation and retained the RNA binding activity in the native protein
despite numerous freeze thaw cycles. This simple approach prevents protein
aggregation by rapidly separating the preformed early aggregates and creating the
appropriate microenvironment for correctly folded proteins to retain their
biological activity. It will be of potential importance to the biotechnological
industry and other fields of protein biochemistry that routinely face the
challenges of protein aggregation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260143 
PMCID: PMC8608356
PMID: 34807939 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

