
1. Retrovirology. 2021 Nov 22;18(1):37. doi: 10.1186/s12977-021-00582-0.

HIV-1 integrase binding to genomic RNA 5'-UTR induces local structural changes in
vitro and in virio.

Liu S(1), Koneru PC(2), Li W(3)(4), Pathirage C(1), Engelman AN(3)(4),
Kvaratskhelia M(2), Musier-Forsyth K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Centers for RNA Biology and
Retroviral Research, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, School of Medicine, University of Colorado,
Aurora, CO, USA.
(3)Department of Cancer Immunology and Virology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Centers for RNA Biology and
Retroviral Research, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
musier-forsyth.1@osu.edu.

BACKGROUND: During HIV-1 maturation, Gag and Gag-Pol polyproteins are
proteolytically cleaved and the capsid protein polymerizes to form the honeycomb 
capsid lattice. HIV-1 integrase (IN) binds the viral genomic RNA (gRNA) and
impairment of IN-gRNA binding leads to mis-localization of the nucleocapsid
protein (NC)-condensed viral ribonucleoprotein complex outside the capsid core.
IN and NC were previously demonstrated to bind to the gRNA in an orthogonal
manner in virio; however, the effect of IN binding alone or simultaneous binding 
of both proteins on gRNA structure is not yet well understood.
RESULTS: Using crosslinking-coupled selective 2'-hydroxyl acylation analyzed by
primer extension (XL-SHAPE), we characterized the interaction of IN and NC with
the HIV-1 gRNA 5'-untranslated region (5'-UTR). NC preferentially bound to the
packaging signal (Psi) and a UG-rich region in U5, irrespective of the presence
of IN. IN alone also bound to Psi but pre-incubation with NC largely abolished
this interaction. In contrast, IN specifically bound to and affected the
nucleotide (nt) dynamics of the apical loop of the transactivation response
element (TAR) and the polyA hairpin even in the presence of NC. SHAPE probing of 
the 5'-UTR RNA in virions produced from allosteric IN inhibitor (ALLINI)-treated 
cells revealed that while the global secondary structure of the 5'-UTR remained
unaltered, the inhibitor treatment induced local reactivity differences,
including changes in the apical loop of TAR that are consistent with the in vitro
results.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, the binding interactions of NC and IN with the 5'-UTR are
largely orthogonal in vitro. This study, together with previous probing
experiments, suggests that IN and NC binding in vitro and in virio lead to only
local structural changes in the regions of the 5'-UTR probed here. Accordingly,
disruption of IN-gRNA binding by ALLINI treatment results in local rather than
global secondary structure changes of the 5'-UTR in eccentric virus particles.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12977-021-00582-0 
PMCID: PMC8609798
PMID: 34809662 

