
1. Front Psychiatry. 2021 Nov 4;12:732028. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2021.732028.
eCollection 2021.

Psychedelic Experiences During the Early COVID-19 Pandemic: Findings From an
International Online Survey.

Evens R(1)(2), Reiche S(1), Marek RM(1)(3)(4), Moon DU(2), Groß RE(2), Romanello 
A(1)(2)(5), Jalilzadeh Masah D(2), Scicchitano Böckheler M(2), Gutwinski S(1)(2),
Montag C(2), Mick I(1)(2), Majić T(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Psychotropic Substances, Psychiatric University Clinic at
Hospital St. Hedwig | CCM, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member
of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Neurosciences | CCM, Berlin Institute of Health, 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin 
and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Interdisciplinary Research Group "The Future of Medicine: Good Health for
All," Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences and Humanities, Berlin, Germany.
(4)German Rheumatism Research Centre Berlin (DRFZ), Berlin, Germany.
(5)Berlin School of Mind and Brain, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.

Introduction: The current corona virus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has caused a
serious global health crisis that has affected large parts of the public and
private life worldwide, including the use of psychoactive substances. In this
study, we investigated the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on the use of
serotonergic psychedelics, i.e., the settings in which people use psychedelics,
the motives of usage, and the subjective quality of psychedelic experiences.
Methods: The study was part of an international, cross-sectional, internet-based 
survey (N = 5,049) available in five languages (English, German, Spanish,
Italian, and Korean) carried out during the early phase of the pandemic from
April to August 2020. Participants were asked to retrospectively rate settings
and motives of psychedelic substance use before the pandemic and in the last 4
weeks during the pandemic, as well as changes in psychedelic experiences.
Results: Of n = 1,375 participants that reported the use psychedelics in 2019 or 
2020, n = 642 (46.6%) also took psychedelics during the pandemic. During the
pandemic, participants used psychedelics significantly less often in settings
that were outside their home. Top motives to use psychedelics were comparable
before and during the pandemic, but participants consumed less out of curiosity, 
to celebrate, or because friends took it, and more out of boredom. An increase in
positively connoted, often pro-social experiences was observed. Two thirds of
participants who used psychedelics during the pandemic claimed that psychedelics 
had helped them to deal better with the corona pandemic at least slightly.
Discussion: Changes in setting and motives were mostly in line with restrictions 
caused by control measures to contain the spread of the virus. The unexpected
increase in positively connoted experiences possibly reflects a favorable
interaction of environmental macro- and individual micro-contexts during the
pandemic (e.g., by reducing the use in more uncontrolled recreational settings or
by encouraging a strong self-selection of substance users due to the expectation 
of "bad trips"). Increased pro-social feelings under psychedelics might reflect a
desire for social interactions in times of social distancing and pandemic-related
stress and anxiety.

Copyright © 2021 Evens, Reiche, Marek, Moon, Groß, Romanello, Jalilzadeh Masah,
Scicchitano Böckheler, Gutwinski, Montag, Mick and Majić.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2021.732028 
PMCID: PMC8599818
PMID: 34803757 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

