
1. Tumour Virus Res. 2021 Nov 18;12:200227. doi: 10.1016/j.tvr.2021.200227. [Epub
ahead of print]

Potential entry receptors for human γ-herpesvirus into epithelial cells: A
plausible therapeutic target for viral infections.

Rani A(1), Jakhmola S(1), Karnati S(2), Parmar HS(3), Chandra Jha H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Biomedical Engineering, Indian Institute of
Technology Indore, India.
(2)Department of Medical Cell Biology, Julius Maximilians University, Wuerzburg, 
Germany.
(3)School of Biotechnology, Devi Ahilya University, Takshashila Campus, Khandwa
Road, Indore, 452001, MP, India.
(4)Department of Biosciences and Biomedical Engineering, Indian Institute of
Technology Indore, India. Electronic address: hemcjha@iiti.ac.in.

Herpesviruses are ubiquitous viruses, specifically the Epstein Barr virus (EBV). 
EBV and Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) establish their latency
for a long period in B-cells and their reactivation instigates dreadful diseases 
from cancer to neurological modalities. The envelope glycoprotein of these
viruses makes an attachment with several host receptors. For instance;
glycoprotein 350/220, gp42, gHgL and gB of EBV establish an attachment with CD21,
HLA-DR, Ephs, and other receptor molecules to hijack the B- and epithelial cell
machinery. Ephs are reported recently as potent receptors for EBV entry into
epithelial cells. Eph receptors play a role in the maintenance and control of
various cellular processes including morphology, adhesion, proliferation,
survival and differentiation. Alterations in the structure and expression of Eph 
and ephrin (Eph ligands) molecules is entangled with various pathologies
including tumours and neurological complications. Along with Eph, integrins, NRP,
NMHC are also key players in viral infections as they are possibly involved in
viral transmission, replication and persistence. Contrarily, KSHV gH is known to 
interact with EphA2 and -A4 molecules, whereas in the case of EBV only EphA2
receptors are being reported to date. The ELEFN region of KSHV gH was involved in
the interaction with EphA2, however, the interacting region of EBV gH is elusive.
Further, the gHgL of KSHV and EBV form a complex with the EphA2 ligand-binding
domain (LBD). Primarily by using gL both KSHV and EBV gHgL bind to the peripheral
regions of LBD. In addition to γ-herpesviruses, several other viruses like Nipah 
virus, Cedar virus, Hepatitis C virus and Rhesus macaque rhadinovirus (RRV) also 
access the host cells via Eph receptors. Therefore, we summarise the possible
roles of Eph and ephrins in virus-mediated infection and these molecules could
serve as potential therapeutic targets.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tvr.2021.200227 
PMCID: PMC8628264
PMID: 34800753 

