
1. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2021 Sep 1;25(9):701-707. doi: 10.5588/ijtld.21.0298.

Thrombotic events and COVID-19 vaccines.

Brazete C(1), Aguiar A(2), Furtado I(3), Duarte R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Saúde Pública da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, Unidade 
de Saúde Pública do Alto Minho, Viana do Castelo, Portugal.
(2)EPIUnit, Instituto de Saúde Pública da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal,
Laboratório para a Investigação Integrativa e Translacional em Saúde Populacional
(ITR), Porto, Portugal.
(3)Serviço de Infeciologia, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário do Porto, Porto,
Portugal.
(4)EPIUnit, Instituto de Saúde Pública da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal,
Laboratório para a Investigação Integrativa e Translacional em Saúde Populacional
(ITR), Porto, Portugal, Unidade de Investigação Clínica da Administração Regional
de Saúde do Norte, Porto, Portugal, Departamento de Ciências da Saúde Pública,
Ciências Forenses e Educação Médica, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal,
Serviço de Pneumologia, Centro Hospitalar de Vila Nova de Gaia/Espinho, Vila Nova
de Gaia, Portugal.

Comment in
    Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2021 Sep 1;25(9):691-692.

COVID-19 vaccines are considered promising agents in the control of the pandemic.
Although their safety was assessed in randomised clinical trials, severe adverse 
events (AEs) have been reported after large-scale administration. This study aims
to evaluate thromboembolic AEs reported after vaccination in a real-world context
and how they led to the interruption of vaccination campaigns. We also review the
benefits and risks of the vaccines approved in the European Union and provide
recommendations. A review of the literature was performed using Medline/PubMed
electronic database as well as institutional and pharmacovigilance official
reports. Our findings show that vaccine-induced prothrombotic immune
thrombocytopenia has been suggested as a very rare AE associated with viral
vector vaccines. Unusual thrombotic events combined with moderate-to-severe
thrombocytopenia were reported mainly in women under 60 years of age. As safety
signals emerged, Vaxzevria and Janssen´s COVID-19 vaccine campaigns have been
paused while investigations proceed. On the other hand, the number of deep vein
thrombosis and pulmonary embolism reports have not increased. Post-marketing
surveillance indicated that mRNA vaccines are safe and should continue to be
used. The thrombotic events report rate is not increased in people over 60 years.
As they are at greater risk for COVID-19 complications and death, no vaccine
restrictions are recommended in this group. Risk factors for vaccine-induced
prothrombotic immune thrombocytopenia should be established so that
evidence-based decisions can be made. Systematic monitoring of COVID-19 vaccine
safety is essential to ensure that the benefits of vaccination outweigh the
risks.

DOI: 10.5588/ijtld.21.0298 
PMCID: PMC8412105
PMID: 34802491  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

