
1. Dev Psychol. 2021 Oct;57(10):1648-1666. doi: 10.1037/dev0001236.

Parent-adolescent relationship quality as a moderator of links between COVID-19
disruption and reported changes in mothers' and young adults' adjustment in five 
countries.

Skinner AT(1), Godwin J(1), Alampay LP(2), Lansford JE(1), Bacchini D(3),
Bornstein MH(4), Deater-Deckard K(5), Di Giunta L(6), Dodge KA(1), Gurdal S(7),
Pastorelli C(6), Sorbring E(7), Steinberg L(8), Tapanya S(9), Yotanyamaneewong
S(10).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Child and Family Policy, Duke University.
(2)Department of Psychology, Ateneo de Manila University.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Naples "Federico II".
(4)Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development.
(5)Department of Brain and Psychological Sciences, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst.
(6)Department of Psychology, Università di Roma "La Sapienza".
(7)Center for Child and Youth Studies, University West.
(8)Department of Psychology, Temple University.
(9)Department of Psychiatry, Chiang Mai University.
(10)Department of Psychology, Chiang Mai University.

The COVID-19 pandemic has presented families around the world with extraordinary 
challenges related to physical and mental health, economic security, social
support, and education. The current study capitalizes on a longitudinal,
cross-national study of parenting, adolescent development, and young adult
competence to document the association between personal disruption during the
pandemic and reported changes in internalizing and externalizing behavior in
young adults and their mothers since the pandemic began. It further investigates 
whether family functioning during adolescence 3 years earlier moderates this
association. Data from 484 families in five countries (Italy, the Philippines,
Sweden, Thailand, and the United States) reveal that higher levels of reported
disruption during the pandemic are related to reported increases in internalizing
and externalizing behaviors after the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic for young
adults (Mage = 20) and their mothers in all five countries, with the exception of
one association in Thailand. Associations between disruption during the pandemic 
and young adults' and their mothers' reported increases in internalizing and
externalizing behaviors were attenuated by higher levels of youth disclosure,
more supportive parenting, and lower levels of destructive adolescent-parent
conflict prior to the pandemic. This work has implications for fostering
parent-child relationships characterized by warmth, acceptance, trust, open
communication, and constructive conflict resolution at all times given their
protective effects for family resilience during times of crisis. (PsycInfo
Database Record (c) 2021 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/dev0001236 
PMID: 34807687  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

