
1. Sci Justice. 2021 Nov;61(6):735-742. doi: 10.1016/j.scijus.2021.08.002. Epub 2021
Aug 19.

Interim recommendations for the management of forensic investigation during the
COVID-19 pandemic: An Italian perspective.

Di Luise E(1), Magni PA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Commander of Sezione Intervento Operativo (S.I.O.) - Arma Carabinieri, Reparto
Carabinieri Investigazioni Scientifiche (R.I.S.), di Messina, Italy; Laboratory
of Forensic Biology, Arma Carabinieri, Reparto Carabinieri Investigazioni
Scientifiche (R.I.S.), di Messina, Italy.
(2)Discipline of Medical, Molecular & Forensic Sciences, Murdoch University, 90
South Street, Murdoch, Western Australia 6150, Australia; Murdoch University
Singapore, King's Centre, 390 Havelock Road, Singapore 169662, Singapore.
Electronic address: p.magni@murdoch.edu.au.

The Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is spreading around the world,
representing a global pandemic. In this context, governments from around the
world suspended almost all education, industry and business activities, alongside
restricting the movement of people. Nevertheless, during this period, the
activity of the law enforcement and forensic investigators never stopped. At
present, guidelines regarding forensic autopsies of SARS-CoV-2 virus-positive
cases and the handling of potentially infected biological samples are available
in literature. However, less attention has been given to the development of
specific adjustments to the existing crime scene investigation protocols and
procedures for this exceptional time. This manuscript aims to share the methods
and strategies adopted for the investigation of high priority criminal cases
during the pandemic. Furthermore, other pandemic-related processes are critically
explored, in order to propose adjustments for any forensic services to be
prepared to face similar challenges in the future. The overall goal of this
manuscript is to provide a summary of the main measures and the procedures
developed to make the operations possible, while safeguarding the technicians in 
the field and the activity in the forensic laboratory. In order to minimize the
risk of infection for personnel, adjustments to the standard practice have been
proposed for each of the different phases of crime scene management, i.e. CSI
call policy, equipment preparation, working groups, procedure at the scene, chain
of custody and analyses of the evidence at the forensic lab. As this is a current
study, based on limited cases and limited sources in the literature, changes and 
updates to the indications provided in this paper may be needed in the near
future, according to new virological data epidemiological trends.

Copyright © 2021 The Chartered Society of Forensic Sciences. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scijus.2021.08.002 
PMCID: PMC8375245
PMID: 34802647 

