
1. Pak J Pharm Sci. 2021 Sep;34(5):1809-1812.

REPORT-Mild encephalitis/encephalopathy with a reversible splenial lesion
associated with mumps infection: A case report.

Lin F(1), Feng X(1), Li Z(1), Fan X(2), Li J(3), Xu B(3), Yang X(3), Wang F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious diseases, Children's Hospital Affiliated to Zhengzhou
University, Henan Children's Hospital, Zhengzhou Children's Hospital, Zhengzhou, 
Henan, China.
(2)Department of Radiology, Children's Hospital Affiliated to Zhengzhou
University, Henan Children's Hospital, Zhengzhou Children's Hospital, Zhengzhou, 
Henan, China.
(3)Department of Neonatology, Children's Hospital Affiliated to Zhengzhou
University, Henan Children's Hospital, Zhengzhou Children's Hospital, Zhengzhou, 
Henan, China.

We describe for the first time an child who demonstrated Mild
encephalitis/encephalopathy with a reversible splenial lesion (MERS) after mumps 
infection in China. In this report, a 12-year-old boy came to Children's Hospital
Affiliated to Zhengzhou University due to fever, swelling and pain under the
earlobe for 4 days, and headache and vomiting for half of a day. Laboratory
examinations showed a blood sodium level of 125mmol/L, both the Immunoglobulin M 
and Polymerase Chain Reaction results for the serum mumps virus were positive.
Brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) showed slight hypointense on T1 weighted
images, hyperintense on T2-weighted images, fluid attenuated inversion recovery, 
diffusion-weighted images in the splenium of the corpus callosum indicative of
MERS. On the 8th day, the patient no longer had swelling and pain around the
parotid salivary glands, the sodium levels returned to normal. Onset of 14th d,
follow-up brain MRI did not reveal any abnormalities. The case given to us
indicates that MERS should be considered when patients after mumps infection
presents with neurological symptoms and MRI should be performed to evaluate the
splenium of the corpus callosum.


PMID: 34803019 

