
1. Acta Trop. 2021 Nov 20;226:106254. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2021.106254. [Epub 
ahead of print]

A comparative review of serological assays for the detection of rabies
virus-specific antibodies.

Ciconello FN(1), Katz ISS(1), Fernandes ER(1), Guedes F(1), Silva SR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Pasteur, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Instituto Pasteur, São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address:
sandrianabr@gmail.com.

Rabies is a major public health problem with a fatality rate close to 100%,
caused by a virus of the Lyssavirus genus, of which rabies virus (RABV) is the
prototype. Nonetheless, the complete prevention can be achieved by the induction 
of neutralizing antibodies by pre- or post-exposure prophylaxis. According to the
world health organization (WHO) and World Organization for animal health (OIE),
serum titers of rabies virus neutralizing antibodies (RVNA) that are higher or
equal to 0.5 international units (IU)/ml indicate adequate immune response after 
vaccination against rabies. Currently, RFFIT and FAVN are the gold standard tests
recommended by both WHO and OIE for detecting and quantitating RVNA in biological
samples from individuals or animals previously vaccinated and/or subjects
suspected of having been infected by RABV. Although the tests RFFIT and FAVN are 
efficient, they are time-consuming, labor-intensive manual tests and not
cost-effective for routine use. Following the previously mentioned, approaches
with alternative methods have been developed to detect RVNA or rabies-specific
antibodies in human or animal serum, but with variable success. This work
summarizes the advances in the serological assays for the detection of
neutralizing antibodies or rabies antibodies and assesses the individual immune
status after vaccination against rabies, as well as the mechanisms of RABV
neutralization mediated by antibodies. Therefore, the main alternative methods
for the determination of RABV or rabies-specific antibodies are exposed, with
promising results, besides being easy to execute, of low cost, and representing a
possibility of being applied, according to the proposal of each test to the
network of Rabies Surveillance Laboratories.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2021.106254 
PMID: 34808119 

