
1. J Assoc Nurses AIDS Care. 2021 Jul 20. doi: 10.1097/JNC.0000000000000285. [Epub
ahead of print]

"Every One of Us Is a Strand in That Basket": Weaving Together Stories of
Indigenous Wellness and Resilience From the Perspective of Those With Lived and
Living Experience With HIV/Hepatitis C Virus.

Heidebrecht L(1), Iyer S, Laframboise SL, Madampage C, King A.

Author information: 
(1)Luke Heidebrecht, PhD Candidate, is a Research Associate, College of Medicine,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada. Subhashini Iyer,
MSc, MPH, is a Research Associate, College of Medicine, University of
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada. Sandy Leo Laframboise, is a Métis 
Two Spirit Elder, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. Claudia Madampage, PhD,
MPH, is a Project Officer, College of Medicine, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada. Alexandra King, MD, FRCPC, from Nipissing First 
Nation, is the Cameco Chair in Indigenous Health and Wellness, College of
Medicine, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.

ABSTRACT: This article primarily focuses on the stories shared by Indigenous
women with living and/or lived experiences of HIV/hepatitis C virus from the
Vancouver Downtown East Side who attended the "Awakening our Wisdom" retreat.
Weaving together the story of an Indigenous approach to research that informed
the design of the retreat and the findings that emerged, a basket is formed that 
highlights the ways settler-colonialism within Canada has produced a system of
health care that has neglected the Indigenous experience. The emerging themes of 
Connection, Disconnection, and Reconnection offers teachings for Indigenous
journeys of resilience and wellness for those living with HIV/hepatitis C virus. 
These findings may help health care practitioners identify health care places and
spaces that are in need of decolonization and offer, from an Indigenous
perspective, the next steps forward for a health care system that promotes
Indigenous engagement and retention in care.

Copyright © 2021 Association of Nurses in AIDS Care.

DOI: 10.1097/JNC.0000000000000285 
PMID: 34806860 

