
1. AME Case Rep. 2021 Oct 25;5:36. doi: 10.21037/acr-21-28. eCollection 2021.

Colonic tuberculosis presenting as intestinal subocclusion in a patient with
neuroendocrine tumor: a case report.

Brabo EP(1), Viana M(2), Caroli-Bottino A(3), Pannain VLN(3), Eiras A(4), Moraes 
AB(2), Vieira Neto L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Service and Neuroendocrine Section, Clementino Fraga Filho University
Hospital, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine and Endocrine Unit, Medical School and
Clementino Fraga Filho University Hospital, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro,
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Department of Pathology, Medical School and Clementino Fraga Filho University 
Hospital, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(4)Department of Radiology, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil.

Extra-pulmonary tuberculosis (EPT) is responsible for approximately 14% of all
tuberculosis cases in Brazil. The incidence of EPT is increasing slightly and is 
often associated with human immunodeficiency virus infection and other causes of 
immunosuppression. The association of EPT and cancer is poorly documented. Here
we present a rare case of intestinal subocclusion that was supposed to be caused 
by cancer and was caused by colonic tuberculosis (CT) in a patient with
metastatic neuroendocrine tumor (NET). A 61-year-old woman presented with
one-year history of abdominal pain, diarrhea and weight loss. An abdominal CT
scan (ACTS) showed liver, peritoneal and lymph nodes metastasis. Colonoscopy
revealed a subocclusive lesion in the descendent colon. She underwent an urgent
laparoscopy and transverse colostomy. The liver biopsy revealed a well
differentiated grade 2 NET and the mycobacterial culture confirmed tuberculosis
in the colonic lesion. Anti-tuberculosis was prescribed, and somatostatin
analogue therapy was introduced one month later. The tuberculosis treatment was
finished, and the patient remained on somatostatin analogue for 21 months. During
this time the symptoms of abdominal pain and diarrhea disappeared and her body
weight increased 35% over her baseline weight. Then, diarrhea, flushing and
abdominal pain returned, and a new ACTS confirmed progressive disease. Interferon
was added to her treatment with satisfactory control of symptoms. She was
forwarded to another hospital to be treated with 177Lu-DOTATOC. The symptoms
improved and the patient remained symptom free for more than a year, and now she 
has a new disease progression. The patient will be evaluated for retreatment with
177Lu-DOTATOC. Advanced NET may be a devastating disease enough to predispose the
patient to EPT. We must keep this hypothesis in the differential diagnosis of our
patients since symptoms of CT are usually nonspecific. At colonoscopy,
radiological features are strictures, colitis and polypoidal lesions and
complications such as bowel perforation or fistula must be in mind. It is
particularly important those with advanced disease in endemic areas of
tuberculosis.

2021 AME Case Reports. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/acr-21-28 
PMCID: PMC8572667
PMID: 34805755 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have completed
the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at
https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acr-21-28). The authors have no conflicts of interest
to declare.

