
1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Nov 3;12:775521. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.775521.
eCollection 2021.

JieZe-1 Alleviates HSV-2 Infection-Induced Genital Herpes in Balb/c Mice by
Inhibiting Cell Apoptosis via Inducing Autophagy.

Shao Q(1), Wu F(1), Liu T(1), Wang W(1), Liu T(1), Jin X(1), Xu L(1), Ma Y(2),
Huang G(1), Chen Z(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, Tongji
Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(3)Department of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, Tongji
Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
Wuhan, China.

Objectives: Genital herpes (GH) is a common sexually transmitted disease mainly
caused by herpes simplex virus 2 (HSV-2). JieZe-1 (JZ-1) is an in-hospital
prescription that has been used in Tongji Hospital for many years to treat
various lower female genital tract infectious diseases. Our previous study showed
that JZ-1 can protect against HSV-2 infection in vitro by inducing autophagy.
However, whether JZ-1 can protect against HSV-2 infection in vivo, and the
underlying mechanisms involved still remain unclear. Therefore, this study was
designed to address above questions. Methods: 8-week-old female balb/c mice were 
injected intravaginally with HSV-2 to establish GH model. The symptom score, body
weight, and histological examination were recorded to assess the animal model of 
HSV-2 infected and the therapeutic effect of JZ-1. Inflammatory response was
determined by detecting inflammatory cells infiltration and local cytokines
levels. After then, under autophagy inhibitor chloroquine application, we
measured the levels of cell apoptosis and autophagy and investigated the
relationship between enhanced autophagy and cell apoptosis. Next, the classic
PI3K/Akt/mTOR axis was examined, and in vitro experiment was carried out for
further verification. Results: Our results showed that JZ-1 administration
significantly reduces symptom score, increases weight gain and alleviates
histological damage in HSV-2 infection-induced GH in balb/c mice. JZ-1
administration obviously ameliorates inflammatory responses with reduced
T-lymphocytes, T helper cells, macrophages and neutrophils infiltration, and
local IL-1β, IL-6, TNF-α and CCL2 levels. HSV-2 infection leads to massive cell
apoptosis, which was also restored by JZ-1. Meanwhile, we found that HSV-2
infection blocks autophagic flux in vivo and JZ-1 administration induces
autophagy. After chloroquine application, it was observed that the inhibition of 
autophagy is strongly associated with increased cell apoptosis, whereas the
promotion of autophagy remarkedly decreases apoptosis. These results suggested
that JZ-1 inhibits cell apoptosis in GH by inducing autophagy, which was further 
supported in later in vitro experiment. Additionally, PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling
pathway was also downregulated by JZ-1 administration. Conclusion: Our data
demonstrated that JZ-1 can alleviate HSV-2 infection-induced GH in balb/c mice by
inhibiting cell apoptosis via inducing autophagy, and the underlying mechanisms
may be associated with the inhibition of PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway.

Copyright © 2021 Shao, Wu, Liu, Wang, Liu, Jin, Xu, Ma, Huang and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.775521 
PMCID: PMC8595469
PMID: 34803718 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

