
1. Drug Alcohol Rev. 2021 Nov 21. doi: 10.1111/dar.13405. [Epub ahead of print]

Tina's ParTy line: Polysubstance use patterns in sexual minority men living with 
HIV who use methamphetamine.

Davis Ewart L(1), Johnson A(1), Bainter S(1), Brown EC(1), Grov C(2), Harkness
A(1), Roth AM(3), Paul R(4), Neilands TB(5), Dilworth SE(5), Carrico AW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health Sciences, University of Miami Miller School of
Medicine, Miami, USA.
(2)Graduate School of Public Health and Health Policy, City University of New
York, New York, USA.
(3)Dornsife School of Public Health, Drexel University, Philadelphia, USA.
(4)Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Missouri St. Louis, St.
Louis, USA.
(5)San Francisco Center for AIDS Prevention Studies, University of California,
San Francisco, USA.

INTRODUCTION: This cross-sectional study examined the associations of
demographic, structural and psychological factors with distinct typologies of
polysubstance use in sexual minority men (SMM) living with HIV who use
methamphetamine.
METHODS: In total, 161 SMM living with HIV who reported methamphetamine use in
the past 3 months were recruited in San Francisco from 2013 to 2017 for a
randomised controlled trial. A latent class analysis was conducted by leveraging 
baseline measures of self-reported use of 15 substances in the past 3 months as
well as validated screening measures of hazardous alcohol and cannabis use.
Correlates of latent class membership were examined using a three-step
categorical latent variable logistic regression.
RESULTS: Four typologies of substance use were identified: (i) methamphetamine
use only (43%); (ii) methamphetamine and crack-cocaine use (22%); (iii) party and
play use-methamphetamine, gamma-hydroxybutyrate and amyl nitrites (i.e. poppers) 
with erectile dysfunction drugs (31%); and (iv) high polysubstance use (4%). SMM 
of colour and those with a history of incarceration were more commonly classified
as engaging in methamphetamine and crack-cocaine use compared to party and play
use. Men with higher sexual compulsivity scores were more commonly classified as 
engaging in party and play use and polysubstance use.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS: There is substantial heterogeneity in polysubstance
use patterns among SMM living with HIV who use methamphetamine. This will inform 
the development of tailored substance use interventions addressing the unique
needs of SMM of colour and targeting sexual compulsivity as a prominent
comorbidity for some men.

© 2021 Australasian Professional Society on Alcohol and other Drugs.

DOI: 10.1111/dar.13405 
PMID: 34806244 

