
1. Sci Total Environ. 2021 Nov 17:151724. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.151724.
[Epub ahead of print]

Influenza seasonality and its environmental driving factors in mainland China and
Hong Kong.

Ali ST(1), Cowling BJ(2), Wong JY(3), Chen D(1), Shan S(1), Lau EHY(1), He D(4), 
Tian L(3), Li Z(5), Wu P(1).

Author information: 
(1)WHO Collaborating Centre for Infectious Disease Epidemiology and Control,
School of Public Health, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region; Laboratory of Data Discovery for
Health, Hong Kong Science and Technology Park, Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region.
(2)WHO Collaborating Centre for Infectious Disease Epidemiology and Control,
School of Public Health, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region; Laboratory of Data Discovery for
Health, Hong Kong Science and Technology Park, Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region. Electronic address: bcowling@hku.hk.
(3)WHO Collaborating Centre for Infectious Disease Epidemiology and Control,
School of Public Health, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.
(4)Department of Applied Mathematics, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region.
(5)Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Influenza epidemics occur during winter in temperate zones, but have 
less regular seasonality in the subtropics and tropics. Here we quantified the
role of environmental drivers of influenza seasonality in temperate and
subtropical China.
METHODS: We used weekly surveillance data on influenza virus activity in mainland
China and Hong Kong from 2005 through 2016. We estimated the transmissibility via
the instantaneous reproduction number (Rt), a real-time measure of
transmissibility, and examined its relationship with different climactic drivers 
and allowed for the timing of school holidays and the decline in susceptibility
in the population as an epidemic progressed. We developed a multivariable
regression model for Rt to quantify the contribution of various potential
environmental drivers of transmission.
FINDINGS: We found that absolute humidity is a potential driver of influenza
seasonality and had a U-shaped association with transmissibility and hence can
predict the pattern of influenza virus transmission across different climate
zones. Absolute humidity was able to explain up to 15% of the variance in Rt, and
was a stronger predictor of Rt across the latitudes. Other climatic drivers
including mean daily temperature explained up to 13% of variance in Rt and
limited to the locations where the indoor measures of these factors have better
indicators of outdoor measures. The non-climatic driver, holiday-related school
closures could explain up to 7% of variance in Rt.
INTERPRETATION: A U-shaped association of absolute humidity with influenza
transmissibility was able to predict seasonal patterns of influenza virus
epidemics in temperate and subtropical locations.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.151724 
PMID: 34800462 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest BJC received
honoraria from Sanofi, Roche, AstraZeneca, Moderna and GSK. The authors report no
other potential conflicts of interest.

