
1. Front Nutr. 2021 Nov 5;8:772033. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2021.772033. eCollection 2021.

The Antiviral Activity of Bacterial, Fungal, and Algal Polysaccharides as
Bioactive Ingredients: Potential Uses for Enhancing Immune Systems and Preventing
Viruses.

Chaisuwan W(1)(2), Phimolsiripol Y(2)(3), Chaiyaso T(2)(3), Techapun C(2)(3),
Leksawasdi N(2)(3), Jantanasakulwong K(2)(3), Rachtanapun P(2)(3), Wangtueai
S(3)(4), Sommano SR(3)(5), You S(6), Regenstein JM(7), Barba FJ(8), Seesuriyachan
P(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Program in Biotechnology, Graduate School, Chiang Mai
University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(2)Faculty of Agro-Industry, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(3)Cluster of Agro Bio-Circular-Green Industry (Agro-BCG), Chiang Mai University,
Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(4)College of Maritime Studies and Management, Chiang Mai University, Samut
Sakhon, Thailand.
(5)Plant Bioactive Compound Laboratory (BAC), Department of Plant and Soil
Sciences, Faculty of Agriculture, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(6)Department of Marine Food Science and Technology, Gangneung-Wonju National
University, Gangneung, South Korea.
(7)Department of Food Science, College of Agriculture and Life Science, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY, United States.
(8)Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, Food Science, Toxicology 
and Forensic Medicine, Faculty of Pharmacy, Universitat de València, Valencia,
Spain.

Viral infections may cause serious human diseases. For instance, the recent
appearance of the novel virus, SARS-CoV-2, causing COVID-19, has spread globally 
and is a serious public health concern. The consumption of healthy, proper,
functional, and nutrient-rich foods has an important role in enhancing an
individual's immune system and preventing viral infections. Several
polysaccharides from natural sources such as algae, bacteria, and fungi have been
considered as generally recognized as safe (GRAS) by the US Food and Drug
Administration. They are safe, low-toxicity, biodegradable, and have biological
activities. In this review, the bioactive polysaccharides derived from various
microorganisms, including bacteria, fungi, and algae were evaluated. Antiviral
mechanisms of these polysaccharides were discussed. Finally, the potential use of
microbial and algal polysaccharides as an antiviral and immune boosting strategy 
was addressed. The microbial polysaccharides exhibited several bioactivities,
including antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial, antitumor, and
immunomodulatory activities. Some microbes are able to produce sulfated
polysaccharides, which are well-known to exert a board spectrum of biological
activities, especially antiviral properties. Microbial polysaccharide can inhibit
various viruses using different mechanisms. Furthermore, these microbial
polysaccharides are also able to modulate immune responses to prevent and/or
inhibit virus infections. There are many molecular factors influencing their
bioactivities, e.g., functional groups, conformations, compositions, and
molecular weight. At this stage of development, microbial polysaccharides will be
used as adjuvants, nutrient supplements, and for drug delivery to prevent several
virus infections, especially SARS-CoV-2 infection.

Copyright © 2021 Chaisuwan, Phimolsiripol, Chaiyaso, Techapun, Leksawasdi,
Jantanasakulwong, Rachtanapun, Wangtueai, Sommano, You, Regenstein, Barba and
Seesuriyachan.

DOI: 10.3389/fnut.2021.772033 
PMCID: PMC8602887
PMID: 34805253 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

