
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 5;12:747574. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.747574. eCollection 
2021.

Protective Efficacy of an Orf Virus-Vector Encoding the Hemagglutinin and the
Nucleoprotein of Influenza A Virus in Swine.

Joshi LR(1)(2), Knudsen D(2), Piñeyro P(3), Dhakal S(4), Renukaradhya GJ(4), Diel
DG(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Population Medicine and Diagnostic Sciences, Animal Health
Diagnostic Center, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca,
NY, United States.
(2)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Animal Disease Research And 
Diagnostic Laboratory, South Dakota State University, Brookings, SD, United
States.
(3)Department of Veterinary Diagnostic and Production Animal Medicine, Iowa State
University, Ames, IA, United States.
(4)Department of Veterinary Preventive Medicine, Center for Food Animal Health,
Ohio State University, Wooster, OH, United States.

Swine influenza is a highly contagious respiratory disease of pigs caused by
influenza A viruses (IAV-S). IAV-S causes significant economic losses to the
swine industry and poses challenges to public health given its zoonotic
potential. Thus effective IAV-S vaccines are needed and highly desirable and
would benefit both animal and human health. Here, we developed two recombinant
orf viruses, expressing the hemagglutinin (HA) gene (OV-HA) or the HA and the
nucleoprotein (NP) genes of IAV-S (OV-HA-NP). The immunogenicity and protective
efficacy of these two recombinant viruses were evaluated in pigs. Both OV-HA and 
OV-HA-NP recombinants elicited robust virus neutralizing antibody response in
pigs, with higher levels of neutralizing antibodies (NA) being detected in
OV-HA-NP-immunized animals pre-challenge infection. Although both recombinant
viruses elicited IAV-S-specific T-cell responses, the frequency of IAV-S-specific
proliferating CD8+ T cells upon re-stimulation was higher in OV-HA-NP-immunized
animals than in the OV-HA group. Importantly, IgG1/IgG2 isotype ELISAs revealed
that immunization with OV-HA induced Th2-biased immune responses, whereas
immunization with OV-HA-NP virus resulted in a Th1-biased immune response. While 
pigs immunized with either OV-HA or OV-HA-NP were protected when compared to
non-immunized controls, immunization with OV-HA-NP resulted in incremental
protection against challenge infection as evidenced by a reduced secondary
antibody response (NA and HI antibodies) following IAV-S challenge and reduced
virus shedding in nasal secretions (lower viral RNA loads and frequency of
animals shedding viral RNA and infectious virus), when compared to animals in the
OV-HA group. Interestingly, broader cross neutralization activity was also
observed in serum of OV-HA-NP-immunized animals against a panel of contemporary
IAV-S isolates representing the major genetic clades circulating in swine. This
study demonstrates the potential of ORFV-based vector for control of swine
influenza virus in swine.

Copyright © 2021 Joshi, Knudsen, Piñeyro, Dhakal, Renukaradhya and Diel.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.747574 
PMCID: PMC8602839
PMID: 34804030 

Conflict of interest statement: DD has patent on orf virus vector (patent no.
11013798). The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.

