
1. J Neuromuscul Dis. 2021 Nov 16. doi: 10.3233/JND-210755. [Epub ahead of print]

Pre Clinical Assessment of AAVrh74.MCK.GNE Viral Vector Therapeutic Potential:
Robust Activity Despite Lack of Consistent Animal Model for GNE Myopathy.

Mitrani-Rosenbaum S(1), Yakovlev L(1), Becker Cohen M(1), Argov Z(2), Fellig
Y(3), Harazi A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Goldyne Savad Institute of Gene Therapy, Hadassah Medical Center, The Faculty 
of Medicine, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
(2)Department of Neurology, Hadassah Medical Center, The Faculty of Medicine,
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
(3)Department of Pathology Hadassah Medical Center, The Faculty of Medicine,
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.

BACKGROUND: GNE myopathy is a unique adult onset rare neuromuscular disease
caused by recessive mutations in the GNE gene. The pathophysiological mechanism
of this disorder is not well understood and to date, there is no available
therapy for this debilitating disease. We have previously established proof of
concept that AAV based gene therapy can effectively deliver the wild type human
GNE into cultured muscle cells from human patients and in mice, using a CMV
promoter driven human wild type GNE plasmid delivered through an adeno associated
virus (AAV8) based platform.
OBJECTIVE: In the present study we have generated a muscle specific GNE
construct, driven by the MCK promoter and packaged with the AAVrh74 serotype for 
efficacy evaluation in an animal model of GNE Myopathy.
METHODS: The viral vector was systemically delivered at 2 doses to two age groups
of a Gne-/- hGNED207V Tg mouse described as a preclinical model of GNE Myopathy, 
and treatment was monitored for long term efficacy.
RESULTS: In spite of the fact that the full described characteristics of the
preclinical model could not be reproduced, the systemic injection of the
rAAVrh74.MCK.GNE viral vector resulted in a long term presence and expression of 
human wt GNE in the murine muscles and in some improvements of their mild
phenotype. The Gne-/- hGNED207V Tg mice are smaller from birth, but cannot be
differentiated from littermates by muscle function (grip strength and Rotarod)
and their muscle histology is normal, even at advanced age.
CONCLUSIONS: The rAAVrh74.MCK.GNE vector is a robust tool for the development of 
GNE Myopathy therapies that supply the intact GNE. However, there is still no
reliable animal model to fully assess its efficacy since the previously developed
Gne-/- hGNED207V Tg mice do not present disease characteristics.

DOI: 10.3233/JND-210755 
PMID: 34806613 

