
1. Front Mol Biosci. 2021 Nov 4;8:746883. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.746883.
eCollection 2021.

Biosynthesis of α-Gal Epitopes (Galα1-3Galβ1-4GlcNAc-R) and Their Unique
Potential in Future α-Gal Therapies.

Galili U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, United
States.

The α-gal epitope is a carbohydrate antigen which appeared early in mammalian
evolution and is synthesized in large amounts by the glycosylation enzyme
α1,3galactosyltransferase (α1,3GT) in non-primate mammals, lemurs, and New-World 
monkeys. Ancestral Old-World monkeys and apes synthesizing α-gal epitopes
underwent complete extinction 20-30 million years ago, and their mutated progeny 
lacking α-gal epitopes survived. Humans, apes, and Old-World monkeys which
evolved from the surviving progeny lack α-gal epitopes and produce the natural
anti-Gal antibody which binds specifically to α-gal epitopes. Because of this
reciprocal distribution of the α-gal epitope and anti-Gal in mammals,
transplantation of organs from non-primate mammals (e.g., pig xenografts) into
Old-World monkeys or humans results in hyperacute rejection following anti-Gal
binding to α-gal epitopes on xenograft cells. The in vivo immunocomplexing
between anti-Gal and α-gal epitopes on molecules, pathogens, cells, or
nanoparticles may be harnessed for development of novel immunotherapies (referred
to as "α-gal therapies") in various clinical settings because such immune
complexes induce several beneficial immune processes. These immune processes
include localized activation of the complement system which can destroy pathogens
and generate chemotactic peptides that recruit antigen-presenting cells (APCs)
such as macrophages and dendritic cells, targeting of antigens presenting α-gal
epitopes for extensive uptake by APCs, and activation of recruited macrophages
into pro-reparative macrophages. Some of the suggested α-gal therapies associated
with these immune processes are as follows: 1. Increasing efficacy of
enveloped-virus vaccines by synthesizing α-gal epitopes on vaccinating
inactivated viruses, thereby targeting them for extensive uptake by APCs. 2.
Conversion of autologous tumors into antitumor vaccines by expression of α-gal
epitopes on tumor cell membranes. 3. Accelerating healing of external and
internal injuries by α-gal nanoparticles which decrease the healing time and
diminish scar formation. 4. Increasing anti-Gal-mediated protection against
zoonotic viruses presenting α-gal epitopes and against protozoa, such as
Trypanosoma, Leishmania, and Plasmodium, by vaccination for elevating production 
of the anti-Gal antibody. The efficacy and safety of these therapies were
demonstrated in transgenic mice and pigs lacking α-gal epitopes and producing
anti-Gal, raising the possibility that these α-gal therapies may be considered
for further evaluation in clinical trials.

Copyright © 2021 Galili.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.746883 
PMCID: PMC8601398
PMID: 34805272 

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that he has shares in the
BiolineRX company which conducts clinical trials on intratumoral injection of
synthetic alpha-gal glycolipids in cancer patients.

