
1. Gene Ther. 2021 Nov 22. doi: 10.1038/s41434-021-00305-2. [Epub ahead of print]

Premature delivery in the domestic sow in response to in utero delivery of AAV9
to fetal piglets.

Rich KA(#)(1), Wier CG(#)(1), Russo J(2), Kong L(3), Heilman PL(4), Reynolds
A(4), Knapp A(4), Pino MG(1), Keckley E(5), Mattox L(5), Malbrue RA(5), Sumner
CJ(3)(6), Buhimschi C(2), Kolb SJ(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center,
Columbus, OH, USA.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Ohio State University Wexner
Medical Center, Columbus, OH, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Department of Biological Chemistry and Pharmacology, The Ohio State University
Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH, USA.
(5)University Laboratory Animal Resources, The Ohio State University Wexner
Medical Center, Columbus, OH, USA.
(6)Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(7)Department of Neurology, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center,
Columbus, OH, USA. Stephen.Kolb@osumc.edu.
(8)Department of Biological Chemistry and Pharmacology, The Ohio State University
Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH, USA. Stephen.Kolb@osumc.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Numerous pediatric neurogenetic diseases may be optimally treated by in utero
gene therapy (IUGT); but advancing such treatments requires animal models that
recapitulate developmental physiology relevant to humans. One disease that could 
benefit from IUGT is the autosomal recessive motor neuron disease spinal muscular
atrophy (SMA). Current SMA gene-targeting therapeutics are more efficacious when 
delivered shortly after birth, however postnatal treatment is rarely curative in 
severely affected patients. IUGT may provide benefit for SMA patients. In
previous studies, we developed a large animal porcine model of SMA using AAV9 to 
deliver a short hairpin RNA (shRNA) directed at porcine survival motor neuron
gene (Smn) mRNA on postnatal day 5. Here, we aimed to model developmental
features of SMA in fetal piglets and to demonstrate the feasibility of prenatal
gene therapy by delivering AAV9-shSmn in utero. Saline (sham), AAV9-GFP, or
AAV9-shSmn was injected under direct ultrasound guidance between gestational ages
77-110 days. We developed an ultrasound-guided technique to deliver virus under
direct visualization to mimic the clinic setting. Saline injection was tolerated 
and resulted in viable, healthy piglets. Litter rejection occurred within seven
days of AAV9 injection for all other rounds. Our real-world experience of in
utero viral delivery followed by AAV9-related fetal rejection suggests that the
domestic sow may not be a viable model system for preclinical in utero AAV9 gene 
therapy studies.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41434-021-00305-2 
PMID: 34803165 

