
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Nov 22;17(11):e1010084. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010084.
eCollection 2021 Nov.

The architecture of the simian varicella virus transcriptome.

Braspenning SE(1), Verjans GMGM(1), Mehraban T(1), Messaoudi I(2), Depledge
DP(3)(4), Ouwendijk WJD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viroscience, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California
Irvine, Irvine, California, United States of America.
(3)Department of Microbiology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
New York, United States of America.
(4)Institute of Virology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.

Primary infection with varicella-zoster virus (VZV) causes varicella and the
establishment of lifelong latency in sensory ganglion neurons. In one-third of
infected individuals VZV reactivates from latency to cause herpes zoster, often
complicated by difficult-to-treat chronic pain. Experimental infection of
non-human primates with simian varicella virus (SVV) recapitulates most features 
of human VZV disease, thereby providing the opportunity to study the pathogenesis
of varicella and herpes zoster in vivo. However, compared to VZV, the
transcriptome and the full coding potential of SVV remains incompletely
understood. Here, we performed nanopore direct RNA sequencing to annotate the SVV
transcriptome in lytically SVV-infected African green monkey (AGM) and rhesus
macaque (RM) kidney epithelial cells. We refined structures of canonical SVV
transcripts and uncovered numerous RNA isoforms, splicing events, fusion
transcripts and non-coding RNAs, mostly unique to SVV. We verified the expression
of canonical and newly identified SVV transcripts in vivo, using lung samples
from acutely SVV-infected cynomolgus macaques. Expression of selected transcript 
isoforms, including those located in the unique left-end of the SVV genome, was
confirmed by reverse transcription PCR. Finally, we performed detailed
characterization of the SVV homologue of the VZV latency-associated transcript
(VLT), located antisense to ORF61. Analogous to VZV VLT, SVV VLT is multiply
spliced and numerous isoforms are generated using alternative transcription start
sites and extensive splicing. Conversely, low level expression of a single
spliced SVV VLT isoform defines in vivo latency. Notably, the genomic location of
VLT core exons is highly conserved between SVV and VZV. This work thus highlights
the complexity of lytic SVV gene expression and provides new insights into the
molecular biology underlying lytic and latent SVV infection. The identification
of the SVV VLT homolog further underlines the value of the SVV non-human primate 
model to develop new strategies for prevention of herpes zoster.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010084 
PMCID: PMC8648126
PMID: 34807956 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

