
1. Am J Emerg Med. 2021 Nov 6;51:342-347. doi: 10.1016/j.ajem.2021.10.055. [Epub
ahead of print]

Psychological impact of COVID-19 on emergency department healthcare workers in a 
tertiary care center during a national economic crisis.

Al Hariri M(1), Hamade B(2), Bizri M(3), Salman O(4), Tamim H(5), Al Jalbout
N(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, American University of Beirut Medical
Center, Beirut, Lebanon. Electronic address: ma147@aub.edu.lb.
(2)Emergency Services Institute, Department of Intensive Care and Resuscitation, 
Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH, United States of America. Electronic 
address: hamadeb@ccf.org.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, American University of Beirut Medical Center,
Beirut, Lebanon. Electronic address: mb112@aub.edu.lb.
(4)Department of Emergency Medicine, American University of Beirut Medical
Center, Beirut, Lebanon. Electronic address: os25@aub.edu.lb.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, American University of Beirut Medical Center,
Beirut, Lebanon. Electronic address: htamim@aub.edu.lb.
(6)Department of Emergency Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, 
United States of America. Electronic address: naljalbout@mgh.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: Since the declaration of the novel Corona Virus Disease (COVID-19) as
a global pandemic by the World Health Organization, frontline healthcare workers 
(HCWs) and staff in the Emergency Departments (ED) started experiencing feelings 
of anxiety and fear from the projected exponential spread and the potential
burden on the healthcare system and infrastructure. In Lebanon, major local
factors contributing to this fear were the rapid escalation of COVID-19 cases
across the country, the lack of preparedness, and the shortage of personal
protective equipment, in addition to the evolving economic crisis and financial
restrictions. This study aims to investigate the immediate psychological impact
of the COVID-19 outbreak on ED staff working in a hospital environment in
relation to their household income.
METHODS: Self-reported cross-sectional survey was delivered to the frontline
staff working at the Department of Emergency Medicine of AUBMC in Beirut,
Lebanon. General demographic characteristics, scores of Generalized Anxiety
Disorder 7 (GAD-7), scores of Patient Health Questionnaire 9 (PHQ-9), and scores 
of Burnout Measure-Short (BMS) version were collected.
RESULTS: 74 HCWs (49.6%) participated in the study. The mean age for participants
was (31.78 ± 9.49). More than half of the participants were nurses and more than 
70% reported a monthly salary of less than 2000 USD. The household income was
negatively associated with the participants' scores on the GAD-7 and PHQ-9, but
not the BMS. Previous mental health diagnosis was positively associated with the 
PHQ-9 and BMS scores, while seeking mental health care was negatively associated 
with the PHQ-9 and BMS scores.
CONCLUSION: At our tertiary care center in a low-income, low resource country
amidst the COVID-19 pandemic, the HCWs reported marked psychological disturbances
on different scales. In particular, the financial burden was associated with
increased anxiety and clinical depression, but was not associated with burnout.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajem.2021.10.055 
PMCID: PMC8571126
PMID: 34808456 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest MAH, BH, MB,
OS, HT and NA report no conflict of interest with the original work presented
below.

