
1. Dev Psychol. 2021 Oct;57(10):1748-1754. doi: 10.1037/dev0001259.

Family risk and resilience in the context of cascading COVID-19 challenges:
Commentary on the special issue.

Masten AS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Child Development, University of Minnesota, Twin Cities.

Articles comprising this special issue on parenting and family dynamics during
the COVID-19 pandemic document the profound disruptions to family life posed by a
cascading multisystem catastrophe as well as the capacity of families for
resilience. Results of these studies during the first year of the pandemic align 
well with theory and past evidence on developmental risk, vulnerability, and
resilience in families contending with large-scale complex disasters, while also 
illustrating methodological advances, such as technologies for remote data
collection. The scope and duration of the global pandemic pose extraordinary,
cumulative, and variable challenges to family life, highlighting the importance
of preexisting as well as unfolding adaptive capabilities embedded in multiple
interacting systems. Findings illustrate the importance of relationships, the
vulnerability of families already at risk, and the protective role of social
support for parenting. This issue represents an exciting harbinger of knowledge
to come on risk and resilience processes from multisystem, multidisciplinary, and
multicultural studies of the pandemic and its effects. There are critical gaps to
fill and many questions yet to answer when so many systems critical to human
well-being and development are disrupted, and knowledge is needed to prepare and 
respond more effectively to inevitable disasters of the future. It will be
essential to include more diverse and representative samples, methods amenable to
dynamic modeling of change and systematic aggregation of findings across studies,
and long-term assessments. This special issue reflects the progress,
complexities, and promise of family-focused research on risk and resilience in
the time of COVID-19. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2021 APA, all rights
reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/dev0001259 
PMID: 34807694  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

