
1. J Vet Med Sci. 2021 Nov 19. doi: 10.1292/jvms.21-0199. [Epub ahead of print]

Viral deubiquitinases and innate antiviral immune response in livestock and
poultry.

Zhou Z(1)(2), Xu J(1)(2), Li Z(1)(2), Lv Y(1), Wu S(3), Zhang H(4), Song Y(5)(6),
Ai Y(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science, Jilin University.
(2)Key Laboratory of Zoonosis Research, Ministry of Education, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Institute of Zoonosis, Jilin University.
(3)College of Basic Medical Sciences, Jilin University.
(4)Avian Disease and Oncology Laboratory, Agriculture Research Service, United
States Department of Agriculture.
(5)Key laboratory of Utilization and Conservation for Tropical Marine
Bioresources (Hainan Tropical Ocean University), Ministry of Education of the
People's Republic of China.
(6)Hainan Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Tropical Marine
Fishery Resources.

Among many of the pathogens, virus is the main cause of diseases in livestock and
poultry. A host infected with the virus triggers a series of innate and adaptive 
immunity. The realization of innate immune responses involves the participation
of a series of protein molecules in host cells, including receptors, signal
molecules and antiviral molecules. Post-translational modification of cellular
proteins by ubiquitin regulates numerous cellular processes, including innate
immune responses. Ubiquitin-mediated control over these processes can be reversed
by cellular or viral deubiquitinases (DUBs). DUBs have now been identified in
diverse viral lineages, and their characterization is providing valuable insights
into virus biology and the role of the ubiquitin system in host antiviral
mechanisms. In this review, we briefly introduce the mechanisms of ubiquitination
and deubiquitination, present antiviral innate immune response and its regulation
by ubiquitin, and summarize the prevalence of DUBs encoded by viruses
(Arteriviridae, Asfarviridae, Nairoviridae, Coronaviridae, Herpesviridae, and
Picornaviridae) infecting domestic animals and poultry. It is found that these
DUBs suppress the innate immune responses mainly by affecting the production of
type I interferon (IFN), which causes immune evasion of the viruses and promotes 
their replication. These findings have important reference significance for
understanding the virulence and immune evasion mechanisms of the relevant
viruses, and thus for the development of more effective prevention and treatment 
measures.

DOI: 10.1292/jvms.21-0199 
PMID: 34803084 

