
1. Med J Malaysia. 2021 Nov;76(6):828-832.

Comparing various cut-offs of aspartate aminotransferase-to-platelet ratio index 
(APRI) in liver cirrhosis diagnosis among hepatitis C patients in Malaysia.

Mohd Suan MA(1), Chan HK(2), Sem XH(3), Shilton S(3), Abu Hassan MR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Clinical Research Centre, Alor Setar, Kedah,
Malaysia. irzah96@yahoo.com.
(2)UHospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Clinical Research Centre, Alor Setar, Kedah,
Malaysia.
(3)Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics (FIND), Geneva, Switzerland.
(4)Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Department of Medicine, Gastroenterology Unit, Alor
Setar, Kedah, Malaysia.

INTRODUCTION: A major challenge in providing hepatitis C virus (HCV) treatment at
primary healthcare clinics is the lack of radiological facilities to guide the
decision making of liver cirrhosis (LC). This study aimed to compare the
performance of three commonly used cut-offs of the aspartate
aminotransferase-to-platelet ratio index (APRI) in diagnosing LC among hepatitis 
C patients in Malaysia.
METHODS: This cross-sectional study was based on the data collected from the
Hepatitis C Elimination through Access to Diagnostics (HEAD-Start) study in 25
primary healthcare clinics across three regions of Malaysia. The findings of
biochemical tests were used to calculate the APRI for each study participant.
Transient elastography was used as a standard reference for the diagnosis of
cirrhosis. The area under the receiver operating curve (AUROC) was used to
determine the discriminative ability of APRI in both HCV mono-infected and
HCV/HIV co-infected patients. The diagnostic performance of APRI at three
different cutoffs (>1.0, ≥1.5 and >2.0) were also evaluated.
RESULTS: This study included 867 HCV-RNA-positive patients, 158 (16.1%) were
co-infected with HIV. For the HCV mono-infected patients, the sensitivity,
specificity, positive predictive value (PPV) and negative predictive values (NPV)
for the cut-off of >1.0 were 61.8%, 88.7%, 73.8% and 81.9%, and for the cut-off
of ≥1.5, 45.6%, 97.0%, 88.7% and 77.6%, respectively. A much lower sensitivity
(29.9%) was observed for the cut-off of >2.0. The diagnostic accuracy of APRI at 
the cut-off of ≥1.5 in the HCV/HIV co-infected patients was relatively
suboptimal.
CONCLUSION: APRI, with a cut-off of ≥1.5, can more accurately predict LC among
hepatitis C patients in Malaysia. However, additional physical examination and
laboratory assessment are likely to be required to support the diagnosis,
especially in those with HCV/HIV co-infection.


PMID: 34806668 

