
1. Front Vet Sci. 2021 Nov 5;8:769312. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2021.769312. eCollection
2021.

Next Generation of Voluntary PRRS Virus Regional Control Programs.

Magalhães ES(1), Zimmerman JJ(1), Holtkamp DJ(1), Classen DM(2), Groth DD(2),
Glowzenski L(3), Philips R(4), Silva GS(1), Linhares DCL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Diagnostic and Production Animal Medicine, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, United States.
(2)Carthage Veterinary Service, Ltd., Carthage, IL, United States.
(3)TriOak Foods Inc., Oakville, IA, United States.
(4)Boehringer Ingelheim Animal Health USA Inc., Atlanta, GA, United States.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) became pandemic in
the 1980's and today remains one of the most significant pathogens of the global 
swine industry. At the herd level, control of PRRSV is complicated by its extreme
genetic diversity and its ability to persist in pigs, despite an active immune
response. Ultimately, PRRSV control or elimination requires the coordination and 
active cooperation of producers and veterinarians at the regional level. Early
voluntary PRRSV regional control programs focused on routine diagnostic testing
and voluntary data-sharing regarding the PRRSV status of participants' herds, but
no pre-defined action plans or decision trees were developed to secure project
successes (or recover from failures). Given that control of PRRSV is paramount to
producer profitability, we propose a coordinated approach for detecting,
controlling, and ultimately eliminating wild-type PRRSV from herds participating 
in regional projects. Fundamental to project success is real-time, multi-platform
communication of all data, information, and events that concern the regional
project and project participants. New to this approach is the concept of
agreed-upon action plans to be implemented by project participants in response to
specific events or situations. The simultaneous and coordinated implementation of
these strategies allows for early detection of wild-type PRRSV virus
introductions and rapid intervention based on agreed-upon response plans. An
example is given of a project in progress in the Midwest USA.

Copyright © 2021 Magalhães, Zimmerman, Holtkamp, Classen, Groth, Glowzenski,
Philips, Silva and Linhares.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2021.769312 
PMCID: PMC8602550
PMID: 34805344 

Conflict of interest statement: DC and DG are employed by Carthage Veterinary
Service, Ltd. LG is employed by TriOak Foods Inc. RP is employed by Boehringer
Ingelheim Animal Health USA Inc. The remaining authors declare that the research 
was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that
could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

