
1. J Med Internet Res. 2021 Nov 19;23(11):e29554. doi: 10.2196/29554.

A Markerless 2D Video, Facial Feature Recognition-Based, Artificial Intelligence 
Model to Assist With Screening for Parkinson Disease: Development and Usability
Study.

Hou X(#)(1), Zhang Y(#)(2), Wang Y(#)(3), Wang X(#)(4), Zhao J(2), Zhu X(2), Su
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Xinhua Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Jiaxing City, Jiaxing, 
China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Shanghai East Hospital, School of Medicine, Tongji
University, Shanghai, China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Masked face is a characteristic clinical manifestation of Parkinson
disease (PD), but subjective evaluations from different clinicians often show low
consistency owing to a lack of accurate detection technology. Hence, it is of
great significance to develop methods to make monitoring easier and more
accessible.
OBJECTIVE: The study aimed to develop a markerless 2D video, facial feature
recognition-based, artificial intelligence (AI) model to assess facial features
of PD patients and investigate how AI could help neurologists improve the
performance of early PD diagnosis.
METHODS: We collected 140 videos of facial expressions from 70 PD patients and 70
matched controls from 3 hospitals using a single 2D video camera. We developed
and tested an AI model that performs masked face recognition of PD patients based
on the acquisition and evaluation of facial features including geometric and
texture features. Random forest, support vector machines, and k-nearest neighbor 
were used to train the model. The diagnostic performance of the AI model was
compared with that of 5 neurologists.
RESULTS: The experimental results showed that our AI models can achieve feasible 
and effective facial feature recognition ability to assist with PD diagnosis. The
accuracy of PD diagnosis can reach 83% using geometric features. And with the
model trained by random forest, the accuracy of texture features is up to 86%.
When these 2 features are combined, an F1 value of 88% can be reached, where the 
random forest algorithm is used. Further, the facial features of patients with PD
were not associated with the motor and nonmotor symptoms of PD.
CONCLUSIONS: PD patients commonly exhibit masked facial features. Videos of a
facial feature recognition-based AI model can provide a valuable tool to assist
with PD diagnosis and the potential of realizing remote monitoring of the
patient's condition, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic.

©Xinyao Hou, Yu Zhang, Yanping Wang, Xinyi Wang, Jiahao Zhao, Xiaobo Zhu, Jianbo 
Su. Originally published in the Journal of Medical Internet Research
(https://www.jmir.org), 19.11.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/29554 
PMID: 34806994  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

