
1. Pak J Pharm Sci. 2021 Sep;34(5):1645-1649.

Assessment of renal function among covid-19 patients admitted to the intensive
care unit.

Makkawi M(1), Alasmari S(1), Mashraqi MM(2), Alshamrani S(2), Alshehri AA(2),
Alqahtani S(3), Alqahtani M(4), Eisa N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, Faculty of Applied Medical
Sciences, King Khalid University, Abha, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, College of Applied Medical
Sciences, Najran University, Najran, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Hematology, King Faisal Medical City, Abha, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Laboratory, Asir Central Hospital, Abha, Saudi Arabia.

Severe acute respiratory viral infections are frequently associated with multiple
organ failure, including acute kidney damage. The present study aimed to
investigate the associated influence of COVID-19 on renal function in patients
admitted to the intensive care unit in Asir region, Saudi Arabia. Thirty patients
infected with COVID-19 who were referred to the intensive care unit during
November and October 2020 at Asir central hospital, Asir region, Saudi Arabia
were recruited. The age of patients ranged between 30 and 90 years old. Renal
function tests exhibited dramatic changes in the renal biomarkers in patients
with COVID-19. Blood urea levels in COVID-19 patients were significantly higher
than in the control group. In addition, significantly lower albumin levels with
abnormally decreased total protein levels were found in COVID-19 patients. Among 
the different electrolytes analyzed, a significantly lower calcium level was
observed in COVID-19 patients' groups than in the controls. Renal function tests 
for COVID-19-infected ICU patients revealed significant changes, indicating the
major impact of COVID-19 on kidney function. Monitoring renal function tests may 
assist in the early prognosis of COVID-19 patients. It is, therefore, crucial to 
increase the understanding of renal function tests in COVID-19 patients who were 
admitted to the hospital before their condition deteriorated.


PMID: 34802997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

