
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 5;12:748417. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.748417. eCollection 
2021.

The Pathogenesis of COVID-19 Myocardial Injury: An Immunohistochemical Study of
Postmortem Biopsies.

Hartmann C(1)(2), Miggiolaro AFRDS(1)(2), Motta JDS(2), Baena Carstens L(1),
Busatta Vaz De Paula C(1), Fagundes Grobe S(1)(2), Hermann de Souza Nunes
L(1)(2), Lenci Marques G(1)(2), Libby P(3), Zytynski Moura L(1)(2), de Noronha
L(1), Pellegrino Baena C(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Paraná (PUCPR),
Curitiba, Brazil.
(2)Department of Medicine, Marcelino Champagnat Hospital, Curitiba, Brazil.
(3)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.

Rationale: Myocardial injury associates significantly and independently with
mortality in COVID-19 patients. However, the pathogenesis of myocardial injury in
COVID-19 remains unclear, and cardiac involvement by SARS-CoV-2 presents a major 
challenge worldwide.
Objective: This histological and immunohistochemical study sought to clarify the 
pathogenesis and propose a mechanism with pathways involved in COVID-19
myocardial injury.
Methods and Results: Postmortem minimally invasive autopsies were performed in
six patients who died from COVID-19, and the myocardium samples were compared to 
a control group (n=11). Histological analysis was performed using
hematoxylin-eosin and toluidine blue staining. Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining
was performed using monoclonal antibodies against targets: caspase-1, caspase-9, 
gasdermin-d, ICAM-1, IL-1β, IL-4, IL-6, CD163, TNF-α, TGF-β, MMP-9, type 1 and
type 3 collagen. The samples were also assessed for apoptotic cells by TUNEL.
Histological analysis showed severe pericardiocyte interstitial edema and higher 
mast cells counts per high-power field in all COVID-19 myocardium samples. The
IHC analysis showed increased expression of caspase-1, ICAM-1, IL-1β, IL-6,
MMP-9, TNF-α, and other markers in the hearts of COVID-19 patients. Expression of
caspase-9 did not differ from the controls, while gasdermin-d expression was
less. The TUNEL assay was positive in all the COVID-19 samples supporting
endothelial apoptosis.
Conclusions: The pathogenesis of COVID-19 myocardial injury does not seem to
relate to primary myocardiocyte involvement but to local inflammation with
associated interstitial edema. We found heightened TGF-β and interstitial
collagen expression in COVID-affected hearts, a potential harbinger of chronic
myocardial fibrosis. These results suggest a need for continued clinical
surveillance of patients for myocardial dysfunction and arrythmias after recovery
from the acute phase of COVID-19.

Copyright © 2021 Hartmann, Miggiolaro, Motta, Baena Carstens, Busatta Vaz De
Paula, Fagundes Grobe, Hermann de Souza Nunes, Lenci Marques, Libby, Zytynski
Moura, de Noronha and Pellegrino Baena.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.748417 
PMCID: PMC8602833
PMID: 34804033  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: PL is an unpaid consultant to, or involved in
clinical trials for Amgen, AstraZeneca, Baim Institute, Beren Therapeutics,
Cartesian, Esperion, Therapeutics, Genentech, Kancera, Kowa Pharmaceuticals,
Medimmune, Merck, Novo Nordisk, Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, Sanofi-Regeneron. PL is 
a member of scientific advisory board for Amgen, Corvidia Therapeutics, Caristo, 
CSL Behring, DalCor Pharmaceuticals, Dewpoint, PlaqueTec, Kancera, Kowa
Pharmaceuticals, Olatec Therapeutics, Medimmune, Novartis, and XBiotech, Inc.
PL’s laboratory has received research funding in the last 2 years from Novartis. 
PL is on the Board of Directors of XBiotech, Inc. PL has a financial interest in 
Xbiotech, a company developing therapeutic human antibodies. PL’s interests were 
reviewed and are managed by Brigham and Women's Hospital and Partners HealthCare 
in accordance with their conflict of interest policies. The remaining authors
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of
interest.

