
1. Vet Ophthalmol. 2021 Nov 22. doi: 10.1111/vop.12956. [Epub ahead of print]

Comparison of the prevalence of Domestic Cat Hepadnavirus in a population of cats
with uveitis and in a healthy blood donor cat population in the United Kingdom.

Jeanes EC(1), Wegg ML(2), Mitchell JA(3), Priestnall SL(3), Fleming L(2), Dawson 
C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Queen Mother Hospital for Animals, Royal Veterinary College, North Mymms,
Hertfordshire, UK.
(2)Animal Health Trust. Centre for Small Animal Studies, Newmarket, Suffolk, UK.
(3)Royal Veterinary College, North Mymms, Hertfordshire, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Domestic Cat Hepadnavirus (DCH) is a novel virus recently identified
in the domestic cat. Currently, little is known regarding its clinical
significance. The hepadnaviridae family includes the Hepatitis B Virus (HBV).
Co-infection of HBV and Hepatitis C in humans increases the risk of uveitis. We
aimed to determine whether DCH is present in the United Kingdom (UK) and whether 
DCH warrants investigation as a potential cause of uveitis in cats.
PROCEDURES: Clinical records from the Royal Veterinary College (RVC) and the
Animal Health Trust (AHT) were reviewed for feline cases diagnosed with
endogenous uveitis. A healthy control group was identified from cats presented to
the RVC as blood donors. DNA was extracted from stored blood samples using
commercially available kits. Polymerase chain reaction assays were performed to
confirm the presence of feline DNA and to detect the presence of DCH DNA using
previously described protocols.
RESULTS: Blood samples were available from 65 cats with endogenous uveitis and 43
healthy control cats. Two blood samples from cats with endogenous uveitis tested 
positive for the presence of DCH DNA. DCH DNA was not detected in the control
group. There was no statistically significant difference between the prevalence
of DCH between the groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Domestic Cat Hepadnavirus is present in the UK. This study failed to
demonstrate a conclusive link between DCH and uveitis in cats, although further
studies to investigate an association with other feline diseases are warranted.

© 2021 American College of Veterinary Ophthalmologists.

DOI: 10.1111/vop.12956 
PMID: 34806802 

