
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 24:JVI0162621. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01626-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Glycosylation and disulfide bonding of wild-type SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein.

Zhang S(1), Go EP(2), Ding H(3), Anang S(1), Kappes JC(3)(4), Desaire H(2),
Sodroski JG(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and Virology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute,Department of Microbiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215,
USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66049, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.
(4)Birmingham Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Research Service,Birmingham, AL
35233, USA.
(5)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T.H. Chan School of 
Public Health, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2021 Apr 01;:.

The SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus, the etiologic agent of COVID-19, uses its spike (S)
glycoprotein anchored in the viral membrane to enter host cells. The S
glycoprotein is the major target for neutralizing antibodies elicited by natural 
infection and by vaccines. Approximately 35% of the SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein
consists of carbohydrate, which can influence virus infectivity and
susceptibility to antibody inhibition. We found that virus-like particles
produced by co-expression of SARS-CoV-2 S, M, E and N proteins contained spike
glycoproteins that were extensively modified by complex carbohydrates. We used a 
fucose-selective lectin to purify the Golgi-modified fraction of a wild-type
SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein trimer, and determined its glycosylation and disulfide 
bond profile. Compared with soluble or solubilized S glycoproteins modified to
prevent proteolytic cleavage and to retain a prefusion conformation, more of the 
wild-type S glycoprotein N-linked glycans are processed to complex forms. Even
Asn 234, a significant percentage of which is decorated by high-mannose glycans
on other characterized S trimer preparations, is predominantly modified in the
Golgi compartment by processed glycans. Three incompletely occupied sites of
O-linked glycosylation were detected. Viruses pseudotyped with natural variants
of the serine/threonine residues implicated in O-linked glycosylation were
generally infectious and exhibited sensitivity to neutralization by soluble ACE2 
and convalescent antisera comparable to that of the wild-type virus. Unlike other
natural cysteine variants, a Cys15Phe (C15F) mutant retained partial, but
unstable, infectivity. These findings enhance our understanding of the Golgi
processing of the native SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein carbohydrates and could assist
the design of interventions. IMPORTANCE The SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus, which causes 
COVID-19, uses its spike glycoprotein to enter host cells. The viral spike
glycoprotein is the main target of host neutralizing antibodies that help to
control SARS-CoV-2 infection and are important for the protection provided by
vaccines. The SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein consists of a trimer of two subunits 
covered with a coat of carbohydrates (sugars). Here, we describe the disulfide
bonds that assist the SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein to assume the correct shape, 
and the composition of the sugar moieties on the glycoprotein surface. We also
evaluate the consequences of natural virus variation in O-linked sugar addition
and in the cysteine residues involved in disulfide bond formation. This
information can expedite the improvement of vaccines and therapies for COVID-19.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01626-21 
PMID: 34817202 

