
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Nov 24:e0139721. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.01397-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

SARS-CoV-2 Infection of Rhesus Macaques Treated Early with Human COVID-19
Convalescent Plasma.

Deere JD(#)(1), Carroll TD(#)(2)(3), Dutra J(1), Fritts L(2), Sammak RL(3), Yee
JL(3), Olstad KJ(3), Reader JR(3), Kistler A(4), Kamm J(4), Di Germanio C(5),
Shaan Lakshmanappa Y(2), Elizaldi SR(2), Roh JW(2), Simmons G(5)(6), Watanabe
J(3), Pollard RE(3), Usachenko J(3), Immareddy R(3), Schmidt BA(2), O'Connor
SL(7)(8), DeRisi J(4)(9), Busch MP(5)(6), Iyer SS(2)(3)(10), Van Rompay
KKA(3)(10), Hartigan-O'Connor DJ(1)(3), Miller CJ(2)(3)(10)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine,
University of California Davis, Davis, California, USA.
(2)Center for Immunology and Infectious Diseases, University of California Davis,
Davis, California, USA.
(3)California National Primate Research Center, University of California Davis,
Davis, California, USA.
(4)Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, California, USA.
(5)Vitalant Research Institute, San Francisco, California, USA.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, USA.
(7)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(8)Wisconsin National Primate Research Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(9)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
(10)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of California Davis, Davis, California, USA.
(11)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, School of
Medicine, University of California Davis, Davis, California, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Human clinical studies investigating use of convalescent plasma (CP) for
treatment of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) have produced conflicting
results. Outcomes in these studies may vary at least partly due to different
timing of CP administration relative to symptom onset. The mechanisms of action
of CP include neutralizing antibodies but may extend beyond virus neutralization 
to include normalization of blood clotting and dampening of inflammation.
Unresolved questions include the minimum therapeutic titer in the CP units or CP 
recipient as well as the optimal timing of administration. Here, we show that
treatment of macaques with CP within 24 h of infection does not reduce viral
shedding in nasal or lung secretions compared to controls and does not detectably
improve any clinical endpoint. We also demonstrate that CP administration does
not impact viral sequence diversity in vivo, although the selection of a viral
sequence variant in both macaques receiving normal human plasma was suggestive of
immune pressure. Our results suggest that CP, administered to medium titers, has 
limited efficacy, even when given very early after infection. Our findings also
contribute information important for the continued development of the nonhuman
primate model of COVID-19. These results should inform interpretation of clinical
studies of CP in addition to providing insights useful for developing other
passive immunotherapies and vaccine strategies. IMPORTANCE Antiviral treatment
options for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) remain
very limited. One treatment that was explored beginning early in the pandemic
(and that is likely to be tested early in future pandemics) is plasma collected
from people who have recovered from coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), known as
convalescent plasma (CP). We tested if CP reduces viral shedding or disease in a 
nonhuman primate model. Our results demonstrate that administration of CP 1 day
after SARS-CoV-2 infection had no significant impact on viral loads, clinical
disease, or sequence diversity, although treatment with normal human plasma
resulted in selection of a specific viral variant. Our results demonstrate that
passive immunization with CP, even during early infection, provided no
significant benefit in a nonhuman primate model of SARS-CoV-2 infection.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.01397-21 
PMCID: PMC8612156
PMID: 34817208 

