
1. Ulster Med J. 2021 Sep;90(3):151-156. Epub 2021 Nov 11.

SUPPORT FOR GENERAL PRACTITONERS DURING COVID-19.

Davies M(1), Carr D(2), Dugan J(3), Hart N(4), Kirkpatrick R(5), Loughrey C(6),
Loughrey P(7), O'Neill G(8).

Author information: 
(1)Consultant Clinical Psychologist, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust.
(2)General Practitioner, Clinical Teaching Fellow Queen's University Belfast,
Clinical Lead North Belfast GP Subdeanery Pilot.
(3)General Practitioner, Co-chair West Belfast GP Federation, Honorary Lecturer
in Clinical Medicine Queen's University Belfast.
(4)Academic General Practitioner and Associate Director for General Practice &
Primary Care, Centre for Medical Education, Queen's University Belfast.
(5)Trainee Clinical Psychologist, Queen's University Belfast.
(6)Director of General Practitioner Education & Training, Eastern Support Unit.
(7)General Practitioner, Chair North Belfast GP Federation.
(8)General Practitioner, Co-chair West Belfast GP Federation.

Background: Evidence of initiatives to support General Practitioners (GPs) during
the Covid-19 pandemic is scant.
Aim: To understand the impact of a novel method of providing support in the early
stages of the pandemic.
Design and setting: A mixed-methods study of GPs working in a socially deprived
area of Belfast.
Method: A survey was distributed to GPs who had attended a series of educational 
meetings at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic. The survey incorporated the
Warwick Edinburgh Mental Wellbeing Scale and questions about the virtual
meetings. Follow-up interviews were undertaken with five GPs to further explore
their lived experiences and their perceptions of the virtual support forum.
Results: The Covid-19 pandemic resulted in a measurable diminution of emotional
well-being in GPs in North and West Belfast. Attendees rated a series of virtual 
meetings highly and described the following themes (and subthemes): a sudden
traumatic change (emotional response, fight or flight, painful reminders of the
status of general practice in the NHS); a coming together (stepping up to take
responsibility, sharing of information, feeling of affirmation); reflections on
what worked (calming facilitation, careful selection of speakers, creating the
right atmosphere, ownership and autonomy) and building future direction (defining
future direction, capitalising on lesson learned).
Conclusion: The virtual meetings harnessed the instinct to come together
witnessed at the beginning of the pandemic, and as well as sharing valuable
information, also provided emotional support along with a sense of comradeship,
ownership and autonomy.
How this fits in: GPs did not feel included or supported at the outset of the
pandemic. Coming together with fellow professionals was a welcome source of
support. Professional support can be delivered using a virtual platform.
Continued professional development is more acceptable than explicit emotional
support, but when done well can bolster resilience and emotional well-being.

Copyright © 2021 Ulster Medical Society.


PMCID: PMC8581688
PMID: 34815593  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared no competing interests.

