
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Nov 24:e0148721. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.01487-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

A Nanobody-Mediated Virus-Targeting Drug Delivery Platform for the Central
Nervous System Viral Disease Therapy.

Zhu S(1)(2)(3), Luo F(4), Zhu B(4), Ling F(4), Wang EL(4), Liu TQ(4), Wang GX(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Fisheries, Southwest University, Chongqing, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fish Reproduction and Development (Ministry of
Education), College of Life Sciences, Southwest University, Chongqing, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Aquatic Science of Chongqing, College of Life Sciences,
Southwest University, Chongqing, China.
(4)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
China.

Viral diseases of the central nervous system (CNS) represent a major global
health concern. Difficulties in treating these diseases are caused mainly by the 
biological tissues and barriers, which hinder the transport of drugs into the
CNS. To counter this, a nanobody-mediated virus-targeting drug delivery platform 
(SWCNTs-P-A-Nb) is constructed for CNS viral disease therapy. Viral
encephalopathy and retinopathy (VER), caused by nervous necrosis virus (NNV), is 
employed as a disease model. SWCNTs-P-A-Nb is successfully constructed by
employing single-walled carbon nanotubes, amantadine, and NNV-specific nanobody
(NNV-Nb) as the nanocarrier, anti-NNV drug, and targeting ligand, respectively.
Results showed that SWCNTs-P-A-Nb has a good NNV-targeting ability in vitro and
in vivo, improving the specific distribution of amantadine in NNV-infected sites 
under the guidance of NNV-Nb. SWCNTs-P-F-A-Nb can pass through the muscle and
gill and be excreted by the kidney. SWCNTs-P-A-Nb can transport amantadine in a
fast manner and prolong the action time, improving the anti-NNV activity of
amantadine. Results so far have indicated that the nanobody-mediated
NNV-targeting drug delivery platform is an effective method for VER therapy,
providing new ideas and technologies for control of the CNS viral diseases.
IMPORTANCE CNS viral diseases have resulted in many deadly epidemics throughout
history and continue to pose one of the greatest threats to public health. Drug
therapy remains challenging due to the complex structure and relative
impermeability of the biological tissues and barriers. Therefore, development in 
the intelligent drug delivery platform is highly desired for CNS viral disease
therapy. In the study, a nanobody-mediated virus-targeting drug delivery platform
is constructed to explore the potential application of targeted therapy in CNS
viral diseases. Our findings hold great promise for the application of targeted
drug delivery in CNS viral disease therapy.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.01487-21 
PMCID: PMC8612154
PMID: 34817277 

