
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021 Nov 23. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14395. [Epub ahead of print]

Origin, genetic diversity, adaptive evolution, and transmission dynamics of Getah
virus.

Shi N(1)(2), Zhu X(2), Qiu X(1)(2), Cao X(1)(2), Jiang Z(3), Lu H(2), Jin
N(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi,
China.
(2)Changchun Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Changchun, Jilin, China.
(3)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, China.

As a member of the Alphavirus, Getah virus (GETV) was becoming more serious and
posing a serious threat to animal safety and public health. However, the
circulation, distribution and evolution of GETV is not well understood. Hence, we
integrated a variety of bioinformatic methodologies, from genomic alterations to 
systematic analysis, phylogeography, selection, adaptive analysis, prediction of 
protein modification, structural biology, and molecular dynamics simulations to
understand the characteristics of GETV. The results of phylogeography and
molecular evolution show that due to the lack of vaccine, GETV is rapidly
expanding its host range and geographical distribution at a high evolutionary
rate. We also predicted the important modification sites, and identified the
adaptive and active selection sites. Finally, the analysis of spatial structure
and function showed that six adaptive sites may be related to the structural
stability, receptor binding ability, immunogenicity and immune evasion of the
virus, respectively. The data from this study have important implications for the
understanding of ongoing GETV outbreaks worldwide and will guide future efforts
to develop effective preventive and control measures against GETV. In particular,
biosafety measures should be strengthened immediately to prevent GETV from
becoming a pandemic, especially in China, South Korea and Japan. This article is 
protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14395 
PMID: 34812572 

