
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021 Nov 23. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14398. [Epub ahead of print]

West Nile virus in Spain: Forecasting the geographical distribution of risky
areas with an ecological niche modelling approach.

Cuervo PF(1)(2), Artigas P(1), Mas-Coma S(1), Bargues MD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Facultad de Farmacia, Departamento de Parasitología, Universidad de Valencia, 
Burjassot, Valencia, Spain.
(2)Laboratorio de Ecología de Enfermedades, Instituto de Ciencias Veterinarias
del Litoral (ICIVET - Litoral), Universidad Nacional del Litoral (UNL)/Consejo
Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Esperanza, Santa
Fe, Argentina.

West Nile virus (WNV), a well-known emerging vector-borne arbovirus with a
zoonotic life cycle, represents a threat to both public and animal health.
Transmitted by ornithophilic mosquitoes, its transmission is difficult to predict
and even more difficult to prevent. The massive and unprecedented number of human
cases and equid outbreaks in Spain during 2020 interpellates for new approaches. 
For the first time, we present an integrate analysis from a niche perspective to 
provide an insight to the situation of West Nile disease (WND) in Spain. Our
modelling approach benefits from the combined use of global occurrence records of
outbreaks of WND in equids and of its two alleged main vectors in Spain, Culex
pipiens and Cx. perexiguus. Maps of the climatic suitability for the presence of 
the two vectors species and for the circulation of WNV are provided. The main
outcome of our study is a map delineating the areas under certain climatic risk
of transmission. Our analyses indicate that the climatic risk of transmission of 
WND is medium in areas nearby the south Atlantic coastal area of the Cadiz Gulf
and the Mediterranean coast, and high in southwestern Spain. The higher risk of
transmission in the basins of the rivers Guadiana and Guadalquivir cannot be
attributed exclusively to the local abundance of Cx. pipiens, but could be
ascribed to the presence and abundance of Cx. perexiguus. Furthermore, this
integrated analysis suggests that the WNV presents an ecological niche of its
own, not fully overlapping the ones of its hosts or vector, and thus requiring
particular environmental conditions to succeed in its infection cycle.

© 2021 The Authors. Transboundary and Emerging Diseases published by Wiley-VCH
GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14398 
PMID: 34812589 

