
1. J Med Virol. 2021 Nov 23. doi: 10.1002/jmv.27473. [Epub ahead of print]

Seroprevalence and molecular characterization of human respiratory syncytial
virus and human adenovirus among children in Ado-Ekiti, Nigeria.

Idris OO(1)(2), Kolawole OM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Life Sciences, Infectious Diseases and 
Environmental Health Research Group, University of Ilorin, Ilorin, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Sciences, Afe Babalola
University, Ado-Ekiti, Nigeria.

In children, the respiratory syncytial virus and adenovirus majorly cause acute
respiratory infections. The study evaluated the seroprevalence and conducted the 
molecular characterization of human respiratory syncytial virus (HRSV) and human 
adenovirus (HAdV) among children. Venous blood, nasopharyngeal, and oropharyngeal
swabs were collected from children presenting with acute respiratory infections
in a tertiary health facility in Ado-Ekiti, Nigeria. A serological investigation 
was carried out on the sera samples for the detection of anti-HRSV immunoglobulin
M (IgM), anti-HRSV IgG, anti-HAdV IgM, and anti-HAdV IgG using ELISA
(enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay) kits. The amplification and sequencing of
HRSV and HAdV were carried out using specific primer pairs that targeted the
glycoprotein (G) gene of HRSV and the hexon gene of HAdV, respectively. The
seroprevalence of HRSV IgG and IgM was 73% and 7.5%, respectively, while the
seroprevalence of HAdV IgG and IgM was 98.5% and 8.5%, respectively. The age of
enrolled children, presence of fever, and cough were associated (p < 0.05) with
the infection. HRSV subtype B (HRSV-B) (13.3%), and species of HAdV
(Mastadenovirus B and C) (11.7%) were detected among the studied population.
There was no viral coinfection with both HRSV and HAdV. In infancy and early
childhood, HRSV-B, HAdV species B and C are common etiologic agents of
respiratory infections as reported in this study. Further studies on molecular
characterization of respiratory tract viruses including circulating respiratory
syncytial virus and adenovirus are hereby advocated.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.27473 
PMID: 34816447 

