
1. Kathmandu Univ Med J (KUMJ). 2021 Apr-Jun;19(74):137-142.

Whole Genome Sequence Analysis to Identify SARS-CoV-2 Variant in Nepal.

Shrestha R (1), Katuwal N (2), Adhikari N (2), Vanaerschot M (3), Tamrakar D (4),
Dhimal M (5), Gyanwali P (5), Bhattarai S (5), Madhup SK (6), Devkota B (7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Kathmandu University School of Medical Sciences,
Dhulikhel, Kavre, Nepal. Research and Development Division, Dhulikhel Hospital,
Kathmandu University Hospital, Dhulikhel, Kavre, Nepal. Genomic Research Lab,
Dhulikhel Hospital, Kathmandu University Hospital, Dhulikhel, Kavre, Nepal.
(2)Research and Development Division, Dhulikhel Hospital, Kathmandu University
Hospital, Dhulikhel, Kavre, Nepal. Genomic Research Lab, Dhulikhel Hospital,
Kathmandu University Hospital, Dhulikhel, Kavre, Nepal.
(3)Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, USA.
(4)Research and Development Division, Dhulikhel Hospital, Kathmandu University
Hospital, Dhulikhel, Kavre, Nepal. Department of Community Medicine, Kathmandu
University School of Medical Sciences, Dhulikhel, Kavre, Nepal.
(5)Nepal Health Research Council, Ramshah Path, Kathmandu, Nepal.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Dhulikhel Hospital, Kathmandu University Hospital,
Dhulikhel, Kavre, Nepal.
(7)Ministry of Health and Population, Kathmandu, Nepal.

Background The spread of SARS-CoV-2 has become a global public health crisis.
Nepal is facing the second wave of COVID-19 pandemic but, there is still a
limited data on the genomic sequence of SARS-CoV-2 variants circulating in Nepal.
Objective The objective of this study is to sequence the whole genome of
SARS-CoV-2 in Nepal to detect possible mutation profiles and phylogenetic
lineages of circulating SARSCoV-2 variants. Method In this study, swab samples
tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 were investigated. After RNA extraction, the
investigation was performed through real-time PCR followed by whole genome
sequencing. The consensus genome sequences were, then, analyzed with appropriate 
bioinformatics tools. Result Sequence analysis of two SARS-CoV-2 genomes from
patient without travel history (Patient A1 and A2) were found to be of lineage
B.1.1. Similarly, among other four samples from subjects returning from the
United Kingdom, genomes of two samples were of lineage B.1.36, and the other two 
were of lineage B.1.1.7 (Alpha Variant). The mutations in the consensus genomes
contained the defining mutations of the respective lineages of SARS-CoV-2.
Conclusion We confirmed two genomic sequences of variant of concern VOC-202012/01
in Nepal. Our study provides the concise genomic evidence for spread of different
lineages of SARS-CoV-2 - B.1.1, B.1.36 and B.1.1.7 of SARS-CoV-2 in Nepal.


PMID: 34819443  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

