
1. J Virol Methods. 2021 Nov 20;300:114369. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114369.
[Epub ahead of print]

A multiplex polymerase chain reaction for the simultaneous detection of the virus
and satellite components associated with cotton leaf curl begomovirus disease
complex.

Palchoudhury S(1), Khare VK(1), Balram N(1), Bhattacharyya UK(1), Das S(1),
Shukla P(1), Chakraborty P(1), Biswas KK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Centre for Plant Virology, Division of Plant Pathology, ICAR-Indian
Agricultural Research Institute, Pusa Campus, New Delhi, 110012, India.
(2)Advanced Centre for Plant Virology, Division of Plant Pathology, ICAR-Indian
Agricultural Research Institute, Pusa Campus, New Delhi, 110012, India.
Electronic address: drkkbiswas@yahoo.co.in.

Cotton leaf curl disease (CLCuD) is caused by a complex of several whiteflies
(Bemisia tabaci Genn.)-transmitted begomovirus species, Cotton leaf curl Multan
virus (CLCuMuV), Cotton leaf curl Kokhran virus (CLCuKoV) and Cotton leaf curl
Alabad virus (CLCuAlV) by individual of mixed infection, associated with Cotton
leaf curl Multan betasatellite (CLCuMB) and several alphasatellites. The disease 
causes major economic losses in cotton in the Indian subcontinent. For monitoring
of epidemiology and development of management strategies of CLCuD, a quick,
sensitive and effective method capable of detecting all the begomovirus,
betasatellite and alphasatellite components associated with CLCuD is required.
With this objective, a multiplex polymerase chain reaction (mPCR) assay was
developed for the simultaneous detection of these three viral components
associated with CLCuD of cotton. Primers for each component were designed based
on the retrieved reference sequences from the GenBank. Each pair of primers,
designed for each of the respective component, was evaluated for its sensitivity 
and specificity in both the component-specific simplex polymerase chain reaction 
(sPCR) and mPCR assay. This report identified three viral component-specific
pairs of primers which, in all combinations, amplified simultaneously the CP gene
(780 nts) of the begomovirus, the βC1gene (375 nts) of the betasatellite and the 
Rep gene (452 nts) of the alphasatellite associated with CLCuD in the mPCR
assays. The amplified products specific to each component produced by these
assays were identified based on their amplicon sizes, and the identities of the
viral components amplified were confirmed by cloning and sequencing the amplicons
obtained in the mPCR. The mPCR assay was validated using naturally CLCuD-affected
cotton plants of the fields. This assay will be useful for rapid detection of
CLCuD-associated begomovirus, betasatellite and alphasatellite DNA in field
samples, extensive resistance screening in resistance breeding programme, and
also monitoring epidemiology for detection of virus and its components when
symptoms are mild or absent in the plant.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114369 
PMID: 34813823 

