
1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Nov 8;12:732891. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.732891.
eCollection 2021.

A Review of Medicinal Plants with Antiviral Activity Available in Bangladesh and 
Mechanistic Insight Into Their Bioactive Metabolites on SARS-CoV-2, HIV and HBV.

Bachar SC(1), Mazumder K(2)(3)(4), Bachar R(5), Aktar A(2), Al Mahtab M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Dhaka, Dhaka,
Bangladesh.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Jashore University of Science and Technology, Jashore,
Bangladesh.
(3)School of Optometry and Vision Science, UNSW Medicine, University of New South
Wales (UNSW), Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(4)School of Biomedical Sciences and Graham Centre for Agricultural Innovation,
Charles Sturt University, Wagga, NSW, Australia.
(5)Department of Pharmacy, School of Science and Engineering, University of
Information Technology and Sciences, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(6)Department of Hepatology, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical University, Dhaka, 
Bangladesh.

Currently, viral infection is the most serious health issue which causing
unexpected higher rate of death globally. Many viruses are not yet curable, such 
as corona virus-2 (SARS-CoV-2), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis
virus, human papilloma virus and so others. Furthermore, the toxicities and
ineffective responses to resistant strains of synthetic antiviral drugs have
reinforced the search of effective and alternative treatment options, such as
plant-derived antiviral drug molecules. Therefore, in the present review, an
attempt has been taken to summarize the medicinal plants reported for exhibiting 
antiviral activities available in Bangladesh along with discussing the
mechanistic insights into their bioactive components against three most hazardous
viruses, namely SARS-CoV-2, HIV, and HBV. The review covers 46 medicinal plants
with antiviral activity from 25 families. Among the reported 79 bioactive
compounds having antiviral activities isolated from these plants, about 37 of
them have been reported for significant activities against varieties of viruses. 
Hesperidin, apigenin, luteolin, seselin, 6-gingerol, humulene epoxide, quercetin,
kaempferol, curcumin, and epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) have been reported to
inhibit multiple molecular targets of SARS-CoV-2 viral replication in a number of
in silico investigations. Besides, numerous in silico, in vitro, and in vivo
bioassays have been demonstrated that EGCG, anolignan-A, and B, ajoene, curcumin,
and oleanolic acid exhibit anti-HIV activity while piperine, ursolic acid,
oleanolic acid, (+)-cycloolivil-4'-O-β-d-glucopyranoside, quercetin, EGCG,
kaempferol, aloin, apigenin, rosmarinic acid, andrographolide, and hesperidin
possess anti-HBV activity. Thus, the antiviral medicinal plants and the isolated 
bioactive compounds may be considered for further advanced investigations with
the aim of the development of effective and affordable antiviral drugs.

Copyright © 2021 Bachar, Mazumder, Bachar, Aktar and Al Mahtab.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.732891 
PMCID: PMC8606584
PMID: 34819855 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

