
1. BMC Genomics. 2021 Nov 24;22(1):849. doi: 10.1186/s12864-021-08067-2.

Benchmarking different approaches for Norovirus genome assembly in metagenome
samples.

Fuentes-Trillo A(1), Monzó C(1), Manzano I(1), Santiso-Bellón C(2), Andrade
JDSR(3), Gozalbo-Rovira R(2), García-García AB(4)(5), Rodríguez-Díaz J(#)(2),
Chaves FJ(#)(1)(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Genomics and Diabetes. Research Foundation of Valencia University
Clinical Hospital- INCLIVA, Valencia, Spain.
(2)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of Valencia,
Valencia, Spain.
(3)Laboratory of Comparative and Environmental Virology, Oswaldo Cruz Institute, 
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(4)Unit of Genomics and Diabetes. Research Foundation of Valencia University
Clinical Hospital- INCLIVA, Valencia, Spain. a.barbara.garcia@ext.uv.es.
(5)Spanish Biomedical Research Network in Diabetes and Associated Metabolic
Disorders (CIBERDEM), Madrid, Spain. a.barbara.garcia@ext.uv.es.
(6)Spanish Biomedical Research Network in Diabetes and Associated Metabolic
Disorders (CIBERDEM), Madrid, Spain.
(7)Sequencing Multiplex S.L., Valencia, Spain.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Genome assembly of viruses with high mutation rates, such as
Norovirus and other RNA viruses, or from metagenome samples, poses a challenge
for the scientific community due to the coexistence of several viral quasispecies
and strains. Furthermore, there is no standard method for obtaining whole-genome 
sequences in non-related patients. After polyA RNA isolation and sequencing in
eight patients with acute gastroenteritis, we evaluated two de Bruijn graph
assemblers (SPAdes and MEGAHIT), combined with four different and common
pre-assembly strategies, and compared those yielding whole genome Norovirus
contigs.
RESULTS: Reference-genome guided strategies with both host and target virus did
not present any advantages compared to the assembly of non-filtered data in the
case of SPAdes, and in the case of MEGAHIT, only host genome filtering presented 
improvements. MEGAHIT performed better than SPAdes in most samples, reaching
complete genome sequences in most of them for all the strategies employed. Read
binning with CD-HIT improved assembly when paired with different analysis
strategies, and more notably in the case of SPAdes.
CONCLUSIONS: Not all metagenome assemblies are equal and the choice in the
workflow depends on the species studied and the prior steps to analysis. We may
need different approaches even for samples treated equally due to the presence of
high intra host variability. We tested and compared different workflows for the
accurate assembly of Norovirus genomes and established their assembly capacities 
for this purpose.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-021-08067-2 
PMCID: PMC8611953
PMID: 34819031  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

