
1. Isr Med Assoc J. 2021 Nov;23(11):690-692.

Adapting Surgical Clerkship Curricula in Response to the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Kim E(1), Goodman E(2), Sebbag G(1)(3), Ohana G(1)(4), Jotkowitz A(1)(5), Taragin
BH(1)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Medical School for International Health, Soroka University Medical Center,
Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva,
Israel.
(2)Department of Surgery, Mount Sinai Beth Israel, New York, New York, USA.
(3)Department of Surgery, Soroka University Medical Center, Faculty of Health
Sciences, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.
(4)Department of Surgery, Barzilai Medical Center, Ashkelon, Israel.
(5)Department of Medicine, Soroka University Medical Center, Faculty of Health
Sciences, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.
(6)Department of Pediatric Radiology, Assuta Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Coronavirus disease-19 (COVID-19) impacted medical education and led 
to the significant modification or suspension of clinical clerkships and
rotations.
OBJECTIVES: To describe a revised surgery clerkship curriculum, in which we
divided in-person clinical teaching into smaller groups of students and adopted
online-based learning to foster student and patient safety while upholding
program standards.
METHODS: The third-year surgery core clerkship of a 4-year international
English-language program at the Medical School for International Health at Ben
Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, was adapted by dividing
students into smaller capsules for in-person learning and incorporating online
learning tools. Specifically, students were divided evenly throughout three
surgical departments, each of which followed a different clinical schedule.
RESULTS: National Board of Medical Examiners clerkship scores of third-year
medical students who were returning to in-person clinical clerkships after
transitioning from 8 weeks of online-based learning showed no significant
difference from the previous 2 years.
CONCLUSIONS: To manage with the restrictions caused by COVID-19 pandemic, we
designed an alternative approach to a traditional surgical clerkship that
minimized the risk of exposure and used online learning tools to navigate
scheduling challenges. This curriculum enabled students to complete their
clinical rotation objectives and outcomes while maintaining program standards.
Furthermore, this approach provided a number of benefits, which medical schools
should consider adopting the model into practice even in a post-pandemic setting.


PMID: 34811982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

