
1. J Gen Virol. 2021 Nov;102(11). doi: 10.1099/jgv.0.001687.

Simulated vector transmission differentially influences dynamics of two viral
variants of deformed wing virus in honey bees (Apis mellifera).

Ray AM(1)(2), Davis SL(3), Rasgon JL(1)(2), Grozinger CM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular, and Integrative Biosciences Graduate Program, The Huck
Institutes of the Life Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University, University
Park, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Entomology, Center for Infectious Disease Dynamics, Center for
Pollinator Research, Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, PA, USA.

Understanding how vectors alter the interactions between viruses and their hosts 
is a fundamental question in virology and disease ecology. In honey bees,
transmission of deformed wing virus (DWV) by parasitic Varroa mites has been
associated with elevated disease and host mortality, and Varroa transmission has 
been hypothesized to lead to increased viral titres or select for more virulent
variants. Here, we mimicked Varroa transmission by serially passaging a mixed
population of two DWV variants, A and B, by injection through in vitro reared
honey bee pupae and tracking these viral populations through five passages. The
DWV-A and DWV-B variant proportions shifted dynamically through passaging, with
DWV-B outcompeting DWV-A after one passage, but levels of both variants becoming 
equivalent by Passage 5. Sequencing analysis revealed a dominant, recombinant
DWV-B strain (DWV-A derived 5' IRES region with the rest of the genome DWV-B),
with low nucleotide diversity that decreased through passaging. DWV-A populations
had higher nucleotide diversity compared to DWV-B, but this also decreased
through passaging. Selection signatures were found across functional regions of
the DWV-A and DWV-B genomes, including amino acid mutations in the putative
capsid protein region. Simulated vector transmission differentially impacted two 
closely related viral variants which could influence viral interactions with the 
host, demonstrating surprising plasticity in vector-host-viral dynamics.

DOI: 10.1099/jgv.0.001687 
PMID: 34816791 

