
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 24:JVI0145521. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01455-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Age-related susceptibility of ferrets to SARS-CoV-2 infection.

Martins M(1), Fernandes MHV(1), Joshi LR(1), Diel DG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Population Medicine and Diagnostic Sciences, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University.

Susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2 and the outcome of COVID-19 have been linked to
underlying health conditions and the age of affected individuals. Here we
assessed the effect of age on SARS-CoV-2 infection using a ferret model. For
this, young (6-month-old) and aged (18-to-39-month-old) ferrets were inoculated
intranasally with various doses of SARS-CoV-2. By using infectious virus shedding
in respiratory secretions and seroconversion, we estimated that the infectious
dose of SARS-CoV-2 in aged animals is ∼32 plaque forming units (PFU) per animal
while in young animals it was estimated to be ∼100 PFU. We showed that viral
replication in the upper respiratory tract and shedding in respiratory secretions
is enhanced in aged ferrets when compared to young animals. Similar to
observations in humans, this was associated with higher transcription levels of
two key viral entry factors - ACE2 and TMPRSS2 - in the upper respiratory tract
of aged ferrets. Importance In humans, ACE2 and TMPRSS2 are expressed in various 
cells and tissues, and a differential expression have been described in young and
old people, with a higher level of expressing cells being detected in the nasal
brushing of older people when compared to young individuals. We described the
same pattern occurring in ferrets and we demonstrated that age affects
susceptibility of ferrets to SARS-CoV-2. Aged animals were more likely to get
infected when exposed to lower infectious dose of the virus when compared to
young animals and the viral replication in the URT and shedding is enhanced in
aged ferrets. Together these results suggest that the higher infectivity and
enhanced ability of SARS-CoV-2 to replicate in aged individuals is associated -
at least in part - with transcription levels of ACE2 and TMPRSS2 at the sites of 
virus entry. The young and aged ferret model developed here may represent a great
platform to assess age-related differences in SARS-CoV-2 infection dynamics and
replication.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01455-21 
PMID: 34817200 

