
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 24:JVI0184221. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01842-21. [Epub ahead of print]

The N-terminal Region of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Accessory
Protein 8b is Essential for Enhanced Virulence of an Attenuated Murine
Coronavirus.

Li Y(1), Jin Y(2), Kuang L(1)(3), Luo Z(4), Li F(1), Sun J(1), Zhu A(1), Zhuang
Z(1), Wang Y(1), Wen L(1), Liu D(1), Chen C(1), Gan M(1), Zhao J(1), Zhao
J(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research Center
for Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health, the First
Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Pediatric Pulmonary Department, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center,
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Guangdong Women and Children Hospital,
Guangzhou, China.
(4)Institute of Precision Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China.
(5)Institute of Infectious Disease, Guangzhou Eighth People's Hospital of
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) is a beta coronavirus
that emerged in 2012, causing severe pneumonia and renal failure. MERS-CoV
encodes five accessory proteins. Some of them have been shown to interfere with
host antiviral immune response. However, the roles of protein 8b in innate
immunity and viral virulence was rarely studied. Here, we introduced individual
MERS-CoV accessory protein genes into the genome of an attenuated murine
coronavirus (Mouse hepatitis virus, MHV), respectively and found accessory
protein 8b could enhance viral replication in vivo and in vitro, and increase the
lethality of infected mice. RNA-seq analysis revealed that protein 8b could
significantly inhibit type I interferon production (IFN-I) and innate immune
response in mice infected with MHV expressing protein 8b. We also found that
MERS-CoV protein 8b could initiate from multiple internal methionine sites and at
least three protein variants were identified. Residues 1-23 of protein 8b was
demonstrated to be responsible for increased virulence in vivo. In addition, the 
inhibitory effect on IFN-I of protein 8b might not contribute to its virulence
enhancement as aa1-23 deletion did not affect IFN-I production in vitro and in
vivo. Next, we also found that protein 8b was localized to the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER)/Golgi membrane in infected cells, which was disrupted by
C-terminal region aa 88-112 deletion. This study will provide new insight into
the pathogenesis of MERS-CoV infection. IMPORTANCE Multiple coronaviruses (CoV)
cause severe respiratory infections and become global public health threats such 
as SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, and SARS-CoV-2. Each coronavirus contains different
numbers of accessory proteins which show high variability among different CoVs.
Accessory proteins are demonstrated to play essential roles in pathogenesis of
CoVs. MERS-CoV contains 5 accessory proteins (protein 3, 4a, 4b, 5, 8b), and
deletion of all four accessory proteins (protein 3, 4a, 4b, 5), significantly
affects MERS-CoV replication and pathogenesis. However, whether ORF8b also
regulates MERS-CoV infection is unknown. Here, we constructed mouse hepatitis
virus (MHV) recombinant virus expressing MERS-CoV protein 8b and demonstrated
protein 8b could significantly enhance the virulence of MHV, which is mediated by
N-terminal domain of protein 8b. This study will shed light on the understanding 
of pathogenesis of MERS-CoV infection.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01842-21 
PMID: 34817197 

