
1. J Med Virol. 2021 Nov 23. doi: 10.1002/jmv.27471. [Epub ahead of print]

Dynamics of spreading of SARS-CoV-2 in a Belgian hemodialysis facility: The
importance of the analysis of viral strains.

Labriola L(1)(2), Ruelle J(3)(2), Scohy A(3)(4), Seghers F(1), Perlot Q(1), De
Greef J(5), Desmet C(1), Romain C(1), Yombi JC(5)(2), Rodriguez-Villalobos
H(3)(4), Kabamba B(3)(4), Jadoul M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, UCLouvain,
Brussels, Belgium.
(2)Institut de Recherche Expérimentale et Clinique (IREC), UCLouvain, Brussels,
Belgium.
(3)Pôle de Microbiologie Médicale (MBLG), UCLouvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, UCLouvain,
Brussels, Belgium.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc,
UCLouvain, Brussels, Belgium.

In-center maintenance hemodialysis (HD) patients are at high risk of acquiring
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) by cross-contamination inside the unit. The
aim of this study was to assess retrospectively the dynamics of severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) transmission during the very
first pandemic phase (March-July 2020) in a cohort of in-center maintenance HD
patients and in nurses the same HD facility, using a phylogenetic approach. All
SARS-CoV-2 quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction positive 
patients and nurses from our HD unit-respectively 10 out of 98, and 8 out of 58- 
and two other positive patients dialyzed in our self-care unit were included.
Whole-genome viral sequencing and phylogenetic analysis supported the cluster
investigation. Five positive patients were usually dialyzed in the same room and 
same shift before their COVID-19 diagnosis was made. Viral sequencing performed
on 4/5 patients' swabs showed no phylogenetic link between their viruses. The
fifth patient (whose virus could not be sequenced) was dialyzed at the end of the
dialysis room and was treated by a different nurse than the one in charge of the 
other patients. Three nurses shared the same virus detected in both self-care
patients (one of them had been transferred to our in-center facility). The
epidemiologically strongly suspected intra-unit cluster could be ruled out by
viral genome sequencing. The infection control policy did not allow inter-patient
contamination within the HD facility, in contrast to evidence of moderate
dissemination within the nursing staff and in the satellite unit. Epidemiologic
data without phylogenetic confirmation might mislead the interpretation of the
dynamics of viral spreading within congregate settings.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.27471 
PMID: 34811754 

