
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Nov 24:e0072721. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.00727-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

Phylogenetic Distribution of WhiB- and Lsr2-Type Regulators in
Actinobacteriophage Genomes.

Sharma V(1), Hardy A(1), Luthe T(1), Frunzke J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bio- and Geosciences (IBG-1) Biotechnology, Forschungszentrum
Jülichgrid.8385.6, Jülich, Germany.

Viruses that infect different actinobacterial host species are known as
actinobacteriophages. They are composed of highly divergent and mosaic genomes
due to frequent gene exchange between their bacterial hosts and related viral
species. This is also reflected by the adaptive incorporation of host
transcription factors (TFs) into phage regulatory networks. Previous studies
discovered Lsr2-type and WhiB-type regulators encoded by actinobacteriophage
genomes. However, limited information is available about their distribution,
evolution, and impact on host species. In this study, we computationally screened
the distribution of known bacterial and phage TFs inside 2951 complete
actinobacteriophage genomes and identified 13 different TF domains. Among those, 
WhiB, Lsr2, MerR, and Cro/CI-like proteins were widespread and found in more than
10% of the analyzed actinobacteriophage genomes. Neighboring genomic context
analysis of the whiB and lsr2 loci showed group-specific conservation of gene
synteny and potential involvement of these genes in diverse regulatory functions.
Both genes were significantly enriched in temperate phages, and the Lsr2-encoding
genomes featured an overall lower GC content. Phylogenetic analysis of WhiB and
Lsr2 proteins showed the grouping of phage sequences within bacterial clades,
suggesting gene acquisition by phages from their bacterial host species or by
multiple, independent acquisition events. Overall, our study reports the global
distribution of actinobacteriophage regulatory proteins and sheds light on their 
origin and evolution. IMPORTANCE Actinobacteriophages are viruses that infect
bacterial species of the diverse phylum of Actinobacteria. Phages engage in a
close relationship with their bacterial host. This is also reflected by the
adoption of genetic material from their host and its incorporation into phage
regulatory circuits. In this study, we systematically searched the genomes of
actinobacteriophages for the presence of transcription factor domains. We show
that proteins belonging to the regulator families of WhiB and Lsr2 belong to the 
most abundant regulatory proteins encoded by actinobacteriophages. Further
phylogenetic analysis shed light on their origin and evolution. Altogether, this 
study provides an important basis for further experimental investigation of their
role in the coordination of the phage life cycle and their interaction with the
host regulatory network in this important bacterial phylum.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.00727-21 
PMCID: PMC8612146
PMID: 34817283 

