
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021 Nov 23. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14399. [Epub ahead of print]

A new cluster of West Nile virus lineage 1 isolated from a northern goshawk in
Spain.

Aguilera-Sepúlveda P(1), Gómez-Martín B(2), Agüero M(2), Jiménez-Clavero
MÁ(1)(3), Fernández-Pinero J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de enfermedades infecciosas y salud global, Centro de
Investigación en Sanidad Animal (CISA), Instituto Nacional de Investigación y
Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria (INIA-CSIC), Valdeolmos, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Laboratorio Central de Veterinaria (LCV), Algete, Madrid, Spain.
(3)CIBER of Epidemiology and Public Health (CIBERESP), Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

West Nile Virus (WNV; family Flaviviridae, genus flavivirus) is a zoonotic
arbovirus worldwide spread. Its genetic diversity has allowed the definition of
at least seven lineages, being lineages 1 and 2 the most widely distributed.
Western Mediterranean region has been affected by WNV since decades. In Spain,
WNV is actively circulating, provoking annual outbreaks in birds, horses and
lately in humans. Lineage 1 is responsible for outbreaks that occurred in central
and southern regions, while lineage 2 has been recently described in wild birds
in north-eastern part of the country. During 2017 season, a disease outbreak in
captive raptors was reported in southern Spain and WNV was isolated from a dead
northern goshawk. Full genome sequencing was followed by phylogenetic analyses
and analyses of the amino acidic substitutions. This strain, named
Spain/2017/NG-b, highly differs from those which have been circulating both in
Spain and in the neighbouring Mediterranean countries, constituting a new
distinct group, tentatively classified in a newly defined cluster 7 within the
WNV clade 1a, supporting a new, independent introduction of the virus in the
Western Mediterranean region from an unknown origin. Besides, circumstantial
evidence indicates that this emerging WNV strain could be behind the subsequent
outbreak occurred nearby in horses. Overall, the reinforcement of surveillance
programs, especially in wild birds, is essential to early detect the circulation 
of WNV and other related flaviviruses that could cause outbreaks in wild or
domestic birds, equine and human populations.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14399 
PMID: 34812592 

