
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2022;2411:219-240. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1888-2_13.

Novel Vaccine Development for Fish Culture Based on the Multiepitope Concept.

Unajak S(1), Pumchan A(2), Roytrakul S(3), Sawatdichaikul O(4), Areechon N(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Kasetsart University, Bangkok,
Thailand. sasimanas.u@ku.th.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Kasetsart University, Bangkok,
Thailand.
(3)Functional Ingredients and Food Innovation Research Group, National Center for
Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Pathumthani, Thailand.
(4)Institute of Food Research and Product Development, Kasetsart University,
Bangkok, Thailand.
(5)Department of Aquaculture, Faculty of Fisheries, Kasetsart University,
Bangkok, Thailand.

For the past several decades, aquaculture all around the world have been retarded
by various disease outbreaks caused by many pathogens including parasites,
bacteria, and viruses. Apart from being harmful to human health, the emerging
diseases also dramatically affect the farm animals such as livestock and aquatic 
animals. To cope with this problem, one of the effective prophylactic measures is
the application of vaccine. However, the traditional vaccines still have some
limitations and several drawbacks; thus there is a need for the development of
novel advanced vaccine such as chimeric multiepitope vaccine. Based on the
current understanding of genomics and immunoproteomics together with the present 
bioinformatics tools, the researchers can identify the potential targeted
epitopes being recognizable by the immune cells. Additionally, another critical
point that should be considered for designing the chimeric multiepitope vaccine
is the exposure of all those epitopes to the host organism. Thus, selecting an
appropriate linker and joining each identified epitope in a suitable site can
create the ideal protein structure protruding all the selected epitopes on its
surface. Herein, our study would provide the fundamental platform to develop the 
multiepitope B-cell vaccine for the prevention and control of the aquatic animal 
disease starting with the epitope prediction until in vivo testing the
multiepitope vaccine efficacy.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1888-2_13 
PMID: 34816408 

