
1. Zoonoses Public Health. 2021 Nov 24. doi: 10.1111/zph.12900. [Epub ahead of
print]

Detection of novel paramyxoviruses in Chaerephon bat species in Nigeria and
phylogenetics of paramyxoviruses co-evolution with bats in Africa.

Ayolabi CI(1), Olusola BA(2), Lawal AA(1), Chibuike AD(1), Nzekwue BN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Lagos, Lagos, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Virology, College of Medicine, University of Ibadan, Ibadan,
Nigeria.

Bat paramyxoviruses (PmV) are a diverse group of viruses and include zoonotic
viruses such as henipaviruses. Members of this group in other continents have
been associated with severe respiratory and neurological infections in animals
and humans. Furthermore, despite the richness of diverse bat species that can
transmit this virus in African countries like Nigeria, there is very scanty
information as to the presence and co-evolution of paramyxoviruses in bats. There
is a need for continuous surveillance of zoonotic viruses and their biological
reservoirs as this will help in the prevention and management of pathogens'
spillovers. This study detected novel paramyxoviruses in Chaerephon nigeriae bat 
species found in Badagry, Lagos. Phylogenetic analyses of paramyxovirus
sequences' co-evolution with frugivorous and insectivorous bats circulating in
African countries were also performed using sequences of African origin available
in the Database of Bat-Associated Viruses (DBatVir:
http://www.mgc.ac.cn/DBatVir/). Oral swabs (n = 18) and blood samples (n = 32)
were collected from C. nigeriae bats in Badagry, Lagos. The L gene of bat
paramyxovirus was detected in all oral swabs using PCR techniques. Six of the
amplicons were successfully sequenced. Estimated phylogenies placed the sequences
in close relationship with those isolated from insectivorous bats. Phylogenetic
analyses of previously sequenced isolates in the African region showed the
likelihood of different co-evolution mechanisms of paramyxoviruses with
frugivorous bats compared with insectivorous bats. This may be due to codon usage
bias of the L gene. Spatial distribution of paramyxoviruses in African countries 
showed limited ongoing surveillance of this virus in the continent, especially in
southern and northern countries. Extensive surveillance of paramyxoviruses with
possible zoonotic potentials among bat species in the continent is recommended.
This will provide further insights into co-evolution as well as prevent possible 
spillover into the human population.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/zph.12900 
PMID: 34817117 

