
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Nov 24:e0061221. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.00612-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

Transcriptome of the Maize Leafhopper (Dalbulus maidis) and Its Transcriptional
Response to Maize Rayado Fino Virus (MRFV), Which It Transmits in a Persistent,
Propagative Manner.

Xu J(1), Willman M(2), Todd J(2), Kim KH(3), Redinbaugh MG(2), Stewart LR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, The Ohio State Universitygrid.261331.4,
Wooster, Ohio, USA.
(2)USDA-ARS Corn, Soybean and Wheat Quality Research Unit, Wooster, Ohio, USA.
(3)National Institute of Agricultural Sciences, Crop Protection Division 166,
Wanju-gun, Jeollabuk-do, South Korea.
(4)USDA-ARS, Foreign Disease-Weed Science Research Unit, Frederick, Maryland,
USA.

The corn leafhopper (Dalbulus maidis) is an important vector of maize rayado fino
virus (MRFV), a positive-strand RNA (+ssRNA) marafivirus which it transmits in a 
persistent propagative manner. The interaction of D. maidis with MRFV, including 
infection of the insect and subsequent transmission to new plants, is not well
understood at the molecular level. To examine the leafhopper-virus interaction, a
D. maidis transcriptome was assembled and differences in transcript abundance
between virus-exposed and naive D. maidis were examined at two time points (4 h
and 7 days) post exposure to MRFV. The D. maidis transcriptome contained 56,116
transcripts generated from 1,727,369,026 100-nt paired-end reads from whole adult
insects. The transcriptome of D. maidis shared highest identity and most
orthologs with the leafhopper Graminella nigrifrons (65% of transcripts had
matches with E values of <10-5) versus planthoppers Sogatella furcifera (with 23%
of transcript matches below the E value cutoff) and Peregrinus maidis (with 21%
transcript matches below the E value cutoff), as expected based on taxonomy. D.
maidis expressed genes in the Toll, Imd, and Jak/Stat insect immune signaling
pathways, RNA interference (RNAi) pathway genes, prophenoloxidase-activating
system pathways, and immune recognition protein-encoding genes such as
peptidoglycan recognition proteins (PGRPs), antimicrobial peptides, and other
effectors. Statistical analysis (performed by R package DESeq2) identified 72
transcripts at 4 h and 67 at 7 days that were significantly responsive to MRFV
exposure. Genes expected to be favorable for virus propagation, such as protein
synthesis-related genes and genes encoding superoxide dismutase, were
significantly upregulated after MRFV exposure. IMPORTANCE The transcriptome of
the corn leafhopper, D. maidis, revealed conserved biochemical pathways for
immunity and discovered transcripts responsive to MRFV-infected plants at two
time points, providing a basis for functional identification of genes that either
limit or promote the virus-vector interaction. Compared to other hopper species
and the propagative plant viruses they transmit, D. maidis shared 15 responsive
transcripts with S. furcifera (to southern rice black-streaked dwarf virus
[SRBSDV]), one with G. nigrifrons (to maize fine streak virus [MFSV]), and one
with P. maidis (to maize mosaic virus [MMV]), but no virus-responsive transcripts
identified were shared among all four hopper vector species.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.00612-21 
PMCID: PMC8612151
PMID: 34817206 

