
1. Int J Equity Health. 2021 Nov 24;20(1):249. doi: 10.1186/s12939-021-01590-4.

The role of cultural, community and natural assets in addressing societal and
structural health inequalities in the UK: future research priorities.

Thomson LJ(1), Gordon-Nesbitt R(2), Elsden E(3), Chatterjee HJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics, Evolution and Environment, UCL Division of Biosciences, University
College London, London, UK.
(2)Kings Culture, Kings College London, London, UK.
(3)UCL Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London, London, UK.
(4)Genetics, Evolution and Environment, UCL Division of Biosciences, University
College London, London, UK. h.chatterjee@ucl.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Reducing health inequalities in the UK has been a policy priority for
over 20 years, yet, despite efforts to create a more equal society, progress has 
been limited. Furthermore, some inequalities have widened and become more
apparent, particularly during the Covid-19 pandemic. With growing recognition of 
the uneven distribution of life expectancy and of mental and physical health, the
current research was commissioned to identify future research priorities to
address UK societal and structural health inequalities.
METHODS: An expert opinion consultancy process comprising an anonymous online
survey and a consultation workshop were conducted to investigate priority areas
for future research into UK inequalities. The seven-question survey asked
respondents (n = 170) to indicate their current role, identify and prioritise
areas of inequality, approaches and evaluation methods, and comment on future
research priorities. The workshop was held to determine areas of research
priority and attended by a closed list of delegates (n = 30) representing a range
of academic disciplines and end-users of research from policy and practice.
Delegates self-selected one of four breakout groups to determine research
priority areas in four categories of inequality (health, social, economic, and
other) and to allocate hypothetical sums of funding (half, one, five, and ten
million pounds) to chosen priorities. Responses were analysed using mixed
methods.
RESULTS: Survey respondents were mainly 'academics' (33%), 'voluntary/third
sector professionals' (17%), and 'creative/cultural professionals'(16%). Survey
questions identified the main areas of inequality as 'health' (58%), 'social
care' (54%), and 'living standards' (47%). The first research priority was
'access to creative and cultural opportunities' (37%), second, 'sense of place'
(23%), and third, 'community' (17%). Approaches seen to benefit from more
research in relation to addressing inequalities were 'health/social care' (55%), 
'advice services' (34%), and 'adult education/training' (26%). Preferred
evaluation methods were 'community/participatory' (76%), 'action research' (62%),
and 'questionnaires/focus groups' (53%). Survey respondents (25%) commented on
interactions between inequalities and issues such as political and economic
decisions, and climate. The key workshop finding from determining research
priorities in areas of inequality was that health equity could only be achieved
by tackling societal and structural inequalities, environmental conditions and
housing, and having an active prevention programme.
CONCLUSIONS: Research demonstrates a clear need to assess the impact of cultural 
and natural assets in reducing inequality. Collaborations between community
groups, service providers, local authorities, health commissioners, GPs, and
researchers using longitudinal methods are needed within a multi-disciplinary
approach to address societal and structural health inequalities.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12939-021-01590-4 
PMCID: PMC8611639
PMID: 34819080  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

