
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Nov 24:e0160121. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.01601-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

Bi-Reporter Vaccinia Virus for Tracking Viral Infections In Vitro and In Vivo.

Chiem K(1)(2), Lorenzo MM(3), Rangel-Moreno J(4), Garcia-Hernandez ML(4), Park
JG(1)(2), Nogales A(1)(5), Blasco R(3), Martínez-Sobrido L(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester, Rochester,
New York, USA.
(2)Texas Biomedical Research Institutegrid.250889.e, San Antonio, Texas, USA.
(3)Departamento de Biotecnología, Centro Nacional Instituto de Investigación y
Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria (INIA CSIC), Madrid, Spain.
(4)Division of Allergy/Immunology and Rheumatology, Department of Medicine,
University of Rochester, Rochester, New York, USA.
(5)Animal Health Research Centre (CISA), Centro Nacional Instituto de
Investigación y Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria (INIA, CSIC), Madrid, Spain.

Recombinant viruses expressing reporter genes allow visualization and
quantification of viral infections and can be used as valid surrogates to
identify the presence of the virus in infected cells and animal models. However, 
one of the limitations of recombinant viruses expressing reporter genes is the
use of either fluorescent or luciferase proteins that are used alternatively for 
different purposes. Vaccinia virus (VV) is widely used as a viral vector,
including recombinant (r)VV singly expressing either fluorescent or luciferase
reporter genes that are useful for specific purposes. In this report, we
engineered two novel rVV stably expressing both fluorescent (Scarlet or GFP) and 
luciferase (Nluc) reporter genes from different loci in the viral genome. In
vitro, these bi-reporter-expressing rVV have similar growth kinetics and plaque
phenotype than those of the parental WR VV isolate. In vivo, rVV Nluc/Scarlet and
rVV Nluc/GFP effectively infected mice and were easily detected using in vivo
imaging systems (IVIS) and ex vivo in the lungs from infected mice. Importantly, 
we used these bi-reporter-expressing rVV to assess viral pathogenesis,
infiltration of immune cells in the lungs, and to directly identify the different
subsets of cells infected by VV in the absence of antibody staining.
Collectively, these rVV expressing two reporter genes open the feasibility to
study the biology of viral infections in vitro and in vivo, including
host-pathogen interactions and dynamics or tropism of viral infections.
IMPORTANCE Despite the eradication of variola virus (VARV), the causative agent
of smallpox, poxviruses still represent an important threat to human health due
to their possible use as bioterrorism agents and the emergence of zoonotic
poxvirus diseases. Recombinant vaccinia viruses (rVV) expressing easily traceable
fluorescent or luciferase reporter genes have significantly contributed to the
progress of poxvirus research. However, rVV expressing one marker gene have
several constraints for in vitro and in vivo studies, since both fluorescent and 
luciferase proteins impose certain limitations for specific applications. To
overcome these limitations, we generated optimized rVV stably expressing both
fluorescent (Scarlet or GFP) and luciferase (Nluc) reporter genes to easily track
viral infection in vitro and in vivo. This new generation of double
reporter-expressing rVV represent an excellent option to study viral infection
dynamics in cultured cells and validated animal models of infection.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.01601-21 
PMCID: PMC8612144
PMID: 34817228 

