
1. Front Glob Womens Health. 2021 Jul 2;2:574327. doi: 10.3389/fgwh.2021.574327.
eCollection 2021.

An International Prospective Cohort Study of HIV and Zika in Infants and
Pregnancy (HIV ZIP): Study Protocol.

Aschengrau A(1), Mussi-Pinhata MM(2), Moye J Jr(3), Chakhtoura N(3), Patel K(4), 
Williams PL(5), Karalius B(4), Garvie PA(6), Monte D(7), Whalen F(7), Lebov J(8),
Seage GR 3rd(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Boston University School of Public Health, Boston,
MA, United States.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of São
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Maternal Pediatric Infectious Disease Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, United States.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health,
Boston, MA, United States.
(5)Departments of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Harvard T. H. Chan School of
Public Health, Boston, MA, United States.
(6)Research Department, Children's Diagnostic and Treatment Center, Fort
Lauderdale, FL, United States.
(7)Westat, Rockville, MD, United States.
(8)Research Triangle Institute International, Research Triangle Park, NC, United 
States.

Zika virus (ZIKV) infection may adversely affect pregnancies of women living with
HIV (WLHIV). Because no study to date has focused on maternal and child effects
of HIV and ZIKV co-infection in pregnant women, we undertook the International
Prospective Cohort Study of HIV and Zika in Infants and Pregnancy (HIV ZIP). The 
aims of this two-phase study of pregnant women and their infants are to compare
the incidence of ZIKV infection among pregnant women with and without HIV
infection and to determine the risk of adverse maternal and child outcomes
associated with ZIKV/HIV co-infection at clinical sites in Brazil, Puerto Rico,
and the continental United States. Phase I was designed to enroll pregnant
women/infant pairs who were: (1) infected with HIV only, (2) infected with ZIKV
only, (3) infected with HIV and ZIKV, and (4) not infected with either HIV or
ZIKV. A key goal of this phase was to assess the feasibility of enrolling 200
women/infant pairs within a year, with a target of 150 WLHIV, 50 HIV-uninfected
women, and a minimum of 20 who were co-infected with HIV and ZIKV. If the
feasibility of Phase I proved successful, Phase II would enroll up to 1,800
additional pregnant women/infant pairs to the same four groups. Enrolled women in
both phases were to be followed throughout their pregnancy and up to 6 weeks
post-partum. Infants were also to be followed for 1 year after birth. To date,
Phase 1 data collection and follow-up have been completed. Delineation of
possible harmful effects of HIV/ZIKV co-infection will allow the formulation of
standard-of-care recommendations to minimize adverse effects but enable the
continuation of preventive HIV therapy. Furthermore, while the prospective HIV
ZIP study was developed before the COVID pandemic, it is especially relevant
today since it can be easily adapted to provide critically important information 
on the impact of COVID-19 infection or other still unrecognized new agents among 
pregnant women and their offspring worldwide.

Copyright © 2021 Aschengrau, Mussi-Pinhata, Moye, Chakhtoura, Patel, Williams,
Karalius, Garvie, Monte, Whalen, Lebov and Seage.

DOI: 10.3389/fgwh.2021.574327 
PMCID: PMC8594009
PMID: 34816174 

Conflict of interest statement: DM and FW were employed by the company Westat,
Rockville, MD, United States. The remaining authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

