
1. Mol Microbiol. 2021 Nov 24. doi: 10.1111/mmi.14849. [Epub ahead of print]

Targeted protein degradation at the host-pathogen interface.

Grohmann C(1)(2), Marapana DS(1)(2), Ebert G(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.
(2)Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia.
(3)Institute of Virology, Technical University of Munich/Helmholtz Zentrum
München, Munich, Germany.

Infectious diseases remain a major burden to global health. Despite the
implementation of successful vaccination campaigns and efficient drugs, the
increasing emergence of pathogenic vaccine or treatment resistance demands novel 
therapeutic strategies. The development of traditional therapies using
small-molecule drugs is based on modulating protein function and activity through
the occupation of active sites such as enzyme inhibition or ligand-receptor
binding. These prerequisites result in the majority of host and pathogenic
disease-relevant, nonenzymatic and structural proteins being labeled
"undruggable." Targeted protein degradation (TPD) emerged as a powerful strategy 
to eliminate proteins of interest including those of the undruggable variety.
Proteolysis-targeting chimeras (PROTACs) are rationally designed
heterobifunctional small molecules that exploit the cellular ubiquitin-proteasome
system to specifically mediate the highly selective and effective degradation of 
target proteins. PROTACs have shown remarkable results in the degradation of
various cancer-associated proteins, and several candidates are already in
clinical development. Significantly, PROTAC-mediated TPD holds great potential
for targeting and modulating pathogenic proteins, especially in the face of
increasing drug resistance to the best-in-class treatments. In this review, we
discuss advances in the development of TPD in the context of targeting the
host-pathogen interface and speculate on their potential use to combat viral,
bacterial, and parasitic infection.

© 2021 The Authors. Molecular Microbiology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.14849 
PMID: 34816514 

