
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 24:JVI0196021. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01960-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Feedback Loop Regulation Between Pim Kinases and Tax Keeps HTLV-I Viral
Replication in Check.

Bellon M(1), Nicot C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Kansas Medical 
Center, Kansas City, Kansas, USA.

The Pim family of serine/threonine kinases promote tumorigenesis by enhancing
cell survival and inhibiting apoptosis. Three isoforms exist, Pim-1, -2, and -3
that are highly expressed in hematological cancers, including Pim-1 in Adult
T-cell leukemia (ATL). Human T-cell leukemia virus type-1 (HTLV-I) is the
etiological agent of ATL, a dismal lymphoproliferative disease known as adult
T-cell leukemia. The HTLV-I virally encoded oncogene Tax promotes CD4+ T-cell
transformation through disruption of DNA repair pathways and activation of
survival and cellular proliferation pathways. In this study, we found Tax
increases the expression of Pim-1 and Pim-3, while decreasing Pim-2 expression.
Furthermore, we discovered that Pim-1, -2, and -3 bind Tax protein to reduce its 
expression thereby creating a feedback regulatory loop between these two
oncogenes. The loss of Tax expression triggered by Pim kinases led to loss in
Tax-mediated transactivation of the HTLV-I LTR and reductions in HTLV-I virus
replication. Since Tax is also the immunodominant cytotoxic T cell lymphocytes
(CTL) target, our data suggest that Pim kinases may play an important role in
immune escape of HTLV-1-infected cells. IMPORTANCE The Pim family of protein
kinases have established pro-oncogenic functions. They are often up regulated in 
cancer; especially leukemias and lymphomas. In addition, a role for Pim kinases
in control of virus expression and viral latency is important for KSHV and HIV-1.
Our data demonstrate that HTLV-I encodes viral genes that promote and maintain
Pim kinase activation, which in turn may stimulate T-cell transformation and
maintain ATL leukemic cell growth. HTLV-I Tax increases expression of Pim-1 and
Pim-3, while decreasing expression of Pim-2. In ATL cells, Pim expression is
maintained through extended protein half-life and heat shock protection. In
addition, we found that Pim kinases have a new role during HTLV-I infection.
Pim-1, -2, and -3 can subvert Tax expression and HTLV-I virus production. This
may lead to partial suppression of the host immunogenic responses to Tax and
favor immune escape of HTLV-1-infected cells. Therefore, Pim kinases have not
only pro-oncogenic roles but also favor persistence of the virus-infected cell.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01960-21 
PMID: 34818069 

