
1. J Fish Dis. 2021 Nov 23. doi: 10.1111/jfd.13561. [Epub ahead of print]

Natural ingredient paeoniflorin could be a lead compound against white spot
syndrome virus infection in Litopenaeus vannamei.

Hu Y(1)(2)(3), Liu L(1)(2)(3), Shan LP(1)(2)(3), Chen J(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality
and Safety of Agro-products, Ningbo University, Ningbo, China.
(2)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Marine Sciences,
Meishan Campus, Ningbo University, Ningbo, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Applied Marine Biotechnology of Ministry of Education,
Meishan Campus, Ningbo University, Ningbo, China.

White spot syndrome virus (WSSV) is an important pathogen causing high mortality 
in the shrimp industry in aquaculture, yet there is no treatment available to
date. In order to find a treatment against WSSV infection, this study examined
the anti-WSSV activity of eight natural compounds using shrimp larvae as a model.
Among the eight compounds, paeoniflorin showed the most obvious anti-WSSV effect,
with a maximum protection efficiency of WSSV-infected shrimp >60% at 100 μM.
Furthermore, pretreatment and post-treatment experiments revealed that
paeoniflorin could prevent and treat WSSV infection in shrimp. The antiviral
activity of paeoniflorin in aquaculture water decreased rapidly with time, and
the results showed that the stable anti-WSSV activity of paeoniflorin could only 
remain in water for 1 day. Thus, the dosing pattern of continuous medication
changes was evaluated. Obviously, in the model of continuous change of
paeoniflorin, WSSV copy numbers in the virus-treated shrimp group still
progressively increased, while the virus content in WSSVpaeoniflorin -treated
group continued to decrease. Interestingly, paeoniflorin inhibited horizontal
transmission of WSSV to a certain extent. Notably, paeoniflorin significantly
increased the expression of antimicrobial peptides of shrimp to resist WSSV. In
conclusion, paeoniflorin has the potential to protect shrimp against WSSV.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jfd.13561 
PMID: 34813672 

