
1. Vaccine. 2021 Nov 20. pii: S0264-410X(21)01393-1. doi:
10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.060. [Epub ahead of print]

A chemiluminescence immunoassay for precise automatic quality control of
glycoprotein in human rabies vaccine.

Ye K(1), Shi D(2), Zhang Z(1), Bian L(1), Li Z(1), Liu T(1), He C(3), Xu S(4), Wu
Y(5), Lin G(6).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Antibody Engineering of Guangdong Higher Education
Institutes, Institute of Antibody Engineering, School of Laboratory Medicine and 
Biotechnology, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Division II of In Vitro Diagnostics for Infectious Diseases, Institute for In 
Vitro Diagnostics Control, National Institutes for Food and Drug Control,
Beijing, China.
(3)Guangzhou Promise Biologics Co., Ltd, No. 1 Wanbao North Street, Panyu
District, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Division II of In Vitro Diagnostics for Infectious Diseases, Institute for In 
Vitro Diagnostics Control, National Institutes for Food and Drug Control,
Beijing, China. Electronic address: xushong@nifdc.org.cn.
(5)Key Laboratory of Antibody Engineering of Guangdong Higher Education
Institutes, Institute of Antibody Engineering, School of Laboratory Medicine and 
Biotechnology, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address:
wg@smu.edu.cn.
(6)Experimental Center of Teaching and Scientific Research, School of Laboratory 
Medicine and Biotechnology, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
Electronic address: lingf@smu.edu.cn.

Currently, quality control of glycoprotein in the human rabies vaccine is based
on enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). However, ELISA does not match the
needs of a modernised quality control system. For a long time, human rabies virus
vaccine manufacturers have been devoted to seeking a detection platform that is
sensitive, accurate, automatic, and feasible for practical applications.
Therefore, our team invested major efforts into establishing a fully automated
micromagnetic particle (MMP)-based chemiluminescence immunoassay (CLIA) platform.
For vaccine quality control, MMP-coupled rabies virus glycoprotein monoclonal
antibodies (S037) were used to capture the rabies virus. Another rabies virus
glycoprotein antibody (S053) labelled with acridinium ester was added as a signal
tracer. After pretreating the vaccine sample, the entire analysis was performed
using a fully automated machine, which had a limited detection time (only 30 min)
and eliminated manual error. Multiple experiments have identified the optimal
conditions allowing valid and reliable assessment of vaccine potency. The CLIA
platform has exhibited merits in terms of speed, robustness, high sensitivity
(with a minimum detection value of 0.45 mIU/mL), considerable accuracy, and a
wide linear range of detection (9.4-1200 mIU/mL). Furthermore, the results showed
that the CLIA platform is consistent with the National Institutes of Health test 
and time-resolved fluorescent immunoassay (TRFIA) in quantitative analysis, and
had a better analytic performance than TRFIA. Therefore, the CLIA platform
presented here may be important for application in modern vaccine quality
control.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.060 
PMID: 34815118 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

