
1. Hum Cell. 2021 Nov 24. doi: 10.1007/s13577-021-00652-7. [Epub ahead of print]

Establishment of an immortalized human erythroid cell line sustaining
differentiation potential without inducible gene expression system.

Soboleva S(1), Kurita R(2), Kajitani N(3), Åkerstrand H(4), Miharada K(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine and Gene Therapy, Lund Stem Cell Center, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Department of Research and Development, Central Blood Institute, Japanese Red 
Cross Society, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Division of Medical Microbiology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(4)Division of Molecular Hematology, Lund Stem Cell Center, Lund University,
Lund, Sweden.
(5)Division of Molecular Medicine and Gene Therapy, Lund Stem Cell Center, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden. kenmiharada@kumamoto-u.ac.jp.
(6)International Research Center for Medical Sciences, Kumamoto University,
Kumamoto, Japan. kenmiharada@kumamoto-u.ac.jp.

Ex vivo manufactured red blood cells (RBC) generated from immortalized erythroid 
cell lines which can continuously grow are expected to become a significant
alternative in future transfusion therapies. The ectopic expression of human
papilloma virus (HPV) E6/E7 gene has successfully been employed to establish
these cell lines. To induce differentiation and maturation of the immortalized
cell lines, terminating the HPV-E6/E7 expression through a gene induction system 
has been believed to be essential. Here, we report that erythroid cell lines
established from human bone marrow using simple expression of HPV-E6/E7 are
capable of normal erythroid differentiation, without turning gene expression off.
Through simply changing cell culture conditions, a newly established cell line,
Erythroid Line from Lund University (ELLU), is able to differentiate toward
mature cells, including enucleated reticulocytes. ELLU is heterogeneous and,
unexpectedly, clones expressing adult hemoglobin rapidly differentiate and
produce fragile cells. Upon differentiation, other ELLU clones shift from fetal
to adult hemoglobin expression, giving rise to more mature cells. Our findings
propose that it is not necessary to employ gene induction systems to establish
immortalized erythroid cell lines sustaining differentiation potential and
describe novel cellular characteristics for desired functionally competent
clones.

© 2021. The Author(s) under exclusive licence to Japan Human Cell Society.

DOI: 10.1007/s13577-021-00652-7 
PMID: 34817797 

