
1. Aging Cell. 2021 Nov 22:e13522. doi: 10.1111/acel.13522. [Epub ahead of print]

α-synuclein suppresses microglial autophagy and promotes neurodegeneration in a
mouse model of Parkinson's disease.

Tu HY(1)(2), Yuan BS(2), Hou XO(1)(2), Zhang XJ(2), Pei CS(2), Ma YT(2), Yang
YP(1), Fan Y(3), Qin ZH(4), Liu CF(1)(2), Hu LF(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Clinical Research Center of Neurological Disease, 
The Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Neuropsychiatric Diseases and Institute of
Neuroscience, Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu,
China.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Soochow
University, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China.

The cell-to-cell transfer of α-synuclein (α-Syn) greatly contributes to
Parkinson's disease (PD) pathogenesis and underlies the spread of α-Syn
pathology. During this process, extracellular α-Syn can activate microglia and
neuroinflammation, which plays an important role in PD. However, the effect of
extracellular α-Syn on microglia autophagy is poorly understood. In the present
study, we reported that extracellular α-Syn inhibited the autophagy initiation,
as indicated by LC3-II reduction and p62 protein elevation in BV2 and cultured
primary microglia. The in vitro findings were verified in microglia-enriched
population isolated from α-Syn-overexpressing mice induced by adeno-associated
virus (AAV2/9)-encoded wildtype human α-Syn injection into the substantia nigra
(SN). Mechanistically, α-Syn led to microglial autophagic impairment through
activating toll-like receptor 4 (Tlr4) and its downstream p38 and Akt-mTOR
signaling because Tlr4 knockout and inhibition of p38, Akt as well as mTOR
prevented α-Syn-induced autophagy inhibition. Moreover, inhibition of Akt
reversed the mTOR activation but failed to affect p38 phosphorylation triggered
by α-Syn. Functionally, the in vivo evidence showed that lysozyme 2 Cre (Lyz2cre 
)-mediated depletion of autophagy-related gene 5 (Atg5) in microglia aggravated
the neuroinflammation and dopaminergic neuron losses in the SN and exacerbated
the locomotor deficit in α-Syn-overexpressing mice. Taken together, the results
suggest that extracellular α-Syn, via Tlr4-dependent p38 and Akt-mTOR signaling
cascades, disrupts microglial autophagy activity which synergistically
contributes to neuroinflammation and PD development.

© 2021 The Authors. Aging Cell published by Anatomical Society and John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/acel.13522 
PMID: 34811872 

