
1. Front Glob Womens Health. 2021 Jul 29;2:686984. doi: 10.3389/fgwh.2021.686984.
eCollection 2021.

COVID-19 Pandemic Worsening Gender Inequalities for Women and Girls in
Sub-Saharan Africa.

Ahinkorah BO(1), Hagan JE Jr(2)(3), Ameyaw EK(1)(4), Seidu AA(5)(6), Schack T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health, School of Public Health, University of Technology Sydney,
Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(2)Department of Health, Physical Education, and Recreation, University of Cape
Coast, Cape Coast, Ghana.
(3)Neurocognition and Action-Biomechanics-Research Group, Faculty of Psychology
and Sport Sciences, Bielefeld University, Bielefeld, Germany.
(4)L & E Research Consult, Wa, Ghana.
(5)Department of Population and Health, University of Cape Coast, Cape Coast,
Ghana.
(6)College of Public Health, Medical and Veterinary Services, James Cook
University, Townsville, QLD, Australia.

Pandemics such as COVID-19 have often resulted in international, national and
sub-regional crises, with considerable inequities across many societies. With the
already existing structural and socio-economic inequalities in sub-Saharan
Africa, the stay-at-home orders, lockdowns, and shutdowns across the sub-regional
states could worsen and have a tremendous impact on vulnerable groups. Numerous
studies across a variety of contexts have well-documented gender, and cultures on
varied health outcomes. However, these have not been contextualized in
sub-Saharan Africa in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic. This mini review
discusses the ways by which COVID-19 has impacted the lives of girls and women
across sub-Saharan Africa and the strategies that can help mitigate these
challenges. The mini review specifically shares light on a wide array of
dimensions where the inequities exist. These include the disproportionate areas
affected by COVID-19; household inequities; educational inequalities;
work/employment inequalities; disparities related to healthcare, sexual and
reproductive health as well as housing inequities. Conclusively, the review
accentuates the need for sub-Saharan African countries to adopt low-cost
preventive measures such as discouraging mass gatherings (e.g., local community
gatherings), and face masking with non-medical cloth like masks for the local
populace as these are crucial in managing the spread of the virus among
disproportionate women population. For localities with limited access to
handwashing facilities, alternative strategies like alcohol-based hand rub
solutions could be deployed. The complex interrelated disparities require a broad
set of policy actions to lessen the current burden faced by many women in
sub-Saharan Africa.

Copyright © 2021 Ahinkorah, Hagan, Ameyaw, Seidu and Schack.

DOI: 10.3389/fgwh.2021.686984 
PMCID: PMC8594039
PMID: 34816232 

Conflict of interest statement: EA is affiliated to L & E Research Consult. The
remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conflict of interest.

