
1. Isr Med Assoc J. 2021 Nov;23(11):685-689.

Recommendations for Orthopedic Surgeons during the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Feldman G(1)(2), Weil YA(2), Mosheiff R(2), Davidson A(2)(3), Rozen N(1)(4),
Rubin G(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel.
(2)Department of Orthopedics, Hadassah Medical Organization and Faculty of
Medicine, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel.
(3)Department of Orthopedics, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(4)Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa,
Israel.

BACKGROUND: Toward the end of 2019, the coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19)
pandemic began to create turmoil for global health organizations. The illness,
caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2),
spreads by droplets and fomites and can rapidly lead to life-threatening lung
disease, especially for the old and those with health co-morbidities. Treating
orthopedic patients, who presented with COVID-19 while avoiding nosocomial
transmission, became of paramount importance.
OBJECTIVES: To present relevant methods for pandemic control and hospital
accommodation with emphasis on orthopedic surgery.
METHODS: We searched search PubMed and Google Scholar electronic databases using 
the following keywords: COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, screening tools, personal
protective equipment, and surgery triage.
RESULTS: We included 25 records in our analysis. The recommendations from these
records were divided into the following categories: COVID-19 disease, managing
orthopedic surgery in the COVID-19 era, general institution precautions, triage
of orthopedic surgeries, preoperative assessment, surgical room setting, personal
protection equipment, anesthesia, orthopedic surgery technical precautions, and
department stay and rehabilitation.
CONCLUSIONS: Special accommodations tailored for each medical facility, based on 
disease burden and available resources can improve patient and staff safety and
reduce elective surgery cancellations. This article will assist orthopedic
surgeons during the COVID-19 medical crisis, and possibly for future pandemics.


PMID: 34811981  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

