
1. Arch Plast Surg. 2021 Nov;48(6):685-690. doi: 10.5999/aps.2020.02285. Epub 2021
Nov 15.

Excisional lipectomy versus liposuction in HIV-associated lipodystrophy.

Barton N(1), Moore R(1), Prasad K(2), Evans G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic Surgery, University of California Irvine, Orange, CA,
USA.
(2)School of Medicine, University of California Irvine, Orange, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-associated lipodystrophy is a
known consequence of long-term highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART).
However, a significant number of patients on HAART therapy were left with the
stigmata of complications, including fat redistribution. Few studies have
described the successful removal of focal areas of lipohypertrophy with
successful outcomes. This manuscript reviews the outcomes of excisional lipectomy
versus liposuction for HIV-associated cervicodorsal lipodystrophy.
METHODS: We performed a 15-year retrospective review of HIV-positive patients
with lipodystrophy. Patients were identified by query of secure operative logs.
Data collected included demographics, medications, comorbidities, duration of
HIV, surgical intervention type, pertinent laboratory values, and the amount of
tissue removed.
RESULTS: Nine male patients with HIV-associated lipodystrophy underwent a total
of 17 procedures. Of the patients who underwent liposuction initially (n=5), 60% 
(n=3) experienced a recurrence. There were a total of three cases of primary
liposuction followed by excisional lipectomy. One hundred percent of these cases 
were noted to have a recurrence postoperatively, and there was one case of seroma
formation. Of the subjects who underwent excisional lipectomy (n=4), there were
no documented recurrences; however, one patient's postoperative course was
complicated by seroma formation.
CONCLUSIONS: HIV-associated lipodystrophy is a disfiguring complication of HAART 
therapy with significant morbidity. Given the limitations of liposuction alone as
the primary intervention, excisional lipectomy is recommended as the primary
treatment. Liposuction may be used for better contouring and for subsequent
procedures. While there is a slightly higher risk for complications, adjunctive
techniques such as quilting sutures and placement of drains may be used in
conjunction with excisional lipectomy.

DOI: 10.5999/aps.2020.02285 
PMCID: PMC8627937
PMID: 34818717 

