
1. J Med Virol. 2021 Nov 23. doi: 10.1002/jmv.27467. [Epub ahead of print]

Emerging SARS-CoV-2 variants can potentially break set epidemiological barriers
in COVID-19.

Kumar A(1)(2), Parashar R(1)(3), Kumar S(1)(4), Faiq MA(1)(5), Kumari C(1)(6),
Kulandhasamy M(1)(7), Narayan RK(1)(2), Jha RK(1)(2), Singh HN(1)(8), Prasoon
P(1)(9), Pandey SN(1)(10), Kant K(1)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Etiologically Elusive Disorders Research Network (EEDRN), New Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Anatomy, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Patna,
India.
(3)India Health Lead, Oxford Policy Management Limited, Oxford, UK.
(4)Centre for Proteomics and Drug Discovery, Amity Institute of Biotechnology,
Amity University, Maharashtra, India.
(5)New York University (NYU) Langone Health Center, NYU Robert I Grossman School 
of Medicine, New York, New York, USA.
(6)Department of Anatomy, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and
Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh, India.
(7)Department of Biochemistry, Maulana Azad Medical College (MAMC), New Delhi,
India.
(8)Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New 
York, USA.
(9)School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(10)Department of Zoology, Banaras Hindu University (BHU), Varanasi, India.
(11)Department of Microbiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), 
Bathinda, India.

Young age, female sex, absence of comorbidities, and prior infection or
vaccination are known epidemiological barriers for contracting the new infection 
and/or increased disease severity. Demographic trends from the recent coronavirus
disease 2019 waves, which are believed to be driven by newer severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) variants, indicate that the
aforementioned epidemiological barriers are being breached and a larger number of
younger and healthy individuals are developing severe disease. The new SARS-CoV-2
variants have key mutations that can induce significant changes in the virus-host
interactions. Recent studies report that, some of these mutations, singly or in a
group, enhance key mechanisms, such as binding of the receptor-binding domain
(RBD) of the viral spike protein with the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) 
receptor in the host-cells, increase the glycosylation of spike protein at the
antigenic sites, and enhance the proteolytic cleavage of the spike protein, thus 
leading to improved host-cell entry and the replication of the virus. The
putative changes in the virus-host interactions imparted by the mutations in the 
RBD sequence can potentially be the reason behind the breach of the observed
epidemiological barriers. Susceptibility for contracting SARS-CoV-2 infection and
the disease outcomes are known to be influenced by host-cell expressions of ACE2 
and other proteases. The new variants can act more efficiently, and even with the
lesser availability of the viral entry-receptor and the associated proteases, can
have more efficient host-cell entry and greater replication resulting in high
viral loads and prolonged viral shedding, widespread tissue-injury, and severe
inflammation leading to increased transmissibility and lethality. Furthermore,
the accumulating evidence shows that multiple new variants have reduced
neutralization by both, natural and vaccine-acquired antibodies, indicating that 
repeated and vaccine breakthrough infections may arise as serious health concerns
in the ongoing pandemic.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.27467 
PMID: 34811761 

