
1. Front Glob Womens Health. 2021 May 11;2:651752. doi: 10.3389/fgwh.2021.651752.
eCollection 2021.

Sensitive to Infection but Strong in Defense-Female Sex and the Power of
Oestradiol in the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Newson L(1), Manyonda I(2), Lewis R(1), Preissner R(3), Preissner S(4), Seeland
U(3).

Author information: 
(1)Newson Health Ltd, Winton House, Stratford-upon-Avon, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, St George's University Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Institute of Physiology and Science-IT, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and
Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Department Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and
Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany.

The incidence of SARS-CoV2 infections is around 15% higher in premenopausal women
compared to age matched men, yet the fatality rate from COVID-19 is significantly
higher in men than women for all age strata. Sex differences have also been
observed in recent epidemics including severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)
and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS), with SARS-CoV 2 virus infection sex 
differences appear more dramatic. The regulation and expression of the
angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) is the key for this special coronavirus
SARS-CoV-2 to enter the cell. 17β-oestradiol increases expression level and
activity of angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ACE2) and the alternative signaling 
pathway of Ang II via the angiotensin II receptor type II (AT2R) and the Mas
receptor is more dominant in female sex than in male sex. Maybe a hint to explain
the higher infection risk in women. The same hormonal milieu plays a major role
in protecting women where morbidity and mortality are concerned, since the
dominant female hormone, oestradiol, has immune-modulatory properties that are
likely to be protective against virus infections. It is also known that the X
chromosome contains the largest number of immune-related genes, potentially
conferring an advantage to women in efficient immune responsiveness. Lifestyle
factors are also likely to be contributory. Premenopausal women could possibly
face higher exposure to infection (hence higher infection rates) because economic
conditions are often less favorable for them with less opportunity for home
office work because of jobs requiring mandatory attendance. Due to the additional
task of childcare, it is likely that contact times with other people will be
longer. Women generally make healthier lifestyle choices, thus reducing the
disease burden that confers high risk of mortality in COVID-19 infected men. This
narrative review aims to present key concepts and knowledge gaps on the effects
of oestrogen associated with SARS-CoV2 infection and COVID-19 disease.

Copyright © 2021 Newson, Manyonda, Lewis, Preissner, Preissner and Seeland.

DOI: 10.3389/fgwh.2021.651752 
PMCID: PMC8593953
PMID: 34816207 

Conflict of interest statement: LN and RL are directors of Newson Health Ltd. The
remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conflict of interest.

