
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 24:JVI0138821. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01388-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Effects of an alphasatellite on life cycle of the nanovirus Faba bean necrotic
yellows virus.

Mansourpour M(1), Gallet R(2), Abbasi A(3), Blanc S(4), Dizadji A(1), Zeddam
JL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Protection, College of Agriculture and Natural Resources, 
University of Tehran, Karaj, Iran.
(2)CBGP, INRAE, CIRAD, IRD, Montpellier SupAgro, Univ Montpellier, Montpellier,
France.
(3)Department of Agronomy and Plant Breeding, College of Agriculture and Natural 
Resources, University of Tehran, Karaj, Iran.
(4)PHIM Plant Health Institute, Univ Montpellier, IRD, CIRAD, INRAE, Institut
Agro, Montpellier, France.

Nanoviruses are plant viruses with a multipartite single-stranded DNA (ssDNA)
genome. Alphasatellites are commonly associated with nanovirus infections, but
their putative impact on their helper viruses is unknown. In this study, we
investigated the role of subterranean clover stunt alphasatellite 1 (hereafter
named SCSA 1) on various important traits of faba bean necrotic yellows virus
(FBNYV) in its host plant Vicia faba and aphid vector Acyrthosiphon pisum,
including disease symptoms, viral accumulation and transmission. The results
indicate that SCSA 1 does not affect the symptom severity nor the overall FBNYV
accumulation in V. faba, but changes the relative amounts of its different
genomic segments. Moreover, the association of SCSA 1 with FBNYV increases the
rate of plant-to-plant transmission by a process seemingly unrelated to simple
increase of the viral accumulation in the vector. These results represent the
first study on the impact of an alphasatellite on the biology of its helper
nanovirus. They suggest that SCSA 1 may benefit FBNYV, but the genericity of this
conclusion is discussed and questioned. Importance Alphasatellites are circular
single stranded DNA molecules frequently found in association with natural
isolates of nanoviruses and some geminiviruse, the two ssDNA plant infecting
virus families. While the implications of alphasatellite presence in geminivirus 
infections are relatively well documented, comparable studies on alphasatellites 
associated with nanoviruses are not available. Here we confirm that subterranean 
clover stunt alphasatellite 1 affects different traits of its helper nanovirus,
faba bean necrotic yellows virus, both in the host plant and aphid vector. We
show that the frequencies of the virus segments change in the presence of
alphasatellite, in both plant and vector. We also confirm that while within-plant
virus load and symptom are not affected by alphasatellite, the presence of
alphasatellite decreases within-aphid virus load, but significantly increases
virus transmission rate, so may confer a possible evolutionary advantage for the 
helper virus.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01388-21 
PMID: 34818072 

