
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2021 Nov 24:JCM0173221. doi: 10.1128/JCM.01732-21. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Evaluation of urethrotropic clade meningococcal infection by urine metagenomic
shotgun sequencing.

Retchless AC(1), Itsko M(2), Bazan JA(3)(4), Norris Turner A(3), Hu F(5), Joseph 
SJ(5), Carter A(3), Brown M(3), Snyder B(3), Wang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bacterial Diseases, National Center for Immunization and
Respiratory Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA
USA.
(2)WDS Inc., Contractor to Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta,
GA USA.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Ohio State
University College of Medicine, Columbus, OH USA.
(4)Sexual Health Clinic, Columbus Public Health, Columbus, OH USA.
(5)IHRC Inc., Contractor to Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta
GA USA.

Background Urethral infections caused by an emerging nongroupable (NG)
urethrotropic clade of Neisseria meningitidis (Nm) were first reported in the
United States in 2015 (the "U.S. NmNG urethritis clade"). Here we evaluate for
the presence of other urethral pathogens in men with U.S. NmNG urethritis clade
infection. Methods: We evaluated 129 urine specimens collected from men at a
sexual health clinic, including 33 from patients with culture-confirmed or
suspected urethral Nm infection and 96 specimens in which nucleic acid
amplification test detected Neisseria gonorrhoeae (Ng), Chlamydia trachomatis
(Ct), both pathogens, or neither pathogen. Nm was detected first by real-time
PCR, followed by metagenomic shotgun sequencing of 91 specimens to identify
coinfections. Nm genomes were sequenced following selective whole genome
amplification when possible. Results: Metagenomic sequencing detected Nm in 16 of
17 specimens from culture-confirmed Nm cases, with no coinfection by other
conventional urethral pathogens. Metagenomic sequencing also detected Nm in three
Ct positive specimens, one specimen positive for both Ng and Ct, and nine
specimens with negative Ng and Ct results, eight of which had suspected Neisseria
infections. Nm from culture-confirmed Nm cases belonged to the U.S. NmNG
urethritis clade, while Nm identified in other specimens belonged to multiple
clonal complexes. Additional urethral pathogens were predominant in non-Nm
specimens, including Ng, Ct, Mycoplasma genitalium, Ureaplasma urealyticum, and
herpes simplex virus type-2. Conclusions: Coinfection with other conventional
urethral pathogens is rare in men with culture-confirmed U.S. NmNG urethritis
clade infection and points to the strong association of this clade with disease.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.01732-21 
PMID: 34817203 

