
1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 24:JVI0156821. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01568-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Nucleoside-modified mRNA vaccines protect IFNAR-/- mice against Crimean Congo
hemorrhagic fever virus infection.

Appelberg S(1), John L(2), Pardi N(3), Végvári Á(4), Bereczky S(1), Ahlén G(5),
Monteil V(5), Abdurahman S(1), Mikaeloff F(5), Beattie M(6), Tam Y(6), Sällberg
M(5), Neogi U(5), Weissman D(3), Mirazimi A(1)(2)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Agency of Sweden, Solna, Sweden.
(2)National Veterinary Institute, Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Department of Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Division of Clinical Microbiology, Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Acuitas Therapeutics, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF), caused by Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever
virus (CCHFV), is on the World Health Organizations' list of prioritized diseases
and pathogens. With global distribution, high fatality rate and no approved
vaccine or effective treatment, CCHF constitutes a threat against global health. 
In the current study, we demonstrate that vaccination with nucleoside-modified
mRNA-lipid nanoparticles (mRNA-LNP), encoding for the CCHFV nucleoprotein (N) or 
glycoproteins (GcGn) protect IFNAR-/- mice against lethal CCHFV infection. In
addition, we found that both mRNA-LNP induced strong humoral and cellular immune 
responses in IFNAR-/- and immunocompetent mice and that neutralizing antibodies
are not necessary for protection. When evaluating immune responses induced by
immunization including CCHFV Gc and Gn antigens, we found the Gc protein to be
more immunogenic compared to the Gn protein. Hepatic injury is prevalent in CCHF 
and contributes to the severity and mortality of the disease in humans. Thus, to 
understand the immune response in the liver after infection and the potential
effect of the vaccine, we performed a proteomic analysis on liver samples from
vaccinated and control mice after CCHFV infection. Similar to observations in
humans, vaccination affected the metabolic pathways. In conclusion, this study
shows that a CCHFV mRNA-LNP vaccine, based on viral nucleo- or glycoproteins,
mediate protection against CCHFV induced disease. Consequently, genetic
immunization is an attractive approach to prevent disease caused by CCHFV and we 
believe we have necessary evidence to bring this vaccine platform to the next
step in the development of a vaccine against CCHFV infection. Importance
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV) is a zoonotic pathogen causing
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF), a severe fever disease. CCHFV have a wide
distribution and are endemic in several areas around the world. Cases of CCHF are
also being reported in new areas, indicating an expansion of the disease, which
is of high concern. Dispersion of the disease, high fatality rate and no approved
vaccine makes CCHF a threat to global health. The development of a vaccine is
thus of great importance. Here we show 100% protection against lethal CCHFV
infection in mice immunized with mRNA-LNP encoding for different CCHFV proteins. 
The vaccination showed both robust humoral and cellular immunity. mRNA-LNP
vaccines combine the ability to induce an effective immune response, the safety
of a transient carrier and the flexibility of genetic vaccines. This and our
results from the current study support the development of a mRNA-LNP based
vaccine against CCHFV.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01568-21 
PMID: 34817199 

