
1. Appl Math Model. 2022 Mar;103:714-730. doi: 10.1016/j.apm.2021.11.011. Epub 2021 
Nov 19.

How efficient is contact tracing in mitigating the spread of COVID-19? a
mathematical modeling approach.

Biala TA(1), Afolabi YO(2), Khaliq AQM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics, The Ohio State University, USA.
(2)Department of Mathematics, University of Louisiana at Lafayette, USA.
(3)Department of Mathematical Sciences, Middle Tennessee State University, USA.

Contact Tracing (CT) is one of the measures taken by government and health
officials to reduce the spread of the novel coronavirus. In this paper, we
investigate its efficacy by developing a compartmental model for assessing its
impact on mitigating the spread of the virus. We describe the impact on the
reproduction number R 0 of COVID-19. In particular, we discuss the importance and
relevance of parameters of the model such as the number of reported cases,
effectiveness of tracking and monitoring policy, and the transmission rates to
contact tracing. We describe the terms "perfect tracking", "perfect monitoring"
and "perfect reporting" to indicate that traced contacts will be tracked while
incubating, tracked contacts are efficiently monitored so that they do not cause 
secondary infections, and all infected persons are reported, respectively. We
consider three special scenarios: (1) perfect monitoring and perfect tracking of 
contacts of a reported case, (2) perfect reporting of cases and perfect
monitoring of tracked reported cases and (3) perfect reporting and perfect
tracking of contacts of reported cases. Furthermore, we gave a lower bound on the
proportion of contacts to be traced to ensure that the effective reproduction, R 
c , is below one and describe R c in terms of observable quantities such as the
proportion of reported and traced cases. Model simulations using the COVID-19
data obtained from John Hopkins University for some selected states in the US
suggest that even late intervention of CT may reasonably reduce the transmission 
of COVID-19 and reduce peak hospitalizations and deaths. In particular, our
findings suggest that effective monitoring policy of tracked cases and tracking
of traced contacts while incubating are more crucial than tracing more contacts. 
The use of CT coupled with other measures such as social distancing, use of face 
mask, self-isolation or quarantine and lockdowns will greatly reduce the spread
of the epidemic as well as peak hospitalizations and total deaths.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apm.2021.11.011 
PMCID: PMC8603240
PMID: 34815616 

