
1. Elife. 2021 Nov 23;10. pii: e70970. doi: 10.7554/eLife.70970. [Epub ahead of
print]

Ten months of temporal variation in the clinical journey of hospitalised patients
with COVID-19: an observational cohort.

ISARIC Clinical Characterisation Group, Hall MD(1), Baruch J(2), Carson G(2),
Citarella BW(2), Dagens A(2), Dankwa E(3), Donnelly CA(3), Dunning J(2), Escher
M(2), Kartsonaki C(3), Merson L(4), Pritchard M(2), Wei J(1), Horby PW(2), Rojek 
A(2), Olliaro PL(5).

Author information: 
(1)Big Data Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)ISARIC Global Support Centre, Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, 
Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(4)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom.
(5)ISARIC Global Support Centre, Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, 
Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, London, United Kingdom.

Background: There is potentially considerable variation in the nature and
duration of the care provided to hospitalised patients during an infectious
disease epidemic or pandemic. Improvements in care and clinician confidence may
shorten the time spent as an inpatient, or the need for admission to an intensive
care unit (ICU) or high density unit (HDU). On the other hand, limited resources 
at times of high demand may lead to rationing. Nevertheless, these variables may 
be used as static proxies for disease severity, as outcome measures for trials,
and to inform planning and logistics.Methods: We investigate these time trends in
an extremely large international cohort of 142,540 patients hospitalised with
COVID-19. Investigated are: time from symptom onset to hospital admission,
probability of ICU/HDU admission, time from hospital admission to ICU/HDU
admission, hospital case fatality ratio (hCFR) and total length of hospital
stay.Results: Time from onset to admission showed a rapid decline during the
first months of the pandemic followed by peaks during August/September and
December 2020. ICU/HDU admission was more frequent from June to August. The hCFR 
was lowest from June to August. Raw numbers for overall hospital stay showed
little variation, but there is clear decline in time to discharge for ICU/HDU
survivors.Conclusions: Our results establish that variables of these kinds have
limitations when used as outcome measures in a rapidly-evolving
situation.Funding: This work was supported by the UK Foreign, Commonwealth and
Development Office and Wellcome [215091/Z/18/Z] and the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation [OPP1209135]. The funders had no role in study design, data collection
and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

© 2021, Hall et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.70970 
PMID: 34812731 

Conflict of interest statement: Allavena, C. declares personal fees from
ViiVHealthcare, MSD, Janssen and Gilead, all outside the submitted work.
Andréjak, C. declares personal fees for lecture from Astra Zeneca, outside the
submitted work. Cheng, M. declares grants from McGill Interdisciplinary
Initiative in Infection and Immunity, grants from Canadian Institutes of Health
Research, during the conduct of the study; personal fees from GEn1E Lifesciences 
(as a member of the scientific advisory board), personal fees from nplex
biosciences (as a member of the scientific advisory board), outside the submitted
work. He is the co-founder of Kanvas Biosciences and owns equity in the company. 
In addition, M. Cheng reports a patent Methods for detecting tissue damage, graft
versus host disease, and infections using cell-free DNA profiling pending, and a 
patent Methods for assessing the severity and progression of SARS-CoV-2
infections using cell-free DNA pending. Cholley, B. declares personal fees (for
lectures and participation to advisory boards) from Edwards, Amomed, Nordic
Pharma, and Orion Pharma. Cruz-Bermúdez, J.L. declares personal fees from
Elsevier for advice, outside the submitted work. Cummings, M. and O'Donnell, M.
participated as investigators for clinical trials evaluating the efficacy and
safety of remdesivir (sponsored by Gilead Sciences) and convalescent plasma
(sponsored by Amazon) in hospitalized patients with COVID-19. Support for this
work is paid to Columbia University. Dalton, H. declares personal fees for
medical director of Innovative ECMO Conceots and honorarium from Abiomed/BREETHE 
Oxi-1 and Instrumentation Labs. Dyrhol-Riise, AM. declares grants from Gilead
outside this work. Deplanque, D. declares personal fees from Biocodex,
Bristol-Myers Squibb and Pfizer (advisory boards). Dudman, S. reports grants from
Research Council of Norway grant no 312780. Durante-Mangoni, E. declares funding 
via his Institution from MSD, Pfizer, and personal fees or participation in
advisory boards or participation to the speaker's bureau of Roche, Pfizer, MSD,
Angelini, Correvio, Nordic Pharma, Bio-Merieux, Abbvie, Sanofi-Aventis,
Medtronic, Tyrx and DiaSorin. Grasselli, G. declares personal fees from Getinge, 
Biotest, Draeger Medical, Fisher &amp; Paykel, MSD and unrestricted research
grant from MSD and Fisher &amp; Paykel, all outside the submitted work.
Guerguerian, AM. participated as site investigator for the Hospital For Sick
Children, Toronto, Canada as a site through SPRINT-SARI Study via the Canadian
Critical Care Trials Group sponsored in part by the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research. Ho, A. declares grant funding from Medical Research Council UK,
Scottish Funding Council - Grand Challenges Research Fund, and the Wellcome
Trust, outside this submitted work. Holter, J. C. reports grants from Research
Council of Norway grant no 312780, and from Vivaldi Invest A/S owned by Jon
Stephenson von Tetzchner, during the conduct of the study. Kimmoun, A. declares
personal fees (payment for lectures) from Baxter, Aguettant, Aspen. Kumar, D.
declares grants and personal fees from Roche, GSK and Merck; and personal fees
from Pfizer and Sanofi. Kutsogiannis, D.J. declares personal fees for a lecture
from Tabuk Pharmaceuticals and the Saudi Critical Care Society. Kutsyna, G.
declares the study consulting fee for clinical trial ClinicalTrials.gov
Identifier: NCT04762628. Laffey, J. reports that he has received fees for
consultancy from GlaxoSmithKline and from Baxter Therapeutics for work outside
the scope of this work. Lairez, O. declares grant funding from Pfizer; conference
fees from Amicus, GE Healthcare, Novartis, Sanofi-Genzyme, and Takeda-Shire; and 
consultancy fees from Alnylam, Amicus, Pfizer, Takeda-Shire. Lee, J. reports
grants from European Commission PREPARE grant agreement No 602525, European
Commission RECOVER Grant Agreement No 101003589 and European Commission
ECRAID-Plan Grant Agreement 825715 supporting the conduct, coordination and
management of the work. Lee, T.C. declares research salary support from les Fonds
de recherche du Québec - Santé. Lefèvre, B. declares travel/accommodation/meeting
expenses from Mylan and Gilead, all outside the submitted work. Lemaignen, A.
declares personal fees (payment for lectures) from MSD and Gilead; and
travel/accommodation/meeting expenses from Pfizer. Lescure, F.X. declares
personal fees (payment for lectures) from Gilead, MSD; and
travel/accommodation/meeting expenses from Astellas, Eumedica, MSD. Liu, K.
reports personal fees from MERA and receives a salary from TXP Medical completely
outside the submitted work. Martin-Loeches I. declares consulting fees for Gilead
outside of the submitted work. Martín-Quiros, A. declares consulting fees for
Gilead. Mentré F, declares consulting fees from IPSEN, Servier and Da Volterra,
and reports research grants to her group from Sanofi, Roche, Servier and Da
Voleterra, all outside the submitted work. Murthy, S declares receiving salary
support from the Health Research Foundation and Innovative Medicines Canada Chair
in Pandemic Preparedness Research. Nichol, A. declares a grant from the Health
Research Board of Ireland to support data collection in Ireland (CTN-2014-012).
Openshaw, P. has served on scientific advisory boards for Janssen/J&amp;J, Oxford
Immunotech Ltd, GSK, Nestle and Pfizer (fees to Imperial College). He is Imperial
College lead investigator on EMINENT, a consortium funded by the MRC and GSK. He 
is a member of the RSV Consortium in Europe (RESCEU) and Inno4Vac, Innovative
Medicines Initiatives (IMI) from the European Union. Peltan, I.D. declares grant 
support from the National Institutes of Health and, outside the submitted work,
grant support from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and Jannsen and
payments to his institution for trials by Regeneron and Asahi Kasei Pharma on
which he served as an investigator. Pesenti, A. declares personal fees from
Maquet, Novalung/Xenios, Baxter, and Boehringer Ingelheim. Poissy, J. declares
personal fees from Gilead for lectures, outside the submitting work. Povoa, P.
declares personal fees (for lectures and advisory boards) from MSD, Technophage, 
Sanofi, and Gilead. Póvoas, D. declares consulting fees (for lectures and/or
participation in advisory boards) from Roche and Viiv Healthcare; and
travel/accommodation/meeting expenses from Abbvie, Gilead Sciences, Janssen
Cilag, Merck Sharp &amp; Dohme and ViiV Healthcare. Rewa, O. declares consulting 
fees from Baxter Inc. Rossanese, A. declares consulting fees (for lectures and/or
participation to advisory boards) from Emergent BioSolutions and Sanofi Pasteur, 
but all outside of the frame of the submitted work. Săndulescu, O. has been an
investigator in COVID-19 clinical trials by Algernon Pharmaceuticals, Atea
Pharmaceuticals, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Diffusion Pharmaceuticals, and
Celltrion, Inc., outside the scope of the submitted work. Semple, M.G. reports
grants from DHSC National Institute of Health Research UK, from the Medical
Research Council UK, and from the Health Protection Research Unit in Emerging
&amp; Zoonotic Infections, University of Liverpool, supporting the conduct of the
study; other interest in Integrum Scientific LLC, Greensboro, NC, USA, outside
the submitted work. Serpa Neto, A. declares personal lecture fees from Drager
outside the submitted work. Shrapnel, S. participated as an investigator for an
observational study analysing ICU patients with COVID-19 (for the Critical Care
Consortium including ECMOCARD) funded by The Prince Charles Hospital Foundation
during the conduct of this study. S. Shrapnel reports in kind support from the
Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Engineered Quantum Systems
(CE170100009). Streinu-Cercel, Adrian has been an investigator in COVID-19
clinical trials by Algernon Pharmaceuticals, Atea Pharmaceuticals, Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals, Diffusion Pharmaceuticals, and Celltrion, Inc., outside the
scope of the submitted work. Streinu-Cercel, Anca has been an investigator in
COVID-19 clinical trials by Algernon Pharmaceuticals, Atea Pharmaceuticals,
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Diffusion Pharmaceuticals, and Celltrion, Inc.,
outside the scope of the submitted work. Summers, C. reports that she has
received fees for consultancy for Abbvie relating to COVID-19 therapeutics. She
was also the UK Chief Investigator of a GlaxoSmithKline plc sponsored study of a 
therapy for COVID, and is a member of the UK COVID Therapeutic Advisory Panel
(UK-CTAP). Outside the scope of this work, Dr Summers' institution receives
research grants from the Wellcome Trust, UKRI/MRC, National Institute for Health 
Research (NIHR), GlaxoSmithKline and AstraZeneca to support research in her
laboratory. Tedder, R. reports grants from MRC/UKRI during the conduct of the
study. In addition, R. Tedder has a patent United Kingdom Patent Application No. 
2014047.1 "SARS-CoV-2 antibody detection assay" issued. Timsit, J.F. declares
personal fees from Merck, Pfizer, Gilead, Beckton dickinson, Medimune, Bayer
pharma, and reports research grants to his research unit from Pfizerpers, Merck, 
Thermofisher. Troost, J. declares personal fees from General Electric and Procter
and Gamble. Turtle, L. reports fees from Eisai for delivering a lecture related
to COVID-19 and cancer, paid to the University of Liverpool. Ullrich, R. reports 
grant funding to his institution from Apeptico, APEIRON, Biotest, Bayer, CCORE
and Philips, as well as personal fees from Biotest. He holds European patent
EP15189777.4 "Blood purification device" and equity in CCORE Technology GesmbH, a
medical device research and development company. Visseaux, B. declares personal
fees from BioMérieux, Qiagen and Gilead and research grants from Qiagen, all
outside the submitted work. MH, JB, GC, BC, AD, ED, CD, JD, ME, CK, LM, MP, JW,
PH, AR, PO The authors declare that no competing interests exist.

