
1. Biomedicines. 2021 Nov 16;9(11). pii: 1701. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines9111701.

Canonical and Divergent N-Terminal HBx Isoform Proteins Unveiled: Characteristics
and Roles during HBV Replication.

Hernández S(1), Álvarez-Astudillo F(1), Garrido D(1), Prieto C(1), Loyola
A(1)(2), Villanueva RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro Ciencia & Vida, Fundación Ciencia & Vida, Avda. Zanartu 1482, Nunoa,
Santiago 7780272, Chile.
(2)Facultad de Medicina y Ciencia, Universidad San Sebastian, Santiago 7510157,
Chile.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) X protein (HBx) is a viral regulatory and multifunctional
protein. It is well-known that the canonical HBx reading frame bears two
phylogenetically conserved internal in-frame translational initiation codons at
Met2 and Met3, thus possibly generating divergent N-terminal smaller isoforms
during translation. Here, we demonstrate that the three distinct HBx isoforms are
generated from the ectopically expressed HBV HBx gene, named XF (full-length), XM
(medium-length), and XS (short-length); they display different subcellular
localizations when expressed individually in cultured hepatoma cells.
Particularly, the smallest HBx isoform, XS, displayed a predominantly cytoplasmic
localization. To study HBx proteins during viral replication, we performed
site-directed mutagenesis to target the individual or combinatorial expression of
the HBx isoforms within the HBV viral backbone (full viral genome). Our results
indicate that of all HBx isoforms, only the smallest HBx isoform, XS, can restore
WT levels of HBV replication, and bind to the viral mini chromosome, thereby
establishing an active chromatin state, highlighting its crucial activities
during HBV replication. Intriguingly, we found that sequences of HBV HBx genotype
H are devoid of the conserved Met3 position, and therefore HBV genotype H
infection is naturally silent for the expression of the HBx XS isoform. Finally, 
we found that the HBx XM (medium-length) isoform shares significant sequence
similarity with the N-terminus domain of the COMMD8 protein, a member of the
copper metabolism MURR1 domain-containing (COMMD) protein family. This novel
finding might facilitate studies on the phylogenetic origin of the HBV X protein.
The identification and functional characterization of its isoforms will shift the
paradigm by changing the concept of HBx from being a unique, canonical, and
multifunctional protein toward the occurrence of different HBx isoforms, carrying
out different overlapping functions at different subcellular localizations during
HBV genome replication. Significantly, our current work unveils new crucial HBV
targets to study for potential antiviral research, and human virus pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines9111701 
PMCID: PMC8616016
PMID: 34829930 

