
1. Vet Microbiol. 2021 Nov 2;264:109271. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2021.109271. [Epub
ahead of print]

Replication of Streptococcus equi subspecies zooepidemicus infection in swine.

Hau SJ(1), Lantz K(2), Stuart KL(2), Sitthicharoenchai P(3), Macedo N(3),
Derscheid RJ(3), Burrough ER(3), Robbe-Austerman S(2), Brockmeier SL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Virus and Prion Research Unit, National Animal Disease Center, ARS, USDA,
Ames, IA, United States.
(2)National Veterinary Services Laboratories, APHIS, USDA, Ames, IA, United
States.
(3)Department of Veterinary Diagnostic and Production Animal Medicine, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, United States.
(4)Virus and Prion Research Unit, National Animal Disease Center, ARS, USDA,
Ames, IA, United States. Electronic address: susan.brockmeier@usda.gov.

Streptococcus equi subspecies zooepidemicus (SEZ) is a commensal bacterium of
horses and causes infections in mammalian species, including humans.
Historically, virulent strains of SEZ caused high mortality in pigs in China and 
Indonesia, while disease in the U.S. was infrequent. More recently, high
mortality events in sows were attributed to SEZ in North America. The SEZ
isolates from these mortality events have high genetic similarity to an isolate
from an outbreak in China. Taken together, this may indicate SEZ is an emerging
threat to swine health. To generate a disease model and evaluate the
susceptibility of healthy, conventionally raised pigs to SEZ, we challenged sows 
and five-month-old pigs with an isolate from a 2019 mortality event. Pigs were
challenged with a genetically similar guinea pig isolate or genetically distinct 
horse isolate to evaluate comparative virulence. The swine isolate caused severe 
systemic disease in challenged pigs with 100 % mortality. Disease manifestation
in sows was similar to field reports: lethargy/depression, fever, reluctance to
rise, and high mortality. The guinea pig isolate also caused severe systemic
disease; however, most five-month-old pigs recovered. In contrast, the horse
isolate did not cause disease and was readily cleared from the respiratory tract.
In conclusion, we were able to replicate disease reported in the field. The
results indicate differences in virulence between isolates, with the highest
virulence associated with the swine isolate. Additionally, we generated a
challenge model that can be used in future research to evaluate virulence factors
and disease prevention strategies.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2021.109271 
PMID: 34826647 

