
1. Harm Reduct J. 2021 Nov 25;18(1):119. doi: 10.1186/s12954-021-00572-7.

Telehealth for opioid use disorder treatment in low-barrier clinic settings: an
exploration of clinician and staff perspectives.

Aronowitz SV(1), Engel-Rebitzer E(2), Dolan A(3), Oyekanmi K(3), Mandell D(4),
Meisel Z(2), South E(2), Lowenstein M(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Pennsylvania School of Nursing, 418 Curie Blvd, Room 419,
Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. visho@nursing.upenn.edu.
(2)University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)University of Pennsylvania Center for Emergency Care Policy and Research,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Penn Center for Mental Health, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA,
USA.

BACKGROUND: The majority of individuals with opioid use disorder (OUD) face
access barriers to evidence-based treatment, and the COVID-19 pandemic has
exacerbated the United States (US) opioid overdose crisis. However, the pandemic 
has also ushered in rapid transitions to telehealth in the USA, including for
substance use disorder treatment with buprenorphine. These changes have the
potential to mitigate barriers to care or to exacerbate pre-existing treatment
inequities. The objective of this study was to qualitatively explore
Philadelphia-based low-barrier, harm-reduction oriented, opioid use disorder
(OUD) treatment provider perspectives about and experiences with telehealth
during the COVID-19 pandemic, and to assess their desire to offer telehealth to
patients at their programs in the future.
METHODS: We interviewed 22 OUD treatment prescribers and staff working outpatient
programs offering OUD treatment with buprenorphine in Philadelphia during July
and August 2020. All participants worked at low-barrier treatment programs that
provide buprenorphine using a harm reduction-oriented approach and without
mandating counseling or other requirements as a condition of treatment. We
analyzed the data using thematic content analysis.
RESULTS: Our analysis yielded three themes: 1/ Easier access for some: telehealth
facilitates care for many patients who have difficulty attending in-person
appointments due to logistical and psychological barriers; 2/ A layered digital
divide: engagement with telehealth can be seriously limited by patients' access
to and comfort with technology; and 3/ Clinician control: despite some clinic
staff beliefs that patients should have the freedom to choose their treatment
modality, patients' access to treatment via telehealth may hinge on clinician
perceptions of patient "stability" rather than patient preferences.
CONCLUSIONS: Telehealth may address many access issues, however, barriers to
implementation remain, including patient ability and desire to attend healthcare 
appointments virtually. In addition, the potential for telehealth models to
extend OUD care to patients currently underserved by in-person models may
partially depend on clinician comfort treating patients deemed "unstable" via
this modality. The ability of telehealth to expand access to OUD care for
individuals who have previously struggled to engage with in-person care will
likely be limited if these patients are not given the opportunity to receive
treatment via telehealth.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12954-021-00572-7 
PMCID: PMC8614631
PMID: 34823538  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

