
1. Heart Lung. 2021 Nov 16;52:16-21. doi: 10.1016/j.hrtlng.2021.07.018. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Should I stay or should I go? An exploration of the decision-making behavior of
acute cardiac patients during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Burton S(1), Hayes JA(1), Morrell-Scott N(2), Sanders J(3), Walthall H(4), Wright
DJ(5), Jones ID(6).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing and Allied Health, Faculty of Health, Liverpool John Moores 
University, Tithebarn Building, Liverpool L2 2ER, United Kingdom.
(2)School of Nursing and Allied Health, Faculty of Health, Liverpool John Moores 
University, Tithebarn Building, Liverpool L2 2ER, United Kingdom; Liverpool
Centre for Cardiovascular Science, United Kingdom.
(3)Barts Health NHS Trust William Harvey Research Institute, St Bartholomew's
Hospital, Queen Mary University of London, United Kingdom.
(4)Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(5)Liverpool Heart and Chest Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom; Liverpool
Centre for Cardiovascular Science, United Kingdom.
(6)School of Nursing and Allied Health, Faculty of Health, Liverpool John Moores 
University, Tithebarn Building, Liverpool L2 2ER, United Kingdom; Liverpool
Centre for Cardiovascular Science, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
i.d.jones@ljmu.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: During the SARS-COV-2 (COVID-19) pandemic efforts to reduce virus
transmission resulted in non-emergency patients being deterred from seeking help.
The number of patients presenting with acute cardiac conditions reduced,
significantly OBJECTIVES: To explore the decision-making process, and influential
factors in that process, of patients and their family during an acute cardiac
event.
METHODS: A qualitative research design was employed using purposive sampling of
patients who experienced an acute cardiac event during the social containment
mandates. Semi-structured interviews were conducted, with thematic analysis of
interview transcripts.
RESULTS: Twenty-five participants were recruited from three UK hospitals. Themes 
identified were reliance on informal support network, lack of awareness of
cardiac symptoms leading to delayed help-seeking, and an indirect COVID-19 effect
(e.g. avoiding treatment).
CONCLUSIONS: These results highlight the need for informed public health
messages, targeting patients and their support networks, that allow those in need
of treatment to access care.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hrtlng.2021.07.018 
PMCID: PMC8606948
PMID: 34823051 

Conflict of interest statement: Decalartion of Competing Interest IJ has received
research grant funding from Bristol Myers Squibb and Astra Zeneca. DJW provides
consultancy services to Boston Scientific and Medtronic. All other authors have
no conflicts of interest.

