
1. Lett Appl Microbiol. 2021 Nov 25. doi: 10.1111/lam.13611. [Epub ahead of print]

A rapid detection of Tomato yellow leaf curl virus using recombinase polymerase
amplification-lateral flow dipstick assay.

Zhou Y(1), Zheng HY(2), Jiang DM(3), Liu M(1), Zhang W(1), Yan JY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plant and Environment Protection, Beijing Academy of Agriculture 
and Forestry Sciences, Key Laboratory of Urban Agriculture (North China),
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Beijing, 100097, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality
and Safety of Agro-products, Key Laboratory of Biotechnology in Plant Protection 
of Ministry of Agriculture and Zhejiang Province, Institute of Plant Virology,
Ningbo University, Ningbo, 315211, China.
(3)Beijing Research Center for Agricultural Standards and Testing, Beijing
Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences, Beijing, China.

Tomato yellow leaf curl disease which is caused by Tomato yellow leaf curl virus 
(TYLCV) is economically important and a widely spread tomato disease in China.
Rapid and accurate detection methods are important in the control TYLCV. Here, a 
rapid method was developed to identify TYLCV on the basis of recombinase
polymerase amplification (RPA) that can be visualized in 5 min using lateral flow
dipsticks. The sensitivity and the specificity of this method were evaluated.
This method can detect 0.5 pg DNA after 30 min at 37°C without any expensive
instrumentation. In addition, it showed higher sensitivity than a PCR method when
purified DNA was used. Moreover, the TYLCV was specifically detected, whereas
other viruses infecting tomato produced negative results. The crude tomato
extracts used in this assay has potential application in minimally equipped plant
clinic laboratories. This method will facilitate the early and rapid detection of
TYLCV for timely application of control measures.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/lam.13611 
PMID: 34822723 

