
1. Liver Int. 2021 Nov 26. doi: 10.1111/liv.15106. [Epub ahead of print]

Hepatitis Delta virus in migrants: The challenge of elimination (ANRS CO22
HEPATHER cohort).

Lotto M(1), Fontaine H(2)(3), Marcellin F(1), Périères L(1), Bureau-Stoltmann
M(1), Carrat F(4)(5), Pol S(6), Zoulim F(7), Carrieri P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Aix Marseille Univ, Inserm, IRD, SESSTIM, Sciences Economiques & Sociales de
la Santé & Traitement de l'Information Médicale, ISSPAM, Marseille, France.
(2)Département d'Hépatologie, AP-HP, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France.
(3)INSERM U1223, Institut Pasteur, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France.
(4)Sorbonne Université, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale
(INSERM), Institut Pierre Louis d'Epidémiologie et de Santé Publique, Paris,
France.
(5)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Unité de
Santé Publique, Paris, France.
(6)Département d'Hépatologie, INSERM U1223, Université de Paris, AP-HP, Hôpital
Cochin, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(7)Département d'hépatologie, Université de Lyon, Hospices Civils de Lyon, INSERM
U1052, Lyon, France.

Novel treatments for hepatitis Delta virus (HDV) infection provide promising
opportunities to treat patients with hepatitis B virus (HBV) and HDV
co-infection. However, current clinical trials on HDV treatment rarely explore
patients' barriers to treatments. In Europe, HDV infection mostly affects young
migrants from HDV-endemic areas who experience early liver-related mortality.
Migrants are more likely to face multiple situations of statutory and
socioeconomic insecurity and structural barriers than non-migrants. These
obstacles may impact their quality of life and can (i) lead them to give
secondary importance to certain HDV care options, (ii) delay treatment initiation
and (iii) affect their adherence and commitment to care. Preliminary results from
the ANRS CO22 HEPATHER cohort show that the majority (61.6%) of HBV-HDV
co-infected migrants live in poverty. Moreover, half were diagnosed and a quarter
of those who initiated HBV treatment had been in France for no more than two
years, a period when language skills are often still poor and when knowledge of
the health and administrative system may be lacking. We advocate for increased
social science research, in particular qualitative studies, to investigate the
effects that multiple forms of precarity (weak access to social rights, language 
barriers, housing insecurity, unexpected expenditures and other difficulties) may
have on HDV screening opportunities, follow-up, and treatment pathways in
migrants. This will help adapt communication and care around viral hepatitis, as 
well as inform and orient medical services and public health actors about the
difficulties that migrants encounter.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/liv.15106 
PMID: 34825765 

