
1. Animals (Basel). 2021 Nov 8;11(11). pii: 3182. doi: 10.3390/ani11113182.

Phylodynamic and Recombination Analyses of Avian Infectious Bronchitis GI-23
Reveal a Widespread Recombinant Cluster and New Among-Countries Linkages.

Houta MH(1), Hassan KE(1), Legnardi M(2), Tucciarone CM(2), Abdel-Moneim AS(3),
Cecchinato M(2), El-Sawah AA(1), Ali A(1), Franzo G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Poultry Diseases Department, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Beni-Suef
University, Beni-Suef 62511, Egypt.
(2)Department of Animal Medicine, Production and Health (MAPS), University of
Padua, 35020 Legnaro, Italy.
(3)Microbiology Department, Virology Division, College of Medicine, Taif
University, Taif 21944, Saudi Arabia.

Infectious bronchitis virus GI-23 lineage, although described approximately two
decades ago in the Middle East, has recently drawn remarkable attention and is
considered an "emerging" lineage due to its current spread to several other
regions, including Europe. Despite the relevance, no comprehensive studies are
available investigating its epidemiologic and evolutionary pattern. The present
phylodynamic study was designed to fill this gap, benefitting from a collection
of freely available GI-23 sequences and ad-hoc generated European ones. After a
relatively ancient origin in the Middle East, likely in the first half of the
previous century, GI-23 circulated largely undetected or underdiagnosed for a
long time in this region, likely causing little damage, potentially because of
low virulence coupled with limited development of avian industry in the
considered years and regions and insufficient diagnostic activity. The following 
development of the poultry industry and spread to other countries led to a
progressive but slow increase of viral population size between the late '90s and 
2010. An increase in viral virulence could also be hypothesized. Of note, a big
recombinant cluster, likely originating in the Middle East but spreading
thereafter, especially to Europe through Turkey, demonstrated a much-marked
increase in viral population size compared to previously circulating variants.
The extensive available GI-23 sequence datasets allowed to demonstrate several
potential epidemiological links among African, Asian, and European countries, not
described for other IBV lineages. However, differently from previously
investigated IBV lineages, its spread appears to primarily involve neighbouring
countries and those with strong economic and political relationships. It could
thus be speculated that frequent effective contacts among locations are necessary
for efficient strain transmission. Some countries appear to play a major role as 
a "bridge" among less related locations, being Turkey the most relevant example. 
The role of vaccination in controlling the viral population was also tentatively 
evaluated. However, despite some evidence suggesting such an effect, the bias in 
sequence and data availability and the variability in the applied vaccination
protocols prevent robust conclusions and warrant further investigations.

DOI: 10.3390/ani11113182 
PMCID: PMC8614413
PMID: 34827914 

