
1. Influenza Other Respir Viruses. 2021 Nov 24. doi: 10.1111/irv.12937. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Role of age and birth month in infants hospitalized with RSV-confirmed disease in
the Valencia Region, Spain.

Mira-Iglesias A(1), Demont C(2), López-Labrador FX(3)(4), Mengual-Chuliá B(3),
García-Rubio J(1), Carballido-Fernández M(5)(6), Tortajada-Girbés M(7),
Mollar-Maseres J(8), Schwarz-Chavarri G(9), Puig-Barberà J(1), Díez-Domingo J(1);
Valencia Hospital Network for the Study of Influenza and other Respiratory
Viruses(1).

Author information: 
(1)Área de Investigación en Vacunas, Fundación para el Fomento de la
Investigación Sanitaria y Biomédica de la Comunitat Valenciana (FISABIO-Public
Health), Valencia, Spain.
(2)RSV Medical Evidence Generation, Sanofi Pasteur, Lyon, France.
(3)Laboratorio de Virología, Área de Genómica y Salud. Fundación para el Fomento 
de la Investigación Sanitaria y Biomédica de la Comunitat Valenciana
(FISABIO-Public Health), Valencia, Spain.
(4)Consorcio de Investigación Biomédica de Epidemiología y Salud Pública
(CIBER-ESP), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Preventive Medicine, Hospital General Universitario de Castellón, Castellón de
la Plana, Spain.
(6)Medicine Department, Universidad CEU Cardenal Herrera, Castellón de la Plana, 
Spain.
(7)Pediatric Pneumology and Allergy Unit, Hospital Universitario Doctor Peset,
Valencia, Spain.
(8)Preventive Medicine, Hospital Universitario y Politécnico La Fe, Valencia,
Spain.
(9)Out-of-Hospital Family and Community Medicine, Hospital General Universitario 
de Alicante, Alicante, Spain.

BACKGROUND: RSV is the leading cause of hospital admissions in infants and the
principal cause of bronchiolitis in young children. There is a lack of granular
data on RSV-associated hospitalization per season using laboratory confirmed
results. Our current study addresses this issue and intends to fill this gap.
METHODS: The study was conducted from 2014 through 2018, in 4 to 10 hospitals in 
the Valencia Region, Spain. Infants included in this study were admitted in
hospital through the Emergency Department with a respiratory complaint and tested
by RT-PCR for RSV in a central laboratory.
RESULTS: Incidence rates of RSV-associated hospitalization varied by season and
hospital. Overall, the highest incidence rates were observed in 2017/2018.
RSV-associated hospitalization was highest in infants below 3 months of age and
in those born before or at the beginning of the RSV season. Almost 54% of total
infants hospitalized with laboratory confirmed RSV were found to be born outside 
the season, from April to October. The RSV positivity rate by ICD-10 discharged
codes varied by season and age with results from 48% to 57% among LRI (J09-J22).
CONCLUSION: The study was instrumental in bringing forth the time
unpredictability of RSV epidemics, the critical impact of age, and the comparable
distribution of RSV-associated hospitalization in infants born on either side of 
the RSV season. These data could help in better characterization of the
population that drives the healthcare burden and is crucial for the development
of future immunization strategies, especially with upcoming vaccines in against
RSV.

© 2021 The Authors. Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/irv.12937 
PMID: 34821055 

