
1. J Genet. 2021;100. pii: 87.

Microsatellite-based association mapping for agronomic traits in mungbean (Vigna 
radiata L. Wilczek).

Singh CM(1), Prajapati U, Gupta S, Pratap A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Biotechnology, CSK Himachal Pradesh Agricultural
University, Palampur 176 062, India. kml1967@rediffmail.com.

Mungbean (Vigna radiata L. Wilczek) is one of the most important warm season food
legumes which contributes significantly towards nutritional security and
environmental sustainability. Marker-trait association (MTA) for agronomic
characters offer opportunities to deploy marker-assisted breeding for genetic
amelioration of crops. This investigation was carried out with an objective to
decipher population genetic structure of diverse Vigna accessions and detect
microsatellite loci linked to major agronomic traits for mungbean improvement.
The study was initiated with 290 diverse Vigna accessions including wild and
cultivated accessions. A mungbean yellow mosaic India virus (MYMIV)-resistant
association mapping panel was constructed to minimize the effect of yellow mosaic
disease on crop performance. Among these, 117 accessions including 55 cultivated 
and 63 wild accessions were found highly resistant to MYMIV. After
multi-environment phenotyping, a panel of 70 MYMIV-resistant mungbean accessions 
was subjected to analysis for assessing the population genetic structure as well 
as MTA for important agronomic traits. There was sufficient genetic variation
among the 70-mungbean genotypes as depicted by 91 microsatellite markers.
Population genetic structure analysis grouped the genotypes into five
subpopulations. The locus GMES0162 (LG4) was strongly associated with days to
first flowering, whereas loci CEDG 035 (LG8), DMB SSR001 (LG6), DMB SSR008 (LG4) 
and CEDG 168 (LG11) were associated with pod number. These marker-trait
associations will be helpful in genetic improvement of mungbean through molecular
breeding.


PMID: 34825660 

