
1. Vet Sci. 2021 Nov 17;8(11). pii: 278. doi: 10.3390/vetsci8110278.

Baculovirus Vectors Induce the Production of Interferons in Swine: Their
Potential in the Development of Antiviral Strategies.

Molina GN(1), Amalfi S(1), Otero I(2), Taboga O(1), Molinari MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Agrobiotecnología y Biología Molecular (IABIMO), Instituto
Nacional de Tecnología Agropecuaria (INTA), Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones
Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Hurlingham, Buenos Aires B1686IGC, Argentina.
(2)Centro de Ciencias Veterinarias (CCV), Universidad Maimónides (UMAI), Buenos
Aires B1686IGC, Argentina.

The huge variety of viruses affecting swine represents a global threat. Since
vaccines against highly contagious viruses last several days to induce protective
immune responses, antiviral strategies for rapid control of outbreak situations
are needed. The baculovirus Autographa californica multiple nucleopolyhedrovirus 
(AcMNPV), an insect virus, has been demonstrated to be an effective vaccine
vector for mammals. Besides the ability to display or transduce heterologous
antigens, it also induces strong innate immune responses and provides
IFN-mediated protection against lethal challenges with viruses like
foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV) in mice. Thus, the aim of this study was to
evaluate the ability of AcMNPV to induce IFN production and elicit antiviral
activity in porcine peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Our results
demonstrated that AcMNPV induced an IFN-α-mediated antiviral activity in PBMCs in
vitro. Moreover, the inoculation of AcMNPV in piglets led to the production of
type I and II IFNs in sera from inoculated animals and antiviral activities
against vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) and FMDV measured by in vitro assays.
Finally, it was demonstrated that the pseudotyping of AcMNPV with VSV-G protein, 
but not the enrichment of the AcMNPV genome with specific immunostimulatory CpG
motifs for the porcine TLR9, improved the ability to induce IFN-α production in
PBMCs in vitro. Together, these results suggest that AcMNPV is a promising tool
for the induction of IFNs in antiviral strategies, with the potential to be
biotechnologically improved.

DOI: 10.3390/vetsci8110278 
PMCID: PMC8617851
PMID: 34822651 

