
1. Hepatol Res. 2021 Nov 26. doi: 10.1111/hepr.13736. [Epub ahead of print]

Predictors associated with a better response to the Japanese aluminum-free
hepatitis A vaccine, Aimmugen® , for people living with HIV.

Koga M(1), Senkoji T(1), Kubota M(1), Ishizaka A(1), Mizutani T(1), Sedohara
A(1), Ikeuchi K(1), Kikuchi T(2), Adachi E(2), Saito M(1), Koibuchi T(2),
Hosomichi K(3), Ohashi J(4), Kawana-Tachikawa A(5), Matano T(5), Tsutsumi T(1),
Yotsuyanagi H(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Advanced Clinical Research Center, The
Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases and Applied Immunology, Hospital of the
Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Japan.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, The University 
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)AIDS Research Center, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, Japan.

AIM: After the hepatitis A virus (HAV) outbreak among men who have sex with men
(MSM) around 2018, the importance of HAV vaccination was emphasized, especially
for MSM-living with human immunodeficiency virus (MSM-LWHIV). Aimmugen® is
licensed and distributed exclusively in Japan. While administration of three
doses is recommended, 85% of recipients in the general population were reported
to acquire seroprotection after the second dose. In this study, we evaluated the 
efficacy of two or three vaccine doses along with predictors associated with the 
response to Aimmugen® in MSM-LWHIV.
METHODS: We retrospectively examined anti-HA-IgG titers of MSM-LWHIV vaccinated
with Aimmugen® in our hospital. Patients' data were collected from medical
records.
RESULTS: Between January 2018 and October 2019, 141 subjects whose median age was
46 years old, were examined. All the subjects were on antiretroviral therapy
(ART) and the median CD4 count was 615/μL. The acquisition rate of protectable
anti-HA-IgG titers after the second and third dose was 71.1% and 98.6%,
respectively. In 114 subjects whose anti-HA-IgG titers were tested after the
second-dose, factors significantly associated with better response were prolonged
ART duration and higher CD4 count. The titers of anti-HA-IgG after the third dose
were higher in those who became seropositive after the second-dose than those who
did not.
CONCLUSIONS: Three-dose of Aimmugen® for MSM-LWHIV was effective while two-dose
was less effective compared to non-HIV-infected people. People-LWHIV with shorter
duration of ART and lesser CD4 cell count achieved lower titers of anti-HA-IgG
and might require an additional vaccination. This article is protected by
copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/hepr.13736 
PMID: 34825436 

