
1. Clin Ter. 2021 Nov 22;172(6):570-576. doi: 10.7417/CT.2021.2380.

Caesarean Section in Preventing Stillbirths in Pregnancy Complicated with
COVID-19: a Narrative Review.

D'Angelo A(1), Giacomin L(2), Murabito M(3), Ciceroni V(3), Petrella C(4), Fiore 
M(4), Ceccanti M(5), De Persis S(6), Messina MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, Obstetrics and Urology, Sapienza University of Rome,
Italy.
(2)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, San Bortolo Hospital, Vicenza, Italy.
(3)Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy.
(4)Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biol-ogy, IBBC-CNR, Rome, Italy.
(5)Centro Riferimento Alcologico Regione Lazio, ASL Roma 1, Rome, Italy.
(6)ASL Rieti, Italy.

Introduction: COVID-19 is a complex syndrome caused by SARS-Cov-2. It mainly
affects the respiratory system, but it could cause serious harm during pregnancy.
An increase in stillbirths and preterm births has been highlighted by many
authors. Although WHO and Royal College of Obstetrics and Gynecology don't
recommend elective cesarean section in women with confirmed infection, cesarean
sections were performed by many clinicians. This short narrative review aims to
analyze pieces of evidence found in literature about the effectiveness of
cesarean section in preventing stillbirths in COVID-19 positive mothers.
Methods: Studies included in the present review were retrieved searching MEDLINE 
(last access August 5th, 2021) with the following keywords: "pregnant woman with 
covid-19", "Caesarean section", "Ab-dominal Delivery" and "Stillbirth". Studies
regarding the mode of delive-ry in pregnant women infected with COVID-19 and
neonatal outcomes were included. Studies about biology, anesthesiology and
necroscopy were excluded. Filters for "human" and "English" were applied.
Results: Searching MEDLINE, 24 references were found. Other 103 articles were
found searching bibliography. Two references were excluded after duplicate
removal, 77 references after the title screen and 27 after the abstract screen.
The final number of references included was 23. Most of the included studies were
case reports. Most of them were from China.
Discussion: Many authors highlighted the increased risk of fetal death in
pregnancies complicated with SARS-Cov-2 infection, but it is not clear if
Caesarean Section could reduce this risk. Pieces of evidence show that most
clinicians choose to perform an elective cesarean section mostly because of
maternal conditions or the fear of possible vertical transmission. Data show that
mode of delivery doesn't affect the neonatal outcome and Caesarean Section
doesn't reduce the positivity rate among neonates. Different opinions were found 
about the possible infection of amniotic fluid, cord blood and placenta. The risk
of vertical transmission is considered moderate or low by most of the authors.
Positivity to SARS-Cov-2 isn't an indication of elective cesarean section by
itself, but this mode of delivery should be optioned in patients with other
obstetrical indications or with severe conditions due to COVID. The recent
increase in stillbirths could be related to the overall deterioration of maternal
conditions.

DOI: 10.7417/CT.2021.2380 
PMID: 34821354  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

