
1. BMC Health Serv Res. 2021 Nov 25;21(1):1271. doi: 10.1186/s12913-021-07297-0.

Exploring healthcare staff narratives to understand the role of quality
improvement methods in innovative practices during COVID-19.

Khurshid Z(1), McAuliffe E(2), De Brún A(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, Midwifery and Health Systems, UCD Centre for
Interdisciplinary Research, Education, and Innovation in Health Systems (UCD
IRIS), University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
zuneera.khurshid@ucdconnect.ie.
(2)School of Nursing, Midwifery and Health Systems, UCD Centre for
Interdisciplinary Research, Education, and Innovation in Health Systems (UCD
IRIS), University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.

BACKGROUND: COVID-19 has impacted the context in which healthcare staff and teams
operate and this has implications for quality improvement (QI) work. Contrary to 
the usual ambivalent relationship staff have with QI work, there have been
examples of unprecedented staff engagement in implementing rapid changes during
the pandemic indicating a change in important underlying factors that impact
staff involvement in QI. The purpose of this study is to explore staff
perspectives about how experience and skills of QI methods supported them in
implementing innovative practices during COVID-19.
METHODS: This is a qualitative narrative study based on narrative interviews to
collect healthcare staff stories of implementing rapid change. The stories were
identified through social media (Twitter) and a national health magazine issued
by the Irish health service. Twenty staff members participated in the interviews.
Interviews were audio recorded, transcribed, and anonymised. A four-step thematic
analysis was conducted.
RESULTS: The analysis revealed the transformational journey of healthcare staff
from the initial shock and anxiety caused by COVID-19 to making sense of the
situation, implementing rapid changes, and acknowledging COVID as a learning
experience. Six themes were evident from the analysis: COVID anxiety and fear,
emotional supports and coping mechanisms, person-centric changes, COVID as a
'forcing function' for change, a collective way of working and looking back and
thinking ahead.
CONCLUSIONS: While most rapid changes during COVID-19 did not represent a
systematic and explicit QI application, QI principles were evident throughout the
stories and actions taken, including making small changes, testing changes,
learning, reflecting as a team, and improving. Many staff members were able to
retrospectively identify the relevance of QI principles. COVID-19 eliminated some
traditional barriers to change leading to efficient solutions, thus highlighting 
a need to sustain these positive changes into routine practice to develop an
adaptive healthcare system receptive to QI.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12913-021-07297-0 
PMCID: PMC8613456
PMID: 34823517  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

