
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021 Nov 25. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14402. [Epub ahead of print]

Tembusu virus infection in laying chickens: Evidence for a distinct genetic
cluster with significant antigenic variation.

Yu Z(1), Ren H(1), Sun M(1), Xie W(1), Sun S(1), Liang N(1), Wang H(1), Ying
X(1), Sun Y(1), Wang Y(1), Zheng Y(1), Hu X(2), Su J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Epidemiology and Zoonosis, Ministry of Agriculture,
College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan,
China.

Tembusu virus (TMUV)-associated disease is a growing cause of egg production
decrease and encephalitis in domestic waterfowl, with expanding distribution. In 
previous studies, TMUV isolates were phylogenetically classified into two genetic
lineages and different clusters with varied pathogenicity. However, little is
known about the phenotypic and virulence characteristics of cluster 3 isolates
within the duck TMUV lineage. In this study, the etiological agent causing egg
drop in a laying chicken farm in southern China was investigated and a TMUV was
isolated from pooled tissue samples. Genome sequencing and phylogenetic analysis 
grouped the isolate into TMUV cluster 3 with closest relation to the
mosquito-origin TMUV YN12193. Cross-neutralization testing using convalescent
sera revealed significant antigenic variation between the isolate and a
representative strain of cluster 2.2. The experimental infection of SPF hens
confirmed the ability of the isolate to replicate in multiple tissues and led to 
ovary damage. Additionally, high seroconversion rates (95.83%-100%) were detected
in the three flocks following retrospective investigation. Our study demonstrates
the occurrence of cluster 3 TMUV infection in laying chickens and that the virus 
exhibits significant antigenic variation compared with cluster 2 TMUV. This
article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14402 
PMID: 34821052 

