
1. Electrophoresis. 2021 Nov 25. doi: 10.1002/elps.202100302. [Epub ahead of print]

Stronger together: Analytical techniques for recombinant adeno associated virus.

Hutanu A(1)(2), Boelsterli D(3), Schmidli C(3), Montealegre C(3), Thai MD(1),
Bobaly B(3), Koch M(3), Schwarz MA(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Analytical Development and Quality Control, Pharma Technical Development
Biologics Europe, F. Hoffmann-La Roche AG, Basel, 4070, Switzerland.
(2)University of Basel, Basel, 4056, Switzerland.
(3)Solvias AG, Kaiseraugst, 4303, Switzerland.

With recent FDA approval of two recombinant adeno associated virus (rAAV) based
gene therapies, these vectors have proven that they are suitable to address
monogenic diseases. However, rAAVs are relatively new modalities, and their
production and therapy costs significantly exceed those of conventional
biologics. Thus, significant efforts are made to improve the processes, methods
and techniques used in manufacturing and quality control (QC). Here we evaluate
transmission electron microscopy (TEM), analytical ultracentrifugation (AUC) and 
two modes of capillary electrophoresis (CE) for their ability to analyze the DNA 
encapsidated by rAAVs. While TEM and AUC are well established methods for rAAV,
capillary gel electrophoresis (CGE) has been just recently proposed for viral
genome sizing. The data presented reflects that samples are very complex, with
various DNA species incorporated in the virus, including small fragments as well 
as DNA that is larger than the targeted transgene. CGE provides a good insight in
the filling of rAAVs, but the workflow is tedious and the method is not
applicable for the determination of DNA titer, since a procedure for the absolute
quantification (e.g., calibration) is not yet established. For estimating the
genome titer, we propose a simplified capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE)
approach with minimal sample preparation and short separation times
(< 5 min/run). Our data shows the benefits of using the four techniques combined,
since each of them alone is prone to delivering ambiguous results. For this
reason, a clear view on the rAAV interior can only be provided by using several
analytical methods simultaneously. This article is protected by copyright. All
rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1002/elps.202100302 
PMID: 34821392 

