
1. Prev Vet Med. 2021 Nov 5;198:105533. doi: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2021.105533. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Bovine Viral Diarrhea Virus within and herd prevalence on pasture-based dairy
systems, in southern Chile dairy farms.

Alocilla OA(1), Monti G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School, Faculty of Veterinary Sciences, Universidad Austral de Chile,
Chile. Electronic address: oscaralocilla@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Preventive Veterinary Medicine, Faculty of Veterinary Sciences, 
Universidad Austral de Chile, Chile.

Bovine Viral Diarrhea (BVD) is a ubiquitous endemic disease in most bovine
populations that causes a negative economic impact on cattle production systems. 
However, true herd and individual prevalence in Chile have not been estimated
based on statistical and epidemiological considerations and uncertainty regarding
the infection's extension at animal and herd levels. In addition, the risk
factors that can influence how the infection has spread among the cattle premises
have not been assessed yet. Therefore, the study aimed to estimate true herd and 
animal prevalence of active BVDV infection in pasture-based dairy herds and to
evaluate risk factors potentially associated with the status of herds and the
within-herd prevalence, using a Bayesian approach. A cross-sectional study was
performed over a random stratified (proportional to herd size) sample of
one-hundred and fifty dairy herds selected in Chile's two leading dairy regions
(Region de Los Ríos and Region de Los Lagos). We obtained 12.311 blood samples
from lactating cows, but 4.998 randomly selected samples were processed due to
budget constraints. For estimating BVDV Herd Prevalence (HP), a herd was
considered infected if at least one positive animal to Ag-ELISA was found. In
addition, a survey was completed on each farm, aiming to collect information to
assess the influence of some variables over the state of the herds; both
estimations were obtained using a Bayesian approach. True herd prevalence and
true individual prevalence of BVDV active infection were estimated at 77 % and
3.5 % respectively, no significant differences were found between characteristics
like herd size, location, vaccination, etc. Open herds and herds that mix herd
categories are more likely to have higher BVDV prevalence.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2021.105533 
PMID: 34826733 

