
1. Adv Clin Exp Med. 2021 Nov;30(11):1111-1114. doi: 10.17219/acem/144135.

Impacts of COVID-19 lockdowns on frailty and wellbeing in older people and those 
living with long-term conditions.

Holland C(1), Garner I(1), Simpson J(1), Eccles F(1), Pardo EN(2), Marr C(1),
Varey S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Ageing Research, Lancaster University, UK.
(2)School of Psychology, University of Valencia, Spain.

Lockdowns and social distancing have been important and successful strategies to 
limit the spread of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) virus. However,
excess deaths related to non-COVID-19 causes have been reported, suggesting
issues around availability and use of health services, particularly for people
with conditions needing ongoing medical support. In addition, evidence indicates 
that a range of age-related diseases and frailty are impacted by physical
activity and social engagement, both limited in lockdown situations. It is
therefore important to learn from the effects of lockdowns in order to limit any 
impacts, while still protecting people from the infection. This editorial
summarizes two research themes at the Centre for Ageing Research at Lancaster
University in the UK, one assessing impacts of lockdown for people living with a 
long-term neurodegenerative condition, Parkinson's disease, and one assessing
longitudinal impacts on frailty and wellbeing, with older adults aged over 70,
including those living with at least one long-term condition. Uncertainty related
to Parkinson's disease and to COVID-19 amplified each other, and cancelled
clinical appointments and limitations on physical activity had very significant
impacts on wellbeing for this group. In the longitudinal study, frailty was more 
severe during lockdown periods. While lockdowns reduce spread of the virus,
becoming frailer could make older adults more vulnerable to the effects of the
virus during these periods. Regular exercise during lockdown had beneficial
effects aiding recovery once restrictions relaxed. These studies suggest factors 
that could lessen negative impacts of future lockdowns. Maintaining physical
activity and providing access to health services during periods of lockdown are
suggested as priorities.

DOI: 10.17219/acem/144135 
PMID: 34821484  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

