
1. Am J Case Rep. 2021 Nov 25;22:e933225. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.933225.

A Case of COVID-19-Associated Free-Floating Aortic Thrombus Successfully Treated 
with Thrombectomy.

Dao L(1), Lund A(1), Schibler CD(1), Yoshioka CA(1), Barsky M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hospital Medicine, UC Irvine Medical Center, Orange, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND COVID-19 caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection has been associated with a
hypercoagulable state in which patients can be at risk for developing venous and 
arterial thromboembolic events at a rate as high as 31%. A free-floating aortic
thrombus (FFT) is a rare life-threatening complication of a hypercoagulable
state. These thrombi require medical, endovascular, or surgical treatment. The
optimal treatment modality for FFT occurring in the setting of COVID-19 remains
unknown. We present a patient with a COVID-19-associated free-floating descending
aortic thrombus that was treated with percutaneous vacuum-assisted thrombectomy
(angio-VAC). CASE REPORT A 61-year-old man presented to the hospital with dyspnea
and hypoxia and was diagnosed with severe COVID-19 pneumonia. Initial chest
computed tomography angiography (CTA) did not show pulmonary emboli or thrombi.
Inflammatory markers (D-dimer, lactate dehydrogenase, ferritin, fibrinogen) were 
tracked every other day. After several measurements of decreasing D-dimer values,
there was a noticeable increase in D-dimer level and continued dependence on high
levels of supplemental oxygen. A repeat chest CTA showed an FFT, confirmed by
transesophageal echocardiogram. Cardiothoracic surgery and interventional
radiology teams performed successful angio-VAC percutaneous removal, confirmed
with intravascular ultrasound. The patient was subsequently discharged with a
3-month supply of apixaban. CONCLUSIONS Minimally invasive endovascular removal
of an FFT is a therapeutic option, as anticoagulation alone carries the risk of
partial lysis and repeat embolization. Clinicians can consider this endovascular 
treatment option paired with therapeutic anticoagulation. Further guidelines on
monitoring and treatment of possible COVID-19-associated thrombosis are needed,
particularly when the risk of embolization is high.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.933225 
PMID: 34822708  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

