
1. Sci Total Environ. 2021 Nov 24:151919. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.151919.
[Epub ahead of print]

Enhanced decay of coronaviruses in sewers with domestic wastewater.

Shi J(1), Li X(2), Zhang S(2), Sharma E(2), Sivakumar M(2), Sherchan SP(3), Jiang
G(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Civil, Mining and Environmental Engineering, University of
Wollongong, Australia; Illawarra Health and Medical Research Institute (IHMRI),
University of Wollongong, Wollongong, Australia.
(2)School of Civil, Mining and Environmental Engineering, University of
Wollongong, Australia.
(3)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Tulane University, New Orleans,
LA 70112, USA.
(4)School of Civil, Mining and Environmental Engineering, University of
Wollongong, Australia; Illawarra Health and Medical Research Institute (IHMRI),
University of Wollongong, Wollongong, Australia. Electronic address:
gjiang@uow.edu.au.

Recent outbreaks caused by coronaviruses and their supposed potential fecal-oral 
transmission highlight the need for understanding the survival of infectious
coronavirus in domestic sewers. To date, the survivability and decay of
coronaviruses were predominately studied using small volumes of wastewater
(normally 5-30 mL) in vials (in-vial tests). However, real sewers are more
complicated than bulk wastewater (wastewater matrix only), in particular the
presence of sewer biofilms and different operational conditions. This study
investigated the decay of infectious human coronavirus 229E (HCoV-229E) and
feline infectious peritonitis virus (FIPV), two typical surrogate coronaviruses, 
in laboratory-scale reactors mimicking the gravity (GS, gravity-driven sewers)
and rising main sewers (RM, pressurized sewers) with and without sewer biofilms. 
The in-sewer decay of both coronaviruses was greatly enhanced in comparison to
those reported in bulk wastewater through in-vial tests. 99% of HCoV-229E and
FIPV decayed within 2 h under either GS or RM conditions with biofilms, in
contrast to 6-10 h without biofilms. There is limited difference in the decay of 
HCoV and FIPV in reactors operated as RM or GS, with the T90 and T99 difference
of 7-10 min and 14-20 min, respectively. The decay of both coronaviruses in sewer
biofilm reactors can be simulated by biphasic first-order kinetic models, with
the first-order rate constant 2-4 times higher during the first phase than the
second phase. The decay of infectious HCoV and FIPV was significantly faster in
the reactors with sewer biofilms than in the reactors without biofilms,
suggesting an enhanced decay of these surrogate viruses due to the presence of
biofilms and related processes. The mechanism of biofilms in virus adsorption and
potential inactivation remains unclear and requires future investigations. The
results indicate that the survivability of infectious coronaviruses detected
using bulk wastewater overestimated the infectivity risk of coronavirus during
wastewater transportations in sewers or the downstream treatment.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.151919 
PMCID: PMC8610560
PMID: 34826473 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

