
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021 Nov 25. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14404. [Epub ahead of print]

Global potential distribution of three underappreciated arboviruses vectors
(Aedes japonicus, Ae. vexans, and Ae. vittatus) under current and future climate 
conditions.

Abdelkrim O(1), Said Z(1)(2), Souad L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Lutte contre les Maladies Infectieuses, Department of Medical
Biology, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cadi Ayyad University, PO Box 7010,
Marrakech, Morocco.
(2)Laboratory of bacteriology-virology, Avicienne Hospital Military, Marrakech,
Morocco.

Arboviruses (arthropod-borne viruses) are expanding their geographic range,
posing significant health threats to millions of people worldwide. This expansion
is associated with efficient and suitable vector availability. Apart from the
well-known Aedes aegypti and Ae. albopictus, other Aedes species may potentially 
promote the geographic spread of arboviruses because these viruses have similar
vector requirements. Aedes japonicus, Ae. vexans, and Ae. vittatus are a growing 
concern, given their potential and known vector competence for several
arboviruses, including dengue, chikungunya, and zika viruses. In the present
study, we developed detailed maps of their global potential distributions under
both current and future (2050) climate conditions, using an ecological niche
modeling approach (Maxent). Under present-day conditions, Ae. japonicus and Ae.
vexans have suitable areas in the northeastern United States, across Europe, and 
in southeastern China, whereas the tropical regions of South America, Africa, and
Asia are more suitable for Ae. vittatus. Future scenarios anticipated range
changes for the three species, with each expected to expand into new areas that
are currently not suitable. By 2050, Ae. japonicus will have a broader potential 
distribution across much of Europe, the United States, western Russia, and
central Asia. Aedes vexans may be able to expand its range, especially in Libya, 
Egypt, and southern Australia. For Ae. vittatus, future projections indicated
areas at risk in sub-Saharan Africa and the Middle East. As such, these species
deserve as much attention as Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus when processing
arboviruses risk assessments and our findings may help to better understand the
potential distribution of each species. This article is protected by copyright.
All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14404 
PMID: 34821477 

