
1. Healthcare (Basel). 2021 Nov 12;9(11). pii: 1546. doi: 10.3390/healthcare9111546.

Back to the Future? Immunoglobulin Therapy for Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic 
Fatigue Syndrome.

Brownlie H(1), Speight N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Independent Researcher and Former Local Government Officer, Social Policy and 
Research, Glasgow G2 4P, UK.
(2)Paediatrician and Independent Researcher, Durham DH1 1QN, UK.

The findings of controlled trials on use of intravenous immunoglobulin G (IV IgG)
to treat myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) are
generally viewed as representing mixed results. On detailed review, a clearer
picture emerges, which suggests that the potential therapeutic value of this
intervention has been underestimated. Our analysis is consistent with the
propositions that: (1) IgG is highly effective for a proportion of patients with 
severe and well-characterised ME/CFS; (2) responders can be predicted with a high
degree of accuracy based on markers of immune dysfunction. Rigorous steps were
taken in the research trials to record adverse events, with transient symptom
exacerbation commonly experienced in both intervention and placebo control
groups, suggesting that this reflected the impact of participation on people with
an illness characterised by post-exertional symptom exacerbation. Worsening of
certain specific symptoms, notably headache, did occur more commonly with IgG and
may have been concomitant to effective treatment, being associated with clinical 
improvement. The findings emerging from this review are supported by clinical
observations relating to treatment of patients with severe and very severe
ME/CFS, for whom intramuscular and subcutaneous administration provide
alternative options. We conclude that: (1) there is a strong case for this area
of research to be revived; (2) pending further research, clinicians would be
justified in offering a course of IgG to selected ME/CFS patients at the more
severe end of the spectrum. As the majority of trial participants had experienced
an acute viral or viral-like onset, we further suggest that IgG treatment may be 
pertinent to the care of some patients who remain ill following infection with
SARS-CoV-2 virus.

DOI: 10.3390/healthcare9111546 
PMCID: PMC8623195
PMID: 34828592 

