
1. Animals (Basel). 2021 Nov 5;11(11). pii: 3170. doi: 10.3390/ani11113170.

Development and Evaluation of a Nested PCR for Improved Diagnosis and Genetic
Analysis of Peste des Petits Ruminants Virus (PPRV) for Future Use in Nascent PPR
Eradication Programme.

Mahapatra M(1), Neto MM(1), Khunti A(1), Njeumi F(2), Parida S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Pirbright Institute, Ash Road, Pirbright, Woking GU24 0NF, UK.
(2)Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Viale delle
Terme di Caracalla, 00153 Rome, Italy.

Peste des petits ruminants (PPR) is a highly contagious viral disease of small
ruminants caused by PPR virus (PPRV). PPR is endemic in Asia, the Middle East and
across large areas of Africa and is currently targeted for global eradication by 
2030. The virus exists as four different lineages that are usually limited to
specific geographical areas. However, recent reports of spread of PPRV, in
particular of lineage IV viruses to infection-free countries and previously PPR
endemic areas are noteworthy. A rapid and accurate laboratory diagnosis and
reports on its epidemiological linkage for virus spread play a major role in the 
effective control and eradication of the disease. Currently, molecular assays,
including conventional reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
and real-time RT-PCR (RT-qPCR) are usually used for diagnosis of PPR while the
sequencing of part of the nucleocapsid gene is usually carried out for the viral 
lineage identification. However, it is difficult to diagnose and sequence the
genetic material if the animal excreted a low level of virus at the initial stage
of infection or if the PPRV is degraded during the long-distance transportation
of samples to the reference laboratories. This study describes the development of
a novel nested RT-PCR assay for the detection of the PPRV nucleic acid by
targeting the N-protein gene, compares the performance of the assay with the
existing conventional RT-PCR and also provides good-quality DNA suitable for
sequencing in order to identify circulating lineages. The assay was evaluated
using cell culture propagated PPRVs, field samples from clinically infected
animals and samples from experimentally infected animals encompassing all four
lineages (I-IV) of PPRV. This assay provides a solution with an easy, accurate,
rapid and cost-effective PPR diagnostic and partial genome sequencing for use in 
resource-limited settings.

DOI: 10.3390/ani11113170 
PMCID: PMC8614562
PMID: 34827902 

