
1. Insects. 2021 Oct 26;12(11). pii: 967. doi: 10.3390/insects12110967.

An Updated Review of the Invasive Aedes albopictus in the Americas; Geographical 
Distribution, Host Feeding Patterns, Arbovirus Infection, and the Potential for
Vertical Transmission of Dengue Virus.

Garcia-Rejon JE(1), Navarro JC(2), Cigarroa-Toledo N(3), Baak-Baak CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Regionales, Laboratorio de Arbovirologia,
Universidad Autonoma de Yucatan, Merida 97069, Yucatan, Mexico.
(2)Grupo de Investigación en Enfermedades Emergentes, Desatendidas,
Ecopidemiología y Biodiversidad, Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad
Internacional SEK, Quito 170107, Ecuador.
(3)Centro de Investigaciones Regionales, Laboratorio de Biología Celular,
Universidad Autonoma de Yucatan, Merida 97069, Yucatan, Mexico.

Aedes (Stegomyia) albopictus is a mosquito native to Southeast Asia. Currently,
it has a wide distribution in America, where natural infection with arboviruses
of medical and veterinary importance has been reported. In spite of their
importance in the transmission of endemic arbovirus, the basic information of
parameters affecting their vectorial capacity is poorly investigated. The aim of 
the work was to update the distribution range of Ae. albopictus in the Americas, 
review the blood-feeding patterns, and compare the minimum infection rate (MIR)
of the Dengue virus (DENV) between studies of vertical and horizontal
transmission. The current distribution of Ae. albopictus encompasses 21 countries
in the Americas. An extensive review has been conducted for the blood-feeding
patterns of Ae. albopictus. The results suggest that the mosquito is capable of
feeding on 16 species of mammals and five species of avian. Humans, dogs, and
rats are the most common hosts. Eight arboviruses with the potential to infect
humans and animals have been isolated in Ae. albopictus. In the United States of 
America (USA), Eastern equine encephalitis virus, Keystone virus, La Crosse
Virus, West Nile virus, and Cache Valley virus were isolated in the Asian
mosquito. In Brazil, Mexico, Colombia, and Costa Rica, DENV (all serotypes) has
been frequently identified in field-caught Ae. albopictus. Overall, the estimated
MIR in Ae. albopictus infected with DENV is similar between horizontal (10.95)
and vertical transmission (8.28). However, in vertical transmission, there is a
difference in the MIR values if the DENV is identified from larvae or adults
(males and females emerged from a collection of eggs or larvae). MIR estimated
from larvae is 14.04 and MIR estimated in adults is 4.04. In conclusion, it has
to be highlighted that Ae. albopictus is an invasive mosquito with wide
phenotypic plasticity to adapt to broad and new areas, it is highly efficient to 
transmit the DENV horizontally and vertically, it can participate in the
inter-endemic transmission of the dengue disease, and it can spread zoonotic
arboviruses across forest and urban settings.

DOI: 10.3390/insects12110967 
PMCID: PMC8621292
PMID: 34821768 

