
1. Future Oncol. 2021 Nov 25. doi: 10.2217/fon-2021-0802. [Epub ahead of print]

Oncolytic virotherapy as promising immunotherapy against cancer: mechanisms of
resistance to oncolytic viruses.

Goradel NH(1), Alizadeh A(2), Hosseinzadeh S(3), Taghipour M(4), Ghesmati Z(5),
Arashkia A(6), Negahdari B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnology, School of Advanced Technologies in
Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Shahid Chamran University of Ahvaz, Ahvaz, Iran.
(3)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Ardabil
University of Medical Sciences, Iran.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Agriculture & Natural Resources, Imam 
Khomeini International University, Qazvin, Iran.
(5)Department of Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Advanced Medical Sciences,
Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(6)Department of Molecular Virology, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.

Oncolytic virotherapy has currently emerged as a powerful therapeutic approach in
cancer treatment. Although the history of using viruses goes back to the early
20th century, the approval of talimogene laherparepvec (T-VEC) in 2015 increased 
interest in oncolytic viruses (OVs). OVs are multifaceted biotherapeutic agents
because they replicate in and kill tumor cells and augment immune responses by
releasing immunostimulatory molecules from lysed cells. Despite promising
results, some limitations hinder the efficacy of oncolytic virotherapy. The
delivery challenges and the upregulation of checkpoints following oncolytic
virotherapy also mediate resistance to OVs by diminishing immune responses.
Furthermore, the localization of receptors of viruses in the tight junctions,
interferon responses, and the aberrant expression of genes involved in the cell
cycle of the virus, including their infection and replication, reduce the
efficacy of OVs. In this review, we present different mechanisms of resistance to
OVs and strategies to overcome them.

plain-language-summary: Lay abstract Using viruses in the treatment of cancer
goes back to the early 20th century. One of the promising fields in cancer
virotherapy is viruses’ ability to preferentially lysis tumor cells, either
naturally or genetically engineered cells; these viruses are termed ‘oncolytic
viruses.’ As with other therapeutic strategies, resistance to the oncolytic
viruses is the main challenge in their application in clinical trials. This
review summarizes the mechanisms of resistance to oncolytic viruses and the
strategies that have been used to overcome these challenges.
DOI: 10.2217/fon-2021-0802 
PMID: 34821517 

