
1. J Med Virol. 2021 Nov 26. doi: 10.1002/jmv.27480. [Epub ahead of print]

Intestinal viral infections of nSARS-CoV2 in the Indian community: Risk of virus 
spread in India.

Maan HS(1), Chaurasia D(2), Kapoor G(2), Dave L(3), Siddiqui A(4), Pal S(5),
Singh HO(6), Biswas D(7), Chowdhary R(8).

Author information: 
(1)State Virology Laboratory, Department of Microbiology, Gandhi Medical College,
Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Gandhi Medical College, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh,
India.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Gandhi Medical College, Bhopal, Madhya
Pradesh, India.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, Barkatullah University, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh,
India.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, Uttar
Pradesh, India.
(6)Division of Molecular Biology, Indian Council of Medical Research, National
AIDS Research Institute, Pune, Maharashtra, India.
(7)Department of Microbiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences Bhopal,
Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India.
(8)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences Bhopal,
Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India.

In December 2019, novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(nSARS-CoV-2) virus outbreaks emerged from Wuhan, China, and spread all over the 
world, including India. Molecular diagnosis of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID)
19 for densely and highly populated countries like India is time-consuming. A few
reports have described the successful diagnosis of nSARS-CoV-2 virus from sewage 
and wastewater samples contaminated with fecal matter, suggesting the diagnosis
of COVID 19 from the same to raise an alarm about the community transmission of
virus for implementation of evacuation and lockdown strategies. So far, the
association between the detection of virus and its concentration in stool samples
with severity of the disease and the presence or absence of gastrointestinal
symptoms have been rarely reported. We led the search utilizing multiple
databases, specifically PubMed (Medline), EMBASE, and Google Scholar. We
conducted a literature survey on gastrointestinal infection and the spread of
this virus through fecal-oral transmission. Reports suggested that the existence 
and persistence of nSARS-CoV-2 in anal/rectal swabs and stool specimens for a
longer period of time than in nasopharyngeal swabs provides a strong tenable
outcome of gastrointestinal contamination and dissemination of this infection via
potential fecal-oral transmission. This review may be helpful to conduct further 
studies to address the enteric involvement and excretion of nSARS-CoV-2 RNA in
feces and control the community spread in both COVID-19 patients ahead of the
onset of symptoms and in asymptomatic individuals through wastewater and sewage
surveillance as an early indication of infection. The existence of the viral
genome and active viral particle actively participate in genomic variations.
Hence, we comprehended the enteric spread of different viruses amongst
communities with special reference to nSARS-CoV-2.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.27480 
PMID: 34825708 

