
1. Clin Ter. 2021 Nov 22;172(6):559-563. doi: 10.7417/CT.2021.2378.

I-PHAN Study - Use of E-learning modules to Promote Physical activity and
wellness among Nurses in order to improve mental and physical health: A research 
protocol for a randomized controlled trial.

Okechukwu CE(1), Gholamalishahi S(1), Ganjali H(1), Marte M(1), Minorenti M(1),
Filomeno L(1), Di Mario S(1), Mannocci A(2), Masala D(3), La Torre G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public health and Infectious Diseases, Sapienza University of
Rome, Italy.
(2)Faculty of Economics, Universitas Mer-catorum, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Catanzaro "Magna
Graecia", Catanzaro, Italy.

Aim: To develop and test the effectiveness of an E-learning program for promoting
physical activity (PA) and wellness among nurses.
Background: Restrictions during the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic drastically
changed many people's lives. Maintaining a healthy lifestyle is an everyday
challenge faced by the general popula-tion. Nurses are one of the health care
professionals who are typically well-educated in taking care of patients. There
are studies that show that night shifts, extended shifts, and obesity have a
correlation with the prevalence of acute low back pain among female nurses. PA is
the key factor in the prevention and treatment of many chronic diseases,
resulting in an improvement in the quality of life. The impact of social media
and technology on our lives is undeniable in the modern era.
Design: This study will be a single-centre, single-blind, randomi-zed controlled 
trial executed on an E-learning platform to provide the control and intervention 
groups with a distance learning program. Par-ticipants will be randomly assigned 
to either the control or intervention group. Participants in the control group
will only sign up for module 1 of the PA modules, which only comprises
information on PA and health promotion. On the other hand, the participants in
the intervention group are expected to carry out 3 modules of exercises at home
three days a week for a total duration of 8 weeks. The exercises will be
performed at moderate intensity (5-6 on the Borg CR10 Scale).
Ethical issues: This trial will comply with the declaration of Helsinki 1975, as 
revised in 2000. Informed written consent will be obtained from the participants.
The Sapienza University of Rome, institutional ethics committee and review board 
approval will be requested for this study.
Conclusion: Establishing an online PA program with good quality, such as a high
level of convenience in access and use, simplified, easy to practice, and made
available on social media, can minimize the difficulties faced previously in the 
implementation of an online PA program for nurses, and may enhance the health and
wellbeing of many nurses in healthcare institutions.

DOI: 10.7417/CT.2021.2378 
PMID: 34821352  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

