
1. J Eval Clin Pract. 2021 Nov 25. doi: 10.1111/jep.13640. [Epub ahead of print]

The danger of the single storyline obfuscating the complexities of managing
SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19.

Sturmberg J(1)(2), Paul E(3), Van Damme W(4), Ridde V(5), Brown GW(6), Kalk A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of General Practice, College of Health, Medicine and Wellbeing,
University of Newcastle, Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia.
(2)Foundation President-International Society for Systems and Complexity Sciences
for Health.
(3)School of Public Health, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.
(4)Department of Public Health, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium.
(5)CEPED, Institute for Research on Sustainable Development (IRD), ERL INSERM
SAGESUD, IRD-Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(6)Colead-Global Health, School of Politics and International Studies (POLIS),
University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
(7)Kinshasa Country Office, Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale
Zusammenarbeit, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie showed how a single story is limited and thereby
distorts the true nature of an issue. During this COVID-19 pandemic there have
been, at least, three consecutive single stories-the 'lethal threat' story,
followed by the 'economic threat' story, and finally the 'vaccine miracle' story.
None of these single stories can convincingly and permanently capture the
dynamics of the pandemic. This is because countries experienced different
morbidity and mortality patterns, different socioeconomic disadvantage, age and
vulnerability of population, timing and level of lockdown with economic
variability, and, despite heavy promotion, vaccines were beset with a significant
and variable degree of hesitancy. Lack of transparency, coherence and consistency
of pandemic management-arising from holding on to single storylines-showed the
global deficiency of public health policy and planning, an underfunding of
(public) health and social services, and a growing distrust in governments'
ability to manage crises effectively. Indeed, the global management has increased
already large inequities, and little has been learnt to address the growing
crises of more infectious and potentially more lethal virus mutations. Holding
onto single stories prevents the necessary learnings to understand and manage the
complexities of 'wicked' problems, whereas listening to the many stories provides
insights and pathways to do so effectively as well as efficiently.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jep.13640 
PMID: 34825442 

