
1. J Inflamm Res. 2021 Nov 19;14:6055-6065. doi: 10.2147/JIR.S338914. eCollection
2021.

Phenotypes, Lung Microbiota and Cytokine Responses in Pneumonia After
Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation.

Hu Y(1), Jiang Y(1), Liu S(1), Shen J(2), An Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Peking University
International Hospital, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Peking University People's Hospital,
Beijing, People's Republic of China.

Objective: We aim to identify phenotypes of hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation (HSCT) patients with pneumonia, discover relations of microbiota 
composition, cytokine profile, and outcomes between phenotypes. Specific
cytokines will be evaluated for their role in lung injury in a murine model.
Methods: HSCT patients with pneumonia were included, and clustering of variables 
including cytokine levels provided the phenotypes. Outcomes were compared between
phenotypes. Analysis of lung microbiota identified marker species of phenotypes. 
In the murine model, marker species-related cytokine regulations and the role of 
cytokines in lung injury were evaluated.
Results: Seventy-two patients were included, and two phenotypes were identified, 
namely "reactive" (N=21) and "nonreactive" (N=51) phenotype. Compared to their
counterparts, patients with nonreactive phenotype had lower serum IL-6, IL-8,
less severe inflammation, worse outcomes and more viruses as marker species in
lung microbiota. The animal study validated the pathogens specific cytokine
responses that presented in the human study and the potential protective role of 
IL-6 in these patients.
Conclusion: HSCT patients with pneumonia can be clustered into two phenotypes
with different marker species and outcomes: the "nonreactive" phenotype and the
"reactive" phenotype. Serum cytokine levels were different between the two
phenotypes, which indicate the existence of the pathogen-related cytokine
responses. For patients with the "nonreactive" phenotype, IL-6 therapy may
improve their prognosis, which should be further tested in clinical studies.

© 2021 Hu et al.

DOI: 10.2147/JIR.S338914 
PMCID: PMC8610763
PMID: 34824541 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflict of interests.

