
1. One Health. 2021 Nov 10;13:100348. doi: 10.1016/j.onehlt.2021.100348. eCollection
2021 Dec.

Genetic diversity of Dengue virus serotypes circulating among Aedes mosquitoes in
selected regions of northeastern Nigeria.

Isa I(1), Ndams IS(1)(2), Aminu M(3), Chechet G(4)(2), Dotzauer A(5), Simon
AY(2)(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria.
(2)Africa Centre of Excellence for Neglected Tropical Diseases & Forensic
Biotechnology, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria.
(5)Laboratory of Virus Research University of Bremen, Germany.
(6)Center for Blood Research and Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(7)National Centers for Animal Disease Research, Lethbridge Laboratory, Science
Branch, Canadian Food Inspection Agency, Government of Canada, Lethbridge,
Alberta, Canada.

The flaviviruses are mosquito borne pathogens that continue to pose a
considerable public health risk to animals and humans. The members of this group 
includes, Dengue virus (DENV), Yellow fever virus (YVF), Japanese encephalitis
virus (JEV), West Nile virus (WEV) and Zika virus (ZKV). The DENV mosquito vector
is endemic to tropical and subtropical climates, placing ∼40% of the world's
population at direct risk of dengue infection. Currently, in Nigeria the status
of DENV serotypes circulating among mosquito vectors is unknown. Our study was
designed to identify and characterize the DENV serotypes circulating in Aedes
mosquito populations collected in selected sites in Nigeria. The mosquitoes were 
collected and identified morphologically to species level using colored
identification keys of Rueda. Generally, each species identified was tested in
pools of 20 individuals of each Aedes species. RT-PCR and semi nested PCR were
used to detect DENV serotypes in mosquitoes and characterized using Sanger
sequencing methods. The results showed that DENV serotypes were detected in
58.54% (24/41) of the pools of Aedes mosquitoes from Mubi, Numan and Yola
screened. All DENV1-4 serotypes were detected in Ae. aegypti. While DENV 1, 2 and
4 were detected in Ae. albopictus. And only DENV 2 was detected in Ae. galloisi
with DENV4 serotype being reported for the first time in Nigeria. DENV2 (37.8%)
was the most detected serotypes, while double and triple co-infections of
serotypes were detected in 24.4% of the pools. Phylogenetic analysis revealed a
strong evolutionary relatedness of DENV serotypes in our study with that of South
and Southeast Asia, North America, and other African countries. This is the first
reports on the natural DENV serotypes co-infection among Aedes species pools in
Nigeria, which can create possible interaction with other flaviviruses causing
animal and human diseases. In addition, our study postulates the possible linkage
between DENV serotypes infection and human febrile flu-like disease burden being 
experienced by host communities in northeastern Nigeria.

© 2021 Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.onehlt.2021.100348 
PMCID: PMC8605110
PMID: 34825044 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests

