
1. Vaccine. 2021 Nov 22. pii: S0264-410X(21)01325-6. doi:
10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.017. [Epub ahead of print]

T cell and memory B cell responses in tetravalent DNA, tetravalent inactivated
and tetravalent live-attenuated prime-boost dengue vaccines in rhesus macaques.

Sun P(1), Jani V(2), Johnson A(3), Cheng Y(4), Nagabhushana N(2), Williams M(5), 
Morrison BJ(6), Defang G(7).

Author information: 
(1)Naval Medical Research Center, Silver Spring, MD, United States. Electronic
address: peifang.sun2.civ@mail.mil.
(2)Henry Jackson Foundation for the Advancement of Military Medicine, Bethesda,
MD, United States.
(3)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals, Inc, CT, United States.
(4)Leidos, VA, United States.
(5)Chemistry Division, US Naval Research Laboratory, DC, United States.
(6)United States Air Force, JBSA-Randolph, TX, United States.
(7)Naval Medical Research Center, Silver Spring, MD, United States.

We previously reported the efficacy of prime-boost vaccination using three
tetravalent (T) dengue vaccines, DNA (TDNA), purified inactivated vaccine (TPIV),
and live attenuated vaccine (TLAV). We demonstrated that the TPIV/TLAV
prime-boost vaccination yielded the highest and most durable neutralizing
antibodies and 100% protection to all 4 serotypes of dengue virus in rhesus
macaques. This study compares gene transcription, T and B cell responses elicited
by these prime-boost combinations in rhesus macaques. This study shows that the
TLAV vaccine increased the expression of the innate immune genes, DDX58 and TLR7,
IL1A, IL1B, TNF, CXCL8, CXCL10, IRF1, IRF7, and IFNB, more robustly as compared
to TDNA and TPIV vaccines. Overall, two doses of TDNA and one dose of TLAV
efficiently elicited a T cell IFNγ response to PrM/E with a comparable magnitude.
Compared to TDNA vaccine, the TLAV vaccine elicited additional IFNγ response to
C, NS1, NS3, and NS5. The TPIV vaccine alone produced poor IFNγ response;
however, the TLAV significantly boosted its IFNγ response. The T cell response
repertoire associated with TPIV/TLAV prime-boost was to both the structural
C/PrM/E and NS proteins, and the T cells were multifunctional as the CD4+ T cells
produced IFNγ, TNF α, and IL2 and the CD8+ cells produced TNF α and IFNγ.
Opposite to the pattern of CMI, the TPIV vaccine alone elicited the highest BMem 
compared to the other two vaccines, which continuously remained as the highest
after boosting. In summary, the TDNA and TLAV vaccines elicited a strong T cell
response whereas the TPIV vaccine elicited a superior BMem. The T cell response
of the TPIV vaccine was significantly boosted by the TLAV vaccine. The elevated T
cell response may have provided T cell help for a sustained antibody response for
TPIV/TLAV vaccines, which is required for a protective immunity against a live
virus challenge.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.10.017 
PMID: 34823910 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

