
1. Vet Microbiol. 2021 Nov 10;264:109277. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2021.109277. [Epub
ahead of print]

Molecular chaperone TRiC governs avian reovirus replication by protecting
outer-capsid protein σC and inner core protein σA and non-structural protein σNS 
from ubiquitin- proteasome degradation.

Huang WR(1), Li JY(1), Liao TL(2), Yeh CM(3), Wang CY(4), Wen HW(5), Hu NJ(6), Wu
YY(1), Hsu CY(7), Chang YK(8), Chang CD(9), Nielsen BL(10), Liu HJ(11).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung,
Taiwan; The iEGG and Animal Biotechnology Center, National Chung Hsing
University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Medical Research, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, 
Taiwan; Rong Hsing Research Center for Translational Medicine, National Chung
Hsing University, Taichung, Taiwan; Ph.D Program in Translational Medicine,
National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, 402, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Molecular Biology, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung,
Taiwan; Bioproduction Reearch Institute, National Institute of Advanced
Industrial Science and Technology, Tsukaba, Japan.
(4)The iEGG and Animal Biotechnology Center, National Chung Hsing University,
Taichung, Taiwan; Department of Veterinary Medicine, National Chung Hsing
University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Food Science and Biotechnology, National Chung Hsing University,
Taichung, Taiwan.
(6)Institute of Biochemistry, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(7)Ph.D Program in Translational Medicine, National Chung Hsing University,
Taichung, 402, Taiwan; Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, Tung's
Taichung MetroHarbor Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Medical Research, Tung's Taichung MetroHarbor Hospital,
Taichung, Taiwan; Depertment of Nursing, Jen-Teh Junior College of Medicine and
Management, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Veterinary Medicine, National Pingtung University of Science and
Technology, Pingtung, Taiwan.
(10)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Brigham Young University,
Provo, UT, USA.
(11)Institute of Molecular Biology, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung,
Taiwan; The iEGG and Animal Biotechnology Center, National Chung Hsing
University, Taichung, Taiwan; Rong Hsing Research Center for Translational
Medicine, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, Taiwan; Ph.D Program in
Translational Medicine, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, 402, Taiwan;
Department of Life Sciences, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, Taiwan.
Electronic address: hjliu5257@nchu.edu.tw.

Avian reoviruses (ARVs) are important pathogens that cause considerable economic 
losses in poultry farming. To date, host factors that control stabilization of
ARV proteins remain largely unknown. In this work we determined that the
eukaryotic chaperonin T-complex protein-1 (TCP-1) ring complex (TRiC) is
essential for avian reovirus (ARV) replication by stabilizing outer-capsid
protein σC, inner core protein σA, and the non-structural protein σNS of ARV.
TriC serves as a chaperone of viral proteins and prevent their degradation via
the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Furthermore, reciprocal co-immunoprecipitation 
assays confirmed the association of viral proteins (σA, σC, and σNS) with TRiC.
Immunofluorescence staining indicated that the TRiC chaperonins (CCT2 and CCT5)
are colocalized with viral proteins σC, σA, and σNS of ARV. In this study,
inhibition of TRiC chaperonins (CCT2 and CCT5) by the inhibitor HSF1A or shRNAs
significantly reduced expression levels of the σC, σA, and σNS proteins of ARV as
well as virus yield, suggesting that the TRiC complex functions in stabilization 
of viral proteins and virus replication. This study provides novel insights into 
TRiC chaperonin governing virus replication via stabilization of outer-capsid
protein σC, inner core protein σA, and the non-structural protein σNS of ARV.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2021.109277 
PMID: 34826648 

