
1. Proteins. 2021 Nov 26. doi: 10.1002/prot.26286. [Epub ahead of print]

Substrate-Assisted Activation and Selectivity of the Bacterial RavD Effector
Deubiquitinylase.

Schulze-Niemand E(1)(2), Naumann M(1), Stein M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Experimental Internal Medicine, Medical Faculty,
Otto-von-Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany.
(2)Molecular Simulations and Design Group, Max Planck Institute for Dynamics of
Complex Technical Systems, Magdeburg, Germany.

Deubiquitinylases (DUBs) catalyze the specific cleavage of ubiquitin linkages at 
distinct protein substrates. Pathogens from viruses and bacteria independently
developed effector proteins with DUB activity to mimic host DUB functions and
circumvent immune responses. The effector protein RavD from Legionella
pneumophila cleaves linear ubiquitin chains with an exclusive methionine-1
selectivity. It thus performs as a functional analogue of the human DUB OTULIN,
which achieves its selectivity only via a specialized proximal ubiquitin S1'
binding site as well as a substrate-assisted activation of the catalytic triad.
An analysis of the crystal structures of bacterial RavD in its free and
di-ubiquitin-bound forms in order to rationalize the structural basis for its
selectivity and activation mechanism is not fully conclusive. As these
ambiguities might arise from the introduced double mutation of the di-ubiquitin
substrate in the RavD-di-ubiquitin complex crystal structure, biomolecular
modeling and molecular dynamics sampling (1-2 μs for each system) were employed
to reconstitute the physiological RavD-di-ubiquitin complex. The simulations show
that the distal S1 ubiquitin binding sites of RavD and OTULIN are similar in
terms of interface area, composition and ubiquitin binding affinity. The proximal
S1' site of RavD, in contrast, is significantly smaller and ubiquitin binding is 
weaker and more flexible than in OTULIN. Upon substrate access, the residues of
the catalytic triad of RavD show a reduction of flexibility and a conformational 
transition towards a catalytically active state. Thus, the enzymatic activation
of RavD is presumably also substrate-assisted and a clear rationale for the
common M1-substrate selectivity.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.26286 
PMID: 34825414 

