
1. Ecol Evol. 2021 Nov 9;11(22):16327-16343. doi: 10.1002/ece3.8332. eCollection
2021 Nov.

Larval sites of the mosquito Aedes aegypti formosus in forest and domestic
habitats in Africa and the potential association with oviposition evolution.

Xia S(1), Dweck HKM(2), Lutomiah J(3), Sang R(3), McBride CS(4)(5), Rose
NH(4)(5), Ayala D(6)(7), Powell JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology Yale University New Haven
Connecticut USA.
(2)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology Yale University
New Haven Connecticut USA.
(3)Arbovirus/Viral Hemorrhagic Fever Laboratory Center for Virus Research Kenya
Medical Research Institute Nairobi Kenya.
(4)Department of Ecology & Evolutionary Biology Princeton University Princeton
New Jersey USA.
(5)Princeton Neuroscience Institute Princeton University Princeton New Jersey
USA.
(6)UMR MIVEGEC Univ. Montpellier CNRS IRD Montpellier France.
(7)CIRMF Franceville Gabon.

Adaptations to anthropogenic domestic habitats contribute to the success of the
mosquito Aedes aegypti as a major global vector of several arboviral diseases.
The species inhabited African forests before expanding into domestic habitats and
spreading to other continents. Despite a well-studied evolutionary history, how
this species initially moved into human settlements in Africa remains unclear.
During this initial habitat transition, African Ae. aegypti switched their larval
sites from natural water containers like tree holes to artificial containers like
clay pots. Little is known about how these natural versus artificial containers
differ in their characteristics. Filling this knowledge gap could provide
valuable information for studying the evolution of Ae. aegypti associated with
larval habitat changes. As an initial effort, in this study, we characterized the
microenvironments of Ae. aegypti larval sites in forest and domestic habitats in 
two African localities: La Lopé, Gabon, and Rabai, Kenya. Specifically, we
measured the physical characteristics, microbial density, bacterial composition, 
and volatile chemical profiles of multiple larval sites. In both localities,
comparisons between natural containers in the forests and artificial containers
in the villages revealed significantly different microenvironments. We next
examined whether the between-habitat differences in larval site microenvironments
lead to differences in oviposition, a key behavior affecting larval distribution.
Forest Ae. aegypti readily accepted the artificial containers we placed in the
forests. Laboratory choice experiments also did not find distinct oviposition
preferences between forest and village Ae. aegypti colonies. These results
suggested that African Ae. aegypti are likely generalists in their larval site
choices. This flexibility to accept various containers with a wide range of
physical, microbial, and chemical conditions might allow Ae. aegypti to use
human-stored water as fallback larval sites during dry seasons, which is
hypothesized to have initiated the domestic evolution of Ae. aegypti.

© 2021 The Authors. Ecology and Evolution published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/ece3.8332 
PMCID: PMC8601902
PMID: 34824830 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

