
1. Clin Mol Hepatol. 2021 Nov 26. doi: 10.3350/cmh.2021.0281. [Epub ahead of print]

The best predictive model for hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with chronic
hepatitis B infection.

Yu JH(1), Cho SG(2), Jin YJ(1), Lee JW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Inha University Hospital and School of
Medicine, Incheon, South Korea.
(2)Department of Radiology, Inha University Hospital and School of Medicine,
Incheon, South Korea.

Chronic hepatitis B (CHB) is a serious threat to human health, with about 820,000
deaths annually from related complications such as cirrhosis and hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). Recently, the use of oral antiviral agents has improved the
prognosis of patients with CHB infections and reduced the risk of HCC
significantly; however, the hepatitis B virus remains a major factor in the
development of HCC and this has raised many concerns[1-3]. Therefore, numerous
studies have been conducted to assess the risk of HCC in patients with CHB
infections, and different models have been proposed to predict risk of developing
HCC[4-7]. However, since each study developed different models, depending on the 
use of antiviral agents or the type of antiviral agents, it is necessary to
understand the characteristics of each model when using the models for the
evaluation of HCC in patients with CHB infections[4, 6]. In addition, because
different variables such as host factor, viral activity, and cirrhosis are used
to evaluate the risk of HCC development, it is also necessary to assess the risk 
by validating the variables. Recently, studies that have also evaluated the risk 
of HCC using transient elastography and artificial intelligence (AI) systems have
indicated that these HCC risk prediction models are also noteworthy. In this
review, we aimed to compare HCC risk prediction models in patients with CHB
infections reported to date to confirm the variables used, specificity of each
model, and to consider an appropriate HCC risk prediction method.

DOI: 10.3350/cmh.2021.0281 
PMID: 34823308 

