
1. Chembiochem. 2021 Nov 25. doi: 10.1002/cbic.202100601. [Epub ahead of print]

Incorporation and Utility of a Responsive Ribonucleoside Analogue in Probing the 
Conformation of a Viral RNA Motif by Fluorescence and 19 F NMR Spectroscopy.

Manna S(1), Sontakke VA(1), Srivatsan SG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research
(IISER), Pune Dr. Homi Bhabha Road, Pune, 411008, India.

Development of versatile probes that can enable the study of different
conformations and recognition properties of therapeutic nucleic acid motifs by
complementing biophysical techniques can greatly aid nucleic acid analysis and
therapy. Here, we report the design, synthesis and incorporation of an
environment-sensitive ribonucleoside analogue, which serves as a two-channel
biophysical platform to investigate RNA structure and recognition by fluorescence
and 19 F NMR spectroscopy techniques. The nucleoside analogue is based on a
5-fluorobenzofuran-uracil core and its fluorescence and 19 F NMR chemical shifts 
are highly sensitive to changes in solvent polarity and viscosity. Notably, the
modified ribonucleotide and phosphoramidite substrates can be efficiently
incorporated into RNA oligonucleotides (ONs) by in vitro transcription and
standard solid-phase ON synthesis protocol, respectively. Fluorescence and 19 F
readouts of the nucleoside incorporated into model RNA ONs are sensitive to the
neighbouring base environment. The responsiveness of the probe was aptly utilized
in detecting and quantifying the metal ion-induced conformational change in an
internal ribosome entry site RNA motif of hepatitis C virus, which is an
important therapeutic target. Taken together, our probe is a good addition to the
nucleic acid analysis toolbox with the advantage that it can be used to study
nucleic acid conformation and recognition simultaneously by two biophysical
techniques.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/cbic.202100601 
PMID: 34821449 

