
1. Am J Clin Exp Immunol. 2021 Oct 15;10(3):77-85. eCollection 2021.

COVID-19 in children with inborn errors of immunity: clinical scenarios.

Moazzen N(1)(2), Ahanchian H(1)(2), Aelami MH(2)(3), Asiyon H(1)(2), Astaneh
M(4), Naeimi AM(1)(2), Rezaei N(5)(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Development Unit of Akbar Hospital, Mashhad University of
Medical Sciences Mashhad, Iran.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical
Sciences Mashhad, Iran.
(3)Department of Pediatrics and Hand Hygiene and Infection Control Research
Center, Imam Reza Hospital, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences Mashhad, Iran.
(4)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Mazandaran University of Medical
Sciences Sari, Iran.
(5)Research Center for Immunodeficiencies, Children's Medical Center, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences Tehran, Iran.
(6)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences Tehran, Iran.
(7)Network of Immunity in Infection, Malignancy and Autoimmunity (NIIMA),
Universal Scientific Education and Research Network (USERN) Tehran, Iran.

The new emerging virus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2), causes a huge burden of morbidity and mortality worldwide. One of
the predisposing factors which might increase the infection susceptibility and
its complications can be the Inborn Errors of Immunity (IEI). One hundred and
seventeen primary immunodeficient (PID) pediatric patients were monitored from
March to December 2020 for any signs and symptoms of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Among 
them twenty-eight children were symptomatic and nineteen out of the twenty-eight 
patients took the coronavirus PCR test. Out of them, the PCR test results of 9
patients were positive. Herein, we report the nine cases of pediatric patients
with IEI who were also infected with SARS-CoV-2 with a positive PCR test. We
observed a variation in clinical manifestations, clinical courses, and outcomes
among IEI pediatric patients affected with COVID-19. In our survey, prompt
diagnosis and appropriate monitoring for possible complications were shown to be 
effective in reducing the mortality rate of the SARS-CoV-2 affected patients with
IEI. Although there is no approved treatment for SARS-CoV-2 infection, supportive
treatment might reduce the complications and lead to better outcomes. This study 
received approval from the Research Ethics Committee of Mashhad University of
Medical Science with the ethics code of IR.MUMS.REC.1399.155.
(https://ethics.research.ac.ir/EthicsProposalViewEn.php?id=129963).

AJCEI Copyright © 2021.


PMCID: PMC8610801
PMID: 34824897 

Conflict of interest statement: None.

