
1. Semin Immunol. 2021 Nov 20:101533. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2021.101533. [Epub ahead
of print]

Mutations of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein: Implications on immune evasion and
vaccine-induced immunity.

Mengist HM(1), Kombe Kombe AJ(2), Mekonnen D(2), Abebaw A(3), Getachew M(4), Jin 
T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
USTC, Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and
Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, 230001, China.
(2)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, CAS Key
Laboratory of Innate Immunity and Chronic Disease, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science &
Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, 230027, China.
(3)Department of Medical Laboratory Science, College of Health Science, Debre
Markos University, Debre Markos, 269, Ethiopia.
(4)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, College of Health Science, Debre Markos
University, Debre Markos, 269, Ethiopia.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
USTC, Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and
Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, 230001, China; Hefei National Laboratory for
Physical Sciences at Microscale, CAS Key Laboratory of Innate Immunity and
Chronic Disease, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Division of Life Sciences and 
Medicine, University of Science & Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, 230027,
China; CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, Chinese Academy of
Science, Shanghai, 200031, China. Electronic address: jint@ustc.edu.cn.

Responsible for more than 4.9 million deaths so far, COVID-19, caused by
SARS-CoV-2, is instigating devastating effects on the global health care system
whose impacts could be longer for the years to come. Acquiring a comprehensive
knowledge of host-virus interaction is critical for designing effective vaccines 
and/or drugs. Understanding the evolution of the virus and the impact of genetic 
variability on host immune evasion and vaccine efficacy is helpful to design
novel strategies to minimize the effects of the emerging variants of concern
(VOC). Most vaccines under development and/or in current use target the spike
protein owning to its unique function of host receptor binding, relatively
conserved nature, potent immunogenicity in inducing neutralizing antibodies, and 
being a good target of T cell responses. However, emerging SARS-CoV-2 strains are
exhibiting variability on the spike protein which could affect the efficacy of
vaccines and antibody-based therapies in addition to enhancing viral immune
evasion mechanisms. Currently, the degree to which mutations on the spike protein
affect immunity and vaccination, and the ability of the current vaccines to
confer protection against the emerging variants attracts much attention. This
review discusses the implications of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein mutations on immune
evasion and vaccine-induced immunity and forward directions which could
contribute to future studies focusing on designing effective vaccines and/or
immunotherapies to consider viral evolution. Combining vaccines derived from
different regions of the spike protein that boost both the humoral and cellular
wings of adaptive immunity could be the best options to cope with the emerging
VOC.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.smim.2021.101533 
PMCID: PMC8604694
PMID: 34836774 

