
1. J Adolesc Health. 2021 Nov 24. pii: S1054-139X(21)00506-1. doi:
10.1016/j.jadohealth.2021.10.013. [Epub ahead of print]

Correlates of Sexual and Reproductive Health Discussions During Preventive
Visits: Findings From a National Sample of U.S. Adolescents.

Sieving RE(1), Mehus C(2), Gewirtz O'Brien JR(3), Steiner RJ(4), Wang S(5),
Catallozzi M(6), Gorzkowski J(7), Grilo SA(8), Kaseeska K(7), McRee AL(3),
Santelli J(8), Klein JD(9).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota; Department
of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Electronic
address: sievi001@umn.edu.
(2)Center for Applied Research and Educational Improvement, College of Education 
and Human Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(4)Division of Reproductive Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, Georgia.
(5)Division of Epidemiology & Community Health, School of Public Health,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Vagelos College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia
University Medical Center, New York, New York; Heilbrunn Department of Population
& Family Health, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University Irving
Medical Center, New York, New York.
(7)Department of Healthy Resilient Children, Youth and Families, American Academy
of Pediatrics, Itasca, Illinois.
(8)Heilbrunn Department of Population & Family Health, Mailman School of Public
Health, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, New York.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago Illinois.

PURPOSE: This study examines characteristics of healthcare delivery, providers,
and adolescents associated with provider-adolescent discussions about sexual and 
reproductive health (SRH) during preventive visits.
METHODS: Data were from a 2019 national internet survey of U.S. adolescents ages 
11-17 years and their parents. Adolescents who had a preventive visit in the past
2 years (n = 853) were asked whether their provider discussed each of eight SRH
topics at that visit: puberty, safe dating, gender identity, sexual orientation, 
whether or not to have sex, sexually transmitted infections including human
immunodeficiency virus, birth control methods, and where to get SRH services.
Eight multivariable logistic regression models were examined (one for each SRH
topic as the outcome), with each model including modifiable healthcare delivery
and provider characteristics, adolescent beliefs, behaviors, and demographic
characteristics as potential correlates.
RESULTS: Provider-adolescent discussions about SRH topics at the last preventive 
visit were positively associated with face-to-face screening about sexual
activity for all eight topics (range of adjusted odds ratios [AORs] = 3.40-9.61),
having time alone with the adolescent during that visit (seven topics; AORs =
1.87-3.87), and ever having communicated about confidentiality with adolescents
(two topics; AORs = 1.88-2.19) and with parents (one topic; AOR = 2.73).
Adolescents' perception that a topic was important to discuss with their provider
was associated with provider-adolescent discussions about seven topics (AORs =
2.34-5.46).
CONCLUSIONS: Findings that provider-adolescent discussions about SRH during
preventive visits were associated with modifiable practices including time alone 
between providers and adolescents and screening about sexual activity can inform 
efforts to improve the delivery of adolescent SRH services within primary care.

Copyright © 2021 Society for Adolescent Health and Medicine. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2021.10.013 
PMID: 34838444 

