
1. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2021 Nov 24. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000850. [Epub ahead
of print]

The current understanding and future directions for sputum microbiome profiling
in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Tiew PY(1), Mac Aogáin M, Chotirmall SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Singapore General
Hospital, Singapore Biochemical Genetics Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry, 
St. James's Hospital Clinical Biochemistry Unit, School of Medicine, Trinity
College Dublin, Ireland. Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological
University, Singapore.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Next-generation sequencing (NGS) has deepened our
understanding of the respiratory microbiome in health and disease. The number of 
microbiome studies employing sputum as an airway surrogate has continued to
increase over the past decade to include multiple large multicentre and
longitudinal studies of the microbiome in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). In this review, we summarize the recent advances to our understanding of 
the bacteriome, virome and mycobiome in COPD.
RECENT FINDINGS: Diverse microbiome profiles are reported in COPD. The
neutrophilic Haemophilus-predominant bacteriome remains a prominent COPD
phenotype, relatively stable over time and during exacerbations. Studies of the
virome remain limited but reveal a potential involvement of viruses and
bacteriophages particularly during COPD exacerbations and advancing disease
severity. Mycobiome signatures, even in stable COPD are associated with poorer
clinical outcomes including mortality.
SUMMARY: The sputum microbiome in COPD is being increasingly recognized for its
clinical relevance, even in the stable state. Future studies integrating
microbial kingdoms holistically (i.e. bacterial, viral and fungal) will provide
deeper insight into its functionality including the relevance of microbial
interactions and effect of treatment on microbiome-associated clinical outcomes.

Copyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000850 
PMID: 34839338 

