
1. BMC Public Health. 2021 Nov 27;21(1):2173. doi: 10.1186/s12889-021-11891-6.

Using GAM functions and Markov-Switching models in an evaluation framework to
assess countries' performance in controlling the COVID-19 pandemic.

de Oliveira AMB(1), Binner JM(2), Mandal A(2), Kelly L(3), Power GJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Business, Federal University of Technology of Paraná, Paraná,
Brazil. abdinardom@utfpr.edu.br.
(2)Birmingham Business School, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(3)Department of Economics, University of Wisconsin, River Falls, USA.
(4)Department of Finance, Insurance and Real Estate, Laval University, Laval,
Canada.

BACKGROUND: The COVID-19 pandemic has initiated several initiatives to better
understand its behavior, and some projects are monitoring its evolution across
countries, which naturally leads to comparisons made by those using the data.
However, most "at a glance" comparisons may be misleading because the curve that 
should explain the evolution of COVID-19 is different across countries, as a
result of the underlying geopolitical or socio-economic characteristics.
Therefore, this paper contributes to the scientific endeavour by creating a new
evaluation framework to help stakeholders adequately monitor and assess the
evolution of COVID-19 in countries, considering the occurrence of spikes,
"secondary waves" and structural breaks in the time series.
METHODS: Generalized Additive Models were used to model cumulative and daily
curves for confirmed cases and deaths. The Root Relative Squared Error and the
Percentage Deviance Explained measured how well the models fit the data. A local 
min-max function was used to identify all local maxima in the fitted values. The 
pure Markov-Switching and the family of Markov-Switching GARCH models were used
to identify structural breaks in the COVID-19 time series. Finally, a quadrants
system to identify countries that are more/less efficient in the short/long term 
in controlling the spread of the virus and the number of deaths was developed.
Such methods were applied in the time series of 189 countries, collected from the
Centre for Systems Science and Engineering at Johns Hopkins University.
RESULTS: Our methodology proves more effective in explaining the evolution of
COVID-19 than growth functions worldwide, in addition to standardizing the entire
estimation process in a single type of function. Besides, it highlights several
inflection points and regime-switching moments, as a consequence of people's
diminished commitment to fighting the pandemic. Although Europe is the most
developed continent in the world, it is home to most countries with an upward
trend and considered inefficient, for confirmed cases and deaths.
CONCLUSIONS: The new outcomes presented in this research will allow key
stakeholders to check whether or not public policies and interventions in the
fight against COVID-19 are having an effect, easily identifying examples of best 
practices and promote such policies more widely around the world.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12889-021-11891-6 
PMCID: PMC8626735
PMID: 34837982 

