
1. J Virol Methods. 2021 Nov 24;300:114380. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114380.
[Epub ahead of print]

Genome-based identification of beet curly top Iran virus infecting sugar beet in 
Turkey and investigation of its pathogenicity by agroinfection.

Yıldırım K(1), Kavas M(2), Kaya R(3), Seçgin Z(2), Can C(4), Sevgen I(4), Saraç
ÇG(5), Tahan V(4).

Author information: 
(1)Ondokuz Mayıs University, Dep.of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Samsun,
Turkey. Electronic address: kubilay.yildirim@omu.edu.tr.
(2)Ondokuz Mayıs University, Dep.of Agricultural Biotechnology, Samsun, Turkey.
(3)Sugar Institute, Ankara, Turkey.
(4)Ondokuz Mayıs University, Dep.of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Samsun,
Turkey.
(5)Akdeniz University Faculty of Engineering Dep. of Biomedical Engineering,
Antalya, Turkey.

Beet curly top disease (BCTD) is a yield-limiting viral infection of sugar beet
(Beta vulgaris) throughout the arid and semi-arid regions of the world. Two virus
species, belonging to two different genera of the family Geminiviridae
(Curtovirus and Becurtovirus) had been described as the disease's causative
agents on sugar beet. Despite the detection of the BCTD in some sugar beet fields
of Turkey sixty years ago, the genome based characterization of BCTD-associated
viruses have not been studied previously. In this study, 628 sugar beet plants
exhibiting BCTD symptoms were collected from fourteen cities in central Anatolia,
the major sugar beet production areas in Turkey. PCR assays of these samples
using the respective Curtovirus and Becurtovirus genus-specific primers indicated
that the Turkish sugar beet samples' viral sequences belong only to the genus
Becurtovirus. The results of sequencing and phylogenetic analysis of the partial 
genome of the virus obtained from fourteen cities confirmed that BCTD-associated 
virus in Turkish sugar beet fields is beet curly top Iran virus
(BCTIV-Becurtovirus) species. The whole genome of the collected viruses from
fourteen cities were amplified by the rolling circle amplification (RCA) and the 
five most phylogenetically diverse viruses obtained from Afyon, Ankara,
Adapazarı, Yozgat and Aksaray were sequenced. The results of whole genome
sequence analysis indicated >98 % sequence identities with that of a BCTIV
variants reported from Urmia province (bordering Turkey) of Iran. A virus genome 
from Yozgat city had a genomic sequence identity of >97 % with those of BCTIV
isolated from cowpea, tomato, pepper and sugar beet in the northern part of Iran.
These results suggested that the spread of BCTIV through the region could create 
a significant threat to the production of sugar beet as well as other
agricultural crops. A tandem dimer of a BCTIV-Turkish variant isolated from
Ankara city was cloned into Agrobacterium plasmid to be used for agro-infection
studies. Agroinoculation of this construct on sugar beet leaves generated severe 
BCTD symptoms (84 %) which were also confirmed by RCA and qPCR analysis. These
results constituted the first genome based characterization of BCTIV Turkish
variants and the first report of BCTIV spreading out of Iran.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114380 
PMID: 34838538 

