
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 20;13(11). pii: 2315. doi: 10.3390/v13112315.

Susceptibility of Four Abalone Species, Haliotis gigantea, Haliotis discus
discus, Haliotis discus hannai and Haliotis diversicolor, to Abalone asfa-like
Virus.

Matsuyama T(1), Kiryu I(2), Inada M(2), Takano T(1), Matsuura Y(1), Kamaishi
T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Fish Diseases, National Research Institute of Aquaculture,
Japan Fisheries Research and Education Agency, Minami-Ise 516-0193, Japan.
(2)Diagnosis and Training Center for Fish Diseases, National Research Institute
of Aquaculture, Japan Fisheries Research and Education Agency, Minami-Ise
516-0193, Japan.

Abalone amyotrophia is a viral disease that causes mass mortality of juvenile
Haliotis discus and H. madaka. Although the cause of this disease has yet to be
identified, we had previously postulated a novel virus with partial genome
sequence similarity to that of African swine fever virus is the causative agent
and proposed abalone asfa-like virus (AbALV) as a provisional name. In this
study, three species of juvenile abalone (H. gigantea, H. discus discus, and H.
diversicolor) and four species of adult abalone (the above three species plus H. 
discus hannai) were experimentally infected, and their susceptibility to AbALV
was investigated by recording mortality, quantitatively determining viral load by
PCR, and conducting immunohistological studies. In the infection test using
7-month-old animals, H. gigantea, which was previously reported to be
insusceptible to the disease, showed multiplication of the virus to the same
extent as in H. discus discus, resulting in mass mortality. H. discus discus at 7
months old showed abnormal cell masses, notches in the edge of the shell and
brown pigmentation inside of the shell, which are histopathological and external 
features of this disease, while H. gigantea did not show any of these
characteristics despite suffering high mortality. Adult abalones had low
mortality and viral replication in all species; however, all three species,
except H. diversicolor, became carriers of the virus. In immunohistological
observations, cells positive for viral antigens were detected predominantly in
the gills of juvenile H. discus discus and H. gigantea, and mass mortality was
observed in these species. In H. diversicolor, neither juvenile nor adult
mortality from infection occurred, and the AbALV genome was not increased by
experimental infection through cohabitation or injection. Our results suggest
that H. gigantea, H. discus discus and H. discus hannai are susceptible to AbALV,
while H. diversicolor is not. These results confirmed that AbALV is the
etiological agent of abalone amyotrophia.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112315 
PMCID: PMC8621809
PMID: 34835121 

