
1. Plants (Basel). 2021 Oct 29;10(11). pii: 2339. doi: 10.3390/plants10112339.

Development and Adoption of Genetically Engineered Plants for Virus Resistance:
Advances, Opportunities and Challenges.

Niraula PM(1), Fondong VN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Delaware State University, Dover, DE 19901,
USA.

Plant viruses cause yield losses to crops of agronomic and economic significance 
and are a challenge to the achievement of global food security. Although
conventional plant breeding has played an important role in managing plant viral 
diseases, it will unlikely meet the challenges posed by the frequent emergence of
novel and more virulent viral species or viral strains. Hence there is an urgent 
need to seek alternative strategies of virus control that can be more readily
deployed to contain viral diseases. The discovery in the late 1980s that viral
genes can be introduced into plants to engineer resistance to the cognate virus
provided a new avenue for virus disease control. Subsequent advances in genomics 
and biotechnology have led to the refinement and expansion of genetic engineering
(GE) strategies in crop improvement. Importantly, many of the drawbacks of
conventional breeding, such as long lead times, inability or difficulty to cross 
fertilize, loss of desirable plant traits, are overcome by GE. Unfortunately,
public skepticism towards genetically modified (GM) crops and other factors have 
dampened the early promise of GE efforts. These concerns are principally about
the possible negative effects of transgenes to humans and animals, as well as to 
the environment. However, with regards to engineering for virus resistance, these
risks are overstated given that most virus resistance engineering strategies
involve transfer of viral genes or genomic segments to plants. These viral
genomes are found in infected plant cells and have not been associated with any
adverse effects in humans or animals. Thus, integrating antiviral genes of virus 
origin into plant genomes is hardly unnatural as suggested by GM crop skeptics.
Moreover, advances in deep sequencing have resulted in the sequencing of large
numbers of plant genomes and the revelation of widespread endogenization of viral
genomes into plant genomes. This has raised the possibility that viral genome
endogenization is part of an antiviral defense mechanism deployed by the plant
during its evolutionary past. Thus, GM crops engineered for viral resistance
would likely be acceptable to the public if regulatory policies were
product-based (the North America regulatory model), as opposed to process-based. 
This review discusses some of the benefits to be gained from adopting GE for
virus resistance, as well as the challenges that must be overcome to leverage
this technology. Furthermore, regulatory policies impacting virus-resistant GM
crops and some success cases of virus-resistant GM crops approved so far for
cultivation are discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/plants10112339 
PMCID: PMC8623320
PMID: 34834702 

