
1. Pathologica. 2021 Oct;113(5):316-329. doi: 10.32074/1591-951X-331.

Follicular dendritic cell sarcoma.

Facchetti F(1), Simbeni M(1), Lorenzi L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, Section of Pathology,
University of Brescia, Spedali Civili, Brescia (Italy).

Follicular dendritic cells (FDC) are mesenchymal-derived dendritic cells located 
in B-follicles where they play a pivotal role in triggering and maintaining
B-cell adaptive immune response. In 1986 Dr. Juan Rosai first reported a series
of neoplasms showing features of FDC and defined it as Follicular Dendritic Cell 
Tumor, subsequently renamed as "sarcoma" (FDCS). In its seminal and subsequent
articles Rosai and colleagues highlighted the heterogeneous microscopic
appearance of FDCS and its immunohistochemical and ultrastructural features.FDCS 
mostly occurs in extranodal sites (79.4% of cases) and lymph nodes (15.1%); in
about 7%-10% of cases it is associated with hyaline-vascular Castleman disease.
Given its significant growth pattern and cytological variability, FDCS can be
confused with various neoplasms and even inflammatory processes. The diagnosis
requires the use of a broad spectrum of FDC markers (e.g. CD21, CD23, CD35,
clusterin, CXCL13, podoplanin), particularly considering that tumor antigen-loss 
is frequent. The inflammatory-pseudotumor-like (IPT-like) variant of FDCS, in
addition to its peculiar histopathological and clinical features, is
characterized by positivity of tumor cells for Epstein-Barr virus, representing a
diagnostic requisite.No distinctive genetic and molecular anomalies have been
identified in FDCS. It often carries an aberrant clonal karyotype and chromosomal
structural alterations, frequently involving onco-suppressor genes. Direct or
next generation sequencing showed alterations on genes belonging to the NF-κB
regulatory pathway and cell-cycle regulators. In contrast to
hematopoietic-derived histiocytic and dendritic cells tumors, FDCS typically
lacks mutations in genes related to the MAPK pathway.FDCS recurs locally in 28%
and metastasizes in 27% of cases. Extent of the disease, surgical resectability
and histopathological features are significantly associated with the outcome.
IPT-like FDCS behaves as an indolent tumor, even if it often recurs locally over 
years.Complete surgical excision is the gold standard of treatment. Data on
targeted therapies (e.g.: tyrosine kinase inhibitors) or immune checkpoint
inhibitors are very limited and responses are variable. A better understanding of
the molecular drivers of this tumor may lead to potential new therapeutic
strategies.

Copyright © 2021 Società Italiana di Anatomia Patologica e Citopatologia
Diagnostica, Divisione Italiana della International Academy of Pathology.

DOI: 10.32074/1591-951X-331 
PMID: 34837090  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

