
1. J Clin Virol. 2021 Nov 16;146:105030. doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2021.105030. [Epub ahead
of print]

Geographical clustering of Hantavirus isolates from Apodemus agrarius identified 
in the Republic of Korea indicate the emergence of a new Hantavirus genotype.

Jalal S(1), Kim CM(2), Kim DM(3), Song HJ(4), Lee JC(4), Shin MY(5), Lim HC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bio-Medical Science, College of Medicine, Chosun University,
Gwangju, Republic of Korea.
(2)Premedical Science, College of Medicine, Chosun University, Gwangju, Republic 
of Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, Chosun University,
Gwangju, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: drongkim@chosun.ac.kr.
(4)Department of Clinical Laboratory Science, Gwangju Health University, Gwangju 
62287, Korea.
(5)Jeollanam-do Institute of Health and Environment, Korea.

AIM AND METHODOLOGY: Several studies on hantavirus evolution have shown that
genetic reassortment plays an important role in the evolution and epidemiology of
this disease. To understand the genetic epidemiology of human hantaviruses,
samples from rodent reservoirs were subjected to reverse-transcription nested
polymerase chain reaction (RT-N-PCR) targeting the L- and S-segments of the
hantavirus genome.
RESULTS: Positive isolates from Gwangju, Boseong-gun (Jeollanam-do Province), and
Jeju Island were confirmed as Hantaan virus using DNA sequencing. Phylogenetic
analysis showed that all isolates grouped together as Hantaan virus but with each
region forming a distinct cluster. In addition, these three clusters were
distinct from other Hantaan isolates reported in previous studies from Korea and 
its neighboring countries China and Russia.
CONCLUSION: This suggests Hantaan viruses exhibit a considerable degree of
geographical clustering, and there may be a novel Hantaan genotype in
southwestern ROK. This study helps expand our knowledge regarding the emergence
of new hantavirus strains and their degree of geographical variation.
IMPORTANCE: Hantaan virus, a pathogenic prototype hantavirus carried by Apodemus 
agrarius, is found throughout China, Russia, and Korea. Here, we examined the
genetic diversity of hantaviruses to expand our knowledge regarding the emergence
of new hantavirus strains and their degree of geographical variation. We found
that hantaan viruses show a considerable degree of geographical clustering, which
may allude to the development of a new genotype variant in the southwestern
region of the ROK.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2021.105030 
PMID: 34839200 

