
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Nov 17;9(11). pii: 1341. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9111341.

Immunomodulatory Strategies for Parapoxvirus: Current Status and Future
Approaches for the Development of Vaccines against Orf Virus Infection.

Bukar AM(1)(2), Jesse FFA(3), Abdullah CAC(4), Noordin MM(1), Lawan Z(1), Mangga 
HK(1), Balakrishnan KN(1), Azmi MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang 43400, Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Science Laboratory Technology, School Agriculture and Applied
Sciences, Ramat Polytechnic Maiduguri, Maiduguri 1070, Borno, Nigeria.
(3)Department of Veterinary Clinical Studies, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang 43400, Selangor, Malaysia.
(4)Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang 
43400, Selangor, Malaysia.

Orf virus (ORFV), the prototype species of the parapoxvirus genus, is the
causative agent of contagious ecthyma, an extremely devastating skin disease of
sheep, goats, and humans that causes enormous economic losses in livestock
production. ORFV is known for its ability to repeatedly infect both previously
infected and vaccinated sheep due to several immunomodulatory genes encoded by
the virus that temporarily suppress host immunity. Therefore, the development of 
novel, safe and effective vaccines against ORFV infection is an important
priority. Although, the commercially licensed live-attenuated vaccines have
provided partial protection against ORFV infections, the attenuated viruses have 
been associated with major safety concerns. In addition to safety issues, the
persistent reinfection of vaccinated animals warrants the need to investigate
several factors that may affect vaccine efficacy. Perhaps, the reason for the
failure of the vaccine is due to the long-term adaptation of the virus in tissue 
culture. In recent years, the development of vaccines against ORFV infection has 
achieved great success due to technological advances in recombinant DNA
technologies, which have opened a pathway for the development of vaccine
candidates that elicit robust immunity. In this review, we present current
knowledge on immune responses elicited by ORFV, with particular attention to the 
effects of the viral immunomodulators on the host immune system. We also discuss 
the implications of strain variation for the development of rational vaccines.
Finally, the review will also aim to demonstrate future strategies for the
development of safe and efficient vaccines against ORFV infections.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9111341 
PMCID: PMC8624149
PMID: 34835272 

