
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 4;13(11). pii: 2221. doi: 10.3390/v13112221.

Retroviral Antisense Transcripts and Genes: 33 Years after First Predicted, a
Silent Retroviral Revolution?

Miller RH(1), Zimmer A(2), Moutot G(3), Mesnard JM(4), Chazal N(4).

Author information: 
(1)CyberGenomics LLC, Brookeville, MD 20833, USA.
(2)DHVS-Département d'Histoire des Sciences de la Vie et de la Santé, Faculté de 
Médecine, Université de Strasbourg, 4 Rue Kirschleger, CEDEX, F-67085 Strasbourg,
France.
(3)Centre d'Etudes Politiques et Sociales (CEPEL), Département de Sciences
Humaines et Sociales, Université de Montpellier, 34090 Montpellier, France.
(4)Institut de Recherche en Infectiologie de Montpellier (IRIM), Université de
Montpellier, CNRS, 1919 Route de Mende, CEDEX 5, 34293 Montpellier, France.

Paradigm shifts throughout the history of microbiology have typically been
ignored, or met with skepticism and resistance, by the scientific community. This
has been especially true in the field of virology, where the discovery of a
"contagium vivum fluidum", or infectious fluid remaining after excluding bacteria
by filtration, was initially ignored because it did not coincide with the
established view of microorganisms. Subsequent studies on such infectious agents,
eventually termed "viruses", were met with skepticism. However, after an
abundance of proof accumulated, viruses were eventually acknowledged as defined
microbiological entities. Next, the proposed role of viruses in oncogenesis in
animals was disputed, as was the unique mechanism of genome replication by
reverse transcription of RNA by the retroviruses. This same pattern of skepticism
holds true for the prediction of the existence of retroviral "antisense"
transcripts and genes. From the time of their discovery, it was thought that
retroviruses encoded proteins on only one strand of proviral DNA. However, in
1988, it was predicted that human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1), and
other retroviruses, express an antisense protein encoded on the DNA strand
opposite that encoding the known viral proteins. Confirmation came quickly with
the characterization of the antisense protein, HBZ, of the human T-cell leukemia 
virus type 1 (HTLV-1), and the finding that both the protein and its antisense
mRNA transcript play key roles in viral replication and pathogenesis. However,
acceptance of the existence, and potential importance, of a corresponding
antisense transcript and protein (ASP) in HIV-1 infection and pathogenesis has
lagged, despite gradually accumulating theoretical and experimental evidence. The
most striking theoretical evidence is the finding that asp is highly conserved in
group M viruses and correlates exclusively with subtypes, or clades, responsible 
for the AIDS pandemic. This review outlines the history of the major shifts in
thought pertaining to the nature and characteristics of viruses, and in
particular retroviruses, and details the development of the hypothesis that
retroviral antisense transcripts and genes exist. We conclude that there is a
need to accelerate studies on ASP, and its transcript(s), with the view that both
may be important, and overlooked, targets in anti-HIV therapeutic and vaccine
strategies.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112221 
PMCID: PMC8622228
PMID: 34835027 

