
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 26;13(11). pii: 2159. doi: 10.3390/v13112159.

The Stem-Loop I of Senecavirus A IRES Is Essential for Cap-Independent
Translation Activity and Virus Recovery.

Wang N(1), Wang H(1), Shi J(1), Li C(1), Liu X(2), Fan J(1), Sun C(1), Cameron
CE(3), Qi H(4), Yu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin 150069, China.
(2)Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
PA 16802, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina School
of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27516, USA.
(4)Key Laboratory of Urban Water Resource and Environment, Harbin Institute of
Technology, School of Environment, Harbin 150090, China.

Senecavirus A (SVA) is a picornavirus that causes vesicular disease in swine and 
the only member of the Senecavirus genus. Like in all members of Picornaviridae, 
the 5' untranslated region (5'UTR) of SVA contains an internal ribosome entry
site (IRES) that initiates cap-independent translation. For example, the
replacement of the IRES of foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV) with its relative 
bovine rhinitis B virus (BRBV) affects the viral translation efficiency and
virulence. Structurally, the IRES from SVA resembles that of hepatitis C virus
(HCV), a flavivirus. Given the roles of the IRES in cap-independent translation
for picornaviruses, we sought to functionally characterize the IRES of this genus
by studying chimeric viruses generated by exchanging the native SVA IRES with
that of HCV either entirely or individual domains. First, the results showed that
a chimeric SVA virus harboring the IRES from HCV, H-SVA, is viable and replicated
normally in rodent-derived BHK-21 cells but displays replication defects in
porcine-derived ST cells. In the generation of chimeric viruses in which
domain-specific elements from SVA were replaced with those of HCV, we identified 
an essential role for the stem-loop I element for IRES activity and recombinant
virus recovery. Furthermore, a series of stem-loop I mutants allowed us to
functionally characterize discrete IRES regions and correlate impaired IRES
activities, using reporter systems with our inability to recover recombinant
viruses in two different cell types. Interestingly, mutant viruses harboring
partially defective IRES were viable. However, no discernable replication
differences were observed, relative to the wild-type virus, suggesting the
cooperation of additional factors, such as intermolecular viral RNA interactions,
act in concert in regulating IRES-dependent translation during infection.
Altogether, we found that the stem-loop I of SVA is an essential element for
IRES-dependent translation activity and viral replication.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112159 
PMCID: PMC8619302
PMID: 34834966 

