
1. Cells. 2021 Nov 9;10(11). pii: 3085. doi: 10.3390/cells10113085.

Murine Trophoblast Stem Cells and Their Differentiated Cells Attenuate Zika Virus
In Vitro by Reducing Glycosylation of the Viral Envelope Protein.

Neupane B(1), Fendereski M(1), Nazneen F(1), Guo YL(1), Bai F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Center for Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences, The University of Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg, MS 39406, USA.

Zika virus (ZIKV) infection during pregnancy can cause devastating fetal
neuropathological abnormalities, including microcephaly. Most studies of ZIKV
infection in pregnancy have focused on post-implantation stage embryos.
Currently, we have limited knowledge about how a pre-implantation stage embryo
deals with a viral infection. This study investigates ZIKV infection on mouse
trophoblast stem cells (TSCs) and their in vitro differentiated TSCs (DTSCs),
which resemble the cellular components of the trophectoderm layer of the
blastocyst that later develops into the placenta. We demonstrate that TSCs and
DTSCs are permissive to ZIKV infection; however, ZIKV propagated in TSCs and
DTSCs exhibit substantially lower infectivity, as shown in vitro and in a mouse
model compared to ZIKV that was generated in Vero cells or mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEFs). We further show that the low infectivity of ZIKV propagated
in TSCs and DTSCs is associated with a reduced level of glycosylation on the
viral envelope (E) proteins, which are essential for ZIKV to establish initial
attachment by binding to cell surface glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). The decreased
level of glycosylation on ZIKV E is, at least, partially due to the low-level
expression of a glycosylation-related gene, Hexa, in TSCs and DTSCs. Furthermore,
this finding is not limited to ZIKV since similar observations have been made as 
to the chikungunya virus (CHIKV) and West Nile virus (WNV) propagated in TSCs and
DTSCs. In conclusion, our results reveal a novel phenomenon suggesting that
murine TSCs and their differentiated cells may have adapted a cellular
glycosylation system that can limit viral infectivity by altering the
glycosylation of viral envelope proteins, therefore serving as a unique, innate
anti-viral mechanism in the pre-implantation stage embryo.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10113085 
PMCID: PMC8619372
PMID: 34831310 

