
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 26;13(11). pii: 2152. doi: 10.3390/v13112152.

Identification of Cacao Mild Mosaic Virus (CaMMV) and Cacao Yellow Vein-Banding
Virus (CYVBV) in Cocoa (Theobroma cacao) Germplasm.

Ullah I(1), Daymond AJ(1), Hadley P(1), End MJ(2), Umaharan P(3), Dunwell JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Agriculture, Policy and Development, University of Reading, Reading 
RG6 6EU, UK.
(2)Cocoa Research Association.
(3)Cocoa Research Centre, St. Augustine Campus, The University of the West
Indies, Trinidad and Tobago.

Cocoa, Theobroma cacao, is an important tropical perennial crop grown widely in
the humid tropics. The exchange of cocoa germplasm between germplasm collections 
and breeding centres is vital for varietal development. Intermediate quarantine
facilities, such as the International Cocoa Quarantine Centre, Reading UK
(ICQC-R) play a vital role in ensuring the transfer of germplasm whilst
minimising the risk of spreading pests and diseases. Current screening procedures
combine visual inspection and molecular techniques, which are effective in
detecting Cocoa swollen shoot virus (CSSV), a badnavirus, which causes severe
losses but are restricted to West Africa. However, the detection of latent or
mild virus infections that produce no visual symptoms has been a challenge.
Recently two badnavirus species of cocoa producing mild symptoms, cacao mild
mosaic virus (CaMMV) and cacao yellow vein-banding virus (CYVBV), have been
sequenced. Here, we report new assays for the detection of these two species, for
the first time in non-symptomatic accessions. Evolutionary and bioinformatic
analyses of the viruses suggest their most recent source was from Trinidad,
though there is historic evidence that these viruses may have their origin in
South America and then become widespread globally over the last century. We also 
report a novel colorimetric Loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) assay
for the detection of CYVBV. This simple and accurate method could be employed in 
field virus testing.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112152 
PMCID: PMC8623607
PMID: 34834959 

