
1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021 Oct 24;57(11). pii: 1153. doi: 10.3390/medicina57111153.

Role of PNPLA3 in the Assessment and Monitoring of Hepatic Steatosis and Fibrosis
in Patients with Chronic Hepatitis C Infection Who Achieved a Sustained Virologic
Response.

Gavril OI(1), Arhire LI(2), Gavrilescu O(1), Dranga M(1), Barboi O(1), Gavril
RS(1), Popescu R(3), Cijevschi Prelipcean C(1), Trifan AV(1), Mihai C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Specialties (I), Faculty of Medicine, "Grigore T. Popa" 
Universityof Medicine and Pharmacy, 700111 Iași, Romania.
(2)Department of Medical Specialties (II), Faculty of Medicine, "Grigore T. Popa"
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 700111 Iași, Romania.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, "Grigore T. Popa"
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 700111 Iași, Romania.

Background and Objectives: Hepatic diseases are an important public health
problem. All patients with chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection receive
treatment, regardless of hepatic fibrosis severity. However, evaluation of
hepatic fibrosis and steatosis is still useful in assessing evolution, prognosis 
and monitoring of hepatic disease, especially after treatment with direct-acting 
antivirals (DAAs). The aim of this study was to assess the link between
patatin-like phospholipase domain-containing 3 (PNPLA3) polymorphism and the
degree of hepatic steatosis and fibrosis in patients with chronic HCV infection, 
as well as changes in steatosis and fibrosis three monthsafter obtaining a
sustained viral response (SVR). Materials and Methods:Ourstudy included 100
patients with chronic hepatitis C (CHC) infection and compensated cirrhosis who
received DAA treatment and who were evaluated using Fibromax prior to and 3
months after SVR. The influence of PNPLA3 (CC, CG, GG) genotype among these
patients on the degree of post-treatment regression of steatosis and fibrosis was
assessed. Results: Regression was noticed in the degree of both hepatic steatosis
and hepatic fibrosis post-DAA treatment (three months after SVR). Analysis of the
correlation between PNPLA3 genotype and fibrosis indicated that the average level
of fibrosis (F) before DAA treatment was higher in patients with the GG genotype 
than in patients with the CC or CG genotype. Three months after SVR, the average 
level of fibrosis decreased; however, it remained significantly increased in GG
subjects compared to that in CC or CG patients. The degree of hepatic steatosis
before treatment was not significantly different among patients with different
PNPLA3 genotypes, and no significant correlations were observed three months
after SVR. Conclusions: The genetic variants of PNPLA3 influence the evolution of
hepatic fibrosis. The GG subtype plays an important role in the degree of hepatic
fibrosis both before and after treatment (three months after SVR)and could be a
prognostic marker for assessment of post-SVR evolution.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina57111153 
PMCID: PMC8618282
PMID: 34833371  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

