
1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021 Oct 26;57(11). pii: 1163. doi: 10.3390/medicina57111163.

Vaccine-Associated Thrombocytopenia and Thrombosis: Venous Endotheliopathy
Leading to Venous Combined Micro-Macrothrombosis.

Chang JC(1), Hawley HB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California Irvine School of Medicine,
Irvine, CA 92868, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Wright State University Boonshoft School of Medicine, 
Dayton, OH 45435, USA.

Serious vaccine-associated side effects are very rare. Major complications of
vaccines are thrombocytopenia and thrombosis in which pathogenetic mechanism is
consistent with endotheliopathy characterized by "attenuated" sepsis-like
syndrome, leading to the activation of inflammatory and microthrombotic pathway. 
In the COVID-19 pandemic, acute respiratory distress syndrome caused by
microthrombosis has been the major clinical phenotype from the viral sepsis in
association with endotheliopathy-associated vascular microthrombotic disease
(EA-VMTD), sometimes presenting with thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
(TTP)-like syndrome. Often, venous thromboembolism has coexisted due to
additional vascular injury. In contrast, clinical phenotypes of vaccine
complication have included "silent" immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP-like
syndrome), multiorgan inflammatory syndrome, and deep venous thrombosis (DVT),
cerebral venous sinus thrombosis (CVST) in particular. These findings are
consistent with venous (v) EA-VMTD. In vEA-VMTD promoted by activated complement 
system following vaccination, "consumptive" thrombocytopenia develops as ITP-like
syndrome due to activated unusually large von Willebrand factor (ULVWF) path of
hemostasis via microthrombogenesis. Thus, the pathologic phenotype of ITP-like
syndrome is venous microthrombosis. Myocarditis/pericarditis and other rare cases
of inflammatory organ syndrome are promoted by inflammatory cytokines released
from activated inflammatory pathway, leading to various organ endotheliitis.
Vaccine-associated CVST is a form of venous combined "micro-macrothrombosis"
composed of binary components of "microthrombi strings" from vEA-VMTD and "fibrin
meshes" from vaccine-unrelated incidental vascular injury perhaps such as
unreported head trauma. This mechanism is identified based on "two-path unifying 
theory" of in vivo hemostasis. Venous combined micro-macrothrombosis due to
vaccine is much more serious thrombosis than isolated distal DVT made of
macrothrombus. This paradigm changing novel concept of combined
micro-macrothrombosis implies the need of combined therapy of a complement
inhibitor and anticoagulant for CVST and other complex forms of DVT.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina57111163 
PMCID: PMC8621006
PMID: 34833382  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

