
1. Probiotics Antimicrob Proteins. 2021 Nov 27. doi: 10.1007/s12602-021-09879-0.
[Epub ahead of print]

In Silico Analysis of Bacteriocins from Lactic Acid Bacteria Against SARS-CoV-2.

Erol I(1), Kotil SE(2), Fidan O(3), Yetiman AE(4), Durdagi S(5), Ortakci F(6).

Author information: 
(1)Computational Biology and Molecular Simulations Laboratory, Department of
Biophysics, School of Medicine, Bahcesehir University, Istanbul, Turkey.
ismail.erol@med.bau.edu.tr.
(2)Department of Biophysics, School of Medicine, Bahcesehir University, Istanbul,
Turkey.
(3)Bioengineering Department, Faculty of Life and Natural Sciences, Abdullah Gul 
University, Kayseri, Turkey.
(4)Food Engineering Department, Faculty of Engineering, Erciyes University,
Kayseri, Turkey.
(5)Computational Biology and Molecular Simulations Laboratory, Department of
Biophysics, School of Medicine, Bahcesehir University, Istanbul, Turkey.
serdar.durdagi@med.bau.edu.tr.
(6)Bioengineering Department, Faculty of Life and Natural Sciences, Abdullah Gul 
University, Kayseri, Turkey. fatih.ortakci@agu.edu.tr.

The COVID-19 pandemic caused by a novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) is a serious
health concern in the twenty-first century for scientists, health workers, and
all humans. The absence of specific biotherapeutics requires new strategies to
prevent the spread and prophylaxis of the novel virus and its variants. The
SARS-CoV-2 virus shows pathogenesis by entering the host cells via spike protein 
and Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2 receptor protein. Thus, the present study
aims to compute the binding energies between a wide range of bacteriocins with
receptor-binding domain (RBD) on spike proteins of wild type (WT) and beta
variant (lineage B.1.351). Molecular docking analyses were performed to evaluate 
binding energies. Upon achieving the best bio-peptides with the highest docking
scores, further molecular dynamics (MD) simulations were performed to validate
the structure and interaction stability. Protein-protein docking of the chosen 22
biopeptides with WT-RBD showed docking scores lower than -7.9 kcal/mol. Pediocin 
PA-1 and salivaricin P showed the lowest (best) docking scores of - 12 kcal/mol. 
Pediocin PA-1, salivaricin B, and salivaricin P showed a remarkable increase in
the double mutant's predicted binding affinity
with -13.8 kcal/mol, -13.0 kcal/mol, and -12.5 kcal/mol, respectively. Also, a
better predicted binding affinity of pediocin PA-1 and salivaricin B against
triple mutant was observed compared to the WT. Thus, pediocin PA-1 binds stronger
to mutants of the RBD, particularly to double and triple mutants. Salivaricin B
showed a better predicted binding affinity towards triple mutant compared to WT, 
showing that it might be another bacteriocin with potential activity against the 
SARS-CoV-2 beta variant. Overall, pediocin PA-1, salivaricin P, and salivaricin B
are the most promising candidates for inhibiting SARS-CoV-2 (including lineage
B.1.351) entrance into the human cells. These bacteriocins derived from lactic
acid bacteria hold promising potential for paving an alternative way for
treatment and prophylaxis of WT and beta variants.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12602-021-09879-0 
PMCID: PMC8626284
PMID: 34837166 

