
1. Microbiome. 2021 Nov 26;9(1):233. doi: 10.1186/s40168-021-01156-0.

Minnesota peat viromes reveal terrestrial and aquatic niche partitioning for
local and global viral populations.

Ter Horst AM(1), Santos-Medellín C(1), Sorensen JW(1), Zinke LA(1), Wilson RM(2),
Johnston ER(3), Trubl GG(4), Pett-Ridge J(4), Blazewicz SJ(4), Hanson PJ(5),
Chanton JP(2), Schadt CW(3), Kostka JE(6)(7), Emerson JB(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA,
USA.
(2)Department of Earth, Ocean, and Atmospheric Science, Florida State University,
Tallahassee, FL, USA.
(3)Biosciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, USA.
(4)Physical and Life Sciences Directorate, Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory, Livermore, CA, USA.
(5)Environmental Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN,
USA.
(6)Schools of Biology and Earth & Atmospheric Sciences, Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(7)Center for Microbial Dynamics and Infection, Georgia Institute of Technology, 
Atlanta, GA, 30332, USA.
(8)Department of Plant Pathology, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA,
USA. jbemerson@ucdavis.edu.
(9)Genome Center, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA, USA.
jbemerson@ucdavis.edu.

BACKGROUND: Peatlands are expected to experience sustained yet fluctuating higher
temperatures due to climate change, leading to increased microbial activity and
greenhouse gas emissions. Despite mounting evidence for viral contributions to
these processes in peatlands underlain with permafrost, little is known about
viruses in other peatlands. More generally, soil viral biogeography and its
potential drivers are poorly understood at both local and global scales. Here, 87
metagenomes and five viral size-fraction metagenomes (viromes) from a boreal
peatland in northern Minnesota (the SPRUCE whole-ecosystem warming experiment and
surrounding bog) were analyzed for dsDNA viral community ecological patterns, and
the recovered viral populations (vOTUs) were compared with our curated PIGEON
database of 266,125 vOTUs from diverse ecosystems.
RESULTS: Within the SPRUCE experiment, viral community composition was
significantly correlated with peat depth, water content, and carbon chemistry,
including CH4 and CO2 concentrations, but not with temperature during the first 2
years of warming treatments. Peat vOTUs with aquatic-like signatures (shared
predicted protein content with marine and/or freshwater vOTUs) were significantly
enriched in more waterlogged surface peat depths. Predicted host ranges for
SPRUCE vOTUs were relatively narrow, generally within a single bacterial genus.
Of the 4326 SPRUCE vOTUs, 164 were previously detected in other soils, mostly
peatlands. None of the previously identified 202,371 marine and freshwater vOTUs 
in our PIGEON database were detected in SPRUCE peat, but 0.4% of 80,714 viral
clusters (VCs, grouped by predicted protein content) were shared between soil and
aquatic environments. On a per-sample basis, vOTU recovery was 32 times higher
from viromes compared with total metagenomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Results suggest strong viral "species" boundaries between
terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems and to some extent between peat and other
soils, with differences less pronounced at higher taxonomic levels. The
significant enrichment of aquatic-like vOTUs in more waterlogged peat suggests
that viruses may also exhibit niche partitioning on more local scales. These
patterns are presumably driven in part by host ecology, consistent with the
predicted narrow host ranges. Although more samples and increased sequencing
depth improved vOTU recovery from total metagenomes, the substantially higher
per-sample vOTU recovery after viral particle enrichment highlights the utility
of soil viromics. Video abstract The importance of Minnesota peat viromes in
revealing terrestrial and aquatic niche partitioning for viral populations.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-021-01156-0 
PMCID: PMC8626947
PMID: 34836550 

