
1. Viruses. 2021 Nov 12;13(11). pii: 2265. doi: 10.3390/v13112265.

Rift Valley Fever Virus Propagates in Human Villous Trophoblast Cell Lines and
Induces Cytokine mRNA Responses Known to Provoke Miscarriage.

Gwon YD(1), Nematollahi Mahani SA(1), Nagaev I(1), Mincheva-Nilsson L(1), Evander
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Umeå University, 901 85 Umeå, Sweden.

The mosquito-borne Rift Valley fever (RVF) is a prioritised disease that has been
listed by the World Health Organization for urgent research and development of
counteraction. Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV) can cause a cytopathogenic effect
in the infected cell and induce hyperimmune responses that contribute to
pathogenesis. In livestock, the consequences of RVFV infection vary from mild
symptoms to abortion. In humans, 1-3% of patients with RVFV infection develop
severe disease, manifested as, for example, haemorrhagic fever, encephalitis or
blindness. RVFV infection has also been associated with miscarriage in humans.
During pregnancy, there should be a balance between pro-inflammatory and
anti-inflammatory mediators to create a protective environment for the placenta
and foetus. Many viruses are capable of penetrating that protective environment
and infecting the foetal-maternal unit, possibly via the trophoblasts in the
placenta, with potentially severe consequences. Whether it is the viral infection
per se, the immune response, or both that contribute to the pathogenesis of
miscarriage remains unknown. To investigate how RVFV could contribute to
pathogenesis during pregnancy, we infected two human trophoblast cell lines, A3
and Jar, representing normal and transformed human villous trophoblasts,
respectively. They were infected with two RVFV variants (wild-type RVFV and RVFV 
with a deleted NSs protein), and the infection kinetics and 15 different
cytokines were analysed. The trophoblast cell lines were infected by both RVFV
variants and infection caused upregulation of messenger RNA (mRNA) expression for
interferon (IFN) types I-III and inflammatory cytokines, combined with cell
line-specific mRNA expression of transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1 and
interleukin (IL)-10. When comparing the two RVFV variants, we found that
infection with RVFV lacking NSs function caused a hyper-IFN response and
inflammatory response, while the wild-type RVFV suppressed the IFN I and
inflammatory response. The induction of certain cytokines by RVFV infection could
potentially lead to teratogenic effects that disrupt foetal and placental
developmental pathways, leading to birth defects and other pregnancy
complications, such as miscarriage.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112265 
PMCID: PMC8625252
PMID: 34835071 

