
1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 20;13(11). pii: 2117. doi: 10.3390/v13112117.

Facilitating Antiviral Drug Discovery Using Genetic and Evolutionary Knowledge.

Xu X(1), Zhang QY(1), Chu XY(1), Quan Y(1), Lv BM(1), Zhang HY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hubei Key Laboratory of Agricultural Bioinformatics, College of Informatics,
Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China.

Over the course of human history, billions of people worldwide have been infected
by various viruses. Despite rapid progress in the development of biomedical
techniques, it is still a significant challenge to find promising new antiviral
targets and drugs. In the past, antiviral drugs mainly targeted viral proteins
when they were used as part of treatment strategies. Since the virus mutation
rate is much faster than that of the host, such drugs feature drug resistance and
narrow-spectrum antiviral problems. Therefore, the targeting of host molecules
has gradually become an important area of research for the development of
antiviral drugs. In recent years, rapid advances in high-throughput sequencing
techniques have enabled numerous genetic studies (such as genome-wide association
studies (GWAS), clustered regularly interspersed short palindromic repeats
(CRISPR) screening, etc.) for human diseases, providing valuable genetic and
evolutionary resources. Furthermore, it has been revealed that successful drug
targets exhibit similar genetic and evolutionary features, which are of great
value in identifying promising drug targets and discovering new drugs.
Considering these developments, in this article the authors propose a
host-targeted antiviral drug discovery strategy based on knowledge of genetics
and evolution. We first comprehensively summarized the genetic, subcellular
location, and evolutionary features of the human genes that have been
successfully used as antiviral targets. Next, the summarized features were used
to screen novel druggable antiviral targets and to find potential antiviral
drugs, in an attempt to promote the discovery of new antiviral drugs.

DOI: 10.3390/v13112117 
PMCID: PMC8626054
PMID: 34834924 

