
1. Pathogens. 2021 Nov 17;10(11). pii: 1498. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10111498.

Mortality Levels and Production Indicators for Suspicion of Highly Pathogenic
Avian Influenza Virus Infection in Commercially Farmed Ducks.

Elbers ARW(1), Gonzales JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Bioinformatics and Animal Models, Wageningen
Bioveterinary Research, 8221 RA Lelystad, The Netherlands.

(1) Background: Highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) is a viral infection
characterized by inducing severe disease and high levels of mortality in
gallinaceous poultry. Increased mortality, drop in egg production or decreased
feed or water intake are used as indicators for notification of suspicions of
HPAI outbreaks. However, infections in commercial duck flocks may result in mild 
disease with low mortality levels, thereby compromising notifications. (2)
Methods: Data on daily mortality, egg production, feed intake and water intake
from broiler and breeder duck flocks not infected (n = 56 and n = 11,
respectively) and infected with HPAIV (n = 13, n = 4) were used for analyses.
Data from negative flocks were used to assess the baseline (daily) levels of
mortality and production parameters and to identify potential threshold values
for triggering suspicions of HPAI infections and assess the specificity (Sp) of
these thresholds. Data from infected flocks were used to assess the effect of
infection on daily mortality and production and to evaluate the sensitivity (Se) 
of the thresholds for early detection of outbreaks. (3) Results: For broiler
flocks, daily mortality > 0.3% (after the first week of production) or using a
regression model for aberration detection would indicate infection with Se and Sp
higher than 80%. Drops in mean daily feed or water intake larger than 7 g or 14
mL (after the first week of production), respectively, are sensitive indicators
of infection but have poor Sp. For breeders, mortality thresholds are poor
indicators of infection (low Se and Sp). However, a consecutive drop in egg
production larger than 9% is an effective indicator of a HPAI outbreak. For both 
broiler and breeder duck flocks, cumulative average methods were also assessed,
which had high Se but generated many false alarms (poor Sp). (4) Conclusions: The
identified reporting thresholds can be used to update legislation and provide
guidelines to farmers and veterinarians to notify suspicions of HPAI outbreaks in
commercial duck flocks.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10111498 
PMCID: PMC8620262
PMID: 34832653 

