
1. Liver Int. 2021 Nov 27. doi: 10.1111/liv.15111. [Epub ahead of print]

HCV disease burden and population segments in Switzerland.

Bihl F(1), Bruggmann P(2), Castro Batänjer E(3), Dufour JF(4), Lavanchy D(5),
Müllhaupt B(6), Negro F(7), Razavi H(8), Scheidegger C(9), Semela D(10), Semmo
N(11), Blach S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology and Hepatology Department, Ente Ospedaliero Cantonale,
Bellinzona and Divisions of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital,
Geneva, Switzerland.
(2)Arud Centre for Addiction Medicine, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Hepatitis C virtual clinic and Private practice, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(4)University Clinic for Visceral Surgery and Medicine, Inselspital, University
of Bern, Switzerland.
(5)Consultant, Ruelle des Chataigniers 1, CH-1026, Denges, VD, Switzerland.
(6)Swiss HPB (Hepato-Pancreato-Biliary) Center and Department of Gastroenterology
and Hepatology, University Hospital Zürich, Switzerland.
(7)Divisions of Gastroenterology and Hepatology and of Clinical Pathology,
University Hospital, rue Gabrielle-Perret-Gentil 4, 1211 Genève 14, Switzerland.
(8)CDA Foundation, Lafayette, Colorado, USA.
(9)Private practice, Basel, Switzerland.
(10)Division of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Cantonal Hospital St, Gallen,
Switzerland.
(11)Department for BioMedical Research, Hepatology, University of Bern, Bern,
Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Switzerland has made strides towards hepatitis C virus elimination,
but as of 2019, elimination was not guaranteed. However, political interest in
viral hepatitis has been increasing. We sought to develop a better understanding 
of Switzerland's progress toward HCV elimination and the profile of remaining
HCV-RNA positive patients.
METHODS: A previously described Markov model was updated with recent diagnosis
and treatment data and run to generate new forecasts for HCV disease burden. Two 
scenarios were developed to evaluate HCV morbidity and mortality under the status
quo and a scenario that achieves the Swiss Hepatitis Strategy Elimination
targets. Next, an analysis was conducted to identify population segments bearing 
a high burden of disease, where future elimination efforts could be directed.
RESULTS: At the beginning of 2020, an estimated 32,100 viremic infections
remained in Switzerland (0.37% viremic prevalence). Adult (≥18 years of age)
permanent residents born abroad represented the largest sub-population,
accounting for 56% of HCV infections. Thirteen countries accounted for ≥60% of
viremic infections among permanent residents born abroad, with most people
currently residing in Zurich, Vaud, Geneva, Bern, Aargau and Ticino. Among
Swiss-born HCV-RNA+ persons, two thirds had a history of IDU, corresponding to
33% of total infections.
CONCLUSIONS: In Switzerland, extra efforts for diagnosis and linkage to care are 
warranted in foreign-born populations and people with a history of drug use.
Population-level measures (e.g., increasing the number of providers, increase
screening) can identify patients who may have otherwise fallen through the gaps
or avoided care due to stigma.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/liv.15111 
PMID: 34839578 

