
1. J Med Virol. 2021 Nov 27. doi: 10.1002/jmv.27484. [Epub ahead of print]

Genetic diversity of rotavirus strains circulating in Norway before and after the
introduction of rotavirus vaccination in children.

Gibory M(1)(2), Bruun T(3), Flem E(3), Dembinski JL(2), Haltbakk I(2), Størdal
K(4), Nordbø SA(5)(6), Jakobsen K(7), Haarr E(8), Leegaard TM(1)(9), Dudman
SG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Department of Virology, Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Infection Epidemiology and Modeling, Norwegian Institute of
Public Health, Oslo, Norway.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Østfold Hospital Trust, Fredrikstad, Norway.
(5)Department of Medical Microbiology, St. Olavs Hospital, Trondheim, Norway.
(6)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science
and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.
(7)Department of Microbiology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(8)Department of Medical Microbiology, Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger, 
Norway.
(9)Department of Microbiology and Infection Control, Akershus University
Hospital, Nordbyhagen, Norway.

Globally, rotavirus (RV) is the leading cause of acute gastroenteritis (AGE) in
young children under 5 years of age. Implementation of RV vaccination is expected
to result in fewer cases of RV in the target population, but it is unknown if
this also results in vaccine-induced virus strain replacement. Rotarix, a
monovalent vaccine based on G1P[8] RV, was introduced in Norway in the children's
immunization program in September 2014. The main aim of this study was to
describe the diversity of RV circulating pre and post introduction of the RV
vaccine in Norway and investigate changes in genotype distribution during the
first 4 years after implementation. A total of 1108 samples were collected from
children under 5 years enrolled with AGE from five large hospitals in Norway and 
were analyzed for RV by enzyme immunoassay (EIA). All positive results were
genotyped by multiplex semi-nested reverse transcription PCR for identification
of G and P types. In total, 487 of the 1108 (44%) samples, collected from the
enrolled children, were positive for RV by EIA method which were further
genotyped. G1P[8] was found to be the most common type of RV pre and post RV
vaccine implementation followed by G9P[8]. There were neither geographical nor
temporal differences in genotype dominance. Also, no apparent changes were shown 
in the genotype distribution in the postvaccine era for years from 2015 to 2018. 
In 21.4% of the cases, vaccine strains were detected. Continuous RV genotype
surveillance is vital for assessing the effectiveness of a vaccine program and
monitoring for any emergence of vaccine-escape strains. Genotyping is also
necessary to detect vaccine strains to avoid reporting false-positive cases of
active RV infection in newly vaccinated cases.

© 2021 The Authors. Journal of Medical Virology published by Wiley Periodicals
LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.27484 
PMID: 34837228 

