
1. Hu Li Za Zhi. 2021 Dec;68(6):73-82. doi: 10.6224/JN.202112_68(6).10.

[Enhancing Maternal-Infant Attachment in a Neonatal Intensive Care Unit During
the Pandemic Prevention Period].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Wang LY(1), Wu TJ(2), Lu TL(2), Lin KH(3).

Author information: 
(1)BSN, RN, Department of Nursing, Linkou Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taiwan,
ROC. hioooo@cgmh.org.tw.
(2)BSN, RN, Department of Nursing, Linkou Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taiwan,
ROC.
(3)MS, RN, Head Nurse, Neonatal Intensive Care Units, Linkou Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital; Adjunct Instructor, Department of Respiratory Therapy, Chang Gung
University, and Department of Nursing, Hsin Sheng Junior College of Medical Care 
and Management, Taiwan, ROC.

BACKGROUND & PROBLEMS: Parent-infant attachment is affected by parent-infant
interaction. The limitations on related visitations during the COVID-19 pandemic 
suspended the opportunity to engage in kangaroo care (skin-to-skin contact)
activities. These changes impacted parent-infant attachment in the neonatal
intensive care unit. After investigation, the score of premature infant-parent
attachment was found to be only 64.6 points during the period in which visitation
limitations were in effect.
PURPOSE: To enhance maternal-premature infant attachment during the pandemic
period by 10% (from an average score of 64.6 to 71.1).
RESOLUTION: This project involved nurses playing audio files provided by mothers 
to their premature infants, and recording a video and taking pictures of the
infants during this process. This project used a cloud platform as bidirectional 
pipelines. Furthermore, emotional support and caring information were provided to
the mothers via expressive arts therapy and phone interviews.
RESULTS: After the intervention, the premature infant-parent attachment score
rose to 74.4 from the pre-intervention score of 64.6.
CONCLUSIONS: During pandemic control periods, traditional modes of care aimed at 
building infant-parent attachment are not applicable. The intervention project
used was found to be an effective alternative approach to increasing
maternal-premature infant attachment. Breaking the restrictions of time and
place, this project applies family-centered care, and may provide a reference for
developing software, hardware, and communication equipment for other care units
related to newborns.

Publisher:
提升防疫期間新生兒加護病房之親子依附關係.親子依附是經由親子間的互動行為相互影響而建立，而新型冠狀病毒疫情逐日升溫，防疫期間探訪的限制，無法以皮膚間的接觸及袋鼠護
理建立親子間的依附關係，以致新生兒加護病房中父母的親子依附受到衝擊。經調查發現禁止家屬探視時，母親及早產兒間的依附關係僅64.6分。.於防疫期間在限制探訪時，提升
新生兒加護病房之母親與早產兒間親子依附關係10%，由平均分數64.6分至71.1分。.本專案運用母親提供之錄音檔，由護理人員播放給早產兒聽，同時錄影及拍照，以雲端
硬碟為平台進行雙向傳輸。另輔以表達性藝術治療及電訪，提供情緒支持及照護資訊。.經專案實施後母親與早產兒親子依附關係量表分數由64.6分提升至74.4分。.在新冠病
毒疫情日趨嚴峻，無法以舊有的模式建立親子依附關係，本專案可有效提升防疫期間新生兒加護病房母親之親子依附，跳脫人時地的限制，以家庭為中心的照護，並期望可提供新生兒相
關單位，作為發展相關軟、硬體通訊設備的參考。.
DOI: 10.6224/JN.202112_68(6).10 
PMID: 34839493  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

