
1. Trials. 2021 Nov 27;22(1):851. doi: 10.1186/s13063-021-05777-6.

Impact of an enhanced screening program on the detection of non-AIDS neoplasias
in patients with human immunodeficiency virus infection.

Masiá M(#)(1), Padilla S(1), Estañ G(2), Portu J(3), Silva A(4), Rivero A(5),
González-Cordón A(6), García-Fraile L(7), Martínez O(8), Bernal E(9), Galera
C(10), Boix Martínez V(11), Macias J(12), Montero M(13), García-Rosado D(14),
Vivancos-Gallego MJ(15), Llenas-García J(16), Torralba M(17), García JA(2),
Agulló V(2), González-Fernández M(2), Gutiérrez F(#)(18), Martínez E(#)(6);
IMPAC-NEO Study Group.

Collaborators: Alcaraz-García A, Caicedo A, Inciarte A, Espinosa A, López-Lirola 
A, Amador C, Silva A, Navarro A, Camacho Á, Pérez A, Galera C, Carreres M, Piatti
C, Vinuesa D, Dalmau D, García-Rosado D, Diez-Martinez M, Podzamczer D, Saez E,
Fagúndez-Reloba E, García F, Flores J, García G, García-Abellán J, Guillén L,
Navarro G, González-Cuello I, Albendín H, Ruiz-Cáceres I, Machuca I, Santos I,
Sobron I, Losa JE, Gómez-Sirvent JL, Blanco JR, Macías J, Gainzarai JC, Martínez 
L, Mallolas J, Alonso-Socas MDM, Martínez-López B, Fernández A,
Hernández-Rodríguez MJ, Moran MA, Navarro M, Pascual R, Pasquau F, Callau P,
Portilla J, Robledano C, Rojas J, Pelazas R, Cuellar S, Del Campo S, Calzado S,
Moreno S, Scévola S, Telenti G, Ortiz Z.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital General Universitario de Elche and Universidad Miguel Hernández de
Elche, Elche, Spain.
(2)Hospital General Universitario de Elche, Elche, Spain.
(3)Hospital Universitario Araba, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain.
(4)Bellvitge University Hospital-IDIBELL, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain.
(5)Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía de Córdoba, Instituto Maimónides de
Investigación Biomédica de Córdoba (IMIBIC) and Universidad de Córdoba, Córdoba, 
Spain.
(6)Hospital Clinic de Barcelona, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi 
I Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Hospital La Princesa, Madrid, Spain.
(8)Hospital General Universitario Santa Lucía de Cartagena, Murcia, Spain.
(9)Hospital General Universitario Reina Sofía de Murcia, Murcia, Spain.
(10)Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain.
(11)Hospital General Universitario de Alicante, Alicante, Spain.
(12)Hospital Universitario de Valme, Seville, Spain.
(13)Hospital La Fe, Valencia, Spain.
(14)Hospital Universitario de Canarias, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain.
(15)Hospital Ramon y Cajal and Ramon y Cajal Health Research Institute (IRYCIS), 
Madrid, Spain.
(16)Hospital Vega Baja, Alicante, Spain.
(17)Hospital Universitario de Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Spain.
(18)Hospital General Universitario de Elche and Universidad Miguel Hernández de
Elche, Elche, Spain. ueielx@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The incidence of non-AIDS defining cancer (NADC) is higher in people 
living with HIV (PLWH) than in the general population, and it is already one of
the leading causes of death in the HIV-infected population. It is estimated that 
the situation will be aggravated by the progressive aging of PLWH. Early
diagnosis through intensive cancer screening may improve the ability for
therapeutic interventions and could be critical in reducing mortality, but it
might also increase expenditure and harms associated with adverse events. The aim
of this study is to evaluate an enhanced screening program for early diagnosis of
cancer in PLWH compared to standard practice. The specific objectives are (1) to 
compare the frequency of cancer diagnosed at an early stage, (2) to analyze
safety of the enhanced program: adverse events and unnecessary interventions, (3)
to analyze the cost-utility of the program, and (4) to estimate the overall and
site-specific incidence of NADC in PLWH.
METHODS: We will conduct a multicenter, non-blinded, randomized, controlled
trial, comparing two parallel arms: conventional vs enhanced screening. Data will
be recorded in an electronic data collection notebook. Conventional intervention 
group will follow the standard of care screening in the participating centers,
according to the European AIDS Clinical Society recommendations, and the enhanced
intervention group will follow an expanded screening aimed to early detection of 
lung, liver, anal, cervical, breast, prostate, colorectal, and skin cancer. The
trial will be conducted within the framework of the Spanish AIDS Research Network
Cohort (CoRIS).
DISCUSSION: The trial will evaluate the efficacy, safety, and efficiency of an
enhanced screening program for the early diagnosis of cancer in HIV patients
compared to standard of care practice. The information provided will be relevant 
since there are currently no studies on expanded cancer screening strategies in
patients with HIV, and available data estimating cost effectiveness or
cost-utility of such as programs are scarce. An enhanced program for NADC
screening in patients with HIV could lead to early diagnosis and improve the
prognosis of these patients, with an acceptable rate of unnecessary
interventions, but it is critical to demonstrate that the benefits clearly
outweigh the harms, before the strategy could be implemented.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT04735445. Registered on 25 June 2019.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13063-021-05777-6 
PMCID: PMC8626748
PMID: 34838115  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

