
1. Cell J. 2021 Oct;23(5):523-531. doi: 10.22074/cellj.2021.7794. Epub 2021 Oct 30.

Global Scientific Research on SARS-CoV-2 Vaccines: A Bibliometric Analysis.

Rahim F(1), Khakimova A(2), Ebrahimi A(3), Zolotarev O(4), Rafiei Nasab F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Thalassemia and Hemoglobinopathy Research Centre, Ahvaz Jundishapur University
of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran.
(2)Department of Development of Scientific and Innovation Activities, Russian New
University, Moscow, Russia. Email: aida_khatif@mail.ru.
(3)Department of Medical Biotechnology, School of Paramedicine, Guilan University
of Medical Sciences, Rasht, Iran.
(4)Department of Information Systems in Economics and Management, Russian New
University, Moscow, Russia.
(5)Department of Scientometrics, Deputy of Research and Technology Affairs, Ahvaz
Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran.

Objective: We performed this bibliometric analysis to identify global scientific 
research on the SARS-CoV-2 vaccines.
Materials and Methods: This bibliometric analysis study inclusive search of
English-language publications related to the SARS-CoV-2 vaccines was conducted in
the Scopus, PubMed, and Dimensions databases without year limitations. The
results of bibliometric analysis comprised a time-dependent citation density
trend, the name of the journal, journal impact factor (IF), year of publication, 
type of article, category, subscription or affiliation, co-authorship, and
cooccurrence network.
Results: A study of the scientific literature from three databases (Scopus,
PubMed, Dimensions) shows that investigators have focused more on studying the
structure of the coronavirus at different levels (organismic, cellular, and
molecular). In addition, the method of virus penetration into the cell and
features of the influence of coronavirus on animals are well-studied. Various
methods and strategies are being used to develop the vaccines, including both
animal-tested methods and computer models. The Dimensions database is the most
representative in terms of coverage of research on development of the SARS-CoV-2 
vaccines.
Conclusion: This research is a scientific investigation based on bibliometric
analysis of papers related to the SARS-CoV-2 vaccines. The Dimensions database
provides the most representative research coverage on the creation of a vaccine
against coronavirus. It is characterized by a large number of formed verbose
terms (length of more than four words) related to coronavirus, which makes it
possible to track trends in the development of methods for creating a vaccine.

Copyright© by Royan Institute. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.22074/cellj.2021.7794 
PMCID: PMC8588811
PMID: 34837679 

Conflict of interest statement: There is no conflict of interest in this study.

