
1. J Clin Med. 2021 Nov 18;10(22). pii: 5381. doi: 10.3390/jcm10225381.

TEG®, Microclot and Platelet Mapping for Guiding Early Management of Severe
COVID-19 Coagulopathy.

Laubscher GJ(1), Lourens PJ(1), Venter C(2), Kell DB(2)(3)(4), Pretorius E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Mediclinic Stellenbosch, Stellenbosch 7600, South Africa.
(2)Department of Physiological Sciences, Faculty of Science, Stellenbosch
University, Stellenbosch 7602, South Africa.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Systems Biology, Institute of Systems,
Molecular and Integrative Biology, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences,
University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 7ZB, UK.
(4)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Centre for Biosustainability, Technical University
of Denmark, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark.

An important component of severe COVID-19 disease is virus-induced
endothelilitis. This leads to disruption of normal endothelial function,
initiating a state of failing normal clotting physiology. Massively increased
levels of von Willebrand Factor (VWF) lead to overwhelming platelet activation,
as well as activation of the enzymatic (intrinsic) clotting pathway. In addition,
there is an impaired fibrinolysis, caused by, amongst others, increased levels of
alpha-(2) antiplasmin. The end result is hypercoagulation (proven by
thromboelastography® (TEG®)) and reduced fibrinolysis, inevitably leading to a
difficult-to-overcome hypercoagulated physiological state. Platelets in
circulation also plays a significant role in clot formation, but they themselves 
may also drive hypercoagulation when they are overactivated due to the
interactions of their receptors with the endothelium, immune cells or circulating
inflammatory molecules. From the literature it is clear that the role of
platelets in severely ill COVID-19 patients has been markedly underestimated or
even ignored. We here highlight the value of early management of severe COVID-19 
coagulopathy as guided by TEG®, microclot and platelet mapping. We also argue
that the failure of clinical trials, where the efficacy of prophylactic versus
therapeutic clexane (low molecular weight heparin (LMWH)) were not always
successful, which may be because the significant role of platelet activation was 
not taken into account during the planning of the trial. We conclude that,
because of the overwhelming alteration of clotting, the outcome of any trial
evaluating an any single anticoagulant, including thrombolytic, would be
negative. Here we suggest the use of the degree of platelet dysfunction and
presence of microclots in circulation, together with TEG®, might be used as a
guideline for disease severity. A multi-pronged approach, guided by TEG® and
platelet mapping, would be required to maintain normal clotting physiology in
severe COVID-19 disease.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm10225381 
PMCID: PMC8621180
PMID: 34830660 

