
1. Cell Res. 2021 Nov 26. doi: 10.1038/s41422-021-00595-6. [Epub ahead of print]

Receptome profiling identifies KREMEN1 and ASGR1 as alternative functional
receptors of SARS-CoV-2.

Gu Y(#)(1), Cao J(#)(1)(2), Zhang X(#)(1), Gao H(#)(1)(3), Wang Y(#)(4), Wang
J(#)(5), He J(#)(6), Jiang X(#)(1), Zhang J(1), Shen G(2), Yang J(1), Zheng
X(1)(2), Hu G(4), Zhu Y(4), Du S(4), Zhu Y(4), Zhang R(4), Xu J(1)(7), Lan F(1), 
Qu D(4), Xu G(1)(5), Zhao Y(8), Gao D(9), Xie Y(10)(11), Luo M(12)(13), Lu Z(14).

Author information: 
(1)The Fifth People's Hospital of Shanghai, the Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Medical Epigenetics, the International Co-laboratory of Medical Epigenetics and
Metabolism, Ministry of Science and Technology, Institutes of Biomedical
Sciences, Shanghai Institute of Infectious Diseases and Biosecurity, Shanghai
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Institute of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai,
China.
(3)Zhongshan-Xuhui Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology (MOE/MOH), School of Basic
Medical Sciences, Shanghai Institute of Infectious Diseases and Biosecurity,
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in
Molecular Cell Science, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Molecular
Andrology, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, Institute of
Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(7)Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(8)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in
Molecular Cell Science, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
yunzhao@sibcb.ac.cn.
(9)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Molecular
Andrology, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, Institute of
Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China. dong.gao@sibcb.ac.cn.
(10)The Fifth People's Hospital of Shanghai, the Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Medical Epigenetics, the International Co-laboratory of Medical Epigenetics and
Metabolism, Ministry of Science and Technology, Institutes of Biomedical
Sciences, Shanghai Institute of Infectious Diseases and Biosecurity, Shanghai
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. yhxie@fudan.edu.cn.
(11)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology (MOE/MOH), School of Basic
Medical Sciences, Shanghai Institute of Infectious Diseases and Biosecurity,
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. yhxie@fudan.edu.cn.
(12)The Fifth People's Hospital of Shanghai, the Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Medical Epigenetics, the International Co-laboratory of Medical Epigenetics and
Metabolism, Ministry of Science and Technology, Institutes of Biomedical
Sciences, Shanghai Institute of Infectious Diseases and Biosecurity, Shanghai
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. luo_min@fudan.edu.cn.
(13)Institute of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai,
China. luo_min@fudan.edu.cn.
(14)The Fifth People's Hospital of Shanghai, the Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Medical Epigenetics, the International Co-laboratory of Medical Epigenetics and
Metabolism, Ministry of Science and Technology, Institutes of Biomedical
Sciences, Shanghai Institute of Infectious Diseases and Biosecurity, Shanghai
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. zhiganglu@fudan.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Host cellular receptors play key roles in the determination of virus tropism and 
pathogenesis. However, little is known about SARS-CoV-2 host receptors with the
exception of ACE2. Furthermore, ACE2 alone cannot explain the multi-organ tropism
of SARS-CoV-2 nor the clinical differences between SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV,
suggesting the involvement of other receptor(s). Here, we performed genomic
receptor profiling to screen 5054 human membrane proteins individually for
interaction with the SARS-CoV-2 capsid spike (S) protein. Twelve proteins,
including ACE2, ASGR1, and KREMEN1, were identified with diverse S-binding
affinities and patterns. ASGR1 or KREMEN1 is sufficient for the entry of
SARS-CoV-2 but not SARS-CoV in vitro and in vivo. SARS-CoV-2 utilizes distinct
ACE2/ASGR1/KREMEN1 (ASK) receptor combinations to enter different cell types, and
the expression of ASK together displays a markedly stronger correlation with
virus susceptibility than that of any individual receptor at both the cell and
tissue levels. The cocktail of ASK-related neutralizing antibodies provides the
most substantial blockage of SARS-CoV-2 infection in human lung organoids when
compared to individual antibodies. Our study revealed an interacting host
receptome of SARS-CoV-2, and identified ASGR1 and KREMEN1 as alternative
functional receptors that play essential roles in ACE2-independent virus entry,
providing insight into SARS-CoV-2 tropism and pathogenesis, as well as a
community resource and potential therapeutic strategies for further COVID-19
investigations.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Center for Excellence in
Molecular Cell Science, CAS.

DOI: 10.1038/s41422-021-00595-6 
PMCID: PMC8617373
PMID: 34837059 

