
1. Life (Basel). 2021 Nov 22;11(11). pii: 1280. doi: 10.3390/life11111280.

Detection of pks Island mRNAs Using Toehold Sensors in Escherichia coli.

Heo T(1), Kang H(1), Choi S(1), Kim J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Pohang University of Science and Technology,
Pohang 37673, Korea.

Synthetic biologists have applied biomolecular engineering approaches toward the 
goal of novel biological devices and have shown progress in diverse areas of
medicine and biotechnology. Especially promising is the application of synthetic 
biological devices towards a novel class of molecular diagnostics. As an example,
a de-novo-designed riboregulator called toehold switch, with its programmability 
and compatibility with field-deployable devices showed promising in vitro
applications for viral RNA detection such as Zika and Corona viruses. However,
the in vivo application of high-performance RNA sensors remains challenging due
to the secondary structure of long mRNA species. Here, we introduced 'Helper
RNAs' that can enhance the functionality of toehold switch sensors by mitigating 
the effect of secondary structures around a target site. By employing the helper 
RNAs, previously reported mCherry mRNA sensor showed improved fold-changes in
vivo. To further generalize the Helper RNA approaches, we employed automatic
design pipeline for toehold sensors that target the essential genes within the
pks island, an important target of biomedical research in connection with
colorectal cancer. The toehold switch sensors showed fold-changes upon the
expression of full-length mRNAs that apparently depended sensitively on the
identity of the gene as well as the predicted local structure within the target
region of the mRNA. Still, the helper RNAs could improve the performance of
toehold switch sensors in many instances, with up to 10-fold improvement over no 
helper cases. These results suggest that the helper RNA approaches can further
assist the design of functional RNA devices in vivo with the aid of the
streamlined automatic design software developed here. Further, our solutions for 
screening and stabilizing single-stranded region of mRNA may find use in other in
vivo mRNA-sensing applications such as cas13 crRNA design, transcriptome
engineering, and trans-cleaving ribozymes.

DOI: 10.3390/life11111280 
PMCID: PMC8625898
PMID: 34833155 

