
1. Cornea. 2021 Nov 24. doi: 10.1097/ICO.0000000000002790. [Epub ahead of print]

Acellular Porcine Cornea Produced by Supercritical Carbon Dioxide Extraction: A
Potential Substitute for Human Corneal Regeneration.

Liang CM(1), Hsieh DJ, Tseng FW, Srinivasan P, Yeh ML, Tai MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, College of Medicine, National Defense Medical
Center, Taipei, Taiwan; R&D Center, ACRO Biomedical Co, Ltd, Kaohsiung, Taiwan;
and Department of Biomedical Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan,
Taiwan.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to develop a non-cytotoxic, biocompatible
innovative acellular porcine cornea (APC) for corneal wound healing and corneal
blindness treatment.
METHODS: APC was produced by using supercritical carbon dioxide (SCCO2) to
decellularize the porcine cornea. Decellularization of the porcine cornea was
examined by hematoxylin and eosin staining and 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole,
dihydrochloride staining. The residual DNA content of APC was analyzed in
comparison with the native porcine cornea. Virus inactivation up to at least 6
log10 was confirmed for the stepwise process of APC for 4 different model
viruses. In addition, a series of in vitro and in vivo tests in accordance with
ISO-10993 biocompatibility assay and animal performance tests were performed.
RESULTS: APC produced by the SCCO2 process revealed complete decellularization,
without any residual non-collagenous proteins. The scanning electron microscopy
structural features of the decellularized cornea were similar to those of human. 
APC was found to be nontoxic and exhibited excellent biocompatibility in both in 
vitro and in vivo studies. The animal performance test proved that APC exerted
excellent adaptability on the cornea and no sign of irritation and good
compatibility in lamellar corneal transplantation.
CONCLUSIONS: APC manufactured by SCCO2 technology revealed complete cells and
non-collagenous protein removal compared with the Triton-sodium dodecyl sulfate
decellularization process. APC showed excellent biocompatibility in rabbit
lamellar corneal transplantation with a follow-up to 1 year. APC can be a
potential substitute for human-donated cornea for corneal transplantation in the 
near future.

Copyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/ICO.0000000000002790 
PMID: 34839331 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no funding or conflicts of
interest to disclose.

