
1. Drug Alcohol Rev. 2021 Nov 28. doi: 10.1111/dar.13414. [Epub ahead of print]

Client resistance to hepatitis C treatment initiation in opioid agonist treatment
clinics in Sydney, Australia: A qualitative study.

Coupland H(1)(2)(3), Day C(1)(2)(3), Haber P(1)(2)(3), Pritchard-Jones J(4),
McKee K(5), George J(5), McCaughan G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Edith Collins Centre (Translational Research in Alcohol, Drugs and
Toxicology), Sydney Local Health District, Sydney, Australia.
(2)Drug Health Services, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, Australia.
(3)Specialty of Addiction Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The
University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(4)W Morrow Gastroenterology and Liver Centre, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital,
Sydney Local Health District, Sydney, Australia.
(5)Storr Liver Centre, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, Australia.

INTRODUCTION: Opioid agonist treatment (OAT) clinics play a key role in achieving
elimination of hepatitis C virus (HCV) globally. Previous research has identified
barriers to HCV treatment uptake in OAT clinics; however, most studies were
conducted prior to the introduction of direct-acting antiviral treatments (DAA). 
It remains unclear whether progress has been made in responding to barriers and
what challenges persist in this setting.
METHODS: Semi-structured in-depth interviews were conducted with staff (n = 20)
and clients (n = 15) in two OAT clinics in Sydney, Australia. Interviews were
transcribed verbatim and analysed using constant comparative methods.
RESULTS: Despite progress in integrating hepatitis C care in the clinics,
competing priorities, concerns about side-effects, distrust of staff, health
problems and difficulties accessing testing and medication persisted as key
reasons why clients had not initiated treatment. Most clients preferred to
postpone treatment and focus on other priorities and some highlighted lack of
medical evidence for urgent treatment. Pressure on services to achieve
elimination targets within set time frames was a primary driver of repeated
offers of treatment by staff and the framing of clients' preferences for
postponing treatment, as a barrier.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: Current timelines for HCV elimination targets may have
galvanised services into action but may have also created tensions at the
coalface due to disparities between staff and clients' priorities. The
involvement of peer workers and mechanisms to ensure continued follow up with
clients about DAA treatments is required. Public health timelines for HCV
elimination need to be informed by affected communities' priorities.

© 2021 Australasian Professional Society on Alcohol and other Drugs.

DOI: 10.1111/dar.13414 
PMID: 34839561 

