
1. J Virol Methods. 2021 Nov 26;300:114383. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114383.
[Epub ahead of print]

Evaluation of sensitivity and specificity in RNA-Seq-based detection of grapevine
viral pathogens.

Di Gaspero G(1), Radovic S(2), De Luca E(3), Spadotto A(2), Magris G(4),
Falginella L(3), Cattonaro F(2), Marroni F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Genomica Applicata, Udine, Italy.
(2)IGA Technology Services s.r.l., Udine, Italy.
(3)Vivai Cooperativi Rauscedo, Rauscedo, Italy.
(4)Department of Agricultural, Food, Environmental and Animal Sciences,
University of Udine, Udine, Italy.
(5)Department of Agricultural, Food, Environmental and Animal Sciences,
University of Udine, Udine, Italy. Electronic address: fabio.marroni@uniud.it.

Virus detection is a crucial step for the implementation of clean stock programs 
that preserve healthy crop species. Viral infections in grapevine, a vegetatively
propagated perennial crop, cannot be eradicated from the vineyards by the
application of agrochemicals and must be curtailed at the stage of nursery
production during the propagation of planting material. Viral detection is
routinely performed using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) or Reverse
Transcription-quantitative Polymerase Chain Reactions (RT-qPCR). High throughput 
sequencing (HTS) approaches have the potential to detect all viral pathogens in a
plant specimen. However, to date, no published HTS-based study has used threshold
selection based on ROC curves for discriminating positive from negative samples. 
To fill this gap, we assessed the specificity and sensitivity of different
sequencing and bioinformatics approaches for nine common viruses, which were
tested in the same specimens using ELISA and/or RT-qPCR. The normalized detection
thresholds giving the best results were 19.28 Fragments Per Kilobase of
transcript per Million mapped reads (FPKM) for alignment-based total RNA-Seq
approaches, 386 Reads Per Million mapped reads (RPM) for metagenomics-based total
RNA-Seq, 1572 FPKM for alignment-based small RNA-Seq analysis and 0.97 % of
contigs for de novo analysis of small RNA-Seq data. Validation of the proposed
thresholds using independent specimens collected over time from the same stocks
and other specimens collected from nearby stocks that had derived from the same
propagating material showed that HTS approaches are accurate, with RNA-Seq
approaches showing better performance than small RNA-Seq.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114383 
PMID: 34843827 

