
1. J Med Internet Res. 2021 Nov 29;23(11):e26743. doi: 10.2196/26743.

Using Ecological Momentary Assessment to Study the Development of COVID-19
Worries in Sweden: Longitudinal Study.

Schulz PJ(1), Andersson EM(2), Bizzotto N(1), Norberg M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Communication and Health, Università della Svizzera italiana,
Lugano, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Psychology, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Global Health, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: The foray of COVID-19 around the globe has certainly instigated
worries in many people, and lockdown measures may well have triggered more
specific worries. Sweden, more than other countries, relied on voluntary measures
to fight the pandemic. This provides a particularly interesting context to assess
people's reactions to the threat of the pandemic.
OBJECTIVE: The general aim of this study was to better understand the worried
reactions to the virus and the associated lockdown measures. As there have been
very few longitudinal studies in this area published to date, development of
feelings of worry over time was analyzed over a longer range than in previous
research. Affective variables, worry in particular, were included because most of
the research in this field has focused on cognitive variables. To employ new
methodology, ecological momentary assessment was used for data collection and a
multilevel modeling approach was adopted for data analysis.
METHODS: Results were based on an unbalanced panel sample of 260 Swedish
participants filling in 3226 interview questionnaires by smartphone over a 7-week
period in 2020 during the rapid rise of cases in the early phase of the pandemic.
Causal factors considered in this study included the perceived severity of an
infection, susceptibility of a person to the threat posed by the virus, perceived
efficacy of safeguarding measures, and assessment of government action against
the spread of COVID-19. The effect of these factors on worries was traced in two 
analytical steps: the effects at the beginning of the study and the effect on the
trend during the study.
RESULTS: The level of general worry related to COVID-19 was modest (mean 6.67, SD
2.54 on an 11-point Likert scale); the increase during the study period was
small, but the interindividual variation of both the worry level and its increase
over time was large. Findings confirmed that the hypothesized causal factors
(severity of infection, susceptibility to the threat of the virus, efficacy of
safeguarding, and assessment of government preventive action) did indeed affect
the level of worry.
CONCLUSIONS: The results confirmed earlier research in a very special case and
demonstrated the usefulness of a different study design, which takes a
longitudinal perspective, and a new type of data analysis borrowed from
multilevel study design.

©Peter Johannes Schulz, Elin M Andersson, Nicole Bizzotto, Margareta Norberg.
Originally published in the Journal of Medical Internet Research
(https://www.jmir.org), 29.11.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/26743 
PMID: 34847065 

