
1. Acta Neurol Taiwan. 2021 Sep 30;30(3):108-112.

A 50 Year-Old Woman with A Delayed Diagnosis of Neuromyelitis Optica Spectrum
Disorder: The Clinical Course and Serial Neuroimaging Findings.

Huang YJ(1), Chang WN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital-Kaohsiung Medical
Center, Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

PURPOSE: Neuromyelitis optica (NMO) spectrum disorder and multiple sclerosis (MS)
have similar clinical presentations which may make a diagnostic difficulty,
especially when the data of aquaporin-4 (AQP4) antibody is not available. We
reported the diagnostic and therapeutic dilemma of a woman with a delayed
diagnosis of NMO spectrum disorder for more than 20 years.
CASE REPORT: The patient was a 51 years old woman who suffered from several
episodes of relapsing and remission of limbs weakness, visual impairment and gait
disturbance since 29 years old. She was diagnosed as a case of MS and received
treatment accordingly. Treatment with the use of Rebif was started since
2008-2012, and was then shifted to Fingolimod due to several minor attacks were
still noted during this period. Serum AQP4-IgG was checked before the use of
Fingolimod by using Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and the result
showed sero-negative for this Ab. However, occasional minor attacks were still
noted. In May 2018, severe relapsing developed and brain magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) showed marked progression of the brain lesion. Initially,
progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy was suspected, but both cerebrospinal 
fluid and serologic study for John Cunningham virus (JCV) were negative. AQP4-IgG
was rechecked by using cell-based assay (CBA), and the result showed positive
finding. Thereafter, her therapy was changed to NMO spectrum disorder regimen.
CONCLUSION: It is worthwhile to recheck the serum AQP4-IgG if the initial study
showed negative result by using ELISA since CBA has higher sensitivity than
previous study method.


PMID: 34841506  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

