
1. Biomacromolecules. 2021 Nov 30. doi: 10.1021/acs.biomac.1c01187. [Epub ahead of
print]

Polymer-Mediated Cryopreservation of Bacteriophages.

Marton HL(1), Styles KM(2), Kilbride P(3), Sagona AP(2), Gibson MI(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, U.K.
(2)School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, U.K.
(3)Asymptote, Cytiva, Chivers Way, Cambridge CB24 9BZ, U.K.
(4)Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, U.K.

Bacteriophages (phages, bacteria-specific viruses) have biotechnological and
therapeutic potential. To apply phages as pure or heterogeneous mixtures, it is
essential to have a robust mechanism for transport and storage, with different
phages having very different stability profiles across storage conditions. For
many biologics, cryopreservation is employed for long-term storage and
cryoprotectants are essential to mitigate cold-induced damage. Here, we report
that poly(ethylene glycol) can be used to protect phages from cold damage,
functioning at just 10 mg·mL-1 (∼1 wt %) and outperforms glycerol in many cases, 
which is a currently used cryoprotectant. Protection is afforded at both -20 and 
-80 °C, the two most common temperatures for frozen storage in laboratory
settings. Crucially, the concentration of the polymer required leads to frozen
solutions at -20 °C, unlike 50% glycerol (which results in liquid solutions).
Post-thaw recoveries close to 100% plaque-forming units were achieved even after 
2 weeks of storage with this method and kill assays against their bacterial host 
confirmed the lytic function of the phages. Initial experiments with other
hydrophilic polymers also showed cryoprotection, but at this stage, the exact
mechanism of this protection cannot be concluded but does show that water-soluble
polymers offer an alternative tool for phage storage. Ice recrystallization
inhibiting polymers (poly(vinyl alcohol)) were found to provide no additional
protection, in contrast to their ability to protect proteins and microorganisms
which are damaged by recrystallization. PEG's low cost, solubility,
well-established low toxicity/immunogenicity, and that it is fit for human
consumption at the concentrations used make it ideal to help translate new
approaches for phage therapy.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biomac.1c01187 
PMID: 34846863 

