
1. Eur J Immunol. 2021 Nov 29. doi: 10.1002/eji.202149457. [Epub ahead of print]

Imprint of unconventional T cell response in acute hepatitis C persists despite
successful early antiviral treatment.

Du Y(1), Khera T(1)(2), Strunz B(3), Deterding K(1)(2), Todt D(4)(5), Woller
N(2), Engelskircher SA(2), Hardtke S(2)(6), Port K(2), Ponzetta A(3), Steinmann
E(4), Cornberg M(2)(7)(6)(8)(9), Hengst J(2), Björkström NK(3), Wedemeyer
H(1)(2)(6); HepNet Acute HCV Ⅳ Study Group(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital Essen,
University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany.
(3)Center for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine Huddinge, Karolinska
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Molecular and Medical Virology, Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum, 
Germany.
(5)European Virus Bioinformatics Center (EVBC), Jena, Germany.
(6)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), HepNet Study-House, Hannover,
Germany.
(7)Center for individualized infection medicine (CIIM), Hannover, Germany.
(8)Twincore, Centre for Experimental and Clinical Infection Research, Hannover,
Germany.
(9)Cluster of Excellence Resolving Infection Susceptibility (RESIST: EXC),
Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.

Unconventional T cells (UTCs) are a heterogenous group of T cells that typically 
exhibit rapid responses towards specific antigens from pathogens. Chronic
hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection causes dysfunction of several subsets of UTCs. 
This altered phenotype and function of UTCs can persist over time even after
direct acting antiviral (DAA) mediated clearance of chronic HCV. However, it is
less clear if and how UTCs respond in acute, symptomatic HCV infection, a rare
clinical condition, and if rapid DAA treatment of such patients reverses the
caused perturbations within UTCs. Here, we comprehensively analyzed the phenotype
and reinvigoration capacity of three major UTC populations, mucosal associated
invariant T (MAIT) cells, γδ T cells, and CD4 and CD8 double-negative αβ T cells 
(DNT cells) before, during, and after DAA-mediated clearance of acute symptomatic
HCV infection. Furthermore, MAIT cell functionality was systematically studied.
We observed a reduced frequency of MAIT cells. However, remaining cells presented
with a near-to-normal phenotype in acute infection, which contrasted with a
significant dysfunction upon stimulation that was not restored after viral
clearance. Notably, DNT and γδ T cells displayed a strong activation ex-vivo in
acute HCV infection, which subsequently normalized during the course of
treatment. In addition, DNT cell activation was specifically associated with
liver inflammation and inflammatory cytokines. Altogether, these data provide
evidence that UTCs respond in a cell type-specific manner during symptomatic HCV 
infection. However, even if early treatment is initiated, long-lasting imprints
within UTCs remain over time. This article is protected by copyright. All rights 
reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.202149457 
PMID: 34843107 

