
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 29;16(11):e0260473. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260473.
eCollection 2021.

Antibiotic use for respiratory syncytial virus in the Middle East: A surveillance
study in hospitalized Jordanian children.

Rankin DA(1)(2), Khankari NK(3), Haddadin Z(1), Hamdan O(1), Yanis A(1), Faouri
S(4), Shehabi A(5), Williams JV(6), Khuri-Bulos N(5), Halasa NB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee, United States of America.
(2)Vanderbilt Epidemiology PhD Program, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America.
(3)Division of Genetic Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee, United States of America.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Al Bashir Hospital, Amman, Jordan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Jordan University, Amman, Jordan.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

INTRODUCTION: In developing countries where point-of-care testing is limited,
providers rely on clinical judgement to discriminate between viral and bacterial 
respiratory infections. We performed a cross-sectional cohort study of
hospitalized Jordanian children to evaluate antibiotic use for respiratory
syncytial virus (RSV) infections.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Admitting diagnoses from a prior viral surveillance cohort
of hospitalized Jordanian children were dichotomized into suspected viral-like,
non-pulmonary bacterial-like, and pulmonary bacterial-like infection. Stratifying
by sex, we performed a polytomous logistic regression adjusting for age,
underlying medical condition, maternal education, and region of residence to
estimate prevalence odds ratios (PORs) for antibiotic use during hospitalization.
Sensitivity and specificity of admission diagnoses and research laboratory
results were compared.
RESULTS: Children with a suspected viral-like admission diagnosis, compared to
those with suspected non-pulmonary bacterial-like, were 88% and 86% less likely
to be administered an empiric/first-line antibiotic (male, aPOR: 0.12; female,
aPOR: 0.14; p-value = <0.001). There were slight differences by sex with males
having a lower prevalence than females in being administered an expanded coverage
antibiotic; but they had a higher prevalence of macrolide administration than
males with non-pulmonary bacterial-like infection. Overall, children with RSV had
a 34% probability (sensitivity) of being assigned to a suspected viral-like
diagnosis; whereas RSV-negative children had a 76% probability (specificity) of
being assigned to a suspected pulmonary bacterial-like diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Hospitalized children with a suspected viral-like admission
diagnosis were less likely to receive an empiric/first-line and expanded coverage
antibiotic compared to suspected non-pulmonary and pulmonary infections; however,
when evaluating the accuracy of admission diagnosis to RSV-laboratory results
there were considerable misclassifications. These results highlight the need for 
developing antibiotic interventions for Jordan and the rest of the Middle East.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260473 
PMCID: PMC8629301
PMID: 34843571 

Conflict of interest statement: Natasha Halasa, MD, MPH receives grant support
from Sanofi, Quidel, and speaker compensation from an education grant supported
by Genentech. Sanofi also donated vaccines and influenza antibody testing for
influenza vaccine trial. John Williams, MD is on the scientific board for Quidel,
Independent Data Safely Monitoring Committee, GlaxoSmithKline, scientific
advisory board ID Connect. All of the other authors declare no competing
interests. These conflicts do not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on
sharing data and materials.

