
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 29;16(11):e0260443. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260443.
eCollection 2021.

Virus-infection in cochlear supporting cells induces audiosensory receptor hair
cell death by TRAIL-induced necroptosis.

Hayashi Y(1), Suzuki H(2), Nakajima W(1), Uehara I(1), Tanimura A(1), Himeda
T(3), Koike S(4), Katsuno T(5), Kitajiri SI(5), Koyanagi N(6), Kawaguchi Y(6),
Onomoto K(7), Kato H(8), Yoneyama M(7), Fujita T(8), Tanaka N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Institute for Advanced Medical Sciences,
Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Division of Morphological and Biomolecular Research, Nippon Medical School,
Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Kanazawa Medical University School of Medicine,
Ishikawa, Japan.
(4)Neurovirology Project, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, Tokyo,
Japan.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Kyoto University, Kyoto, 
Japan.
(6)Division of Molecular Virology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The
Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Division of Molecular Immunology, Medical Mycology Research Center, Chiba
University, Chiba, Japan.
(8)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan.

Although sensorineural hearing loss (SHL) is relatively common, its cause has not
been identified in most cases. Previous studies have suggested that viral
infection is a major cause of SHL, especially sudden SHL, but the system that
protects against pathogens in the inner ear, which is isolated by the
blood-labyrinthine barrier, remains poorly understood. We recently showed that,
as audiosensory receptor cells, cochlear hair cells (HCs) are protected by
surrounding accessory supporting cells (SCs) and greater epithelial ridge (GER or
Kölliker's organ) cells (GERCs) against viral infections. Here, we found that
virus-infected SCs and GERCs induce HC death via production of the tumour
necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL). Notably, the HCs
expressed the TRAIL death receptors (DR) DR4 and DR5, and virus-induced HC death 
was suppressed by TRAIL-neutralizing antibodies. TRAIL-induced HC death was not
caused by apoptosis, and was inhibited by necroptosis inhibitors. Moreover,
corticosteroids, the only effective drug for SHL, inhibited the virus-induced
transformation of SCs and GERCs into macrophage-like cells and HC death, while
macrophage depletion also inhibited virus-induced HC death. These results reveal 
a novel mechanism underlying virus-induced HC death in the cochlear sensory
epithelium and suggest a possible target for preventing virus-induced SHL.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260443 
PMCID: PMC8629241
PMID: 34843580 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

