
1. Clin Chim Acta. 2021 Nov 27;524:78-83. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2021.11.017. [Epub
ahead of print]

Comparison of laboratory diagnosis, clinical manifestation, and management of
pulmonary cryptococcosis: Report of the clinical scenario and literature review.

Hsiao PJ(1), Cheng H(2), Kao YH(3), Wang YH(4), Chiu CC(5), Chiang WF(6), Kuo
CC(7), Chuu CP(8), Wu KA(9).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Taoyuan Armed Forces 
General Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan; Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, 
Taiwan; Department of Life Sciences, National Central University, Taoyuan,
Taiwan. Electronic address: doc10510@aftygh.gov.tw.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Taoyuan Armed Forces General Hospital,
Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Life Sciences, National Central University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Taoyuan Armed Forces General Hospital,
Taoyuan, Taiwan; Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine,
Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Internal Medicine, Taoyuan Armed
Forces General Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan; Division of Infectious Disease and
Tropical Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Tri-Service General Hospital,
National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Taoyuan Armed Forces 
General Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan; Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(7)Division of Metabolism and Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine,
Taoyuan Armed Forces General Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(8)Institute of Cellular and System Medicine, National Health Research
Institutes, Miaoli County, Taiwan; Graduate Program for Aging, China Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(9)Division of Pulmonary & Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Taoyuan Armed Forces General Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Pulmonary cryptococcosis is an opportunistic aggressive mycosis in
immunocompromised patients, but it can be increasingly seen in immunocompetent
patients. It is still challenging to make a rapid and accurate diagnosis due to
the various clinical manifestations and limitations in the diagnostic tools.
METHOD: A 54-year-old man presented with intermittent productive cough and fever 
for 1 week. A chest X-ray demonstrated multiple consolidations in both lungs.
Blood biochemistry indicated elevated immunoglobulin G levels. Including sputum
cultures, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests for severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2, influenza A and B virus were all negative. Computed
tomography of the chest showed ground-glass opacities with a nodular pattern. The
serum cryptococcal antigen test was positive; however, the cerebral spinal fluid 
was negative. The diagnosis of pulmonary cryptococcal infection was made. An
initial bronchoscopy was performed unsuccessfully and the patient received
intravenous fluconazole therapy for 2 weeks. Due to poor improvement of clinical 
condition, he then underwent a surgical lung biopsy. The pathology revealed
several encapsulated yeast cells, diffuse pulmonary interstitial fibrosis,
noncaseating granulomas surrounded by T lymphocytes and multinucleated giant
cells with intracellular inclusions, confirming pulmonary yeast infection
associated with hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Ultimately, fungal cultures of the 
pathology samples revealed Cryptococcus neoformans. Subsequently antifungal
therapy combined with oral steroid treatment, his general condition improved.
After a total of 6 months of antifungal therapy, the patient recovered
completely.
CONCLUSIONS: Applicable laboratory diagnosis can help facilitate the accurate and
rapid diagnosis of pulmonary cryptococcosis. This report elected to provide an
update on the topic of laboratory diagnosis, clinical manifestation, and
management of pulmonary cryptococcosis.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2021.11.017 
PMID: 34843703 

