
1. Neurologist. 2021 Nov 26. doi: 10.1097/NRL.0000000000000353. [Epub ahead of
print]

HSV-encephalitis Resembling Acute Cerebral Infarction in a Patient With Atrial
Fibrillation: Beware of Stroke Mimics.

Kargiotis O(1), Oikonomi K, Geka A, Psychogios K, Safouris A, Zis P, Kararizou E,
Papadionisiou P, Tsivgoulis G.

Author information: 
(1)Stroke Unit, Metropolitan Hospital, Piraeus Departments of Radiology
Ophthalmology, Olympion Medical Center Cardiologist, Private Practice, Patras
First Department of Neurology, Eginition Hospital, Medical School, National and
Kapodistrian University of Athens Second Department of Neurology, School of
Medicine, National & Kapodistiran University of Athens, "Attikon" University
Hospital, Athens, Greece Medical School, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus.

INTRODUCTION: Herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1) encephalitis, the most common and
potentially life-threatening type of encephalitis, may rarely present as a stroke
mimic. Prompt diagnosis is of paramount importance for the timely initiation of
antiviral treatment and to avert intravenous thrombolysis.
CASE REPORT: A 60-year-old man with a history of lone paroxysmal atrial
fibrillation without prior antithrombotic treatment was admitted due to mild gait
unsteadiness and intermittent dysarthria of acute onset. On admission, the
patient was afebrile, whereas neurological examination revealed only a mild
pronator drift on the left. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an
extensive right temporo-occipital and thalamic lesion with restricted diffusion
and 3 small-sized hemorrhagic foci. Brain MR-angiography did not show large
vessel stenosis or occlusion. On the basis of careful observation and the
depiction of several imaging discrepancies, such as early vasogenic edema and
hemorrhagic transformation, as well as uncus involvement, but also the lack of
significant neurological deficits despite the size of the brain lesion we
suspected viral encephalitis which was confirmed by the detection of HSV-1 DNA in
the cerebrospinal fluid.
CONCLUSION: HSV-encephalitis might occasionally result in the development of
unilateral brain MRI lesions with extensive cytotoxic edema, resembling an acute 
ischemic stroke. Therefore, HSV-encephalitis must be considered in the
differential diagnosis of acute ischemic stroke with atypical presentation. The
presence of a significant dissociation between the brain MRI lesion volume and
the neurological deficits, as well as certain brain MRI imaging discrepancies
might serve as "red flags" to extend the diagnostic workup.

Copyright © Copyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/NRL.0000000000000353 
PMID: 34842570 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

