
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 30;16(11):e0259425. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259425.
eCollection 2021.

Using Theory of Change to inform the design of the HIV+D intervention for
integrating the management of depression in routine HIV care in Uganda.

Ssebunnya J(1)(2), Mugisha J(3), Mpango R(1), Kyohangirwe L(3), Taasi G(4),
Ssentongo H(5), Kaleebu P(1), Patel V(6), Kinyanda E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mental Health Research Unit, Medical Research Council/Uganda Virus Research
Institute & London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine Uganda Research Unit, 
Entebbe, Uganda.
(2)Butabika National Referral Mental Hospital, Kampala, Uganda.
(3)Department of Social Work and Social Administration, Kyambogo University,
Kampala, Uganda.
(4)STD/AIDS Control Program, Ministry of Health, Kampala, Uganda.
(5)Mental Health Division, Ministry of Health, Kampala, Uganda.
(6)Department of Global Health and Social Medicine, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

There is growing recognition of the burden of depression in people living with
HIV/AIDS (PLWHA), associated with negative behavioural and clinical outcomes.
Unfortunately, most HIV care providers in sub-Saharan Africa do not routinely
provide mental health services to address this problem. This article describes
the process of developing a model for integrating the management of depression in
HIV care in Uganda. Theory of Change (ToC) methodology was used to guide the
process of developing the model. Three successive ToC workshops were held with a 
multi-disciplinary group of 38 stakeholders within Wakiso district, in the
Central region of Uganda. The first 2 workshops were for generating practical
ideas for a feasible and acceptable model of integrating the management of
depression in HIV care at all levels of care within the district healthcare
system; while the third and final workshop was for consensus building. Following 
meaningful brainstorming and discussions, the stakeholders suggested improved
mental wellbeing among PLWHA as the ultimate outcome of the program. This would
be preceded by short-term and intermediate outcomes including reduced morbidity
among persons with HIV attributable to depression, allocation of more resources
towards management of depression, increased help-seeking among depressed PLWHA
and more health workers detecting and managing depression. These would be
achieved following several interventions undertaken at all levels of care. The
participants further identified some indicators of successful implementation such
as emphasis of depression management in the district healthcare plans, increased 
demand for anti-depressants etc; as well as various assumptions underlying the
intervention. All these were graphically aligned in a causal pathway, leading to 
a ToC map, contextualizing and summarizing the intervention model. The ToC was a 
valuable methodology that brought together stakeholders to identify key
strategies for development of a comprehensible contextualized intervention model 
for managing depression within HIV care in Uganda; allowing greater stakeholder
engagement and buy-in.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259425 
PMCID: PMC8631669
PMID: 34847165 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

