
1. BioDrugs. 2021 Nov 29. doi: 10.1007/s40259-021-00511-9. [Epub ahead of print]

SARS-CoV-2 Neutralization in Convalescent Plasma and Commercial Lots of
Plasma-Derived Immunoglobulin.

Volk A(#)(1), Covini-Souris C(#)(2), Kuehnel D(3), De Mey C(4), Römisch J(#)(2), 
Schmidt T(#)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Virus and Prion Validation, Octapharma Biopharmaceuticals GmbH, Frankfurt,
Germany. andreas.volk@octapharma.com.
(2)R&D Plasma, Octapharma Pharmazeutika Produktionsgesellschaft m.b.H., Vienna,
Austria.
(3)Virus and Prion Validation, Octapharma Biopharmaceuticals GmbH, Frankfurt,
Germany.
(4)ACPS-Network GmbH, Wiesbaden, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: Patients with primary or secondary immunodeficiency (PID or SID)
face increased insecurity and discomfort in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic,
not knowing if and to what extent their comorbidities may impact the course of a 
potential SARS-CoV-2 infection. Furthermore, recently available vaccination
options might not be amenable or effective for all patients in this heterogeneous
population. Therefore, these patients often rely on passive immunization with
plasma-derived, intravenous or subcutaneous immunoglobulin (IVIG/SCIG). Whether
the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and/or the progress in vaccination programs lead to
increased and potentially protective titers in plasma-derived immunoglobulins
(Ig) indicated (e.g., for humoral immunodeficiency) remains a pressing question
for this patient population.
PURPOSE: We investigated SARS-CoV-2 reactivity of US plasma-derived IVIG/SCIG
products from the end of 2020 until June 2021 as well as in convalescent plasma
(CP) from May 2020 to August 2020 to determine whether potentially neutralizing
antibody titers may be present.
METHODS: Final containers of IVIG/SCIG and CP donations were analyzed by
commercial ELISA for anti-SARS-CoV-2 S1-receptor binding domain (RBD) IgG as well
as microneutralization assay using a patient-derived SARS-CoV-2 (D614G) isolate. 
Neutralization capacities of 313 single plasma donations and 119 plasma-derived
IVIG/SCIG lots were determined. Results obtained from both analytical methods
were normalized against the WHO International Standard. Finally, based on dense
pharmacokinetic profiles of an IVIG preparation from previously published
investigations, possible steady-state plasma levels of SARS-CoV-2 neutralization 
capacities were approximated based on currently measured anti-SARS-CoV-2
potencies in IVIG/SCIG preparations.
RESULTS: CP donations presented with high variability with regards to
anti-SARS-CoV-2 reactivity in ELISA as well as in neutralization testing. While
approximately 50% of convalescent donations were not/low neutralizing,
approximately 10% were at or above 600 IU/mL. IVIG/SCIG lots derived from
pre-pandemic plasma donations did not show neutralizing capacities for
SARS-CoV-2. Lots produced between December 2020 and June 2021 entailing plasma
donations after the emergence of SARS-CoV-2 showed a rapid and constant increase 
in anti-SARS-CoV-2 reactivity and neutralization capacity over time. While
lot-to-lot variability was substantial, neutralization capacity increased from a 
mean of 21 IU/mL in December 2020 to 506 IU/mL in June 2021 with a maximum of
864 IU/mL for the most recent lots. Pharmacokinetic extrapolations, based on
non-compartmental superposition principles using steady-state reference profiles 
from previously published pharmacokinetic investigations on IVIG in PID, yielded 
potential steady-state trough plasma levels of 16 IU/mL of neutralizing
SARS-CoV-2 IgG based on the average final container concentration from May 2021
of 216 IU/mL. Maximum extrapolated trough levels could reach 64 IU/mL based on
the latest maximal final container potency tested in June 2021.
CONCLUSIONS: SARS-CoV-2 reactivity and neutralization capacity in IVIG/SCIG
produced from US plasma rapidly and in part exponentially increased in the first 
half of 2021. The observed increase of final container potencies is likely
trailing the serological status of the US donor population in terms of COVID-19
convalescence and vaccination by at least 5 months due to production lead times
and should in principle continue at least until Fall 2021. In summary, the data
support rapidly increasing levels of anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies in IVIG/SCIG
products, implicating that a certain level of protection could be possible
against COVID-19 for regularly substituted PID/SID patients. Nevertheless, more
research is still needed to confirm which plasma levels are needed to provide
protection against SARS-CoV-2 infection in immune-compromised patients.

plain-language-summary: People with deficiencies in their immune system often
have an insufficient antibody response to antigens such as bacteria, viruses, or 
vaccines. These patients therefore often receive antibodies from healthy people
to replace the missing antibodies and build a first line of defense against
infections. These antibodies (also called immunoglobulins [Ig]) are prepared from
plasma, the liquid fraction of the blood without cells, of healthy donors. This
plasma is then split up during pharmaceutical production into its protein
components. One of these is immunoglobulin G (IgG), which is the protein family
that neutralizes/inactivates infectious agents as well as marks these infectious 
agents so they can be recognized by other parts of the immune system. With the
ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and the severe to fatal outcomes for certain patient
groups, especially people with impaired immunity, these patients and their
physicians are interested in whether their antibody replacement therapy also
confers protection against SARS-CoV-2 infection. We analyzed the capability of
plasma-derived Ig lots to (i) recognize SARS-CoV-2 protein by ELISA method as
well as (ii) neutralize SARS-CoV-2 by neutralization studies using the actual
virus under biosafety level 3 (BSL-3) conditions. Here we show increasing
anti-SARS-CoV-2 activity over time of manufactured Ig lots produced between
December 2020 and June 2021. The most recent lots had a neutralizing activity of 
up to 864 IU/mL. Considering that the US represents Octapharma’s main plasma
source, the progress in vaccination levels together with the evolution of the
COVID-19 pandemic in this country suggests that the intravenous or subcutaneous
immunoglobulin (IVIG/SCIG) neutralization capacities against SARS-CoV-2 might
still increase and could potentially reach a level where antibody plasma
concentrations in the patient confer immune protection.
© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s40259-021-00511-9 
PMCID: PMC8628143
PMID: 34843105 

