
1. Ann Hepatobiliary Pancreat Surg. 2021 Nov 30;25(4):517-522. doi:
10.14701/ahbps.2021.25.4.517.

Rescue fibrin glue-infiltrating hemostasis combined with hepatorrhaphy to control
intractable postoperative bleeding from the liver cut surface.

Hwang S(1), Na BG(1), Kim M(1), Won DH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hepatobiliary Surgery and Liver Transplantation, Department of
Surgery, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea.

Various topical hemostatic agents can help induce coagulation at the liver cut
surface. However, hemostasis is usually ineffective in controlling bleeding. We
present a case of rescue fibrin glue-infiltrating hemostasis combined with
hepatorrhaphy to manage intractable postoperative bleeding from the liver cut
surface. The case was a 56-year-old male patient with hepatocellular carcinoma in
hepatitis B virus-associated cirrhotic liver. The patient was administered
warfarin because of graft replacement of the ascending aorta and hemi-arch one
year earlier. After warfarin was discontinued, segment VII partial hepatectomy
was performed according to standard procedures. However, considerable bleeding
occurred during and after hepatectomy. Bleeding from the liver cut surface was
controlled over one hour using surface coagulation and topical application of
four kinds of hemostatic agents. However, active abdominal bleeding led to
reoperation soon after the hepatectomy. During the reoperation, we identified
diffuse oozing from the edge of the liver cut surface which was difficult to
control. Thus, we performed direct parenchymal injection of fibrin glue at the
bleeding points using 12 fibrin glue kits which induced complete hemostasis.
Because the patient would undergo anticoagulation again soon after the operation,
we also performed hepatorrhaphy. The patient recovered uneventfully after the
reoperation. He has been doing well for six months without complications. In
conclusion, fibrin glue-infiltrating hemostasis effectively controlled
intractable bleeding from the hepatic cut surface in our case. Thus, it can be
considered as an optional method for rescue hemostasis.

DOI: 10.14701/ahbps.2021.25.4.517 
PMID: 34845124 

