
1. Pediatr Dent J. 2021 Dec;31(3):203-215. doi: 10.1016/j.pdj.2021.08.003. Epub 2021
Sep 1.

Teledentistry and its applications in paediatric dentistry: A literature review.

Sharma H(1), Suprabha BS(1), Rao A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric and Preventive Dentistry, Manipal College of Dental
Sciences, Mangalore, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, India.

Background: During the unfortunate event of the COVID-19 pandemic, restrictions
were placed on face-to-face interactions in dentistry to promote social
distancing and reduce spread of virus. In order to provide dental services
teledentistry was employed.
Objective: This article aims to review the literature and information available
on the provision and utilization of teledentistry as a method to address oral
health needs of paediatric patients.
Results: Teledentistry has been utilised in paediatric population for the purpose
of oral health education and promotion, remote diagnosis and monitoring, and
behaviour guidance. Studies involving paediatric population for aforementioned
applications have shown that this practice strategy is beneficial to provide
dental treatment in remote locations with little access to paediatric dental
specialists, monitor patients between appointments, conduct remote diagnosis and 
screening programmes, promote oral health of children through dental education,
and in pre-appointment behaviour guidance. This method was particularly useful
during the current COVID-19 pandemic where dentists use their mobile phones,
computer webcams for patient appointments while maintaining safe distance and
avoid exposing themselves as well as patient to the virus.
Conclusion: Teledentistry can be a supplement to face-to-face methods of
paediatric dental care, ultimately leading to better patient management. This
technology can make a significant contribution in reducing the supply-demand gap 
of paediatric dental specialists in places where healthcare facilities are
limited and ensure safety during the pandemic whilst providing dental care to
paediatric patients. Further research is required for safe, effective and
evidence-based use of teledentistry in the field of paediatric dentistry.

© 2021 Japanese Society of Pediatric Dentistry. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pdj.2021.08.003 
PMCID: PMC8613071
PMID: 34848924 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors of this manuscript declare that they 
have no conflicts of interest.

