
1. J Health Organ Manag. 2021 Nov 18;35(9):368-377. doi: 10.1108/JHOM-11-2020-0440.

Managing medicines at the end of life: a position paper for health policy and
practice.

Latif A(1), Faull C(2), Waring J(3), Wilson E(1), Anderson C(4), Avery A(5),
Pollock K(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(2)LOROS Hospice Leicester, Leicester, UK.
(3)Health Services Management Centre, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(4)School of Pharmacy, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(5)School of Medicine, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.

PURPOSE: The impact of population ageing is significant, multifaceted and
characterised by frailty and multi-morbidity. The COVID-19 pandemic has
accelerated care pathways and policies promoting self-management and home-based
care. One under-researched area is how patients and family caregivers manage the 
complexity of end-of-life therapeutic medicine regimens. In this position paper
the authors bring attention to the significant strain that patients and family
caregivers experience when navigating and negotiating this aspect of palliative
and end-of-life care.
DESIGN/METHODOLOGY/APPROACH: Focussing on self-care and organisation of medicines
in the United Kingdom (UK) context, the paper examines, builds on and extends the
debate by considering the underlying policy assumptions and unintended
consequences for individual patients and family care givers as they assume
greater palliative and end-of-life roles and responsibilities.
FINDINGS: Policy makers and healthcare professionals often lack awareness of the 
significant burden and emotional work associated with managing and administering 
often potent high-risk medicines (i.e. opioids) in the domiciliary setting. The
recent "revolution" in professional roles associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, 
including remote consultations and expanding community-based care, means there
are opportunities for commissioners to consider offering greater support. The
prospect of enhancing the community pharmacist's medicine optimisation role to
further support the wider multi-disciplinary team is considered.
ORIGINALITY/VALUE: The paper takes a person-focused perspective and adopts a
holistic view of medicine management. The authors argue for urgent review, reform
and investment to enable and support terminally ill patients and family
caregivers to more effectively manage medicines in the domiciliary setting. There
are clear implications for pharmacists and these are discussed in the context of 
public awareness, inter-professional collaboration, organisational drivers,
funding and regulation and remote care delivery.

© Asam Latif, Christina Faull, Justin Waring, Eleanor Wilson, Claire Anderson,
Anthony Avery and Kristian Pollock.

DOI: 10.1108/JHOM-11-2020-0440 
PMID: 34841822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

