
1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 30;16(11):e0259018. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259018.
eCollection 2021.

Smart investment of virus RNA testing resources to enhance Covid-19 mitigation.

Gorji H(1), Arnoldini M(2), Jenny DF(3), Hardt WD(4), Jenny P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Multiscale Studies in Building Physics, Empa, Dübendorf,
Switzerland.
(2)Department of Health Sciences and Technology, Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology, Zürich, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Mathematics, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zürich,
Switzerland.
(4)Institute of Microbiology, D-BIOL, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology,
Zürich, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Mechanical and Process Engineering, Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology, IFD, Zürich, Switzerland.

A variety of mitigation strategies have been employed against the Covid-19
pandemic. Social distancing is still one of the main methods to reduce spread,
but it entails a high toll on personal freedom and economic life. Alternative
mitigation strategies that do not come with the same problems but are effective
at preventing disease spread are therefore needed. Repetitive mass-testing using 
PCR assays for viral RNA has been suggested, but as a stand-alone strategy this
would be prohibitively resource intensive. Here, we suggest a strategy that aims 
at targeting the limited resources available for viral RNA testing to subgroups
that are more likely than the average population to yield a positive test result.
Importantly, these pre-selected subgroups include symptom-free people. By testing
everyone in these subgroups, in addition to symptomatic cases, large fractions of
pre- and asymptomatic people can be identified, which is only possible by
testing-based mitigation. We call this strategy smart testing (ST). In principle,
pre-selected subgroups can be found in different ways, but for the purpose of
this study we analyze a pre-selection procedure based on cheap and fast virus
antigen tests. We quantify the potential reduction of the epidemic reproduction
number by such a two-stage ST strategy. In addition to a scenario where such a
strategy is available to the whole population, we analyze local applications,
e.g. in a country, company, or school, where the tested subgroups are also in
exchange with the untested population. Our results suggest that a two-stage ST
strategy can be effective to curb pandemic spread, at costs that are clearly
outweighed by the economic benefit. It is technically and logistically feasible
to employ such a strategy, and our model predicts that it is even effective when 
applied only within local groups. We therefore recommend adding two-stage ST to
the portfolio of available mitigation strategies, which allow easing social
distancing measures without compromising public health.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259018 
PMCID: PMC8631684
PMID: 34847176 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

