
1. EBioMedicine. 2021 Nov 26;74:103723. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2021.103723. [Epub
ahead of print]

Next generation plasma proteome profiling of COVID-19 patients with mild to
moderate symptoms.

Zhong W(1), Altay O(2), Arif M(1), Edfors F(1), Doganay L(3), Mardinoglu A(4),
Uhlen M(1), Fagerberg L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Science for Life Laboratory, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm,
Sweden.
(2)Science for Life Laboratory, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm,
Sweden; Department of Clinical Microbiology, Dr Sami Ulus Training and Research
Hospital, University of Health Sciences, Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Umraniye Training and Research Hospital,
University of Health Sciences, Istanbul, Turkey.
(4)Science for Life Laboratory, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm,
Sweden; Centre for Host-Microbiome Interactions, Faculty of Dentistry, Oral &
Craniofacial Sciences, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Science for Life Laboratory, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm,
Sweden. Electronic address: linn.fagerberg@scilifelab.se.

BACKGROUND: COVID-19 has caused millions of deaths globally, yet the cellular
mechanisms underlying the various effects of the disease remain poorly
understood. Recently, a new analytical platform for comprehensive analysis of
plasma protein profiles using proximity extension assays combined with next
generation sequencing has been developed, which allows for multiple proteins to
be analyzed simultaneously without sacrifice on accuracy or sensitivity.
METHODS: We analyzed the plasma protein profiles of COVID-19 patients (n = 50)
with mild and moderate symptoms by comparing the protein levels in newly
diagnosed patients with the protein levels in the same individuals after 14 days.
FINDINGS: The study has identified more than 200 proteins that are significantly 
elevated during infection and many of these are related to cytokine response and 
other immune-related functions. In addition, several other proteins are shown to 
be elevated, including SCARB2, a host cell receptor protein involved in virus
entry. A comparison with the plasma protein response in patients with severe
symptoms shows a highly similar pattern, but with some interesting differences.
INTERPRETATION: The study presented here demonstrates the usefulness of "next
generation plasma protein profiling" to identify molecular signatures of
importance for disease progression and to allow monitoring of disease during
recovery from the infection. The results will facilitate further studies to
understand the molecular mechanism of the immune-related response of the
SARS-CoV-2 virus.
FUNDING: This work was financially supported by Knut and Alice Wallenberg
Foundation.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2021.103723 
PMCID: PMC8626206
PMID: 34844191 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare no competing interests.

