
1. Clin Infect Dis. 2021 Nov 28. pii: ciab985. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciab985. [Epub ahead
of print]

Proportion of incident genital human papillomavirus detections not attributable
to transmission and potentially attributable to latent infections: Implications
for cervical cancer screening.

Malagón T(1), MacCosham A(1), Burchell AN(2)(3), El-Zein M(1), Tellier PP(4),
Coutlée F(5)(6), Franco EL(1); HITCH Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology, Department of Oncology, McGill University,
Montreal, Canada.
(2)Department of Family and Community Medicine and Centre for Urban Health
Solutions, Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto,
Canada.
(3)Department of Family and Community Medicine and Dalla Lana School of Public
Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(4)Department of Family Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.
(5)Service de Biologie moléculaire du département de Médecine de laboratoire et
Service d'infectiologie du département de Médecine, Centre Hospitalier de
l'Université de Montréal, Montréal, Canada.
(6)Département de microbiologie, infectiologie et immunologie, Université de
Montréal, Montréal, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Infections with human papillomaviruses (HPV) may enter a latent
state, and eventually become reactivated following loss of immune control. It is 
unclear what proportion of incident HPV detections are reactivations of previous 
latent infections versus new transmissions.
METHODS: The HITCH cohort study prospectively followed young newly-formed
heterosexual partners recruited between 2005-2011 in Montréal, Canada. We
calculated the fraction of incident HPV detections non-attributable to sexual
transmission risk factors with a Bayesian Markov model. Results are the median
(2.5-97.5 th percentiles) of the estimated posterior distribution.
RESULTS: 544 type-specific incident HPV detection events occurred in 849
participants; 33% of incident HPV detections occurred in participants whose HITCH
partners were negative for that HPV type and who reported no other sex partners
over follow-up. We estimate that 43% (38-48%) of all incident HPV detections in
this population were not attributable to recent sexual transmission and might be 
potentially reactivation of latent infections.
CONCLUSIONS: A positive HPV test result in many cases may be a reactivated past
infection, rather than a new infection from recent sexual behaviors or partner
infidelity. The potential for reactivation of latent infections in previously
HPV-negative women should be considered in the context of cervical cancer
screening.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciab985 
PMID: 34849640 

