
1. J Eval Clin Pract. 2021 Nov 29. doi: 10.1111/jep.13641. [Epub ahead of print]

Experiences and aftermath of the COVID-19 lockdown among community-dwelling older
people in Serbia: A qualitative study.

Gazibara T(1), Maksimovic N(1), Dotlic J(2)(3), Jeremic Stojkovic V(4),
Cvjetkovic S(4), Milic M(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Epidemiology, University of Belgrade,
Belgrade, Serbia.
(2)Clinic for Obstetrics and Gynecology, Clinical Center of Serbia, Belgrade,
Serbia.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
(4)Department of Humanities, Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade,
Belgrade, Serbia.
(5)Department of Immunization, Institute of Public Health of Serbia, Belgrade,
Serbia.
(6)Department of Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Pristina
Temporarily Seated in Kosovska Mitrovica, Kosovska Mitrovica, Kosovo, Serbia.

RATIONALE AND AIM: At the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020, the
Serbian government instituted a 24-h curfew for people aged ≥65 years for 2
months. The aim of this study was to examine the experiences and perceptions of
curfew for older people in Serbia 15 months after the curfew had ended.
METHODS: In-depth interviews were carried out with 23 older adults from urban
areas in Serbia. We identified the first three participants, while others were
selected using the snowballing method. The interviews were audio-recorded,
transcribed and data were analyzed according to guidelines for qualitative
studies.
RESULTS: Six topics emerged: (1) perception of the curfew announcement; (2)
attitude toward the curfew; (3) organization of daily living; (4) mood; (5)
frustrations/limitations and 6) making sense of the curfew 15 months after. Older
people in this study overall remember not feeling disturbed by the curfew because
they perceived it as prevention, especially because this population group is
considered to have the highest rate of mortality from COVID-19. Some people
remember being extremely frustrated because of the restrictions and considered
them unnecessary. Most people remembered that the lack of social interactions and
lack of physical activity were the most difficult to cope with.
CONCLUSIONS: Although challenging and bothersome, the majority of older people in
this study accepted the curfew as an appropriate measure to avoid catching the
virus and combat the COVID-19 pandemic.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jep.13641 
PMID: 34843147 

