
1. Br J Health Psychol. 2021 Nov 30. doi: 10.1111/bjhp.12576. [Epub ahead of print]

Intention to adhere to test, trace, and isolate during the COVID-19 pandemic (the
COVID-19 Rapid Survey of Adherence to Interventions and Responses study).

Smith LE(1)(2), Potts HWW(3), Amlȏt R(2)(4), Fear NT(1)(5), Michie S(6), Rubin
GJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London,
UK.
(2)NIHR Health Protection Research Unit in Emergency Preparedness and Response,
London, UK.
(3)Institute of Health Informatics, University College London, UK.
(4)Behavioural Science and Insights Unit, UK Health Security Agency, Salisbury,
UK.
(5)Academic Department of Military Mental Health, King's Centre for Military
Health Research, London, UK.
(6)Centre for Behaviour Change, University College London, UK.

OBJECTIVES: (1) To investigate factors associated with intention to self-isolate,
request a test, and share details of close contacts when required. (2) To
determine whether associations were stronger during periods when less stringent
national COVID-19 restrictions were in place.
DESIGN: Series of cross-sectional nationally representative surveys. We selected 
survey waves where different national restrictions were in place in England
(first lockdown, summer release, second lockdown, third lockdown).
METHODS: We investigated whether psychological factors and increased out-of-home 
activity in the last week were associated with intention to self-isolate and
request a test if you were to develop COVID-19 symptoms, and intention to share
details of contacts if you were to test positive. We also investigated whether
the strength of associations differed by timepoint in the pandemic.
RESULTS: Intention to self-isolate, request a test and share details of contacts 
were associated with greater perceived risk of COVID-19 to people in the United
Kingdom, knowing that COVID-19 transmission can be asymptomatic, and agreeing
that personal behaviour has an impact on COVID-19 transmission. There were few
differences in strength of associations by timepoint suggesting these effects are
broadly stable over time.
CONCLUSIONS: Psychological factors were associated with intention to adhere to
key components of the contact tracing system; there was no evidence for an
association with increased out-of-home activity. Messages that increase knowledge
that COVID-19 can be transmitted even if someone does not have symptoms and that 
an individual's actions can contribute to the spread of the virus may promote
engagement with the test, trace, and isolate system.

© 2021 The Authors. British Journal of Health Psychology published by John Wiley 
& Sons Ltd on behalf of British Psychological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bjhp.12576 
PMID: 34846088 

