
1. Pharmacol Res. 2021 Nov 27;175:106005. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2021.106005. [Epub
ahead of print]

Old wine in new bottles: Kaempferol is a promising agent for treating the trilogy
of liver diseases.

Xiao X(1), Hu Q(2), Deng X(2), Shi K(1), Zhang W(2), Jiang Y(2), Ma X(3), Zeng
J(4), Wang X(5).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital of Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, School of
Clinical Medicine, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu
611137, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Southwestern Chinese Medicine Resources, School of
Pharmacy, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu 611137,
China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Southwestern Chinese Medicine Resources, School of
Pharmacy, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu 611137,
China. Electronic address: tobymaxiao@163.com.
(4)Hospital of Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, School of
Clinical Medicine, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu
611137, China. Electronic address: zengjinhao0018@126.com.
(5)Hospital of Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, School of
Clinical Medicine, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu
611137, China. Electronic address: 84859645@qq.com.

As a source of various compounds, natural products have long been important and
valuable for drug development. Kaempferol (KP) is the most common flavonol with
bioactive activity and has been extracted from many edible plants and traditional
Chinese medicines. It has a wide range of pharmacological effects on
inflammation, oxidation, and tumour and virus regulation. The liver is an
important organ and is involved in metabolism and activity. Because the
pathological process of liver diseases is extremely complicated, liver diseases
involving ALD, NASH, liver fibrosis, and HCC are often complicated and difficult 
to treat. Fortunately, there have been many reports that KP has a good
pharmacological effect on a series of complex liver diseases. To fully understand
the mechanism of KP and provide new ideas for its clinical application in the
treatment of liver diseases, this article reviews the pharmacological mechanism
and potential value of KP in different studies involving various liver diseases. 
In the trilogy of liver disease, high concentrations of ROS stimulate
peroxidation and activate the inflammatory signal cascade, which involves
signalling pathways such as MAPK/JAK-STAT/PERK/Wnt/Hipp, leading to varying
degrees of cell degradation and liver damage. The development of liver disease is
promoted in an inflammatory environment, which is conducive to the activation of 
TGF-β1, leading to increased expression of pro-fibrosis and pro-inflammatory
genes. Inflammation and oxidative stress promote the formation of tumour
microenvironments, and uncontrolled autophagy of cancer cells further leads to
the development of liver cancer. The main pathway in this process is
AMPK/PTEN/PI3K-Akt/TOR. KP can not only protect liver parenchymal cells through a
variety of antioxidant and anti-apoptotic mechanisms but also reduces the immune 
inflammatory response in the liver microenvironment, thereby preventing cell
apoptosis; it can also inhibit the ER stress response, prevent inflammation and
inhibit tumour growth. KP exerts multiple therapeutic effects on liver disease by
regulating precise signalling targets and is expected to become an emerging
therapeutic opportunity to treat liver disease in the future.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2021.106005 
PMID: 34843960 

