
1. Liver Int. 2021 Nov 30. doi: 10.1111/liv.15124. [Epub ahead of print]

State of the art treatment of HBV hepatocellular carcinoma and the role of HBsAg 
post liver transplantation and resection.

Schemmer P(1), Burra P(2), Hu RH(3), Markus Hüber C(4), Loinaz C(5), Machida
K(6), Vogel A(7), Samuel D(8).

Author information: 
(1)General, Visceral and Transplant Surgery, Department of Surgery, Medical
University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
(2)Department of Surgery, Oncology, and Gastroenterology, Padua University
Hospital, Padua, Italy.
(3)Department of Surgery, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Biotest AG, Dreieich, Germany.
(5)Department of General and Digestive Surgery, University Hospital, 12 de
Octubre, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Keck Hospital of University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Medizinische
Hochschule Hannover, Hannover, Germany.
(8)Centre Hepatobiliaire, University Hospital Paul Brousse, University
Paris-Saclay and Inserm-Paris Saclay Research Unit 1193, Villejuif, France.

Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is the major aetiology of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The optimal goal of therapy, hepatitis B surface 
antigen (HBsAg) loss and anti-HBs production, is achieved rarely and
HBsAg-associated HCC risk is well recognized. Here we review the role of HBsAg in
HCC, the link between HBsAg and HCC recurrence post-liver transplantation or
resection, and the implications for therapy. HBV-associated carcinogenesis is a
multifactorial process. The observation that HBV-related HCC can occur in the
absence of cirrhosis is compatible with a direct oncogenic effect of the virus,
which may occur via multiple mechanisms, including those mediated by both mutated
and unmutated HBsAg. HCC recurrence in HBsAg-positive patients post-liver
transplantation has been reported in 10-15% of patients and is likely to be due
to expansion of residual HCC tumour cell populations containing integrated HBV
DNA, which expand and independently replicate HBV, leading to the recurrence of
both HCC and HBV. The direct role of HBsAg in HCC recurrence post-liver resection
is less clear. Cirrhosis is the most important risk factor for HCC development,
and precancerous cirrhotic liver remains after resection, with the potential to
undergo malignant transformation regardless of the existence of HBV-derived
oncogenic drivers. The role of HBsAg in the development of HCC and its recurrence
post-surgical intervention has multiple implications for therapy and suggests a
potential role for immunotherapy in the future management of HCC, in particular
post-liver transplantation. Use of HBIGs that target HBsAg directly, alongside
immune-oncology therapies, may be relevant in this setting.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/liv.15124 
PMID: 34846790 

