
1. mBio. 2021 Nov 30:e0281721. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02817-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Toll-Like Receptor (TLR) Signaling Enables Cyclic GMP-AMP Synthase (cGAS) Sensing
of HIV-1 Infection in Macrophages.

Siddiqui MA(1), Yamashita M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center, Columbia University Vagelos College of
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York, USA.

HIV-1 replicates in cells that express a wide array of innate immune sensors and 
may do so simultaneously with other pathogens. How a coexisting innate immune
stimulus influences the outcome of HIV-1 sensing, however, remains poorly
understood. Here, we demonstrate that the activation of a second signaling
pathway enables a cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS)-dependent type I interferon
(IFN-I) response to HIV-1 infection. We used RNA sequencing to determine that
HIV-1 alone induced few or no signs of an IFN-I response in THP-1 cells. In
contrast, when supplemented with suboptimal levels of bacterial
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), HIV-1 infection triggered the production of elevated
levels of IFN-I and significant upregulation of interferon-stimulated genes.
LPS-mediated enhancement of IFN-I production upon HIV-1 infection, which was
observed in primary macrophages, was lost by blocking reverse transcription and
with a hyperstable capsid, pointing to viral DNA being an essential
immunostimulatory molecule. LPS also synergistically enhanced IFN-I production by
cyclic GMP-AMP (cGAMP), a second messenger of cGAS. These observations suggest
that the DNA sensor cGAS is responsible for a type I IFN response to HIV-1 in
concert with LPS receptor Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4). Small amounts of a TLR2
agonist also cooperate with HIV-1 to induce type I IFN production. These results 
demonstrate how subtle immunomodulatory activity renders HIV-1 capable of
eliciting an IFN-I response through positive cross talk between cGAS and TLR
sensing pathways. IMPORTANCE Innate immune activation is a hallmark of HIV-1
pathogenesis. Thus, it is critical to understand how HIV-1 infection elicits
innate immune responses. In this work, we show that HIV-1 infection of
macrophages leads to a robust type I interferon (IFN) production only when a
second signaling event is initiated by a coexisting immunostimulatory molecule.
Our results show that HIV-1 infection alone is not sufficient for triggering a
strong IFN response. We find that bacterial membrane components, which are
recognized by endosomal innate sensors, enable production of elevated levels of
IFNs and significant upregulation of interferon-stimulated genes upon HIV-1
infection. This IFN response is dependent on viral DNA synthesis and prevented by
a stable capsid, pointing to an essential role for a DNA sensing molecule. These 
observations provide new insights into how different innate immune recognition
pathways synergize during HIV-1 infection and determine the outcome of innate
responses.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02817-21 
PMCID: PMC8630538
PMID: 34844429 

