
1. Microbiol Immunol. 2021 Nov 29. doi: 10.1111/1348-0421.12952. [Epub ahead of
print]

A comprehensive profiling of innate immune responses in Eptesicus bat cells.

Lin HH(1)(2), Horie M(1)(3)(4), Tomonaga K(1)(2)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of RNA Viruses, Department of Virus Research, Institute for
Frontier Life and Medical Sciences (InFRONT), Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Department of Mammalian Regulatory Network, Graduate School of Biostudies,
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Hakubi Center for Advanced Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(4)Laboratory of Veterinary Microbiology, Division of Veterinary Sciences,
Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Osaka Prefecture University, 
Izumisano, Osaka, Japan.
(5)Department of Molecular Virology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan.

Bats (the order Chiroptera), including those of the genus Eptesicus, have been
reported to serve as reservoirs of several zoonotic viruses. Notably, bats have
been reported to lack obvious symptoms of infection with such viruses and are
thought to have unique immune system responses. However, the responses of their
innate immune system, the first line of immunity, remain largely unclear. Here,
we comprehensively analyzed the expression profiles in two Eptesicus bat cell
lines to investigate their innate immune responses. The gene expression profiles 
after polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (poly (I:C)) induction were similar between
the two bat cell lines, but uniquely upregulated differentially expressed genes
were also identified. We also revealed that the upregulated genes of Eptesicus
bat cells were distinct from those of human epithelial cells in response to
induction. Moreover, the basal expression levels of several immune-related genes 
were higher in bat cells than in human cells. We also identified unannotated
novel transcripts that were upregulated after induction and novel microRNAs
expressed in bat cells, some of which were upregulated by poly (I:C) treatment.
This is the first report to illustrate the innate immune response in Eptesicus
bat cells; therefore, this study provides basic and novel insights into bat
innate immunity. Our data represent a valuable resource for future studies into
bat immunity and the biology of Eptesicus bats. This article is protected by
copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/1348-0421.12952 
PMID: 34842304 

