
1. Fam Pract. 2021 Nov 26. pii: cmab156. doi: 10.1093/fampra/cmab156. [Epub ahead of
print]

Development of a patient decision aid for COVID-19 vaccination with the Comirnaty
vaccine.

Vincent YM(1)(2), Frachon A(3), Allaire A(4), Boussageon R(2)(5)(6), Pouchain
D(2), Ferrat E(2)(7)(8), Rat C(2)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Practice, Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(2)French National College of Teachers in General Practice, Paris, France.
(3)Département de médecine générale, Université de Paris, Faculté de Santé, UFR
de Médecine, F-75014 Paris, France.
(4)France Assos Santé Pays de la Loire, Vertou, France.
(5)University College of General Medicine, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1,
Lyon, France.
(6)UMR 5558, Laboratory of Biometry and Evolutionary Biology, Centre National de 
la Recherche Scientifique, Lyon, France.
(7)Primary Care Department, Faculty of Medicine, University of Paris-East
Creteil, Creteil, France.
(8)Clinical Epidemiology and Ageing Unit, University of Paris-Est Creteil,
Creteil, France.
(9)Department of General Practice, University of Nantes, Nantes, France.

BACKGROUND: SARS-CoV-2 has been responsible for a pandemic since the beginning of
2020. Vaccine arrival brings a concrete solution to fight the virus. However,
vaccine hesitancy is high. In France, the first available vaccine was Comirnaty
from Pfizer-BioNTech. Shared decision-making, based on tools such as patient
decision aids (PtDAs), can help patients make an informed choice about
vaccination with Comirnaty.
OBJECTIVE: The French College of Teachers in General Practice (CNGE) aimed to
create a PtDA for people who have to decide whether they will receive the
Comirnaty vaccine.
METHODS: Development of the PtDA was performed according to the International
Patient Decision Aids Standards (IPDAS). The initial design was based on a
literature review and semistructured interviews with 17 patients to explore and
clarify patients' expectations. A first draft of the PtDA was then alpha tested
by a patient expert group and a physician expert group. The PtDA was finally beta
tested in 14 prevaccine consultations. A steering group was consulted throughout 
the work. Patient support, community groups and the French National Authority for
Health (HAS) were involved in the development process.
RESULTS: A literature review identified one randomized trial on Comirnaty
efficacy and safety. The first part of the PtDA allows patients to identify their
own risk factors. The second part of the PtDA provides information on
vaccination: benefits and risks, unknown data, and technical explanations about
the mRNA vaccine.
CONCLUSIONS: We developed a PtDA to be used in primary care settings for shared
decision-making regarding vaccination with Comirnaty.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/fampra/cmab156 
PMID: 34849748 

