
1. Curr Opin Solid State Mater Sci. 2022 Feb;26(1):100966. doi:
10.1016/j.cossms.2021.100966. Epub 2021 Nov 20.

Overcoming the limitations of COVID-19 diagnostics with nanostructures, nucleic
acid engineering, and additive manufacturing.

Li N(1)(2)(3), Zhao B(1)(2), Stavins R(4), Peinetti AS(5), Chauhan N(1)(2),
Bashir R(1)(2)(3)(6), Cunningham BT(1)(2)(3)(6), King WP(2)(4), Lu Y(1)(5), Wang 
X(1)(2)(5), Valera E(2)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Carle Woese Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, United States.
(2)Holonyak Micro and Nanotechnology Laboratory, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, United States.
(3)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, United States.
(4)Department of Mechanical Science and Engineering, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, United States.
(5)Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, United
States.
(6)Department of Bioengineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
United States.

The COVID-19 pandemic revealed fundamental limitations in the current model for
infectious disease diagnosis and serology, based upon complex assay workflows,
laboratory-based instrumentation, and expensive materials for managing samples
and reagents. The lengthy time delays required to obtain test results, the high
cost of gold-standard PCR tests, and poor sensitivity of rapid point-of-care
tests contributed directly to society's inability to efficiently identify
COVID-19-positive individuals for quarantine, which in turn continues to impact
return to normal activities throughout the economy. Over the past year, enormous 
resources have been invested to develop more effective rapid tests and laboratory
tests with greater throughput, yet the vast majority of engineering and chemistry
approaches are merely incremental improvements to existing methods for nucleic
acid amplification, lateral flow test strips, and enzymatic amplification assays 
for protein-based biomarkers. Meanwhile, widespread commercial availability of
new test kits continues to be hampered by the cost and time required to develop
single-use disposable microfluidic plastic cartridges manufactured by injection
molding. Through development of novel technologies for sensitive, selective,
rapid, and robust viral detection and more efficient approaches for scalable
manufacturing of microfluidic devices, we can be much better prepared for future 
management of infectious pathogen outbreaks. Here, we describe how photonic
metamaterials, graphene nanomaterials, designer DNA nanostructures, and polymers 
amenable to scalable additive manufacturing are being applied towards overcoming 
the fundamental limitations of currently dominant COVID-19 diagnostic approaches.
In this paper, we review how several distinct classes of nanomaterials and
nanochemistry enable simple assay workflows, high sensitivity, inexpensive
instrumentation, point-of-care sample-to-answer virus diagnosis, and rapidly
scaled manufacturing.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cossms.2021.100966 
PMCID: PMC8604633
PMID: 34840515 

Conflict of interest statement: Yi Lu is a co-founder of ANDAlyze and
GlucoSentient, Inc. The other authors declare that they have no known competing
financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.

