
1. Am J Clin Nutr. 2021 Nov 26. pii: nqab391. doi: 10.1093/ajcn/nqab391. [Epub ahead
of print]

Full breastfeeding protection against common enteric bacteria and viruses:
Results from the MAL-ED cohort study.

McCormick BJJ(1), Richard SA(1), Murray-Kolb LE(2), Kang G(3), Lima AAM(4), Mduma
E(5), Kosek MN(6), McQuade ETR(6), Houpt ER(6), Bessong P(7), Shrestha S(8),
Bhutta Z(9), Ahmed T(10), Caulfield LE(11).

Author information: 
(1)Fogarty International Center/National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA.
(3)Christian Medical College, Vellore, India.
(4)Federal University of Ceara, Fortaleza, Brazil.
(5)Haydom Lutheran Hospital, Haydom, Manyara, Tanzania.
(6)University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA.
(7)University of Venda, Thohoyandou, South Africa.
(8)Walter Reed/AFRIMS Research Unit, Nepal, Kathmandu, Nepal.
(9)Aga Khan University, Karachi, Pakistan.
(10)icddr, b, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(11)The Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: Breastfeeding is known to reduce risk of enteropathogen infections,
but protection from specific enteropathogens is not well characterized.
OBJECTIVE: To estimate the association between full breastfeeding (days fed
breast milk exclusively or with non-nutritive liquids) and enteropathogen
detection.
DESIGN: 2,145 newborns were enrolled in eight sites, of whom 1,712 had
breastfeeding and key enteropathogen data through 6 months. We focused on eleven 
enteropathogens: adenovirus 40/41, norovirus, sapovirus, astrovirus, and
rotavirus, enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC), Campylobacter spp, and
typical enteropathogenic E. coli as well as entero-aggregative E. coli, Shigella 
and Cryptosporidium. Logistic regression was used to estimate the risk of
enteropathogen detection in stools and survival analysis to estimate the timing
of first detection of an enteropathogen.
RESULTS: Infants with 10% more days of full breastfeeding within the preceding 30
days of a stool sample were less likely to have the three E. Coli and
Campylobacter spp detected in their stool (mean odds 0.92-0.99) but equally
likely (0.99-1.02) to have the viral pathogens detected in their stool. A 10%
longer period of full breastfeeding from birth was associated with later first
detection of the three E. Coli, Campylobacter, adenovirus, astrovirus, and
rotavirus (mean hazard ratios of 0.52-0.75). The hazards declined and point
estimates were not statistically significant at 3 months.
CONCLUSIONS: In this large multi-center cohort study, full breastfeeding was
associated with lower likelihood of detecting four important enteric pathogens in
the first six months of life. These results also show that full breastfeeding is 
related to delays in the first detection of some bacterial and viral pathogens in
the stool. As several of these pathogens are risk factors for poor growth during 
childhood, this work underscores the importance of exclusive or full
breastfeeding during the first six months of life to optimize early health.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
American Society for Nutrition.

DOI: 10.1093/ajcn/nqab391 
PMID: 34849524 

