
1. J Drug Target. 2021 Dec 6:1-8. doi: 10.1080/1061186X.2021.2009841. [Epub ahead of
print]

Significant metabolic alterations in patients with hepatitis B virus replication 
observed via serum untargeted metabolomics shed new light on hepatitis B virus
infection.

Yu L(1), Zeng Z(2)(3), Tan H(4), Feng Q(5), Zhou Q(1), Hu J(6), Li Y(7), Wang
J(5), Yang W(5), Feng J(1), Xu B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Mianyang Central Hospital, School of
Medicine, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Mianyang,
China.
(2)College of Environmental and Chemical Engineering, Dalian University, Dalian, 
China.
(3)Dalian ChemDataSolution Information Technology Co. Ltd, Dalian, China.
(4)Development and Regeneration Key Lab of Sichuan Province, Department of
Histology and Embryology, Chengdu Medical College, Chengdu, China.
(5)College of Medical Technology, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Chengdu, China.
(6)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Mianyang Central Hospital, School of
Medicine, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Mianyang,
China.
(7)Department of Medical Laboratory, Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical
University, Luzhou, China.

Until now, the metabolic effects of hepatitis B virus (HBV) replication on the
progression of hepatic diseases (hepatitis, cirrhosis, and liver cancer) and
liver functions have remained unexplored. Thus, a total of 199 hepatic disease
patients with active and inactive HBV were enrolled in this study to explore
serum metabolic characteristics using untargeted metabolomics. Multiple analyses,
including principal component analysis (PCA), partial least squares discriminant 
analysis (PLS-DA), volcano plot and pathway analysis, were used for metabolic
data analysis. Additionally, differential metabolites were analysed by commercial
databases. A decrease of approximately 0.8-fold in amino acids (L-glutamic acid, 
D-glutamine and L-tyrosine) and an increase of 2-fold in phosphatidylcholines
(PCs) and lysophosphatidylcholines (LPCs) were observed in hepatic disease
patients with HBV replication. Moreover, downregulation of arachidonic acid, PC
34:2, sn-glycerol-3-phosphocholine, 1-palmitoylglycerophosphoinositol, and
1-oleoylglycerophosphoinositol by 0.6-fold was also found in the serum of
patients with HBV replication. In addition, liver function was significantly
different between cirrhosis patients with or without HBV replication (p < .05).
In summary, this is the first study to focus on the metabolic changes induced by 
HBV replication in patients and to compare metabolic alterations in the
progression of hepatic disease induced by HBV infection. High levels of amino
acid depletion and PC and LPC biosynthesis were primarily observed, which may
shed new light on the pathogenesis and treatment of HBV infection.

DOI: 10.1080/1061186X.2021.2009841 
PMID: 34844491 

