
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2021 Nov 29;15(11):e0009997. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0009997. [Epub ahead of print]

Clinical and virological impact of single and dual infections with influenza A
(H1N1) and SARS-CoV-2 in adult inpatients.

Zheng J(1)(2), Chen F(3), Wu K(1), Wang J(4), Li F(5), Huang S(6), Lu J(7), Huang
J(8), Liu H(1), Zhou R(1), Huang Z(1), Meng B(9), Yuan Z(1), Wu X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health (Guangdong Provincial Key 
Laboratory of Tropical Disease Research), Southern Medical University, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, China.
(2)School of Public Health (Shenzhen), Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China.
(3)Department of Medical Administration, Guangzhou Eighth People's Hospital,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(4)Department of Intensive Care Unit, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Southern
Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(5)School of Medicine, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen,
China.
(6)P3 biosafety laboratory, School of Public Health (Guangdong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Tropical Disease Research), Southern Medical University, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, China.
(7)Department of Infectious Disease Control and Prevention, Guangzhou Center for 
Disease Control and Prevention, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(8)Department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Boston University,
Boston, United States of America.
(9)Department of Toxicology, School of Public Health (Guangdong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Tropical Disease Research), Southern Medical University, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, China.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) mimics the influenza
A (H1N1) virus in terms of clinical presentation, transmission mechanism, and
seasonal coincidence. Comprehensive data for the clinical severity of adult
patients co-infected by both H1N1 and SARS-CoV-2, and, particularly, the
relationship with PCR cycle threshold (Ct) values are not yet available. All
participants in this study were tested for H1N1 and SARS-CoV-2 simultaneously at 
admission. Demographic, clinical, treatment, and laboratory data were extracted
from electronic medical records and compared among adults hospitalized for H1N1
infection, SARS-CoV-2 infection and co-infection with both viruses. Ct values for
viral RNA detection were further compared within SARS-CoV-2 and co-infection
groups. Score on seven-category ordinal scale of clinical status at day 7 and day
14 were assessed. Among patients with monoinfection, H1N1 infection had higher
frequency of onset symptoms but lower incidence of adverse events during
hospitalization than SAR-CoV-2 infection (P < 0.05). Co-infection had an
increased odds of acute kidney injury, acute heart failure, secondary bacterial
infections, multilobar infiltrates and admittance to ICU than monoinfection.
Score on seven-category scale at day 7 and day 14 was higher in patients with
coinfection than patients with SAR-CoV-2 monoinfection (P<0.05). Co-infected
patients had lower initial Ct values (referring to higher viral load) (median 32)
than patients with SAR-CoV-2 monoinfection (median 36). Among co-infected
patients, low Ct values were significantly and positively correlated with acute
kidney injury and ARDS (P = 0.03 and 0.02, respectively). Co-infection by
SARS-CoV-2 and H1N1 caused more severe disease than monoinfection by either virus
in adult inpatients. Early Ct value could provide clues for the later trajectory 
of the co-infection. Multiplex molecular diagnostics for both viruses and early
assessment of SAR-CoV-2 Ct values are recommended to achieve optimal treatment
for improved clinical outcome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0009997 
PMID: 34843492 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

