
1. Int J Qual Health Care. 2021 Nov 29;33(Supplement_2):ii71-ii77. doi:
10.1093/intqhc/mzab074.

International, national and local trends in the spread of COVID-19: a geographic 
view of COVID-19 spread and the role to be played by coproduction.

Schmidt P(1), Nelson EC(2), Kearney G(1), Kraft S(3), Oliver BJ(3)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Brody School of Medicine, East Carolina University, Greenville, NC, USA.
(2)The Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy & Clinical Practice, Geisel School
of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, USA.
(3)Population Health, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Health, Lebanon, NH, USA.
(4)Departments of Community and Family Medicine and Psychiatry,
Dartmouth-Hitchcock Health and Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover,
NH, USA.
(5)Department of Veterans Affairs, VAQS and HPEER Advanced Fellowship Programs,
White River Junction, Houston, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: COVID-19, a respiratory disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus,
emerged in 2019 and led to a worldwide pandemic in 2020. The COVID-19 pandemic
has been a massive natural experiment in the formation of mitigation strategies
to prevent cases and to provide effective healthcare for those afflicted.
Regional differences in the impact of the pandemic on morbidity and mortality
have been driven by political and regional differences in the coproduction of
public health and social policy. We explored the United States (US) experience of
COVID-19 for trends and correlations with other nations and also at the national,
regional, state and local levels.
OBJECTIVE: To identify geographic and temporal trends in the spread of COVID-19
in the United States.
METHODS: Population data on COVID-19 cases and mortality were acquired on a daily
basis from multiple publicly available databases, including the New York Times
and Johns Hopkins University. At each geographic level (national, state and
county), geographic entities' reported cases were evaluated for correlations
using linear least-squares methods to identify patterns of correlation in the
cases independent of scale. We evaluated for two specific characteristics: (i)
the nature of the curvature of the line linking across percentile scores, ranging
from concave to convex and (ii) the area under this curve, indicating how
effectively a selected region (nation, state and county) is linked to its entire 
containing unit (world, country and state). We used this approach to identify
three distinct COVID behavior phenotypes, each of which consisted of a number of 
states in the USA.
RESULTS: We found that COVID activity in the USA follows a unique trend compared 
to other countries and that within the USA during the first year of the pandemic,
three initial COVID phenotypes emerged: (i) the metropolitan outbreak (early
outbreak phenotype); (ii) the regional outbreak (summer peak phenotype) and (iii)
trans-regional outbreak (fall/winter peak phenotype), which, taken in sum,
represent the overall USA national trend. Each phenotype has specific behavioral 
characteristics and is composed of a cluster of different states experiencing
different conditions.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest a new opportunity for public health strategy in 
the pandemic, namely to apply targeted public health approaches to address the
specific needs of each phenotype. In the future, we should create databases that 
capture key health and hardship data elements at the smallest geographic level
possible and use these to track trends, predict the future and apply targeted
coproduction approaches to more effectively and efficiently safeguard population 
health, economic vitality and social well-being.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
International Society for Quality in Health Care. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/intqhc/mzab074 
PMID: 34849958 

