
1. Vaccine. 2021 Nov 26. pii: S0264-410X(21)01505-X. doi:
10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.11.049. [Epub ahead of print]

Recombinant Bacillus subtilis flagellin Hag is a potent immunostimulant with
reduced proinflammatory properties compared to Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium FljB.

Côté-Cyr M(1), Gauthier L(2), Zottig X(1), Bourgault S(3), Archambault D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Department, Université du Québec à Montréal, Montréal, Canada;
Quebec Network for Research on Protein Function, Engineering and Applications
(PROTEO), Québec, Canada; Department of Biological Sciences, Université du Québec
à Montréal, Montréal, Canada; The Swine and Poultry Infectious Diseases Research 
Centre (CRIPA), Saint-Hyacinthe, Canada.
(2)Quebec Network for Research on Protein Function, Engineering and Applications 
(PROTEO), Québec, Canada; Department of Biological Sciences, Université du Québec
à Montréal, Montréal, Canada; The Swine and Poultry Infectious Diseases Research 
Centre (CRIPA), Saint-Hyacinthe, Canada.
(3)Chemistry Department, Université du Québec à Montréal, Montréal, Canada;
Quebec Network for Research on Protein Function, Engineering and Applications
(PROTEO), Québec, Canada; The Swine and Poultry Infectious Diseases Research
Centre (CRIPA), Saint-Hyacinthe, Canada. Electronic address:
bourgault.steve@uqam.ca.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, Université du Québec à Montréal, Montréal, 
Canada; The Swine and Poultry Infectious Diseases Research Centre (CRIPA),
Saint-Hyacinthe, Canada. Electronic address: archambault.denis@uqam.ca.

Flagellin constitutes a potential adjuvant for vaccines owing to its robust
immunostimulatory properties. However, clinical trials have revealed that
flagellin derived from Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium induces high
levels of proinflammatory markers and substantial adverse effects. The flagellin 
from Bacillus subtilis, Hag, shares high sequence homology with Salmonella FljB
within the D0 and D1 domains responsible for TLR5 engagement, while the D2 and D3
domains associated with an off-target immune response are absent. Accordingly, we
compared the immunostimulatory and proinflammatory properties of Hag with FljB by
harnessing an epitope from the matrix 2 protein (M2e) of the influenza virus.
Both flagellins engaged TLR5, with FljB showing a 2.5-fold higher potency than
Hag. Mice inoculation showed a robust FljB- or Hag-induced M2e-specific antibody 
response, with Hag demonstrating a decreased secretion of proinflammatory markers
and reduced weight loss. This study revealed that flagellin Hag is a potent
immunoadjuvant with reduced proinflammatory properties.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.11.049 
PMID: 34844822 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

