
1. J Clin Invest. 2021 Nov 29. pii: e152042. doi: 10.1172/JCI152042. [Epub ahead of 
print]

SARS-CoV-2-specific memory B cells can persist in the elderly who have lost
detectable neutralising antibodies.

Jeffery-Smith A(1), Burton AR(1), Lens S(1), Rees-Spear C(1), Davies J(1), Patel 
M(2), Gopal R(2), Muir L(1), Aiano F(3), Doores KJ(4), Chow JY(5), Ladhani SN(3),
Zambon M(2), McCoy LE(1), Maini MK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infection and Immunity, University College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Virus Reference Department, Public Health England, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Immunisation and Countermeasures Division, Public Health England, London,
United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, King's College London, London, United
Kingdom.
(5)London Coronavirus Response Cell, Public Health England, London, United
Kingdom.

Memory B cells (MBC) can provide a recall response able to supplement waning
antibodies with an affinity-matured response better able to neutralise variant
viruses. We studied a cohort of elderly care home residents and younger staff
(median age 87yrs and 56yrs respectively) who had survived COVID-19 outbreaks
with only mild/asymptomatic infection. The cohort was selected to enrich for a
high proportion who had lost neutralising antibodies (nAb), to specifically
investigate the reserve immunity from SARS-CoV-2-specific MBC in this setting.
Class-switched spike and RBD-tetramer-binding MBC persisted five months
post-mild/asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection, irrespective of age. The majority of
spike/RBD-specific MBC had a classical phenotype but activated memory B cells,
that may indicate ongoing antigenic stimulation or inflammation, were expanded in
the elderly. Spike/RBD-specific MBC remained detectable in the majority who had
lost nAb, although at lower frequencies and with a reduced IgG/IgA isotype ratio.
Functional spike/S1/RBD-specific recall was also detectable by ELISpot in some
who had lost nAb, but was significantly impaired in the elderly. Our findings
demonstrate a reserve of SARS-CoV-2-specific MBC persists beyond loss of nAb, but
highlight the need for careful monitoring of functional defects in
spike/RBD-specific B cell immunity in the elderly.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI152042 
PMID: 34843448 

