
1. J Invest Dermatol. 2021 Nov 26. pii: S0022-202X(21)02529-X. doi:
10.1016/j.jid.2021.10.029. [Epub ahead of print]

Recalcitrant Warts, Epidermodysplasia Verruciformis, and the Tree-Man Syndrome:
Phenotypic Spectrum of Cutaneous HPV Infections at the Intersection of Genetic
Variability of Viral and Human Genomes.

Uitto J(1), Saeidian AH(2), Youssefian L(3), Saffarian Z(4), Casanova JL(5),
Béziat V(6), Jouanguy E(6), Vahidnezhad H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Sidney Kimmel Medical
College, and Jefferson Institute of Molecular Medicine, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia Pennsylvania 19107, USA;. Electronic address:
Jouni.Uitto@jefferson.edu.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Sidney Kimmel Medical
College, and Jefferson Institute of Molecular Medicine, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia Pennsylvania 19107, USA;; The Genetics, Genomics and
Cancer Biology Graduate Program, Jefferson College of Life Sciences, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Sidney Kimmel Medical
College, and Jefferson Institute of Molecular Medicine, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia Pennsylvania 19107, USA.
(4)Imam Khomeini Hospital, Tehran University of Medical Science, Tehran, Iran;;
Department of Dermatology, Razi Hospital, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.
(5)Imagine Institute, University of Paris, INSERM U1163, Paris, France;;
Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, INSERM U1163,
Necker Hospital for Sick Children, Paris, France;; St Giles Laboratory of Human
Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller Branch, the Rockefeller University, 
New York, New York, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Imagine Institute, University of Paris, INSERM U1163, Paris, France;;
Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, INSERM U1163,
Necker Hospital for Sick Children, Paris, France;; St Giles Laboratory of Human
Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller Branch, the Rockefeller University, 
New York, New York, USA.

Human papilloma virus (HPV) infections can cause common warts, which usually
resolve spontaneously or become recalcitrant, resistant to multiple treatments.
In rare cases, they transform into cutaneous giant horns resulting in the
tree-man syndrome (TMS). Defective β-HPVs can cause flat warts in
epidermodysplasia verruciformis (EV), a genetic disorder. In typical EV, limited 
to the skin, the mutated genes are critical for keratinocyte-intrinsic immunity, 
while atypical, syndromic EV involves genes controlling T-cells. Inborn errors of
immunity due to mutations in distinct genes underlying recalcitrant warts and the
α-HPV2-driven TMS have been identified, all disrupting T-cell immunity.
Collectively, these observations attest to the wide phenotypic spectrum of
cutaneous infections caused by different HPV types, at the intersection of the
genetic diversity of the viral and human genomes.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jid.2021.10.029 
PMID: 34843682 

