
1. J Virol. 2021 Dec 1:JVI0183721. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01837-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Development of a Single-cycle Infectious SARS-CoV-2 Virus Replicon Particle
System for use in BSL2 Laboratories.

Malicoat J(1), Manivasagam S(1), Zuñiga S(2), Sola I(2), McCabe D(1), Rong L(3), 
Perlman S(1), Enjuanes L(2), Manicassamy B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, 
USA.
(2)Coronavirus Laboratory, Departamento Biologia Molecular y Celular, Centro
Nacional de Biotecnologia (CNB-CSIC), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
IL, USA.

Research activities with infectious severe acute respiratory syndrome associated 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) are currently permitted only under biosafety level 3
(BSL3) containment. Here, we report the development of a single-cycle infectious 
SARS-CoV-2 virus replicon particle (VRP) system with a luciferase and green
fluorescent protein (GFP) dual reporter that can be safely handled in BSL2
laboratories to study SARS-CoV-2 biology. The Spike (S) gene of SARS-CoV-2
encodes for the envelope glycoprotein, which is essential for mediating infection
of new host cells. Through deletion and replacement of this essential S gene with
a luciferase and GFP dual reporter, we have generated a conditional SARS-CoV-2
mutant (ΔS-VRP) that produces infectious particles only in cells expressing a
viral envelope glycoprotein of choice. Interestingly, we observed more efficient 
production of infectious particles in cells expressing vesicular stomatitis virus
(VSV) glycoprotein G (ΔS-VRP(G)) as compared to cells expressing other viral
glycoproteins including S. We confirmed that infection from ΔS-VRP(G) is limited 
to a single round and can be neutralized by anti-VSV serum. In our studies with
ΔS-VRP(G), we observed robust expression of both luciferase and GFP reporters in 
various human and murine cell types, demonstrating that a broad variety of cells 
can support intracellular replication of SARS-CoV-2. In addition, treatment of
ΔS-VRP(G) infected cells with anti-CoV drugs remdesivir (nucleoside analog) or
GC376 (CoV 3CL protease inhibitor) resulted in a robust decrease in both
luciferase and GFP expression in a drug-dose and cell-type dependent manner.
Taken together, we have developed a single-cycle infectious SARS-CoV-2 VRP system
that serves as a versatile platform to study SARS-CoV-2 intracellular biology and
to perform high throughput screening of antiviral drugs under BSL2 containment.
Importance Due to the highly contagious nature of SARS-CoV-2 and the lack of
immunity in the human population, research on SARS-CoV-2 has been restricted to
biosafety level 3 laboratories. This has greatly limited participation of the
broader scientific community in SARS-CoV-2 research and thus has hindered the
development of vaccines and antiviral drugs. By deleting the essential Spike gene
in the viral genome, we have developed a conditional mutant of SARS-CoV-2 with
luciferase and fluorescent reporters, which can be safely used under biosafety
level 2 conditions. Our single-cycle infectious SARS-CoV-2 virus replicon system 
can serve as a versatile platform to study SARS-CoV-2 intracellular biology and
to perform high throughput screening of antiviral drugs under BSL2 containment.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01837-21 
PMID: 34851142 

