
1. J Virol. 2021 Dec 1:JVI0137821. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01378-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Mooring stone-like Arg114 pulls diverse bulged peptides: first insight into
African swine fever virus-derived T cell epitopes presented by swine MHC class I.

Yue C(1)(2), Xiang W(3), Huang X(1)(2), Sun Y(4), Xiao J(3), Liu K(5), Sun Z(6), 
Qiao P(2), Li H(2), Gan J(7), Ba L(3), Chai Y(5), Qi J(5), Liu P(2), Qi P(3),
Zhao Y(2), Li Y(4), Qiu HJ(4), Gao GF(1)(2)(5), Gao G(1), Liu WJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Savaid Medical School, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China.
(2)NHC Key Laboratory of Biosafety, National Institute for Viral Disease Control 
and Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (China CDC),
Beijing, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Veterinary Bioproduction and Chemical Medicine of the
Ministry of Agriculture, Engineering and Technology Research Center for Beijing
Veterinary Peptide Vaccine Design and Preparation, Zhongmu Institute of China
Animal Husbandry Industry Co. Ltd., Beijing, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, National High-Containment
Facilities for Animal Disease Control and Prevention, Harbin Veterinary Research 
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, China.
(5)CAS Key Laboratory of Pathogen Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of
Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, China.
(6)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases,
National Clinical Research Center for Infectious Diseases, Collaborative
Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Disease, The First
Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(7)School of Engineering, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada.

African swine fever virus (ASFV) is the causative agent of African swine fever
(ASF), which is a devastating pig disease threatening the global pork industry.
However, currently no commercial vaccines are available. During the immune
response, major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules select viral
peptide epitopes and present them to host cytotoxic T lymphocytes, thereby
playing critical roles in eliminating viral infections. Here we screened peptides
derived from ASFV and determined the molecular basis of ASFV-derived peptides
presented by the swine leukocyte antigen (SLA)-1*0101. We found that peptide
binding in SLA-1*0101 differs from the traditional mammalian binding patterns.
Unlike the typical B and F pockets used by the common MHC-I molecule, SLA-1*0101 
uses the D and F pockets as major peptide anchor pockets. Furthermore, the
conformationally stable Arg114 residue located in the peptide-binding groove
(PBG) was highly selective for the peptides. Arg114 draws negatively charged
residues at positions P5 to P7 of the peptides, which led to multiple bulged
conformations of different peptides binding to SLA-1*0101 and creating diversity 
for T cells receptor docking. Thus, the solid Arg114 residue acts as a "mooring
stone" and pulls the peptides into the PBG of SLA-1*0101. Notably, the T cells
recognition and activation of p72-derived peptides were verified by SLA-1*0101
tetramer-based flow cytometry in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of
the donor pigs. These results refresh our understanding of MHC I molecular anchor
peptides, and provide new insights into vaccine development for the prevention
and control of ASF. IMPORTANCE The spread of African swine fever virus (ASFV) has
caused enormous losses to the pork industry worldwide. Here, a series of
ASFV-derived peptides were identified, which could bind to swine leukocyte
antigen SLA-1*0101, a prevalent SLA allele among Yorkshire pigs. The crystal
structure of four ASFV-derived peptides and one foot-and-mouth disease virus
(FMDV)-derived peptide complexed with SLA-1*0101 revealed an unusual peptide
anchoring mode of SLA-1*0101 with D and F pockets as anchoring pockets.
Negatively-charged residues are preferred within the middle portion of
SLA-1*0101-binding peptides. Notably, we determined an unexpected role of Arg114 
of SLA-1*0101 as a "mooring stone" which pulls the peptide anchoring into the PBG
in diverse "M" or "n" shaped conformation. Furthermore, T cells from donor pigs
could activate through the recognition of ASFV-derived peptides. Our study sheds 
light on the uncommon presentation of ASFV peptides by swine MHC I and benefits
the development of ASF vaccines.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01378-21 
PMID: 34851145 

