
1. Med Res Arch. 2021 Jul;9(7). pii: 2481. doi: 10.18103/mra.v9i7.2481. Epub 2021
Jul 10.

Increasing Efficacy of Enveloped Whole-Virus Vaccines by In situ
Immune-Complexing with the Natural Anti-Gal Antibody.

Galili U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Rush Medical College, Chicago, IL, USA.

The appearance of variants of mutated virus in course of the Covid-19 pandemic
raises concerns regarding the risk of possible formation of variants that can
evade the protective immune response elicited by the single antigen S-protein
gene-based vaccines. This risk may be avoided by inclusion of several antigens in
vaccines, so that a variant that evades the immune response to the S-protein of
SARS-CoV-2 virus will be destroyed by the protective immune response against
other viral antigens. A simple way for preparing multi-antigenic enveloped-virus 
vaccines is using the inactivated whole-virus as vaccine. However, immunogenicity
of such vaccines may be suboptimal because of poor uptake of the vaccine by
antigen-presenting-cells (APC) due to electrostatic repulsion by the negative
charges of sialic-acid on both the glycan-shield of the vaccinating virus and on 
the carbohydrate-chains (glycans) of APC. In addition, glycan-shield can mask
many antigenic peptides. These effects of the glycan-shield can be reduced and
immunogenicity of the vaccinating virus markedly increased by glycoengineering
viral glycans for replacing sialic-acid units on glycans with α-gal epitopes
(Galα1-3Galβ1-4GlcNAc-R). Vaccination of humans with inactivated whole-virus
presenting α-gal epitopes (virusα-gal) results in formation of immune-complexes
with the abundant natural anti-Gal antibody that binds to viral α-gal epitopes at
the vaccination site. These immune-complexes are targeted to APC for rigorous
uptake due to binding of the Fc portion of immunecomplexed anti-Gal to Fcγ
receptors on APC. The APC further transport the large amounts of internalized
vaccinating virus to regional lymph nodes, process and present the virus
antigenic peptides for the activation of many clones of virus specific helper and
cytotoxic T-cells. This elicits a protective cellular and humoral immune response
against multiple viral antigens and an effective immunological memory. The immune
response to virusα-gal vaccine was studied in mice producing anti-Gal and
immunized with inactivated influenza-virusα-gal. These mice demonstrated 100-fold
increase in titer of the antibodies produced, a marked increase in T-cell
response, and a near complete protection against challenge with a lethal dose of 
live influenza-virus, in comparison to a similar vaccine lacking α-gal epitopes. 
This glycoengineering can be achieved in vitro by enzymatic reaction with
neuraminidase removing sialic-acid and with recombinant α1,3galactosyltransferase
(α1,3GT) synthesizing α-gal epitopes, by engineering host-cells to contain
several copies of the α1,3GT gene (GGTA1), or by transduction of this gene in a
replication-defective adenovirus vector into host-cells. Theoretically, these
methods for increased immunogenicity may be applicable to all enveloped viruses
with N-glycans on their envelope.

DOI: 10.18103/mra.v9i7.2481 
PMCID: PMC8631339
PMID: 34853815 

