
1. Vasc Health Risk Manag. 2021 Nov 23;17:739-769. doi: 10.2147/VHRM.S328096.
eCollection 2021.

Promising Nutritional Fruits Against Cardiovascular Diseases: An Overview of
Experimental Evidence and Understanding Their Mechanisms of Action.

Zuraini NZA(1), Sekar M(1), Wu YS(2)(3), Gan SH(4), Bonam SR(5), Mat Rani NNI(6),
Begum MY(7), Lum PT(1), Subramaniyan V(8), Fuloria NK(9), Fuloria S(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy and Health
Sciences, Universiti Kuala Lumpur Royal College of Medicine Perak, Ipoh, Perak,
30450, Malaysia.
(2)Centre for Virus and Vaccine Research, School of Medical and Life Sciences,
Sunway University, Selangor, 47500, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, School of Medical and Life Sciences, Sunway
University, Selangor, 47500, Malaysia.
(4)School of Pharmacy, Monash University Malaysia, Bandar Sunway, Selangor Darul 
Ehsan, 47500, Malaysia.
(5)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Centre de Recherché
des Cordeliers, Sorbonne Université, Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(6)Faculty of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Universiti Kuala Lumpur Royal College
of Medicine Perak, Ipoh, Perak, 30450, Malaysia.
(7)Department of Pharmaceutics, College of Pharmacy, King Khalid University
(KKU), Asir-Abha, 61421, Saudi Arabia.
(8)Faculty of Medicine, Bioscience and Nursing, MAHSA University, Selangor,
42610, Malaysia.
(9)Faculty of Pharmacy & Centre of Excellence for Biomaterials Engineering, AIMST
University, Kedah, 08100, Malaysia.

Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) are one of the leading causes of morbidity and
mortality in both developed and developing countries, affecting millions of
individuals each year. Despite the fact that successful therapeutic drugs for the
management and treatment of CVDs are available on the market, nutritional fruits 
appear to offer the greatest benefits to the heart and have been proved to
alleviate CVDs. Experimental studies have also demonstrated that nutritional
fruits have potential protective effects against CVDs. The aim of the review was 
to provide a comprehensive summary of scientific evidence on the effect of 10 of 
the most commonly available nutritional fruits reported against CVDs and describe
the associated mechanisms of action. Relevant literatures were searched and
collected from several scientific databases including PubMed, ScienceDirect,
Google Scholar and Scopus. In the context of CVDs, 10 commonly consumed
nutritious fruits including apple, avocado, grapes, mango, orange, kiwi,
pomegranate, papaya, pineapple, and watermelon were analysed and addressed. The
cardioprotective mechanisms of the 10 nutritional fruits were also compiled and
highlighted. Overall, the present review found that the nutritious fruits and
their constituents have significant benefits for the management and treatment of 
CVDs such as myocardial infarction, hypertension, peripheral artery disease,
coronary artery disease, cardiomyopathies, dyslipidemias, ischemic stroke, aortic
aneurysm, atherosclerosis, cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure, diabetic
cardiovascular complications, drug-induced cardiotoxicity and cardiomyopathy.
Among the 10 nutritional fruits, pomegranate and grapes have been well explored, 
and the mechanisms of action are well documented against CVDs. All of the
nutritional fruits mentioned are edible and readily accessible on the market.
Consuming these fruits, which may contain varying amounts of active constituents 
depending on the food source and season, the development of nutritious
fruits-based health supplements would be more realistic for consistent CVD
protection.

© 2021 Zuraini et al.

DOI: 10.2147/VHRM.S328096 
PMCID: PMC8631183
PMID: 34858028 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.

