
1. Rev Med Virol. 2021 Dec 2:e2311. doi: 10.1002/rmv.2311. [Epub ahead of print]

Viruses of the oral cavity: Prevalence, pathobiology and association with oral
diseases.

Thakkar P(1), Banks JM(1), Rahat R(1), Brandini DA(2), Naqvi AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics, College of Dentistry, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(2)Department of Diagnosis and Surgery, School of Dentistry, São Paulo State
University (UNESP), Araçatuba, São Paulo, Brazil.

The human oral cavity contains a plethora of habitats and tissue environments,
such as teeth, tongue, and gingiva, which are home to a rich microbial flora
including bacteria, fungi, and viruses. Given the exposed nature of the mouth,
oral tissues constantly encounter infectious agents, forming a complex ecological
community. In the past, the discussion of microbiological aspects of oral disease
has traditionally focused on bacteria and fungi, but viruses are attracting
increasing attention as pathogens in oral inflammatory diseases. Therefore,
understanding viral prevalence, pathogenicity, and preference regarding oral
tissues is critical to understanding the holistic effects of viruses on oral
infections. Recent investigations have demonstrated the abundance of certain
viruses in oral inflammatory diseases, suggesting an association between viruses 
and disease. Human herpesviruses are the most extensively studied viruses in
different oral inflammatory diseases. However, challenges in viral detection and 
the lack of reproducible in vitro and in vivo infection models have limited our
progress in understanding viruses and their contribution to oral diseases. This
review presents a summary of major mammalian viruses and associated diseases in
the human oral cavity. The emergence of a recent pathogen SARS-CoV-2 and its
tropism for salivary and periodontal tissues further highlights the relevance of 
the oral cavity in host-pathogen interaction. Understanding how these different
viruses present clinically and influence oral health will advance our
understanding of multifactorial oral diseases and their association with viruses.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/rmv.2311 
PMID: 34854161 

