
1. PLoS One. 2021 Dec 2;16(12):e0260537. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260537.
eCollection 2021.

The inflammatory biomarkers profile of hospitalized patients with COVID-19 and
its association with patient's outcome: A single centered study.

Hachim IY(1)(2), Hachim MY(3), Hannawi H(4)(5), Naeem KB(5), Salah A(6), Hannawi 
S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Sharjah Institute for Medical Research, University of Sharjah, Sharjah, United
Arab Emirates.
(2)College of Medicine, University of Sharjah, Sharjah, United Arab Emirates.
(3)College of Medicine, Mohammed bin Rashid University of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Dubai, United Arab Emirates.
(4)Mohammed bin Rashid University of Medicine and Health Sciences, Dubai, United 
Arab Emirates.
(5)Ministry of Health and Prevention (MOHAP), Dubai, UAE.
(6)Gulf Medical University, Ajman, United Arab Emirates.

Several reports highlighted the central role of inflammation in the pathogenesis 
of corona virus disease-19 (COVID-19) disease. Also, the hyper-inflammatory
response that is triggered by severe acute respiratory syndrom-Covid-2
(SARS-CoV-2) infection was believed to play an essential role in disease severity
and adverse clinical course. For that reason, the classical inflammatory markers 
were proposed as a possible indicator for COVID-19 severity. However, an
extensive analysis of the predictive value of inflammatory biomarkers in large
patients' cohorts is still limited and critically needed. In this study we
investigated the predictive value of the classical inflammatory biomarkers in a
patient cohort consists of 541 COVID-19 patients admitted to Al Kuwait Hospital, 
Dubai, UAE. A detailed analysis of the association between the essential
inflammatory markers and clinical characteristics as well as clinical outcome of 
the patients were made. In addition, the correlation between those markers and a 
wide range of laboratory biomarkers and incidence of acute organs injury were
investigated. Our results showed a significant elevation of many inflammatory
markers including white cell count (WBC) count, neutrophils count, C-reactive
protein (CRP), D-Dimer, ferritin, procalcitonin (PCT), and lactate dehydrogenase 
(LDH) levels in patients with more severe illness. Also, our results highlighted 
that higher levels of those markers can predict worse patient outcome including
the need of ventilation, intensive care unit (ICU) admission, multiple organs
dysfunction as well as death. In addition, Our results showed that the presence
of lymphopenia and lower absolute lymphocyte count (ALC) at the time of admission
were associated with severe to critical COVID-19 illness (P<0.0001), presence of 
acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) (P<0.0001) and the need for
ventilation and ICU admission., Moreover, our results showed a strong association
between lower ALC count and multiple organs dysfunction and patient's death
(P<0.0001). In conclusion, our results highlighted the possible use of classical 
inflammatory biomarkers at time of admission as a potential predictive marker for
more severe clinical course in COVID-19 patients that might need more aggressive 
therapeutic approach including the need of ventilators and ICU admission. The
presence of such predictive markers might improve patient's stratification and
help in the direction of the available resources to patients in need, which in
turn help in improving our response to the disease pandemic.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260537 
PMCID: PMC8638892
PMID: 34855832 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

