
1. Med Pr. 2021 Dec 2. pii: 143899. doi: 10.13075/mp.5893.01207. [Epub ahead of
print]

Potential therapeutic application of mesenchymal stem cells in COVID-19
complications.

Kolanko E(1), Mazurski A(2), Czekaj P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Śląski Uniwersytet Medyczny w Katowicach / Medical University of Silesia in
Katowice, Katowice, Poland (Wydział Nauk Medycznych w Katowicach, Katedra
Histologii i Embriologii, Zakład Cytofizjologii / Faculty of Medical Sciences in 
Katowice, Chair of Histology and Embryology, Department of Cytophysiology).
(2)Śląski Uniwersytet Medyczny w Katowicach / Medical University of Silesia in
Katowice, Katowice, Poland (Wydział Nauk Medycznych w Katowicach, Katedra
Histologii i Embriologii, Studenckie Koło Naukowe / Faculty of Medical Sciences
in Katowice, Chair of Histology and Embryology, Students' Scientific Circle).

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have remarkable immunomodulatory properties, low
immunogenicity, and paracrine properties as well as the ability to differentiate 
into multiple cell lines. These properties make them potential candidates for
clinical applications in the treatment of neurodegenerative, cardiovascular, and 
lung diseases, which may be occupational diseases. Preclinical studies using
experimental animal models have demonstrated regenerative properties of MSCs in
diseases such as silicosis and occupational asthma. Currently, treatment of the
novel disease COVID-19 could be enhanced by using MSC therapies. This disease
affects many professional groups with great intensity and its consequences might 
be considered as an occupational disease. It is a significant public health
problem and a therapeutic challenge. Despite the development of vaccines against 
COVID-19, there is growing concern about the emergence of new mutations of the
SARS-CoV-2 virus in addition to the known alpha, beta, gamma, and delta variants.
There is still no effective COVID-19 treatment and the existing ones only play a 
supporting role. MSCs offer treatment possibilities as an alternative or
complementary therapy. The clinical trials to date using MSCs in patients with
COVID-19 give hope for the safe and effective use of this stem cell population.
Med Pr. 2021;72(6).

This work is available in Open Access model and licensed under a CC BY-NC 3.0 PL 
license.

DOI: 10.13075/mp.5893.01207 
PMID: 34854435 

