
1. ACS Sens. 2021 Dec 2. doi: 10.1021/acssensors.1c01524. [Epub ahead of print]

Gravity-Driven Microfluidic Siphons: Fluidic Characterization and Application to 
Quantitative Immunoassays.

Reis NM(1), Needs SH(2), Jegouic SM(2)(3), Gill KK(1), Sirivisoot S(4), Howard
S(1), Kempe J(1), Bola S(1), Al-Hakeem K(1), Jones IM(3), Prommool T(5),
Luangaram P(5), Avirutnan P(4)(5)(6), Puttikhunt C(4)(5)(6), Edwards AD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Centre for Biosensors, Biodevices and
Bioelectronics (C3Bio), University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath BA2 7AY, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Reading School of Pharmacy, University of Reading, Whiteknights Campus,
Reading, RG6 6AD United Kingdom.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, University of Reading, Whiteknights Campus,
Reading, RG6 6AJ, United Kingdom.
(4)Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever Research Unit, Office for Research and Development,
Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, 10700,
Thailand.
(5)Molecular Biology of Dengue and Flaviviruses Research Team, Medical Molecular 
Biotechnology Research Group, National Center for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, National Science and Technology Development Agency, Pathum Thani, 
73170, Thailand.
(6)Siriraj Center of Research Excellence in Dengue and Emerging Pathogens,
Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, 10700,
Thailand.

A range of biosensing techniques including immunoassays are routinely used for
quantitation of analytes in biological samples and available in a range of
formats, from centralized lab testing (e.g., microplate enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA)) to automated point-of-care (POC) and lateral flow
immunochromatographic tests. High analytical performance is intrinsically linked 
to the use of a sequence of reagent and washing steps, yet this is extremely
challenging to deliver at the POC without a high level of fluidic control
involving, e.g., automation, fluidic pumping, or manual fluid handling/pipetting.
Here we introduce a microfluidic siphon concept that conceptualizes a multistep
″dipstick″ for quantitative, enzymatically amplified immunoassays using a strip
of microporous or microbored material. We demonstrated that gravity-driven siphon
flow can be realized in single-bore glass capillaries, a multibored
microcapillary film, and a glass fiber porous membrane. In contrast to other POC 
devices proposed to date, the operation of the siphon is only dependent on the
hydrostatic liquid pressure (gravity) and not capillary forces, and the unique
stepwise approach to the delivery of the sample and immunoassay reagents results 
in zero dead volume in the device, no reagent overlap or carryover, and full
start/stop fluid control. We demonstrated applications of a 10-bore microfluidic 
siphon as a portable ELISA system without compromised quantitative capabilities
in two global diagnostic applications: (1) a four-plex sandwich ELISA for rapid
smartphone dengue serotype identification by serotype-specific dengue virus NS1
antigen detection, relevant for acute dengue fever diagnosis, and (2)
quantitation of anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgG and IgM titers in spiked serum samples.
Diagnostic siphons provide the opportunity for high-performance immunoassay
testing outside sophisticated laboratories, meeting the rapidly changing global
clinical and public health needs.

DOI: 10.1021/acssensors.1c01524 
PMID: 34854666 

