
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 9;12:747830. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.747830. eCollection 
2021.

Recognition of Variants of Concern by Antibodies and T Cells Induced by a
SARS-CoV-2 Inactivated Vaccine.

Melo-González F(1)(2), Soto JA(1)(2), González LA(1)(2), Fernández J(3), Duarte
LF(1)(2), Schultz BM(1)(2), Gálvez NMS(1)(2), Pacheco GA(1)(2), Ríos M(1)(2),
Vázquez Y(1)(2), Rivera-Pérez D(1)(2), Moreno-Tapia D(1)(2), Iturriaga C(4),
Vallejos OP(1)(2), Berríos-Rojas RV(1)(2), Hoppe-Elsholz G(1)(2), Urzúa M(4),
Bruneau N(3), Fasce RA(3), Mora J(3), Grifoni A(5), Sette A(5)(6), Weiskopf D(5),
Zeng G(7), Meng W(7), González-Aramundiz JV(8), González PA(1)(2), Abarca
K(1)(4), Ramírez E(3), Kalergis AM(1)(2)(9), Bueno SM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Millennium Institute on Immunology and Immunotherapy, Pontificia Universidad
Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(2)Departamento de Genética Molecular y Microbiología, Facultad de Ciencias
Biológicas, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(3)Departamento de Laboratorio Biomédico, Instituto de Salud Pública de Chile,
Santiago, Chile.
(4)Departamento de Enfermedades Infecciosas e Inmunología Pediátrica, División de
Pediatría, Escuela de Medicina, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile,
Santiago, Chile.
(5)Center for Infectious Disease and Vaccine Research, La Jolla Institute for
Immunology (LJI), La Jolla, CA, United States.
(6)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases and Global Public
Health, University of California, San Diego (UCSD), La Jolla, CA, United States.
(7)Sinovac Biotech, Beijing, China.
(8)Departamento de Farmacia, Facultad de Química y de Farmacia, Pontificia
Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(9)Departamento de Endocrinología, Facultad de Medicina, Escuela de Medicina,
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.

Background: Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the
virus responsible of the current pandemic ongoing all around the world. Since its
discovery in 2019, several circulating variants have emerged and some of them are
associated with increased infections and death rate. Despite the genetic
differences among these variants, vaccines approved for human use have shown a
good immunogenic and protective response against them. In Chile, over 70% of the 
vaccinated population is immunized with CoronaVac, an inactivated SARS-CoV-2
vaccine. The immune response elicited by this vaccine has been described against 
the first SARS-CoV-2 strain isolated from Wuhan, China and the D614G strain
(lineage B). To date, four SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern described have
circulated worldwide. Here, we describe the neutralizing capacities of antibodies
secreted by volunteers in the Chilean population immunized with CoronaVac against
variants of concern Alpha (B.1.1.7), Beta (B.1.351) Gamma (P.1) and Delta
(B.617.2).
Methods: Volunteers enrolled in a phase 3 clinical trial were vaccinated with two
doses of CoronaVac in 0-14 or 0-28 immunization schedules. Sera samples were used
to evaluate the capacity of antibodies induced by the vaccine to block the
binding between Receptor Binding Domain (RBD) from variants of concern and the
human ACE2 receptor by an in-house ELISA. Further, conventional
microneutralization assays were used to test neutralization of SARS-CoV-2
infection. Moreover, interferon-γ-secreting T cells against Spike from variants
of concern were evaluated in PBMCs from vaccinated subjects using ELISPOT.
Results: CoronaVac promotes the secretion of antibodies able to block the RBD of 
all the SARS-CoV-2 variants studied. Seropositivity rates of neutralizing
antibodies in the population evaluated were over 97% for the lineage B strain,
over 80% for Alpha and Gamma variants, over 75% for Delta variant and over 60%
for the Beta variant. Geometric means titers of blocking antibodies were reduced 
when tested against SARS-CoV-2 variants as compared to ancestral strain. We also 
observed that antibodies from vaccinated subjects were able to neutralize the
infection of variants D614G, Alpha, Gamma and Delta in a conventional
microneutralization assay. Importantly, after SARS-CoV-2 infection, we observed
that the blocking capacity of antibodies from vaccinated volunteers increased up 
to ten times for all the variants tested. We compared the number of
interferon-γ-secreting T cells specific for SARS-CoV-2 Spike WT and variants of
concern from vaccinated subjects and we did not detect significant differences.
Conclusion: Immunization with CoronaVac in either immunization schedule promotes 
the secretion of antibodies able to block SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern and
partially neutralizes SARS-CoV-2 infection. In addition, it stimulates cellular
responses against all variants of concern.

Copyright © 2021 Melo-González, Soto, González, Fernández, Duarte, Schultz,
Gálvez, Pacheco, Ríos, Vázquez, Rivera-Pérez, Moreno-Tapia, Iturriaga, Vallejos, 
Berríos-Rojas, Hoppe-Elsholz, Urzúa, Bruneau, Fasce, Mora, Grifoni, Sette,
Weiskopf, Zeng, Meng, González-Aramundiz, González, Abarca, Ramírez, Kalergis and
Bueno.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.747830 
PMCID: PMC8630786
PMID: 34858404 

Conflict of interest statement: Authors GZ and WM are employed by company SINOVAC
Biotech. AS is a consultant for Gritstone Bio, Flow Pharma, Arcturus
Therapeutics, ImmunoScape, CellCarta, Avalia, Moderna, Fortress and Repertoire.
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest. La Jolla Institute for Immunology (LJI) has filed for
patent protection for various aspects of T cell epitope and vaccine design work. 
The authors declare this study received the investigational product (placebo and 
vaccines) from the company SINOVAC Biotech. SINOVAC employees contributed to the 
conceptualization of the study (clinical protocol and eCRF design) but did not
participate in either the analysis or interpretation of the data shown in this
manuscript.

