
1. Clin Nutr ESPEN. 2021 Dec;46:1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.clnesp.2021.10.016. Epub 2021
Oct 23.

The efficacy of probiotics on virus titres and antibody production in virus
diseases: A systematic review on recent evidence for COVID-19 treatment.

Mirashrafi S(1), Moravejolahkami AR(2), Balouch Zehi Z(3), Hojjati Kermani MA(4),
Bahreini-Esfahani N(5), Haratian M(6), Ganjali Dashti M(7), Pourhossein M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Nutrition, School of Nutrition & Food Science, Isfahan 
University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran. Electronic address:
shahrzadmirashrafy@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Clinical Nutrition, School of Nutrition & Food Science, Isfahan 
University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran. Electronic address:
a.moravej@mail.mui.ac.ir.
(3)Department of Nutrition, Faculty of Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical
Sciences, Mashhad, Iran. Electronic address: zakiyezb@gmail.com.
(4)Clinical Tuberculosis and Epidemiology Research Center, National Research
Institute of Tuberculosis and Lung Diseases (NRITLD), Shahid Beheshti University 
of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: Imhojjati@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Food Science and Technology, School of Nutrition and Food
Science, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran. Electronic
address: nimahbahreini@yahoo.com.
(6)Department of Nutrition, Vice Chancellor of Health, Hamadan University of
Medical Sciences, Hamedan, Iran. Electronic address: Haratianmohsen@yahoo.com.
(7)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Texas at Dallas, 800 W
Campbell Road, Richardson, TX, USA. Electronic address: ganjali_marjan@yahoo.com.
(8)Department of Food Science and Technology, School of Nutrition and Food
Science, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran. Electronic
address: P5M10@yahoo.co.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: There are some studies indicating the effects of
probiotic-containing foods or supplements on viral diseases. We aimed to conduct 
a rapid review of probiotics with specific emphasis on their potential for early 
administration in patients at greater risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection.
METHODS: We searched on PubMed, EMBASE, Google Scholar, Science Direct, Scopus
and Web of Science up to February 2021 to identify interventional and
observational studies documenting the effects of probiotics strains on
interleukins, virus titers, and antibody production with a focus on
probiotic-containing foods (PROSPERO Registration ID. CRD42020181453) RESULTS:
From a total of 163 records, 21 studies were classified into three domains based 
on the efficacy of probiotics on 1) the level of interleukins (n = 7), 2) virus
titers (n = 2), and 3) interferon (IFN) and antibody production (n = 12). The
suppuration of pro-inflammatory interleukins and type I INF production seemed to 
be the main anti-viral effect of probiotics. Nine studies also indicated the
beneficial effects of probiotics and fermented foods on viral diseases.
CONCLUSION: Based on evidence, some probiotic strains may be useful in viral
infections; randomized trials are needed to confirm these findings.

Copyright © 2021 European Society for Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clnesp.2021.10.016 
PMCID: PMC8539817
PMID: 34857182 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None of the
authors had a conflict of interest.

