
1. Sao Paulo Med J. 2021 Nov 29. pii: S1516-31802021005028201. doi:
10.1590/1516-3180.2020.0718.R1.18052021. [Epub ahead of print]

Recent dengue virus infection: epidemiological survey on risk factors associated 
with infection in a medium-sized city in Mato Grosso.

Ferreira DTO(1), Atanaka M(2), Espinosa MM(3), Schuler-Faccini L(4), Caldeira
ADS(5), Silva JHD(6), Vivi-Oliveira VK(7), Paz RCD(8), Nascimento VFD(9),
Terças-Trettel ACP(10).

Author information: 
(1)MSc. Nutritionist and Public Manager, Storage and Distribution Center for
Medicines and Supplies of the Municipal Health Department, Várzea Grande (MT),
Brazil.
(2)PhD. Nurse and Associate Professor IV, Postgraduate Program on Collective
Health, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso (UFMT), Cuiabá campus, Cuiabá (MT),
Brazil.
(3)PhD. Statistician and Associate Professor IV, Postgraduate Program on
Collective Health, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso (UFMT), Cuiabá campus,
Cuiabá (MT), Brazil.
(4)MD, PhD. Full Professor, Department of Genetics, Universidade Federal do Rio
Grande do Sul (UFRS), Porto Alegre (RS), Brazil.
(5)RN. Primary Healthcare Nurse, Municipal Health Department, Poconé (MT),
Brazil.
(6)MSc. Nurse and Technical Manager, Municipal Epidemiological Surveillance
Department, Tangará da Serra (MT), Brazil.
(7)MSc. Doctoral Student, Biologist and Professor, Department of Biomedicine,
Universidade de Cuiabá, Cuiabá (MT), Brazil.
(8)Specialist. Pharmacist, Biochemist and Technical Consultant, General
Coordination Office for Health Laboratories, Health Surveillance Department,
Ministry of Health, Brasília (DF), Brazil.
(9)PhD. Nurse and Adjunct Professor II, Universidade do Estado de Mato Grosso
(UNEMAT), Tangará da Serra campus, Tangará da Serra (MT), Brazil.
(10)PhD. Nurse and Adjunct Professor, Universidade do Estado de Mato Grosso
(UNEMAT), Tangará da Serra campus, Tangará da Serra (MT), Brazil; and Permanent
Professor, Postgraduate Program on Collective Health, Universidade Federal de
Mato Grosso (UFMT), Cuiabá campus, Cuiabá (MT), Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Dengue is considered to be the most important arbovirus worldwide,
with important complications that increase its lethality. In Brazil, an endemic
country, the disease reaches significant incidence levels, with occurrences of
serious cases and high costs of hospitalizations for its treatment.
OBJECTIVE: To analyze risk factors among individuals with recent histories of
dengue infection in a medium-sized city in Mato Grosso.
DESIGN AND SETTING: Descriptive cross-sectional study, of epidemiological-survey 
type, conducted among the urban population of a city located in mid-northern Mato
Grosso.
METHODS: A seroepidemiological survey using questionnaires and collection of
biological material was conducted among 596 adults aged ≥ 18 years who had been
selected through a cluster sampling process. Positive dengue cases were those
with positive results from anti-dengue immunoassays (ELISA). Statistical analyses
with descriptive and inferential techniques were used, with 95% confidence
intervals and a 5% significance level.
RESULTS: The seroepidemiological profile of the study participants was
predominantly female, with ages between 18 and 39 years, self-declared non-white 
race/color, not more than eight years of education and not living with a
companion. Among the sanitary factors analyzed, the following were risk factors
for dengue virus infection: no running water at home; no water supply from the
public piped network; no waste from drains or toilets sent to the sewage network;
endemic disease combat agents visiting the home; and presence of mosquito
breeding sites at home.
CONCLUSION: Low schooling levels and previous dengue virus infection were
associated with current dengue virus infection.

DOI: 10.1590/1516-3180.2020.0718.R1.18052021 
PMID: 34852169 

