
1. PLoS One. 2021 Dec 2;16(12):e0259867. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259867.
eCollection 2021.

Sub-lethal doses of Nucleopolyhedrosis Virus and synthetic ınsecticides alter the
biological parameters of Helicoverpa armigera Hübner (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae).

Abid AD(1)(2), Zaka SM(1), Saeed S(3), Iqbal N(3), Naqqash MN(3), Shahzad MS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Plant Protection, Ministry of National Food Security and
Research, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(3)Institute of Plant Protection, Muhammad Nawaz Sharif University of Agriculture
Multan, Multan, Pakistan.

Resistance management is very important for devising control strategies of
polyphagous insect-pests like Helicoverpa armigera Hübner (Lepidoptera:
Noctuidae). Considering the importance of resistance management, demographic
features of selected and unselected populations of H. armigera were studied in 6 
different treatments viz. emamectin benzoate, Helicoverpa armigera
Nucleopolyhedrosis Virus (HaNPV), emamectin benzoate+HaNPV, spinetoram,
spinetoram+HaNPV and control. Higher values for fecundity, intrinsic rate, the
finite rate of increase (λ) were recorded in the control of selected as compared 
to the rest of treatment. Similarly, higher values for these population
parameters viz. oviposition days, fecundity, intrinsic rate, the finite rate of
increase were calculated in the unselected control. Similarly, net reproductive
rate (R0) for selected and unselected control was higher as compared to the rest 
of the treatments. It may happen because these kinds of selection pressures can
result in decreased fitness of the test insect thus decreased fitness of H.
armigera in different treatments was observed as compared to the control.
Additionally, quicker development of susceptible insects was observed because
susceptible insects were growing without any stressor (xenobiotics) as compared
to the rest which contributed to their faster development.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259867 
PMCID: PMC8639075
PMID: 34855796 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

