
1. Indian J Pharmacol. 2021 Sep-Oct;53(5):394-402. doi: 10.4103/ijp.IJP_654_20.

Evidences suggesting a possible role of Vitamin D in COVID 19: The missing link.

Singh S(1), Singh CM(2), Ranjan A(2), Kumar S(3), Singh DK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Patna,
Bihar, India.
(2)Department of Community and Family Medicine, All India Institute of Medical
Sciences, Patna, Bihar, India.
(3)Department of CTVS, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Patna, Bihar,
India.

The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 is spreading like wildfire
with no specific recommended treatment in sight. While some risk factors such as 
the presence of comorbidities, old age, and ethnicity have been recognized, not a
lot is known about who the virus will strike first or impact more. In this
hopeless scenario, exploration of time-tested facts about viral infections, in
general, seems to be a sound basis to prop further research upon. The fact that
immunity and its various determinants (e.g., micronutrients, sleep, and hygiene) 
have a crucial role to play in the defense against invading organisms, may be a
good starting point for commencing research into these as yet undisclosed
territories. Herein, the excellent immunomodulatory, antiviral, and
anti-inflammatory roles of Vitamin D necessitate thorough investigation,
particularly in COVID-19 perspective. This article reviews mechanisms and
evidence suggesting the role Vitamin D plays in people infected by the newly
identified COVID-19 virus. For this review, we searched the databases of Medline,
PubMed, and Embase. We studied several meta-analyses and randomized controlled
trials evaluating the role of Vitamin D in influenza and other contagious viral
infections. We also reviewed the circumstantial and anecdotal evidence connecting
Vitamin D with COVID-19 emerging recently. Consequently, it seems logical to
conclude that the immune-enhancing, antiviral, anti-inflammatory, and
lung-protective role of Vitamin D can be potentially lifesaving. Hence, Vitamin D
deserves exhaustive exploration through rigorously designed and controlled
scientific trials. Using Vitamin D as prophylaxis and/or chemotherapeutic
treatment of COVID-19 infection is an approach worth considering. In this regard,
mass assessment and subsequent supplementation can be tried, especially
considering the mechanistic evidence in respiratory infections, low potential for
toxicity, and widespread prevalence of the deficiency of Vitamin D affecting many
people worldwide.

DOI: 10.4103/ijp.IJP_654_20 
PMID: 34854410 

Conflict of interest statement: None

