
1. HLA. 2021 Dec 1. doi: 10.1111/tan.14503. [Epub ahead of print]

Association between BoLA-DRB3 polymorphism and bovine leukemia virus proviral
load in Vietnamese Holstein Friesian cattle.

Thi DL(#)(1), Vu SN(#)(2)(3), Lo CW(4), Dao TD(5)(6), Bui VN(5)(6), Ogawa H(5),
Imai K(5), Sugiura K(7)(8), Aida Y(4), Haga T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infection Control and Disease Prevention, Graduate School of
Agricultural and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Veterinary Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Vietnam
National University of Agriculture, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(3)Laboratory of Veterinary Pathology, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Laboratory of Global Infectious Diseases Control Science, Graduate School of
Agricultural and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Veterinary Medicine, Obihiro University of Agriculture and
Veterinary Medicine, Hokkaido, Japan.
(6)National Institute of Veterinary Research, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(7)Laboratory of Environment Science for Sustainable Development, Graduate School
of Agricultural and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Nippon Institute for Biological Science, Tokyo, Japan.
(#)Contributed equally

Bovine leukemia virus (BLV) is the causative agent of enzootic bovine leukosis.
Polymorphism in bovine leukocyte antigen (BoLA)-DRB3 allele can influence the
host immune response to pathogens, including BLV. However, association between
specific BoLA-DRB3 alleles and BLV proviral load (PVL), which is a useful index
for estimating disease progression and transmission risk, in Vietnamese cattle
are unknown. Here, association study of BoLA-DRB3 allele frequency between cattle
with high or low PVL demonstrated BoLA-DRB3*12:01 associates with high PVL in
Vietnamese Holstein-Friesian (HF) crossbred cattle. This is the first study to
demonstrate that BoLA-DRB3 polymorphism confers susceptibility to BLV high PVL in
HF crossbred kept in Vietnam. Our results may be useful in disease control and
eradiation for BLV through genetic selection. This article is protected by
copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/tan.14503 
PMID: 34854239 

