
1. J Virol. 2021 Dec 1:JVI0162421. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01624-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Roles of ESCRT proteins (ALIX and CHIMP4A) and their interplay with ISG15 during 
tick-borne flavivirus infection.

Tran PT(1), Chiramel AI(2), Johansson M(1), Melik W(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Science, Inflammatory Response and Infection Susceptibility 
Centre (iRiSC), Örebro University, Örebro, 70342, Sweden.
(2)Innate Immunity and Pathogenesis Section, Laboratory of Virology, Rocky
Mountain Laboratories (RML), National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Hamilton, MT 59840, USA.

Flaviviruses are usually transmitted to humans via mosquito or tick bites. During
infection, virus replication and assembly, whose cellular sites are relatively
close, are controlled by virus proteins and a diverse range of host proteins. By 
siRNA-mediated gene silencing, we show that ALIX and CHMP4A, two members of the
host endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) protein machinery, 
are required for flavivirus infection. Using cell lines expressing subgenomic
replicons and replicon virus-like particles, we demonstrate specific roles for
ALIX and CHMP4A in viral replication and assembly, respectively. Employing
biochemical methodology, we show that the ESCRT proteins are recruited by a
putative specific late (L) domain motif LYXLA within the NS3 protein of
tick-borne flaviviruses. Furthermore, to counteract the recruitment of ESCRT
proteins, the host cells may elicit defense mechanisms. We found that ectopic
expression of the interferon-stimulated gene 15 (ISG15) or the E3 ISG15-protein
ligase (HERC5) reduced virus replication by suppressing the positive effects of
ALIX and CHMP4A. Collectively, these results have provided new insights into
flavivirus-host cell interactions that function as checkpoints, including the NS3
and the ESCRT proteins, the ISG15 and the ESCRT protein, at essential stages of
the virus life cycle. IMPORTANCE Flaviviruses are important zoonotic viruses with
high fatality rates worldwide. Here, we report that during infection the virus
employs ESCRT protein members for virus replication and assembly. Among the ESCRT
proteins, ALIX acts during virus replication, while CHMP4A is required during
virus assembly. Other ESCRT protein members such as TSG101 are not required for
virus production. The ESCRT, ALIX -CHMP4A complex, is recruited to NS3 through
their interactions with the putative L domain motif of NS3, while CHMP4A is
recruited to E. In addition, we demonstrate the antiviral mechanism of ISG15 and 
HERC5, which degrades ALIX and CHIMP4A, indirectly targets virus infection. In
summary, we reveal host-dependency factors supporting flavivirus infection, but
these factors may also be targeted by antiviral host effector mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01624-21 
PMID: 34851141 

