
1. Immunity. 2021 Nov 4. pii: S1074-7613(21)00490-8. doi:
10.1016/j.immuni.2021.11.001. [Epub ahead of print]

Lipid nanoparticles enhance the efficacy of mRNA and protein subunit vaccines by 
inducing robust T follicular helper cell and humoral responses.

Alameh MG(1), Tombácz I(1), Bettini E(2), Lederer K(2), Sittplangkoon C(3),
Wilmore JR(4), Gaudette BT(4), Soliman OY(1), Pine M(1), Hicks P(5), Manzoni
TB(2), Knox JJ(4), Johnson JL(4), Laczkó D(1), Muramatsu H(1), Davis B(1), Meng
W(4), Rosenfeld AM(4), Strohmeier S(6), Lin PJC(7), Mui BL(7), Tam YK(7), Karikó 
K(8), Jacquet A(3), Krammer F(6), Bates P(2), Cancro MP(4), Weissman D(1), Luning
Prak ET(4), Allman D(4), Locci M(9), Pardi N(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Center of Excellence in Vaccine Research and Development, Faculty of Medicine,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
NY, USA.
(7)Acuitas Therapeutics, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(8)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA;
BioNTech RNA Pharmaceuticals, Mainz, Germany.
(9)Department of Microbiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Electronic address:
michela.locci@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(10)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
Electronic address: pnorbert@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.

Adjuvants are critical for improving the quality and magnitude of adaptive immune
responses to vaccination. Lipid nanoparticle (LNP)-encapsulated
nucleoside-modified mRNA vaccines have shown great efficacy against severe acute 
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), but the mechanism of action of
this vaccine platform is not well-characterized. Using influenza virus and
SARS-CoV-2 mRNA and protein subunit vaccines, we demonstrated that our LNP
formulation has intrinsic adjuvant activity that promotes induction of strong T
follicular helper cell, germinal center B cell, long-lived plasma cell, and
memory B cell responses that are associated with durable and protective
antibodies in mice. Comparative experiments demonstrated that this LNP
formulation outperformed a widely used MF59-like adjuvant, AddaVax. The adjuvant 
activity of the LNP relies on the ionizable lipid component and on IL-6 cytokine 
induction but not on MyD88- or MAVS-dependent sensing of LNPs. Our study
identified LNPs as a versatile adjuvant that enhances the efficacy of traditional
and next-generation vaccine platforms.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.immuni.2021.11.001 
PMCID: PMC8566475
PMID: 34852217 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests In accordance with the
University of Pennsylvania policies and procedures and our ethical obligations as
researchers, we report that D.W. and N.P. are named on a patent describing the
use of nucleoside-modified mRNA in lipid nanoparticles as a vaccine platform. We 
have disclosed those interests fully to the University of Pennsylvania, and we
have in place an approved plan for managing any potential conflicts arising from 
licensing of our patents. K.K. is an employee of BioNTech. P.J.C.L., B.L.M., and 
Y.K.T. are employees of Acuitas Therapeutics, a company involved in the
development of mRNA-LNP therapeutics. Y.K.T., D.W., and M.G.A. are named on
patents that describe lipid nanoparticles for delivery of nucleic acid
therapeutics, including mRNA and the use of modified mRNA in lipid nanoparticles 
as a vaccine platform. The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai has filed
patent applications regarding SARS-CoV-2 and influenza virus vaccines that name
F.K. as co-inventor.

