
1. Res Rep Trop Med. 2021 Nov 25;12:263-266. doi: 10.2147/RRTM.S341711. eCollection 
2021.

The First Experience of Effective 3rd Line Antiretroviral Therapy - A Case of
40-Year-Old Female Retroviral-Infected Patient at Hawassa University
Comprehensive Specialized Hospital, Hawassa, Sidama, Ethiopia.

Ketema W(1), Taye K(1), Shibeshi MS(1), Tagesse N(1), Hirigo AT(2), Woubishet
K(3), Gutema S(3), Eifa A(4), Toma A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, College of Health Sciences, Hawassa
University, Hawassa, Ethiopia.
(2)Department of Medical Laboratory Technology, College of Health Sciences,
Hawassa University, Hawassa, Ethiopia.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Health Sciences, Hawassa
University, Hawassa, Ethiopia.
(4)Department of Midwifery, College of Health Sciences, Hawassa University,
Hawassa, Ethiopia.
(5)Department of Pharmacology, College of Health Sciences, Hawassa University,
Hawassa, Ethiopia.

Background: Treatment failure continues to be an impediment to the efficacy of
highly active antiretroviral therapy (HART) in the treatment of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection (HIV-1). The World Health Organization
(WHO) recommends third-line antiretroviral therapy (ART) for patients who have
failed second-line ART. Darunavir (DRV) boosted with ritonavir (DRV/r) has a
higher genetic barrier to resistance, is active against multidrug-resistant HIV
isolates, retaining virological activity even when multiple protease mutations
are present, and has been shown to be cost-effective when compared to other
boosted protease inhibitors (PIs).
Case Summary: This is a case of a 40-year-old female known HIV/AIDS patient who
has been on ART for the last 14 years with good adherence and regular follow-up, 
and who is now on 3rd line ART medication with TLD
(tenofovir/lamivudine/dolutegravir)+DRV/r (in her 11th month) after being
diagnosed with second-line treatment failure. After 6 months and 1 week of
therapy, the viral load (VL) was sent, and the result was undetectable. The
patient's clinical conditions had greatly improved.
Conclusion: Third-line ART therapy, which was once thought to be a salvageable
treatment, is now the primary option for second-line ART failure. TLD in
combination with ritonavir-boosted darunavir is found to be effective at lowering
viral loads in the blood below detectable limits. Despite a lack of data on the
use of third-line ART in Ethiopia, access to third-line ART containing
ritonavir-boosted darunavir is recommended because it has been shown to be an
effective alternative for patients who have failed second-line ART. We recommend 
that more research be done with a larger sample size, and that the findings in
this paper be used with caution.

© 2021 Ketema et al.

DOI: 10.2147/RRTM.S341711 
PMCID: PMC8631462
PMID: 34858075 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest for
this work.

