
1. J Appl Psychol. 2021 Oct;106(10):1435-1447. doi: 10.1037/apl0000981.

Sacrificing heroes or suffering victims? Investigating third parties' reactions
to divergent social accounts of essential employees in the COVID-19 pandemic.

Yuan Z(1), Cockburn BS(2), Astrove SL(3), Buis BC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Managerial Studies.
(2)Department of Management.
(3)Department of Management, Marketing, and Supply Chain.

As the COVID-19 pandemic rages on globally, essential employees are widely
recognized as heroes working on the frontlines confronting the virus and serving 
others. At the same time, stories abound whereby these essential employees are
not provided adequate support and protection on their jobs. Nevertheless, they
have been portrayed predominantly as heroes rather than as victims, which may
inadvertently lead third parties (e.g., the general public) to overlook their
suffering. The current research sought to understand the implications of these
divergent social accounts of essential employees for third parties. We
investigated the effects of third parties being provided with (Study 1) and
endorsing (Study 2 and Study 3) heroism and victimization accounts on their
cognitions, emotions, and behaviors toward essential employees. Unlike
victimization which was associated with higher levels of third parties' injustice
perceptions, anger and sympathy toward essential employees' situation, and their 
intent to take political action to support essential workers, we found that
heroism was only significantly related to higher levels of sympathy and had
limited effects on other outcomes. Further, victimization was a more important
predictor of injustice and anger than heroism. Overall, the sharp contrast
between the two accounts points to the caveats of overemphasizing heroism
accounts in the COVID-19 pandemic as they may divert third parties' attention
away from essential employees' suffering. Theoretical and practical implications 
of our findings are discussed. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2021 APA, all rights
reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/apl0000981 
PMID: 34855420 

