
1. J Virol. 2021 Dec 1:JVI0110321. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01103-21. [Epub ahead of print]

ATF6-mediated unfolded protein response facilitates AAV2 transduction by
releasing the suppression of AAV receptor on ER stress.

Cui M(1), Zhao Q(1), Wang J(1), Si Y(1), Cheng S(1), Ding W(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.

Adeno-associated virus (AAV) is extensively used as a viral vector to deliver
therapeutic genes during human gene therapy. A high affinity cellular receptor
(AAVR) for most serotypes was recently identified, however, its biological
function as a gene product remains unclear. In this study, we used AAVR knockdown
cell models to show that AAVR depletion significantly attenuated cells to
activate unfolded protein response (UPR) pathways, when exposed to the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress inducer, tunicamycin. By analyzing three major 
UPR pathways, we found that ATF6 signaling was most affected in an AAVR-dependent
fashion, distinct to CHOP and XBP1 branches. AAVR capacity in UPR regulation
required the full native AAVR protein, and AAV2 capsid binding to the receptor
altered ATF6 dynamics. Conversely, the transduction efficiency of AAV2 was
associated with changes in ATF6 signaling in host cells following treatment with 
different small molecules. Thus, AAVR served as an inhibitory molecule to repress
UPR responses via a specificity for ATF6 signaling, and the AAV2 infection route 
involved the release from AAVR-mediated ATF6 repression, thereby facilitating
viral intracellular trafficking and transduction. Importance The native function 
of the AAVR as an ER-Golgi localized protein is largely unknown. We showed that
AAVR acted as a functional molecule to regulate UPR signaling under induced ER
stress. AAVR inhibited the activation of the transcription factor, ATF6, whereas 
receptor binding to AAV2 released the suppression effects. This finding has
expanded our understanding of AAV infection biology in terms of the physiological
properties of AAVR in host cells. Importantly, our research provides a possible
strategy which may improve the efficiency of AAV mediated gene delivery during
gene therapy.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01103-21 
PMID: 34851146 

