
1. PLoS One. 2021 Dec 2;16(12):e0260583. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260583.
eCollection 2021.

Experiences of women with Zika virus (ZIKV) versus the provision of health
services in two cities in Colombia: A qualitative study.

Ocampo Cañas JA(1), Pinilla Alfonso MJ(1), Navarro Plazas CDP(1), Mejia Arbelaez 
CM(1), Patiño Rueda JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Line on Health Systems, Childhood, Gender, Interculturality and
Tropical Diseases, Research Group on Public Health, Medical Education and Medical
Professionalism, School of Medicine, Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá DC,
Colombia.

BACKGROUND: In February 2016, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared the
epidemic of the ZIKA virus (ZIKV) in Latin America to be a public health
emergency. In Colombia, 11,944 pregnant women registered a ZIKV infection during 
the epidemic. So far, little is known about the experiences of women infected
with ZIKV during their pregnancy, especially those relating to the provision of
health services during the period of the epidemic.
OBJECTIVE: To explore the experiences of pregnant women diagnosed with ZIKV
infection about the provision of health services in two Colombian cities,
considering the perspective of sexual and reproductive rights.
METHODS: Qualitative study under the grounded theory approach, which uses
semi-structured interviews as tools to explore the biographical experience of
mothers during their gestation process and ZIKV infection, dividing the interview
into two broad categories: before and during pregnancy.
RESULTS: Twenty-two women were interviewed, 10 in Cali and 12 in Villavicencio.
The average age at the time of pregnancy was 27.6 years. Most women were not
planning at the time of pregnancy and the pregnancy was unwanted. Most campaigns 
focused on mosquito eradication rather than on sexual and reproductive health
campaigns. The quality of health care was not sufficient, adequate, or
appropriate. Also, the breakdown of the health system to deal with the pandemic
was also noted. Some women were treated with disrespect by health professionals. 
Voluntary termination of pregnancy was inadequately advised, and women lost
autonomy regarding decisions about their health.
CONCLUSIONS: In the health care of ZIKV epidemics, it is necessary to include the
gender perspective, more specifically, sexual and reproductive rights. In
addition, these epidemics must be addressed through a comprehensive, appropriate,
and not fragmented health system, in which sexual and reproductive rights must be
mainstreamed in all health promotion and prevention programs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260583 
PMCID: PMC8638867
PMID: 34855811 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

