
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2021 Dec 2;15(12):e0009922. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0009922. eCollection 2021 Dec.

Impact of the introduction of chikungunya and zika viruses on the incidence of
dengue in endemic zones of Mexico.

Fernandes-Matano L(1)(2), Monroy-Muñoz IE(3), Pardavé-Alejandre HD(1),
Uribe-Noguez LA(1), Hernández-Cueto MLA(1), Rojas-Mendoza T(4), Santacruz-Tinoco 
CE(5), Grajales-Muñiz C(4), Muñoz-Medina JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio Central de Epidemiología, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social,
Mexico City, Mexico.
(2)Escuela Nacional de Ciencias Biológicas, Instituto Politécnico Nacional,
Mexico City, Mexico.
(3)Laboratorio de Genómica, Departamento de Genética y Genómica Humana, Instituto
Nacional de Perinatología "Isidro Espinosa de los Reyes", Mexico City, Mexico.
(4)Coordinación de Control Técnico de Insumos, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro
Social, Mexico City, Mexico.
(5)División de Laboratorios de Vigilancia e Investigación Epidemiológica, Mexico 
City, Mexico.

BACKGROUND: With the arrival of chikungunya (CHIKV) and zika (ZIKV) viruses in
Mexico, there was a decrease in diagnosed dengue virus (DENV) cases. During the
first years of cocirculation (2015-2017), the algorithms established by
epidemiological surveillance systems and the installed capacity limited us to one
diagnostic test per sample, so there was an underestimation of cases until
September 2017, when a multiplex algorithm was implemented. Therefore, the
objective of this study was determine the impact of the introduction of CHIKV and
ZIKV on the incidence of diagnosed DENV in endemic areas of Mexico, when
performing the rediagnosis, using the multiplex algorithm, in samples from the
first three years of co-circulation of these arboviruses.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: For this, 1038 samples received by the
Central Laboratory of Epidemiology between 2015 and 2017 were selected for this
work. Viruses were identified by multiplex RT-qPCR, and the χ2 test was used to
compare categorical variables. With the new multiplex algorithm, we identified
2.4 times the rate of arbovirosis as originally reported, evidencing an
underestimation of the incidence of the three viruses. Even so, significantly
less dengue was observed than in previous years. The high incidence rates of
chikungunya and Zika coincided with periods of dengue decline. The endemic
channel showed that the cases caused by DENV rose again after the circulation of 
CHIKV and ZIKV decreased. In addition, 23 cases of coinfection were identified,
with combinations between all viruses.
CONCLUSIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE: The results obtained in this study show for the
first time the real impact on the detected incidence of dengue after the
introduction of CHIKV and ZIKV in Mexico, the degree of underestimation of these 
arboviruses in the country, as well as the co-infections between these viruses,
whose importance clinical and epidemiological are still unknown.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0009922 
PMCID: PMC8638990
PMID: 34855759 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

