
1. J Virol. 2021 Dec 1:JVI0150421. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01504-21. [Epub ahead of print]

A nucleic acid-based orthopoxvirus vaccine targeting the vaccinia virus L1, A27, 
B5 and A33 proteins protects rabbits against lethal rabbitpox virus aerosol
challenge.

Mucker EM(1), Golden JW(1), Hammerbeck CD(1), Kishimori JM(2), Royals M(3),
Joselyn MD(1), Ballantyne J(4), Nalca A(5), Hooper JW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Virology Division, United States Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious
Diseases, Fort Detrick, Maryland, USA.
(2)Headquarters Division, United States Army Medical Research Institute of
Infectious Diseases, Fort Detrick, Maryland, USA.
(3)Consultant, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA.
(4)Aldevron LLC, Fargo, North Dakota, USA.
(5)Center for Aerobiological Sciences, United States Army Medical Research
Institute of Infectious Diseases, Fort Detrick, Maryland, USA.

In the age of COVID, nucleic acid vaccines have garnered much attention, at least
in part, because of the simplicity of construction, production, and flexibility
to adjust and adapt to an evolving outbreak. Orthopoxviruses remain a threat on
multiple fronts, especially as emerging zoonosis. In response, we developed a DNA
vaccine, termed 4pox, that protected nonhuman primates against monkeypox virus
(MPXV) induced severe disease. Here, we examined the protective efficacy of the
4pox DNA vaccine delivered by intramuscular (i.m.) electroporation (EP) in
rabbits challenged with aerosolized rabbitpox virus (RPXV), a model that
recapitulates the respiratory route of exposure and low dose associated with
natural smallpox exposure in humans. We found that 4pox vaccinated rabbits
developed immunogen-specific antibodies, including neutralizing antibodies and
did not develop any clinical disease, indicating protection against aerosolized
RPXV. In contrast, unvaccinated animals developed significant signs of disease,
including lesions, and were euthanized. These findings demonstrate that an
unformulated, non-adjuvanted DNA vaccine delivered (i.m.) can protect against an 
aerosol exposure. Importance The eradication of smallpox and subsequent cessation
of vaccination has left a majority of the population susceptible to variola virus
or other emerging poxvirus. This is exemplified by human monkeypox, as evidenced 
by the increase in reported endemic and imported cases over the past decades.
Therefore, a malleable vaccine technology that can be mass produced, and doesn't 
require complex conditions for distribution and storage is sought. Herein, we
show that a DNA vaccine, in the absence of a specialized formulation or adjuvant,
can protect against a lethal aerosol insult of rabbitpox virus.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01504-21 
PMID: 34851148 

