
1. BJGP Open. 2021 Dec 1. pii: BJGPO.2021.0151. doi: 10.3399/BJGPO.2021.0151. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Information seeking behaviours and uncertainty around accessing primary care in
the changing landscape of the COVID-19 pandemic: a qualitative study.

Brown LR(1), Williams AJ(2), Shaw K(3), Ozakinci G(4), van Beusekom MM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Research Assistant, School of Medicine, University of St Andrews, North Haugh,
St Andrews, Fife, Scotland lrb21@st-andrews.ac.uk.
(2)Senior Lecturer Public Health, School of Medicine, University of St Andrews,
St Andrews, Scotland.
(3)Independent Scholar, PLACEHOLDER, USA.
(4)Senior Lecturer Health Psychology, School of Medicine, University of St
Andrews, St Andrews, Scotland.
(5)Research Fellow, School of Medicine, University of St Andrews, St Andrews,
Scotland.

BACKGROUND: The COVID-19 pandemic has and will continue to have a
disproportionate effect on the most vulnerable. Public health messaging has been 
vital to regulate the impact of the pandemic. However, messages intended to slow 
the transmission of the virus may also cause harm. Understanding the areas where 
public health messaging could be improved may help reduce this harm.
AIM: To explore and understand health communication issues faced by those most
likely to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
DESIGN & SETTING: A qualitative study using online surveys. The area of focus was
Fife, a local authority in Scotland, UK.
METHOD: Two consecutive surveys were conducted. Survey 1: N=19 support workers
and Facebook group moderators, focussing on key issues faced by service users, as
well as examples of good practice. Survey 2: N=34 community members, focussing on
issues regarding access to and communication around access to primary care.
RESULTS: Survey one found broad issues around communication and access to primary
care services. Survey two emphasised key issues in accessing primary care,
including, (a) the lengthy process of making appointments, (b) feeling like a
burden for wanting to be seen, (c) a lack of confidence in remote triaging and
consultations, and (d) not knowing what to expect prior to getting an
appointment.
CONCLUSION: Clear issues regarding access to primary care were identified. Our
new understanding of these issues will inform a co-creation process designed to
develop clear, actionable and effective public health messages centred on
improving access to primary care.

Copyright © 2021, The Authors.

DOI: 10.3399/BJGPO.2021.0151 
PMID: 34853007 

