
1. J Virol. 2021 Dec 1:JVI0198521. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01985-21. [Epub ahead of print]

HSV-1 small non-coding RNA (sncRNA) 1 and 2 activate the Herpes virus entry
mediator (HVEM) promoter.

Tormanen K(1), Wang S(1), Matundan HH(1), Yu J(1), Jaggi U(1), Ghiasi H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurobiology and Vaccine Development, Ophthalmology Research,
Department of Surgery, Cedars-Sinai Burns & Allen Research Institute, CSMC -
SSB3, 8700 Beverly Blvd., Los Angeles, CA.

HSV-1 latency associated transcript (LAT) plays a significant role in efficient
establishment of latency and reactivation. LAT has antiapoptotic activity and
downregulates expression of components of the Type I interferon pathway. LAT also
specifically activates expression of the herpesvirus entry mediator (HVEM), one
of seven known receptors used by HSV-1 for cell entry that is crucial for latency
and reactivation. However, the mechanism by which LAT regulates HVEM expression
is not known. LAT encodes two sncRNAs that are not miRNAs, within its 1.5 kb
stable transcript, which also have antiapoptotic activity. These sncRNAs may
encode short peptides, but experimental evidence is lacking. Here, we demonstrate
that these two sncRNAs control HVEM expression by activating its promoter. Both
sncRNAs are required for WT level of activation of HVEM and sncRNA1 is more
important in HVEM activation than sncRNA2. Disruption of a putative start codon
in sncRNA1 and sncRNA2 sequences reduced HVEM promoter activity, suggesting that 
sncRNAs may encode a protein. However, we did not detect peptide binding using
two chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) approaches and a web-based algorithm
predicts low probability that the putative peptides bind to DNA. In addition,
computational modeling predicts that sncRNA molecules bind with high affinity to 
the HVEM promoter and deletion of these binding sites to sncRNA1, sncRNA2 or both
reduced HVEM promoter activity. Together, our data suggests that sncRNAs exert
their function as RNA molecules, not as proteins, and we provide a model for the 
predicted binding affinities and binding sites of sncRNA1 and sncRNA2 in the HVEM
promoter. IMPORTANCE HSV-1 causes recurrent ocular infections, which is the
leading cause of corneal scarring and blindness. Corneal scarring is caused by
the host immune response to repeated reactivation events. LAT functions by
regulating latency and reactivation, in part by inhibiting apoptosis and
activating HVEM expression. However, the mechanism used by LAT to control of HVEM
expression is unclear. Here, we demonstrate that two sncRNAs encoded within the
1.5 kb LAT transcript activate HVEM expression by binding to two regions of its
promoter. Interfering with these interactions may reduce latency and thereby eye 
disease associated with reactivation.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01985-21 
PMID: 34851143 

