
1. PLoS One. 2021 Dec 1;16(12):e0258659. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258659.
eCollection 2021.

Seroprevalence and incidence of hepatitis A in Southeast Asia: A systematic
review.

Hernandez-Suarez G(1), Saha D(1), Lodroño K(2), Boonmahittisut P(3), Taniwijaya
S(4), Saha A(5), Badur S(6), Poovorawan Y(7).

Author information: 
(1)GSK, Medical & Clinical Emerging Markets, Wavre, Belgium.
(2)GSK, Medical Affairs Philippines, Manila, The Philippines.
(3)GSK, Thailand Vaccines, Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)GSK, Medical & Clinical Emerging Markets, Jakarta, Indonesia.
(5)GSK, Vaccines Medical, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(6)GSK, Medical & Clinical Emerging Markets, Istanbul, Turkey.
(7)Center of Excellence in Clinical Virology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn 
University, Bangkok, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: A previous review on hepatitis A virus (HAV) seroprevalence in 2005
categorized Southeast Asia as a low HAV endemicity region. In 2010, the World
Health Organization modified this from low to low/medium endemicity, pointing out
that these estimates were based on limited evidence. Since then, there has been
no attempt to review HAV epidemiology from this region. We conducted a systematic
review of literature to collect information on HAV incidence and seroprevalence
in select countries in the Southeast Asian region, specifically, The Association 
of Southeast Asian Nations over the last 20 years.
METHODOLOGY: This systematic review was conducted according to the Preferred
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses guidelines. From the
relevant articles, we extracted data and conducted a risk of bias assessment of
individual studies.
RESULTS: The search yielded 22 and 13 publications on HAV seroprevalence and
incidence, respectively. Overall, our findings point to a very low HAV endemicity
profile in Thailand and Singapore and evidence of a shift towards low HAV
endemicity in Indonesia, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Malaysia, the
Philippines, and Vietnam. Only Singapore, Thailand, Malaysia, and the Philippines
have existing HAV disease surveillance and reported incidence rates below 1 per
100,000. Several outbreaks with varying magnitude documented in the region
provide insights into the evolving epidemiology of HAV in the region. Risk of
bias assessment of studies revealed that the individual studies were of low to
medium risk.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The available HAV endemicity profiles in Southeast
Asian countries, aside from Thailand, are limited and outdated, but suggest an
endemicity shift in the region that is not fully documented yet. These findings
highlight the need to update information on HAV epidemiology through
strengthening of disease surveillance mechanisms to confirm the shift in HAV
endemicity in the region.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258659 
PMCID: PMC8635355
PMID: 34851983 

Conflict of interest statement: GHS, DS, KL, PB, ST, AS and SB are employees of
the GSK group of companies. GHS and DS hold shares in the GSK group of companies.
YP was supported by The Center of Excellence in Clinical Virology, Chulalongkorn 
University. Authors declare no other financial and non-financial relationships
and activities. GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals SA funded this review and all costs
associated with its development and publication. All authors had full access to
all of the data in this study and take complete responsibility for the integrity 
of the data and accuracy of the data analysis. We declare that HavrixTM, an
inactivated hepatitis A vaccine, is a trademark of the GSK group of companies
that is marketed in several countries in Southeast Asia under the scope of this
review. There are no additional patents, products in development or marketed
products to declare. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on
sharing data and materials.

