
1. J Virol. 2021 Dec 1:JVI0114021. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01140-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Time-series transcriptomic analysis of bronchoalveolar lavage cells from virulent
and low virulent PRRSV-1-infected piglets.

Sánchez-Carvajal JM(1), Rodríguez-Gómez IM(1), Ruedas-Torres I(1), Zaldívar-López
S(2), Larenas-Muñoz F(1), Bautista-Moreno R(3), Garrido JJ(2), Pallarés FJ(1),
Carrasco L(1), Gómez-Laguna J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Comparative Pathology and Toxicology, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Córdoba, 14014, Córdoba, Spain.
(2)Department of Genetics, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Córdoba,
Córdoba, 14014, Córdoba, Spain.
(3)Andalusian Platform of Bioinformatic, University of Málaga, 29590,
Campanillas, Málaga, Spain.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) has evolved to escape
the immune surveillance for a survival advantage leading to a strong modulation
of host's immune responses and favoring secondary bacterial infections. However, 
limited data are available on how the immunological and transcriptional responses
elicited by virulent and low virulent PRRSV-1 strains are comparable and how are 
them conserved along the infection. To explore the kinetic transcriptional
signature associated with the modulation of host immune response at lung level a 
time-series transcriptomic analysis was performed in bronchoalveolar lavage cells
upon experimental in vivo infection with two PRRSV-1 strains of different
virulence, virulent subtype 3 Lena strain or the low virulent subtype 1 3249
strain. The time-series analysis revealed overlapping patterns of dysregulated
genes enriched in T-cell signaling pathways among both virulent and low-virulent 
strains, highlighting an up-regulation of co-stimulatory and co-inhibitory immune
checkpoints which were disclosed as Hub genes. On the other hand, virulent Lena
infection induced an early and more marked "negative regulation of immune system 
process" with an overexpression of co-inhibitory receptors genes related to
T-cell and NK cell functions, in association with more severe lung lesion, lung
viral load and BAL cell kinetics. These results underline a complex network of
molecular mechanisms governing PRRSV-1 immunopathogenesis at lung level,
revealing a pivotal role of co-inhibitory and co-stimulatory immune checkpoints
in the pulmonary disease, which may have an impact on T-cell activation and
related-pathways. These immune checkpoints together with the regulation of
cytokine-signaling pathways, modulated in a virulence-dependent fashion,
orchestrate an interplay among pro- and anti-inflammatory responses. Importance: 
Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) is one of the major
threats to swine health and global production, causing substantial economic
losses. We explore the mechanisms involved in the modulation of host immune
response at lung level performing a time-series transcriptomic analysis upon
experimental infection with two PRRSV-1 strains of different virulence. A complex
network of molecular mechanisms was revealed to control the immunopathogenesis of
PRRSV-1 infection, highlighting an interplay among pro- and anti-inflammatory
responses as a potential mechanism to restrict inflammation-induced lung injury. 
Moreover, a pivotal role of co-inhibitory and co-stimulatory immune checkpoints
was evidenced, which may lead to progressive dysfunction of T cells, impairing
viral clearance and leading to persistent infection, favoring as well secondary
bacterial infections or viral rebound. Although further studies should be
conducted to evaluate the functional role of immune checkpoints in advanced
stages of PRRSV infection and explore a possible T-cell exhaustion state.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01140-21 
PMID: 34851149 

