
1. Indian J Pharmacol. 2021 Sep-Oct;53(5):403-411. doi: 10.4103/ijp.IJP_81_20.

Demystifying therapeutic potential of medicinal plants against chikungunya virus.

Kumar S(1), Garg C(1), Kaushik S(2), Buttar HS(3), Garg M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak,
Haryana, India.
(2)Center for Biotechnology, Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, Haryana,
India.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.

Viral infections are posing a great threat to humanity for the last few years.
Among these, Chikungunya which is a mosquito-borne viral infection has produced
enormous epidemics around the world after been rebounded. Although this infection
shows a low mortality rate, patients suffer from fever, arthralgia, and
maculopapular rashes, which reduce the quality of life for several weeks to
years. The currently available treatments only provide symptomatic relief based
on analgesics, antipyretics, and anti-inflammatory drugs which are nonspecific
without satisfactory results. Medicinal plants are a widely accepted source of
new molecules for the treatment of infectious diseases including viral
infections. The scientific reports, primarily focusing on the anti-chikungunya
activity of plant extracts, natural origin pure compounds, and their synthetic
analog published from 2011 to 2021, were selected from PubMed, Google Scholar,
and Scopus by using related keywords like anti-chikungunya plants, natural
antivirals for Chikungunya. The present review decodes scientific reports on
medicinal plants against chikungunya virus (CHIKV) infection and demystifies the 
potential phytoconstituents which reveals that the screening of flavonoids
containing plants and phytochemicals showing efficacy against other arbovirus
infections, may prove as a potential lead for drug development against CHIKV. The
present article also outlines pathogenesis, clinical aspects, molecular virology,
and diagnostic approaches of CHIKV infection.

DOI: 10.4103/ijp.IJP_81_20 
PMID: 34854411 

Conflict of interest statement: None

