
1. J Virol. 2021 Dec 1:JVI0173721. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01737-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Cell strain-derived induced pluripotent stem cell as a genetically controlled
approach to investigate age-related host response to flaviviral infection.

Bifani AM(1), Tan HC(1), Choy MM(1), Ooi EE(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Programme in Emerging Infectious Diseases, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore.
(2)Viral Research and Experimental Medicine Centre, SingHealth Duke-NUS Academic 
Medical Centre, Singapore.
(3)Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health, National University of Singapore,
Singapore.

The expansion of the geographical footprint of dengue viruses (DENVs) and their
mosquito vectors have affected more than half of the global population, including
older adults who appear to show elevated risk of severe dengue. Despite this
epidemiological trend, how ageing contributes to increase dengue pathogenesis is 
poorly understood. A limitation has been the lack of useful in vitro experimental
approaches; cell lines commonly used for infection studies are immortal and hence
do not age. Cell strains, such as WI-38 and MRC-5 with diploid genomes, do age
with in vitro passaging but these cell strains were isolated decades ago and are 
now mostly highly passaged. Herein, we show that reprogramming of cell strains
with finite lifespan into induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), followed by
conversion back into terminally differentiated cells, can be an approach to
derive genetically identical cells at different stages of ageing. The
iPSC-derived differentiated cells were susceptible to wild-type DENV infection
and produced greater levels of type-I interferon expression with increase
passaging, despite similar levels of infection. In contrast, infection with the
attenuated DENV-2 PDK53 and YF17D-204 strains showed reduced and increased levels
of infection with increasing passages; the latter could be clinically pertinent
as YF17D-204 vaccination in older adults is associated with increased risk of
severe adverse outcome. The differences in infection susceptibility and host
response collectively suggest the potential of iPSC-derived cell strains as a
genetically controlled approach to understand how ageing impacts viral
pathogenesis. Importance Ageing has been a risk factor for poor clinical outcome 
in several infectious diseases, including dengue. However, age-dependent
responses to dengue and other flaviviral infection or vaccination have remained
incompletely understood due partly to lack of suitable laboratory tools. We thus 
developed an in vitro approach to examine age-related changes in host response to
flaviviral infection. Notably, this approach uses cell strains with diploid
rather than aneuploidic genomes, which are unstable. Conversion of these cells
into iPSCs ensure sustainability of this resource and reprogramming back into
terminally differentiated cells would, even with limited number of passages,
produce cells at different stages of ageing for infection studies. Our findings
suggest that this in vitro system has the potential to serve as a
genetically-controlled approach to define the age-related response to flavivirus 
infection.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01737-21 
PMID: 34851147 

