
1. J Clin Invest. 2021 Dec 2. pii: e153090. doi: 10.1172/JCI153090. [Epub ahead of
print]

Antiretroviral therapy timing impacts latent tuberculosis infection reactivation 
in a tuberculosis/simian immunodeficiency virus coinfection model.

Sharan R(1), Ganatra SR(1), Bucsan AN(2), Cole J(1), Singh DK(1), Alvarez X(1),
Gough M(1), Alvarez C(1), Blakley A(1), Ferdin J(1), Thippeshappa R(1), Singh
B(1), Escobedo R(1), Shivanna V(1), Dick EJ Jr(1), Hall-Ursone S(1), Khader
SA(2), Mehra S(3), Rengarajan J(4), Kaushal D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Southwest National Primate Research Center, Texas Biomedical Research
Institute, San Antonio, United States of America.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University, St. Louis, St.
Louis, United States of America.
(3)Divisions of Bacteriology and Parasitology, Tulane National Primate Research
Center, Covington, United States of America.
(4)Emory Vaccine Center and Yerkes National Primate Research Center, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, United States of America.

Studies using the nonhuman primate model of M. tuberculosis /Simian
Immunodeficiency Virus co-infection have revealed protective CD4+ T
cell-independent immune responses that suppress LTBI reactivation. In particular,
chronic immune activation rather than the mere depletion of CD4+ T cells
correlates with reactivation due to SIV co-infection. Here, we administered cART 
at 2 weeks post-SIV co-infection to study if restoration of CD4+ T cell immunity 
occurred more broadly, and if this prevented reactivation of LTBI compared to
cART initiated at 4 weeks post-SIV. Earlier initiation of cART enhanced survival,
led to better control of viral replication and reduced immune activation in the
periphery and lung vasculature thereby reducing the rate of SIV-induced
reactivation. We observed robust CD8+ T effector memory responses and
significantly reduced macrophage turnover in the lung tissue. However, skewed
CD4+ T effector memory responses persisted and new TB lesions formed post SIV
co-infection. Thus, reactivation of LTBI is governed by very early events of SIV 
infection. Timing of cART is critical in mitigating chronic immune activation.
The novelty of these findings mainly relates to the development of a robust
animal model of human Mtb/HIV co-infection that allows the testing of underlying 
mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI153090 
PMID: 34855621 

