
1. Evol Med Public Health. 2021 Oct 13;9(1):360-373. doi: 10.1093/emph/eoab032.
eCollection 2021.

A novel predictor of ACE2-binding ability among betacoronaviruses.

Dixson JD(1), Azad RK(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and BioDiscovery Institute, University of
North Texas, Denton, TX 76203, USA.
(2)Department of Mathematics, University of North Texas, Denton, TX 76203, USA.

Background: Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), has resulted in ~4.8 million
deaths worldwide as of this writing. Almost all conceivable aspects of SARS-CoV-2
have been explored since the virus began spreading in the human population.
Despite numerous proposals, it is still unclear how and when the virus gained the
ability to efficiently bind to and infect human cells. In an effort to understand
the evolution of receptor binding domain (RBD) of the spike protein of
SARS-CoV-2, and specifically, how the ability of RBD to bind to
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 receptor (ACE2) of humans evolved in
coronaviruses, we have applied an alignment-free technique to infer functional
relatedness among betacoronaviruses. This technique, concurrently being optimized
for identifying novel prions, was adapted to gain new insights into coronavirus
evolution, specifically in the context of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Novel
methods for predicting the capacity for coronaviruses, in general, to infect
human cells are urgently needed.
Methodology: proposed method utilizes physicochemical properties of amino acids
to develop fully dynamic waveform representations of proteins that encode both
the amino acid content and the context of amino acids. These waveforms are then
subjected to dynamic time warping (DTW) and distance evaluation to develop a
distance metric that is relatively less sensitive to variation in sequence length
and primary amino acid composition.
Results and Conclusions: Using our proposed method, we show that in contrast to
alignment-based maximum likelihood (ML) and neighbor-joining (NJ) phylogenetic
analyses, all bat betacoronavirus spike protein RBDs known to bind to the ACE2
receptor are found within a single physicochemical cluster. Further, other RBDs
within that cluster are from pangolin coronaviruses, two of which have already
been shown to bind to ACE2 while the others are suspected, yet unverified ACE2
binding domains. This finding is important because both severe acute respiratory 
syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and SARS-CoV-2 use the host ACE2 receptor for
cell entry. Surveillance for coronaviruses belonging to this cluster could
potentially guide efforts to stifle or curtail potential and/or early zoonotic
outbreaks with their associated deaths and financial devastation.
Lay Summary: Robust methods for predicting human ACE2 receptor binding by the
spike protein of coronaviruses are needed for the early detection of zoonotic
coronaviruses and biosurveillance to prevent future outbreaks. Here we present a 
new waveform-based approach that utilizes the physicochemical properties of amino
acids to determine the propensity of betacoronaviruses to infect humans.
Comparison with the established phylogenetic methods demonstrates the usefulness 
of this new approach in the biosurveillance of coronaviruses.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Foundation for Evolution, Medicine, and Public Health.

DOI: 10.1093/emph/eoab032 
PMCID: PMC8634463
PMID: 34858595 

