
1. Front Digit Health. 2021 Nov 8;3:721044. doi: 10.3389/fdgth.2021.721044.
eCollection 2021.

Remote Patient Monitoring Program for COVID-19 Patients Following Hospital
Discharge: A Cross-Sectional Study.

Bouabida K(1)(2), Malas K(3)(4)(5), Talbot A(5)(6), Desrosiers MÈ(5)(6), Lavoie
F(5)(6), Lebouché B(7)(8), Taguemout M(5)(9), Rafie E(5)(9), Lessard D(7)(8),
Pomey MP(4)(9)(10)(11).

Author information: 
(1)University of Montreal Hospital Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire de Montréal (CRCHUM), Montreal, QC, Canada.
(2)École de Santé publique, Département de Gestion, Université de Montréal,
Montreal, QC, Canada.
(3)Excutive Office, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Montréal (CHUM),
Montreal, QC, Canada.
(4)Département de Recherche, Montreal Cancer Institute, University of Montreal
Hospital Centre (CRCHUM), Montreal, QC, Canada.
(5)Innovation Axis, Research Center of the CHUM, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(6)Network Coordination Department, CHUM, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(7)Canadian Institutes of Health Research Strategy for Patient-Oriented Research 
Mentorship Chair in Innovative Clinical Trials in Human Immunodeficiency Virus
(HIV), Montreal, QC, Canada.
(8)Centre for Outcomes Research and Evaluation, McGill University Health Centre
Research Institute, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(9)State-of-the-Art Technology and Methods, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(10)Center of Excellence of Patient Partnership and the Public, Montreal, QC,
Canada.
(11)Department of Health Management, Evaluation, and Policy, School of Public
Health, Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada.

Background: The COVID-19 pandemic created an urgent need to act to reduce the
spread of the virus and alleviate congestion from healthcare services, protect
healthcare providers, and help them maintain satisfactory quality and safety of
care. Remote COVID-19 monitoring platforms emerged as potential solutions.
Objective: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the capacity and
contribution of two different platforms used to remotely monitor patients with
COVID-19 to maintain quality, safety, and patient engagement in care, as well as 
their acceptability, usefulness, and user-friendliness from the user's
perspective. The first platform is focused on telecare phone calls
(Telecare-Covid), and the second is a telemonitoring app (CareSimple-Covid).
Methods: We performed a cross-sectional study. The data were collected through a 
phone survey from May to August 2020. Data were analyzed using descriptive
statistics and t-test analysis. Participants' responses and comments on
open-ended questions were analyzed using content analysis to identify certain
issues and challenges and potential avenues for improving the platforms. Results:
Fifty one patients participated in the study. Eighteen participants used the
CareSimple-Covid platform and 33 participants used the Telecare-Covid platform.
Overall, the satisfaction rate for quality and safety of care for the two
platforms was 80%. Over 88% of the users on each platform considered the
platforms' services to be engaging, useful, user-friendly, and appropriate to
their needs. The survey identified a few significant differences in users'
perceptions of each platform: empathy toward users and the quality and safety of 
the care received were rated significantly higher on the CareSimple-Covid
platform than on the Telecare-Covid platform. Users appreciated four aspects of
these telehealth approaches: (1) the ease of access to services and the
availability of care team members; (2) the user-friendliness of the platforms;
(3) the continuity of care provided, and (4) the wide range of services
delivered. Users identified some technical limitations and raised certain issues,
such as the importance of maintaining human contact, data security, and
confidentiality. Improvement suggestions include promoting access to connected
devices; enhancing communications between institutions, healthcare users, and the
public on confidentiality and personal data protection standards; and integrating
a participatory approach to telehealth platform development and deployment
efforts. Conclusion: This study provides preliminary evidence that the two remote
monitoring platforms are well-received by users, with very few significant
differences between them concerning users' experiences and views. This type of
program could be considered for use in a post-pandemic era and for other
post-hospitalization clienteles. To maximize efficiency, the areas for
improvement and the issues identified should be addressed with a patient-centered
approach.

Copyright © 2021 Bouabida, Malas, Talbot, Desrosiers, Lavoie, Lebouché,
Taguemout, Rafie, Lessard and Pomey.

DOI: 10.3389/fdgth.2021.721044 
PMCID: PMC8630581
PMID: 34859244 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

