
1. J Gastrointest Cancer. 2021 Dec 2. doi: 10.1007/s12029-021-00755-2. [Epub ahead
of print]

Surveillance Strategies for Hepatocellular Carcinoma: Recent Advances and the
Shifting Paradigm.

Demirtas CO(1), Gunduz F(2), Ozdogan OC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, School of Medicine, Marmara
University, Istanbul, Turkey. coskun_demirtas10@hotmail.com.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, School of Medicine, Marmara
University, Istanbul, Turkey.

Currently, international liver societies recommend screening at-risk individuals 
for HCC (patients with cirrhosis regardless of etiology, and/or chronic hepatitis
B virus, and/or advanced liver fibrosis) with biannual abdominal ultrasound (USG)
with or without alpha-fetoprotein (AFP). The global acceptance of USG in
surveillance relies on the absence of risks, non-invasiveness, and lower costs.
However, the suboptimal performance of USG ± AFP in reaching direct and indirect 
goals of HCC surveillance highlights the need for alternative surveillance
strategies. Several studies targeted contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging
techniques, but the main barriers for their entrance to surveillance programs
have been concerns about cost-effectivity and long scan times. Overall, the HCC
risk stratification appears at hand by several validated multiple score systems, 
but their optimal performance is obtained only in populations who show highly
homogenous clinical, pathological, epidemiologic, etiologic, and therapeutic
characteristics, and this limitation poses a major drawback to their sustainable 
use in clinical practice. We need globally validated and molecular integrated
risk stratification tools to shape the future tailored HCC surveillance decision 
algorithms. A dynamic process for HCC surveillance algorithms awaits us owing to 
the expected further prospective studies focusing on risk-stratified screening
strategy.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12029-021-00755-2 
PMID: 34855124 

