
1. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr. 2021 Nov 28;2021(58):99-106. doi:
10.1093/jncimonographs/lgab008.

Cannabinoid Cancer Biology and Prevention.

McAllister SD(1), Abood ME(2), Califano J(3)(4), Guzmán M(5).

Author information: 
(1)California Pacific Medical Center Research Institute, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)Center for Substance Abuse Research, Lewis Katz School of Medicine at Temple
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Division of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Department of Surgery,
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(4)Moores Cancer Center, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, CIBERNED, IUIN and IRYCIS,
Complutense University, Madrid, Spain.

Plant-based, synthetic, and endogenous cannabinoids have been shown to control a 
diverse array of biological processes, including regulation of cell fate across
cancers. Their promise as broad-based antitumor agents in preclinical models has 
led to the initiation of pilot clinical trials. Session 5 of the National Cancer 
Institute's Cannabis, Cannabinoids and Cancer Research Symposium provides an
overview of this research topic. Overall, the presentations highlight cannabinoid
signal transduction and specific molecular mechanisms underlying cannabinoid
antitumor activity. They also demonstrate the broad-based antitumor activity of
the plant-based, synthetic, and endogenous cannabinoid compounds. Importantly,
evidence is presented demonstrating when cannabinoids may be contraindicated as a
treatment for cancer, as in the case of human papilloma virus-meditated
oropharynx cancer or potentially other p38 MAPK pathway-driven cancers. Finally, 
it is discussed that a key to advancing cannabinoids into the clinic is to
conduct well-designed, large-scale clinical trials to determine whether
cannabinoids are effective antitumor agents in cancer patients.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jncimonographs/lgab008 
PMID: 34850900 

