
1. Nanoscale. 2021 Dec 1. doi: 10.1039/d1nr04153c. [Epub ahead of print]

Bacteriophage PRD1 as a nanoscaffold for drug loading.

Duyvesteyn HME(1)(2), Santos-Pérez I(3), Peccati F(4), Martinez-Castillo A(3),
Walter TS(1), Reguera D(5), Goñi FM(6), Jiménez-Osés G(4)(7), Oksanen HM(8),
Stuart DI(1)(2)(9), Abrescia NGA(3)(7)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Structural Biology, University of Oxford, The Henry Wellcome
Building for Genomic Medicine, Headington, Oxford, UK.
dave.stuart@strubi.ox.ac.uk.
(2)Diamond Light Source, Harwell Science and Innovation Campus, Didcot, UK.
(3)Structure and Cell Biology of Viruses Lab, Center for Cooperative Research in 
Biosciences (CIC bioGUNE), Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA),
Bizkaia Technology Park, Derio, Spain. nabrescia@cicbiogune.es.
(4)Computational Chemistry Lab, CIC bioGUNE, Basque Research and Technology
Alliance (BRTA), Bizkaia Technology Park, Derio, Spain.
(5)Departament de Física de la Matèria Condensada, Facultat de Física,
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Departamento de Bioquímica, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU) and
Instituto Biofisika (CSIC, UPV/EHU), Leioa, Spain.
(7)IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain.
(8)Molecular and Integrative Biosciences Research Programme, Faculty of
Biological and Environmental Sciences, Viikki Biocenter, University of Helsinki, 
Helsinki, Finland.
(9)Instruct-ERIC, Oxford House, Parkway Court, John Smith Drive, Oxford, UK.
(10)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y
Digestivas (CIBERehd), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.

Viruses are very attractive biomaterials owing to their capability as
nanocarriers of genetic material. Efforts have been made to functionalize
self-assembling viral protein capsids on their exterior or interior to
selectively take up different payloads. PRD1 is a double-stranded DNA
bacteriophage comprising an icosahedral protein outer capsid and an inner lipidic
vesicle. Here, we report the three-dimensional structure of PRD1 in complex with 
the antipsychotic drug chlorpromazine (CPZ) by cryo-electron microscopy. We show 
that the jellyrolls of the viral major capsid protein P3, protruding outwards
from the capsid shell, serve as scaffolds for loading heterocyclic CPZ molecules.
Additional X-ray studies and molecular dynamics simulations show the binding
modes and organization of CPZ molecules when complexed with P3 only and onto the 
virion surface. Collectively, we provide a proof of concept for the possible use 
of the lattice-like organisation and the quasi-symmetric morphology of virus
capsomers for loading heterocyclic drugs with defined properties.

DOI: 10.1039/d1nr04153c 
PMID: 34851350 

