
1. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2021 Dec 1. doi: 10.1021/acsami.1c20198. [Epub ahead
of print]

Low-Voltage Bacterial and Viral Killing Using Laser-Induced Graphene-Coated
Non-woven Air Filters.

Gupta A(1), Sharma CP(1), Thamaraiselvan C(1), Pisharody L(1), Powell CD(1),
Arnusch CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Desalination and Water Treatment, Zuckerberg Institute of Water
Research, The Jacob Blaustein Institutes for Desert Research, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Midreshet Ben Gurion 8499000, Israel.

Laser-induced graphene (LIG) is uniquely positioned to advance applications in
which electrically conductive carbon coatings are required. Recently, the
antifouling, antiviral, and antibacterial properties of LIG have been proven in
both air and water filtration applications. For example, an unsupported LIG based
filter (pore size: ∼0.3 μm) demonstrated exceptional air filtration properties,
while its joule heating effects successfully sterilized and removed unwanted
biological components in air despite persisting challenges such as pressure drop,
energy consumption, and lack of mechanical robustness. Here, we developed a
polyimide (PI) non-woven supported LIG air filter with negligible pressure drop
changes compared to the non-woven support material and showed that low electrical
current density inactivates aerosolized bacteria. A current density of 4.5 mA/cm2
did not cause significant joule heating, and 97.2% bacterial removal was
obtained. The low-voltage antibacterial mechanism was elucidated using bacterial 
inhibition experiments on a titanium surface and on an LIG surface fabricated on 
dense PI films. Complete sterilization was obtained using current densities of ∼8
mA/cm2 applied for 2 min or ∼ 6 mA/cm2 for 10 min upon the dense PI-LIG surface. 
Lastly, >98% bacterial removal was observed using a low-resistance LIG-coated
non-woven polyimide air filter at 5 V. However, only very low voltages (∼0.3 V)
were needed to remove ∼99% Pseudomonas aeruginosa bacteria and 100% of T4 virus
when the LIG-coated filters were hybridized with a stainless steel mesh. Our
results show that low current density levels at very low voltages are sufficient 
for substantial bacterial and viral inactivation, and that these principles might
be effectively used in a wide number of air filtration applications such as air
conditioners or other ventilation systems, which might limit the spread of
infectious particles in hospitals, homes, workplaces, and the transportation
industry.

DOI: 10.1021/acsami.1c20198 
PMID: 34851621 

