
1. Antiviral Res. 2021 Nov 29;197:105223. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2021.105223.
[Epub ahead of print]

Posaconazole inhibits multiple steps of the alphavirus replication cycle.

Varghese FS(1), Meutiawati F(1), Teppor M(2), Jacobs S(3), de Keyzer C(3),
Taşköprü E(1), van Woudenbergh E(4), Overheul GJ(1), Bouma E(5), Smit JM(5),
Delang L(3), Merits A(2), van Rij RP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life
Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(2)Institute of Technology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
(3)KU Leuven, Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Rega
Institute for Medical Research, Laboratory of Virology and Chemotherapy, Leuven, 
Belgium.
(4)Section Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Laboratory of Medical Immunology,
Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, the Netherlands; Centre for Immunology of Infectious Diseases and
Vaccines, National Institute for Public Health and the Environment, Bilthoven,
the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infection Prevention, University
Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Medical Microbiology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life
Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
Electronic address: ronald.vanrij@radboudumc.nl.

Repurposing drugs is a promising strategy to identify therapeutic interventions
against novel and re-emerging viruses. Posaconazole is an antifungal drug used to
treat invasive aspergillosis and candidiasis. Recently, posaconazole and its
structural analog, itraconazole were shown to inhibit replication of multiple
viruses by modifying intracellular cholesterol homeostasis. Here, we show that
posaconazole inhibits replication of the alphaviruses Semliki Forest virus (SFV),
Sindbis virus and chikungunya virus with EC50 values ranging from 1.4 μM to
9.5 μM. Posaconazole treatment led to a significant reduction of virus entry in
an assay using a temperature-sensitive SFV mutant, but time-of-addition and RNA
transfection assays indicated that posaconazole also inhibits post-entry stages
of the viral replication cycle. Virus replication in the presence of posaconazole
was partially rescued by the addition of exogenous cholesterol. A transferrin
uptake assay revealed that posaconazole considerably slowed down cellular
endocytosis. A single point mutation in the SFV E2 glycoprotein, H255R, provided 
partial resistance to posaconazole as well as to methyl-β-cyclodextrin,
corroborating the effect of posaconazole on cholesterol and viral entry. Our
results indicate that posaconazole inhibits multiple steps of the alphavirus
replication cycle and broaden the spectrum of viruses that can be targeted in
vitro by posaconazole, which could be further explored as a therapeutic agent
against emerging viruses.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2021.105223 
PMID: 34856248 

