
1. J Med Virol. 2021 Dec 2. doi: 10.1002/jmv.27493. [Epub ahead of print]

Progressive Multifocal Leukoencephalopathy in immunocompetent patient: a case
report and review of literature.

Sriwastava S(1)(2)(3), Khan E(4), Khalid SH(1), Kaur A(5), Feizi P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Rockefeller Neuroscience Institute, West Virginia
University, Morgantown, WV.
(2)West Virginia Clinical and Translational Science Institute, Morgantown, WV,
26505, USA.
(3)Department of Neuroradiology, Rockefeller Neuroscience Institute, West
Virginia University, Morgantown, WV, USA.
(4)B.J. Medical College and Civil Hospital, Ahmedabad, India.
(5)Department of Neurology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI.

BACKGROUND: Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, (PML) a demyelinating
disease of the brain, caused by the John Cunningham (JC Virus) is usually seen in
patients who are immunocompromised. Here, we describe a case of an
immunocompetent patient diagnosed with PML and a comprehensive literature review.
CASE DESCRIPTION: A 64-year-old Caucasian male presented with acute worsening of 
progressive neurological decline with difficulty in vision and reading. Based on 
history, examination, CSF markers, histopathology, and MRI Brain at the time of
presentation diagnosed the patient with PML in a setting of no immunosuppression 
disorder. Patient was started on Pelfilgrastim with significant systematic
improvement.
RESULT: In our literature review, it was seen that the average age of symptom
presentation was 57.5 with predominance in males. Most of the patients presented 
with progressive neurological deficits with symptomology ranging from mild
confusion, aphasia, anxiety to sensory disturbances with numbness, hemiparesis
and hemianopsia. Out of the 21 cases, patients responded to mirtazapine and
intravenous pulse methylprednisolone (IVMP). The mortality rate was close to 50% 
with 11 fatal cases and 10 non-fatal cases.
CONCLUSION: Our case and literature review demonstrate the possibility that PML
may very rarely occur in patients that our immunocompetent. Furthermore, our
review showed that patients responded well to mirtazapine and IVMP. We also want 
to highlight that mortality rate was lower in this review and was only compared
to morality in PML associated with immunocompromised status. This article is
protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.27493 
PMID: 34854099 

