
1. ACS Infect Dis. 2021 Dec 2. doi: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.1c00433. [Epub ahead of
print]

Structure and Mutations of SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein: A Focused Overview.

Mehra R(1), Kepp KP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Bhilai, Sejbahar,
Raipur 492015, Chhattisgarh, India.
(2)DTU Chemistry, Technical University of Denmark, Building 206, 2800 Kongens
Lyngby, Denmark.

The spike protein (S-protein) of SARS-CoV-2, the protein that enables the virus
to infect human cells, is the basis for many vaccines and a hotspot of concerning
virus evolution. Here, we discuss the outstanding progress in structural
characterization of the S-protein and how these structures facilitate analysis of
virus function and evolution. We emphasize the differences in reported structures
and that analysis of structure-function relationships is sensitive to the
structure used. We show that the average residue solvent exposure in nearly
complete structures is a good descriptor of open vs closed conformation states.
Because of structural heterogeneity of functionally important surface-exposed
residues, we recommend using averages of a group of high-quality protein
structures rather than a single structure before reaching conclusions on specific
structure-function relationships. To illustrate these points, we analyze some
significant chemical tendencies of prominent S-protein mutations in the context
of the available structures. In the discussion of new variants, we emphasize the 
selectivity of binding to ACE2 vs prominent antibodies rather than simply the
antibody escape or ACE2 affinity separately. We note that larger chemical
changes, in particular increased electrostatic charge or side-chain volume of
exposed surface residues, are recurring in mutations of concern, plausibly
related to adaptation to the negative surface potential of human ACE2. We also
find indications that the fixated mutations of the S-protein in the main variants
are less destabilizing than would be expected on average, possibly pointing
toward a selection pressure on the S-protein. The richness of available
structures for all of these situations provides an enormously valuable basis for 
future research into these structure-function relationships.

DOI: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.1c00433 
PMID: 34856799 

