
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021 Nov 30. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14406. [Epub ahead of print]

Autochthonous West Nile virus infection in Germany: Increasing numbers and a rare
encephalitis case in a kidney transplant recipient.

Schneider J(1)(2), Bachmann F(3), Choi M(3), Kurvits L(4), Schmidt ML(1),
Bergfeld L(1), Meier I(5), Zuchowski M(6), Werber D(5), Hofmann J(6), Ruprecht
K(4), Eckardt KU(3), Jones TC(1)(2)(7), Drosten C(1)(2), Corman VM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of
Freie, Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute
of Health, Berlin, Germany.
(2)German Centre for Infection Research (DZIF), partner site Charité, Berlin,
Germany.
(3)Department of Nephrology and Medical Intensive Care,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin,
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Department of Neurology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member 
of Freie, Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin
Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany.
(5)State Office for Health and Social Affairs, Berlin, Germany.
(6)Labor Berlin-Charité Vivantes GmbH, Berlin, Germany.
(7)Centre for Pathogen Evolution, Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, U.K.

West Nile Virus (WNV) infections are increasingly detected in birds and horses in
central Europe, with a first mosquito-borne autochthonous human infection
detected in Germany in 2019. Human infections are typically asymptomatic, with
occasional severe neurological disease. Because of a low number of cases in
central Europe, awareness regarding potential cases is low and WNV diagnostic is 
neglected. We tested cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples from unsolved encephalitis
and meningitis cases from Berlin from 2019 and 2020, and describe a
WNV-encephalitis case in a 33-year old kidney transplant recipient. The
infectious course was resolved by serology, RT-PCR, and sequencing of stored
samples. Phylogenetic sequence analysis revealed a close relationship of the
patient's WNV strain to German sequences from 2019 and 2020. A lack of travel
history and patient self-isolation during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic suggest the
infection was acquired in the patient's home or garden. Serological tests of four
people sharing the living space were negative. Retrospective RT-PCR and WNV-IgM
testing of 671 CSF samples from unsolved encephalitis and meningitis cases from
Berlin detected no additional infections. The recent increase of WNV cases
illustrates the importance of considering WNV in cases of meningoencephalitis,
especially in immunocompromised patients, as described here. Proper education and
communication and a revised diagnostic strategy will help to raise awareness and 
to detect future WNV infections. This article is protected by copyright. All
rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14406 
PMID: 34850584 

