
1. J Public Health Res. 2021 Nov 29. doi: 10.4081/jphr.2021.2513. [Epub ahead of
print]

HIV epidemic in a province of the Brazilian Amazon region: Temporal trend
analysis.

De Sá Pinheiro A(1), Souza Lima S(2), Oliveira Naiff Ferreira GR(3), Rodrigues
Feijão A(4), Rosendo da Silva RA(5), Gir E(6), Reis RK(7), Vieira Pereira FM(8), 
Hisako Takase Gonçalves L(9), Isse Polaro SH(10), Pereira Cruz Ramos AM(11),
Pinheiro Botelho E(12).

Author information: 
(1)Postgraduate Nursing Program, Federal University of Pará, Belém.
adrianadesapinheiro@hotmail.com.
(2)Biology of Infectious and Parasitic Agents Graduate Program, Federal
University of Pará, Belém. sandra.souza.lima@gmail.com.
(3)Postgraduate Nursing Program, Federal University of Pará, Belém.
grnaiff@gmail.com.
(4)Postgraduate Nursing Program, Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte, Natal
. alexsandrarf@hotmail.com.
(5)Postgraduate Nursing Program, Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte, Natal
. rirosendo@hotmail.com.
(6)Graduate Program in Fundamental Nursing, University of Sao Paulo, Ribeirão
Preto. egir@eerp.usp.br.
(7)Graduate Program in Fundamental Nursing, University of Sao Paulo, Ribeirão
Preto. rkreis@eerp.usp.br.
(8)Nursing Department, Federal Fluminense University, Rio das Ostras.
fernanddamaria@hotmail.com.
(9)Postgraduate Nursing Program, Federal University of Pará, Belém.
lhtakase@gmail.com.
(10)Postgraduate Nursing Program, Federal University of Pará, Belém.
shpolaro@ufpa.br.
(11)Postgraduate Nursing Program, Federal University of Pará, Belém.
nurse.alinecruz@gmail.com.
(12)Postgraduate Nursing Program, Federal University of Pará, Belém.
ebotelho@ufpa.br.

BACKGROUND: Although considerable progress has been made over the last decades,
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) incidence and acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS) mortality rates have remarkably increased in the Brazilian Amazon
region. Here, we employed temporal analysis to determine the impact of public
policies on the HIV epidemic in the state of Pará, Brazil, which has the second
highest HIV incidence rate in the Amazon region.
DESIGN AND METHODS: This is an ecological study conducted in the state of Pará,
employing secondary data of HIV/AIDS cases notified to the Information System for
Notifiable Diseases, 2007-2018. The following epidemiological variables were
collected: year of notification, municipality of residence, age, sex, education, 
exposure category, and HIV/AIDS diagnostic criteria. The study population was
composed of 21,504 HIV/AIDS cases. The HIV/AIDS incidence rates were analyzed
employing the temporal trend analysis (TTA) followed by the chi-square test and
residue analysis to determine the association between the epidemiological
variables and time series periods.
RESULTS: A total of 50% of the notifications were composed of AIDS cases. TTA
identified two periods in HIV/AIDS incidence, with stabilization of cases in the 
first period (G1, 2007-2012) and an upward trend in the second period (G2,
2012-2018). The most prevalent epidemiological characteristics in G2 (versus G1) 
were as follows: young people, brown skin color, higher schooling, and
homosexuals.
CONCLUSION: Public policy to control HIV infection in the Brazilian Amazon region
has been partially effective. HIV screening tests and treatment should be made
widely available to eradicate HIV infection in the Amazon region by 2030.

DOI: 10.4081/jphr.2021.2513 
PMID: 34850619 

