
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Dec 2;17(12):e1009678. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009678.
eCollection 2021 Dec.

A pigtailed macaque model of Kyasanur Forest disease virus and Alkhurma
hemorrhagic disease virus pathogenesis.

Broeckel RM(1), Feldmann F(2), McNally KL(1), Chiramel AI(1), Sturdevant GL(1),
Leung JM(3), Hanley PW(2), Lovaglio J(2), Rosenke R(2), Scott DP(2), Saturday
G(2), Bouamr F(4), Rasmussen AL(5)(6), Robertson SJ(1), Best SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Rocky Mountain Laboratories, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Hamilton,
Montana, United States of America.
(2)Rocky Mountain Veterinary Branch, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Hamilton, Montana, United States of
America.
(3)Research Technologies Branch, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Hamilton, Montana, United States of
America.
(4)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United
States of America.
(5)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.
(6)Center for Global Health Science and Security, Georgetown University,
Washington, District of Columbia, United States of America.

Kyasanur Forest disease virus (KFDV) and the closely related Alkhurma hemorrhagic
disease virus (AHFV) are emerging flaviviruses that cause severe viral
hemorrhagic fevers in humans. Increasing geographical expansion and case numbers,
particularly of KFDV in southwest India, class these viruses as a public health
threat. Viral pathogenesis is not well understood and additional vaccines and
antivirals are needed to effectively counter the impact of these viruses.
However, current animal models of KFDV pathogenesis do not accurately reproduce
viral tissue tropism or clinical outcomes observed in humans. Here, we show that 
pigtailed macaques (Macaca nemestrina) infected with KFDV or AHFV develop viremia
that peaks 2 to 4 days following inoculation. Over the course of infection,
animals developed lymphocytopenia, thrombocytopenia, and elevated liver enzymes. 
Infected animals exhibited hallmark signs of human disease characterized by a
flushed appearance, piloerection, dehydration, loss of appetite, weakness, and
hemorrhagic signs including epistaxis. Virus was commonly present in the
gastrointestinal tract, consistent with human disease caused by KFDV and AHFV
where gastrointestinal symptoms (hemorrhage, vomiting, diarrhea) are common.
Importantly, RNAseq of whole blood revealed that KFDV downregulated gene
expression of key clotting factors that was not observed during AHFV infection,
consistent with increased severity of KFDV disease observed in this model. This
work characterizes a nonhuman primate model for KFDV and AHFV that closely
resembles human disease for further utilization in understanding host immunity
and development of antiviral countermeasures.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009678 
PMCID: PMC8638978
PMID: 34855915 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

