
1. J Med Libr Assoc. 2021 Oct 1;109(4):631-636. doi: 10.5195/jmla.2021.1262.

Providing real-time resources in support of LGBTQ+ and HIV+ populations as
information experts on the ECHO hub team: a case report.

Menard L(1), Misquith C(2).

Author information: 
(1)lmenard@iu.edu, Assistant Director for Medical Education and Access Services, 
Ruth Lilly Medical Library, Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN.
(2)chelsea_misquith@brown.edu, Brown University, Providence, RI.

Background: Project ECHO (Extension for Community Healthcare Outcomes) is a
telehealth initiative that aims to reduce disparities in delivery of health care 
by leveraging technology and local expertise to provide guidance on specialized
subjects to health care providers across the world. In 2018, a new ECHO hub
convened in Indianapolis with a focus on health care for individuals in the
lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans, and queer (LGBTQ+) populations. This ECHO
iteration was one of the first of its kind and would soon be followed by a new
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) ECHO as well.
Case Presentation: In a novel approach, information professionals participated in
the early planning stages of the formation of these ECHO teams, which enabled the
provision of real-time medical evidence and resources at the point-of-need once
the teams were launched. This case study demonstrates proof of concept for
including health sciences librarians and/or information professionals in the ECHO
as hub team members. In this case study, the authors describe and quantify the
value added to the HIV and LGBTQ+ ECHO sessions by the medical librarians, as
well as provide a template for how other telehealth initiatives can collaborate
with their local health information professionals.
Conclusions: Librarian involvement in Project ECHO over the past three years has 
been enthusiastically received. The librarians have contributed hundreds of
resources to ECHO participants, helped build and curate resource repositories,
and expanded the embedded librarian program to an additional two ECHO iterations.
ECHO hub team members report high rates of satisfaction with the performance of
embedded librarians and appreciate the provision of point-of-need evidence to
ECHO participants.

Copyright © 2021 Laura Menard, Chelsea Misquith.

DOI: 10.5195/jmla.2021.1262 
PMCID: PMC8608201
PMID: 34858094 

