
1. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2021 Dec 2. doi: 10.1021/acsami.1c16479. [Epub ahead
of print]

Enhanced Antimicrobial Activity and Low Phytotoxicity of Acoustically Synthesized
Large Aspect Ratio Cu-BTC Metal-Organic Frameworks with Exposed Metal Sites.

Marqus S(1), Ahmed H(1), Rezk AR(1), Huynh T(2), Lawrie A(2), Nguyen D(2), Ehrnst
Y(1), Dekiwadia C(3), Yeo LY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Micro/Nanophysics Research Laboratory, School of Engineering, RMIT University,
Melbourne, VIC 3001, Australia.
(2)School of Science, RMIT University, Bundoora, VIC 3083, Australia.
(3)RMIT Microscopy and Microanalysis Facility, RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC
3001, Australia.

Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) have recently been shown to be effective
antimicrobial agents, particularly if they comprise pathogenicidal metal ions.
Nevertheless, the accessibility of these active metal sites to the pathogen, and 
hence the MOFs' antimicrobial activity itself, is often poor since the metal
nodes are usually embedded deep within its three-dimensional (3D) structure. We
show that a unique copper-based (copper(II)-benzene-1,3,5-tricarboxylate) MOF,
whose quasi-two-dimensional (quasi-2D) swordlike structure facilitates exposure
of the metal ions along its surface, exhibits enhanced antimicrobial properties
against three representative plant pathogens: a bacterium (Pseudomonas syringae),
a fungus (Fusarium solani), and a virus (Odontoglossum ringspot virus (ORSV)).
Such superior antimicrobial activity results in low minimum inhibitory
concentrations (MICs)─half that of a commercial pesticide and an eighth of its
conventional 3D cubic MOF counterpart (HKUST-1)─and hence low phytotoxicity,
which can be attributed to the accessibility of the surface copper sites to the
pathogen, thereby facilitating their adhesion and physical contact with the MOF. 
Additionally, we observed that orchids treated with the quasi-2D MOF showed
negligible phytotoxicity and 80% decreased viral load. This work constitutes the 
first study to demonstrate the antimicrobial properties of this novel MOF against
bacterial, fungal, and viral plant pathogens, and the first chemical control of
ORSV.

DOI: 10.1021/acsami.1c16479 
PMID: 34855354 

