
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 16;12:761798. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.761798. eCollection
2021.

Epstein-Barr Virus+ B Cells in Breast Cancer Immune Response: A Case Report.

Aran A(1), Peg V(2), Rabanal RM(3), Bernadó C(4), Zamora E(5), Molina E(1),
Arribas YA(1), Arribas J(4)(6)(7)(8), Pérez J(9), Roura-Mir C(1), Carrascal
M(10), Cortés J(5)(9), Martí M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Unit, Department of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunology,
Institut de Biotecnologia i Biomedicina (IBB), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona 
(UAB), Bellaterra, Spain.
(2)Translational Molecular Pathology, Vall d'Hebron Institut de Recerca (VHIR),
Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Unitat de Patologia Murina i Comparada, Department of Animal Medicine and
Surgery, Veterinary Faculty, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB), Barcelona, 
Spain.
(4)Preclinical and Translational Research Program, Vall d'Hebron Institute of
Oncology (VHIO), Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Breast Cancer Unit, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Hospital
Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Cancer Research Program, Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute (IMIM),
Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Cáncer, Madrid, Spain.
(8)Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain.
(9)International Breast Cancer Center (BCC), Quironsalud Group, Barcelona, Spain.
(10)Biological and Environmental Proteomics, Institute of Biomedical Research of 
Barcelona, Spanish National Research Council, Institut d'Investigacions
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IIBB-CSIC/IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain.

EBV-specific T cells have been recently described to be involved in fatal
encephalitis and myocarditis in cancer patients after immune checkpoint
therapies. Here, we report the study of a human triple-negative breast cancer
tumor (TNBC) and EBV-transformed B cells obtained from a patient-derived
xenograft (PDX) that progressed into a lymphocytic neoplasm named
xenograft-associated B-cell lymphoma (XABCL). T-cell receptor (TCR)
high-throughput sequencing was performed to monitor the T-cell clonotypes present
in the different samples. Forty-three T-cell clonotypes were found infiltrating
the XABCL tissue after three passes in mice along 6 months. Eighteen of these
(42%) were also found in the TNBC biopsy. TCR infiltrating the XABCL tissue
showed a very restricted T-cell repertoire as compared with the
biopsy-infiltrating T cells. Consequently, T cells derived from the TNBC biopsy
were expanded in the presence of the B-cell line obtained from the XABCL
(XABCL-LCL), after which the TCR repertoire obtained was again very restricted,
i.e., only certain clonotypes were selected by the B cells. A number of these
TCRs had previously been reported as sequences involved in infection, cancer,
and/or autoimmunity. We then analyzed the immunopeptidome from the XABCL-LCL, to 
identify putative B-cell-associated peptides that might have been expanding these
T cells. The HLA class I and class II-associated peptides from XABCL-LCL were
then compared with published repertoires from LCL of different HLA typing.
Proteins from the antigen processing and presentation pathway remained
significantly enriched in the XABCL-LCL repertoire. Interestingly, some class
II-presented peptides were derived from cancer-related proteins. These results
suggest that bystander tumor-infiltrating EBV+ B cells acting as APC may be able 
to interact with tumor-infiltrating T cells and influence the TCR repertoire in
the tumor site.

Copyright © 2021 Aran, Peg, Rabanal, Bernadó, Zamora, Molina, Arribas, Arribas,
Pérez, Roura-Mir, Carrascal, Cortés and Martí.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.761798 
PMCID: PMC8637110
PMID: 34868006 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

