
1. Enzymes. 2021;50:195-226. doi: 10.1016/bs.enz.2021.06.010. Epub 2021 Aug 9.

The hepatitis B virus polymerase.

Clark DN(1), Tajwar R(2), Hu J(3), Tavis JE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Weber State University, Ogden, UT, United States.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Saint Louis University
School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, United States.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The Pennsylvania State University
College of Medicine, Hershey, PA, United States.
(4)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Saint Louis University
School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, United States. Electronic address:
john.tavis@health.slu.edu.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a hepatotropic, partially double-stranded DNA virus
that replicates by reverse transcription and is a major cause of chronic liver
disease and hepatocellular carcinoma. Reverse transcription is catalyzed by the
four-domain multifunctional HBV polymerase (P) protein that has protein-priming, 
RNA- and DNA-dependent DNA synthesis (i.e., reverse transcriptase), and
ribonuclease H activities. P also likely promotes the three strand transfers that
occur during reverse transcription, and it may participate in immune evasion by
HBV. Reverse transcription is primed by a tyrosine residue in the amino-terminal 
domain of P, and P remains covalently attached to the product DNA throughout
reverse transcription. The reverse transcriptase activity of P is the target for 
the nucleos(t)ide analog drugs that dominate HBV treatment, and P is the target
of ongoing efforts to develop new drugs against both the reverse transcriptase
and ribonuclease H activities. Despite the unusual reverse transcription pathway 
catalyzed by P and the importance of P to HBV therapy, understanding the
enzymology and structure of HBV P severely lags that of the retroviral reverse
transcriptases due to substantial technical challenges to studying the enzyme.
Obtaining a better understanding of P will broaden our appreciation of the
diversity among reverse transcribing elements in nature, and will help improve
treatment for people chronically infected with HBV.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.enz.2021.06.010 
PMID: 34861937 

