
1. Bioinformatics. 2021 Dec 2. pii: btab811. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btab811.
[Epub ahead of print]

Predicting the multi-label protein subcellular localization through
multi-information fusion and MLSI dimensionality reduction based on MLFE
classifier.

Liu Y(1)(2), Jin S(1)(2), Gao H(1)(2), Wang X(1)(2), Wang C(1)(2), Zhou W(1)(2), 
Yu B(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Mathematics and Physics, Qingdao University of Science and
Technology, Qingdao, 266061, China.
(2)Artificial Intelligence and Biomedical Big Data Research Center, Qingdao
University of Science and Technology, Qingdao, 266061, China.

MOTIVATION: Multi-label protein subcellular localization (SCL) is an
indispensable way to study protein function. It can locate a certain protein
(such as the human transmembrane protein that promotes the invasion of the
SARS-CoV-2) or expression product at a specific location in a cell, which can
provide a reference for clinical treatment of diseases such as COVID-19.
RESULTS: The paper proposes a novel method named ML-locMLFE. First of all, six
feature extraction methods are adopted to obtain protein effective information.
These methods include pseudo amino acid composition (PseAAC), encoding based on
grouped weight (EBGW), gene ontology (GO), multi-scale continuous and
discontinuous (MCD), residue probing transformation (RPT) and evolutionary
distance transformation (EDT). In the next part, we utilize the multi-label
information latent semantic index (MLSI) method to avoid the interference of
redundant information. In the end, multi-label learning with feature induced
labeling information enrichment (MLFE) is adopted to predict the multi-label
protein SCL. The Gram-positive bacteria dataset is chosen as a training set,
while the Gram-negative bacteria dataset, virus dataset, newPlant dataset and
SARS-CoV-2 dataset as the test sets. The overall actual accuracy (OAA) of the
first four datasets is 99.23%, 93.82%, 93.24%, and 96.72% by the leave-one-out
cross validation (LOOCV). It is worth mentioning that the OAA prediction result
of our predictor on the SARS-CoV-2 dataset is 72.73%. The results indicate that
the ML-locMLFE method has obvious advantages in predicting the SCL of multi-label
protein, which provides new ideas for further research on the SCL of multi-label 
protein.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: The source codes and data are publicly available
at https://github.com/QUST-AIBBDRC/ML-locMLFE/.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics
online.

© The Author(s) (2021). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights
reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btab811 
PMID: 34864897 

