
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 11;12:749291. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.749291. eCollection
2021.

Effects of β-Blockers on the Sympathetic and Cytokines Storms in Covid-19.

Al-Kuraishy HM(1), Al-Gareeb AI(1), Mostafa-Hedeab G(2), Kasozi KI(3)(4),
Zirintunda G(5), Aslam A(6), Allahyani M(7), Welburn SC(3)(8), Batiha GE(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Medicine, College of Medicine,
ALmustansiriyia University, Baghdad, Iraq.
(2)Pharmacology Department, Health Sciences Research Unit, Medical College, Jouf 
University, Sakaka, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Infection Medicine, Deanery of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine and
Veterinary Medicine, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(4)School of Medicine, Kabale Unviersity, Kabale, Uganda.
(5)Department of Animal Production and Management, Faculty of Agriculture and
Animal Sciences, Busitema University, Tororo, Uganda.
(6)Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of Applied Medical Sciences, Umm Al-Qura
University, Makkah, Saudi Arabia.
(7)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, College of Applied Medical
Sciences, Taif University, Taif, Saudi Arabia.
(8)Zhejiang University-University of Edinburgh Institute, Zhejiang University
School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Haining, China.
(9)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Damanhour University, Damanhour, Egypt.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is a causative virus
in the development of coronavirus disease 2019 (Covid-19) pandemic. Respiratory
manifestations of SARS-CoV-2 infection such as acute lung injury (ALI) and acute 
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) leads to hypoxia, oxidative stress, and
sympatho-activation and in severe cases leads to sympathetic storm (SS). On the
other hand, an exaggerated immune response to the SARS-CoV-2 invasion may lead to
uncontrolled release of pro-inflammatory cytokine development of cytokine storm
(CS). In Covid-19, there are interactive interactions between CS and SS in the
development of multi-organ failure (MOF). Interestingly, cutting the bridge
between CS and SS by anti-inflammatory and anti-adrenergic agents may mitigate
complications that are induced by SARS-CoV-2 infection in severely affected
Covid-19 patients. The potential mechanisms of SS in Covid-19 are through
different pathways such as hypoxia, which activate the central sympathetic center
through carotid bodies chemosensory input and induced pro-inflammatory cytokines,
which cross the blood-brain barrier and activation of the sympathetic center.
β2-receptors signaling pathway play a crucial role in the production of
pro-inflammatory cytokines, macrophage activation, and B-cells for the production
of antibodies with inflammation exacerbation. β-blockers have anti-inflammatory
effects through reduction release of pro-inflammatory cytokines with inhibition
of NF-κB. In conclusion, β-blockers interrupt this interaction through inhibition
of several mediators of CS and SS with prevention development of neural-cytokine 
loop in SARS-CoV-2 infection. Evidence from this study triggers an idea for
future prospective studies to confirm the potential role of β-blockers in the
management of Covid-19.

Copyright © 2021 Al-kuraishy, Al-Gareeb, Mostafa-Hedeab, Kasozi, Zirintunda,
Aslam, Allahyani, Welburn and Batiha.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.749291 
PMCID: PMC8637815
PMID: 34867978 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

