
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 11;12:772550. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.772550. eCollection
2021.

Immunogenicity and Protective Potential of Mucosal Vaccine Formulations Based on 
Conserved Epitopes of Influenza A Viruses Fused to an Innovative Ring
Nanoplatform in Mice and Chickens.

Calzas C(1), Mao M(1), Turpaud M(1), Viboud Q(1), Mettier J(1), Figueroa T(2),
Bessière P(2), Mangin A(1)(3), Sedano L(1), Hervé PL(1)(4), Volmer R(2), Ducatez 
MF(2), Bourgault S(4), Archambault D(5), Le Goffic R(1), Chevalier C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de Recherche pour l'Agriculture, l'Alimentation et
l'Environnement (INRAE) Molecular and Virology Unit VIM-Unité Mixte de Recherche 
(UMR) 892, University Paris-Saclay, Jouy-en-Josas, France.
(2)Institut National de Recherche pour l'Agriculture, l'Alimentation et
l'Environnement (INRAE) Unité Mixte de Recherche (UMR1225), Interactions
Hótes-Agents Pathogénes-Ecole Nationale Vétérinaire de Toulouse
(IHAP-ENVT)-University of Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
(3)Dementia Research Institute, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
(4)Chemistry Department, Université du Québec à Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, Université du Québec à Montréal, Montreal, 
QC, Canada.

Current inactivated vaccines against influenza A viruses (IAV) mainly induce
immune responses against highly variable epitopes across strains and are mostly
delivered parenterally, limiting the development of an effective mucosal
immunity. In this study, we evaluated the potential of intranasal formulations
incorporating conserved IAV epitopes, namely the long alpha helix (LAH) of the
stalk domain of hemagglutinin and three tandem repeats of the ectodomain of the
matrix protein 2 (3M2e), as universal mucosal anti-IAV vaccines in mice and
chickens. The IAV epitopes were grafted to nanorings, a novel platform technology
for mucosal vaccination formed by the nucleoprotein (N) of the respiratory
syncytial virus, in fusion or not with the C-terminal end of the P97 protein
(P97c), a recently identified Toll-like receptor 5 agonist. Fusion of LAH to
nanorings boosted the generation of LAH-specific systemic and local antibody
responses as well as cellular immunity in mice, whereas the carrier effect of
nanorings was less pronounced towards 3M2e. Mice vaccinated with chimeric
nanorings bearing IAV epitopes in fusion with P97c presented modest LAH- or
M2e-specific IgG titers in serum and were unable to generate a mucosal humoral
response. In contrast, N-3M2e or N-LAH nanorings admixed with Montanide™ gel (MG)
triggered strong specific humoral responses, composed of serum type 1/type 2 IgG 
and mucosal IgG and IgA, as well as cellular responses dominated by type 1/type
17 cytokine profiles. All mice vaccinated with the [N-3M2e + N-LAH + MG]
formulation survived an H1N1 challenge and the combination of both N-3M2e and
N-LAH nanorings with MG enhanced the clinical and/or virological protective
potential of the preparation in comparison to individual nanorings. Chickens
vaccinated parenterally or mucosally with N-LAH and N-3M2e nanorings admixed with
Montanide™ adjuvants developed a specific systemic humoral response, which
nonetheless failed to confer protection against heterosubtypic challenge with a
highly pathogenic H5N8 strain. Thus, while the combination of N-LAH and N-3M2e
nanorings with Montanide™ adjuvants shows promise as a universal mucosal anti-IAV
vaccine in the mouse model, further experiments have to be conducted to extend
its efficacy to poultry.

Copyright © 2021 Calzas, Mao, Turpaud, Viboud, Mettier, Figueroa, Bessière,
Mangin, Sedano, Hervé, Volmer, Ducatez, Bourgault, Archambault, Le Goffic and
Chevalier.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.772550 
PMCID: PMC8632632
PMID: 34868036 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

