
1. J Infect Dis. 2021 Dec 2. pii: jiab591. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiab591. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Maternal-fetal immunologic response to SARS-CoV-2 infection in a symptomatic
vulnerable population: A prospective cohort.

Larcade R(1), DeShea L(2), Lang GA(3), Caballero MT(4)(5), Ferretti A(4), Beasley
WH(2), Tipple TE(2), Vain N(1), Prudent L(1), Lang ML(3), Polack F(4), Ofman
G(2)(4); Fundación INFANT-COVID-19 Group.

Author information: 
(1)FUNDASAMI, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Department of Pediatrics,
Oklahoma City, USA.
(3)The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, USA,
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Oklahoma City; USA.
(4)Fundación INFANT, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(5)Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Buenos
Aires, Argentina.

BACKGROUND: COVID-19 disproportionally affects pregnant women and their newborn, 
yet little is known about the variables that modulate the maternal-fetal immune
response to infection.
METHODS: We prospectively studied socioeconomic, biologic and clinical factors
affecting humoral immunity in 87 unvaccinated pregnant women admitted to hospital
in the Buenos Aires metropolitan area for symptoms consistent with COVID-19
disease.
RESULTS: The number of days between symptom onset and childbirth predicted
maternal and newborn virus Spike protein Receptor Binding Domain (RBD)-specific
IgG. These findings suggest newborns may benefit less when mothers deliver soon
after COVID-19 infection. Similarly, a longer time between symptom onset and
birth predicted higher in utero transfer of maternal IgG and its concentration in
cord blood. Older gestational ages at birth were associated with lower maternal
IgG: cord blood IgG ratios. Eighty seven percent of women with confirmed
SARS-CoV-2 infection developed RBD-specific IgA responses in breast milk within
96 h of childbirth. IgA was not significantly associated with time from infection
but correlated with maternal serum IgG and placental transfer.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate the combined role of biologic, clinical
and socioeconomic variables associated with maternal SARS-CoV-2 RBD-specific
antibodies and supports early vaccination strategies for COVID-19 in
socioeconomically vulnerable pregnant women.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiab591 
PMID: 34865064 

