
1. Transl Behav Med. 2021 Dec 3. pii: ibab150. doi: 10.1093/tbm/ibab150. [Epub ahead
of print]

Relationship between mask wearing, testing, and vaccine willingness among Los
Angeles County adults during the peak of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Lam CN(1)(2), Kaplan C(3)(4), Saluja S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Population and Public Health Sciences, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)USC Gehr Family Center for Health Systems Science and Innovation, Los Angeles,
CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Mask wearing mitigates the spread of COVID-19; however, many
individuals have not adopted the protective behavior.
PURPOSE: We examine mask wearing behavior during the height of the pandemic in
Los Angeles County, and its association with COVID-19 testing and willingness to 
get vaccinated.
METHODS: We conducted a cross-sectional survey using representative sampling
between December 2020 and January 2021, through an online platform targeting Los 
Angeles County residents. Survey items include demographic characteristics,
health conditions, access to health care, mask wearing, COVID-19 testing,
exposure risk factors, and willingness to receive COVID-19 vaccine. We performed 
logistic regression models to examine factors associated with always mask
wearing.
RESULTS: Of the analytic sample (n = 1,984), 75.3% reported always wearing a face
mask when leaving home. Being a female, Asian or African American, or
non-Republican resident, or having higher education, having poor or fair health, 
having a regular doctor, knowing someone hospitalized for COVID-19, and being
willing to receive the COVID-19 vaccine were associated with always wearing a
mask. Residents who were younger, had a highest risk health condition, and had ≥2
COVID-19 tests had lower odds of always mask wearing.
CONCLUSION: Mask wearing guidelines are easing; however, as vaccination rates
plateau and new virus variants emerge, mask wearing remains an important tool to 
protect vulnerable populations. Encouraging protective measures among younger
adults, those with less education, republicans, men, and White residents-groups
that are least likely to be vaccinated or wear a mask-may be critical to reducing
transmission.

© Society of Behavioral Medicine 2021. All rights reserved. For permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/tbm/ibab150 
PMID: 34865166 

