
1. J Infect Dis. 2021 Dec 4. pii: jiab589. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiab589. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Detection of non-enveloped hepatitis E virus in plasma of infected blood donors.

Costafreda MI(1)(2)(3), Sauleda S(1)(2)(3), Rico A(1), Piron M(1)(2)(3), Bes
M(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Catalan Blood Bank (Banc de Sang i Teixits de Catalunya), Transfusion Safety
Laboratory, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y
Digestivas (CIBEREhd), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Spain.
(3)Vall d'Hebron Institute of Research (VHIR), Vall d'Hebron Universitary
Hospital, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Transfusion-transmitted HEV infections have raised many concerns
regarding the safety of blood products. To date, enveloped HEV particles have
been described in circulating blood, while non-enveloped HEV virions have only
been found in feces; however, no exhaustive studies have been performed to fully 
characterize HEV particles in blood.
METHODS: Using isopycnic ultracentrifugation, we determined the types of HEV
particles in plasma of HEV-infected blood donors.
RESULTS: Non-enveloped HEV was detected in 8 out of 23 plasma samples, while
enveloped HEV was found in all of them. No association was observed between the
presence of non-enveloped HEV and viral load, gender, or age at infection.
However, samples with HEV-positive serology and/or increased levels of liver
injury markers contained higher proportion of non-enveloped HEV than samples with
HEV-negative serology and normal levels of liver enzymes. These results were
further confirmed by analyzing paired donations and follow-up samples of 10
HEV-infected donors who were HEV-seronegative at donation but had anti-HEV
antibodies and/or increased levels of liver enzymes at follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: HEV-contaminated blood products may contain non-enveloped HEV, which
may pose an additional risk to blood safety by behaving differently to pathogen
inactivation treatments or increasing infectivity.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiab589 
PMID: 34865052 

