
1. Am J Surg Pathol. 2021 Dec 6. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000001848. [Epub ahead of
print]

Hepatic Secondary Syphilis Can Cause a Variety of Histologic Patterns and May Be 
Negative for Treponeme Immunohistochemistry.

Malvar G(1), Cardona D, Pezhouh MK, Adeyi OA, Chatterjee D, Deisch JK, Lamps LW, 
Misdraji J, Stueck AE, Voltaggio L, Gonzalez RS.

Author information: 
(1)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical 
School Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA
Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Raleigh, NC Department
of Pathology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL
Department of Pathology, Toronto General Hospital, Toronto, ON Department of
Pathology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada Department of Pathology &
Immunology, Washington University, St. Louis, MO Department of Pathology and
Human Anatomy, Loma Linda University Medical Center, Loma Linda, CA Department of
Pathology, University of Michigan Hospitals, Ann Arbor, MI Department of
Pathology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD.

The rate of syphilis in the United States has been increasing steadily in the
past decade, but it remains an uncommon diagnosis in tissue biopsies. Most of the
pathology literature on hepatic syphilis consists of older series or case
reports. This study aimed to systematically characterize the histologic spectrum 
of hepatic syphilis in a contemporary cohort. Clinicopathologic features of 14
hepatic syphilis cases between 2012 and 2018 were analyzed to characterize the
broad spectrum of histologic changes. Thirteen patients were men (age range: 19
to 59 y); 6 had known human immunodeficiency virus, 7 were men known to have sex 
with men, and no patient had known prior syphilis. Hepatic syphilis was the
primary clinical suspicion in only 1 patient. Common symptoms included jaundice, 
rash, and abdominal pain. Thirteen had elevated transaminases, and 12 had
elevated alkaline phosphatase. Pathologic changes were grouped into 5 histologic 
patterns: biliary-pattern injury (n=5), acute hepatitis (n=4), autoimmune
hepatitis-like (n=1), fibroinflammatory mass-forming lesion (n=2), and no
particular pattern (n=2). Nearly all showed portal and lobular lymphocytes and
plasma cells; 12 had prominent histiocytes/Kupffer cells, 9 had ductular
reaction, and 7 had duct inflammation. Occasional focal findings included dropout
(n=7), phlebitis (n=7), and loose granulomata (n=5). Treponeme
immunohistochemistry was positive in 10 and negative in 4, though treatment was
given before biopsy in 3 of those 4. Thirteen patients had rapid plasma reagin
testing either before or after biopsy, with 1:64 or higher titer. All patients
who received treatment recovered. Hepatic syphilis is rare but likely
underrecognized. It exhibits a variety of histologic appearances and therefore
should be considered in several hepatic differential diagnoses, especially in men
who have sex with men. Kupffer cells, granulomata, and phlebitis may suggest the 
diagnosis regardless of predominant histologic pattern. Negative treponeme
immunohistochemical staining does not exclude the diagnosis, including in
untreated patients.

Copyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000001848 
PMID: 34864775 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest and Source of Funding: The 
authors have disclosed that they have no significant relationships with, or
financial interest in, any commercial companies pertaining to this article.

