
1. Front Vet Sci. 2021 Nov 17;8:759812. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2021.759812. eCollection 
2021.

Intracellular Replication Inhibitory Effects of Tea Tree Oil on Vesicular
Stomatitis Virus and Anti-inflammatory Activities in Vero Cells.

Shao Q(1)(2), Huang J(1)(2), Li J(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China.
(2)Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal
Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou, China.
(3)Joint International Research Laboratory of Agriculture and Agri-Product
Safety, The Ministry of Education of China, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China.

Viral disease management has been proven difficult, and there are no broadly
licensed vaccines or therapeutics. Vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) is an active 
pathogen of wild ungulates and livestock; its infection frequently caused
irreversible vesicles on the tongue or other positions, leading to enormous
economic loss. Tea tree oil (TTO) has been shown to be a popular remedy for many 
skin diseases owing to its antibacterial, antipruritic, and anti-inflammatory
effects. However, the potential effect of TTO on VSV proliferation and the
corresponding inflammatory response in cells remain unclear. In this study,
methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium assay was used to evaluate the cell viability of
TTO, and cytotoxic concentration 50 (CC50) was calculated. Then, fluorescence
observation, reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction,
Western blot (WB), and flow cytometry (FCM) assay were used to evaluate the
antiviral effect of TTO against VSV under three manners of pre-infection before
medication, co-administration, pretreatment before infection at safe doses to
Vero cells. Meanwhile, the mRNA expressions of interleukin 8, tumor necrosis
factor α, and ISG56 in cells were also detected. The results showed that the
maximum safe concentration of TTO to Vero cells was 0.063% and the CC50 is 0.32%.
Most notably, TTO dose-dependently inhibited the VSV GFP fluorescence generation 
and restrained the replication of VSV in gene and protein levels regardless of
the treatment modes. Based on the results of the FCM, effective concentration 50 
of TTO against VSV is 0.019%. Similarly, the mRNA expression of the above
cytokines induced by viral infection was also remarkably curbed. These findings
suggest that TTO emerged blocking, prophylaxis, and treatment action against VSV 
replication and suppressed the related inflammation in Vero cells. This study
provides a novel potential for TTO fighting against viral infection and
anti-inflammatory activities in Vero cells.

Copyright © 2021 Shao, Huang and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2021.759812 
PMCID: PMC8635969
PMID: 34869732 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

