
1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Nov 18;8:727593. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.727593.
eCollection 2021.

Substance P/ Neurokinin-1 Receptor, Trigeminal Ganglion, Latency, and Coronavirus
Infection-Is There Any Link?

Mehboob R(1)(2), Kurdi M(3), Bamaga A(4), Aldardeir N(5), Nasief H(6), Moshref
LH(7), Alsinani T(8), Rayes AO(9), Jabbad RH(10).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, The University of Lahore, Lahore, Pakistan.
(2)Lahore Medical Research Center, LLP, Lahore, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, King Abdulaziz University,
Rabigh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Neurology Division, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, King
Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Faculty of Education, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, Jeddah, Saudi
Arabia.
(7)Department of Surgery, Doctor Soliman Fakeeh Hospital, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(8)Division of Neurosurgery, King Fahad General Hospital, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(9)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, King Abdulaziz
University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(10)Department of Medicine, King Fahad Armed Forces Hospital, Jeddah, Saudi
Arabia.

Novel Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome-Corona Virus-2 infection (SARS-CoV-2) is 
an acute respiratory and infectious disease. This perspective aims to provide a
basic understanding of the inflammation caused by SARS-CoV-2 and its relation to 
the trigeminal ganglion (TG). The virus enters through the mucous membranes of
the orofacial region and reaches the TG, where it resides and takes control of
its peptides including Substance P (SP). SP is the main neuropeptide,
neuromodulator, and neuro-hormone of TG, associated with nociception and
inflammation under noxious stimulus. SP release is triggered and, consequently,
affects the immune cells and blood vessels to release the mediators for
inflammation. Hence, cytokine storm is initiated and causes respiratory distress,
bronchoconstriction, and death in complicated cases. Neurokinin-1 Receptor
(NK-1R) is the receptor for SP and its antagonists, along with glucocorticoids,
may be used to alleviate the symptoms and treat this infection by blocking this
nociceptive pathway. SP seems to be the main culprit involved in the triggering
of inflammatory pathways in SARS-CoV-2 infection. It may have a direct
association with cardio-respiratory rhythm, sleep-wake cycle, nociception, and
ventilatory responses and regulates many important physiological and pathological
functions. Its over-secretion should be blocked by NK-1R antagonist. However,
experimental work leading to clinical trials are mandatory for further
confirmation. Here, it is further proposed that there is a possibility of latency
in SARS-CoV-2 virus infection if it is acting through TG, which is the main site 
for other viruses that become latent.

Copyright © 2021 Mehboob, Kurdi, Bamaga, Aldardeir, Nasief, Moshref, Alsinani,
Rayes and Jabbad.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.727593 
PMCID: PMC8637107
PMID: 34869423 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

