
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Nov 18;11:765300. doi:
10.3389/fcimb.2021.765300. eCollection 2021.

Can the SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein Bind Integrins Independent of the RGD Sequence?

Beaudoin CA(1), Hamaia SW(2), Huang CL(2)(3), Blundell TL(1), Jackson AP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Sanger Building, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Hopkins Building, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(3)Physiological Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

The RGD motif in the Severe Acute Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) spike
protein has been predicted to bind RGD-recognizing integrins. Recent studies have
shown that the spike protein does, indeed, interact with αVβ3 and α5β1 integrins,
both of which bind to RGD-containing ligands. However, computational studies have
suggested that binding between the spike RGD motif and integrins is not
favourable, even when unfolding occurs after conformational changes induced by
binding to the canonical host entry receptor, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2
(ACE2). Furthermore, non-RGD-binding integrins, such as αx, have been suggested
to interact with the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. Other viral pathogens, such as
rotaviruses, have been recorded to bind integrins in an RGD-independent manner to
initiate host cell entry. Thus, in order to consider the potential for the
SARS-CoV-2 spike protein to bind integrins independent of the RGD sequence, we
investigate several factors related to the involvement of integrins in SARS-CoV-2
infection. First, we review changes in integrin expression during SARS-CoV-2
infection to identify which integrins might be of interest. Then, all known
non-RGD integrin-binding motifs are collected and mapped to the spike protein
receptor-binding domain and analyzed for their 3D availability. Several
integrin-binding motifs are shown to exhibit high sequence similarity with
solvent accessible regions of the spike receptor-binding domain. Comparisons of
these motifs with other betacoronavirus spike proteins, such as SARS-CoV and
RaTG13, reveal that some have recently evolved while others are more conserved
throughout phylogenetically similar betacoronaviruses. Interestingly, all of the 
potential integrin-binding motifs, including the RGD sequence, are conserved in
one of the known pangolin coronavirus strains. Of note, the most recently
recorded mutations in the spike protein receptor-binding domain were found
outside of the putative integrin-binding sequences, although several mutations
formed inside and close to one motif, in particular, may potentially enhance
binding. These data suggest that the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein may interact with
integrins independent of the RGD sequence and may help further explain how
SARS-CoV-2 and other viruses can evolve to bind to integrins.

Copyright © 2021 Beaudoin, Hamaia, Huang, Blundell and Jackson.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.765300 
PMCID: PMC8637727
PMID: 34869067 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

