
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Dec 3;17(12):e1010119. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010119. [Epub
ahead of print]

Antiviral RNA interference in disease vector (Asian longhorned) ticks.

Xu Y(1)(2), Zhong Z(2), Ren Y(2), Ma L(1)(2), Ye Z(2), Gao C(1), Wang J(2), Li
Y(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Animal Ecology and Conservation Biology, Institute of
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China.

Disease vectors such as mosquitoes and ticks play a major role in the emergence
and re-emergence of human and animal viral pathogens. Compared to mosquitoes,
however, much less is known about the antiviral responses of ticks. Here we
showed that Asian longhorned ticks (Haemaphysalis longicornis) produced
predominantly 22-nucleotide virus-derived siRNAs (vsiRNAs) in response to severe 
fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus (SFTSV, an emerging tick-borne virus),
Nodamura virus (NoV), or Sindbis virus (SINV) acquired by blood feeding. Notably,
experimental acquisition of NoV and SINV by intrathoracic injection also
initiated viral replication and triggered the production of vsiRNAs in H.
longicornis. We demonstrated that a mutant NoV deficient in expressing its viral 
suppressor of RNAi (VSR) replicated to significantly lower levels than wildtype
NoV in H. longicornis, but accumulated to higher levels after knockdown of the
tick Dicer2-like protein identified by phylogeny comparison. Moreover, the
expression of a panel of known animal VSRs in cis from the genome of SINV
drastically enhanced the accumulation of the recombinant viruses. This study
establishes a novel model for virus-vector-mouse experiments with longhorned
ticks and provides the first in vivo evidence for an antiviral function of the
RNAi response in ticks. Interestingly, comparing the accumulation levels of SINV 
recombinants expressing green fluorescent protein or SFTSV proteins identified
the viral non-structural protein as a putative VSR. Elucidating the function of
ticks' antiviral RNAi pathway in vivo is critical to understand the virus-host
interaction and the control of tick-borne viral pathogens.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010119 
PMID: 34860862 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

