
1. Enzymes. 2021;50:79-132. doi: 10.1016/bs.enz.2021.07.003. Epub 2021 Sep 1.

DNA polymerases of herpesviruses and their inhibitors.

Piret J(1), Boivin G(2).

Author information: 
(1)CHU de Québec-Université Laval, Quebec City, QC, Canada.
(2)CHU de Québec-Université Laval, Quebec City, QC, Canada. Electronic address:
guy.boivin@crchudequebec.ulaval.ca.

Human herpesviruses are large double-stranded DNA viruses belonging to the
Herpesviridae family. The main characteristics of these viruses are their ability
to establish a lifelong latency into the host with a potential to reactivate
periodically. Primary infections and reactivations with herpesviruses are
responsible for a large spectrum of diseases and may result in severe
complications in immunocompromised patients. The viral DNA polymerase is a key
enzyme in the replicative cycle of herpesviruses, and the target of most
antiviral agents (i.e., nucleoside, nucleotide and pyrophosphate analogs).
However, long-term prophylaxis and treatment with these antivirals may lead to
the emergence of drug-resistant isolates harboring mutations in genes encoding
viral enzymes that phosphorylate drugs (nucleoside analogs) and/or DNA
polymerases, with potential cross-resistance between the different analogs. Drug 
resistance mutations mainly arise in conserved regions of the polymerase and
exonuclease functional domains of these enzymes. In the polymerase domain,
mutations associated with resistance to nucleoside/nucleotide analogs may
directly or indirectly affect drug binding or incorporation into the primer
strand, or increase the rate of extension of DNA to overcome chain termination.
In the exonuclease domain, mutations conferring resistance to
nucleoside/nucleotide analogs may reduce the rate of excision of incorporated
drug, or continue DNA elongation after drug incorporation without excision.
Mutations associated with resistance to pyrophosphate analogs may alter drug
binding or the conformational changes of the polymerase domain required for an
efficient activity of the enzyme. Novel herpesvirus inhibitors with a potent
antiviral activity against drug-resistant isolates are thus needed urgently.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.enz.2021.07.003 
PMID: 34861944 

