
1. Evol Med Public Health. 2021 Oct 26;9(1):349-359. doi: 10.1093/emph/eoab035.
eCollection 2021.

Helminth infection is associated with dampened cytokine responses to viral and
bacterial stimulations in Tsimane forager-horticulturalists.

Schneider-Crease IA(1), Blackwell AD(2), Kraft TS(3), Emery Thompson M(4),
Maldonado Suarez I(5), Cummings DK(6), Stieglitz J(7), Snyder-Mackler N(1)(8),
Gurven M(3), Kaplan H(6), Trumble BC(1)(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Evolution and Medicine, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(2)Department of Anthropology, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, USA.
(3)Department of Anthropology, University of California Santa Barbara, Santa
Barbara, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Anthropology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA.
(5)Tsimane Health and Life History Project, San Borja, Bolivia.
(6)Economic Science Institute, Chapman University, Orange, CA, USA.
(7)Institute for Advanced Study in Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
(8)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(9)School of Human Evolution and Social Change, Arizona State University, Tempe, 
AZ, USA.

Background: Soil-transmitted helminths (STHs) and humans share long
co-evolutionary histories over which STHs have evolved strategies to permit their
persistence by downregulating host immunity. Understanding the interactions
between STHs and other pathogens can inform our understanding of human evolution 
and contemporary disease patterns.
Methodology: We worked with Tsimane forager-horticulturalists in the Bolivian
Amazon, where STHs are prevalent. We tested whether STHs and eosinophil
levels-likely indicative of infection in this population-are associated with
dampened immune responses to in vitro stimulation with H1N1 and
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) antigens. Whole blood samples (n = 179) were treated
with H1N1 vaccine and LPS and assayed for 13 cytokines (INF-γ, IL-1β, IL-2, IL-4,
IL-5, IL-6, IL-7, IL-8, IL-10, IL-12p70, IL-13, GM-CSF and TNF-ɑ). We evaluated
how STHs and eosinophil levels affected cytokine responses and T helper (Th) 1
and Th2-cytokine suite responses to stimulation.
Results: Infection with Ascaris lumbricoides was significantly (P ≤ 0.05)
associated with lower response of some cytokines to H1N1 and LPS in women.
Eosinophils were significantly negatively associated with some cytokine responses
to H1N1 and LPS, with the strongest effects in women, and associated with a
reduced Th1- and Th2-cytokine response to H1N1 and LPS in women and men.
Conclusions and implications: Consistent with the 'old friends' and hygiene
hypotheses, we find that STHs were associated with dampened cytokine responses to
certain viral and bacterial antigens. This suggests that STH infections may play 
an essential role in immune response regulation and that the lack of STH immune
priming in industrialized populations may increase the risk of over-reactive
immunity. Lay Summary: Indicators of helminth infection were associated with
dampened cytokine immune responses to in vitro stimulation with viral and
bacterial antigens in Tsimane forager-horticulturalists in the Bolivian Amazon,
consistent with the 'old friends' and hygiene hypotheses.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Foundation for Evolution, Medicine, and Public Health.

DOI: 10.1093/emph/eoab035 
PMCID: PMC8634526
PMID: 34868595 

