
1. Health Expect. 2021 Dec 3. doi: 10.1111/hex.13400. [Epub ahead of print]

Barriers and facilitators to hepatitis C screening and treatment for people with 
lived experience of homelessness: A mixed-methods systematic review.

Paisi M(1)(2), Crombag N(3), Burns L(2), Bogaerts A(1)(4)(5), Withers L(6), Bates
L(7), Crowley D(8), Witton R(2), Shawe J(1)(9).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing and Midwifery, University of Plymouth, Plymouth, UK.
(2)Peninsula Dental School, University of Plymouth, Plymouth, UK.
(3)Department of Development and Regeneration, Urogenital, Abdominal and Plastic 
Surgery, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Department of Development and Regeneration, Unit Woman and Child, KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Centre for Research and Innovation in
Care (CRIC), University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(6)Community volunteer/research partner, Plymouth, UK.
(7)Hepatology Nursing Team, University Hospitals Plymouth NHS Trust, Plymouth,
UK.
(8)The Hepatitis C Trust, Plymouth, UK.
(9)Royal Cornwall NHS Trust, Cornwall, UK.

BACKGROUND: People experiencing homelessness have an increased risk of hepatitis 
C virus (HCV) infection, with rates higher than the general population. However, 
their access to HCV diagnosis is limited and treatment uptake is low.
OBJECTIVES: To identify and describe the barriers and facilitators for HCV
screening and treatment for adults with lived experience of homelessness in
highly developed countries.
METHODS: Bibliographic databases (Embase, MEDLINE, CINAHL and SocINDEX) and grey 
literature (Google, EThOS, the Health Foundation, Social Care Online, the World
Health Organisation, Shelter, Crisis and Pathway) were searched. Two reviewers
independently screened and appraised all studies. The Critical Appraisal Skills
Programme tool and the Joanna Briggs Institute checklist were used. The analysis 
involved a three-stage process: coding, theme generation and theme mapping under 
Penchansky and Thomas's modified access model.
RESULTS: Twelve papers/reports were included in the review. Several interacting
factors influence access of people with lived experience of homelessness to HCV
testing and treatment. Some mirror those identified for the general population.
The precarious conditions associated with the lived experience of homelessness
along with the rigidity of hospital settings and lack of awareness emerged as
dominant barriers. Flexibility, outreach, effective communication, tailoring and 
integration of services were found to be important facilitators. Evidence from
Black, Asian and minority ethnic groups is limited.
CONCLUSIONS: People experiencing homelessness face multiple barriers in accessing
and completing HCV treatment, relating to both their lived experience and
characteristics of health systems. Although some barriers are readily amenable to
change, others are more difficult to modify. The facilitators identified could
inform future targeted measures to improve HCV diagnosis and treatment for people
experiencing homelessness. Research is warranted into successful models to
promote screening, diagnosis and treatment.
PATIENT OR PUBLIC CONTRIBUTION: Our team includes a peer advocate, a hepatology
nurse and a community volunteer, all with significant experience in promoting and
engaging in HCV care and outreach for people experiencing homelessness. They
contributed to the protocol, interpretation and reporting of the review findings.

© 2021 The Authors. Health Expectations published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/hex.13400 
PMID: 34862710 

