
1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Nov 10;12:773844. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.773844.
eCollection 2021.

Blood Nanoparticles - Influence on Extracellular Vesicle Isolation and
Characterization.

Holcar M(1), Kandušer M(1), Lenassi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Blood is a rich source of disease biomarkers, which include extracellular
vesicles (EVs). EVs are nanometer-to micrometer-sized spherical particles that
are enclosed by a phospholipid bilayer and are secreted by most cell types. EVs
reflect the physiological cell of origin in terms of their molecular composition 
and biophysical characteristics, and they accumulate in blood even when released 
from remote organs or tissues, while protecting their cargo from degradation. The
molecular components (e.g., proteins, miRNAs) and biophysical characteristics
(e.g., size, concentration) of blood EVs have been studied as biomarkers of
cancers and neurodegenerative, autoimmune, and cardiovascular diseases. However, 
most biomarker studies do not address the problem of contaminants in EV isolates 
from blood plasma, and how these might affect downstream EV analysis. Indeed,
nonphysiological EVs, protein aggregates, lipoproteins and viruses share many
molecular and/or biophysical characteristics with EVs, and can therefore
co-isolate with EVs from blood plasma. Consequently, isolation and downstream
analysis of EVs from blood plasma remain a unique challenge, with important
impacts on the outcomes of biomarker studies. To help improve rigor,
reproducibility, and reliability of EV biomarker studies, we describe here the
major contaminants of EV isolates from blood plasma, and we report on how
different EV isolation methods affect their levels, and how contaminants that
remain can affect the interpretation of downstream EV analysis.

Copyright © 2021 Holcar, Kandušer and Lenassi.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.773844 
PMCID: PMC8635996
PMID: 34867406 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

