
1. Neuropharmacology. 2021 Dec 1;205:108898. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2021.108898. 
[Epub ahead of print]

Leptin coordinates efferent sympathetic outflow to the white adipose tissue
through the midbrain centrally-projecting Edinger-Westphal nucleus in male rats.

Xu L(1), Füredi N(2), Lutter C(3), Geenen B(4), Pétervári E(5), Balaskó M(5),
Dénes Á(6), Kovács KJ(7), Gaszner B(8), Kozicz T(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy Medical Imaging, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition 
and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, the
Netherlands; Department of Structural and Cellular Biology, School of Medicine,
Tulane University, New Orleans, LA, USA.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Center for Neuroscience, Medical School, Pécs
University, Pécs, Hungary; Department of Translational Medicine, Medical School, 
Pécs University, Pécs, Hungary.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Center for Neuroscience, Medical School, Pécs
University, Pécs, Hungary.
(4)Department of Anatomy Medical Imaging, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition 
and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, the
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Translational Medicine, Medical School, Pécs University, Pécs,
Hungary.
(6)"Momentum" Laboratory of Neuroimmunology, Institute of Experimental Medicine, 
Budapest, Hungary.
(7)Institute of Experimental Medicine, Eötvös Loránd Research Network, Budapest, 
Hungary.
(8)Department of Anatomy and Center for Neuroscience, Medical School, Pécs
University, Pécs, Hungary. Electronic address: balazs.b.gaszner@aok.pte.hu.
(9)Department of Anatomy Medical Imaging, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition 
and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, the
Netherlands; Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, MN, USA; Department of
Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, MN, USA; Center for
Individualized Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. Electronic address:
Kozicz.Tamas@mayo.edu.

The centrally-projecting Edinger-Westphal nucleus (EWcp) hosts a large population
of neurons expressing urocortin 1 (Ucn1) and about half of these neurons also
express the leptin receptor (LepRb). Previously, we have shown that the
peripheral adiposity hormone leptin signaling energy surfeit modulates EWcp
neurons' activity. Here, we hypothesized that Ucn1/LepRb neurons in the EWcp
would act as a crucial neuronal node in the brain-white adipose tissue (WAT) axis
modulating efferent sympathetic outflow to the WAT. We showed that leptin bound
to neurons of the EWcp stimulated STAT3 phosphorylation, and increased
Ucn1-production in a time-dependent manner. Besides, retrograde transneuronal
tract-tracing using pseudorabies virus (PRV) identified EWcp Ucn1 neurons
connected to WAT. Interestingly, reducing EWcp Ucn1 contents by ablating EWcp
LepRb-positive neurons with leptin-saporin, did not affect food intake and body
weight gain, but substantially (+26%) increased WAT weight accompanied by a
higher plasma leptin level and changed plasma lipid profile. We also found that
ablation of EWcp Ucn1/LepRb neurons resulted in lower respiratory quotient and
oxygen consumption one week after surgery, but was comparable to sham values
after 3 and 5 weeks of surgery. Taken together, we report that EWcp/LepRb/Ucn1
neurons not only respond to leptin signaling but also control WAT size and fat
metabolism without altering food intake. These data suggest the existence of a
EWcp-WAT circuitry allowing an organism to recruit fuels without being able to
eat in situations such as the fight-or-flight response.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2021.108898 
PMID: 34861283 

