
1. ILAR J. 2021 Dec 3. pii: ilab029. doi: 10.1093/ilar/ilab029. [Epub ahead of
print]

Livestock and Risk Group 4 Pathogens: Researching Zoonotic Threats to Public
Health and Agriculture in Maximum Containment.

Lewis CE(1)(2), Pickering B(1)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Preventive Medicine, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, USA.
(2)Interdepartmental Microbiology Program, College of Agriculture and Life
Sciences, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, USA.
(3)Special Pathogens Unit, National Centre for Foreign Animal Diseases, Canadian 
Food Inspection Agency, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of
Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

Maximum-containment laboratories are a unique and essential component of the
bioeconomy of the United States. These facilities play a critical role in the
national infrastructure, supporting research on a select set of especially
dangerous pathogens, as well as novel, emerging diseases. Understanding the
ecology, biology, and pathology at the human-animal interface of zoonotic
spillover events is fundamental to efficient control and elimination of disease. 
The use of animals as human surrogate models or as target-host models in research
is an integral part of unraveling the interrelated components involved in these
dynamic systems. These models can prove vitally important in determining both
viral- and host-factors associated with virus transmission, providing invaluable 
information that can be developed into better risk mitigation strategies. In this
article, we focus on the use of livestock in maximum-containment, biosafety
level-4 agriculture (BSL-4Ag) research involving zoonotic, risk group 4 pathogens
and we provide an overview of historical associated research and contributions.
Livestock are most commonly used as target-host models in high-consequence,
maximum-containment research and are routinely used to establish data to assist
in risk assessments. This article highlights the importance of animal use,
insights gained, and how this type of research is essential for protecting animal
health, food security, and the agriculture economy, as well as human public
health in the face of emerging zoonotic pathogens. The utilization of animal
models in high-consequence pathogen research and continued expansion to include
available species of agricultural importance is essential to deciphering the
ecology of emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases, as well as for emergency
response and mitigation preparedness.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine.

DOI: 10.1093/ilar/ilab029 
PMID: 34864994 

