
1. Hum Antibodies. 2021 Nov 26. doi: 10.3233/HAB-211506. [Epub ahead of print]

COVID-19 pandemic: Insights into genetic susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2 and host
genes implications on virus spread, disease severity and outcomes.

Dastar S(1), Gharesouran J(2), Mortazavi D(3), Hosseinzadeh H(2), Kian SJ(4),
Taheri M(5), Ghafouri-Fard S(6), Jamali E(7), Rezazadeh M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Genetics, Department of Basic Oncology, Oncology Institute,
Istanbul University, Fatih, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of
Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(3)Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Isfahan
University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
(4)Department of Virology, Iran University of Medical Sciences, School of
Medicine, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Skull Base Research Center, Loghman Hakim Hospital, Shahid Beheshti University
of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University
of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(7)Department of Pathology, Loghman Hakim Hospital, Shahid Beheshti University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

The outbreak of the newly emerging severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 
2 (SARS-CoV-2) all over the world has caused global public health emergencies,
international concern and economic crises. The systemic SARS-CoV-2 disease
(COVID-19) can lead to death through causing unrestrained cytokines-storm and
subsequent pulmonary shutdown among the elderly and patients with pre-existing
comorbidities. Additionally, in comparison with poor nations without primary
health care services, in developed countries with advanced healthcare system we
can witness higher number of infections per one million people. In this review,
we summarize the latest studies on genes associated with SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis 
and propose possible mechanisms of the virus replication cycle and its triggered 
signaling pathways to encourage researchers to investigate genetic and immune
profiles of the disease and try strategies for its treatment. Our review shows
that immune response in people with different genetic background might vary as
African and then Asian populations have lowest number of affected cases compared 
with European and American nations. Considering SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis, we put
forward some potentially important genetic gateways to COVID-19 infection
including genes involved in the entry and replication of SARS-CoV-2 and the
regulation of host immune response which might represent explanation for its
spread, severity, and morality. Finally, we suggest that genetic alterations
within these gateways could be critical factors in influencing geographical
discrepancies of the virus, so it is essential to fully study them and design
appropriated and reliable therapeutic agents against COVID-19.

DOI: 10.3233/HAB-211506 
PMID: 34864654 

