
1. Front Vet Sci. 2021 Nov 17;8:742877. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2021.742877. eCollection 
2021.

Animal-Based Factors Prior to Infection Predict Histological Disease Outcome in
Porcine Reproductive and Respiratory Syndrome Virus- and Actinobacillus
pleuropneumoniae-Infected Pigs.

van Dixhoorn IDE(1), Te Beest DE(2), Bolhuis JE(3), Parmentier HK(3), Kemp B(3), 
van Mourik S(4), Stockhofe-Zurwieden N(5), van Reenen CG(1), Rebel JMJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wageningen Livestock Research, Department of Animal Health and Welfare,
Wageningen, Netherlands.
(2)Biometris, Wageningen University & Research, Wageningen, Netherlands.
(3)Adaptation Physiology Group, Wageningen University & Research, Wageningen,
Netherlands.
(4)Farm Technology Group, Wageningen University & Research, Wageningen,
Netherlands.
(5)Wageningen Bio-Veterinary Research, Lelystad, Netherlands.

A large variety of clinical manifestation in individual pigs occurs after
infection with pathogens involved in porcine respiratory disease complex (PRDC). 
Some pigs are less prone to develop respiratory disease symptoms. The variation
in clinical impact after infection and the recovery capacity of an individual
animal are measures of its resilience. In this paper, we examined which ones of a
range of animal-based factors (rectal temperature, body weight, skin lesion
scores, behavior, natural antibody serum levels, serum levels of white blood
cells, and type of T and granulocyte subsets) when measured prior to infection
are related to disease severity. These animal-based factors and the interaction
with housing regimen of the piglets (conventional or enriched) were modeled using
linear regression to predict disease severity using a dataset acquired from a
previous study using a well-established experimental coinfection model of porcine
reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) and Actinobacillus
pleuropneumoniae. Both PRRSV and A. pleuropneumoniae are often involved in PRDC. 
Histological lung lesion score of each animal was used as a measure for PRDC
severity after infection. Prior to infection, higher serum levels of lymphocytes 
(CD3+), naïve T helper (CD3+CD4+CD8-), CD8+ (as well as higher relative levels of
CD8+), and memory T helper (CD3+CD4+CD8+) cells and higher relative levels of
granulocytes (CD172a) were related to reduced disease severity in both housing
systems. Raised serum concentrations of natural IgM antibodies binding to keyhole
limpet hemocyanin (KLH) were also related to reduced disease severity after
infection. Increased levels of skin lesions at the central body part (after
weaning and before infection) were related to increased disease severity in
conventional housing systems only. High resisters showed a lower histological
lung lesion score, which appeared unrelated to sex. Body temperature, behavior,
and growth prior to infections were influenced by housing regimen but could not
explain the variation in lung lesion scores after infection. Raised basal
lymphocyte counts and lower skin lesion scores are related to reduced disease
severity independent of or dependent on housing system, respectively. In
conclusion, our study identifies intrinsic animal-based measures using linear
regression analysis that predicts resilience to infections in pigs.

Copyright © 2021 van Dixhoorn, te Beest, Bolhuis, Parmentier, Kemp, van Mourik,
Stockhofe-Zurwieden, van Reenen and Rebel.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2021.742877 
PMCID: PMC8635501
PMID: 34869719 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

