
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 18;12:791764. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.791764. eCollection
2021.

Safety and Immunogenicity Analysis of a Newcastle Disease Virus (NDV-HXP-S)
Expressing the Spike Protein of SARS-CoV-2 in Sprague Dawley Rats.

Tcheou J(1), Raskin A(1), Singh G(1), Kawabata H(1), Bielak D(1), Sun W(1),
González-Domínguez I(1), Sather DN(2)(3)(4), García-Sastre A(1)(5)(6)(7)(8),
Palese P(1)(5), Krammer F(1)(8), Carreño JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
NY, United States.
(2)Center for Global Infectious Disease Research, Seattle Children's Research
Institute, Seattle, WA, United States.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United
States.
(4)Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United
States.
(5)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States.
(6)Global Health and Emerging Pathogens Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States.
(7)The Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
NY, United States.
(8)Department of Pathology, Molecular and Cell-Based Medicine, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States.

Despite global vaccination efforts, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
2 (SARS-CoV-2) continues to evolve and spread globally. Relatively high
vaccination rates have been achieved in most regions of the United States and
several countries worldwide. However, access to vaccines in low- and mid-income
countries (LMICs) is still suboptimal. Second generation vaccines that are
universally affordable and induce systemic and mucosal immunity are needed. Here 
we performed an extended safety and immunogenicity analysis of a
second-generation SARS-CoV-2 vaccine consisting of a live Newcastle disease virus
vector expressing a pre-fusion stabilized version of the spike protein
(NDV-HXP-S) administered intranasally (IN), intramuscularly (IM), or IN followed 
by IM in Sprague Dawley rats. Local reactogenicity, systemic toxicity, and
post-mortem histopathology were assessed after the vaccine administration, with
no indication of severe local or systemic reactions. Immunogenicity studies
showed that the three vaccination regimens tested elicited high antibody titers
against the wild type SARS-CoV-2 spike protein and the NDV vector. Moreover, high
antibody titers were induced against the spike of B.1.1.7 (alpha), B.1.351 (beta)
and B.1.617.2 (delta) variants of concern (VOCs). Importantly, robust levels of
serum antibodies with neutralizing activity against the authentic SARS-CoV-2
USA-WA1/2020 isolate were detected after the boost. Overall, our study expands
the pre-clinical safety and immunogenicity characterization of NDV-HXP-S and
reinforces previous findings in other animal models about its high
immunogenicity. Clinical testing of this vaccination approach is ongoing in
different countries including Thailand, Vietnam, Brazil and Mexico.

Copyright © 2021 Tcheou, Raskin, Singh, Kawabata, Bielak, Sun,
González-Domínguez, Sather, García-Sastre, Palese, Krammer and Carreño.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.791764 
PMCID: PMC8637447
PMID: 34868082 

Conflict of interest statement: The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai has
filed patent applications relating to NDV-based SARS-CoV-2 vaccines which list
WS, FK, AG-S and PP as co-inventors. FK is also listed as inventor on patent
applications for SARS-CoV-2 serological assays filed by the Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai. Mount Sinai has spun out a company, Kantaro, to market
serological tests for SARS-CoV-2. FK has consulted for Merck and Pfizer (before
2020) as well as Goldman Sachs, and is currently consulting for Pfizer, Seqirus
and Avimex. The Krammer laboratory is also collaborating with Pfizer on animal
models of SARS-CoV-2. The Adolfo García-Sastre laboratory has received research
support from Pfizer, Senhwa Biosciences, Kenall Manufacturing, Avimex, Johnson & 
Johnson, Dynavax, 7Hills Pharma, Pharmamar, ImmunityBio, Accurius, Nanocomposix, 
Hexamer, N-fold LLC, Model Medicines and Merck, outside of the reported work.
AG-S has consulting agreements for the following companies involving cash and/or 
stock: Vivaldi Biosciences, Contrafect, 7Hills Pharma, Avimex, Vaxalto, Pagoda,
Accurius, Esperovax, Farmak, Applied Biological Laboratories, Pharmamar, and
Pfizer. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.

