
1. Epidemics. 2021 Nov 25;37:100532. doi: 10.1016/j.epidem.2021.100532. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Assessing the risk of cascading COVID-19 outbreaks from prison-to-prison
transfers.

Parsons TL(1), Worden L(2).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS & Laboratoire de Probabilités, Statistique et Modèlisation, Campus Pierre
et Marie Curie, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France.
(2)Francis I. Proctor Foundation, UCSF, San Francisco, USA. Electronic address:
worden.lee@gmail.com.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2021 Apr 27;:.

COVID-19 transmission has been widespread across the California prison system,
and at least two of these outbreaks were caused by transfer of infected
individuals between prisons. Risks of individual prison outbreaks due to
introduction of the virus and of widespread transmission within prisons due to
poor conditions have been documented. We examine the additional risk potentially 
posed by transfer between prisons that can lead to large-scale spread of
outbreaks across the prison system if the rate of transfer is sufficiently high. 
We estimated the threshold number of individuals transferred per prison per month
to generate supercritical transmission between prisons, a condition that could
lead to large-scale spread across the prison system. We obtained numerical
estimates from a range of representative quantitative assumptions, and derived
the percentage of transfers that must be performed with effective quarantine
measures to prevent supercritical transmission given known rates of transfers
occurring between California prisons. Our mean estimate of the critical threshold
rate of transfers was 27 individuals transferred per prison per month, with
standard deviation 26, in the absence of quarantine measures. Available data
documents transfers occurring at a rate of 61 transfers per prison per month. At 
that rate, estimates of the threshold rate of adherence to quarantine precautions
had mean 61%, with standard deviation 32%. While the impact of vaccination and
possible decarceration measures is unclear, we include estimates of the above
quantities given reductions in the probability and extent of outbreaks. We
conclude that the risk of supercritical transmission between California prisons
has been substantial, requiring quarantine protocols to be followed rigorously to
manage this risk. The rate of outbreaks occurring in California prisons suggests 
that supercritical transmission may have occurred. We stress that the thresholds 
we estimate here do not define a safe level of transfers, even if supercritical
transmission between prisons is avoided, since even low rates of transfer can
cause very large outbreaks. We note that risks may persist after vaccination, due
for example to variant strains, and in prison systems where widespread
vaccination has not occurred. Decarceration remains urgently needed as a public
health measure.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.epidem.2021.100532 
PMCID: PMC8612764
PMID: 34861580 

