
1. Front Mol Biosci. 2021 Nov 15;8:727847. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.727847.
eCollection 2021.

Molecular Recognition Insights of Sialic Acid Glycans by Distinct Receptors
Unveiled by NMR and Molecular Modeling.

Soares CO(1)(2), Grosso AS(1)(2), Ereño-Orbea J(3)(4), Coelho H(1)(2), Marcelo
F(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Associate Laboratory i4HB-Institute for Health and Bioeconomy, NOVA School of 
Science and Technology, NOVA University Lisbon, Caparica, Portugal.
(2)Department of Chemistry, UCIBIO-Applied Molecular Biosciences Unit, NOVA
School of Science and Technology, NOVA University Lisbon, Caparica, Portugal.
(3)CIC bioGUNE, Basque Research and Technology Alliance, Bizkaia Technology Park,
Bilbao, Spain.
(4)Ikerbasque, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain.

All cells are decorated with a highly dense and complex structure of glycan
chains, which are mostly attached to proteins and lipids. In this context, sialic
acids are a family of nine-carbon acidic monosaccharides typically found at the
terminal position of glycan chains, modulating several physiological and
pathological processes. Sialic acids have many structural and modulatory roles
due to their negative charge and hydrophilicity. In addition, the recognition of 
sialic acid glycans by mammalian cell lectins, such as siglecs, has been
described as an important immunological checkpoint. Furthermore, sialic acid
glycans also play a pivotal role in host-pathogen interactions. Various pathogen 
receptors exposed on the surface of viruses and bacteria are responsible for the 
binding to sialic acid sugars located on the surface of host cells, becoming a
critical point of contact in the infection process. Understanding the molecular
mechanism of sialic acid glycans recognition by sialic acid-binding proteins,
present on the surface of pathogens or human cells, is essential to realize the
biological mechanism of these events and paves the way for the rational
development of strategies to modulate sialic acid-protein interactions in
diseases. In this perspective, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy,
assisted with molecular modeling protocols, is a versatile and powerful technique
to investigate the structural and dynamic aspects of glycoconjugates and their
interactions in solution at the atomic level. NMR provides the corresponding
ligand and protein epitopes, essential for designing and developing potential
glycan-based therapies. In this review, we critically discuss the current state
of knowledge about the structural features behind the molecular recognition of
sialic acid glycans by different receptors, naturally present on human cells or
pathogens, disclosed by NMR spectroscopy and molecular modeling protocols.

Copyright © 2021 Soares, Grosso, Ereño-Orbea, Coelho and Marcelo.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.727847 
PMCID: PMC8634706
PMID: 34869580 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

