
1. Hum Antibodies. 2021 Nov 26. doi: 10.3233/HAB-211505. [Epub ahead of print]

Evaluation of molecular apoptosis signaling pathways and its correlation with EBV
viral load in SLE patients using systems biology approach.

Ghabeshi S(1), Najafi A(2), Zamani B(3), Soltani M(1), Arero AG(4)(5), Izadi
S(1), Piroozmand A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Virology Department, School of Public Health, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Molecular Biology Research Center, Baqiyatallah University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Autoimmune Diseases Research Center, Kashan University of Medical Sciences,
Kashan, Iran.
(4)Students' Scientific Research Center (SSRC), Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Universal Scientific Education and Research Network (USERN), Tehran, Iran.
(6)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Kashan University of Medical
Sciences, Kashan, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Considerable evidence supports that SLE could be related to apoptotic
cells and EBV infection.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to identify the transcriptional signature of
EBV infection in SLE patients for survey of the molecular apoptosis signaling
pathways.
METHODS: The PBMCs gene expression profiles of healthy control and SLE patients
were obtained from GEO. Functional annotation and signaling pathway enrichment
were carried out using DAVID, KEGG. To validate bioinformatics analysis the
changes in genes expression of some of obtained genes, Real time PCR was
performed on PBMCs from 28 SLE patients and 18 controls.
RESULTS: We found that mean viral load was 6013 ± 390.1 copy/μg DNA from PBMCs in
all patients. QRT-PCR results showed that the expression of the DUSP1 and LAMP3
genes which had most changes in the logFC among 4 candidate genes, increased
significantly in comparison with control. The consistent expression of LMP2 as
viral latency gene involve in apoptosis signaling pathways was detected in SLE
patients with EBV viral load and some controls.
CONCLUSIONS: The study indicated that some cellular genes may have an important
role in pathogenesis of SLE through apoptosis signaling pathways. Beside, EBV
infection as an environmental risk factor for SLE may affect the dysfunction of
apoptosis.

DOI: 10.3233/HAB-211505 
PMID: 34864653 

