
1. PLoS One. 2021 Dec 3;16(12):e0260976. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260976.
eCollection 2021.

Spatial parameters associated with the risk of banana bunchy top disease in
smallholder systems.

Dato KMG(1), Dégbègni MR(1), Atchadé MN(1)(2), Zandjanakou Tachin M(3),
Hounkonnou MN(1), Aman Omondi B(4).

Author information: 
(1)International Chair in Mathematical Physics and Applications (ICMPA-UNESCO
CHAIR), University of Abomey-Calavi, Cotonou, Benin Republic.
(2)National Higher School of Mathematics Genius and Modelization, National
University of Sciences, Technologies, Engineering and Mathematics, Abomey,
Republic of Benin.
(3)Doctorate School of Agriculture and Water Sciences, National University of
Agriculture, Kétou, Benin Republic.
(4)Bioversity International (Alliance of Bioversity International and CIAT),
Abomey Calavi, Cotonou, Benin.

The Banana Bunchy Top Disease (BBTD), caused by the Banana Bunchy Top Virus
(BBTV) is the most important and devastating in many tropical countries. BBTD
epidemiology has been little studied, mixed landscape smallholder systems. The
relative risks associated with this disease vary between geographical areas and
landscapes. This work analyzed the management and vegetation conditions in
smallholder gardens to assess the factors linked to landscape-level BBTV
transmission and management. Mapping was done in this study area which is in a
BBTD-endemic region, involving farmers actively managing the disease, but with
household-level decision making. A spatial scanning statistic was used to detect 
and identify spatial groups at the 5% significance threshold, and a Poisson
regression model was used to explore propagation vectors and the effect of
surrounding vegetation and crop diversity. Spatial groups with high relative risk
were identified in three communities, Dangbo, Houéyogbé, and Adjarra. Significant
associations emerged between the BBTD prevalence and some crop diversity, seed
systems, and BBTD management linked factors. The identified factors form
important candidate management options for the detailed assessment of
landscape-scale BBTD management in smallholder communities.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260976 
PMCID: PMC8641891
PMID: 34860836 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

