
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 15;12:656797. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.656797. eCollection
2021.

Epstein-Barr Virus and the Origin of Myalgic Encephalomyelitis or Chronic Fatigue
Syndrome.

Ruiz-Pablos M(1), Paiva B(2), Montero-Mateo R(3), Garcia N(2), Zabaleta A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine of the European University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Clinica Universidad de Navarra, Centro de Investigación Medica Aplicada
(CIMA), IdiSNA, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain.

Myalgic encephalomyelitis or chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) affects
approximately 1% of the general population. It is a chronic, disabling,
multi-system disease for which there is no effective treatment. This is probably 
related to the limited knowledge about its origin. Here, we summarized the
current knowledge about the pathogenesis of ME/CFS and revisit the
immunopathobiology of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection. Given the similarities 
between EBV-associated autoimmune diseases and cancer in terms of poor T cell
surveillance of cells with EBV latency, expanded EBV-infected cells in peripheral
blood and increased antibodies against EBV, we hypothesize that there could be a 
common etiology generated by cells with EBV latency that escape immune
surveillance. Albeit inconclusive, multiple studies in patients with ME/CFS have 
suggested an altered cellular immunity and augmented Th2 response that could
result from mechanisms of evasion to some pathogens such as EBV, which has been
identified as a risk factor in a subset of ME/CFS patients. Namely, cells with
latency may evade the immune system in individuals with genetic predisposition to
develop ME/CFS and in consequence, there could be poor CD4 T cell immunity to
mitogens and other specific antigens, as it has been described in some
individuals. Ultimately, we hypothesize that within ME/CFS there is a subgroup of
patients with DRB1 and DQB1 alleles that could confer greater susceptibility to
EBV, where immune evasion mechanisms generated by cells with latency induce
immunodeficiency. Accordingly, we propose new endeavors to investigate if
anti-EBV therapies could be effective in selected ME/CFS patients.

Copyright © 2021 Ruiz-Pablos, Paiva, Montero-Mateo, Garcia and Zabaleta.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.656797 
PMCID: PMC8634673
PMID: 34867935 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

