
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 19;12:748291. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.748291. eCollection
2021.

Analysis of Serological Biomarkers of SARS-CoV-2 Infection in Convalescent
Samples From Severe, Moderate and Mild COVID-19 Cases.

Castillo-Olivares J(1), Wells DA(1)(2), Ferrari M(1)(2), Chan ACY(1), Smith P(1),
Nadesalingam A(1), Paloniemi M(1), Carnell GW(1), Ohlendorf L(1), Cantoni D(3),
Mayora-Neto M(3), Palmer P(1), Tonks P(1), Temperton NJ(3), Peterhoff D(4),
Neckermann P(4), Wagner R(4)(5), Doffinger R(6), Kempster S(7), Otter AD(8),
Semper A(8), Brooks T(8), Albecka A(9), James LC(9), Page M(7), Schwaeble W(10), 
Baxendale H(11), Heeney JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lab of Viral Zoonotics, Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(2)DIOSynVax, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(3)Viral Pseudotype Unit, Medway School of Pharmacy, University of Kent, Chatham,
United Kingdom.
(4)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Regensburg,
Regensburg, Germany.
(5)Institute of Clinical Microbiology and Hygiene, University Hospital
Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(6)Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Immunology, Addenbrooke's Hospital,
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(7)Division of Virology, National Institute for Biological Standards and Control,
Potters Bar, United Kingdom.
(8)UK Health Security Agency, Porton Down, United Kingdom.
(9)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(10)Complement Laboratory, Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(11)Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Precision monitoring of antibody responses during the COVID-19 pandemic is
increasingly important during large scale vaccine rollout and rise in prevalence 
of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome-related Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) variants 
of concern (VOC). Equally important is defining Correlates of Protection (CoP)
for SARS-CoV-2 infection and COVID-19 disease. Data from epidemiological studies 
and vaccine trials identified virus neutralising antibodies (Nab) and SARS-CoV-2 
antigen-specific (notably RBD and S) binding antibodies as candidate CoP. In this
study, we used the World Health Organisation (WHO) international standard to
benchmark neutralising antibody responses and a large panel of binding antibody
assays to compare convalescent sera obtained from: a) COVID-19 patients; b)
SARS-CoV-2 seropositive healthcare workers (HCW) and c) seronegative HCW. The
ultimate aim of this study is to identify biomarkers of humoral immunity that
could be used to differentiate severe from mild or asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2
infections. Some of these biomarkers could be used to define CoP in further
serological studies using samples from vaccination breakthrough and/or
re-infection cases. Whenever suitable, the antibody levels of the samples studied
were expressed in International Units (IU) for virus neutralisation assays or in 
Binding Antibody Units (BAU) for ELISA tests. In this work we used commercial and
non-commercial antibody binding assays; a lateral flow test for detection of
SARS-CoV-2-specific IgG/IgM; a high throughput multiplexed particle flow
cytometry assay for SARS-CoV-2 Spike (S), Nucleocapsid (N) and Receptor Binding
Domain (RBD) proteins); a multiplex antigen semi-automated immuno-blotting assay 
measuring IgM, IgA and IgG; a pseudotyped microneutralisation test (pMN) and an
electroporation-dependent neutralisation assay (EDNA). Our results indicate that 
overall, severe COVID-19 patients showed statistically significantly higher
levels of SARS-CoV-2-specific neutralising antibodies (average 1029 IU/ml) than
those observed in seropositive HCW with mild or asymptomatic infections (379
IU/ml) and that clinical severity scoring, based on WHO guidelines was tightly
correlated with neutralisation and RBD/S antibodies. In addition, there was a
positive correlation between severity, N-antibody assays and intracellular virus 
neutralisation.

Copyright © 2021 Castillo-Olivares, Wells, Ferrari, Chan, Smith, Nadesalingam,
Paloniemi, Carnell, Ohlendorf, Cantoni, Mayora-Neto, Palmer, Tonks, Temperton,
Peterhoff, Neckermann, Wagner, Doffinger, Kempster, Otter, Semper, Brooks,
Albecka, James, Page, Schwaeble, Baxendale and Heeney.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.748291 
PMCID: PMC8640495
PMID: 34867975 

Conflict of interest statement: DAW, MF, RW and JH are affiliated to the company 
DIOSynVax. JC-O holds a position as vaccinology consultant at Oxford Expression
Technologies, Ltd. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted 
in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be
construed as a potential conflict of interest.

