
1. Influenza Other Respir Viruses. 2021 Dec 5. doi: 10.1111/irv.12941. [Epub ahead
of print]

A comparison of coronavirus disease 2019 and seasonal influenza surveillance in
five European countries: France, Germany, Italy, Spain and the United Kingdom.

Rigoine de Fougerolles T(1), Puig-Barbera J(2), Kassianos G(3), Vanhems P(4),
Schelling J(5), Crepey P(6), de Lejarazu RO(7), Ansaldi F(8), Fruhwein M(9),
Galli C(10), Mosnier A(11), Pariani E(10), Rasuli A(12), Vitoux O(1), Watkins
J(13), Weinke T(14), Bricout H(12).

Author information: 
(1)CVA, Healthcare Practice, Paris, France.
(2)Vaccines Research, Fisabio, Valencia, Spain.
(3)Royal College of General Practitioners, UK and British Global & Travel Health 
Association, London, UK.
(4)Department of Hygiene and Epidemiology, Public Health, Epidemiology and
Evolutionary Ecology of Infectious Diseases (PHE3ID) - Inserm - U1111 - UCBL,
Lyon University Hospital and Centre International de Recherche en Infectiologie
(CIRI), Lyon, France.
(5)Medical Faculty, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.
(6)School of Advanced Studies in Public Health, University of Rennes, Rennes,
France.
(7)Valladolid NIC, University of Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain.
(8)Department of Health Sciences, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy.
(9)Dr. Fruehwein & Partners, Practise for General Medicine, Travel Medicine and
Tropical Diseases, Munich, Germany.
(10)Department of Biomedical Sciences for Health, University of Milan, Milan,
Italy.
(11)Réseau des GROG, Open Rome, Paris, France.
(12)Medical Department, Sanofi Pasteur, Lyon, France.
(13)Division of Population Medicine, School of Medicine, Cardiff University,
Cardiff, UK.
(14)Klinikum Ernst von Bergmann, Medizinische Klinik, Gastroenterologie,
Infektiologie, Pneumologie, Potsdam, Germany.

BACKGROUND: In response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak that
unfolded across Europe in 2020, the World Health Organisation (WHO) called for
repurposing existing influenza surveillance systems to monitor COVID-19. This
analysis aimed to compare descriptively the extent to which influenza
surveillance systems were adapted and enhanced and how COVID-19 surveillance
could ultimately benefit or disrupt routine influenza surveillance.
METHODS: We used a previously developed framework in France, Germany, Italy,
Spain and the United Kingdom to describe COVID-19 surveillance and its impact on 
influenza surveillance. The framework divides surveillance systems into seven
subsystems and 20 comparable outcomes of interest and uses five evaluation
criteria based on WHO guidance. Information on influenza and COVID-19
surveillance systems were collected from publicly available resources shared by
European and national public health agencies.
RESULTS: Overall, non-medically attended, virological, primary care and mortality
surveillance were adapted in most countries to monitor COVID-19, although
community, outbreak and hospital surveillance were reinforced in all countries.
Data granularity improved, with more detailed demographic and medical information
recorded. A shift to systematic notification for cases and deaths enhanced both
geographic and population representativeness, although the sampling strategy
benefited from the roll out of widespread molecular testing. Data communication
was greatly enhanced, contributing to improved public awareness.
CONCLUSIONS: Well-established influenza surveillance systems are a key component 
of pandemic preparedness, and their upgrade allowed European countries to respond
to the COVID-19 pandemic. However, uncertainties remain on how both influenza and
COVID-19 surveillance can be jointly and durably implemented.

© 2021 Sanofi Pasteur. Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/irv.12941 
PMID: 34866344 

