
1. Am J Case Rep. 2021 Dec 5;22:e934554. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.934554.

Efficacy of Systemic Acyclovir as Adjuvant Therapy for Oral Lichen Planus.

Zakiawati D(1)(2), Al Farisyi M(1), Dewi TS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Oral Medicine Specialist Degree Program, Faculty of Dentistry, Universitas
Padjadjaran, Bandung, Indonesia.
(2)Department of Oral Medicine, Faculty of Dentistry, Universitas Padjadjaran,
Bandung, Indonesia.

BACKGROUND Oral lichen planus (OLP) is a chronic inflammatory disease involving
the oral mucosa, associated with the T-cell activity that mediates an autoimmune 
condition, with various predisposing factors, such as herpes simplex virus (HSV).
The first-line treatment is topical corticosteroids. However, additional therapy 
can be given according to the underlying factors. This report assessed the
efficacy of oral acyclovir as adjuvant therapy in the management of OLP. CASE
REPORT A 73-year-old man came to our unit reporting he had recurring sores on the
tongue for the past 10 years. The tongue was painful and there was taste
impairment. Intraoral examination showed erosion and erythematous areas
surrounded by white net-like plaques on the tongue and buccal mucosa, as well as 
depapillation on 2/3 dorsal anterior of the tongue. The diagnosis of reticular
and erosive OLP was determined based on clinical features. The patient was
prescribed topical corticosteroids, multivitamins, and mouthwash containing
chlorine dioxide. Supporting examinations were performed to rule out systemic
predisposing factors. The patient was referred for anti-HSV-1 IgG testing, and it
was reactive (34.8 U/mL). Thus, oral acyclovir was prescribed. After 2 weeks of
antiviral treatment, the tongue pain and altered taste were resolved, and the
clinical features showed significant improvement. CONCLUSIONS Management of OLP
requires a comprehensive approach. OLP symptoms can be relieved if treatment is
not only limited to reducing the inflammation but also seeks to remedy other
comorbidities, in this case, administration of an antiviral agent to resolve the 
HSV-1 involvement.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.934554 
PMID: 34864814 

