
1. Brief Bioinform. 2021 Dec 2. pii: bbab485. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbab485. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Multiomics integration-based molecular characterizations of COVID-19.

Li CX(1)(2), Gao J(1)(3)(4), Zhang Z(5), Chen L(5), Li X(2)(4)(6)(7), Zhou M(5), 
Wheelock ÅM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine & Centre for Molecular
Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)The First Hospital of Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China.
(3)Heart and Lung Centre, Department of Pulmonary Medicine, University of
Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(4)The First School of Clinical Medicine, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China.
(5)School of Biomedical Engineering, School of Ophthalmology & Optometry and Eye 
Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, China.
(6)Department of General Surgery, The First Hospital of Lanzhou University,
Lanzhou, China.
(7)Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Regenerative Medicine of Gansu Province, The 
First Hospital of Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China.

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, caused by the severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), rapidly became a global health
challenge, leading to unprecedented social and economic consequences. The
mechanisms behind the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 are both unique and complex.
Omics-scale studies are emerging rapidly and offer a tremendous potential to
unravel the puzzle of SARS-CoV-2 pathobiology, as well as moving forward with
diagnostics, potential drug targets, risk stratification, therapeutic responses, 
vaccine development and therapeutic innovation. This review summarizes various
aspects of understanding multiomics integration-based molecular characterizations
of COVID-19, which to date include the integration of transcriptomics,
proteomics, genomics, lipidomics, immunomics and metabolomics to explore virus
targets and developing suitable therapeutic solutions through systems biology
tools. Furthermore, this review also covers an abridgment of omics investigations
related to disease pathogenesis and virulence, the role of host genetic variation
and a broad array of immune and inflammatory phenotypes contributing to
understanding COVID-19 traits. Insights into this review, which combines existing
strategies and multiomics integration profiling, may help further advance our
knowledge of COVID-19.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbab485 
PMID: 34864875 

