
1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 16;12:789345. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.789345. eCollection
2021.

High Prevalence of Genital Human Papillomavirus Infection in Patients With
Primary Immunodeficiencies.

Gernert M(1), Kiesel M(2), Fröhlich M(1), Renner R(3), Strunz PP(1), Portegys
J(1), Tony HP(1), Schmalzing M(1), Schwaneck EC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, University
Hospital of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital of Würzburg,
Würzburg, Germany.
(3)Institute of Sociology, Friedrich Alexander University of Erlangen, Erlangen, 
Germany.
(4)Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Asklepios Klinik Altona , Hamburg,
Germany.

Background: Genital human papillomavirus (HPV)-infections are common in the
general population and are responsible for relevant numbers of epithelial
malignancies. Much data on the HPV-prevalence is available for secondary
immunodeficiencies, especially for patients with human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV)-infection. Little is known about the genital HPV-prevalence in patients
with primary immunodeficiencies (PIDs).
Methods: We performed a cross-sectional study of patients with PIDs and took
genital swabs from male and female patients, which were analyzed with polymerase 
chain reaction for the presence of HPV-DNA. Clinical and laboratory data was
collected to identify risk factors.
Results: 28 PID patients were included in this study. 10 of 28 (35.7%) had
HPV-DNA in their genital swabs. 6 patients had high-risk HPV-types (21.4%). Most 
patients had asymptomatic HPV-infections, as genital warts were rare (2 of 28
patients) and HPV-associated malignancy was absent. Differences in the
HPV-positivity regarding clinical PID-diagnosis, duration of PID, age, sex,
immunosuppression, immunoglobulin replacement, or circumcision in males were not 
present. HPV-positive PID patients had higher numbers of T cells (CD3+), of
cytotoxic T cells (CD3+/CD8+), of transitional B cells (CD19+/CD38++/CD10+/IgD+),
and of plasmablasts (CD19+/CD38+/CD27++/IgD-) compared to HPV-negative.
Conclusion: PID patients exhibit a high rate of genital HPV-infections with a
high rate of high-risk HPV-types. Regular screening for symptomatic genital
HPV-infection and HPV-associated malignancy in PID patients seems recommendable.

Copyright © 2021 Gernert, Kiesel, Fröhlich, Renner, Strunz, Portegys, Tony,
Schmalzing and Schwaneck.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.789345 
PMCID: PMC8637119
PMID: 34868076 

Conflict of interest statement: MG received travel grants from AbbVie, Chugai,
Eli Lilly, Hexal, Janssen, Novartis, Pfizer and compensation for board membership
from Takeda. MF received travel grants from AbbVie, Novartis, Janssen, Eli Lilly 
and compensation for board memberships from AbbVie. P-PS received travel grants
from AbbVie, Eli Lilly, Janssen-Cilag. JP received travel grants from AbbVie and 
Janssen-Cilag. H-PT received speaker’s fees, travel grants, research funding, or 
compensation for consultancies or board memberships from AbbVie, Chugai/Roche,
Eli Lilly, Gilead, Janssen, Novartis, Sandoz/Hexal, Sanofi Aventis, Takeda
(Shire). MS received speaker’s fees, travel grants, research funding, or
compensation for consultancies or board memberships from AbbVie, Actelion, BMS,
Boehringer/Ingelheim, Celgene, Chugai/Roche, Eli Lilly, Genzyme, Gilead,
Hexal/Sandoz, Janssen-Cilag, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, Sanofi Pasteur, Takeda
(Shire), UCB. ES received speaker’s fees, travel grants, research funding, or
compensation for consultancies or board memberships from AbbVie, Chugai/Roche,
Janssen-Cilag, Eli Lilly, Novartis, Pfizer, Takeda (Shire). The remaining authors
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of
interest.

