
1. Psychiatriki. 2021 Nov 26. doi: 10.22365/jpsych.2021.044. [Epub ahead of print]

COVID-19 psychological impact, knowledge and perceptions of healthcare
professionals in Greece: Α nationwide cross-sectional study.

Samara MT(1)(2), Peppou LE(3)(4), Giannouchos TV(5), Nimatoudis I(1),
Papageorgiou C(3), Economou M(3)(4), Souliotis K(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)3rd Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Technical University of Munich,
School of Medicine, Munich, Germany.
(3)1st Department of Psychiatry, Medical School, Aiginition Hospital, National & 
Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(4)Unit of Social Psychiatry & Psychosocial Care, University Mental Health,
Neurosciences and Precision Medicine Research Institute "Costas Stefanis"
(UMHRI), Athens, Greece.
(5)Pharmacotherapy Outcomes Research Center, College of Pharmacy, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, United States.
(6)Faculty of Social and Education Sciences, University of Peloponnese,
Corinth,Greece.
(7)Health Policy Institute, Athens, Greece.

The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the mental health of healthcare
professionals is currently under research and prevalence of mental health
symptoms across the world vary a lot. Moreover, knowledge and perceptions of
healthcare professionals towards the new coronavirus is yet to be explored since 
very few data have been published to date. Thus, we decided to conduct a
cross-sectional, web-based survey to measure the levels of depressive, anxiety
and stress symptoms using the Depression, Anxiety and Stress Scale-21. The
knowledge and perceptions of healthcare professionals towards the new coronavirus
were also examined with a self-constructed questionnaire. Data were collected
between April 19th and May 31st 2020. In total, 1484 professionals participated
in the survey and 1064 completed it in full; 60.8% were females, 66.5% were
physicians and 24.3% were first-line healthcare workers. The prevalence of at
least moderate symptoms was 13% for depression, 11.9% for anxiety, and 11.3% for 
stress. Women, younger participants, residents in urban areas, having lower
income and worse self-reported health status had higher scores in all outcomes.
First-line healthcare workers also indicated higher anxiety scores compared to
those who were not first responders. Regarding knowledge and perceptions, most
participants agreed with the asymptomatic nature of the virus and its heightened 
danger for older individuals and those with underlying health conditions.
Different views were expressed regarding the possibility of airborne
transmission, its similarity to common flu, and the statements that the new
coronavirus is manufactured and serves a specific purpose and that it is out of
control. In conclusion, the results of our study suggest that the prevalence of
depressive, anxiety and stress symptoms in Greek healthcare professionals is
placed in the lower end of the range reported from various recent studies across 
the world. Nevertheless, professionals at risk should be monitored closely and
supported when needed.airborne transmission, its similarity to common flu, and
the statements that the new coronavirus is manufactured and serves a specific
purpose and that it is out of control. In conclusion, the results of our study
suggest that the prevalence of depressive, anxiety and stress symptoms in Greek
healthcare professionals is placed in the lower end of the range reported from
various recent studies across the world. Nevertheless, professionals at risk
should be monitored closely and supported when needed.

DOI: 10.22365/jpsych.2021.044 
PMID: 34860686 

