
1. J Rural Health. 2021 Dec 3. doi: 10.1111/jrh.12636. [Epub ahead of print]

Social disorganization and new HIV diagnoses, 2013-2017, Florida: Rural-urban
differences.

Trepka MJ(1)(2), Dawit R(1), Fernandez SB(2)(3), Sheehan DM(1)(2)(4), Degarege
A(5), Li T(6), Maddox LM(7), Spencer EC(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Robert Stempel College of Public Health and Social
Work, Florida International University, Miami, Florida, USA.
(2)Research Center in Minority Institutions, Florida International University,
Miami, Florida, USA.
(3)School of Social Work, Robert Stempel College of Public Health and Social
Work, Florida International University, Miami, Florida, USA.
(4)Center for Research on US Latino HIV/AIDS and Drug Abuse, Florida
International University, Miami, Florida, USA.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, College of Public Health, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, 984395 Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.
(6)Department of Biostatistics, Robert Stempel College of Public Health and
Social Work, Florida International University, Miami, Florida, USA.
(7)HIV/AIDS Section, Bureau of Communicable Diseases, Florida Department of
Health, Tallahassee, Florida, USA.

PURPOSE: To compare the role of neighborhood social disorganization factors on
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) diagnosis rates in urban and rural areas in
Florida, we conducted an ecologic study of HIV diagnosis rates during 2013-2017
and social disorganization components, including concentrated disadvantage,
ethnic heterogeneity, and residential instability.
METHODS: Indices of social disorganization components were obtained from
principal component analyses of American Community Survey variables for 910
postal codes. Rural/urban classification was based on the United States
Department of Agriculture Rural Urban Commuting Area codes. Using multivariable
linear regression, the relationship between social disorganization indices and
HIV diagnosis rates was assessed.
FINDINGS: The only social disorganization index that was significantly higher in 
rural than urban areas was concentrated disadvantage. In rural areas, the
concentrated disadvantage index was significantly associated with HIV diagnosis
rates (P = .007) when controlling for the other social disorganization factors
but was no longer significant after additionally controlling for prevalence of
people with an HIV diagnosis who were not virally suppressed. In urban areas,
even after controlling for prevalence of people with HIV who were not virally
suppressed, lower male-to-female population ratios and higher scores of
residential instability, concentrated disadvantage, and LatinX/immigrant density 
indices were associated with higher HIV diagnosis rates (all P < .01).
CONCLUSIONS: In addition to improving community levels of viral suppression, the 
community contextual environment, including the rurality of the environment,
needs to be considered in strategies to end the HIV epidemic in the United
States.

© 2021 National Rural Health Association.

DOI: 10.1111/jrh.12636 
PMID: 34861068 

