
1. Immun Inflamm Dis. 2021 Dec 3. doi: 10.1002/iid3.573. [Epub ahead of print]

Immunomodulation of COVID-19 severity by helminth co-infection: Implications for 
COVID-19 vaccine efficacy.

Akelew Y(1), Andualem H(2), Ebrahim E(3), Atnaf A(4), Hailemichael W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology and Molecular Biology, Medical Laboratory Sciences, College of
Health Sciences, Debre Markos University, Debre Markos, Ethiopia.
(2)Immunology and Molecular Biology, Medical Laboratory Sciences, College of
Health Sciences, Debre Tabor University, Debre Tabor, Ethiopia.
(3)Immunology and Molecular Biology, Medical Laboratory Sciences, College of
Health Sciences, Wollo University, Dessie, Ethiopia.
(4)Hematology and Immunohematology, Medical Laboratory Sciences, College of
Health Sciences, Debre Markos University, Debre Markos, Ethiopia.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), an emerging virus
in late 2019 causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), has caused a
catastrophic effect, resulting in an unprecedented global crisis. The
immunopathology of COVID-19 appears to be clearly associated with a dysregulated 
immune response leading to organ failure and death. Similarly, over two billion
people worldwide are infected with helminth, with those living in
low-middle-income countries disproportionately affected. Helminth infections have
been shown to possess immunomodulatory effects in several conditions. Helminth
co-infection in COVID-19 patients is one of the potential reasons for global
attention to answer why COVID-19 severity is still lower in helminth endemic
countries. Recent studies have shown that helminth endemic countries showed fewer
cases and deaths so far and helminth co-infection might reduce the severity of
COVID-19. Moreover, lessons from other diseases with helminth co-infection have
been shown to substantially reduce vaccine efficacy that could also be implicated
for COVID-19. This immunomodulatory effect of helminth has intended and
unintended consequences, both advantageous and disadvantageous which could
decrease the severity of COVID-19 and COVID-19 vaccine efficacy respectively.
Herewith, we discuss the overview of COVID-19 immune response, immunomodulatory
effects of helminth co-infections in COVID-19, lessons from other diseases, and
perspectives on the efficacy of COVID-19 vaccines.

© 2021 The Authors. Immunity, Inflammation and Disease published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/iid3.573 
PMID: 34861106 

