
1. Rev Med Virol. 2021 Dec 3:e2314. doi: 10.1002/rmv.2314. [Epub ahead of print]

Is SARS-CoV-2 viral clearance in nasopharyngeal swabs an appropriate surrogate
marker for clinical efficacy of neutralising antibody-based therapeutics?

Focosi D(1), Franchini M(2), Pirofski LA(3), Maggi F(4)(5), Casadevall A(6).

Author information: 
(1)North-Western Tuscany Blood Bank, Pisa University Hospital, Pisa, Italy.
(2)Division of Transfusion Medicine, Carlo Poma Hospital, Mantua, Italy.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Departments of Medicine, Microbiology and
Immunology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine and Montefiore Medical Center,
New York City, New York, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Insubria, Varese, Italy.
(5)Laboratory of Microbiology, ASST Sette Laghi, Varese, Italy.
(6)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins School of Public Health and School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Viral clearance is likely the best way to assess the efficacy of antibody-based
therapies. Although antibodies can mediate a variety of effects that include
modulation of inflammation, the demonstration of viral clearance provides an
accessible and measurable parameter that can be used to evaluate efficacy and
determine dosing. Therefore, it is important to ascertain the ability of
monoclonal antibodies and convalescent plasma to effect viral clearance. For
COVID-19, which is caused by the respiratory virus SARS-CoV-2, the most common
assay to assess viral clearance is via a nasopharyngeal swab (NPS). However,
assessment of antibody efficacy by sampling this site may be misleading because
it may not be as accessible to serum antibodies as respiratory secretions or
circulating blood. Adding to the complexity of assessing the efficacy of
administered antibody, particularly in randomised controlled trials (RCTs) that
enroled patients at different times after the onset of COVID-19 symptoms, viral
clearance may also be mediated by endogenous antibody. In this article we
critically review available data on viral clearance in RCTs, matched control
studies, case series and case reports of antibody therapies in an attempt to
identify variables that contribute to antibody efficacy and suggest optimal
strategies for future studies.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/rmv.2314 
PMID: 34861088 

