
1. Cureus. 2021 Oct 30;13(10):e19149. doi: 10.7759/cureus.19149. eCollection 2021
Oct.

Intermittent Frontal Rhythmic Discharges as an Electroencephalogram Biomarker of 
Acute SARS-CoV-2 Infection-Associated Encephalopathy in Children.

Khair A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neurology, Nemours Children's Health, Thomas Jefferson University, Wilmington,
USA.

Data on neurological sequelae of COVID-19 infection in children are sparse.
Neurotropic and neuroinvasive potentials of the SARS-CoV-2 virus are a matter of 
ongoing scientific debate and not yet well understood. Most of the reported
symptoms are nonspecific including headache, encephalopathy, weakness, and as a
part of multisystem inflammatory response syndrome. Few observational studies
have reported acute encephalopathy to be one of the neurological manifestations
of COVID-19 infection, mostly in adults. A little is known about epileptogenesis 
or electroencephalogram (EEG) findings in this limited cohort of pediatric
patients. We report a 17-year-old female with type 1 diabetes mellitus (DM), who 
presented with two weeks history of intermittent headaches, followed by a one-day
history of acute change in behavior in the form of prolonged staring, decreased
speech, confusion, and alternating periods of agitation and sleepiness. No fever 
or respiratory symptoms. Her blood glucose was normal. Brain MRI was
unremarkable. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) studies showed 1000 RBCs, no WBCs, normal
glucose/protein, negative culture, and negative infectious PCR, and autoimmune
panels. She was found to be positive for SARS-CoV-2 PCR with negative IgG. Her
EEG showed remarkable background slowing and frequent frontal intermittent
rhythmic discharges. She was managed with high-dose steroids with the full
clinical recovery of all symptoms at discharge, as well as normalization of
subsequent EEG studies. We hypothesize there may be some specific seizure
characteristics or EEG patterns in patients with pediatric COVID-19 infection and
concomitant acute encephalopathy. It is perhaps reasonable to obtain EEG studies 
in children who test positive for SARS-CoV-2 and report central neurological
symptoms. Long-term follow-up of this cohort of patients will be helpful to
understand the clinical significance and implications of such neurophysiological 
studies.

Copyright © 2021, Khair et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.19149 
PMCID: PMC8628864
PMID: 34868783 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

