
1. Front Mol Biosci. 2021 Nov 16;8:756701. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.756701.
eCollection 2021.

Evidence for Quantum Chemical Effects in Receptor-Ligand Binding Between Integrin
and Collagen Fragments - A Computational Investigation With an Impact on Tissue
Repair, Neurooncolgy and Glycobiology.

Eckert T(1)(2)(3), von Cosel J(1), Kamps B(1)(3), Siebert HC(4), Zhang R(4)(5),
Zhang N(4)(5), Gousias K(6), Petridis AK(7), Kanakis D(8), Falahati K(1).

Author information: 
(1)RISCC Research Institute for Scientific Computing and Consulting, Heuchelheim,
Germany.
(2)Institut für Veterinärphysiologie und Biochemie, Fachbereich Veterinärmedizin,
Justus-Liebig- Universität Gießen, Gießen, Germany.
(3)Fachbereich Biologie und Chemie, Hochschule Fresenius University of Applied
Sciences, Idstein, Germany.
(4)RI-B-NT Research Institute of Bioinformatics and Nanotechnology, Kiel,
Germany.
(5)Institute of BioPharmaceutical Research, Liaocheng University, Liaocheng,
China.
(6)Klinik für Neurochirurgie, Klinikum Lünen, St.-Marien-Hospital, Akad.
Lehrkrankenhaus der Westf. Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Lünen, Germany.
(7)Medical School, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(8)Institute of Pathology, University of Nicosia Medical School, Nicosia, Cyprus.

The collagen-integrin interactions are mediated by the doubly charged Mg2+
cation. In nature this cation seems to have the optimal binding strength to
stabilize this complex. It is essential that the binding is not too weak so that 
the complex becomes unstable, however, it is also of importance that the
ligand-receptor binding is still labile enough so that the ligand can separate
from the receptor in a suited environment. In the case of crystal growing for
experimentally useful integrin-collagen fragment complexes it turned out that
Co2+ cations are ideal mediators to form stable complexes for such experiments.
Although, one can argue that Co2+ is in this context an artificial cation,
however, it is now of special interest to test the impact of this cation in
cell-culture experiments focusing on integrin-ligand interactions. In order to
examine, in particular, the role cobalt ions we have studied a Co2+ based model
system using quantum chemical calculations. Thereby, we have shown that hybrid
and long-range corrected functional, which are approximations provide already a
sufficient level of accuracy. It is of interest to study a potential impact of
cations on the binding of collagen-fragments including collagens from various
species because different integrins have numerous biological functions (e.g.
Integrin - NCAM (Neural cell adhesion molecule) interactions) and are triggered
by intact and degraded collagen fragments. Since integrin-carbohydrate
interactions play a key role when bio-medical problems such as tumor cell
adhesion and virus-host cell infections have to be addressed on a sub-molecular
level it is essential to understand the interactions with heavy-metal ions also
at the sub-atomic level. Our findings open new routes, especially, in the fields 
of tissue repair and neuro-oncology for example for cell-culture experiments with
different ions. Since Co2+ ions seem to bind stronger to integrin than Mg2+ ions 
it should be feasible to exchange these cations in suited tumor tissues although 
different cations are present in other metalloproteins which are active in such
tissues. Various staining methods can be applied to document the interactions of 
integrins with carbohydrate chains and other target structures. Thereby, it is
possible to study a potential impact of these interactions on biological
functions. It was therefore necessary to figure out first which
histological-glycobiological experimental settings of tumor cells are suited for 
our purpose. Since the interactions of several metalloproteins (integrin, ADAM12)
with polysialic acid and the HNK-1 epitope play a crucial role in tumor tissues
selected staining methods are proper tools to obtain essential information about 
the impact of the metal ions under study.

Copyright © 2021 Eckert, von Cosel, Kamps, Siebert, Zhang, Zhang, Gousias,
Petridis, Kanakis and Falahati.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.756701 
PMCID: PMC8637888
PMID: 34869589 

Conflict of interest statement: The Authors TE, BK, JC, and KF are employed by
RISCC UG. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.

