
1. Skinmed. 2021 Oct 1;19(5):390-391. eCollection 2021.

Psoriasis Alba (White Psoriasis) of the Perianal Region.

Kansal NK(1), Kumar A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venereology All India Institute of Medical
Sciences, Rishikesh, Uttarakhand, India.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, All India Institute of
Medical Sciences, Rishikesh, Uttarakhand, India.

A 40-year-old man presented with pruritic perianal lesions existing for 18
months, accompanied by frequent burning sensation on defecating. He had received 
oral fluconazole 150 mg weekly for a presumptive diagnosis of candidosis earlier.
There was no history of other mucocutaneous lesions or comorbidities. The patient
denied any unprotected sexual exposure or having anal intercourse. Examination
revealed a well-defined perianal, horseshoe-shaped, white-colored macerated
plaque with fissures on the gluteal cleft (Figure 1) with tenderness. Examination
of scalp, nail, and oral mucosa was unremarkable. Routine investigations,
including complete blood counts and chemical profile, were within normal limits. 
His fasting glucose level was 85 mg/ dL and glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) was 5.3. 
The Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) test and testing for human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 and 2 were nonreactive. A 10% potassium hydroxide 
(KOH) examination was negative for fungal elements. Differential diagnoses of
flexural psoriasis, Hailey-Hailey disease, and lichen sclerosus were considered, 
and a skin biopsy for pathology and direct immunofluorescence was performed. The 
pathologic features showed epidermal acanthosis, hyperkeratosis with elongated
rete ridges, and focal hypogranulosis. The upper part of the dermis showed a
moderate perivascular mononuclear inflammatory infiltrate with a few melanophages
(Figure 2). Direct immunofluorescence was negative. Based on pathologic features,
a diagnosis of psoriasis alba was confirmed, and the patient was started on
desonide lotion (0.05%) to be applied in the morning and tacrolimus cream (0.1%) 
at night, plus oral antihistamines. At the follow-up visit 3 weeks later, the
lesions diminished to a great extent (Figure 3).


PMID: 34861923 

