
1. EBioMedicine. 2021 Nov 29;74:103705. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2021.103705. [Epub
ahead of print]

Safety and efficacy of the mRNA BNT162b2 vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 in five
groups of immunocompromised patients and healthy controls in a prospective
open-label clinical trial.

Bergman P(1), Blennow O(2), Hansson L(3), Mielke S(4), Nowak P(5), Chen P(6),
Söderdahl G(7), Österborg A(3), Smith CIE(8), Wullimann D(6), Vesterbacka J(9),
Lindgren G(10), Blixt L(3), Friman G(7), Wahren-Borgström E(9), Nordlander A(10),
Gomez AC(6), Akber M(6), Valentini D(10), Norlin AC(9), Thalme A(9), Bogdanovic
G(11), Muschiol S(12), Nilsson P(13), Hober S(13), Loré K(14), Chen MS(15),
Buggert M(6), Ljunggren HG(6), Ljungman P(16), Aleman S(17); COVAXID-collaborator
group (shown separately).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden; Department of Laboratory Medicine, Clinical Microbiology, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden; Department of Transplantation, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm,
Sweden; Department of Clinical Science, Intervention and Technology, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Hematology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden;
Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Biomolecular and Cellular Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Department of Cellular Therapy and
Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplantation (CAST), Karolinska University Hospital
Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden; Department of Medicine Huddinge, Infectious Diseases, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Laboratory for Molecular Infection Medicine Sweden
MIMS, Umeå University, Sweden.
(6)Department of Medicine Huddinge, Center for Infectious Medicine, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)Department of Transplantation, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm,
Sweden; Department of Clinical Science, Intervention and Technology, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(8)Department of Infectious Diseases, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden; Department of Cellular Therapy and Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplantation
(CAST), Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.
(9)Department of Infectious Diseases, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(10)Department of Cellular Therapy and Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplantation
(CAST), Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.
(11)Dept of Clinical Microbiology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm,
Sweden.
(12)Dept of Clinical Microbiology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm,
Sweden; Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(13)Department of Protein Science, SciLifeLab, KTH Royal Institute of Technology,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(14)Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(15)Department of Dental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(16)Department of Cellular Therapy and Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplantation
(CAST), Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden; Department of
Medicine Huddinge, Hematology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm.
(17)Department of Infectious Diseases, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm,
Sweden; Department of Medicine Huddinge, Infectious Diseases, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address: soo.aleman@ki.se.

BACKGROUND: Patients with immunocompromised disorders have mainly been excluded
from clinical trials of vaccination against COVID-19. Thus, the aim of this
prospective clinical trial was to investigate safety and efficacy of BNT162b2
mRNA vaccination in five selected groups of immunocompromised patients and
healthy controls.
METHODS: 539 study subjects (449 patients and 90 controls) were included. The
patients had either primary (n=90), or secondary immunodeficiency disorders due
to human immunodeficiency virus infection (n=90), allogeneic hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation/CAR T cell therapy (n=90), solid organ transplantation (SOT)
(n=89), or chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) (n=90). The primary endpoint was
seroconversion rate two weeks after the second dose. The secondary endpoints were
safety and documented SARS-CoV-2 infection.
FINDINGS: Adverse events were generally mild, but one case of fatal suspected
unexpected serious adverse reaction occurred. 72.2% of the immunocompromised
patients seroconverted compared to 100% of the controls (p=0.004). Lowest
seroconversion rates were found in the SOT (43.4%) and CLL (63.3%) patient groups
with observed negative impact of treatment with mycophenolate mofetil and
ibrutinib, respectively.
INTERPRETATION: The results showed that the mRNA BNT162b2 vaccine was safe in
immunocompromised patients. Rate of seroconversion was substantially lower than
in healthy controls, with a wide range of rates and antibody titres among
predefined patient groups and subgroups. This clinical trial highlights the need 
for additional vaccine doses in certain immunocompromised patient groups to
improve immunity.
FUNDING: Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation, the Swedish Research Council,
Nordstjernan AB, Region Stockholm, Karolinska Institutet, and organizations for
PID/CLL-patients in Sweden.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2021.103705 
PMCID: PMC8629680
PMID: 34861491 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest SM received
honoraria via his institution from Celgene/BMS, Novartis, Gilead/Kite, DNA Prime 
for lectures and educational events and as a member and/or head of data safety
monitoring boards from Miltenyi and Immunicum outside the submitted work. SH has 
been taking part in a COVID-19 Strategic Consultancy Group and a Virtual Advisory
Board, not related to the current study. KL reports grants from Knut and Alice
Wallenberg Foundation for this study. HGL reports grants from Knut and Alice
Wallenberg Foundation and Nordstjernan AB for studies on COVID-19, and has served
on the UK-CIC Oversight Committee, is leading the Karolinska Institutet COVID-19 
vaccine group, and has served on several Karolinska Institutet COVID-19 Task
force and Reference groups. PL reports grants from Pfizer, grants from MSD,
grants and personal fees from Takeda, personal fees from AiCuris, personal fees
from OctaPharma, outside the submitted work. SA has received honoraria for
lectures and educational events, not related to this work, from Gilead, AbbVie,
MSD, Biogen and Netdoktor, and reports grants from Knut and Alice Wallenberg
Foundation for this study.

