
1. PLoS One. 2021 Dec 3;16(12):e0260769. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260769.
eCollection 2021.

Analysis of case fatality rate of SARS-CoV-2 infection in the Spanish Autonomous 
Communities between March and May 2020.

V MS(1)(2), A CM(3), A BG(4), F VS(1), A SF(5), V OQ(6), A SC(7); COVID-19 Group 
of the Spanish Society of Primary Care Physicians (SEMERGEN).

Author information: 
(1)Research Group in Gene-Environment Interactions and Health, Institute of
Biomedicine (IBIOMED), University of León, León, Spain.
(2)Consortium for Biomedical Research in Epidemiology and Public Health
(CIBERESP), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Doctor Pedro Laín Entralgo Health Center, Madrid Health Service (SERMAS),
Alcorcón, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Trujillo Health Center, Extremadura Health Service, Cáceres, Spain.
(5)Health Science Department, Castilla La Mancha University, Talavera de la
Reina, Toledo, Spain.
(6)Management Pharmacy Service Primary Health Care, Vicepresident of Ethical
Committee Research with Medicine Hospital Dr. Negrín Gran Canaria Las Palmas
(CEI/CEIm) Canary Health Service, Las Palmas, Spain.
(7)Family and Community Medicine, Getxo, Bizkaia, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: The Spanish health system is made up of seventeen regional health
systems. Through the official reporting systems, some inconsistencies and
differences in case fatality rates between Autonomous Communities (CC.AA.) have
been observed. Therefore the objective of this paper is to compare COVID-19 case 
fatality rates across the Spanish CC.AA.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Observational descriptive study. The COVID-19 case fatality
rate (CFR) was estimated according to the official records (CFR-PCR+), the daily 
mortality monitory system (MoMo) record (CFR-Mo), and the seroprevalence study
ENE-COVID-19 (Estudio Nacional de sero Epidemiologia Covid-19) according to sex, 
age group and CC.AA. between March and June 2020. The main objective is to detect
whether there are any differences in CFR between Spanish Regions using two
different register systems, i. e., the official register of the Ministry of
Health and the MoMo.
RESULTS: Overall, the CFR-Mo was higher than the CFR-PCR+, 1.59% vs 0.98%. The
differences in case fatality rate between both methods were significantly higher 
in Castilla La Mancha, Castilla y León, Cataluña, and Madrid. The difference
between both methods was higher in persons over 74 years of age (CFR-PCR+ 7.5% vs
13.0% for the CFR-Mo) but without statistical significance. There was no
correlation of the estimated prevalence of infection with CFR-PCR+, but there was
with CFR-Mo (R2 = 0.33). Andalucía presented a SCFR below 1 with both methods,
and Asturias had a SCFR higher than 1. Cataluña and Castilla La Mancha presented 
a SCFR greater than 1 in any scenario of SARS-CoV-2 infection calculated with
SCFR-Mo.
CONCLUSIONS: The PCR+ case fatality rate underestimates the case fatality rate of
the SARS-CoV- 2 virus pandemic. It is therefore preferable to consider the MoMo
case fatality rate. Significant differences have been observed in the information
and registration systems and in the severity of the pandemic between the Spanish 
CC.AA. Although the infection prevalence correlates with case fatality rate,
other factors such as age, comorbidities, and the policies adopted to address the
pandemic can explain the differences observed between CC.AA.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260769 
PMCID: PMC8641878
PMID: 34860848 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

