
1. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Nov 18;12:741469. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.741469.
eCollection 2021.

Oral Immunization With Plant-Based Vaccine Induces a Protective Response Against 
Infectious Bursal Disease.

Lucero MS(1), Chimeno Zoth S(1), Jaton J(1), Gravisaco MJ(1), Pinto S(2),
Richetta M(3), Berinstein A(1), Gómez E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Inmunología y Vacunas Aviares, Instituto de Agrobiotecnología y
Biología Molecular, INTA-CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Cátedra de Patología, Facultad de Ciencias Veterinarias, Universidad de Buenos
Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Gerencia de Gestión Estratégica de Procesos Complementarios, Centro de
Investigación en Ciencias Veterinarias y Agronómicas, INTA, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Infectious bursal disease virus (IBDV) is the etiological agent of an
immunosuppressive and highly contagious disease that affects young birds causing 
important economic losses in the poultry industry worldwide. We have previously
developed a plant-based vaccine candidate for infectious bursal disease (IBD)
that is able to protect against infection with IBDV when administered through
intramuscular (im) route. Given that oral vaccination is non-invasive and
stimulates the immunity of the mucosal gastrointestinal surface, the initial site
of contact and entry of IBDV, the aim of this work was to study if our immunogen 
was also able to elicit a protective immune response when orally administered. We
demonstrated that 85% of the animals that received two oral doses of the vaccine 
formulation and all animals that were orally boosted after an im prime scheme
developed virus neutralizing antibodies and were protected against IBDV
infection, evidenced by the bursa/body weight (BB) ratio, absence of T-cell
infiltration, and low viral load in bursa. Although mild to moderate bursal
damage was observed in some of these animals, these lesions were not as severe as
the ones observed in challenged control groups, which also presented signs of
acute inflammation, bursal atrophy, T-cell infiltration, and absence of viral
clearance. These results show that two immunizations with our recombinant
immunogen are able to induce a specific and protective immune response in chicken
against IBDV when orally administered in a prime/boost scheme or when the oral
boost follows an im prime scheme. In conclusion, our oral plant-based vaccine
candidate could represent a viable alternative to conventional vaccines and is of
great interest to the poultry industry.

Copyright © 2021 Lucero, Chimeno Zoth, Jaton, Gravisaco, Pinto, Richetta,
Berinstein and Gómez.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.741469 
PMCID: PMC8636702
PMID: 34868126 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

