
1. JCI Insight. 2021 Dec 6. pii: e155483. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.155483. [Epub
ahead of print]

Duration of viral shedding and culture positivity with post-vaccination
SARS-CoV-2 delta variant infections.

Siedner MJ(1), Boucau J(2), Gilbert RF(3), Uddin R(3), Luu J(4), Haneuse S(4),
Vyas T(3), Reynolds Z(3), Iyer S(3), Chamberlin GC(3), Goldstein RH(3), North
CM(3), Sacks CA(3), Regan J(5), Flynn JP(5), Choudhary MC(5), Vyas JM(3), Barczak
AK(2), Lemieux JE(6), Li JZ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, United States of America.
(2)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, United States of America.
(3)Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, United States 
of America.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, TH Chan Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, 
United States of America.
(5)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Cambridge, United States
of America.
(6)Infectious Disease Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, United States
of America.
(7)Department of Infectious Disease, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, United
States of America.

Isolation guidelines for severe acute respiratory syndrome-cornavirus-2
(SARS-CoV-2) are largely derived from data collected prior to emergence of the
delta variant. We followed a cohort of ambulatory patients with post-vaccination 
breakthrough SARS-CoV-2 infections with longitudinal collection of nasal swabs
for SARS-CoV-2 viral load quantification, whole genome sequencing, and viral
culture. All delta variant infections (10/10, 100%) in our cohort were
symptomatic, compared with 64% (9/14) of non-delta variant infections.
Symptomatic delta variant breakthrough infections were characterized by higher
initial viral load, longer duration of virologic shedding by PCR, greater
likelihood of replication-competent virus at early stages of infection, and
longer duration of culturable virus compared to non-delta variants. The duration 
of time since vaccination was also correlated with both duration of PCR
positivity and duration of detection of replication-competent virus. Nonetheless,
no individuals with symptomatic delta variant infections had
replication-competent virus by day 10 after symptom onset or 24 hours after
resolution of symptoms. These data support current US Center for Disease Control 
isolation guidelines and reinforce the importance of prompt testing and isolation
among symptomatic individuals with delta variant breakthrough infections.
Additional data are needed to evaluate these relationships among asymptomatic and
more severe delta variant breakthrough infections.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.155483 
PMID: 34871181 

