
1. World J Exp Med. 2021 Nov 20;11(5):66-78. doi: 10.5493/wjem.v11.i5.66.
eCollection 2021 Nov 20.

Potential role of intermittent fasting on decreasing cardiovascular disease in
human immunodeficiency virus patients receiving antiretroviral therapy.

Gnoni M(1), Beas R(2), Raghuram A(3), Díaz-Pardavé C(4), Riva-Moscoso A(4),
Príncipe-Meneses FS(4), Vásquez-Garagatti R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Good Samaritan Hospital, Cincinnati, OH
45220, United States.
(2)Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
IN 46202, United States.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of
Louisville Health Sciences Center, Louisville, KY 40202, United States.
(4)Division of Research and Academic Affairs, Larkin Health System, South Miami, 
FL 33143, United States.
(5)Hospital Medicine Department and Infectious Diseases, University of Tennessee 
Medical Center at Knoxville, Knoxville, TN 37920, United States.

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) has become one of the commonest causes of
comorbidity and mortality among People living with human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) (PLWH) on antiretroviral therapy (ART). Nearly 50% of PLWH are likely to
have an increased risk of developing CVD, including coronary heart disease,
cerebrovascular disease, peripheral artery disease and aortic atherosclerosis.
Aside from the common risk factors, HIV infection itself and side effects of
antiretroviral therapy contribute to the pathophysiology of this entity.
Potential non-pharmacological therapies are currently being tested worldwide for 
this purpose, including eating patterns such as Intermittent fasting (IF). IF is 
a widespread practice gaining high level of interest in the scientific community 
due to its potential benefits such as improvement in serum lipids and
lipoproteins, blood pressure (BP), platelet-derived growth factor AB, systemic
inflammation, and carotid artery intima-media thickness among others
cardiovascular benefits. This review will focus on exploring the potential role
of intermittent fasting as a non-pharmacological and cost-effective strategy in
decreasing the burden of cardiovascular diseases among HIV patients on ART due to
its intrinsic properties improving the main cardiovascular risk factors and
modulating inflammatory pathways related to endothelial dysfunction, lipid
peroxidation and aging. Intermittent fasting regimens need to be tested in
clinical trials as an important, cost-effective, and revolutionary coadjutant of 
ART in the fight against the increased prevalence of cardiovascular disease in
PLWH.

©The Author(s) 2021. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.5493/wjem.v11.i5.66 
PMCID: PMC8611195
PMID: 34877266 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: The authors
declare that there is no conflict of interest

