
1. J Virol. 2021 Dec 8:JVI0183121. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01831-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Mechanical Capsid Maturation Facilitates the Resolution of Conflicting
Requirements for Herpesvirus Assembly.

Evilevitch A(1)(2), Sae-Ueng U(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Department of Physics, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
USA.

Most viruses undergo a maturation process from a weakly self-assembled,
noninfectious particle to a stable, infectious virion. For herpesviruses, this
maturation process resolves several conflicting requirements: i) assembly must be
driven by weak, reversible interactions between viral particle subunits to reduce
errors and minimize energy of self-assembly; ii) the viral particle must be
stable enough to withstand tens of atmospheres of DNA pressure resulting from its
strong confinement in the capsid. With herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) as a
prototype of human herpesviruses, we demonstrate that this mechanical capsid
maturation is mainly facilitated through capsid-binding auxiliary protein UL25,
orthologs of which are present in all herpesviruses. Through genetic manipulation
of UL25 mutants of HSV-1 combined with interrogation of capsid mechanics with
atomic force microscopy nano-indentation, we suggest the mechanism of stepwise
binding of distinct UL25 domains correlated with capsid maturation and DNA
packaging. These findings demonstrate another paradigm of viruses as elegantly
programmed nano-machines, where an intimate relationship between mechanical and
genetic information is preserved in UL25 architecture. IMPORTANCE Minor capsid
protein UL25 plays a critical role in mechanical maturation of HSV-1 capsid
during virus assembly, required for stable DNA packaging. We modulate UL25-capsid
interactions by genetically deleting different UL25 regions and quantify the
effect on mechanical capsid stability using an atomic force microscopy (AFM)
nano-indentation approach. This approach reveals how UL25 regions reinforce the
herpesvirus capsid in order to stably package and retain pressurized DNA. Our
data suggests a mechanism of stepwise binding of two main UL25 domains timed with
DNA packaging.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01831-21 
PMID: 34878808 

