
1. J Virol. 2021 Dec 8:JVI0201721. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02017-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Hepatitis delta virus genome RNA synthesis initiates at position 1646 with a
non-templated guanosine.

Stephenson-Tsoris S(1), Casey JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Georgetown University Medical
Center, Washington, DC.

Hepatitis delta virus (HDV) is a significant human pathogen that causes acute and
chronic liver disease; there is no licensed therapy. HDV is a circular
negative-sense ssRNA virus that produces three RNAs in infected cells: genome,
antigenome and mRNA; the latter encodes hepatitis delta antigen, the viral
protein. These RNAs are synthesized by host DNA-dependent RNA polymerase acting
as an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. Although HDV genome RNA accumulates to high
levels in infected cells, the mechanism by which this process occurs remains
poorly understood. For example, the nature of the 5' end of the genome, including
the synthesis start site and its chemical composition, are not known. Analysis of
this process has been challenging because the initiation site is part of an
unstable precursor in the rolling circle mechanism by which HDV genome RNA is
synthesized. In this study, circular HDV antigenome RNAs synthesized in vitro
were used to directly initiate HDV genome RNA synthesis in transfected cells,
thus enabling detection of the 5' end of the genome RNA. The 5' end of this RNA
is capped, as expected for a Pol II product. Initiation begins at position 1646
on the genome, which is located near the loop end proximal to the start site for 
HDAg mRNA synthesis. Unexpectedly, synthesis begins with a guanosine that is not 
conventionally templated by the HDV RNA. IMPORTANCE Hepatitis delta virus (HDV)
is a unique virus that causes severe liver disease. It uses host RNA Polymerase
II to copy its circular RNA genome in a unique and poorly understood process.
Although the virus RNA accumulates to high levels within infected cells, it is
not known how synthesis of the viral RNA begins, nor even where on the genome
synthesis starts. Here, we identify the start site for the initiation of HDV
genome RNA synthesis as position 1646, which is at one end of the closed
hairpin-like structure of the viral RNA. The 5' end of the RNA is capped, as
expected for Pol II products. However, RNA synthesis begins with a guanosine that
is not present in the genome. Thus, although HDV uses Pol II to synthesize the
viral genome, some details of the initiation process are different. These
differences could be important for successfully targeting virus replication.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02017-21 
PMID: 34878890 

