
1. Rev Inst Med Trop Sao Paulo. 2021 Dec 6;63:e84. doi: 10.1590/S1678-9946202163084.
eCollection 2021.

Cytomegalovirus as a possibly overlooked agent of hypertensive anterior uveitis
and endotheliitis in immunocompetent patients in Brazil.

Dos Reis C(1), Miranda BA(1), da Cunha Afonso AF(1), Malta E Cunha LH(1),
Trindade BC(2), Vasconcelos-Santos DV(1)(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Hospital das Clínicas, Hospital São
Geraldo, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(2)Instituto de Oftalmologia Cançado Trindade, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais,
Brazil.
(3)Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Faculdade de Medicina, Departamento de
Oftalmologia e Otorrinolaringologia, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(4)Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Faculdade de Medicina, Programa de
Pós-Graduação em Ciências da Saúde - Infectologia e Medicina Tropical, Belo
Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(5)Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Faculdade de Medicina, Programa de
Pós-Graduação em Ciências Aplicadas à Cirurgia e à Oftalmologia, Belo Horizonte, 
Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(6)Instituto da Visão, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.

Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a member of the Herpesviridae family, including viruses 
that are well-known agents of keratitis, anterior uveitis, scleritis and
retinitis. CMV is usually associated with ocular diseases in immunosuppressed
individuals, with a notable exception of hypertensive anterior uveitis with
distinctive clinical features in immunocompetent patients. This syndrome was
characterized in the last two decades in Europe and Southeast Asia, and then
documented in the rest of world. Definitive diagnosis in these cases is usually
made by Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) of the anterior chamber fluid. We report 
three immunocompetent Brazilian adults with history of multiple
glaucomatocyclitic crises and presenting with chronic hypertensive anterior
uveitis invariably with mild anterior chamber inflammation and characteristic
scarce nummular keratic precipitates. CMV DNA was successfully amplified and
detected in the aqueous humor of all patients. Corneal endothelial counts were
significantly reduced in the involved eyes, with one patient developing bullous
keratopathy. All patients were then treated with topical ganciclovir gel and
corticosteroids, with subsequent control of the intraocular inflammation. CMV may
represent an overlooked / underestimated etiology of hypertensive anterior
uveitis that may progressively lead to endothelial dysfunction, culminating in
bullous keratopathy. Management of patients is challenging, with the potential
use of topical antivirals to decrease the number of relapses, and corticosteroids
to control anterior uveitis / endotheliitis and to protect the corneal
endothelium.

DOI: 10.1590/S1678-9946202163084 
PMID: 34878042 

