
1. J Water Health. 2021 Dec;19(6):918-932. doi: 10.2166/wh.2021.068.

Systematic review of the relative concentrations of noroviruses and fecal
indicator bacteria in wastewater: considerations for use in quantitative
microbial risk assessment.

Hamadieh Z(1), Hamilton KA(2), Silverman AI(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil and Urban Engineering, New York University Tandon School
of Engineering, Brooklyn, NY, USA E-mail: andrea.silverman@nyu.edu.
(2)School of Sustainable Engineering and the Built Environment, Arizona State
University, Tempe, AZ, USA; The Biodesign Institute Center for Environmental
Health Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(3)Department of Civil and Urban Engineering, New York University Tandon School
of Engineering, Brooklyn, NY, USA E-mail: andrea.silverman@nyu.edu; School of
Global Public Health, New York University, New York, NY, USA.

Human noroviruses are a leading cause of food- and water-borne disease, which has
led to an interest in quantifying norovirus health risks using quantitative
microbial risk assessment (QMRA). Given the limited availability of quantitative 
norovirus data to input to QMRA models, some studies have applied a conversion
factor to estimate norovirus exposure based on measured fecal indicator bacteria 
(FIB) concentrations. We conducted a review of peer-reviewed publications to
identify the concentrations of noroviruses and FIB in raw, secondary-treated, and
disinfected wastewater. A meta-analysis was performed to determine the ratios of 
norovirus-FIB pairs in each wastewater matrix and the variables that
significantly impact these ratios. Norovirus-to-FIB ratios were found to be
significantly impacted by the norovirus genotype, month of sample collection,
geographic location, and the extent of wastewater treatment. Additionally, we
evaluated the impact of using a FIB-to-virus conversion factor in QMRA and found 
that the choice of conversion ratio has a great impact on estimated health risks.
For example, the use of a conversion ratio previously used in the World Health
Organization Guidelines for the Safe Use of Wastewater, Excreta and Greywater
predicted health risks that were significantly lower than those estimated with
measured norovirus concentrations used as inputs. This work emphasizes the gold
standard of using measured pathogen concentrations directly as inputs to exposure
assessment in QMRA. While not encouraged, if one must use a FIB-to-virus
conversion ratio to estimate norovirus dose, the ratio should be chosen carefully
based on the target microorganisms (i.e., strain, genotype, or class), prevalence
of disease, and extent of wastewater treatment.

DOI: 10.2166/wh.2021.068 
PMCID: wh_2021_068
PMID: 34874900 

