
1. PLoS One. 2021 Dec 6;16(12):e0260706. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260706.
eCollection 2021.

Budesonide promotes airway epithelial barrier integrity following double-stranded
RNA challenge.

Rimmer C(1), Hetelekides S(1), Eliseeva SI(1), Georas SN(1)(2), Veazey JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care, University of Rochester, 
Rochester, New York, United States of America.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester, Rochester,
New York, United States of America.

Airway epithelial barrier dysfunction is increasingly recognized as a key feature
of asthma and other lung diseases. Respiratory viruses are responsible for a
large fraction of asthma exacerbations, and are particularly potent at disrupting
epithelial barrier function through pattern recognition receptor engagement
leading to tight junction dysfunction. Although different mechanisms of barrier
dysfunction have been described, relatively little is known about whether barrier
integrity can be promoted to limit disease. Here, we tested three classes of
drugs commonly prescribed to treat asthma for their ability to promote barrier
function using a cell culture model of virus-induced airway epithelial barrier
disruption. Specifically, we studied the corticosteroid budesonide, the long
acting beta-agonist formoterol, and the leukotriene receptor antagonist
montelukast for their ability to promote barrier integrity of a monolayer of
human bronchial epithelial cells (16HBE) before exposure to the viral mimetic
double-stranded RNA. Of the three, only budesonide treatment limited
transepithelial electrical resistance and small molecule permeability (4 kDa
FITC-dextran flux). Next, we used a mouse model of acute dsRNA challenge that
induces transient epithelial barrier disruption in vivo, and studied the effects 
budesonide when administered prophylactically or therapeutically. We found that
budesonide similarly protected against dsRNA-induced airway barrier disruption in
the lung, independently of its effects on airway inflammation. Taken together,
these data suggest that an under-appreciated effect of inhaled budesonide is to
maintain or promote airway epithelial barrier integrity during respiratory viral 
infections.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260706 
PMID: 34871316 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

