
1. mBio. 2021 Dec 7:e0325421. doi: 10.1128/mbio.03254-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Plasma Membrane Anchoring and Gag:Gag Multimerization on Viral RNA Are Critical
Properties of HIV-1 Gag Required To Mediate Efficient Genome Packaging.

Duchon A(1), Santos S(1), Chen J(1), Brown M(1), Nikolaitchik OA(1), Tai S(1),
Chao JA(2), Freed EO(3), Pathak VK(4), Hu WS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Viral Recombination Section, HIV Dynamics and Replication Program, National
Cancer Institutegrid.48336.3a, Frederick, Maryland, USA.
(2)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Virus-Cell Interaction Section, National Cancer Institutegrid.48336.3a,
Frederick, Maryland, USA.
(4)Viral Mutation Section, HIV Dynamics and Replication Program, National Cancer 
Institutegrid.48336.3a, Frederick, Maryland, USA.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Gag selects and packages the HIV RNA 
genome during virus assembly. However, HIV-1 RNA constitutes only a small
fraction of the cellular RNA. Although Gag exhibits a slight preference to viral 
RNA, most of the cytoplasmic Gag proteins are associated with cellular RNAs.
Thus, it is not understood how HIV-1 achieves highly efficient genome packaging. 
We hypothesize that besides RNA binding, other properties of Gag are important
for genome packaging. Many Gag mutants have assembly defects that preclude
analysis of their effects on genome packaging. To bypass this challenge, we
established complementation systems that separate the particle-assembling and
RNA-binding functions of Gag: we used a set of Gag proteins to drive particle
assembly and an RNA-binding Gag to package HIV-1 RNA. We have developed two types
of RNA-binding Gag in which packaging is mediated by the authentic nucleocapsid
(NC) domain or by a nonviral RNA-binding domain. We found that in both cases,
mutations that affect the multimerization or plasma membrane anchoring properties
of Gag reduce or abolish RNA packaging. These mutant Gag can coassemble into
particles but cannot package the RNA genome efficiently. Our findings indicate
that HIV-1 RNA packaging occurs at the plasma membrane and RNA-binding Gag needs 
to multimerize on RNA to encapsidate the viral genome. IMPORTANCE To generate
infectious virions, HIV-1 must package its full-length RNA as the genome during
particle assembly. HIV-1 Gag:RNA interactions mediate genome packaging, but the
mechanism remains unclear. Only a minor portion of the cellular RNA is HIV-1 RNA,
and most of the RNAs associated with cytoplasmic Gag are cellular RNAs. However, 
>94% of the HIV-1 virions contain viral RNA genome. We posited that, besides RNA 
binding, other properties of Gag contribute to genome packaging. Using two
complementation systems, we examined features of Gag that are important for
genome packaging. We found that the capacities for Gag to multimerize and to
anchor at the plasma membrane are critical for genome packaging. Our results
revealed that Gag needs to multimerize on viral RNA at the plasma membrane in
order to package RNA genome.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.03254-21 
PMID: 34872357 

