
1. Vet Med Sci. 2021 Dec 8. doi: 10.1002/vms3.680. [Epub ahead of print]

Carboxymethyl chitosan bounded iron oxide nanoparticles and gamma-irradiated
avian influenza subtype H9N2 vaccine to development of immunity on mouse and
chicken.

Motamedi-Sedeh F(1), Saboorizadeh A(2), Khalili I(3), Sharbatdaran M(4),
Wijewardana V(5), Arbabi A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Animal Science, Nuclear Agriculture Research
School, Nuclear Science and Technology Research Institute, Karaj, Iran.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Science Faculty, Islamic Azad University, Karaj
Branch, Karaj, Iran.
(3)Razi Vaccine and Serum Research Institute, Agricultural Research, Education
and Extension Organization, Karaj, Iran.
(4)Physics and accelerator Research School, Nuclear Science and Technology
Research Institute, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Department of Nuclear Sciences and Applications, Animal Production and Health 
Section, International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Vienna International Centre
(VIC), Vienna, Austria.
(6)Faulty of Medical Science, Tehran University of Medical Science, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Avian influenza virus (AIV) subtype H9N2 is a low pathogenic avian
influenza virus (LPAIV).
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to evaluate the humoral and cellular immunity in
vaccinated mice and broiler chicken by irradiated AIV antigen plus carboxymethyl 
chitosan bounded iron oxide nanoparticles (CMC-IO NPs) as an adjuvant.
METHODS: AIV subtype H9N2 with 108.5 EID50 /ml and haemagglutinin antigen assay
about 10 log2 was irradiated by 30 kGy gamma radiation dose. Then, the
gamma-irradiated AIV was used as an inactivated vaccine and conjugated with
CMC-IO NPs to improve immune responses on mice. IO NPs must be applied in all
activated tests using 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide (EDC) and
N-hydroxysulfosuccinimide sodium salt (sulfo-NHS), and then functionalized by CMC
as IO-CMC. Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra on functionalized IO-CMC
showed a peak of 638 cm-1 which is a band between metal and O (Fe-O).
RESULTS: Based on the comparison between the two X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns
on Fe2 O3 -NPs and IO-CMC, the characteristics of IO-NPs did not change after
carboxymethylation. A CHN Analyzer was applied to measure the molecular weight of
IO-CMC that was calculated as 1045 g. IO-CMC, irradiated AIV-IO-CMC and formalin 
AIV-IO-CMC were injected into 42 BALB/c mice in six groups. The fourth group was 
the negative control, and the fifth and sixth groups were inoculated by
irradiated AIV-ISA70 and formalin AIV-ISA70 vaccines. An increase in
haemagglutination inhibition (HI) antibody titration was observed in the
irradiated AIV-IO-CMC and formalin AIV-IO-CMC groups (p < 0.05). In addition,
increases in the lymphoproliferative activity of re-stimulated splenic
lymphocytes, interfron-γ (IFN-γ) and interleukin-2 (IL-2) concentration in the
irradiated AIV-IO-CMC group demonstrated the activation of Type 1 helper cells.
The concentration of IL-4 was without any significant increases in non-group.
CONCLUSIONS: Accordingly, Th2 activation represented no increase. Finally, the
finding showed that AIV-IO-CMC was effective on enhancing immunogenicity as
irradiated AIV antigen administered with a clinically acceptable adjuvant (i.e.
IO-CMC).

© 2021 The Authors. Veterinary Medicine and Science published by John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/vms3.680 
PMID: 34878724 

