
1. J Gen Virol. 2021 Dec;102(12). doi: 10.1099/jgv.0.001700.

Chikungunya virus produced by a persistently infected mosquito cell line
comprises a shorter genome and is non-infectious to mammalian cells.

de Oliveira AS(1), Vasconcellos AF(1), Rodrigues BMP(1), da Silva LA(1), Resende 
RO(1), Ribeiro BM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Department of Cell Biology, University of Brasília,
Brasília, Brazil.

Although RNA viruses have high mutation rates, host cells and organisms work as
selective environments, maintaining the viability of virus populations by
eliminating deleterious genotypes. In serial passages of RNA viruses in a single 
cell line, most of these selective bottlenecks are absent, with no virus
circulation and replication in different tissues or host alternation. In this
work, Aedes aegypti Aag-2 cells were accidentally infected with Chikungunya virus
(CHIKV) and Mayaro virus (MAYV). After numerous passages to achieve infection
persistency, the infectivity of these viruses was evaluated in Ae. albopictus
C6/36 cells, African green monkey Vero cells and primary-cultured human
fibroblasts. While these CHIKV and MAYV isolates were still infectious to
mosquito cells, they lost their ability to infect mammalian cells. After genome
sequencing, it was observed that CHIKV accumulated many nonsynonymous mutations
and a significant deletion in the coding sequence of the hypervariable domain in 
the nsP3 gene. Since MAYV showed very low titres, it was not sequenced
successfully. Persistently infected Aag-2 cells also accumulated high loads of
short and recombinant CHIKV RNAs, which seemed to have been originated from
virus-derived DNAs. In conclusion, the genome of this CHIKV isolate could guide
mutagenesis strategies for the production of attenuated or non-infectious (to
mammals) CHIKV vaccine candidates. Our results also reinforce that a paradox is
expected during passages of cells persistently infected by RNA viruses: more
loosening for the development of more diverse virus genotypes and more pressure
for virus specialization to this constant cellular environment.

DOI: 10.1099/jgv.0.001700 
PMID: 34878970 

