
1. BMC Ecol Evol. 2021 Dec 7;21(1):220. doi: 10.1186/s12862-021-01946-y.

Applicability of several rooted phylogenetic network algorithms for representing 
the evolutionary history of SARS-CoV-2.

Wallin R(1), van Iersel L(2), Kelk S(3), Stougie L(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica (CWI), Science Park 123, 1098 XG, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.
(2)Delft Institute of Applied Mathematics, Delft University of Technology, Van
Mourik Broekmanweg 6, 2628 XE, Delft, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Data Science and Knowledge Engineering (DKE), Maastricht
University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(4)Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica (CWI), Science Park 123, 1098 XG, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands. Leen.Stougie@cwi.nl.
(5)School of Business and Economics, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. Leen.Stougie@cwi.nl.

BACKGROUND: Rooted phylogenetic networks are used to display complex evolutionary
history involving so-called reticulation events, such as genetic recombination.
Various methods have been developed to construct such networks, using for example
a multiple sequence alignment or multiple phylogenetic trees as input data.
Coronaviruses are known to recombine frequently, but rooted phylogenetic networks
have not yet been used extensively to describe their evolutionary history. Here, 
we created a workflow to compare the evolutionary history of SARS-CoV-2 with
other SARS-like viruses using several rooted phylogenetic network inference
algorithms. This workflow includes filtering noise from sets of phylogenetic
trees by contracting edges based on branch length and bootstrap support, followed
by resolution of multifurcations. We explored the running times of the network
inference algorithms, the impact of filtering on the properties of the produced
networks, and attempted to derive biological insights regarding the evolution of 
SARS-CoV-2 from them.
RESULTS: The network inference algorithms are capable of constructing rooted
phylogenetic networks for coronavirus data, although running-time limitations
require restricting such datasets to a relatively small number of taxa. Filtering
generally reduces the number of reticulations in the produced networks and
increases their temporal consistency. Taxon bat-SL-CoVZC45 emerges as a major and
structural source of discordance in the dataset. The tested algorithms often
indicate that SARS-CoV-2/RaTG13 is a tree-like clade, with possibly some
reticulate activity further back in their history. A smaller number of
constructed networks posit SARS-CoV-2 as a possible recombinant, although this
might be a methodological artefact arising from the interaction of bat-SL-CoVZC45
discordance and the optimization criteria used.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that as part of a wider workflow and with
careful attention paid to running time, rooted phylogenetic network algorithms
are capable of producing plausible networks from coronavirus data. These networks
partly corroborate existing theories about SARS-CoV-2, and partly produce new
avenues for exploration regarding the location and significance of reticulate
activity within the wider group of SARS-like viruses. Our workflow may serve as a
model for pipelines in which phylogenetic network algorithms can be used to
analyse different datasets and test different hypotheses.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12862-021-01946-y 
PMID: 34876022 

