
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Dec 8:e0098921. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.00989-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

Pathotyping of Newcastle Disease Virus: a Novel Single BsaHI Digestion Method of 
Detection and Differentiation of Avirulent Strains (Lentogenic and Mesogenic
Vaccine Strains) from Virulent Virus.

Desingu PA(1)(2), Singh SD(1), Dhama K(1), Vinodhkumar OR(3), Nagarajan K(4),
Singh R(1), Malik YS(5), Singh RK(6).

Author information: 
(1)Avian Diseases Section, Division of Pathology, ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research
Institute, Izatnagar, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, Karnataka, India.
(3)Division of Epidemiology, ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research Institute,
Izatnagar, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(4)Department of Veterinary Pathology, Madras Veterinary College, Tamil Nadu
Veterinary and Animal Sciences University, Vepery, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.
(5)Division of Biological Standardization, ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research
Institute, Izatnagar, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(6)ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, Uttar Pradesh, India.

We provide a novel single restriction enzyme (RE; BsaHI) digestion approach for
detecting distinct pathotypes of Newcastle disease virus (NDV). After scanning
4,000 F gene nucleotide sequences in the NCBI database, we discovered a single RE
(BsaHI) digestion site in the cleavage site. APMV-I "F gene" class II-specific
primer-based reverse transcriptase PCR was utilized to amplify a 535-bp fragment,
which was then digested with the RE (BsaHI) for pathotyping avian NDV field
isolates and pigeon paramyxovirus-1 isolates. The avirulent (lentogenic and
mesogenic strains) produced 189- and 346-bp fragments, respectively, but the
result in velogenic strains remained undigested with 535-bp fragments. In
addition, 45 field NDV isolates and 8 vaccine strains were used to confirm the
approach. The sequence-based analysis also agrees with the data obtained
utilizing the single RE (BsaHI) digestion approach. The proposed technique has
the potential to distinguish between avirulent and virulent strains in a short
time span, making it valuable in NDV surveillance and monitoring research.
IMPORTANCE The extensive use of the NDV vaccine strain and the existence of
avirulent NDV strains in wild birds makes it difficult to diagnose Newcastle
Disease virus (NDV). The intracerebral pathogenicity index (ICPI) and/or
sequencing-based identification, which are required to determine virulent NDV,
are time-consuming, costly, difficult, and cruel techniques. We evaluated 4,000 F
gene nucleotide sequences and discovered a restriction enzyme (RE; BsaHI)
digestion technique for detecting NDV and vaccine pathotypes in a short time
span, which is cost-effective and useful for field cases as well as for
large-scale NDV monitoring and surveillance. The data acquired using the single
RE BsaHI digestion technique agree with the sequence-based analysis.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.00989-21 
PMID: 34878298 

