
1. ACS Infect Dis. 2021 Dec 8. doi: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.1c00367. [Epub ahead of
print]

Emerging Roles of Glycopeptide Antibiotics: Moving beyond Gram-Positive Bacteria.

Acharya Y(1), Bhattacharyya S(2), Dhanda G(1), Haldar J(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Antimicrobial Research Laboratory, New Chemistry Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre
for Advanced Scientific Research (JNCASR), Jakkur, Bengaluru 560064, Karnataka,
India.
(2)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Program, Departments of Chemistry and
Biology, College of Arts and Science, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts
02215, United States.
(3)School of Advanced Materials, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific 
Research (JNCASR), Jakkur, Bengaluru 560064, Karnataka, India.

Glycopeptides, a class of cell wall biosynthesis inhibitors, have been the
antibiotics of choice against drug-resistant Gram-positive bacterial infections. 
Their unique mechanism of action involving binding to the substrate of cell wall 
biosynthesis and substantial longevity in clinics makes this class of antibiotics
an attractive choice for drug repurposing and reprofiling. However, resistance to
glycopeptides has been observed due to alterations in the substrate, cell wall
thickening, or both. The emergence of glycopeptide resistance has resulted in the
development of synthetic and semisynthetic glycopeptide analogues to target
acquired resistance. Recent findings demonstrate that these derivatives, along
with some of the FDA approved glycopeptides have been shown to have antimicrobial
activity against Gram-negative bacteria, Mycobacteria, and viruses thus expanding
their spectrum of activity across the microbial kingdom. Additional mechanisms of
action and identification of novel targets have proven to be critical in
broadening the spectrum of activity of glycopeptides. This review focuses on the 
applications of glycopeptides beyond their traditional target group of
Gram-positive bacteria. This will aid in making the scientific community aware
about the nontraditional activity profiles of glycopeptides, identify the
existing loopholes, and further explore this antibiotic class as a potential
broad-spectrum antimicrobial agent.

DOI: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.1c00367 
PMID: 34878254 

