
1. J Extracell Vesicles. 2021 Dec;10(14):e12170. doi: 10.1002/jev2.12170.

Millisecond dynamic of SARS-CoV-2 spike and its interaction with ACE2 receptor
and small extracellular vesicles.

Lim K(1), Nishide G(2), Yoshida T(1)(3), Watanabe-Nakayama T(1), Kobayashi A(4), 
Hazawa M(1)(4), Hanayama R(1)(3), Ando T(1), Wong RW(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)WPI-Nano Life Science Institute, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Ishikawa,
Japan.
(2)Division of Nano Life Science in the Graduate School of Frontier Science
Initiative, WISE Program for Nano-Precision Medicine, Science and Technology,
Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.
(3)Department of Immunology, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.
(4)Cell-Bionomics Research Unit, Institute for Frontier Science Initiative
(INFINITI), Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.

SARS-CoV-2 spike protein (S) binds to human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2
(hACE2), allowing virus to dock on cell membrane follow by viral entry. Here, we 
use high-speed atomic force microscopy (HS-AFM) for real-time visualization of S,
and its interaction with hACE2 and small extracellular vesicles (sEVs). Results
show conformational heterogeneity of S, flexibility of S stalk and
receptor-binding domain (RBD), and pH/temperature-induced conformational change
of S. S in an S-ACE2 complex appears as an all-RBD up conformation. The complex
acquires a distinct topology upon acidification. S and S2 subunit demonstrate
different membrane docking mechanisms on sEVs. S-hACE2 interaction facilitates S 
to dock on sEVs, implying the feasibility of ACE2-expressing sEVs for viral
neutralization. In contrary, S2 subunit docks on lipid layer and enters sEV using
its fusion peptide, mimicking the viral entry scenario. Altogether, our study
provides a platform that is suitable for real-time visualization of various entry
inhibitors, neutralizing antibodies, and sEV-based decoy in blocking viral entry.
Teaser: Comprehensive observation of SARS-CoV-2 spike and its interaction with
receptor ACE2 and sEV-based decoy in real time using HS-AFM.

© 2021 The Authors. Journal of Extracellular Vesicles published by Wiley
Periodicals, LLC on behalf of the International Society for Extracellular
Vesicles.

DOI: 10.1002/jev2.12170 
PMID: 34874124 

