
1. J Virol. 2021 Dec 8:JVI0194221. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01942-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Comprehensive analysis of protein acetylation and glucose metabolism inmouse
brains infected with rabies virus.

Pei J(1)(2), Yuan Y(1)(2), Tian D(1)(2), Huang F(1)(2), Zhang C(1)(2), Wang
C(1)(2), Zhou M(1)(2), Chen H(1)(2), Fu Z(1)(2)(3), Zhao L(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Preventive Veterinary Medicine of Hubei Province, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA.

Rabies, caused by rabies virus (RABV), is a widespread zoonosis that is nearly
100% fatal. Alteration of the metabolic environment affects viral replication and
the immune response during viral infection. In this study, glucose uptake was
increased in mouse brains at the late stage of infection with different RABV
strains (lab-attenuated CVS strain and wild-type DRV strain). To illustrate the
mechanism underlying glucose metabolism alteration, comprehensive analysis of
lysine acetylation and target analysis of energy metabolites in mouse brains
infected with CVS and DRV strains were performed. A total of 156 acetylated sites
and 115 acetylated proteins were identified as significantly different during
RABV infection. Compared to CVS- and mock-infected mice, the lysine acetylation
levels of glycolysis and tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle enzymes were decreased,
and enzyme activity was upregulated in DRV-infected mouse brains. Metabolomic
analysis revealed that high levels of oxaloacetate (OAA) in RABV-infected mouse
brains. Specifically, the OAA level in CVS-infected mouse brains was higher than 
that in DRV-infected mouse brains, which contributed to the enhancement of the
metabolic rate at the substrate level. Finally, we confirmed that OAA could
reduce excessive neuroinflammation in CVS-infected mouse brains by inhibiting JNK
and P38 phosphorylation. Taken together, this study provides fresh insight into
the different strategies the host adapts to regulate glucose metabolism for
energy requirements after different RABV strain infection and suggest that OAA
treatment could be a potential strategy to prevent neural damage during RABV
infection. IMPORTANCE Both viral replication and the host immune response are
highly energy-dependent. It is important to understand how the rabies virus
affects energy metabolism in the brain. Glucose is the direct energy source for
cell metabolism. Previous studies have revealed that there is some association
between acetylation and metabolic processes. In this study, comprehensive protein
acetylation and glucose metabolism analysis were conducted to compare glucose
metabolism in mouse brains infected with different RABV strains. Our study
demonstrates that the regulation of enzyme activity by acetylation and OAA
accumulation at the substrate level are two strategies for the host to respond to
the energy requirements after RABV infection. Our study also indicates the
potential role OAA could play in neuronal protection by suppressing excessive
neuroinflammation.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01942-21 
PMID: 34878915 

