
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Dec 8:e0033821. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.00338-21. [Epub
ahead of print]

Amino Acid Metabolism is Significantly Altered at the Time of Admission in
Hospital for Severe COVID-19 Patients: Findings from Longitudinal Targeted
Metabolomics Analysis.

Ansone L(#)(1), Briviba M(#)(1), Silamikelis I(1), Terentjeva A(2), Perkons I(3),
Birzniece L(1), Rovite V(1), Rozentale B(2), Viksna L(2), Kolesova O(2), Klavins 
K(4), Klovins J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centregrid.419210.f, Riga, Latvia.
(2)Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia.
(3)Institute of Food Safety, Animal Health and Environment (BIOR), Riga, Latvia.
(4)Riga Technical University, Riga, Latvia.
(#)Contributed equally

The heterogeneity in severity and outcome of COVID-19 cases points out the urgent
need for early molecular characterization of patients followed by risk-stratified
care. The main objective of this study was to evaluate the fluctuations of serum 
metabolomic profiles of COVID-19 patients with severe illness during the
different disease stages in a longitudinal manner. We demonstrate a distinct
metabolomic signature in serum samples of 32 hospitalized patients at the acute
phase compared to the recovery period, suggesting the tryptophan (tryptophan,
kynurenine, and 3-hydroxy-DL-kynurenine) and arginine (citrulline and ornithine) 
metabolism as contributing pathways in the immune response to SARS-CoV-2 with a
potential link to the clinical severity of the disease. In addition, we suggest
that glutamine deprivation may further result in inhibited M2 macrophage
polarization as a complementary process, and highlight the contribution of
phenylalanine and tyrosine in the molecular mechanisms underlying the severe
course of the infection. In conclusion, our results provide several functional
metabolic markers for disease progression and severe outcome with potential
clinical application. IMPORTANCE Although the host defense mechanisms against
SARS-CoV-2 infection are still poorly described, they are of central importance
in shaping the course of the disease and the possible outcome. Metabolomic
profiling may complement the lacking knowledge of the molecular mechanisms
underlying clinical manifestations and pathogenesis of COVID-19. Moreover, early 
identification of metabolomics-based biomarker signatures is proved to serve as
an effective approach for the prediction of disease outcome. Here we provide the 
list of metabolites describing the severe, acute phase of the infection and bring
the evidence of crucial metabolic pathways linked to aggressive immune responses.
Finally, we suggest metabolomic phenotyping as a promising method for developing 
personalized care strategies in COVID-19 patients.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.00338-21 
PMID: 34878333 

