
1. Allergy Asthma Proc. 2021 Nov 1;42(6):495-505. doi: 10.2500/aap.2021.42.210077.

The immunologic response to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2.

Le NK(1), Kaman K(2), Martin HC(3), Mullur J(3), Stenehjem KK(4), Coomar L(5),
Bahar B(6), Dutta M(1), Izurieta R(7), Brooks JP(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Surgery, Morsani College of Medicine, University of
South Florida, Tampa, Florida.
(2)Divison of Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
(3)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and Immunology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Children's National Hospital, Washington, 
D.C.
(5)Department of Anatomical Science and Education, Saint Louis University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri.
(6)Division of Laboratory Medicine, Children's National Hospital, Washington,
D.C.
(7)Division of Global Communicable Disease, College of Public Health, University 
of South Florida, Tampa, Florida; and.

Background: The spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) has precipitated the worst global pandemic in a century, which has
caused millions of infections and deaths as well as massive economic
repercussions. Objective: As with any pathogenic virus, it is crucial to
understand its unique interactions with the human immune system so that
pharmaceutical and prophylactic interventions can be deployed to effectively
control the pandemic. Methods: A literature search by using PubMed was conducted 
in 2020 with variants of the terms "COVID-19," "SARS-CoV-2," and "immunological
response." English language articles that presented original data about the
immunologic response to coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) were selected for
review. This article reviewed the current understanding of the innate and
adaptive immune responses to SARS-CoV-2 infection, including their relationship
to current therapeutic and diagnostic strategies. Results: SARS-CoV-2 uses
several unique molecular techniques to evade detection by the innate immune
system early in the course of infection, and upregulation of these innate immune 
pathways may possibly accelerate the time to recovery and prevent severe disease.
Although the majority of cases results in the patients' recovery, a significant
proportion of infections result in deaths prompted by the host's inflammatory
overreaction to the infection, a response that can be attenuated with
corticosteroids and potentially other immune modulators. Conclusion: Current work
by the scientific community to further understand how SARS-CoV-2 interacts with
the human immune system will be invaluable to our response and preparedness for
future coronavirus pandemics.

DOI: 10.2500/aap.2021.42.210077 
PMID: 34871157 

