
1. mBio. 2021 Dec 7:e0225921. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02259-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Staphylococcal Phages Adapt to New Hosts by Extensive Attachment Site
Variability.

Leinweber H(1), Sieber RN(2), Larsen J(2), Stegger M(2), Ingmer H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, University of
Copenhagengrid.5254.6, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Department of Bacteria, Parasites and Fungi, Statens Serum
Institutgrid.6203.7, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Bacterial pathogens commonly carry prophages that express virulence factors, and 
human strains of Staphylococcus aureus carry Sa3int phages, which promote immune 
evasion. Recently, however, these phages have been found in livestock-associated,
methicillin-resistant S. aureus (LA-MRSA). This is surprising, as LA-MRSA strains
contain a mutated primary bacterial integration site, which likely explains why
the rare integration events that do occur mostly happen at alternative locations.
Using deep sequencing, we show that after initial integration at secondary sites,
Sa3int phages adapt through nucleotide changes in their attachment sequences to
increase homology with alternative bacterial attachment sites. Importantly, this 
homology significantly enhances integrations in new rounds of infections. We
propose that promiscuity of the phage-encoded tyrosine recombinase is responsible
for establishment of Sa3int phages in LA-MRSA. Our results demonstrate that
phages can adopt extensive population heterogeneity, leading to establishment in 
strains lacking bona fide integration sites. Ultimately, their presence may
increase virulence and zoonotic potential of pathogens with major implications
for human health. IMPORTANCE A growing number of humans are being infected by
antibiotic resistant Staphylococcus aureus originating from livestock. The
preference of S. aureus for humans or animals is in part determined by factors
encoded by viruses (phages) that reside in the bacterial genome. Here, we reveal 
a process by which phages adapt to and become integrated in new strains of S.
aureus lacking the preferred phage integration site. We propose that this is due 
to the relaxed specificity of a phage-encoded enzyme called recombinase. As this 
recombinase is used by many other phages, our results might have implications for
a broader range of phages. Importantly, the adaptation described here enables S. 
aureus to jump between host organisms and increases its zoonotic threat.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02259-21 
PMID: 34872344 

