
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Dec 8;17(12):e1010107. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010107.
eCollection 2021 Dec.

A double deletion prevents replication of the pestivirus bovine viral diarrhea
virus in the placenta of pregnant heifers.

Carlson J(1), Kammerer R(1), Teifke JP(2), Sehl-Ewert J(2), Pfarrer C(3), Meyers 
G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Immunologie, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Greifswald-Insel Riems.
(2)Abteilung für experimentelle Tierhaltung und Biosicherheit,
Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Greifswald-Insel Riems.
(3)Institute for Anatomy, University of Veterinary Medicine, Hannover, Germany,
University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Hannover, Germany.

In contrast to wild type bovine viral diarhea virus (BVDV) specific double
deletion mutants are not able to establish persistent infection upon infection of
a pregnant heifer. Our data shows that this finding results from a defect in
transfer of the virus from the mother animal to the fetus. Pregnant heifers were 
inoculated with such a double deletion mutant or the parental wild type virus and
slaughtered pairwise on days 6, 9, 10 and 13 post infection. Viral RNA was
detected via qRT-PCR and RNAscope analyses in maternal tissues for both viruses
from day 6 p.i. on. However, the double deletion mutant was not detected in
placenta and was only found in samples from animals infected with the wild type
virus. Similarly, high levels of wild type viral RNA were present in fetal
tissues whereas the genome of the double deletion mutant was not detected
supporting the hypothesis of a specific inhibition of mutant virus replication in
the placenta. We compared the induction of gene expression upon infection of
placenta derived cell lines with wild type and mutant virus via gene array
analysis. Genes important for the innate immune response were strongly
upregulated by the mutant virus compared to the wild type in caruncle epithelial 
cells that establish the cell layer on the maternal side at the maternal-fetal
interface in the placenta. Also, trophoblasts which can be found on the fetal
side of the interface showed significant induction of gene expression upon
infection with the mutant virus although with lower complexity. Growth curves
recorded in both cell lines revealed a general reduction of virus replication in 
caruncular epithelial cells compared to the trophoblasts. Compared to the wild
type virus this effect was dramtic for the mutant virus that reached only a
TCID50 of 1.0 at 72 hours post infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010107 
PMID: 34879119 

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal’s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: GM holds a patent on
the use of double deletion mutants of pestiviruses as vaccines.

