
1. Appl Health Econ Health Policy. 2021 Dec 6. doi: 10.1007/s40258-021-00694-w.
[Epub ahead of print]

Population-Based Testing for Undiagnosed Hepatitis C: A Systematic Review of
Economic Evaluations.

Carty PG(1)(2), Fawsitt CG(3), Gillespie P(4), Harrington P(3), O'Neill M(3),
Smith SM(5), Teljeur C(3), Ryan M(3)(6).

Author information: 
(1)RCSI University of Medicine and Health Sciences, Dublin, Ireland.
paulcarty@rcsi.com.
(2)Health Information and Quality Authority, Dublin, Ireland. paulcarty@rcsi.com.
(3)Health Information and Quality Authority, Dublin, Ireland.
(4)Health Economics and Policy Analysis Centre, CÚRAM, the SFI Research Centre
for Medical Devices (12/RC/2073_2), National University of Ireland Galway,
Galway, Ireland.
(5)Health Research Board Centre for Primary Care Research, Department of General 
Practice, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 123 St Stephens Green, Dublin,
Ireland.
(6)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Trinity College Dublin, Trinity
Health Sciences, St James's Hospital, Dublin 8, Ireland.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Recognising the significant public health threat posed
by hepatitis C, international targets have been established by the World Health
Organization with the aim of eradicating the hepatitis C virus (HCV) by 2030.
With the availability of safe and effective therapies, the greatest challenge to 
achieving elimination is the identification and treatment of those currently
undiagnosed. This systematic review aimed to identify and appraise the
international literature on the cost-effectiveness of birth cohort, universal,
and age-based general population testing for identifying people with undiagnosed 
chronic HCV infection.
METHODS: A comprehensive literature search was undertaken in Medline, Embase and 
grey literature sources to identify studies published between 1 January 2000 and 
17 July 2020. Retrieved citations were independently reviewed by two reviewers
according to pre-defined eligibility criteria. Data extraction and critical
appraisal were completed in duplicate. Study quality, relevance and credibility
were assessed using the Consensus for Health Economic Criteria and the ISPOR
questionnaires. All costs were reported in 2019 Irish Euro following adjustment
for inflation and purchasing power parity. Willingness-to-pay (WTP) thresholds of
€20,000 and €45,000 were adopted as reference points for interpreting
cost-effectiveness in the narrative synthesis. The systematic review is reported 
according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) criteria.
RESULTS: Overall, 4622 citations were retrieved in the literature search. Of
these, 27 studies met the inclusion criteria. Six (22%) of the 27 studies were
rated as low quality, 17 (63%) were moderate quality and four (15%) were high
quality. Compared with no testing or risk-based testing: 14 of 16 (88%)
cost-utility analyses found that birth cohort testing was cost effective, eight
of nine (89%) analyses found that universal testing was cost effective, and eight
of eight (100%) analyses found that age-based general population testing was cost
effective. Cost effectiveness was influenced by disease prevalence and
progression, testing and treatment uptake, treatment eligibility of those
identified by testing, the cost of treatment and the proportion of those treated 
that achieve sustained virological response.
CONCLUSION: Overall, the international evidence supports the potential cost
effectiveness of birth cohort, universal, and age-based general population
testing, but is caveated by study generalisability, specifically the
transferability of findings from one jurisdiction to another, and institutional
variations in healthcare delivery systems and budgetary constraints. The cost
effectiveness of each approach will vary according to population- and health
system-specific characteristics such as epidemiological context, testing
coverage, linkage to care and capacity to treat. Given issues regarding the
transferability of economic evaluations (for example, model inputs and
assumptions) and the significant resources required to implement these
interventions, jurisdiction-specific economic evaluations and budget impact
analyses will likely be required to inform investment and implementation
decisions.
REGISTRATION: PROSPERO, CRD42019127159. Registered 29 April 2019.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40258-021-00694-w 
PMID: 34870793 

