
1. J Virol. 2021 Dec 8:JVI0195321. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01953-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Bryostatin-1 decreases HIV-1 infection and viral production in human primary
macrophages.

Hany L(1), Turmel MO(1), Barat C(1), Ouellet M(1), Tremblay MJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Axe des Maladies Infectieuses et Immunitaires, Centre de Recherche du Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec-Université Laval, Québec (QC), G1V 4G2,
Canada.
(2)Département de Microbiologie-Infectiologie et Immunologie, Faculté de
médecine, Université Laval, Québec (QC), G1V 0A6, Canada.

While combination antiretroviral therapy maintains undetectable viremia in People
Living With HIV (PLWH), a life-long treatment is necessary to prevent viremic
rebound after therapy cessation. This rebound seemed mainly caused by long lived 
HIV-1 latently infected cells reversing to a viral productive status. Reversing
latency and elimination of these cells by the so-called shock and kill strategy
is one of the main investigated leads to achieve an HIV-1 cure. Small molecules
referred as latency reversal agents (LRAs) proved to efficiently reactivate
latent CD4+ T cells. However, LRAs impact on de novo infection or HIV-1
production in productively infected macrophages remain elusive. Nontoxic doses of
bryostatin-1, JQ1 and romidepsin were investigated in human monocyte-derived
macrophages (MDMs). Treatment with bryostatin-1 or romidepsin resulted in a
downregulation of CD4 and CCR5 receptors respectively, accompanied by a reduction
of R5 tropic virus infection. HIV-1 replication was mainly regulated by receptor 
modulation for bryostatin-1, while romidepsin effect rely on upregulation of
SAMHD1 activity. LRA stimulation of chronically infected cells did not enhance
neither HIV-1 production nor gene expression. Surprisingly, bryostatin-1 caused a
major decrease in viral production. This effect was not viral strain specific but
appears to occur only in myeloid cells. Bryostatin-1 treatment of infected MDMs
led to decreased amounts of capsid and matrix mature proteins with little to no
modulation of precursors. Our observations revealed that bryostatin-1-treated
myeloid and CD4+ T cells are responding differently upon HIV-1 infection.
Therefore, additional studies are warranted to more fully assess the efficiency
of HIV-1 eradicating strategies. Importance HIV-1 persists in a cellular latent
form despite therapy that quickly propagates infection upon treatment
interruption. Reversing latency would contribute to eradicate these cells,
closing a gap to a cure. Macrophages are an acknowledged HIV-1 reservoir during
therapy and are suspected to harbor latency establishment in vivo. Yet, the
impact of latency reversal agents (LRAs) on HIV-1 infection and viral production 
in human macrophages is poorly known but nonetheless crucial to probe the safety 
of this strategy. In this in vitro study, we discovered encouraging
anti-replicative features of distinct LRAs in human macrophages. We also
described a new viral production inhibition mechanism by protein kinase C
agonists which is specific to myeloid cells. This study provides new insights on 
HIV-1 propagation restriction potentials by LRAs in human macrophages and
underline the importance of assessing latency reversal strategy on all HIV-1
targeted cells.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01953-21 
PMID: 34878918 

