
1. J Virol. 2021 Dec 8:JVI0186721. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01867-21. [Epub ahead of print]

The mouse cytomegalovirus G protein-coupled receptor homolog, M33, coordinates
key features of in vivo infection via distinct components of its signalling
repertoire.

Ma J(1), Bruce K(1), Davis-Poynter N, Stevenson PG(1), Farrell HE(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland,
Brisbane, Australia.

Common to all cytomegalovirus (CMV) genomes analysed to date is the presence of G
protein-coupled receptors (GPCR). Animal models of CMV provide insights into
their role in viral fitness. The mouse cytomegalovirus (MCMV) GPCR, M33,
facilitates dendritic cell (DC)-dependent viremia, the extravasation of
blood-borne infected DC to the salivary gland and the frequency of reactivation
events from latently-infected tissue explants. Constitutive G protein-coupled M33
signalling is required for these phenotypes, although the contribution of
distinct biochemical pathways activated by M33 is unknown. M33 engages Gq/11 to
constitutively activate phospholipase C β (PLCβ) and downstream cyclic AMP
response-element binding protein (CREB) in vitro. Identification of a MCMV M33
mutant (M33ΔC38) for which CREB signalling was disabled, but PLCβ activation was 
preserved, provided the opportunity to investigate their relevance in vivo.
Following intranasal infection with MCMV M33ΔC38, the absence of M33 CREB
Gq/11-dependent signalling correlated with reduced mobilisation of
lytically-infected DC to draining lymph node high endothelial venules (HEVs) and 
reduced viremia compared with wild type MCMV. In contrast, M33ΔC38-infected DC
within the vascular compartment extravasated to the salivary glands via a
pertussis toxin-sensitive, Gi/o-dependent and CREB-independent mechanism. In the 
context of MCMV latency, spleen explants from M33ΔC38-infected mice were markedly
attenuated for reactivation. Taken together, these data demonstrate that key
features of the MCMV lifecycle are coordinated in diverse tissues by distinct
pathways of the M33 signalling repertoire. IMPORTANCE G protein-coupled receptors
(GPCRs) act as cell surface molecular "switches" which regulate the cellular
response to environmental stimuli. All cytomegalovirus (CMV) genomes analysed to 
date possess GPCR homologs with phylogenetic evidence for independent gene
capture events, signifying important in vivo roles. The mouse CMV (MCMV) GPCR
homolog, designated M33, is important for cell-associated virus spread and for
the establishment and/or reactivation of latent MCMV infection. The signalling
repertoire of M33 is distinct from cellular GPCRs and little is known of the
relevance of component signalling pathways for in vivo M33 function. In this
report, we show temporal and tissue-specific M33 signalling is required
facilitating in vivo infection. Understanding the relevance of the viral GPCR
signalling profiles for in vivo function will provide opportunities for future
targeted interventions.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01867-21 
PMID: 34878888 

