
1. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2021 Oct 3;8(12):ofab494. doi: 10.1093/ofid/ofab494.
eCollection 2021 Dec.

Myositis Caused by Trachipleistophora hominis in a Person With Human
Immunodeficiency Virus: The First Case in Thailand.

Buppajarntham A(1), Atikankul T(2), Putaporntip C(3), Jongwutiwes S(3),
Suankratay C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Bangkok Phuket
Hospital, Phuket, Thailand.
(2)Department of Pathology, Queen Savang Vadhana Memorial Hospital, Thai Red
Cross Society, Chonburi, Thailand.
(3)Molecular Biology of Malaria and Opportunistic Parasites Research Unit,
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Background: To date, cases of extraintestinal micro-sporidiosis have been
increasingly reported in both otherwise healthy and immunocompromised
individuals. Among them, microsporidial myositis is very rare. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first report of microsporidial myositis caused by
Trachipleistophora hominis in a patient with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
in Thailand.
Case report: A Thai man with HIV presented with fever and muscle pain at both
anterior thighs and left arm for 3 months. Muscle biopsy was performed, and
pathology exhibited neutrophil infiltration and focal aggregations of
microsporidial spores. The 18S ribosomal RNA sequence revealed the species of
this microsporidium as T hominis, and albendazole of 800mg/day was initiated. He 
gradually improved, and was discharged home 6 weeks after hospitalization.
Conclusions: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of
microsporidial myositis caused by Trachipleistophora hominis in a person with HIV
in Thailand.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
Infectious Diseases Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/ofid/ofab494 
PMCID: PMC8643666
PMID: 34877363 

