
1. Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2021 Dec 6;76:e3192. doi: 10.6061/clinics/2021/e3192.
eCollection 2021.

The importance of viral load in the severity of acute bronchiolitis in
hospitalized infants.

De Paulis M(1)(2), Oliveira DBL(3)(4), Thomazelli LM(3), Ferraro AA(5), Durigon
EL(3)(6), Vieira SE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Unidade de Urgencia e Emergencia Referenciada Infantil, Divisao de Pediatria, 
Hospital Universitario, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP, BR.
(2)Unidade de Pronto Atendimento, Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, Sao Paulo, 
SP, BR.
(3)Laboratorio de Virologia Clinica e Molecular, Departamento de Microbiologia,
Instituto de Ciencias Biomedicas, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP, BR.
(4)Instituto Israelita de Ensino e Pesquisa Albert Einstein, Sao Paulo, SP, BR.
(5)Departamento de Pediatria, Faculdade de Medicina FMUSP, Universidade de Sao
Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP, BR.
(6)Plataforma Cientifica Pasteur, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP, BR.

OBJECTIVE: The relationship between viral load and the clinical evolution of
bronchiolitis is controversial. Therefore, we aimed to analyze viral loads in
infants hospitalized for bronchiolitis.
METHODS: We tested for the presence of human respiratory syncytial virus (HRSV)
or human rhinovirus (HRV) using quantitative molecular tests of nasopharyngeal
secretions and recorded severity outcomes.
RESULTS: We included 70 infants [49 (70%) HRSV, 9 (13%) HRV and 12 (17%)
HRSV+HRV]. There were no differences among the groups according to the outcomes
analyzed individually. Clinical scores showed greater severity in the isolated
HRSV infection group. A higher isolated HRSV viral load was associated with more 
prolonged ventilatory support, oxygen therapy, and hospitalization days, even
after adjustment for the age and period of nasopharyngeal secretion collection.
In the co-infection groups, there was a longer duration of oxygen therapy when
the HRSV viral load was predominant. Isolated HRV infection and co-infection with
a predominance of HRV were not associated with severity.
CONCLUSION: Higher HRSV viral load in isolated infections and the predominance of
HRSV in co-infections, independent of viral load, were associated with greater
severity. These results contribute to the development of therapeutic and
prophylactic approaches and a greater understanding of the pathophysiology of
bronchiolitis.

DOI: 10.6061/clinics/2021/e3192 
PMID: 34878030 

