
1. J Virol. 2021 Dec 8:JVI0200521. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02005-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Rab1b-GBF1-ARF1 secretory pathway axis is required for Birnavirus replication.

Gimenez MC(1)(2)(3), Frontini-Lopez YR(1), Pocognoni CA(1), Roldán JS(4),
Samartino CG(5), Uhart M(1), Colombo MI(1), Terebiznik MR(3), Delgui LR(1)(6).

Author information: 
(1)IHEM, Universidad Nacional de Cuyo, CONICET, Mendoza, Argentina.
(2)Facultad de Ciencias Veterinarias y Ambientales, Universidad Juan Agustín
Maza, Mendoza, Argentina.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences and Department of Cell and System Biology,
University of Toronto at Scarborough, Canada.
(4)Instituto de Investigaciones Biotecnológicas "Dr. Rodolfo A. Ugalde" (IIBIO), 
Universidad Nacional de San Martín (UNSAM), Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones
Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), San Martín, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(5)Facultad de Ciencias Médicas, Universidad Nacional de Cuyo, Mendoza,
Argentina.
(6)Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad Nacional de Cuyo,
Mendoza, Argentina.

Birnaviruses are members of the Birnaviridae family, responsible for major
economic losses to poultry and aquaculture. The family is composed of
non-enveloped viruses with a segmented double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) genome.
Infectious bursal disease virus (IBDV), the prototypic family member, is the
etiological agent of Gumboro disease, a highly contagious immunosuppressive
disease in the poultry industry worldwide. We previously demonstrated that IBDV
hijacks the endocytic pathway for establishing the viral replication complexes on
endosomes associated with the Golgi complex (GC). In this work, we report that
IBDV reorganizes the GC to localize the endosome-associated replication complexes
without affecting its secretory functionality. Analyzing crucial proteins
involved in the secretory pathway, we showed the essential requirement of Rab1b
for viral replication. Rab1b comprises a key regulator of GC transport and we
demonstrate that transfecting the negative mutant Rab1b N121I or knocking down
Rab1b expression by RNA interference significantly reduces the yield of
infectious viral progeny. Furthermore, we showed that the Rab1b downstream
effector Golgi-specific BFA resistance factor 1 (GBF1), which activates the small
GTPase ADP-ribosylation factor 1 (ARF1), is required for IBDV replication since
inhibiting its activity by treatment with brefeldin A (BFA) or Golgicide A (GCA) 
significantly reduces the yield of infectious viral progeny. Finally, we show
that ARF1 dominant negative-mutant T31N over-expression hampered the IBDV
infection. Taken together, these results demonstrate that IBDV requires the
function of the Rab1b-GBF1-ARF1 axis to promote its replication, making a
substantial contribution to the field of birnaviruses-host cell interactions.
IMPORTANCE Birnaviruses are unconventional members of the dsRNA viruses, being
the lack of a transcriptionally active core the main differential feature. This
structural trait, among others that resemble the plus single-stranded (+ssRNA)
viruses features, suggests that birnaviruses might follow a different replication
program from that conducted by prototypical dsRNA members and have argued the
hypothesis that birnaviruses could be evolutionary links between +ssRNA and dsRNA
viruses. Here, we present original data showing the IBDV-induced GC
reorganization and the crosstalk between IBDV and the Rab1b-GBF1-ARF1 mediated
intracellular trafficking pathway. The replication of several +ssRNA viruses
depends on the cellular protein GBF1, but its role in the replication process is 
not clear. Thus, our findings make a substantial contribution to the field of
birnaviruses-host cells and provide further evidence supporting the proposed
evolutionary connection role of birnaviruses, an aspect which we consider
especially relevant for researchers working in the virology field.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02005-21 
PMID: 34878889 

