
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2021 Dec 6. doi: 10.1111/tbed.14410. [Epub ahead of print]

Main determinants of the acceptance of COVID-19 control measures by the
population: a first pilot survey at the University of Liege, Belgium.

Renault V(1), Fontaine S(2), Mpouam SE(3), Saegerman C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of infectious and parasitic diseases, Research Unit in Epidemiology
and risk analysis applied in veterinary sciences (UREAR), Fundamental and Applied
Research for Animals and Health (FARAH) Center, University of Liege, Belgium.
(2)Institute for Research in Social Sciences (IRSS), Faculty of Social Sciences, 
University of Liege, Belgium.
(3)School of veterinary medicine and Science, University of Ngaoundere, Cameroon.

BACKGROUND: In order to control the COVID-19 pandemic, barrier gestures were used
to reduce the transmission of the virus within a community and avoid large peaks 
of infections with the risk of overwhelming the healthcare systems. The
acceptability of these measures is the backbone of their successful
implementation. However, population compliance with these measures within a
community is uncertain, even when mandatory. At the beginning of the 2020-2021
academic year, the University of Liege complemented these measures, by organizing
a weekly screening by saliva testing on a voluntary basis for all its workers and
students. Their compliance with the different measures was necessary for
effective control program and an intensive communication plan was implemented
throughout the 2020-2021 academic year for that purpose METHOD AND PRINCIPAL
FINDINGS: An on-line survey was launched upon the implementation of the saliva
testing in order (i) to assess the level of acceptance of the different measures 
by the university workers and students, (ii) to identify the factors determining 
their acceptance (based on the Health Belief Model) and their reported level of
implementation. A total of 921 responses was received and analysed by sub-group
comparison, structural equation modelling and multivariable ordinal logistic
regression. Health motivation, susceptibility, severity and perception of
benefits were identified as the key determinants of protective measures
acceptance CONCLUSION AND SIGNIFICANCE: In order to influence positively these
mental constructs and to increase the level of implementation of control
measures, it is therefore recommended to raise the awareness of the university
workers and students about their self and collective responsibility to protect
themselves and the population at risk that can be severely affected by the
disease. The non-medical faculties (i.e. the Faculty of Medicine and the Faculty 
of Veterinary Medicine excluded) should be specifically targeted as their heath
motivation was significantly lower. This survey demonstrates that the risk
mitigation strategies against COVID-19 should integrate the importance of
individual perception. The methodology developed in this survey can be
generalised in space and time, in different contexts. This article is protected
by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.14410 
PMID: 34870377 

