
1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2021 Nov 22. [Epub ahead of print]

Human herpesvirus infections and circulating microvesicles expressing galectin-3 
binding protein in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Rasmussen NS(1), Draborg AH(2), Houen G(2), Nielsen CT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Copenhagen Lupus and Vasculitis Clinic, Center for Rheumatology and Spine
Diseases, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
niclasra@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Autoimmunology and Biomarkers, Statens Serum Institut,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Copenhagen Lupus and Vasculitis Clinic, Center for Rheumatology and Spine
Diseases, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.

OBJECTIVES: Circulating microvesicles (MVs) expressing the type 1
interferon-inducible protein galectin-3 binding protein (G3BP) are potentially
major sources of autoantigens in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). In this
study, we explore if plasma concentrations of G3BP-expressing MVs correlate with 
signs of various active human herpesvirus (HHV) infections in SLE patients,
suggesting a virus-induced mechanism for the generation of these vesicles.
METHODS: In 49 SLE patients, the plasma levels of immunoglobulin G (IgG) against 
cytomegalovirus (CMV) pp52, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) early antigen diffuse
(EA/D), and HHV6 p41 were measured by ELISAs and used as humoral markers of
ongoing/recently active viral infection. MVs in platelet-poor plasma were
quantified and characterised by flow cytometry, with regard to the binding of
Annexin V (AnxV) and the expression of G3BP. Spearman's rho and the Wilcoxon
rank-sum test were applied for associative evaluation of virus serology with MV
subsets, and clinical and demographic data.
RESULTS: The CMV pp52-directed antibodies correlated positively with the high
G3BP-expressing MVs; either low (rho=0.4, p-value=0.005) or high (rho=0.37,
p-value=0.01) in AnxV-expression. Furthermore, these MV subsets were higher in
individuals with high and low IgG levels against CMV pp52 and EBV EA/D,
respectively, relative to subjects with low and high IgG levels against these HHV
antigens. Importantly, none of the associations were explained by
immunosuppressants or antimalarials.
CONCLUSIONS: Ongoing/recently active CMV infection is associated with circulating
MVs expressing G3BP in SLE patients, supporting a link between specific viral
infections and potentially pathogenic MVs in SLE.


PMID: 34874835 

