
1. Ann Palliat Med. 2021 Nov;10(11):12025-12033. doi: 10.21037/apm-21-3178.

Primary colon natural killer (NK)/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type, with perforations:
a case report and literature review.

Xie Y(1), Liu Y(2), Wen C(3), Li W(4), Lu X(4), Deng L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Gannan
Medical University, Ganzhou, China.
(2)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jiangxi
Medical College, Shangrao, China.
(3)School of Nursing, Gannan Medical University, Ganzhou, China.
(4)Department of General Surgery, The People's Hospital of Ningdu County,
Ganzhou, China.
(5)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Gannan Medical University, Ganzhou, China.

Extranodal natural killer (NK)/T-cell lymphoma-nasal type (ENKTL-NT) is a rare,
aggressive subtype of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma associated with Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV) infection and has a poor prognosis. ENKTL-NT primarily involves the nasal
cavity, and the colon as the primary site has rarely been reported. Its lack of a
characteristic clinical presentation makes early diagnosis difficult to diagnose 
early, and misdiagnosis is common without the use of immunohistochemistry of
specimens. To further understand this rare solid tumor, we report a case in a
51-year-old male patient admitted to hospital with abdominal pain as the primary 
symptom. A provisional diagnosis of gastrointestinal perforation was made on the 
basis of enhanced computed tomography of the abdomen, and emergency surgery was
performed. However, 58 days after discharge, he suffered a second colonic
perforation, underwent emergency surgery and was diagnosed with primary colonic
ENKTL-NT based on the immunohistochemical results of the surgical specimen. He
was transferred to the oncology department for chemotherapy after recovery from
surgery, with gemcitabine, oxaliplatin, and pegaspargase as the chemotherapy
regimen. To date, he has completed 11 courses of chemotherapy, and is now in a
significantly improved general condition with no signs of tumor recurrence. We
also reviewed and compared the literature related to primary colonic ENKTL-NT.

DOI: 10.21037/apm-21-3178 
PMID: 34872326 

