
1. PLoS Med. 2021 Dec 6;18(12):e1003868. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1003868. [Epub
ahead of print]

Neutralizing antibody responses over time in demographically and clinically
diverse individuals recovered from SARS-CoV-2 infection in the United States and 
Peru: A cohort study.

Karuna S(1), Li SS(1), Grant S(1), Walsh SR(2), Frank I(3), Casapia M(4), Trahey 
M(1), Hyrien O(1), Fisher L(1), Miner MD(1), Randhawa AK(1), Polakowski L(5),
Kublin JG(1), Corey L(1), Montefiori D(6); HVTN 405/HPTN 1901 Study Team.

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.
(2)Brigham & Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
United States of America.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(4)Asociación Civil Selva Amazónica, Iquitos, Peru.
(5)Division of AIDS, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
(6)Department of Surgery and Duke Human Vaccine Institute, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: People infected with Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2) experience a wide range of clinical manifestations, from
asymptomatic and mild illness to severe illness and death, influenced by age and 
a variety of comorbidities. Neutralizing antibodies (nAbs) are thought to be a
primary immune defense against the virus. Large, diverse, well-characterized
cohorts of convalescent individuals provide standardized values to benchmark nAb 
responses to past SARS-CoV-2 infection and define potentially protective levels
of immunity.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: This analysis comprises an observational cohort of 329
HIV-seronegative adults in the United States (n = 167) and Peru (n = 162)
convalescing from SARS-CoV-2 infection from May through October 2020. The mean
age was 48 years (range 18 to 86), 54% of the cohort overall was Hispanic, and
34% identified as White. nAb titers were measured in serum by SARS-CoV-2.D614G
Spike-pseudotyped virus infection of 293T/ACE2 cells. Multiple linear regression 
was applied to define associations between nAb titers and demographic variables, 
disease severity and time from infection or disease onset, and comorbidities
within and across US and Peruvian cohorts over time. nAb titers peaked 28 to 42
days post-diagnosis and were higher in participants with a history of severe
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) illness (p < 0.001). Diabetes, age >55 years,
male sex assigned at birth, and, in some cases, body mass index were also
independently associated with higher nAb titers, whereas hypertension was
independently associated with lower nAb titers. nAb titers did not differ by
race, underlying pulmonary disease or smoking. Two months post-enrollment, nAb
ID50 (ID80) titers declined 3.5 (2.8)-fold overall. Study limitations in this
observational, convalescent cohort include survivorship bias and missing early
viral loads and acute immune responses to correlate with the convalescent
responses we observed.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, in our cohort, nAb titers after SARS-CoV-2 infection
peaked approximately 1 month post-diagnosis and varied by age, sex assigned at
birth, disease severity, and underlying comorbidities. Our data show great
heterogeneity in nAb responses among people with recent COVID-19, highlighting
the challenges of interpreting natural history studies and gauging responses to
vaccines and therapeutics among people with recent infection. Our observations
illuminate potential correlations of demographic and clinical characteristics
with nAb responses, a key element for protection from COVID-19, thus informing
development and implementation of preventative and therapeutic strategies
globally.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT04403880.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1003868 
PMID: 34871308 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have read the journal’s policy and
the authors of this manuscript have the following competing interests: IF serves 
on advisory boards for Gilead and ViiV and receives grant money from Sanofi,
Janssen and Moderna. SRW has received funding from NIH/NIAID as well as the Bill 
and Melinda Gates Foundation unrelated to this work; he has also conducted
clinical trials funded by Janssen, Sanofi Pasteur, and Regeneron, also unrelated 
to this work. SK, LF, AKR, SG, LC, JGK, LP, MC, DM, OH, SSL, MT, MDM declare no
conflicts of interest.

