
1. Rev Med Virol. 2021 Dec 7:e2316. doi: 10.1002/rmv.2316. [Epub ahead of print]

Complement inhibition: A possible therapeutic approach in the fight against
Covid-19.

Deravi N(1), Ahsan E(1), Fathi M(1), Hosseini P(2), Yaghoobpoor S(1), Lotfi R(3),
Pourbagheri-Sigaroodi A(4), Bashash D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Student Research Committee, School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Virology, School of Public Health, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Clinical Research Development Center, Tohid Hospital, Kurdistan University of 
Medical Sciences, Sanandaj, Iran.
(4)Department of Hematology and Blood Banking, School of Allied Medical Sciences,
Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

The complement system, as a vital part of innate immunity, has an important role 
in the clearance of pathogens; however, unregulated activation of this system
probably has a key role in the pathogenesis of acute lung injury, which is
induced by highly pathogenic viruses (i.e. influenza A viruses and severe acute
respiratory syndrome [SARS] coronavirus). The novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, which
is the causal agent for the ongoing global pandemic of the coronavirus disease
2019 (Covid-19), has recently been spread to almost all countries around the
world. Although most people are immunocompetent to SARS-CoV-2, a small group
develops hyper-inflammation that leads to complications like acute respiratory
distress syndrome, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and multi-organ
failure. Emerging evidence demonstrates that the complement system exerts a
crucial role in this inflammatory reaction. Additionally, patients with the
severe form of Covid-19 show over-activation of the complement in their skin,
sera, and lungs. This study aims to summarise current knowledge concerning the
interaction of SARS-CoV-2 with the complement system and to critically appraise
complement inhibition as a potential new approach for Covid-19 treatment.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/rmv.2316 
PMID: 34873779 

