
1. Mater Today Proc. 2021 Dec 3. doi: 10.1016/j.matpr.2021.11.549. [Epub ahead of
print]

Analyzing the impact of Machine learning and Artificial intelligence and its
Effect on Management of lung cancer detection in covid-19 pandemic.

Sarath Kumar Boddu R(1), Karmakar P(2), Bhaumik A(3), Kumar Nassa V(4),
Vandana(5), Bhattacharya S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Professor and Principal, Department of CSE, Lenora College of Engineering,
Rampachodavaram, Andhra Pradesh, India.
(2)(W.B.E.S.) Joint Director of Public Instruction, Government of West Bengal,
Bikash Bhawan, Salt Lake, Kolkata, W.B., India.
(3)Research Scholar, Dept.of Applied Mathematics With Oceanology and Computer
Programming, Vidyasagar University, Midnapore, India.
(4)Principal/Professor, Department of Computer Science Engineering, South Point
Group Of Institutions Sonepat, Haryana, India.
(5)Assistant Professor, Department of Mathematics Dasmesh Khalsa College,
Zirakpur, India.
(6)Research Scholar, Department of Science and Technology and biotechnology,
MAKAUT, India.

Cancer victims, particularly those with lung cancer, are more susceptible and at 
higher danger of COVID-19 and associated consequences as a result of their
compromised immune systems, which makes them particularly sensitive. Because of a
variety of circumstances, cancer patients' diagnosis, treatment, and aftercare
are very complicated and time-consuming during an epidemic. In such
circumstances, advances in artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning
algorithms (ML) offer the capacity to boost cancer sufferer diagnosis, therapy,
and care via the use of cutting technologies. For example, using clinical and
imaging data combined with machine learning methods, the researchers may be able 
to distinguish among lung alterations induced by corona virus and those produced 
by immunotherapy and radiation. During this epidemic, artificial intelligence
(AI) may be utilized to guarantee that the appropriate individuals are recruited 
in cancer clinical trials more quickly and effectively than in the past, which
was done in a conventional and complicated manner. In order to better care for
cancer patients and find novel and more effective therapies, It is critical that 
we move beyond traditional research methods and use artificial intelligence (AI) 
and machine learning to update our research (ML). Artificial intelligence (AI)
and machine learning (ML) are being utilised to help with several aspects of the 
COVID-19 epidemic, such as epidemiology, molecular research and medication
development, medical diagnosis and treatment, and socioeconomics. The use of
artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) in the diagnosis and
treatment of COVID-19 patients is also being investigated. The combination of
artificial intelligence and machine learning in COVID-19 may help to identify
positive patients more quickly. In order to understand the dynamics of an
epidemic that is relevant to artificial intelligence, when used in different
patient groups, AI-based algorithms can quickly detect CT scans with COVID-19
linked pneumonia, as well as discriminate non-COVID connected pneumonia with high
specificity and accuracy. It is possible to utilize the existing difficulties and
future views presented in this study to guide an optimal implementation of AI and
machine learning technologies in an epidemic.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Selection and peer-review
under responsibility of the scientific committee of the International Conference 
on Applied Research and Engineering 2021.

DOI: 10.1016/j.matpr.2021.11.549 
PMCID: PMC8641302
PMID: 34877264 

