
1. J Womens Health (Larchmt). 2021 Dec 6. doi: 10.1089/jwh.2021.0507. [Epub ahead of
print]

Gaps and Opportunities to Improve Prevention of Human Papillomavirus-Related
Cancers.

Aninye IO(1), Berry-Lawhorn JM(2), Blumenthal P(3), Felder T(4), Jay N(5),
Merrill J(6), Messman JB(7), Nielsen S(8), Perkins R(9), Rowen T(10), Saslow
D(11), Trimble CL(12), Smith-McCune K(10).

Author information: 
(1)Society for Women's Health Research, Washington, District of Columbia, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
California, USA.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Stanford University, Stanford,
California, USA.
(4)Cervivor, Inc., Upper Marlboro, Maryland, USA.
(5)Anal Neoplasia Clinic, Research, and Education Center, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
(6)Policy Programs, American Society of Clinical Oncology, Alexandria, Virginia, 
USA.
(7)University Health Center, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, USA.
(8)Human Relations, High Point University, High Point, North Carolina, USA.
(9)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Boston University, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.
(10)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Gynecologic Surgery, University of 
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
(11)Department of Prevention and Early Detection, American Cancer Society,
Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(12)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Johns Hopkins Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA.

Background: Human papillomavirus (HPV) infections cause more than 35,900 cancers 
annually in the United States. Although cervical cancer is the most prevalent
HPV-related malignancy in women, the virus is also responsible for a significant 
percentage of anal, vaginal, and vulvar cancers. A comprehensive approach to
mitigating cervical cancer includes HPV vaccination (primary prevention),
screening and treatment of precancerous lesions (secondary prevention), and
diagnosis and treatment of invasive cancer (tertiary prevention). Although a
successful strategy, there are opportunities to innovate and increase access that
can also be adapted to address the unique clinical care gaps that exist with the 
other anogenital cancers. Methods: The Society for Women's Health Research held a
series of interdisciplinary meetings and events, during which expert researchers,
clinicians, patient advocates, and health care policy leaders evaluated the
current landscape of HPV-related cancers and their effects on women's health.
Discussion: This report summarizes the discussions of this working group and
areas it identified in which to address gaps in primary and secondary prevention 
approaches to improve access and health outcomes for women with HPV-related
anogenital cancers.

DOI: 10.1089/jwh.2021.0507 
PMID: 34871035 

