
1. Hepatology. 2021 Dec 6. doi: 10.1002/hep.32270. [Epub ahead of print]

Suppressed farnesoid X receptor by iron overload in mice and humans potentiates
iron-induced hepatotoxicity.

Xiong H(1), Zhang C(2), Han L(3), Xu T(1), Saeed K(1), Han J(1), Liu J(1),
Klaassen CD(4), Gonzalez FJ(5), Lu Y(6), Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 
300072, China.
(2)Department of Colorectal Surgery, Tianjin Union Medical Center, Tianjin,
300121, China.
(3)Tianjin State Key Laboratory of Modern Chinese Medicine, Tianjin Key
Laboratory of TCM Chemistry and Analysis, Tianjin University of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, Tianjin, 301617, China.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, University of Kansas 
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA.
(5)Laboratory of Metabolism, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA.
(6)Key Laboratory of Basic Pharmacology of Ministry of Education and Joint
International Research Laboratory of Ethnomedicine of Ministry of Education,
Zunyi Medical University, Zunyi, Guizhou, 563003, China.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Iron overload is a frequent finding in the general
population. As the major iron storage site, liver is subject to iron toxicity.
Farnesoid X receptor (FXR) regulates bile acid metabolism and is implicated in
various liver diseases. We aimed to determine whether FXR plays a role in
regulating iron hepatotoxicity.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: Human and mouse hepatocytes were treated with ferric
ammonium citrate or iron dextran. Mice were orally administered ferrous sulfate
or injected intraperitoneally with iron dextran. Wild-type and Fxr-/- mice were
fed an iron-rich diet for 1 week or 5 weeks. Mice fed an iron-rich diet were
co-administered the FXR agonist GW4064. Forced expression of FXR was carried out 
with recombinant adeno-associated virus 1 week before iron-rich diet feeding.
Serum levels of bile acids and FGF19 were quantified in adults with
hyperferritinemia and children with β-thalassemia. The data demonstrated that
iron suppressed FXR expression and signaling in human and mouse hepatocytes as
well as in mouse liver and intestine. FXR deficiency potentiated iron
hepatotoxicity, accompanied with hepatic steatosis as well as dysregulated iron
and bile acid homeostasis. FXR negatively regulated iron-regulatory proteins
IRP1/2 and prevented hepatic iron accumulation. Forced FXR expression and ligand 
activation significantly suppressed iron hepatotoxicity in iron-fed mice. The FXR
agonist GW4064 almost completely restored the dysregulated bile acid signaling
and metabolic syndrome in iron-fed mice. Conjugated primary bile acids were
increased and FGF19 was decreased in serum of adults with hyperferritinemia and
children with β-thalassemia.
CONCLUSIONS: FXR plays a pivotal role in regulating iron homeostasis, and
protects mice against iron hepatotoxicity. Targeting FXR may represent a
therapeutic strategy for iron overload-associated chronic liver diseases.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.32270 
PMID: 34870866 

