
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021 Nov 5;100(44):e27428. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000027428.

Identification of HIV-1-specific cascaded microRNA-mRNA regulatory relationships 
by parallel mRNA and microRNA expression profiling with AIDS patients after
antiviral treatment.

Shen F(1), Liu Y(2)(3), Wang L(1), Chai X(1), Yang J(1), Feng Q(2), Li X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Bio-Resource and Eco-Environment of Ministry of Education,
College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
(2)College of Basic Medicine, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Chengdu, China.
(3)No. 3 Affiliated Hospital of Chengdu University of TCM (West District),
Chengdu Pidu District Hospital of TCM, China.

BACKGROUND: The pathogenesis of human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) infection 
is so complex that have not been clearly defined, despite intensive efforts have 
been made by many researchers. MicroRNA (miRNA) as regulation factor in various
human diseases may influence the course of HIV-1 infection by targeting mRNAs.
Thus, studies combining transcription of posttranscriptional miRNA regulation are
required.
METHODS: With the purpose of identifying cascaded miRNA-mRNA regulatory
relationships related to HIV infection in gene level, the parallel miRNA, and
mRNA expression profiles were analyzed to select differential expressed miRNAs
and mRNAs. Then, miRNA-mRNA interactions were predicted using 3 data sources and 
Pearson correlation coefficient was calculated based on the gene expression level
for accuracy improvement. Furthermore, the calculation of the regulatory impact
factors was conducted to reveal crucial regulators in HIV-1 infection. To give
further insight into these transcription factor (TF) regulators, the
differentially co-expression analysis was conducted to identify differentially
co-expressed links and differential co-expressed genes and the co-expression gene
modules were identified using a threshold-based hierarchical clustering method,
then modules were combined into a miRNA-TF-mRNA network.
RESULTS: A total of 69,126 differentially co-expressed links and 626 differential
co-expressed genes were identified. Functional enrichment analysis indicated that
these co-expressed genes were significantly involved in immune response and
apoptosis. Moreover, according to regulatory impact factors, 5 most influential
TFs and miRNA in HIV-1 infection were identified and miRNA-TF-mRNA regulatory
networks were built during the computing process.
CONCLUSIONS: In our study, a set of integrated methods was generated to identify 
important regulators and miRNA-TF-mRNA interactions. Parallel profiling analysis 
of the miRNAs and mRNAs expression of HIV/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(AIDS) patients after antiretroviral therapy indicated that some regulators have 
wide impact on gene regulation and that these regulatory elements may bear
significant implications on the underlying molecular mechanism and pathogenesis
of AIDS occurrence.

Copyright © 2021 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000027428 
PMID: 34871208 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.

