
1. ACS Omega. 2021 Nov 18;6(47):32043-32071. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.1c04817.
eCollection 2021 Nov 30.

Designing of a Multi-epitope Vaccine against the Structural Proteins of Marburg
Virus Exploiting the Immunoinformatics Approach.

Sami SA(1), Marma KKS(1), Mahmud S(2), Khan MAN(3), Albogami S(4), El-Shehawi
AM(4), Rakib A(1), Chakraborty A(1), Mohiuddin M(1), Dhama K(5), Uddin MMN(1),
Hossain MK(1), Tallei TE(6), Emran TB(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of
Chittagong, Chittagong 4331, Bangladesh.
(2)Microbiology Laboratory, Bioinformatics Division, Department of Genetic
Engineering and Biotechnology, University of Rajshahi, Rajshahi 6205, Bangladesh.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological
Sciences, University of Chittagong, Chittagong 4331, Bangladesh.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, College of Science, Taif University, P.O. Box
11099, Taif 21944, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Division of Pathology, ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar,
Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh 243122, India.
(6)Department of Biology, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, Sam
Ratulangi University, Manado, North Sulawesi 95115, Indonesia.
(7)Department of Pharmacy, BGC Trust University Bangladesh, Chittagong 4381,
Bangladesh.

Marburg virus disease (MVD) caused by the Marburg virus (MARV) generally appears 
with flu-like symptoms and leads to severe hemorrhagic fever. It spreads via
direct contact with infected individuals or animals. Despite being considered to 
be less threatening in terms of appearances and the number of infected patients, 
the high fatality rate of this pathogenic virus is a major concern. Until now, no
vaccine has been developed to combat this deadly virus. Therefore, vaccination
for this virus is necessary to reduce its mortality. Our current investigation
focuses on the design and formulation of a multi-epitope vaccine based on the
structural proteins of MARV employing immunoinformatics approaches. The screening
of potential T-cell and B-cell epitopes from the seven structural proteins of
MARV was carried out through specific selection parameters. Afterward, we
compiled the shortlisted epitopes by attaching them to an appropriate adjuvant
and linkers. Population coverage analysis, conservancy analysis, and MHC cluster 
analysis of the shortlisted epitopes were satisfactory. Importantly,
physicochemical characteristics, human homology assessment, and structure
validation of the vaccine construct delineated convenient outcomes. We
implemented disulfide bond engineering to stabilize the tertiary or quaternary
interactions. Furthermore, stability and physical movements of the vaccine
protein were explored using normal-mode analysis. The immune simulation study of 
the vaccine complexes also exhibited significant results. Additionally, the
protein-protein docking and molecular dynamics simulation of the final construct 
exhibited a higher affinity toward toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4). From simulation
trajectories, multiple descriptors, namely, root mean square deviations (rmsd),
radius of gyration (Rg), root mean square fluctuations (RMSF), solvent-accessible
surface area (SASA), and hydrogen bonds, have been taken into account to
demonstrate the inflexible and rigid nature of receptor molecules and the
constructed vaccine. Inclusively, our findings suggested the vaccine constructs' 
ability to regulate promising immune responses against MARV pathogenesis.

© 2021 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.1c04817 
PMCID: PMC8638006
PMID: 34870027 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial
interest.

