
1. Ann Behav Med. 2021 Dec 6. pii: kaab102. doi: 10.1093/abm/kaab102. [Epub ahead of
print]

The Interplay Between Strictness of Policies and Individuals' Self-Regulatory
Efforts: Associations with Handwashing During the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Luszczynska A(1)(2), Szczuka Z(1), Abraham C(3), Baban A(4), Brooks S(5),
Cipolletta S(6), Danso E(7), Dombrowski SU(5), Gan Y(8), Gaspar T(9), de Matos
MG(9), Griva K(10), Jongenelis MI(2), Keller J(11), Knoll N(11), Ma J(8), Miah
MAA(12), Morgan K(12), Peraud W(13), Quintard B(13), Shah V(14), Schenkel K(15), 
Scholz U(15)(16), Schwarzer R(11), Siwa M(1), Taut D(4), Tomaino SCM(6),
Vilchinsky N(17), Wolf H(17).

Author information: 
(1)Wroclaw Faculty of Psychology, SWPS University of Social Sciences and
Humanities, Wroclaw, Poland.
(2)Melbourne Centre for Behaviour Change, Melbourne School of Psychological
Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Australia.
(3)School of Psychology, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia.
(4)Department of Psychology, Babes-Bolyai University, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(5)Faculty of Kinesiology, University of New Brunswick, Fredericton, Canada.
(6)Department of General Psychology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(7)Medical Research Council Unit-The Gambia at London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, Serrekunda, Gambia.
(8)School of Psychological and Cognitive Sciences, Peking University, Beijing,
China.
(9)Institute of Environmental Health, Medical School, University of Lisbon,
Lisbon, Portugal.
(10)Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore.
(11)Department of Education and Psychology, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.
(12)School of Medicine, Perdana University-Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(13)Department of Psychology, INSERM 1219, University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux,
France.
(14)Department of Infectious Diseases, Environmental Health Group, London School 
of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(15)Department of Psychology, Applied Social and Health Psychology, University of
Zurich , Zurich, Switzerland.
(16)University Research Priority Program "Dynamics of Healthy Ageing", University
of Zurich , Zurich, Switzerland.
(17)Department of Psychology, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Patterns of protective health behaviors, such as handwashing and
sanitizing during the COVID-19 pandemic, may be predicted by macro-level
variables, such as regulations specified by public health policies. Health
behavior patterns may also be predicted by micro-level variables, such as
self-regulatory cognitions specified by health behavior models, including the
Health Action Process Approach (HAPA).
PURPOSE: This study explored whether strictness of containment and health
policies was related to handwashing adherence and whether such associations were 
mediated by HAPA-specified self-regulatory cognitions.
METHODS: The study (NCT04367337) was conducted among 1,256 adults from Australia,
Canada, China, France, Gambia, Germany, Israel, Italy, Malaysia, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Singapore, and Switzerland. Self-report data on
cross-situational handwashing adherence were collected using an online survey at 
two time points, 4 weeks apart. Values of the index of strictness of containment 
and health policies, obtained from the Oxford COVID-19 Government Response
Tracker database, were retrieved twice for each country (1 week prior to
individual data collection).
RESULTS: Across countries and time, levels of handwashing adherence and
strictness of policies were high. Path analysis indicated that stricter
containment and health policies were indirectly related to lower handwashing
adherence via lower self-efficacy and self-monitoring. Less strict policies were 
indirectly related to higher handwashing adherence via higher self-efficacy and
self-monitoring.
CONCLUSIONS: When policies are less strict, exposure to the SARS-CoV-2 virus
might be higher, triggering more self-regulation and, consequently, more
handwashing adherence. Very strict policies may need to be accompanied by
enhanced information dissemination or psychosocial interventions to ensure
appropriate levels of self-regulation.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society of Behavioral Medicine.

DOI: 10.1093/abm/kaab102 
PMID: 34871341 

