
1. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2021 Nov 16;8(12):ofab510. doi: 10.1093/ofid/ofab510.
eCollection 2021 Dec.

Coronavirus Disease 2019-Associated Invasive Fungal Infection.

Baddley JW(1), Thompson GR 3rd(2), Chen SC(3), White PL(4), Johnson MD(5), Nguyen
MH(6), Schwartz IS(7), Spec A(8), Ostrosky-Zeichner L(9), Jackson BR(10),
Patterson TF(11)(12), Pappas PG(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Maryland School of Medicine and
Baltimore Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases and
Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of California,
Davis Medical Center, Sacramento, California, USA.
(3)Centre for Infectious Diseases and Microbiology, Westmead Hospital and Marie
Bashir Institute for Infectious Diseases and Biosecurity, The University of
Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(4)Public Health Wales Microbiology Cardiff, University Hospital of Wales,
Cardiff, United Kingdom.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
USA.
(7)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine
and Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(8)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Washington University
in St Louis School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri, USA.
(9)Division of Infectious Diseases, McGovern Medical School, Houston, Texas, USA.
(10)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(11)University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas,
USA.
(12)South Texas Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, Texas, USA.
(13)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, Alabama, USA.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) can become complicated by secondary invasive 
fungal infections (IFIs), stemming primarily from severe lung damage and
immunologic deficits associated with the virus or immunomodulatory therapy. Other
risk factors include poorly controlled diabetes, structural lung disease and/or
other comorbidities, and fungal colonization. Opportunistic IFI following severe 
respiratory viral illness has been increasingly recognized, most notably with
severe influenza. There have been many reports of fungal infections associated
with COVID-19, initially predominated by pulmonary aspergillosis, but with recent
emergence of mucormycosis, candidiasis, and endemic mycoses. These infections can
be challenging to diagnose and are associated with poor outcomes. The reported
incidence of IFI has varied, often related to heterogeneity in patient
populations, surveillance protocols, and definitions used for classification of
fungal infections. Herein, we review IFI complicating COVID-19 and address
knowledge gaps related to epidemiology, diagnosis, and management of
COVID-19-associated fungal infections.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
Infectious Diseases Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/ofid/ofab510 
PMCID: PMC8643686
PMID: 34877364 

