
1. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2021 Sep 17;8(12):ofab469. doi: 10.1093/ofid/ofab469.
eCollection 2021 Dec.

A Qualitative Study of the Experience of Immediate Antiretroviral Therapy Among
Urban Persons With Newly Diagnosed Human Immunodeficiency Virus.

Christopoulos KA(1), Erguera XA(1), VanderZanden L(2), Campbell C(1), Green M(2),
Tsuzuki MD(1), Schneider J(2)(3), Coffey S(1), Bacon O(1)(4), Gandhi M(1),
Koester KA(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
(2)Howard Brown Health, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(3)University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(4)San Francisco Department of Public Health, San Francisco, California, USA.

Background: Guidelines recommend immediate antiretroviral therapy (ART) at or
shortly after human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) diagnosis, yet little is known
about how people living with HIV (PLWH) experience this treatment strategy,
including racial/ethnic minorities, cisgender/transgender women, and those with
housing instability.
Methods: To assess the acceptability of immediate ART offer among urban PLWH,
understand how this approach affects the lived experience of HIV diagnosis, and
explore reasons for declining immediate ART, we conducted a cross-sectional
qualitative study using semi-structured interviews with individuals who had been 
offered immediate ART after HIV diagnosis at a safety-net HIV clinic in San
Francisco and a federally qualified health center in Chicago. Interviews were
analyzed using thematic analysis.
Results: Among 40 participants with age range 19-52 years, 27% of whom were
cisgender/transgender women or gender-queer, 85% racial/ethnic minority, and 45% 
homeless/unstably housed, we identified 3 major themes: (1) Individuals
experienced immediate ART encounters as supportive; (2) individuals viewed
immediate ART as sensible; and (3) immediate ART offered emotional relief by
offsetting fears of death and providing agency over one's health. Reasons for
declining immediate ART ranged from simply needing a few more days to complex
interactions of logistical and psychosocial barriers.
Conclusions: Immediate ART was highly acceptable to urban persons with newly
diagnosed HIV infection. Immediate ART was viewed as a natural next step after
HIV diagnosis and provided a sense of control over one's health, mitigating
anxiety over a decline in physical health. As such, immediate ART somewhat eased 
but in no way obviated the psychosocial challenges of HIV diagnosis.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
Infectious Diseases Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/ofid/ofab469 
PMCID: PMC8643677
PMID: 34877362 

