
1. J Virol. 2021 Dec 8:JVI0149521. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01495-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Epstein-Barr virus miR-BHRF1-3 targets the BZLF1 3'UTR and regulates the lytic
cycle.

Fachko DN(1), Chen Y(1), Skalsky RL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute, Oregon Health and Science University,
Beaverton, Oregon, USA.

Suppression of lytic viral gene expression is a key aspect of the Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV) life cycle to facilitate the establishment of latent infection.
Molecular mechanisms regulating transitions between EBV lytic replication and
latency are not fully understood. Here, we investigated the impact of viral
microRNAs on the EBV lytic cycle. Through functional assays, we found that
miR-BHRF1-3 attenuates EBV lytic gene expression following reactivation. To
understand the miRNA targets contributing to this activity, we performed Ago
PAR-CLIP analysis on EBV-positive, reactivated Burkitt's lymphoma cells and
identified multiple miR-BHRF1-3 interactions with viral transcripts. Using
luciferase reporter assays, we confirmed a miRNA interaction site within the
3'UTR of BZLF1 which encodes the essential immediate early (IE) transactivator
Zta. Comparison of >850 published EBV genomes identified sequence polymorphisms
within the miR-BHRF1-3 locus that deleteriously affect miRNA expression and
function. Molecular interactions between the homologous viral miRNA, miR-rL1-17, 
and IE transcripts encoded by rhesus lymphocryptovirus were further identified.
Our data demonstrate that regulation of IE gene expression by a BHRF1 miRNA is
conserved amongst lymphocryptoviruses, and further reveal virally-encoded genetic
elements that orchestrate viral antigen expression during the lytic cycle.
Importance Epstein-Barr virus infection is predominantly latent in healthy
individuals, while periodic cycles of reactivation are thought to facilitate
persistent lifelong infection. Lytic infection has been linked to development of 
certain EBV-associated diseases. Here, we demonstrate that EBV miR-BHRF1-3 can
suppress lytic replication by directly inhibiting Zta expression. Moreover, we
identify nucleotide variants that impact the function of miR-BHRF1-3, which may
contribute to specific EBV pathologies.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01495-21 
PMID: 34878852 

