
1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Dec 6;17(12):e1010133. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010133. [Epub
ahead of print]

Protective effects of combining monoclonal antibodies and vaccines against the
Plasmodium falciparum circumsporozoite protein.

Wang LT(1), Pereira LS(1), Kiyuka PK(1)(2), Schön A(3), Kisalu NK(1), Vistein
R(1), Dillon M(1), Bonilla BG(1), Molina-Cruz A(4), Barillas-Mury C(4), Tan J(5),
Idris AH(1)(6), Francica JR(1), Seder RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine Research Center, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of
America.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Pwani University, Kilifi, Kenya.
(3)Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, United
States of America.
(4)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, United
States of America.
(5)Antibody Biology Unit, Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville,
Maryland, United States of America.
(6)The Ragon Institute of Massachusetts General Hospital, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology and Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of 
America.

Combinations of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against different epitopes on the
same antigen synergistically neutralize many viruses. However, there are limited 
studies assessing whether combining human mAbs against distinct regions of the
Plasmodium falciparum (Pf) circumsporozoite protein (CSP) enhances in vivo
protection against malaria compared to each mAb alone or whether passive transfer
of PfCSP mAbs would improve protection following vaccination against PfCSP. Here,
we isolated a panel of human mAbs against the subdominant C-terminal domain of
PfCSP (C-CSP) from a volunteer immunized with radiation-attenuated Pf
sporozoites. These C-CSP-specific mAbs had limited binding to sporozoites in
vitro that was increased by combination with neutralizing human "repeat" mAbs
against the NPDP/NVDP/NANP tetrapeptides in the central repeat region of PfCSP.
Nevertheless, passive transfer of repeat- and C-CSP-specific mAb combinations did
not provide enhanced protection against in vivo sporozoite challenge compared to 
repeat mAbs alone. Furthermore, combining potent repeat-specific mAbs (CIS43, L9,
and 317) that respectively target the three tetrapeptides (NPDP/NVDP/NANP) did
not provide additional protection against in vivo sporozoite challenge. However, 
administration of either CIS43, L9, or 317 (but not C-CSP-specific mAbs) to mice 
that had been immunized with R21, a PfCSP-based virus-like particle vaccine that 
induces polyclonal antibodies against the repeat region and C-CSP, provided
enhanced protection against sporozoite challenge when compared to vaccine or mAbs
alone. Collectively, this study shows that while combining mAbs against the
repeat and C-terminal regions of PfCSP provide no additional protection in vivo, 
repeat mAbs do provide increased protection when combined with vaccine-induced
polyclonal antibodies. These data should inform the implementation of PfCSP human
mAbs alone or following vaccination to prevent malaria infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010133 
PMID: 34871332 

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal’s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: R.A.S., J.F., L.T.W., 
and R.V. have submitted U.S. Provisional Patent Application No. 62/842,590, filed
3 May 2019, describing mAb L9. All other authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.

