
1. J Virol. 2021 Dec 8:JVI0203921. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02039-21. [Epub ahead of print]

Epigenetic silencing of recombinant AAV genomes by NP220 and the HUSH complex.

Das A(1), Vijayan M(1), Walton EM(1), Stafford VG(1), Fiflis DN(1)(2), Asokan
A(1)(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Genetics & Microbiology, Duke University School of
Medicine, Durham, NC.

The single-stranded DNA genome of adeno-associated viruses (AAV) undergoes
second-strand synthesis and transcription in the host cell nucleus. While
wild-type AAV genomes are naturally silenced upon integration into the host
genome, recombinant AAV (rAAV) genomes typically provide robust expression of
transgenes persisting as extrachromosomal DNA or episomes. Episomal DNA
associating with host histones are subject to epigenetic modifications, although 
the mechanisms underlying such are not well understood. Here, we provide evidence
that the double-stranded DNA binding protein NP220, in association with the human
silencing hub (HUSH) complex, mediates transcriptional silencing of
single-stranded as well as self-complementary rAAV genomes. In cells lacking
NP220 or other components of the HUSH complex, AAV genome transcript levels are
increased and correlate with a marked reduction in repressive H3K9 histone
methylation marks. We also provide evidence that the AAV capsid (serotype) can
profoundly influence NP220-mediated mediated silencing of packaged genomes,
indicating potential role(s) for capsid-genome or capsid-host factor interactions
in regulating epigenetic silencing of rAAV genomes. Importance Recombinant AAV
vectors can enable long term gene expression in a wide variety of tissues.
However, transgene silencing has been reported in some human gene therapy
clinical trials. Here, we demonstrate the human silencing hub (HUSH) complex can 
suppress transcript formation from rAAV vector genomes by epigenetic modification
of associated host histones. Further, the AAV capsid appears to play an important
role in this pathway. We postulate that modulation of epigenetic pathways could
help improve rAAV expression.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02039-21 
PMID: 34878926 

