
1. Enferm Infecc Microbiol Clin (Engl Ed). 2021 Nov 26. pii: S2529-993X(21)00218-5. 
doi: 10.1016/j.eimce.2021.11.003. [Epub ahead of print]

Planning for the assistance of critically ill patients in a Pandemic Situation:
The experience of Vall d'Hebron University Hospital.

Ferrer R(1), Báguena M(2), Balcells J(3), Bañeras J(4), Biarnes A(5), de Nadal
M(5), Gracia RM(6), Martinez J(7), Nuvials X(6), Riera J(6), Roca O(6),
Ruiz-Rodriguez JC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Medicina Intensiva, Hospital Universitario Vall d'Hebron, Sepsis
Organ Dysfunction and Resuscitation (SODIR) Research Group, Vall d'Hebron
Institut de Recerca (VHIR), Universidad Autónoma de Barcelona (UAB), Barcelona,
Spain. Electronic address: r.ferrer@vhebron.net.
(2)Servicio de Medicina Intensiva, Hospital Universitario de Traumatología,
Rehabilitación y Quemados Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Unidad de Cuidados Intensivos Pediátricos, Hospital Universitario Vall
d'Hebron, Universidad Autónoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Acute Cardiovascular Care Unit, Department of Cardiology, Centre de Simulació 
Clínica Avançada VHISCA, Vall d'Hebron Hospital, Universidad Autónoma de
Barcelona, CIBERCV, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Servicio de Anestesiología y Reanimación, Hospital Universitario Vall
d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Servicio de Medicina Intensiva, Hospital Universitario Vall d'Hebron, Sepsis
Organ Dysfunction and Resuscitation (SODIR) Research Group, Vall d'Hebron
Institut de Recerca (VHIR), Universidad Autónoma de Barcelona (UAB), Barcelona,
Spain.
(7)Coordinador de Críticos, Hospital Universitario Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona,
Spain.

INTRODUCTION: In the context of community transmission of the virus, the impact
of the pandemic on health-care systems, mainly on intensive care units (ICU), was
expected to be devastating. Vall d'Hebron University Hospital (HUVH) implemented 
an unprecedented critical patient-care planning and management of resources.
METHODS: We describe a cohort of critically ill patients during the first two
months of the pandemic (from March 3, 2020, to May 2, 2020) in HUVH, Barcelona.
In this manuscript, we report our previsions, strategies implemented, and the
outcomes obtained.
RESULTS: Three-thousand and thirty-three patients were admitted to the HUVH
Critical Care Units. Throughout the study period, the proportion of patients on
IMV or IMV and ECMO remained above 78%. Most patients were men (65%); the most
common age group was 60-70 years. Twenty-three patients received ECMO, and
eighteen were cannulated at another center and transferred to HUVH. At the end of
the study, fourteen patients were successfully decannulated, three patients died,
and the rest of the patients were still on ECMO. Eight pregnant women have been
treated in the ICU, with a survival rate of 100%. The ICU mortality of patients
younger than 60 years was 3.2%. The mean ICU stay of both survivors and
nonsurvivors was 14 days.
CONCLUSION: The adequate preparation for resource expansion for critically ill
patients care, main challenges, and overall positive results can serve as a
precedent for similar future scenarios.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier España, S.L.U.

DOI: 10.1016/j.eimce.2021.11.003 
PMID: 34872890 

