
1. Nat Rev Immunol. 2021 Dec 7. doi: 10.1038/s41577-021-00662-4. [Epub ahead of
print]

SARS-CoV-2 breakthrough infections in vaccinated individuals: measurement, causes
and impact.

Lipsitch M(1), Krammer F(2)(3), Regev-Yochay G(4)(5), Lustig Y(5)(6), Balicer
RD(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Communicable Disease Dynamics, Department of Epidemiology and
Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T.H. Chan School of
Public Health, Boston, MA, USA. mlipsitc@hsph.harvard.edu.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
NY, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Molecular and Cell-Based Medicine, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Infection Prevention & Control Unit, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat-Gan, Israel.
(5)Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(6)The Central Virology Laboratory, Public Health Services, Ministry of Health,
Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel.
(7)Clalit Research Institute, Innovation Division, Clalit Health Services, Tel
Aviv, Israel.
(8)The School of Public Health, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University
of the Negev, Be'er Sheva, Israel.

Breakthrough infections with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) in fully vaccinated individuals are receiving intense scrutiny
because of their importance in determining how long restrictions to control virus
transmission will need to remain in place in highly vaccinated populations as
well as in determining the need for additional vaccine doses or changes to the
vaccine formulations and/or dosing intervals. Measurement of breakthrough
infections is challenging outside of randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind
field trials. However, laboratory and observational studies are necessary to
understand the impact of waning immunity, viral variants and other determinants
of changing vaccine effectiveness against various levels of coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) severity. Here, we describe the approaches being used to measure 
vaccine effectiveness and provide a synthesis of the burgeoning literature on the
determinants of vaccine effectiveness and breakthrough rates. We argue that,
rather than trying to tease apart the contributions of factors such as age, viral
variants and time since vaccination, the rates of breakthrough infection are best
seen as a consequence of the level of immunity at any moment in an individual,
the variant to which that individual is exposed and the severity of disease being
considered. We also address key open questions concerning the transition to
endemicity, the potential need for altered vaccine formulations to track viral
variants, the need to identify immune correlates of protection, and the public
health challenges of using various tools to counter breakthrough infections,
including boosters in an era of global vaccine shortages.

© 2021. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41577-021-00662-4 
PMID: 34876702 

