
1. Virology. 2021 Nov 27;566:60-68. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2021.11.008. [Epub ahead of
print]

Pharmacologic profiling reveals lapatinib as a novel antiviral against SARS-CoV-2
in vitro.

Raymonda MH(1), Ciesla JH(1), Monaghan M(1), Leach J(2), Asantewaa G(3),
Smorodintsev-Schiller LA(4), Lutz MM 4th(2), Schafer XL(1), Takimoto T(2),
Dewhurst S(2), Munger J(5), Harris IS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Medicine and Dentistry,
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA; Wilmot Cancer Institute, University 
of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester, Rochester,
NY, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Medicine and Dentistry,
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA; Department of Biomedical Genetics,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA; Wilmot Cancer
Institute, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Biomedical Genetics, University of Rochester Medical Center,
Rochester, NY, USA; Wilmot Cancer Institute, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, NY, USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Medicine and Dentistry,
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA; Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA; Wilmot Cancer Institute,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA. Electronic address:
joshua_munger@urmc.rochester.edu.
(6)Department of Biomedical Genetics, University of Rochester Medical Center,
Rochester, NY, USA; Wilmot Cancer Institute, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, NY, USA. Electronic address: isaac_harris@urmc.rochester.edu.

The emergence of SARS-CoV-2 virus has resulted in a worldwide pandemic, but
effective antiviral therapies are not widely available. To improve treatment
options, we conducted a high-throughput screen to uncover compounds that block
SARS-CoV-2 infection. A minimally pathogenic human betacoronavirus (OC43) was
used to infect physiologically-relevant human pulmonary fibroblasts (MRC5) to
facilitate rapid antiviral discovery in a preclinical model. Comprehensive
profiling was conducted on more than 600 compounds, with each compound arrayed
across 10 dose points. Our screening revealed several FDA-approved agents that
can attenuate both OC43 and SARS-CoV-2 viral replication, including lapatinib,
doramapimod, and 17-AAG. Importantly, lapatinib inhibited SARS-CoV-2 RNA
replication by over 50,000-fold. Further, both lapatinib and doramapimod could be
combined with remdesivir to improve antiviral activity in cells. These findings
reveal novel therapeutic avenues that could limit SARS-CoV-2 infection.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2021.11.008 
PMID: 34871905 

