
1. Curr Microbiol. 1999 Jun;38(6):349-54.

The effects of a tsetse DNA virus infection on the functions of the male
accessory reproductive gland in the host fly Glossina morsitans centralis
(Diptera; Glossinidae).

Sang RC(1), Jura WG, Otieno LH, Mwangi RW, Ogaja P.

Author information: 
(1)Virus Research Centre, Kenya Medical Research Institute (KEMRI), P.O. Box
54628, Nairobi, Kenya.

Freshly deposited third instar Glossina morsitans centralis larvae were infected 
with the tsetse DNA virus by microinjection, and at emergence adult males were
separated from the females and fed on rabbit blood every second day for 8 days. A
control group treated with sterile saline were handled similarly. They were
dissected, and comparative observations made on the appearance and size of the
accessory reproductive glands (ARG) in infected and control males. Regularly fed 
8-day-old males from infected and control groups were mated to 2-day-old normal
females obtained from the insectay. After separation from copula, the females
were dissected and the uteri examined for the presence and quality of the
spermatophore. The spermathecae were also examined for insemination. ARG tissues 
from the control and virus infected regularly fed 8-day-old male flies were fixed
and processed for electron microscopic studies. The ARGs from control flies were 
found to be milky in appearance, whereas those from virus-infected flies were
transparent in most parts. The ARGs from virus-infected males were significantly 
smaller in diameters (F = 42.26, p < 0.0001) and shorter (F = 200.4, p < 0. 0001)
than those of the controls. Most of the virus-infected males failed to form a
complete spermatophore, whereas almost all the controls formed complete
spermatophore as observed in the uteri of the female mates (Chi2 = 111.661, p <
0.0001). The infected males that formed partial spermatophores and those that did
not form any at all failed to inseminate their female mates. Histological studies
of the ARGs revealed some lesions in the epithelial cells characterized by
degeneration of cytoplasmic organelles and detachment of the muscle layer from
the basal plasma membrane. However, no virus particles were observed in the
affected cells.

DOI: 10.1007/pl00006815 
PMID: 10341076  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

