
1. Arch Virol. 1999;144(10):1977-90.

Rescue of a bovine respiratory syncytial virus genomic RNA analog by bovine,
human and ovine respiratory syncytial viruses confirms the "functional integrity"
and "cross-recognition" of BRSV cis-acting elements by HRSV and ORSV.

Yunus AS(1), Krishnamurthy S, Pastey MK, Huang Z, Khattar SK, Collins PL, Samal
SK.

Author information: 
(1)Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Maryland, College Park, Maryland, USA.

The nucleotide sequences of the 3' leader and 5' trailer regions were determined 
for genomic RNA of bovine respiratory syncytial virus (BRSV) strain A-51908. The 
leader and trailer sequences are '45' and '161' nucleotides in length,
respectively. The functionality of BRSV leader and trailer sequences and their
recognition by HRSV and ovine respiratory syncytial virus (ORSV) proteins were
examined with a in vitro transcribed BRSV genomic RNA analog carrying the
bacterial chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT) gene under the control of BRSV
transcription signals. Upon transfection into BRSV, HRSV or ORSV infected cells, 
the BRSV minireplicons were 'rescued' such that the reporter gene was expressed, 
the minigenome was replicated and packaged into micrococcal nuclease
resistant-infectious minireplicons. The passage of infectious minireplicons could
be blocked by a polyclonal BRSV neutralizing antiserum. Bovine parainfluenza
virus-3, a heterologous paramyxovirus was inactive in rescuing BRSV genomic RNA
analog. Mutational substitution of the G residue at position 4 of leader sequence
in the BRSV genomic RNA analog, with an A or U residue inhibited its
transcription and replication, while replacement with a C residue had no
significant effect on rescue. These results show that the cis-acting elements of 
BRSV are functional and are also recognized by the proteins of HRSV and ORSV. The
helper virus complemented rescue system developed here will be useful for
characterizing the cis-acting elements of BRSV.

DOI: 10.1007/s007050050719 
PMID: 10550670  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

