
1. Hepatology. 2000 Feb;31(2):521-7.

Cellular and humoral immune responses induced by intradermal or intramuscular
vaccination with the major hepatitis B surface antigen.

Rahman F(1), Dahmen A, Herzog-Hauff S, Böcher WO, Galle PR, Löhr HF.

Author information: 
(1)I. Department of Internal Medicine, Johannes-Gutenberg-University, Mainz,
Germany.

The vaccination route may influence the success of immunization against
pathogens. The conventional intramuscular (i.m.) application of a vaccine
containing the hepatitis B virus (HBV) surface antigen (HBsAg) led to protective 
anti-HBs antibody levels in the majority of vaccine recipients. In this study, we
vaccinated healthy volunteers and a group of i.m. vaccine nonresponders via the
intradermal (i.d.) route and analyzed the HBV-specific B-cell response as well as
class-II- and class-I-restricted T-cell responses by (3)H-thymidine uptake,
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and enzyme-linked immunospot assay
(ELISPOT). The results were then compared with i.m. vaccinated controls. I.d.
vaccinations were well tolerated and induced neutralizing anti-HBs antibodies in 
all naive vaccine recipients and, importantly, all but one former i.m.
nonresponder developed protective anti-HBs serum antibody levels after 2 or 3
i.d. immunizations. On the cellular level, i.d. vaccine recipients showed
significantly higher anti-HBs producing B-cell frequencies and more vigorous
class-II-restricted T-helper (Th) cell responses than i.m. controls. However,
although the HBsAg-specific T cells were characterized by their cytokine release 
as Th1-like cells in both groups, human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-A2+ individuals
who received the soluble HBsAg via the i.d. route developed higher
peptide-specific cytotoxic CD8+ T cell precursor (CTLp) frequencies. In
conclusion, i.d. HBsAg vaccination is more effective even in former i.m. vaccine 
nonresponders with respect to antibody induction and specific B- and T-cell
responses. The induction of virus-specific CTLp may provide the rationale to
study the i.d. HBsAg vaccine in the treatment of chronic hepatitis B.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.510310237 
PMID: 10655280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

