
1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2000 May;161(5):1518-23.

Monocyte IL-10 production during respiratory syncytial virus bronchiolitis is
associated with recurrent wheezing in a one-year follow-up study.

Bont L(1), Heijnen CJ, Kavelaars A, van Aalderen WM, Brus F, Draaisma JT, Geelen 
SM, Kimpen JL.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital for Children and Youth "Het Wilhelmina Kinderziekenhuis," 
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) bronchiolitis is associated with subsequent
recurrent wheezing episodes. To determine whether cytokine responses during
infection can be of predictive value for the development of recurrent wheezing,
we performed a follow-up study in 50 hospitalized children with RSV
bronchiolitis. Monocyte and lymphocyte cytokine responses in vitro were studied
during the acute phase of disease, and again during the convalescent phase, 3 to 
4 wk later. Monocyte cytokine responses, including interleukin-10 (IL-10), were
measured in whole blood cultures, stimulated with lipopolysaccharide and
interferon-gamma (LPS + IFN-gamma). In addition, T-cell cytokine responses,
including IFN-gamma and IL-4 production, were measured in whole-blood cultures
stimulated with phytohemagglutinin (PHA) or alphaCD2 + alphaCD28. Cytokine
responses were analyzed in relation to the development of recurrent episodes of
wheezing, documented by parents in a diary during a 1-yr follow-up period. IL-10 
responses during the acute phase of RSV bronchiolitis were comparable to those in
healthy control subjects. During the convalescent phase, IL-10 responses were
significantly increased in patients as compared with those in healthy control
subjects (p < 0.001). At follow-up, 27 children (58%) had recurrent episodes of
wheezing. IL-10 levels, measured during the convalescent phase, were
significantly higher in patients who developed recurrent wheezing during the year
after RSV bronchiolitis than in patients without recurrent episodes of wheezing
(p = 0.006). Moreover, IL-10 responses during the convalescent phase correlated
significantly with the number of wheezing episodes (r = 0.42, n = 46, p = 0.004).
Interestingly, no association was found between IFN-gamma responses, IL-4
responses, or IFNgamma/IL-4 ratios and recurrent wheezing. We conclude that
monocyte IL-10 responses in vitro upon stimulation with nonspecific stimuli may
have predictive value for the development of recurrent wheezing after RSV
bronchiolitis. Moreover, our results indicate that not only allergen-driven Th2
cytokine responses can lead to asthmatic symptoms but also virus-induced changes 
in cytokine responses may result in asthmatic symptoms.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.161.5.9904078 
PMID: 10806148  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

