
1. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2000 Jul;19(7):635-41.

Placental transfer and decay of maternally acquired antimeasles antibodies in
Nigerian children.

Hartter HK(1), Oyedele OI, Dietz K, Kreis S, Hoffman JP, Muller CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Laboratoire National de Santé, Luxembourg.

BACKGROUND: In developing countries vaccination against measles virus (MV) is
generally administered at 9 months of age, although it is well-documented that
protection of most infants by passively acquired maternal MV antibodies is waning
before immunization is given. The purpose of this study was to investigate the
decay of maternally derived MV antibodies in Nigerian infants as well as to
compare a German and Nigerian cohort of paired mothers and newborns regarding the
placental transfer efficiency of MV-specific IgG and total IgG antibodies.
METHODS: MV-specific IgG antibodies were measured with a commercially available
MV-enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, a recombinant hemagglutinin enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay as well as a neutralization assay. Total IgG values were
determined with a standard immunoturbidimetric test.
RESULTS: Anti-MV IgG titers were twice as high in German newborns as in Nigerian 
newborns. An increased concentration of immunoglobulins transferred via the
placenta was found only in the German cohort. High concentrations of total
maternal IgG reduced the concentration of MV-specific as well as total IgG that
crossed the placenta. Furthermore only 17% of the 4-month-old Nigerian infants
were still protected against measles. Antibodies had a biologic half-life of 33
days and a biochemical half-life of 48 days.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that the decay of passively acquired MV
antibodies occurred even more rapidly than expected resulting in susceptibility
to MV in most of the 4-month-old infants in Nigeria. Furthermore transfer of
maternal anti-MV IgG and total IgG antibodies to the newborn was more efficient
in the German cohort compared with the Nigerian group. These findings suggest the
use of alternative vaccination strategies in developing countries to possibly
reduce the window of susceptibility against measles.

DOI: 10.1097/00006454-200007000-00010 
PMID: 10917222  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

