
1. Postgrad Med J. 2000 Sep;76(899):561-5.

High prevalence of iliofemoral venous thrombosis with severe groin infection
among injecting drug users in North East Scotland: successful use of low
molecular weight heparin with antibiotics.

Mackenzie AR(1), Laing RB, Douglas JG, Greaves M, Smith CC.

Author information: 
(1)Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, Scotland.
a.r.mackenzie@arh.grampian.scot.nhs.uk

Injecting drug use, mainly of heroin, currently represents a major public health 
issue in the North East of Scotland. The recent tendency of the committed
injecting drug user to inject into the groin has created novel problems for the
Infection Unit. Data are presented on 20 consecutive patients admitted between
1994 and 1999 with iliofemoral venous thromboses, often complicated by severe
soft tissue infections and bacteraemia as a result of heroin injection into the
femoral vein. Nine had coexistent groin abscesses, four had severe streptococcal 
soft tissue infection of the right thigh, groin and lower abdomen, and two had
coincidental soft tissue infections of the upper limb. Nine were bacteraemic on
admission. All of the patients were chronic injecting drug users with a median
injection duration of 6.5 years. The 18 patients tested for hepatitis C virus
were all seropositive. None of the 14 patients tested was positive for HIV.
Seventeen patients were treated with subcutaneous low molecular weight heparin
(tinzaparin), three having received intravenous unfractionated heparin initially.
The tinzaparin was self administered and given for a median duration of seven
weeks. One patient declined to have any treatment. Three months after
presentation eight patients were asymptomatic, seven had a persistently swollen
leg, and five were lost to follow up. None developed clinically apparent
pulmonary embolism after institution of anticoagulant therapy. The management of 
iliofemoral venous thrombosis in injection drug users is problematic because of
poor venous access, non-compliance with prescribed treatment, ongoing injecting
behaviour, and coexistent sepsis. It is unlikely that a randomised trial of
standard treatment with heparin and warfarin versus low molecular weight heparin 
alone would be practical in this patient group. These retrospective data indicate
that the use of tinzaparin in injecting drug users is feasible and appears to
result in satisfactory clinical responses. The possibility of concomitant
infection in injecting drug users with venous thrombosis should always be
addressed, as it appears to be a common phenomenon. Early drainage of abscesses
and antimicrobial chemotherapy, often administered intramuscularly or orally
because of lack of peripheral venous access, is central to the appropriate care
of these patients.

DOI: 10.1136/pmj.76.899.561 
PMCID: PMC1741719
PMID: 10964121  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

