
1. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2000 Sep;154(9):893-9.

Correlates of unprotected vaginal sex among African American female adolescents: 
importance of relationship dynamics.

Crosby RA(1), DiClemente RJ, Wingood GM, Sionéan C, Cobb BK, Harrington K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Behavioral Sciences and Health Education, Rollins School of
Public Health of Emory University, 1518 Clifton Rd NE, Room 520, Atlanta, GA
30333, USA. rcrosby@sph.emory.edu

OBJECTIVE: To determine the associations between the frequency of unprotected
vaginal sex (UVS) and female adolescents' perceptions, particularly their
perceptions of relationship dynamics.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional study of 522 African American female adolescents enrolled
in a sexually transmitted disease (STD) and human immunodeficiency virus
prevention intervention trial.
SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: A volunteer sample of adolescents recruited from
neighborhoods characterized by high rates of unemployment, substance abuse,
violence, and STDs; 28% tested positive for STDs as assessed by DNA amplification
or culture.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Frequency of UVS assessed by interview using a 6-month
recall period.
RESULTS: Among adolescents having steady relationships, those spending more time 
with their boyfriends and having longer relationships reported a significantly
greater frequency of UVS. Other significant correlates included perception of
more girlfriends using condoms, no history of STDs, stronger normative beliefs
favoring male decision making in relationships, greater pregnancy worry, and
greater perceived invulnerability to STDs. For adolescents reporting casual
relationships, personal barriers to condom use, no history of STDs, and reporting
that their boyfriends typically decide when to have sex were associated with more
frequent UVS.
CONCLUSIONS: Adolescents' perceptions, particularly their perceptions of
relationship dynamics, played an integral role in explaining female adolescents' 
frequency of UVS with both steady and casual partners. Female adolescents in
steady relationships differ from those in casual relationships relative to their 
prevention needs. These findings have implications for clinic- or community-based
STD and human immunodeficiency virus prevention programs.

DOI: 10.1001/archpedi.154.9.893 
PMID: 10980792  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

