
1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 29;275(52):40897-903.

The formation of a flexible DNA-binding protein chain is required for efficient
DNA unwinding and adenovirus DNA chain elongation.

van Breukelen B(1), Kanellopoulos PN, Tucker PA, van der Vliet PC.

Author information: 
(1)University Medical Center of Utrecht, Department of Physiological Chemistry
and Centre for Biomedical Genetics, Utrecht 3584 CG, The Netherlands.

The adenovirus DNA-binding protein (DBP) binds cooperatively to single-stranded
DNA (ssDNA) and stimulates both initiation and elongation of DNA replication. DBP
consists of a globular core domain and a C-terminal arm that hooks onto a
neighboring DBP molecule to form a stable protein chain with the DNA bound to the
internal surface of the chain. This multimerization is the driving force for
ATP-independent DNA unwinding by DBP during elongation. As shown by x-ray
diffraction of different crystal forms of the C-terminal domain, the C-terminal
arm can adopt different conformations, leading to flexibility in the protein
chain. This flexibility is a function of the hinge region, the part of the
protein joining the C-terminal arm to the protein core. To investigate the
function of the flexibility, proline residues were introduced in the hinge
region, and the proteins were purified to homogeneity after baculovirus
expression. The mutant proteins were still able to bind ss- and double-stranded
DNA with approximately the same affinity as wild type, and the binding to ssDNA
was found to be cooperative. All mutant proteins were able to stimulate the
initiation of DNA replication to near wild type levels. However, the proline
mutants could not support elongation of DNA replication efficiently. Even the
elongation up to 26 nucleotides was severely impaired. This defect was also seen 
when DNA unwinding was studied. Binding studies of DBP to homo-oligonucleotides
showed an inability of the proline mutants to bind to poly(dA)(40), indicating an
inability to adapt to specific DNA conformations. Our data suggest that the
flexibility of the protein chain formed by DBP is important in binding and
unwinding of DNA during adenovirus DNA replication. A model explaining the need
for flexibility of the C-terminal arm is proposed.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M005745200 
PMID: 11016931  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

