
1. J Med Virol. 2001 Jan;63(1):22-8.

CD81 nucleotide mutation in hepatocellular carcinoma and lack of CD81
polymorphism in patients at stages of hepatitis C virus infection.

Itakura J(1), Nagayama K, Enomoto N, Sakamoto N, Tazawa J, Izumi N, Marumo F,
Sato C.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Tokyo Medical and
Dental University, Japan.

Mechanisms determining the chronicity or the pattern of clinical course of
hepatitis C virus (HCV) infections have not been clarified. Recently, CD81 was
reported to bind the E2 protein of HCV and was suggested to function as a
cellular receptor for HCV. Accordingly, the hypothesis was examined that CD81
polymorphism, if it exists, might correlate with certain clinical courses of HCV 
infection. CD81 cDNA sequences were determined from peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells (PBMCs). Twenty-four Japanese subjects were enrolled initially as follows: 
patients with chronic hepatitis C without cirrhosis (n = 3), patients with
cirrhosis (n = 3), patients with cirrhosis complicated by hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) (n = 3), patients with persistent HCV viremia without ALT
elevation (n = 3), those with positive anti-HCV antibodies without evidence of
HCV viremia (n = 3), and healthy volunteers (n = 9). In all PBMCs samples
analyzed, no polymorphism was found in the CD81 cDNA sequence. The sequence was
different, however, from the one reported previously at three nucleotide
positions: a transversion to thymine instead of cytosine at nt 1130, a deletion
at nt 1206, and a guanine insertion at nt 71. Subsequently, CD81 cDNA sequences
from PBMCs and HCC tissue were compared among the other 6 patients with chronic
hepatitis C bearing HCC. A comparative study of the CD81 sequences from HCC and
PBMCs revealed that various nucleotide mutations existed only in the HCC samples 
in 3 out of 6 patients. Several mutations in the 3' non-coding region of CD81
cDNA were observed exclusively in HCC tissue suggesting its possible role in
hepatocarcinogenesis. Because of the absence of polymorphisms, however, CD81 is
unlikely to affect the progression of chronic hepatitis C in terms of chronicity,
hepatitis activity, or disease stage.


PMID: 11130883  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

