
1. Blood. 2001 Feb 1;97(3):708-13.

Characterization of novel natural killer (NK)-cell and gammadelta T-cell lines
established from primary lesions of nasal T/NK-cell lymphomas associated with the
Epstein-Barr virus.

Nagata H(1), Konno A, Kimura N, Zhang Y, Kimura M, Demachi A, Sekine T, Yamamoto 
K, Shimizu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, School of Medicine, Chiba University,
Chiba, Japan.

Studies on nasal T/natural killer (NK)-cell lymphoma have been hampered by its
tendency to cause necrosis. Thus, the establishment of cell lines of this
neoplasm would seem to be valuable. This study attempted to establish cell lines 
from primary lesions of this tumor, and successfully obtained 2 novel
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-positive cell lines, SNK-6 and SNT-8, by means of
high-dose recombinant interleukin 2. Flow cytometry showed that SNK-6 had an
NK-cell phenotype, CD3- CD4- CD8- CD19- CD56+ T-cell receptor (TCR) alpha/beta-
TCR gamma/delta-, whereas SNT-8 was CD3+ CD4- CD8- CD19- CD56+ TCR alpha/beta-
TCR gamma/delta+. These were consistent with immunophenotypes of their original
tumors, and the cell lines had monoclonal EBV clones identical to ones in their
original tumors. Thus, the cell lines developed from cells forming the primary
lesions. Genotypic analysis showed that SNK-6 had unrearranged TCR and
immunoglobulin heavy-chain genes, supporting the conclusion that SNK-6 was of
NK-cell lineage. On the other hand, SNT-8 had rearranged TCR beta-, gamma-, and
delta-chain genes, and together with its phenotype, SNT-8 proved to be a
gammadelta T-cell line. This is the first report of the establishment of cell
lines from primary lesions of nasal T/NK cell lymphomas, and the results
demonstrated that there are at least 2 lineages, NK- and gammadelta T-cell, in
this neoplasm. Moreover, it has been suggested that nasal T/NK cell lymphomas of 
these lineages may belong to the same clinicopathologic entity because both types
of cases shared common clinical and histopathologic features.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.v97.3.708 
PMID: 11157488  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

