
1. In Vivo. 2000 Sep-Oct;14(5):643-9.

Murine retroviral vector producer cells survival and toxicity in the dog liver.

Link CJ Jr(1), Seregina T, Levy JP, Martin M, Ackermann M, Moorman DW.

Author information: 
(1)Human Gene Therapy Research Institute, Iowa Health Systems, 1415 Woodland
Ave., Des Moines, IA 50309, USA. chrclink@aol.com

To develop a safe method to target gene delivery into intrahepatic tumors, we
examined the toxicity of intrahepatic (IH) injection of retroviral vector
producer cells (VPC) into the canine liver. VPC have been demonstrated to
effectively transfer genes in vivo. To evaluate for adverse effects form
xenogeneic cell transplantation, mongrel dogs were injected IH with 1 x 10(9)
murine LTKOSN.2 VPC divided into three aliquots. The animals were then monitored 
for acute toxicity induced by the VPC. The intraoperative IH injections of the
cells were tolerated without difficulty. Starting 7 days after IH injection, the 
dogs then received intravenous ganciclovir (GCV) twice daily (5 mg/kg) for 7
days. GCV treatment did not cause significant toxicities. Dogs underwent serial
blood tests to evaluate bone marrow, renal, liver and immunological function.
Complete blood counts, electrolytes, liver function and renal function tests
remained normal except for mild elevations of alkaline phosphatase. Histologic
examination of liver tissues from the IH injection site revealed no apparent
normal tissue destruction induced by the VPC. Two of the four treated dogs
underwent liver biopsy on day 3. These biopsy specimens were cultured and
persistent, viable VPC were recovered. The dogs mounted an antibody response to
the murine VPC that was first demonstrated 5 days post injection. PCR analysis
demonstrated low level gene transfer into dog liver tissue. Overall, our results 
demonstrate that IH xenogeneic VPC injections are not accompanied by significant 
adverse effects over a 1 month period following administration into the canine
liver. These data support the safety aspects of using murine VPC in Phase I
clinical trials.


PMID: 11212842  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

