
1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 8;276(23):20206-12. Epub 2001 Apr 3.

Molecular cloning of a novel lipocalin-1 interacting human cell membrane receptor
using phage display.

Wojnar P(1), Lechner M, Merschak P, Redl B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology (Medical School), University of Innsbruck, Fritz
Pregl Strasse 3, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria.

Human lipocalin-1 (Lcn-1, also called tear lipocalin), a member of the lipocalin 
structural superfamily, is produced by a number of glands and tissues and is
known to bind an unusually large array of hydrophobic ligands. Apart from its
specific function in stabilizing the lipid film of human tear fluid, it is
suggested to act as a physiological scavenger of potentially harmful lipophilic
compounds, in general. To characterize proteins involved in the reception,
detoxification, or degradation of these ligands, a cDNA phage-display library
from human pituitary gland was constructed and screened for proteins interacting 
with Lcn-1. Using this method an Lcn-1 interacting phage was isolated that
expressed a novel human protein. Molecular cloning and analysis of the entire
cDNA indicated that it encodes a 55-kDa protein, lipocalin-1 interacting membrane
receptor (LIMR), with nine putative transmembrane domains. The cell membrane
location of this protein was confirmed by immunocytochemistry and Western blot
analysis of membrane fractions of human NT2 cells. Independent biochemical
investigations using a recombinant N-terminal fragment of LIMR also demonstrated 
a specific interaction with Lcn-1 in vitro. Based on these data, we suggest LIMR 
to be a receptor of Lcn-1 ligands. These findings constitute the first report of 
cloning of a lipocalin interacting, plasma membrane-located receptor, in general.
In addition, a sequence comparison supports the biological relevance of this
novel membrane protein, because genes with significant nucleotide sequence
similarity are present in Takifugu rubripes, Drosophila melanogaster,
Caenorhabditis elegans, Mus musculus, Bos taurus, and Sus scrofa. According to
data derived from the human genome sequencing project, the LIMR-encoding gene has
to be mapped on human chromosome 12, and its intron/exon organization could be
established. The entire LIMR-encoding gene consists of about 13.7 kilobases in
length and contains 16 introns with a length between 91 and 3438 base pairs.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M101762200 
PMID: 11287427  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

