
1. J Surg Res. 2001 May 15;97(2):155-8.

Modified AdCTLA-4 vector blocks alloimmune response in vitro.

Zamir G(1), Gelman AE, Debonera F, Hardwigsen J, Que X, Aldeguer X, Martin M,
Shaked A, Olthoff KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
19104, USA.

BACKGROUND: Gene transfer of the costimulatory blockade molecule CTLA-4Ig into
cold-preserved rat liver allografts results in indefinite allograft survival.
Despite local delivery, this mode of immunomodulation is associated with systemic
immunosuppression. In an effort to restrict immunosuppression to the graft, we
have constructed a novel adenoviral vector, AdCTLA-4ex-TAG, in which the Ig
sequence of CTLA-4Ig DNA has been deleted to destabilize the gene product to
promote rapid extrahepatic degradation while maintaining its immunosuppressive
activity within the graft milieu.
METHODS: (1) Vector construction. CTLA-4 extracellular binding domain (CTLA-4ex) 
was prepared by PCR-based cloning methods and fused in frame to a genetic element
encoding an epitope TAG allowing identification of the transgene product
CTLA-4exTAG. CTLA-4exTAG was subcloned into a shuttle vector enabling isolation
of AdCTLA-4exTAG. (2) In vitro transfection: AdCTLA-4exTAG was transfected into
MH(1)C(1) cells and then supernatant was recovered for Western blot analysis. (3)
In vitro alloimmune response was characterized by CFSE proliferation assay. (4)
Extrahepatic effect of AdCTLA-4exTAG was characterized by the ability to control 
tumor growth after implantation of a regressive, immune sensitive cancer cell
line (REGb) in the skin of BDIX rats after liver transduction with AdCTLA-4exTAG.
RESULTS: Expression and secretion of the recombinant protein were documented by
Western blot after infection of the MH(1)C(1) cell line() with AdCTLA-4exTAG.
Addition of infected MH(1)C(1) cell supernatant resulted in abrogation of
alloimmune response as shown by markedly diminished division of CD4(+) T cells in
a CFSE proliferation assay. Extrahepatic tumor regressed normally after liver
transduction with AdCTLA-4exTAG.
CONCLUSIONS: These results show efficient in vitro expression of CTLA-4exTAG
after transfection with AdCTLA-4exTAG. The modified protein retains its ability
to abrogate in vitro alloimmune response. Efficient control of extrahepatic tumor
growth after liver-directed delivery of AdCTLA-4exTAG suggests that the
immunosuppressive effect of this vector is restricted to the liver. These results
set the ground for the utilization of this novel adenoviral vector in the
transplant setting.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jsre.2001.6142 
PMID: 11341792  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

