
1. Am J Surg Pathol. 2001 Jul;25(7):865-74.

Bone marrow involvement in lymphomas with hemophagocytic syndrome at
presentation: a clinicopathologic study of 11 patients in a Western institution.

Allory Y(1), Challine D, Haioun C, Copie-Bergman C, Delfau-Larue MH, Boucher E,
Charlotte F, Fabre M, Michel M, Gaulard P.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Pathologie and EA 2348, Hôpital Henri Mondor, AP-HP, Créteil,
France.

Hemophagocytic syndrome (HPS) is a clinicopathologic syndrome that can reveal a
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. The pathologic features of lymphoma associated with HPS
remain ill defined. We studied 11 lymphomas associated with HPS on initial bone
marrow biopsies, consecutively diagnosed during a 6-year period in a Western
institution. There were seven diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs), three
T-cell lymphomas (one peripheral T-cell lymphoma unspecified, two hepatosplenic
gammadelta T-cell lymphomas [HS gammadeltaTLs]), and one aggressive NK-cell
lymphoma/leukemia (NKL). These lymphomas shared common clinicopathologic features
with a systemic presentation, a poor outcome (nine patients died within 2 years),
and a mild interstitial lymphoid infiltrate of the bone marrow at presentation in
nine patients. This equivocal lymphoma infiltrate was blending with normal
hematopoietic cells, and CD20 and CD3 immunolabelings were essential for its
detection. A high number of reactive T (CD3+) cells, most often with a
predominant cytotoxic (CD8+ TiA1+) phenotype, was present in all DLBCLs. By in
situ hybridization, Epstein-Barr virus was detected in neoplastic cells of three 
cases (one DLBCL, one HS gammadeltaTL, and one NKL), which also showed serum
viral DNA. Polymerase chain reaction studies disclosed HHV6 DNA sequences in
tumor tissues of two DLBCLs, whereas HHV8 DNA was not detected. Because tumor
mass indicative of lymphoma was not striking in most patients, bone marrow biopsy
appears to be of great value for the diagnosis of an HPS-associated lymphoma,
which may be, in Western patients, of B- as well as T- or NK-cell type.
Immunostaining for CD3 and CD20 is essential to identify the common subtle
lymphoma involvement. Together with a better understanding of the pathogenic
processes, an early diagnosis may improve the prognosis of HPS-associated
lymphoma.

DOI: 10.1097/00000478-200107000-00004 
PMID: 11420457  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

