
1. J Virol. 1975 Aug;16(2):366-87.

Structure and composition of the adenovirus type 2 core.

Brown DT, Westphal M, Burlingham BT, Winterhoff U, Doerfler W.

The structure and composition of the core of adenovirus type 2 were analyzed by
electron microscopy and biochemical techniques after differential degradation of 
the virion by heat, by pyridine, or by sarcosyl treatment. In negatively stained 
preparations purified sarcosyl cores reveal spherical subunits of 21.6-nm
diameter in the electron microscope. It is suggested that these subunits are
organized as an icosahedron which has its axes of symmetry coincident with those 
of the viral capsid. The subunits are connected by the viral DNA molecule. The
sarcosyl cores contain the viral DNA and predominantly the arginine/alanine-rich 
core polypeptide VII. When sarcosyl cores are spread on a protein film, tightly
coiled particles are observed which gradually unfold giving rise to a
rosette-like pattern due to the uncoiling DNA molecule. Completely unfolded DNA
molecules are circular. Pyridine cores consist of the viral DNA and polypeptides 
V and VII. In negatively stained preparations of pyridine cores the subunit
arrangement apparent in the sarcosyl cores is masked by an additional shell which
is probably formed by polypeptide V. In freeze-cleaved preparations of the
adenovirion two fracture planes can be recognized. One fracture plane probably
passes between the outer capsid of the virion and polypeptide V exposing a
subviral particle which corresponds to the pyridine core. The second fracture
plane observed could be located between polypeptide V and the polypeptide VII-DNA
complex, thus uncovering a subviral structure which corresponds to the sarcosyl
core. In the sarcosyl core polypeptide VII is tightly bound to the viral DNA
which is susceptible to digestion with DNase. The restriction endonuclease EcoRI 
cleaves the viral DNA in the sarcosyl cores into the six specific fragments.
These fragments can be resolved on polyacrylamide-agarose gels provided the
sarcosyl cores are treated with pronase after incubation with the restriction
endonuclease. When pronase digestion is omitted, a complex of the terminal EcoRI 
fragments adenovirus DNA and protein can be isolated. From this complex the
terminal DNA fragments can be liberated after pronase treatment. The complex
described is presumably responsible for the circularization of the viral DNA
inside the virion. The nature of the protein(s) involved in circle formation has 
not yet been elucidated.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.16.2.366-387.1975 
PMCID: PMC354676
PMID: 1152144  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

