
1. Mol Med. 2001 Oct;7(10):668-78.

Interleukin-6 and glucocorticoids synergistically induce human immunodeficiency
virus type-1 expression in chronically infected U1 cells by a long terminal
repeat independent post-transcriptional mechanism.

Kinter AL(1), Biswas P, Alfano M, Justement JS, Mantelli B, Rizzi C, Gatti AR,
Vicenzi E, Bressler P, Poli G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunoregulation, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: Glucocorticoids (GC) such as dexamethasone (Dex) can directly
upregulate human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) replication in acutely
infected cells and potentiate HIV expression from chronically infected
promonocytic U1 cells stimulated with tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha). We
have here investigated the potential effect of Dex in U1 cells stimulated with
interleukin-6 (IL-6), a cytokine inducing virus expression by acting mostly at a 
post-transcriptional level on the virus life cycle.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Virus production in culture supernatants was evaluated by 
reverse transcriptase (RT) activity. GC receptor expression was tested by both
binding of [3H]-Dexamethasone 21-mesylate and Northern blotting. Cell-associated 
HIV protein expression was analyzed by Western blotting, whereas both HIV and
monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) RNA accumulation were evaluated by
Northern blotting. HIV transcription was tested by long terminal repeat (LTR)
chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT) assay after transient transfection of U1
or U937 cells. Formation of activating protein-1 (AP-1) DNA binding complex in
nuclear cell extracts was visualized by electrophoretic mobility shift assay
(EMSA), whereas ERK1/2 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) phosphorylation
was studied by Western blotting.
RESULTS: IL-6 and Dex synergistically induced HIV expression in U1 cells, and
this effect was blocked by RU 486. No substantial HIV RNA accumulation was
demonstrated in U1 cells co-stimulated with IL-6 and Dex, whereas IL-6
upregulated the expression of MCP-1 RNA, and this effect was inhibited by Dex. In
contrast, Dex potentiated IL-6 induced activation of AP-1 and ERK1/2 MAPK
phosphorylation, as revealed by EMSA. HIV-1 LTR driven transcription was observed
in U1 cells stimulated with TNF-alpha and this effect was potentiated by Dex. In 
sharp contrast, no induction of LTR-directed CAT activity was observed in
transfected U1 cells (or in their parental uninfected U937 cells) stimulated with
IL-6 and Dex either alone or in combination.
CONCLUSIONS: High levels of virion production can be induced in latently infected
cells by stimulation with IL-6 and Dex in the absence of activation of the HIV
LTR or viral transcription in spite of activation of both ERK1/2 MAPK and AP-1.
These findings suggest the existence of LTR-independent pathways influenced by
cytokine and GC through which HIV can maintain substantial levels of protein
expression and virion production.


PMCID: PMC1949996
PMID: 11713366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

