
1. HIV Clin Trials. 2001 Nov-Dec;2(6):477-83.

Highly active antiretroviral treatment (HAART) and health-related quality of life
in naive and pretreated HIV-infected patients.

Casado A(1), Consiglio E, Podzamczer D, Badia X.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Recerca en Resultats Sanitaris, Departament d'Epidemiología Clínica 
y Salut Pública, Hospital de la Santa Creu y Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
Acasado@cochrane.es

PURPOSE: To compare changes in health-related quality of life (HR-QOL) over 3
months in a cohort of patients who were initiating their first antiretroviral
therapy (naive patients) and patients who had been previously treated with two
nucleoside analogues and who switched to HAART (pretreated patients).
METHOD: One hundred thirty-eight patients initiating or changing to HAART
(indinavir plus two nucleoside analogues) were recruited from 23 Spanish
hospitals. Patients' HR-QOL was evaluated by administering the Medical Outcome
Study HIV Health Survey (MOS-HIV) questionnaire at baseline and after 3 months of
treatment. Clinical changes and changes in HR-QOL were measured after 3 months of
treatment. The size of changes in HR-QOL scores was calculated at 3 months using 
the effect size (ES).
RESULTS: On entering the study, both groups showed similar characteristics except
in viral load and number of symptoms. The naive group presented an average viral 
load 2.5 times greater than the pretreated group and had 1.5 more symptoms per
patient. The pretreated group began treatment with higher scores (better QOL)
than the naive group in 7 of the 11 HR-QOL dimensions and in the two health
summary scores (p <.05). After 3 months of treatment, significant differences
appeared between both groups in terms of the percentage of patients with viral
loads that decreased by more than 1 log (78.9% naive group, 54.3% pretreated
group; p <.01); plasma HIV-1 viral load was not detectable in 33.3% of naive
patients versus 13.5% of pretreated patients (p <.01). At 3 months, no
statistically significant differences in changes in HR-QOL were found between
naive and pretreated patients.
CONCLUSION: After 3 months of therapy with a HAART regimen, including two
nucleoside analogues plus indinavir, naive patients presented a greater
virological response but no significant differences in changes in HR-QOL when
compared to pretreated patients. Both naive patients and patients previously
treated with two nucleoside analogues showed improvement in clinical variables
and in HR-QOL after this period of time.

DOI: 10.1310/10VL-4FBP-K7VV-XPX9 
PMID: 11742436  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

