
1. J Virol. 2002 Mar;76(5):2255-62.

trans-Complementation rescue of cyclophilin A-deficient viruses reveals that the 
requirement for cyclophilin A in human immunodeficiency virus type 1 replication 
is independent of its isomerase activity.

Saphire AC(1), Bobardt MD, Gallay PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 Torrey Pines
Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) requires the incorporation of
cyclophilin A (CypA) for replication. CypA is packaged by binding to the capsid
(CA) region of Gag. This interaction is disrupted by cyclosporine (CsA).
Preventing CypA incorporation, either by mutations in the binding region of CA or
by the presence of CsA, abrogates virus infectivity. Given that CypA possesses an
isomerase activity, it has been proposed that CypA acts as an uncoating factor by
destabilizing the shell of CA that surrounds the viral genome. However, because
the same domain of CypA is responsible for both its isomerase activity and its
capacity to be packaged, it has been challenging to determine if isomerase
activity is required for HIV-1 replication. To address this issue, we fused CypA 
to viral protein R (Vpr), creating a Vpr-CypA chimera. Because Vpr is packaged
via the p6 region of Gag, this approach bypasses the interaction with CA and
allows CypA incorporation even in the presence of CsA. Using this system, we
found that Vpr-CypA rescues the infectivity of viruses lacking CypA, either
produced in the presence of CsA or mutated in the CypA packaging signal of CA.
Furthermore, a Vpr-CypA mutant which has no isomerase activity and no capacity to
bind to CA also rescues HIV-1 replication. Thus, this study demonstrates that the
isomerase activity of CypA is not required for HIV-1 replication and suggests
that the interaction of the catalytic site of CypA with CA serves no other
function than to incorporate CypA into viruses.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.76.5.2255-2262.2002 
PMCID: PMC135933
PMID: 11836403  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

