
1. J Med Virol. 2002 Jun;67(2):234-40.

Single-cell cytokine analysis allows detection of cervical T-cell responses
against human papillomavirus type 16 L1 in women infected with genital HPV.

Passmore JA(1), Burch VC, Shephard EG, Marais DJ, Allan B, Kay P, Rose RC,
Williamson AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, Division of Medical Virology,
University of Cape Town and Groote Schuur Hospital, Observatory, Cape Town, South
Africa.

Specific types of human papillomavirus (HPV) are known to play a causal role in
the development of cervical cancer, with human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV-16)
identified as the predominant type. Despite this, little is known about cervical 
immune responses to this pathogen. The aim of this study was to assess the
feasibility of cervical cytobrush sampling and single-cell cytokine staining to
investigate cervical lymphocyte-specific cytokine responses to HPV-16 antigens.
Of eighteen women recruited into the study, five were HPV DNA positive at the
cervix (current exposure) and a further five had circulating antibodies to HPV-16
(previous exposure). Cervical lymphocytes, isolated from the five HPV
DNA-positive women, two HPV DNA-negative controls, and one woman with circulating
HPV-16 antibodies were assessed for HPV-specific responses using intracellular
staining for interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) and interleukin-4 (IL-4). We
demonstrate that both CD4(+) and CD8(+) cervical T lymphocytes, harvested from
noninfected and infected subjects, produce these cytokines in response to
nonspecific stimulation. However, antigen-specific (HPV-16 L1) IFN-gamma
production by CD4(+) and CD8(+) cervical T lymphocytes is only detectable in
women exposed currently or previously to HPV-16. This is the first time that
antigen-specific cytokine responses of mucosal lymphocytes, obtained from a site 
of HPV infection, have been demonstrated. This finding clearly illustrates the
use of intracellular cytokine staining for investigation of low precursor
frequency single-cell antigen-specific responses in lymphocytes harvested from
mucosal sites with HPV infection.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.2212 
PMID: 11992584  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

