
1. Acta Virol. 2001;45(5-6):287-92.

Significance of anti-interferon-alpha2 and sICAM-1 activities in the sera of
viral hepatitis B and C patients treated with human recombinant
interferon-alpha2.

Stancek D(1), Fuchsberger N, Oltman M, Schmeisser H, Kontsek P, Jahnová E,
Hajnická V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Preventive and Clinical Medicine, Bratislava, Slovak Republic.

In this study the presence of an IFN-binding activity in the sera of patients
with chronic viral hepatitis B or C treated with rIFN-alpha2 was screened by a
radioimmune assay (RIA) using radiolabeled rIFN-alpha2. Incidence of an anti-IFN 
activitywas compared with hepatitis B virus (HBV) or hepatitis C virus (HCV)
serum markers as hepatitis B s antigen (HBsAg), hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg),
antibodies to HBsAg (anti-HBsAg), antibodies to HBeAg (anti-HBeAg),
seroconversion, HBV DNA, HCV RNA, and serum soluble intracellular adhesion
molecule I (sICAM). Injections (intramuscular) of rIFN-alpha2 caused an anti-rIFN
activity formation in 8 (27.6%) of 29 patients with chronic active hepatitis B
(CAH-B) and in 8 (30.8%) of 26 patients with chronic active hepatitis C (CAH-C). 
The presence of the anti-rIFN activity in CAH-B patients correlated frequently
with the persistence of HBsAg, HBeAg and HBV-DNA, while its absence was often
accompanied by the anti-HBeAg and anti-HBsAg seroconversion, respectively, and
HBV-DNA negativity. In two CAH-C patients who became HCV RNA-negative no anti-IFN
activity was found. Levels of serum sICAM-1 in CAH-B patients responding to the
IFN treatment were higher than those in non-responders or in which the anti-IFN
activity was present. The anti-IFN activity may negatively influence the effect
of the IFN therapy of CAH-B or CAH-C patients at early stages of the therapy. The
appearance of the anti-IFN activity at the end of a long-term IFN therapy does
not seem to influence the outcome of the therapy. sICAM-1 may be involved in the 
process of CAH-B reactivation and IFN-triggered cytotoxicity during the IFN
therapy.


PMID: 12083327  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

