
1. Gene Ther. 2002 Oct;9(19):1291-301.

Evaluation of Tet-on system to avoid transgene down-regulation in ex vivo gene
transfer to the CNS.

Johansen J(1), Rosenblad C, Andsberg K, Møller A, Lundberg C, Björlund A,
Johansen TE.

Author information: 
(1)NsGene A/S, 97-Pederstrupvej, DK-2750 Ballerup, Denmark.

Ex vivo gene transfer to the CNS has so far been hampered by instability of
transgene expression. To avoid the phenomenon of transgene down-regulation, we
have employed strong, constitutive promoters and compared this expression system 
with the inducible Tet expression system incorporated in a single plasmid vector 
or in lentiviral vectors. Plasmid-based transgene expression directed by the
constitutive, human ubiquitin promoter, UbC, was stable in transfected HiB5 cells
in vitro and comparable in strength to the CMV promoter. However, after
transplantation of UbC and CMV HiB5 clones to the rat striatum, silencing of the 
transgene occurred in most cells soon after implantation of transfected cells.
The Tet-on elements were incorporated in a single plasmid vector and inducible
HiB5 clones were generated. Inducible clones displayed varying basal expression
activity, which could not be ascribed to an effect of cis-elements in the vector,
but rather was due, at least in part, to intrinsic activity of the minimal
promoter. Basal expression activity could be blocked in a majority of cells by
stable expressing the transrepressor tTS. Fully induced expression levels were
comparable to CMV and UbC promoters. Similar to the constitutive promoters
transgene expression was down-regulated soon after grafting of inducible HiB5
clones to the rat striatum. Lentiviral vectors can direct long-term stable in
vivo transgene expression. To take advantage of this quality of the lentiviral
vector, the Tet-on elements were incorporated in two lentiviral transfer vectors 
followed by transduction of Hib5 cells. Interestingly, all HiB5 clones
established by lentiviral transduction showed very similar expression patterns
and tight regulatability that apparently was independent of transgene copy number
and integration site. Nevertheless, transgene expression in all lentiviral HiB5
clones was down-regulated shortly after transplantation to the rat striatum.
These results confirm the general phenomenon of transgene down-regulation.
Moreover, the results suggest that the considerable advantages offered by
lentiviral vectors for direct gene delivery cannot necessarily be transferred
directly to ex vivo gene delivery. This emphasizes the need for alternative
vector strategies for ex vivo gene transfer.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.gt.3301778 
PMID: 12224012  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

