
1. AIDS Anal Afr. 1995 Mar-Apr;5(2):14-5.

Patterns of sexual behaviour and AIDS: a new perspective.

Van Niftrik J.

PIP: Although people have linked HIV and AIDS with homosexuality ever since HIV
appeared in the Western world, studies show that sexual orientation is relatively
unimportant in the transmission of HIV. AIDS is becoming more and more an
heterosexual phenomenon. Studies show that perceived differences between the
practices of heterosexual and homosexual couples are inaccurate. For example, an 
estimated 75% of heterosexual couples engage in oral sex, exactly the same
percentage as has been reported in male homosexual couples. Many heterosexual
couples also practice anal intercourse on one or another occasion, but less
frequently than do homosexual couples. Of homosexual and bisexual men over age
20, almost all reported having had approximately 20 same-sex partners. In a
sample of 1450 men, only two reported having had 100 or more partners. 55% of
heterosexually active male adult Americans report having had up to 20 partners
and 25% have had more than 20 partners. These statistics confound the myth that
homosexual men have excessive sexual appetites. Developed countries will
eventually mirror the heterosexual incidence profiles of developing countries,
albeit at a much lower level. By 1992, 128,500 women and 1,038,500 men in the US 
were estimated to be HIV-seropositive, although the US Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention that year reported that the number of women developing
AIDS in the US was four times greater than men. These figures support the need to
focus upon all types of sexual behavior in order to prevent HIV infection. Future
research must consider the practices and needs of homosexuals, heterosexuals, and
bisexuals. Furthermore, sexual orientation should be regarded as a psychosocially
normal, non-pathological behavior pattern and not be singled out as an abnormal
factor. With regard to HIV transmission and sexual behavior, distinction should
also not be made between racial groups.

PMID: 12288599  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

