
1. AIDS Action. 1995 Sep-Nov;(30):2-3.

Slow progress against HIV.

Alcorn K.

PIP: Treatment for people with HIV attempts to prevent HIV from reproducing,
boost the immune system, or cure opportunistic infections. The chemical structure
of anti-viral drugs is similar to that of DNA. Since HIV bonds with the drugs
rather than DNA, it cannot replicate itself. The most widely used anti-viral drug
is zidovudine or AZT (brand name, Retrovir), but it does not help HIV infected
persons who are still healthy. A recent trial shows that a combination of
anti-viral drugs is more likely to delay opportunistic infections and death than 
AZT alone. When pregnant women use AZT before and during delivery and when their 
newborns receive AZT therapy, the likelihood of HIV transmission to the newborn
is reduced by about 66%. Follow-up studies are needed, however, since AZT is
toxic. Disadvantages of anti-viral drugs include resistance, toxicity, side
effects (e.g., nausea and anemia), which are particularly severe at high doses,
and accessibility of regular and expensive monitoring tests. Protease inhibitors 
are in the early stages of development. They deactivate the HIV enzyme which
allows HIV to attach to white blood cells. Imuthiol (DTC) aims to increase the
number of white blood cells so the body can fight HIV longer, but it appears that
it has no benefit and may even facilitate development of opportunistic
infections. Interleuken 2 may increase the number of CD4 cells. Alternative
approaches to strengthening the immune system are lifestyle changes, improved
diet, reduced stress, Chinese medicine and acupuncture, herbal medicines, and
relaxation exercises. HIV/AIDS therapies are very expensive and often induce side
effects. Many HIV positive people in developed countries are opting out of these 
treatments, even though they have access to them. Prevention and treatment of
opportunistic infection remain the best strategies for most HIV-infected persons.

PMID: 12290561  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

