
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Nov 1;30(21):e113.

Advanced modular self-inactivating lentiviral expression vectors for multigene
interventions in mammalian cells and in vivo transduction.

Mitta B(1), Rimann M, Ehrengruber MU, Ehrbar M, Djonov V, Kelm J, Fussenegger M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, ETH Zurich,
ETH Hoenggerberg, HPT, CH-8093 Zurich, Switzerland.

In recent years, lentiviral expression systems have gained an unmatched
reputation among the gene therapy community for their ability to deliver
therapeutic transgenes into a wide variety of difficult-to-transfect/transduce
target tissues (brain, hematopoietic system, liver, lung, retina) without
eliciting significant humoral immune responses. We have cloned a construction
kit-like self-inactivating lentiviral expression vector family which is
compatible to state-of-the-art packaging and pseudotyping technologies and
contains, besides essential cis-acting lentiviral sequences, (i) unparalleled
polylinkers with up to 29 unique sites for restriction endonucleases, many of
which recognize 8 bp motifs, (ii) strong promoters derived from the human
cytomegalovirus immediate-early promoter (P(hCMV)) or the human elongation factor
1alpha (P(hEF1)(alpha)), (iii) P(hCMV-) or P(PGK-) (phosphoglycerate kinase
promoter) driven G418 resistance markers or fluorescent protein-based expression 
tracers and (iv) tricistronic expression cassettes for coordinated expression of 
up to three transgenes. In addition, we have designed a size-optimized series of 
highly modular lentiviral expression vectors (pLenti Module) which contain,
besides the extensive central polylinker, unique restriction sites flanking any
of the 5'U3, R-U5-psi+-SD, cPPT-RRE-SA and 3'LTR(DeltaU3) modules or placed
within the 5'U3 (-78 bp) and 3'LTR(DeltaU3) (8666 bp). pLentiModule enables
straightforward cassette-type module swapping between lentiviral expression
vector family members and facilitates the design of Tat-independent (replacement 
of 5'LTR by heterologous promoter elements), regulated and self-excisable
proviruses (insertion of responsive operators or LoxP in the 3'LTR(DeltaU3)
element). We have validated our lentiviral expression vectors by transduction of 
a variety of insect, chicken, murine and human cell lines as well as adult rat
cardiomyocytes, rat hippocampal slices and chicken embryos. The novel
multi-purpose construction kit-like vector series described here is compatible
with itself as well as many other (non-viral) mammalian expression vectors for
straightforward exchange of key components (e.g. promoters, LTRs, resistance
genes) and will assist the gene therapy and tissue engineering communities in
developing lentiviral expression vectors tailored for optimal treatment of
prominent human diseases.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gnf112 
PMCID: PMC135834
PMID: 12409472  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

