
1. Jpn J Cancer Res. 2002 Oct;93(10):1154-63.

Development of gene therapy using prostate-specific membrane antigen
promoter/enhancer with Cre Recombinase/LoxP system for prostate cancer cells
under androgen ablation condition.

Ikegami S(1), Tadakuma T, Suzuki S, Yoshimura I, Asano T, Hayakawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, National Defense Medical College, 3-2 Namiki,
Tokorozawa, Saitama 359-8513, Japan.

To enhance the efficacy of suicide gene therapy for prostate cancer under
androgen deprivation, we designed a promoter system that consists of the
prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) promoter / enhancer (PEPM) and Cre-loxP
DNA recombination system. We constructed two kinds of plasmids. One plasmid
contains a Cre recombinase (Cre) under the control of PEPM and the other
expresses CMV-lox-luciferase / herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase (TK). In
PSMA-positive LNCaP cells, the promoter activity of the PEPM-Cre plus
CMV-lox-luciferase demonstrated 800-fold greater activity compared with that of
the PSMA promoter alone. However, no enhancement of the promoter activity was
observed in the PSMA-negative cells. Furthermore, in contrast to prostate
specific antigen promoter / enhancer (PP), the promoter activity of PEPM did not 
decrease when the LNCaP cells were cultured in charcoal-stripped fetal bovine
serum (CFBS). In an in vitro gene therapy model with LNCaP cells, the cell growth
inhibition in the presence of ganciclovir (GCV) was more evident in the cells
transfected with the PEPM-Cre plus CMV-lox-TK than in the cells with the PP-TK,
and the difference in efficacy between the two plasmids was more remarkable when 
the cells were maintained in CFBS medium. The therapeutic effect of PEPM-Cre plus
CMV-lox-TK was also observed in xenografted LNCaP cells on nude mice when the
plasmids were directly injected into tumors and GCV was administered
intraperitoneally. These findings indicate that the combination of the PSMA
promoter / enhancer and the Cre-loxP system can enhance the PSMA promoter
activity even under androgen ablation conditions and can exert its anti-tumor
effect both in vitro and in vivo.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2002.tb01218.x 
PMCID: PMC5926883
PMID: 12417046  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

