
1. Lancet Oncol. 2003 Jan;4(1):22-9.

Emerging pathways in the development of AIDS-related lymphomas.

Carbone A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro di Riferimento Oncologico-IRCCS, Aviano, Italy. acarbone@cro.itc

The clinicopathological range of AIDS-related non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHLs)
includes systemic lymphomas, primary central-nervous-system lymphomas, primary
effusion lymphoma, and plasmablastic lymphoma of the oral cavity. Most
AIDS-related NHLs belong to one of three categories of high-grade B-cell
lymphomas: Burkitt's lymphoma, centroblastic lymphoma, and immunoblastic
lymphoma. The pathological heterogeneity of AIDS-related NHL reflects the
heterogeneity of their associated molecular lesions. In AIDS-related Burkitt's
lymphoma, the molecular lesions involve activation of c-MYC, inactivation of p53,
and infection with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). AIDS-related immunoblastic lymphomas
infected with EBV are characterised by frequent expression of latent membrane
protein 1-an EBV oncoprotein. The biological heterogeneity of AIDS-related NHLs
is highlighted by their histogenetic differences; AIDS-related NHLs are related
to distinct B-cell subgroups (eg, germinal-centre or post-germinal-centre B
cells). The phenotypic pattern of AIDS-related Burkitt's lymphomas and systemic
AIDS-related centroblastic lymphomas closely reflects that of B cells in germinal
centres. Conversely, the phenotype of AIDS-related immunoblastic lymphomas and
AIDS-related primary effusion lymphomas reflects post-germinal-centre B cells in 
all cases. Despite their clinicopathological, genetic, and phenotypic
heterogeneity, most lymphomas in patients with AIDS carry somatic mutations of
immunoglobulin and BCL-6 genes. However, the somatic hypermutation mechanism
functions aberrantly in a significant proportion of AIDS-related NHLs, causing
the mutation of many genes, and possibly favouring chromosomal translocation,
which may be a powerful contributor to malignant transformation. New molecular
and virological evidence of such pathways and a greater knowledge of other
biological features of AIDS-related NHLs may lead to new targets for
pathogenetically and biologically oriented therapies.

DOI: 10.1016/s1470-2045(03)00957-4 
PMID: 12517536  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

