
1. J Med Virol. 2003 Mar;69(3):417-25.

EBNA-1 sequence variations reflect active EBV replication and disease status or
quiescent latency in lymphocytes.

Wang JT(1), Sheeng TS, Su IJ, Chen JY, Chen MR.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Microbiology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

EBV infects most of the global population, but only a small percentage of
infected individuals develop EBV-associated malignancies. Host and viral factors 
may play a role in determining the clinical outcome. Because EBNA-1 functions as 
an oriP binding protein and links the episomal viral DNA to metaphase
chromosomes, variation of EBNA-1 has been suggested to contribute to determining 
the tissue tropism of EBV and the development of various EBV-associated diseases.
Five subtypes have been described, according to the amino acid at residue 487:
P-ala (B95-8 prototype), P-thr (aa 487 ala to thr), V-val, V-pro and V-leu. Other
studies, however, concluded that EBNA-1 sequence variation simply reflects the
geographical distribution of EBV. To clarify these possibilities, we collected
DNA samples from healthy individuals and patients with various EBV-associated
diseases in Taiwan for PCR amplification and DNA sequencing. The results indicate
that: 1) V-val EBNA-1 was detected in patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma
(NPC) and other EBV-associated malignant diseases; 2) the prototype P-ala strain 
was detected only in peripheral blood lymphocytes; 3) mixed populations of
different subtypes of N-terminal and C-terminal sequences were observed in
samples from one patient with nasopharyngeal carcinoma, one with T lymphoma and
one with infectious mononucleosis sample; 4) intermediate variations between
P-ala and V-val were observed in T-lymphoma, Hodgkin disease and infectious
mononucleosis samples; and 5) in comparison with the major sequences identified
in healthy carriers, the EBNA-1 sequences in peripheral lymphocytes from
nasopharyngeal carcinoma were mixed types in 4 of 5 patients, implying increasing
frequency of V-val might correlate with the progression of nasopharyngeal
carcinoma.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.10305 
PMID: 12526054  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

