
1. Biochemistry. 2003 Mar 11;42(9):2625-33.

Inhibition of nuclear import mediated by the Rev-arginine rich motif by RNA
molecules.

Fineberg K(1), Fineberg T, Graessmann A, Luedtke NW, Tor Y, Lixin R, Jans DA,
Loyter A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life 
Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 91904 Jerusalem, Israel.

The HIV-1 Rev protein plays a pivotal role in viral replication, and therefore,
inhibition of its function should block the progression of the virus-induced
immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). Here, RNA molecules have been shown to inhibit
import of the HIV-1 Rev protein into nuclei of permeabilized cells. Nuclear
uptake of biotinylated recombinant His-tagged Rev-GFP was assessed in nuclear
extracts from digitonin-permeabilized cells by binding to either importin
beta-receptors or nickel molecules immobilized on a microtiter plate. Using this 
method together with fluorescence microscopy, we determined that nuclear import
of Rev is inhibited by the addition of a reticulocyte lysate which routinely is
used as a source of nuclear import receptors. This inhibition was released by
treatment with the RNase enzyme. Also t-RNA molecules and the oligoribonucleotide
RRE IIB, namely, the second stem structure of the Rev responsive element (RRE) of
the viral RNA, inhibit Rev nuclear import. Similar results were obtained when BSA
molecules with covalently attached Rev-arginine rich motif (ARM) peptides were
used as a nuclear transport substrate, indicating that the nuclear import
inhibition of the Rev protein is due to the presence of the ARM domain. Binding
experiments revealed that the RNA molecules inhibit the interaction between the
ARM region and importin beta, implying that the RNA prevents the formation of the
import complex. The implication of our results for the regulation of the nuclear 
import of Rev as well as for the use of RNA molecules as antiviral drugs is
discussed.

DOI: 10.1021/bi0206199 
PMID: 12614157  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

