
1. Transplantation. 2003 Apr 15;75(7):1006-11.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type I infection in various recipients of transplants
from the same donor.

González-Pérez MP(1), Muñoz-Juárez L, Cárdenas FC, Zarranz Imirizaldu JJ,
Carranceja JC, García-Saiz A.

Author information: 
(1)Diagnóstico y Referencia de Retrovirus, Centro Nacional de Microbiología,
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Ctra. Pozuelo-Majadahonda, km 2, 28220 Madrid,
Spain. gonzalez@isciii.es

BACKGROUND: The human T-cell lymphotrophic virus (HTLV) causes adult T-cell
leukemia-lymphoma, tropical spastic paraparesis-HTLV type I, and associated
myelopathy.
METHODS: An analysis was performed of serum samples from a multiorgan donor and
the five recipients. Also studied was the donor's family and the partner of one
of the renal recipients. Serologic detection of anti-HTLV antibodies was carried 
out by enzyme immunoassay and Western blot to confirm and discriminate between
HTLV types. Analysis of proviral DNA was performed by polymerase chain reaction
and sequenced in the long terminal repeat region and the env gene. Peripheral
blood mononuclear cell samples from all the recipients of the HTLV-I-positive
organs and the donor's mother were studied.
RESULTS: Two years after transplantation, three organ recipients positive for
antibodies to HTLV-I were detected (two kidney transplants and one liver). All
the recipients' serum samples were negative at the time of transplantation except
those from the multiorgan donor. The donor's mother was born in Venezuela and was
confirmed positive for antibodies to HTLV-I. The remaining family members were
negative. HTLV-I DNA sequences were recovered, amplified, and sequenced from all 
the samples from the HTLV-I-positive recipients and the donor's mother. The
homology of HTLV-I sequences was 100% in all cases.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors are reporting the first documented case of HTLV-I
infection in several transplant recipients sharing the same donor. The donor was 
infected by vertical transmission. HTLV-I infection has devastating consequences 
for some immunocompromised organ recipients. This emphasizes the need for a
systematic survey of HTLV antibodies in all potential donors.

DOI: 10.1097/01.TP.0000058470.15921.CA 
PMID: 12698089  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

