
1. Cancer Res. 2003 Jun 1;63(11):2990-6.

Down-regulation of c-Met inhibits growth in the liver of human colorectal
carcinoma cells.

Herynk MH(1), Stoeltzing O, Reinmuth N, Parikh NU, Abounader R, Laterra J,
Radinsky R, Ellis LM, Gallick GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Texas M D Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Overexpression of c-Met, the protein tyrosine kinase receptor for the hepatocyte 
growth factor/scatter factor, has been implicated in the progression and
metastasis of human colorectal carcinoma. To examine the role of c-Met on in
vitro and in vivo growth of human colon tumor cell lines, stable subclones of the
high metastatic human colorectal carcinoma cell line, KM20, isolated from a
Dukes' D patient, with reduced c-Met expression were obtained after transfection 
with a c-Met-specific targeting ribozyme. The subclones were only modestly
reduced in c-Met expression because of c-Met playing an important role in
cellular survival. However, a 60-90% reduction in basal c-Met autophosphorylation
and kinase activity were observed. Correlating with the reduction in c-Met kinase
activity, subclones with reduced c-Met expression had significantly reduced in
vitro growth rates and soft-agar colony-forming abilities. The in vivo growth of 
these cells was examined at both the ectopic SQ site and the orthotopic site of
metastatic growth, the liver. SQ growth was delayed significantly in the c-Met
down-regulated clones compared with controls, with tumors growing on loss of the 
ribozyme construct. In contrast, tumor incidence was significantly reduced when
the c-Met down-regulated cells were grown in the orthotopic liver site. Thus,
c-Met activation may be important in metastatic growth of colon tumor cells in
the liver. Collectively these data demonstrate that a small reduction in c-Met
protein levels leads to profound biological effects, and potential c-Met
inhibitors may be of therapeutic value in treatment of colon cancer.


PMID: 12782608  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

