
1. J Gen Physiol. 1953 Mar;36(4):581-99.

Growth and phage production of B. megatherium. I. Growth of cells after infection
with C phage. II. Rate of growth, phage yield, and RNA content of cells. III.
Effect of various substances on growth rate and phage production.

NORTHROP JH.

I. Lysogenic B. megatherium 899a (de Jong, 1931) produces two types of phage
(Gratia, 1936 c) T and C. The T phage forms cloudy plaques and gives rise to
fresh lysogenic strains (Gratia, 1936 b) when added to the sensitive strain of
megatherium. It may or may not cause lysis, depending on the media (Northrop,
1951). The C phage occurs very rarely) forms clear plaques, does not give rise to
lysogenic strains, and causes complete lysis of the sensitive strain under all
conditions tested, provided infection occurs. If C phage is added to the
sensitive strain, and the mixture allowed to stand, or made into a hanging drop
preparation, the infected cells stop growing and lyse completely after 60 to 80
minutes with the liberation of from 50 to 200 phage particles per cell. If,
however, C phage is added to a rapidly growing culture of B. megatherium and the 
suspension shaken at 34 degrees , the cells continue to grow and divide for 50 to
60 minutes, after infection has occurred. They then lyse, with the liberation of 
from 1000 to 2500 phage particles per cell. II. The following determinations have
been made on megatherium sensitive cells growing in 5 per cent peptone at
different stages of growth. (1) Growth rate of infected and uninfected cells; (2)
RNA, DNA, and protein content; (3) volume of the cell; (4) phage yield per cell
by plaque count; (5) phage yield per cell by cell and plaque count; (6) lysis
time. The growth rate decreases as the cell concentration increases. The lysis
time and the protein N per cell are nearly independent of the growth rate; all
the other values increase as the growth rate increases. The ratio See PDF for
Equation is nearly constant. RNA and DNA per cell increase less rapidly than the 
volume, so that NA per unit volume is not constant, but decreases as the size of 
the cell increases. The phage yield measured under conditions in which the
infected cells do not grow (by plaque count) is very nearly proportional to the
size of the cell. The phage yield per cell, under conditions in which the
infected cells do grow, increases more rapidly than the size of the cells. The
phage yield per cell under these conditions may be calculated by the equation See
PDF for Equation The determining factor for the variation in phage yield is the
growth rate of the cells. This, in turn, is determined by the composition of the 
medium. III. The growth and phage production of megatherium 899a have been
determined in the presence of the following substances: aureomycin, bacitracin,
chloromycetin, gramicidin, Merck AB631, Merck AB191, Merck AB624, penicillin,
streptomycin, terramycin, tyrothricin, usnic acid, acetone, chloroform, ethyl
alcohol, formaldehyde, gentian violet, glycerin, maleic hydrazide, methyl
alcohol, phenyl mercuric acetate, sodium fluoride, sulfanilamide, toluene, and
urethane. In every case, the lowest concentration of the substance which
completely inhibits growth, is also the lowest concentration which completely
inhibits phage production. One antibiotic, Merck AB81, causes increased phage
production in concentrations which partially inhibit growth, and low phage
production in concentrations which completely inhibit growth (as determined by
turbidity). Short exposure to ultraviolet light also decreases the growth rate,
with increase in phage production. Longer exposure, which completely inhibits
growth (as determined by turbidity) results in lysis and phage liberation.

DOI: 10.1085/jgp.36.4.581 
PMCID: PMC2147375
PMID: 13035070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

