
1. J Bacteriol. 1964 Sep;88:716-26.

EPISOME-MEDIATED TRANSFER OF DRUG RESISTANCE IN ENTEROBACTERIACEAE. VII. TWO
TYPES OF NATURALLY OCCURRING R FACTORS.

WATANABE T, NISHIDA H, OGATA C, ARAI T, SATO S.

Watanabe, Tsutomu (Keio University, Tokyo, Japan), Hiroshi Nishida, Chizuko
Ogata, Toshihiko Arai, and Sachiko Sato. Episome-mediated transfer of drug
resistance in Enterobacteriaceae. VII. Two types of naturally occurring R
factors. J. Bacteriol. 88:716-726. 1964.-Naturally occurring R factors are
classified into two types, fi(+) and fi(-), depending on their fi characters. The
term fi is an abbreviation of fertility inhibition and fi(-) and fi(-) mean,
respectively, the presence and absence of suppression of the functions of the sex
factor F of Escherichia coli K-12. It was found that fi(-) R factors reduce the
efficiency of plating of phages lambda and T(1) in K-12; fi(+) R factors did not 
have this inhibitory action. One of the fi(-) R factors reduced the efficiency of
plating of phage T(7) as well. Phages lambda and T(1) underwent host-induced
modifications in the host carrying some fi(-) R factors. At least two types of
fi(-) R factors were recognized by the types of their restriction and
host-induced modification of these phages. CaCl(2) exhibited antagonistic actions
against the restrictions of phages lambda and T(1) by fi(-) R factors.
Transduction of the ability to ferment galactose with HFT lysates of lambda was
reduced by fi(-) R factors. Ultraviolet induction of lambda was not affected by
any R factors. Furthermore, adsorption of phages lambda and T(1) was not altered 
by the presence of any R factors. From these results, we concluded that the
suppression of progeny formation of these phages by fi(-) R factors is due to
some step(s) after adsorption of the phages to the bacteria. Superinfection
immunity and mutual exclusion were found between two different fi(+) R factors
but not between fi(+) and fi(-) R factors. The two different fi(-) R factors were
frequently genetically recombined. but fi(+) and fi(-) R factors were not
genetically recombined, as indicated by findings of independent transfer of these
R factors by conjugation and by transduction from the donors having these two R
factors. It was assumed from these findings that fi(+) and fi(-) R factors are
considerably different episomes having different resistance-transfer factors.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.88.3.716-726.1964 
PMCID: PMC277371
PMID: 14208512  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

