
1. Bull World Health Organ. 1960;22:243-53.

Genetic markers and serological identity of wild and attenuated strains of type-1
poliovirus, with special emphasis on strains isolated from patients during an
epidemic in the Belgian Congo.

KOPROWSKI H, NORTON TW, WECKER E, GARD S.

An epidemic of paralytic poliomyelitis occurred in Léopoldville at a time when
both virulent and attenuated type 1 polioviruses were present in the population. 
The attenuated virus was of the CHAT strain, then being given extensive field
trials as a vaccine in the Belgian Congo. It was thought that intratypic
identification of "wild" and vaccine strains might give information on the
hypothetical possibility of a reversion to virulence of attenuated strains.
Viruses were isolated from the stools of patients with paralytic poliomyelitis,
both those who had not been vaccinated and those who had previously been fed the 
CHAT attenuated vaccine. Other viruses studied were CHAT virus itself and strains
obtained from first, second and third human passages; Mahoney, a virulent strain;
W 1063, a "naturally attenuated" strain; and Sickle, a strain, which, in mixture 
with Mahoney strain, constituted the initial inoculum from which CHAT had been
derived. Serologically, the strains were tested for growth in the presence of an 
agar overlay containing CHAT immune serum. Genetically, the strains were
characterized by a study of genetic markers relating to growth under agar of low 
bicarbonate content (d character), comparative growth in a fresh versus the MS
established line of monkey kidney tissue culture, and temperature susceptibility 
at 37 degrees C and 40 degrees C. The Léopoldville strains and Mahoney were able 
to produce plaques when grown under overlay containing CHAT immune serum, and
they had d+, MS+ and "hot" characters. CHAT and its derivatives were d, MS and
"cold"-in other words, exactly opposite in all respects studied. Sickle and W
1063 were intermediate.Evidence is given that CHAT is genetically stable through 
several human passages, that the poliomyelitis cases in vaccinees were not caused
by vaccination, and that the hypothesis of a return to virulence of attenuated
strains has not been substantiated.


PMCID: PMC2555337
PMID: 14410972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

