
1. J Virol. 2003 Nov;77(21):11754-66.

Evidence against an essential role of COPII-mediated cargo transport to the
endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi intermediate compartment in the formation of the
primary membrane of vaccinia virus.

Husain M(1), Moss B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-0445, USA.

Vaccinia virus assembles two distinct lipoprotein membranes. The primary membrane
contains nonglycosylated proteins, appears as crescents in the cytoplasm, and
delimits immature and mature intracellular virions. The secondary or wrapping
membrane contains glycoproteins, is derived from virus-modified trans-Golgi or
endosomal cisternae, forms a loose coat around some intracellular mature virions,
and becomes the envelope of extracellular virions. Although the mode of formation
of the wrapping membrane is partially understood, we know less about the primary 
membrane. Recent reports posit that the primary membrane originates from the
endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi intermediate compartment (ERGIC). According to this
model, viral primary membrane proteins are cotranslationally inserted into the ER
and accumulate in the ERGIC. To test the ERGIC model, we employed Sar1(H79G), a
dominant negative form of the Sar1 protein, which is an essential component of
coatomer protein II (COPII)-mediated cargo transport from the ER to the ERGIC and
other post-ER compartments. Overexpression of Sar1(H79G) by transfection or by a 
novel recombinant vaccinia virus with an inducible Sar1(H79G) gene resulted in
retention of ERGIC 53 in the ER but did not interfere with localization of viral 
primary membrane proteins in factory regions or with formation of viral crescent 
membranes and infectious intracellular mature virions. Wrapping of intracellular 
mature virions and formation of extracellular virions did not occur, however,
because some proteins that are essential for the secondary membrane were retained
in the ER as a consequence of Sar1(H79G) overexpression. Our data argue against
an essential role of COPII-mediated cargo transport and the ERGIC in the
formation of the viral primary membrane. Instead, viral membranes may be derived 
directly from the ER or by a novel mechanism.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.77.21.11754-11766.2003 
PMCID: PMC229368
PMID: 14557660  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

