
1. Reprod Biol. 2001 Jul;1(1):5-9.

Adrenocortical tumorigenesis in transgenic mice: the role of luteinizing hormone 
receptor and transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-61.

Rahman NA(1), Kiiveri S, Siltanen S, Levallet J, Kero J, Lensu T, Wilson DB,
Heikinheimo MT, Huhtaniemi IT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 10, FIN-20520
Turku, Finland. nafis.rahman@utu.fi

Transgenic (TG) mice, bearing the Simian Virus 40 T-antigen (Tag) under a 6-kb
fragment of the murine inhibin alpha-subunit promoter (inhalpha), develop gonadal
tumors of granulosa or Leydig cell origin with 100% penetrance by the age of 5-7 
months. When these TG mice were gonadectomized prepubertally, between 21-25 days 
of life, adrenal gland tumors were observed in each mouse by the age of 5-7
months. No adrenal tumors were detected in any intact TG, gonadectomized or
intact or control non-TG littermates. The adrenocortical tumors appeared to
originate from the X-zone of the adrenal cortex. If functional gonadectomy was
induced by GnRH antagonist treatment or by cross-breeding of the TG mice into
hypogonadotropic hpg genetic background, neither gonadal nor adrenal
tumorigenesis appeared. This prompted a hypothesis that adrenal tumor development
in inhalpha/Tag TG mice is related to elevated gonadotropin secretion, which is
the most obvious difference between the surgical and functional gonadectomy
models. The adrenal tumors and a cell line (Calpha1) derived from them, was found
to express luteinizing hormone receptor (LHR), but no FSHR, and hCG treatment
stimulated their proliferation. No FSHR was found in the adrenal glands. On the
basis of this it was suggested that expression of the potent oncogene T-antigen, 
allow LH in adrenocortical cells to function as a tumor promoter, and induction
of high level functional LHR expression in adrenal tumors. Given the induction of
expression and regulation of the GATA-4 and GATA-6 zinc finger family of
transcription factors in the gonads by gonadotropins, it was in our interest to
explore their expression in the adrenals. We utilized the inalpha/Tag TG mouse
model and pathological human adrenal samples to explore the role of GATA-4 and
GATA-6 in adrenocortical tumorigenesis. Abundant GATA-6 mRNA expression was found
in normal control adrenal cortex during mouse development, whereas GATA-4 mRNA
was undetectable. In striking contrast to this, GATA-6 was absent from murine
adrenocortical tumors, while GATA-4 mRNA expression was dramatically upregulated 
in the murine adrenal tumors as well as in human adrenocortical carcinomas. Taken
together, these results suggest different roles for GATA-4 and GATA-6 in the
adrenal gland, and implicate GATA-4 in adrenal LHR expression and tumorigenesis. 
Immunohistochemical detection of GATA-4 may serve as a useful marker in
differential diagnosis of human adrenal tumors. In addition, the inhalpha/Tag TG 
model will be helpful for exploring the molecular mechanisms underlying
adrenocortical tumorigenesis, ectopic LHR expression in adrenals and the
GATA-4/LHR interaction that is related to adrenal tumorigenesis in TG mice.


PMID: 14666170  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

