
1. Indian J Cancer. 2003 Jan-Mar;40(1):23-6.

Atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance: is it worthwhile to qualify
them further?

Sodhani P(1), Gupta S, Sehgal A, Singh V, Khan IU, Mitra AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytopathology, Institute of Cytology and Preventive Oncology
(ICMR), Maulana Azad Medical College Campus, New Delhi-110 002, India.
psodhani@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: In Bethesda System of reporting cervico-vaginal smears, the equivocal
epithelial cell abnormalities have been categorised as "atypical squamous and
glandular cells of undetermined significance" (ASCUS and AGUS). These
abnormalities may harbour minor lesions attributed to mere inflammatory changes
to potentially serious high grade lesions. It is recommended to further qualify
these lesions according to whether they favor a reactive or a neoplastic outcome.
AIMS: We undertook the present study to assess the significance of ASCUS
qualifiers.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A total of 12071 women were screened for early detection of
cancer cervix. The women with ASCUS diagnosis were further qualified as ASCUS
favor reactive and ASCUS favor SIL (Squamous intraepithelial lesion) according
the Bethesda 1991 system of reporting. ASCUS-reactive cases were followed up by a
repeat smear examination and persistent ASCUS cases were taken up for colposcopy 
and biopsy if indicated. All ASCUS-SIL cases were taken up for immediate
colposcopy.
RESULTS: The pick up rate of high grade lesions was not significantly different
(P=0.47; Chi square test) on the follow up of ASCUS-reactive (2/222) and
ASCUS-SIL (2/130) groups. The low grade lesions were picked up in 10/222
ASCUS-reactive and 58/130 in ASCUS-SIL, which was statistically significant (P < 
0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The results of our study indicate that it is not worthwhile to
qualify these lesions as majority of ASCUS-SIL also revealed only low grade
epithelial which have a benign biological behaviour.


PMID: 14716128  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

