
1. Biochemistry. 2004 Jan 27;43(3):700-9.

Divergent roles of hepatitis B virus X-associated protein 2 (XAP2) in human
versus mouse Ah receptor complexes.

Ramadoss P(1), Petrulis JR, Hollingshead BD, Kusnadi A, Perdew GH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Toxicology and Carcinogenesis and the Department of
Veterinary Science, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) mediates the toxicologic and carcinogenic
properties of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. In the cytoplasm, the AhR is
complexed with a dimer of hsp90, and the hepatitis B virus X-associated protein 2
(XAP2). Most studies that have examined the ability of XAP2 to modulate the AhR
have characterized the mouse receptor (mAhR). However, the amino acid sequence of
mAhR is significantly different from human AhR (hAhR) in the carboxy terminal
half of the protein, and this could lead to differences in the behavior of the
two receptors. mAhR-yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) and hAhR-YFP were used to
compare nucleocytoplasmic shuttling properties and the ability of XAP2 to
modulate their activity. As reported previously, mAhR localized predominantly in 
the nucleus and was redistributed to the cytoplasm by coexpression of XAP2 in
COS-1 cells. Leptomycin B treatment revealed that XAP2 blocked mAhR-YFP
translocation to the nucleus in the absence of ligand. In contrast, hAhR-YFP
localized predominantly in the cytoplasm, and coexpression of XAP2 did not affect
this localization, and did not block nuclear accumulation in the presence of
leptomycin B. An XAP2 fusion protein with a nuclear localization signal fused to 
the carboxy terminus (XAP2-NLS) was utilized to test whether this protein could
drag the AhR into the nucleus. Coexpression of mAhR-YFP and XAP2-NLS caused
cytoplasmic localization of the mAhR, while hAhR-YFP was partially localized in
the nucleus, suggesting that XAP2 remains bound to the hAhR during
nucleocytoplasmic shuttling. The presence of XAP2 in the ligand-bound hAhR
complex enhanced the rate of nuclear translocation but repressed transcriptional 
activity. Together, these results suggest that the hAhR differs biochemically
from the mAhR.

DOI: 10.1021/bi035827v 
PMID: 14730974  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

