
1. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2002 May-Jun;34(3):275-86.

Promise and problems in relating cellular senescence in vitro to aging in vivo.

Rubin H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology and Virus Laboratory, Life Sciences
Addition, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-3200, USA.
hrubin@uclink4.berkeley.edu

According to the 'Hayflick limit', human fetal fibroblasts have a uniform,
limited replicative lifespan of about 50 population doublings in cell culture.
This concept was extrapolated to diverse cells in the body. It seemed to decrease
with the age of the cell donor and, as a form of cell senescence, was thought to 
underlie the aging process. More discriminating analysis, however, showed that
the fibroblasts decayed in a stochastic manner from the time of their
explantation, at a rate that increased with the number of population doublings in
culture. There was no consistent relation to the age of the donor. Despite the
contradictory evidence, the original version of the Hayflick limit retained its
general acceptance. Cell senescence was attributed to the absence of telomerase
in the fibroblasts, which resulted in shortening of telomeres at each division
until they fell below a critical length needed for further division. However, it 
is well established that stem cells in renewing tissues undergo many more than 50
divisions in a lifetime, without apparent senescence. Contrary to early findings 
of no telomerase in most tissues, their stem cells retain telomerase and
presumably telomere length despite many divisions in vivo. Massive accumulation
of lipofuscin granules occurs under stress in long term crowded cultures, but the
granules dissipate on subculture or neoplastic transformation. The overall
results indicate a critical disjunction between cell senescence in vitro and
aging in vivo. By contrast, cell culture has been useful in showing a need for
telomere capping in maintaining cell stability and viability. It may also provide
information about the biochemical mechanism of lipofuscin production.

DOI: 10.1016/s0167-4943(01)00221-7 
PMID: 14764330 

