
1. J Exp Med. 1950 Dec;92(6):571-89.

Studies on entry and egress of poliomyelitis infection. III. Excretion of the
virus during the presymptomatic period in parenterally inoculated monkeys.

FABER HK, SILVERBERG RJ, LUZ LA, DONG L.

Excretion of poliomyelitis virus has been demonstrated in monkeys after four
different parenteral routes of inoculation. Virus has been found in both the
pharyngeal secretions and the stools after infraorbital nerve dip and after
inoculation of the Gasserian ganglion; in the pharyngeal secretions after
intrathalamic inoculation; and in the stools after inoculation of the celiac
ganglion. Excretion began as early as the 2nd and as late as the 7th day after
inoculation, in all instances before the onset of symptoms. The immediate source 
of the excreted virus appeared to be infected peripheral ganglia with neural
connections to the mucous membranes of the upper and lower portions of the
alimentary tract, notably the pharynx. Primary infection of the body surfaces was
excluded in the experiments and therefore could not account for the excretion of 
virus. The mode of elimination was probably by centrifugal spread through axons
of peripheral nerve fibers and not by way of the blood stream or lymphatics.
Evidence was obtained that when excretion of virus has once occurred, reinvasion 
from the implicated surface to other, previously uninfected peripheral ganglia
ensues, thus providing new sources for excretion and other potential pathways for
invasion of the CNS. It is suggested that such reinvasion may occur serially
until the immunological defenses come into play. Our experiments lend support to 
the view that during the initial stage of poliomyelitis, and perhaps throughout
its course in some cases, e.g. the asymptomatic and the mild cases without
central nervous symptoms, infection is confined to the peripheral nervous system.
Involvement of the CNS when it occurs is a secondary phase of the infective
process and is not a necessary prelude to elimination of the virus. Excretion is 
explainable on the basis of the established neurocytotropism and axonal
conduction of the virus without resort to the hypothesis of extraneural
infection.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.92.6.571 
PMCID: PMC2136002
PMID: 14784538  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

