
1. Front Biosci. 2004 May 1;9:1073-81.

Elevated expression of IFN-gamma in the HIV-1 infected brain.

Shapshak P(1), Duncan R, Minagar A, Rodriguez de la Vega P, Stewart RV, Goodkin
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Miami Medical 
School, Miami, Florida 33136, USA. pshapsha@med.miami.edu

We determined the extent of expression of three cytokines (IFN-gamma, IL-4, and
TNF-alpha ) in brain tissue infected with human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1).
The selections were IFN-gamma as a Th1 cytokine, IL- 4 as a Th2 cytokine, and
TNF-alpha as a pro-inflammatory cytokine (and because of its prior implication in
brain tissue damage due to HIV-1 infection). Based on current models for
pathogenesis of HIV-1-associated dementia (HAD), in the periphery, Th1 cytokines 
are considered to be salutary, whereas Th2 cytokines are regarded as deleterious.
However, we hypothesized that in the CNS these roles are reversed. Post-mortem
temporal lobe tissue specimens from 16 HIV-1-seropositive patients and 11
HIV-1-seronegative controls were stained for IFN-gamma, IL-4, and TNF-alpha
utilizing immunohistochemistry and alkaline phosphatase. HIV-1 infection causes
alterations of brain cytokine expression that include increased IFN-gamma
expression for HIV-1-seropositive vs. HIV-1-seronegative individuals. There was
increased expression of IFN-gamma for HIV-1-seropositive individuals with or
without HAD, with or without the broader category of neuropsychiatric impairment 
(NPI), and with or without opportunistic infections (OIs) compared to
HIV-1-seronegatives. A significant inverse correlation between IFN-gamma vs. IL-4
in HIV-1-seropositives with HAD and in seronegative individuals was observed.
There was an inverse correlation in seropositives between IFN-gamma vs.
TNF-alpha, a positive trend with HAD, significant without HAD, significant with
NPI and significant without OIs. Between IL-4 vs. TNF-alpha there was a
correlation (trend) in seropositives, a trend with NPI, significant without NPI, 
and a trend without OI. Due to HIV-1 infection of the brain and neurological
disease there is a prominent increased expression of IFN-gamma, an inverse
expression of IFN-gamma vs. TNF-alpha, and TNF-alpha vs. IL-4. The inverse
correlation between increased IFN-gamma and decreased IL-4 expression is
consistent with the stimulation of activated macrophages, and T cells, greater
toxicity in the HIV-1-infected brain, and is supportive of the significance of
IFN-gamma in HIV-1-infected patients.

DOI: 10.2741/1271 
PMID: 14977530  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

