
1. Enferm Infecc Microbiol Clin. 2004 Mar;22(3):160-76.

Prevention of opportunistic infections in adult and adolescent patients with HIV 
infection. GESIDA/National AIDS Plan guidelines, 2004 [correction].

[Article in English, Spanish]

Berenguer J(1), Laguna F, López-Aldeguer J, Moreno S, Arribas JR, Arrizabalaga J,
Baraia J, Casado JL, Cosín J, Polo R, González-García J, Iribarren JA, Kindelán
JM, López-Bernaldo de Quirós JC, López-Vélez R, Lorenzo JF, Lozano F, Mallolas J,
Miró JM, Pulido F, Ribera E.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Enfermedades Infecciosas, Hospital General Gregorio Marañón, Madrid,
Spain. juaberber@terra.es

Erratum in
    Enferm Infecc Microbiol Clin. 2004 Nov;22(5):271.

OBJECTIVE: To provide an update of guidelines from the Spanish AIDS Study Group
(GESIDA) and the National AIDS Plan (PNS) committee on the prevention of
opportunistic infections in adult and adolescent HIV-infected patients.
METHODS: These consensus recommendations have been produced by a group of experts
from GESIDA and/or the PNS after reviewing the earlier document and the
scientific advances in this field in the last years. The system used by the
Infectious Diseases Society of America and the United States Public Health
Service has been used to classify the strength and quality of the data.
RESULTS: This document provides a detailed review of the measures for the
prevention of infections caused by viruses, bacteria, fungi and parasites in the 
context of HIV infection. Recommendations are given for preventing exposure and
for primary and secondary prophylaxis for each group of pathogens. In addition,
criteria are established for the withdrawal of prophylaxis in patients who
respond well to highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART).
CONCLUSIONS: HAART is the best strategy for the prevention of opportunistic
infections in HIV-positive patients. Nevertheless, prophylaxis is still necessary
in countries with limited economic resources, in highly immunodepressed patients 
until HAART achieves beneficial effects, in patients who refuse to take or who
cannot take HAART, in those in whom HAART is not effective, and in the small
group of infected patients with inadequate recovery of CD4+ T lymphocyte counts
despite good inhibition of HIV replication.

DOI: 10.1016/s0213-005x(04)73057-8 
PMID: 14987537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

