
1. Virus Res. 2004 Apr;101(1):29-43.

The bluetongue virus core: a nano-scale transcription machine.

Mertens PP(1), Diprose J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Health, Pirbright Laboratory, Ash Road, Pirbright, Woking
GU24 0NF, UK.

The replication phase of the bluetongue virus (BTV) infection cycle is initiated 
when the virus core is delivered into the cytoplasm of a susceptible host cell.
The 10 segments of the viral genome remain packaged within the core throughout
the replication cycle, helping to prevent the activation of host defence
mechanisms that would be caused by direct contact between the dsRNA and the host 
cell cytoplasm. However, the BTV core is a biochemically active 'nano-scale'
machine, which can simultaneously and repeatedly transcribe mRNA from each of the
10 genome segments, which are packaged as a liquid crystal array within a central
cavity. These mRNAs, which are also capped and methylated within the core, are
extruded into the cytoplasm through pores at the vertices of the icosahedral
structure, where they are translated into viral proteins. One copy of each of the
viral mRNAs is also assembled with these newly synthesised proteins to form
nascent virus particles, which mature by a process that involves -ve RNA strand
synthesis on the +ve stand template, thereby reforming dsRNA genome segments
within progeny virus cores. The structure of the BTV core particle has been
determined to atomic resolution by X-ray crystallography, revealing the
organisation and interactions of its major protein components (VP3(T2)-subcore
shell and VP7(T13) outer core layer) and important features of the packaged
dsRNA. By soaking crystals of BTV cores with metal ions and substrates/products
of the transcription reactions prior to analysis by X-ray crystallography, then
constructing difference maps, it has been possible to identify binding sites and 
entry/exit routes for these ions, substrates and products. This has revealed how 
BTV solves the many logistical problems of multiple and simultaneous
transcription from the 10 genome segments within the confined space of the core
particle. The crystal structure of the BTV core has also revealed an outer
surface festooned with dsRNA. This may represent a further protective strategy
adopted by the virus to prevent host cell shut-off, by sequestering any dsRNA
that may be released from damaged particles.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2003.12.004 
PMID: 15010215  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

