
1. Med Pregl. 2003 Nov-Dec;56(11-12):557-63.

[Characteristics of the immune response in protozoan infections].

[Article in Serbian]

Arsić-Arsenijević V(1), Dzamić A, Mitrović S, Radonjić I, Kranjcić-Zec I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut za mikrobiologiju i imunologiju, Medicinski fakultet, Beograd.
arsicval@eunet.yu

INTRODUCTION: When protozoa enter the blood stream or tissues they can often
survive and replicate because they adapt to the resisting natural host defenses. 
The interaction of immune system with infectious organisms is a dynamic interplay
of host mechanisms aimed at eliminating infections and microbial strategies
designed to permit survival in the face of powerful effector mechanisms. Protozoa
cause chronic and persistent infections, because natural immunity against them is
weak and because protozoa have evolved multiple mechanisms for evading and
resisting specific immunity.
NATURAL AND SPECIFIC IMMUNE RESPONSE TO PROTOZOA: Different protozoa vary greatly
in their structural and biochemical properties and stimulate distinct patterns of
immune responses and have evolved unique mechanisms for evading specific
immunity. Protozoa activate quite distinct specific immune responses, which are
different from the responses to fungi, bacteria and viruses. Protozoa may be
phagocytozed by macrophages, but many are resistant to phagocytic killing and may
even replicate within macrophages. T. brucei gambiense is the best example of
protozoa which can induce humoral immune response because of its extra-cellular
location. In Leishmania sp. infections, cellular defense mechanisms depend upon
CD4+ T-lymphocytes and activate macrophages as effector cells that are regulated 
by cytokines of Th1 subset. Plasmodium sp. is a protozoa which show the diversity
of defence mechanisms which can be cellular or humoral, depending on Ag and
protozoa's location.
IMMUNE EVASION MECHANISMS OF PROTOZOA: Different protozoa have developed
remarkably effective ways of resisting specific immunity: a) anatomic
sequestration is commonly observed with protozoa Plasmodium and T. gondii; b)
some protozoa can become resistant to immune effector mechanisms: Trypanosoma,
Leishmania and T. gondii; c) some protozoa have developed effective mechanisms
for varying their surface antigens: Plasmodium and Trypanosoma; d) some protozoa 
shed their antigen coats, either spontaneously or after binding with specific
antibodies: E. histolytica; e) some protozoa alter host immune response by
nonspecific and generalized immunosuppression (abnormalities in cytokine
production, deficient T cell activation): Trypanosoma, Leishmania, Toxoplasma,
Entamoeba.
CONCLUSION: Protozoa activate numerous, different immune mechanisms in human
body. Evolution, progression and outcome of diseases depend upon these
mechanisms. Resent progresses in research have defined and selected Ag as
candidates for new vaccines. Better definitions regarding the role of cytokines
in protozoan infections will facilitate rational development of cytokines and
cytokine antagonists and their use as immunotherapeutic agents.

DOI: 10.2298/mpns0312557a 
PMID: 15080050  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

