
1. Kidney Int. 2004 May;65(5):1761-73.

Hepatitis A virus receptor blocks cell differentiation and is overexpressed in
clear cell renal cell carcinoma.

Vilà MR(1), Kaplan GG, Feigelstock D, Nadal M, Morote J, Porta R, Bellmunt J,
Meseguer A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'Investigacions en Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular (CIBBIM), Hospital 
Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona. Spain.

BACKGROUND: The molecular mechanisms underlying tumorigenesis and progression of 
clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) are not well understood. We aimed to
identify new molecular markers to provide insight into these processes.
METHODS: This work reports on the identification of human hepatitis A virus
cellular receptor 1 (hHAVcr-1) as a differentially expressed gene in ccRCC using 
RNA-based arbitrarily primed polymerase chain reaction (RAP-PCR). Results were
further confirmed by Northern and Western blot assays. Carcinoma 769-P and normal
HK-2 cells derived from proximal tubule epithelial cells, grown under different
culture conditions, were used to understand the putative role of hHAVcr-1 in
renal malignancy. hHAVcr-1 stable transfected clones and dipeptidyl peptidase IV 
(DPPIV) assays allowed assessing its involvement in cell differentiation.
RESULTS: The hHAVcr-1 is overexpressed in eight out of 13 ccRCC and its
expression neglected in benign oncocytomas. In culture, hhavcr-1 is dramatically 
overexpressed in normal and tumor cell lines that, having acquired the fully
differentiated phenotype, are induced to de-differentiate by means of phorbol
ester phorbol 12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA) treatment. Similarly, differentiation
prevention by addition of PMA to confluent cells also increases hhavcr-1
expression. hHAVcr-1 stable transfected 769-P cells proved that hhavcr-1 itself
blocks differentiation. Since hhavcr-1 is expressed at higher levels in tumor
cells, we used an African green monkey cell model to show that immunotoxins
directed against the monkey homologue of hhavcr-1 could kill kidney cells.
CONCLUSION: Our results showed that hHAVcr-1 blocks differentiation of proximal
tubule epithelial cells and that it could be used as a target for therapy of
kidney carcinomas.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1523-1755.2004.00601.x 
PMID: 15086915  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

