
1. Biol Reprod. 2004 Sep;71(3):761-9. Epub 2004 May 5.

Interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6, and IL-8 predict mucosal toxicity of vaginal
microbicidal contraceptives.

Fichorova RN(1), Bajpai M, Chandra N, Hsiu JG, Spangler M, Ratnam V, Doncel GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
rfichorova@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

Inflammation of the female reproductive tract increases susceptibility to HIV-1
and other viral infections and, thus, it becomes a serious liability for vaginal 
products. Excessive release of proinflammatory cytokines may alter the mucosal
balance between tissue destruction and repair and be linked to enhanced
penetration and replication of viral pathogens upon chemical insult. The present 
study evaluates four surface-active microbicide candidates, nonoxynol-9 (N-9),
benzalkonium chloride (BZK), sodium dodecyl sulfate, and sodium monolaurate for
their activity against human sperm and HIV, and their capacity to induce an
inflammatory response on human vaginal epithelial cells and by the rabbit vaginal
mucosa. Spermicidal and virucidal evaluations ranked N-9 as the most potent
compound but were unable to predict the impact of the compounds on vaginal cell
viability. Interleukin (IL)-1 release in vitro reflected their cytotoxicity
profiles more accurately. Furthermore, IL-1 concentrations in vaginal washings
correlated with cumulative mucosal irritation scores after single and multiple
applications (P < 0.01), showing BZK as the most damaging agent for the vaginal
mucosa. BZK induced rapid cell death, IL-1 release, and IL-6 secretion. The other
compounds required either more prolonged or repeated contact with the vaginal
epithelium to induce a significant inflammatory reaction. Increased IL-8 levels
after multiple applications in vivo identified compounds with the highest
cumulative mucosal toxicity (P < 0.01). In conclusion, IL-1, IL-6, and IL-8 in
the vaginal secretions are sensitive indicators of compound-induced mucosal
toxicity. The described evaluation system is a valuable tool in identifying novel
vaginal contraceptive microbicides, selecting out candidates that may enhance,
rather than decrease, HIV transmission.

DOI: 10.1095/biolreprod.104.029603 
PMID: 15128598  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

