
1. Minerva Stomatol. 2004 Jul-Aug;53(7-8):389-402.

The challenge of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in dentistry.

[Article in English, Italian]

Testarelli L(1), D' Aversa L, Dolci G.

Author information: 
(1)School of Dentistry, La Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.
luca_testarelli@virgilio.it

Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) is caused by a newly identified
coronavirus, called SARS-associated coronavirus (SARS-CoV) that appears to be
transmitted primarily through droplets of saliva. This is the reason why the most
important international organizations recommend that the dentists adopt a unique 
preventive approach to the problem: SARS patients should not be treated in the
dental office. This is possible only if a suspected case of SARS is correctly and
promptly identified. But a correct identification is made difficult by several
factors, such as the incubation period, a possibly asymptomatic onset of the
illness, the still low specificity and sensitivity of laboratory and instrumental
tests. A case or suspected case of SARS may thus unwillingly be treated at the
dental office. It is therefore necessary to adopt protective measures for the
dental personnel and to implement and enforce infection control measures in order
to eliminate the risk of viral contamination. Nonetheless, these procedures do
not ensure a complete elimination of SARS-CoV contamination risk since a major
risk is represented by blood-borne infection, which is originated by the mouth of
patients, and the contamination of dental units water lines (DUWLs) is most
difficult to control. Blood-borne contamination may be achieved only by adopting 
a high level, between-patients disinfection protocol of the DUWLs based on the
use of chemical agents with biocidal activity against spores, viruses, bacteria
and fungi (Autosteril method). In conclusion a fully effective control of the
cross-infection risk will be obtained only by adopting a correct, integrated use 
of different infection control procedures.


PMID: 15278018  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

