
1. J Virol. 2004 Aug;78(16):8536-42.

Effect of membrane curvature-modifying lipids on membrane fusion by tick-borne
encephalitis virus.

Stiasny K(1), Heinz FX.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, Medical University of Vienna, Kinderspitalgasse 15,
A-1095 Vienna, Austria. karin.stiasny@meduniwien.ac.at

Enveloped viruses enter cells by fusion of their own membrane with a cellular
membrane. Incorporation of inverted-cone-shaped lipids such as
lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC) into the outer leaflet of target membranes has been
shown previously to impair fusion mediated by class I viral fusion proteins,
e.g., the influenza virus hemagglutinin. It has been suggested that these results
provide evidence for the stalk-pore model of fusion, which involves a hemifusion 
intermediate (stalk) with highly bent outer membrane leaflets. Here, we
investigated the effect of inverted-cone-shaped LPCs and the cone-shaped oleic
acid (OA) on the membrane fusion activity of a virus with a class II fusion
protein, the flavivirus tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV). This study included
an analysis of lipid mixing, as well as of the steps preceding or accompanying
fusion, i.e., binding to the target membrane and lipid-induced conformational
changes in the fusion protein E. We show that the presence of LPC in the outer
leaflet of target liposomes strongly inhibited TBEV-mediated fusion, whereas OA
caused a very slight enhancement, consistent with a fusion mechanism involving a 
lipid stalk. However, LPC also impaired the low-pH-induced binding of a soluble
form of the E protein to liposomes and its conversion into a trimeric postfusion 
structure that requires membrane binding at low pH. Because inhibition is already
observed before the lipid-mixing step, it cannot be determined whether impairment
of stalk formation is a contributing factor in the inhibition of fusion by LPC.
These data emphasize, however, the importance of the composition of the target
membrane in its interactions with the fusion peptide that are crucial for the
initiation of fusion.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.78.16.8536-8542.2004 
PMCID: PMC479076
PMID: 15280462  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

