
1. J Gen Virol. 1992 Jan;73 ( Pt 1):39-46.

Alterations in antioxidant defences in lung and liver of mice infected with
influenza A virus.

Hennet T(1), Peterhans E, Stocker R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Virology, University of Berne, Switzerland.

We investigated the possible involvement of oxidative mechanisms in the
pathogenesis of influenza A/PR8/34 virus infection in mice. As a biochemical
marker of oxidative stress, we determined the endogenous concentrations of the
antioxidants glutathione and vitamins C and E in their reduced and oxidized forms
in the lungs, liver and blood plasma of control and infected animals. Following
intranasal infection with 8 to 10 LD50, influenza virus was detected in the
lungs, but not in the plasma, liver or other organs. Infection resulted in a
decrease in the total concentration of glutathione and vitamins C and E, whereas 
no relevant change in the ratio of oxidized to total concentration of
antioxidants was observed. Changes in the concentration of hepatic antioxidants
were significant in the early stages of the infection. The results suggest that
hepatic alterations may be caused indirectly by mechanisms related to the host
response to virus infection. The observed general decrease in the antioxidant
buffering capacity may reduce the ability of tissues to protect against potential
oxidative stress. Such stress can occur during bacterial superinfections, which
are common in influenza, thereby rendering the host more susceptible to the
pathogenic effects of such agents. In addition, reactive oxygen species produced 
in the lung may inactivate protease inhibitors, resulting in increased protease
activity. Using an in vitro system consisting of alpha 1-antiprotease, trypsin
and HOCl as the oxidant, we have shown that the infectivity of influenza viruses 
can be increased up to 10,000-fold by proteolytic cleavage of haemagglutinin,
leading to activation of the fusogenic properties of this protein.

DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-73-1-39 
PMID: 1530963  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

