
1. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2004 Aug;20(8):846-59.

An SHIV DNA/MVA rectal vaccination in macaques provides systemic and mucosal
virus-specific responses and protection against AIDS.

Wang SW(1), Bertley FM, Kozlowski PA, Herrmann L, Manson K, Mazzara G, Piatak M, 
Johnson RP, Carville A, Mansfield K, Aldovini A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

We explored the use of a simian-human immunodeficiency virus (SHIV) DNA vaccine
as an effective mucosal priming agent to stimulate a protective immune response
for AIDS prevention. Rhesus macaques were vaccinated rectally with a DNA
construct producing replication-defective SHIV particles, and boosted with either
the same DNA construct or recombinant modified vaccinia virus Ankara (MVA)
expressing SIV Gag, SIV Pol, and HIV Env (MVA-SHIV). Virus-specific mucosal and
systemic humoral and cell-mediated immune responses could be stimulated by this
approach but were present inconsistently among the vaccinated animals. Rectal
vaccination with either SHIV DNA alone or SHIV DNA followed by MVA-SHIV induced
SIV Gag/Pol- or HIV gp120-specific IgA in rectal secretions of four of seven
animals. However, the gp120-specific rectal IgA antibody responses were not
durable and had become undetectable in all but one animal shortly before rectal
challenge with pathogenic SHIV 89.6P. Only the macaques primed with SHIV DNA and 
boosted with MVA-SHIV demonstrated SHIV-specific IgG in plasma. In addition,
these animals developed more consistent antiviral cell-mediated responses and had
better preservation of CD4 T cells following challenge with SHIV 89.6P. Our study
demonstrates the utility of a rectal DNA/MVA vaccination protocol for the
induction of diverse responses in different immunological compartments. In
addition, the immunity achieved with this mucosal vaccination regimen is
sufficient to delay progression to AIDS.

DOI: 10.1089/0889222041725253 
PMID: 15320989  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

