
1. J Gene Med. 2004 Sep;6(9):974-83.

Hepatocyte-specific gene expression from integrated lentiviral vectors.

Nash KL(1), Jamil B, Maguire AJ, Alexander GJ, Lever AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills
Road, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK.

BACKGROUND: For many applications, efficient gene therapy will require long-term,
organ-specific therapeutic gene expression. Lentiviral vectors based on HIV-1 are
promising gene delivery vehicles due to their ability to integrate transgenes
into non-dividing cells. Many experimental vectors express transgenes under the
control of the cytomegalovirus (CMV) immediate-early gene promoter. Although this
promoter directs strong gene expression in vitro, it may be shut off rapidly in
vivo. This study explores the potential of HIV-1-based vectors to transduce
hepatocytes and compares gene expression from different promoters in integrated
vectors.
METHODS: HIV-1-based vector plasmids expressing the green fluorescent protein
(GFP) under the control of the CMV promoter, the alpha-1 antitrypsin gene
promoter or promoters derived from the hepatitis B virus (HBV) genome were used
to compare expression in transfected and transduced cell lines.
RESULTS: Hepatocyte cell lines differed strikingly in their transfectability.
Transduction with replication-deficient HIV-1-based vector particles
incorporating the different promoter elements was uniformly effective in
hepatocyte and non-hepatocyte lines. However, in hepatocytes, only the CMV,
alpha-1 antitrypsin and HBV core but not HBV surface promoters were able to
produce GFP expression. Addition of the HBV enhancer 2 element improved the
transducing ability of the HBV surface promoter and suppressed expression in
non-hepatocytes increasing specificity for hepatocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: Integrated lentiviral vectors can be used to direct transgene
expression in liver cells both promiscuously and specifically. Promoters derived 
from the alpha-1 antitrypsin gene or HBV are alternatives to the CMV promoter.
Inclusion of the HBV enhancer 2 permits strong liver-specific gene expression in 
vitro.

Copyright 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/jgm.591 
PMID: 15352070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

