
1. Gut. 2005 Jan;54(1):60-9.

CD4+ T cell mediated intestinal immunity: chronic inflammation versus immune
regulation.

Westendorf AM(1), Templin M, Geffers R, Deppenmeier S, Gruber AD, Probst-Kepper
M, Hansen W, Liblau RS, Gunzer F, Bruder D, Buer J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Immunology, German Research Centre for
Biotechnology, Mascheroder Weg 1, D-38124 Braunschweig, Germany.

Comment in
    Gut. 2005 Jan;54(1):4-6.

BACKGROUND: Several studies have suggested that chronic inflammatory bowel
disease may be a consequence of antigen specific recognition by appropriate T
cells which expand and induce immunopathology.
AIMS: We wished to investigate whether autoreactive CD4+ T cells can initiate the
disease on recognition of enterocyte specific antigens directly and if induction 
of mucosal tolerance occurs.
METHODS: Transgenic mice (VILLIN-HA) were generated that showed specific
expression of haemagglutinin from influenza virus A exclusively in enterocytes of
the intestinal epithelium. To investigate the impact of enterocyte specific
haemagglutinin expression in an autoimmune environment, we mated VILLIN-HA mice
with T cell receptor (TCR)-HA mice expressing an alpha/beta-TCR, which recognises
an MHC class II restricted epitope of haemagglutinin, and analysed the HA
specific T cells for induction of autoimmunity or tolerance.
RESULTS: In VILLIN-HAxTCR-HA mice, incomplete central deletion of HA specific
lymphocytes occurred. Peripheral HA specific lymphocytes showed an activated
phenotype and increased infiltration into the intestinal mucosa, but not into
other organs of double transgenic mice. Enterocyte specific lamina propria
lymphocytes showed a dose dependent proliferative response on antigen stimulation
whereas the proliferative capacity of intraepithelial lymphocytes was reduced.
Mucosal lymphocytes from VILLIN-HAxTCR-HA mice secreted lower amounts of
interferon gamma and interleukin (IL)-2 but higher levels of tumour necrosis
factor alpha, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1, and IL-6. Mucosal immune
reactions were accompanied by broad changes in the gene expression profile with
expression of proinflammatory genes, but strikingly also a remarkable set of
genes discussed in the context of peripheral induction of regulatory T cells,
including IL-10, Nrp-1, and Foxp3.
CONCLUSIONS: Enterocyte specific antigen expression is sufficient to trigger a
specific CD4+ T cell response leading to mucosal infiltration. In our model,
progression to overt clinical disease was counteracted most likely by induction
of regulatory T cells.

DOI: 10.1136/gut.2003.037663 
PMCID: PMC1774349
PMID: 15591505  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

