
1. J Wildl Dis. 2004 Oct;40(4):617-31.

Molecular epidemiology of terrestrial rabies in the former Soviet Union.

Kuzmin IV(1), Botvinkin AD, McElhinney LM, Smith JS, Orciari LA, Hughes GJ, Fooks
AR, Rupprecht CE.

Author information: 
(1)Rabies Group, Institute for Natural Foci Infections, Prospekt Mira, 7, Omsk,
644080 Russia.

Fifty-five rabies virus isolates originating from different regions of the former
Soviet Union (FSU) were compared with isolates originating from Eurasia, Africa, 
and North America according to complete or partial nucleoprotein (N) gene
sequences. The FSU isolates formed five distinct groups. Group A represented
viruses originating from the Arctic, which were similar to viruses from Alaska
and Canada. Group B consisted of "Arctic-like" viruses, originating from the
south of East Siberia and the Far East. Group C consisted of viruses circulating 
in the steppe and forest-steppe territories from the European part of Russia to
Tuva and in Kazakhstan. These three phylogenetic groups were clearly different
from the European cluster. Viruses of group D circulate near the western border
of Russia. Their phylogenetic position is intermediate between group C and the
European cluster. Group E consisted of viruses originating from the northwestern 
part of Russia and comprised a "northeastern Europe" group described earlier from
the Baltic region. According to surveillance data, a specific host can be defined
clearly only for group A (arctic fox; Alopex lagopus) and for the Far Eastern
part of the group B distribution area (raccoon dog; Nyctereutes procyonoides).
For other territories and rabies virus variants, the red fox (Vulpes vulpes) is
the main virus reservoir. However, the steppe fox (Vulpes corsac), wolf (Canis
lupus), and raccoon dog are also involved in virus circulation, depending on host
population density. These molecular data, joined with surveillance information,
demonstrate that the current fox rabies epizootic in the territory of the FSU
developed independently of central and western Europe. No evidence of positive
selection was found in the N genes of the isolates. In the glycoprotein gene,
evidence of positive selection was strongly suggested in codons 156, 160, and
183. At these sites, no link between amino acid substitutions and phylogenetic
placement or specific host species was detected.

DOI: 10.7589/0090-3558-40.4.617 
PMID: 15650080  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

