
1. Otol Neurotol. 2005 Jan;26(1):109-13.

Bell's palsy and Herpes simplex virus: fact or mystery?

Linder T(1), Bossart W, Bodmer D.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Kantonsspital Luzern,
Switzerland. thomas.linder@ksl.ch

HYPOTHESIS AND BACKGROUND: In recent years, progress has been made in the
understanding of Bell's palsy, the most common form of acute facial weakness.
Herpes simplex virus (HSV) reactivation within the geniculate ganglion with
subsequent inflammation and entrapment of the nerve at the meatal foramen has
been proposed to be the pathogenetic mechanism. We challenged its accuracy by
analyzing our own data on the presence of viral genomic DNA of HSV-1 and 2, human
herpes virus (HHV)-6A/B, as well as varizella zoster virus (VZV) in patients with
Bell's palsy and in control patients without the disease.
METHODS: Polymerase chain reaction was performed with primer sets specific for
viral genomic DNA of HSV-1, HSV-2, and VZV in facial muscle biopsy specimens from
patients with Bell's palsy. As control specimens, the Scarpa's ganglion of
patients with Meniere's disease and the geniculate ganglion harvested at autopsy 
from patients without history of facial palsy. In a second study, we used
polymerase chain reaction with primers specific for HSV-1, -2, and HHV-6A, -6B to
analyze for the presence of these viruses in tear fluid samples from control
patients and patients with acute Bell's palsy.
RESULTS: HSV-1 and VZV genomic DNA were detected in 86 and 43%, respectively, of 
geniculate ganglion preparations from control specimen. We were not able to
detect the presence of HSV-1, HSV-2, or VZV genomic DNA in ganglion scarpae or
muscle biopsy results in control and Bell's palsy patients. HHV-6A could be
detected in tear fluid samples in 40% of control patients and 30% of Bell's palsy
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The sole presence of HSV genomic DNA within the sensory ganglion
along the facial nerve does not explain the direct association with Bell's palsy.
The missing link would be the identification of an active replicating virus, an
investigation that has not yet been carried out.

DOI: 10.1097/00129492-200501000-00020 
PMID: 15699730  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

