
1. Bioinformatics. 2005 Aug 1;21(15):3248-54. Epub 2005 Jun 9.

A quantitative determination of multi-protein interactions by the analysis of
confocal images using a pixel-by-pixel assessment algorithm.

Goucher DR(1), Wincovitch SM, Garfield SH, Carbone KM, Malik TH.

Author information: 
(1)DVP/OVRR, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, US Food and Drug
Administration, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

MOTIVATION: Recent advances in confocal microscopy have allowed scientists to
assess the expression, and to some extent, the interaction/colocalization of
multiple molecules within cells and tissues. In some instances, accurately
quantifying the colocalization of two or more proteins may be critical. This can 
require the acquisition of multiple Z plane images (Z stacks) throughout a
specimen and, as such, we report here the successful development of a freeware,
open-source image analysis tool, IMAJIN_COLOC, developed in PERL (v. 5.8, build
806), using the PERLMagick libraries (ImageMagick). Using a pixel-by-pixel
analysis algorithm, IMAJIN_COLOC can analyze images for antigen expression (any
number of colors) and can measure all possible combinations of colocalization for
up to three colors by analyzing a Z stack gallery acquired for each sample. The
simultaneous (i.e. in a single pass) analysis of three-color colocalization, and 
batch analysis capabilities are distinctive features of this program.
RESULTS: A control image, containing known individual and colocalized pixel
counts, was used to validate the accuracy of IMAJIN_COLOC. As further validation,
pixel counts and colocalization values from the control image were compared to
those obtained with the software packaged with the Zeiss laser-scanning
microscope (LSM AIM, version 3.2). The values from both programs were found to be
identical. To demonstrate the applicability of this program in addressing novel
biological questions, we examined the role of neurons in eliciting an immune
reaction in response to viral infection. Specifically, we successfully examined
expression of the chemokine RANTES in measles virus (MV) infected hippocampal
neurons and quantified changes in RANTES production throughout the disease
period. The resultant quantitative data were also evaluated visually, using a gif
image created during the analysis.
AVAILABILITY: PERL (ActivePerl, version 5.8) is available at activestate.com; the
PERLMagick libraries are available at imagemagick.org, and IMAJIN_COLOC, the
source code and user documentation can be downloaded from
http://www.fda.gov/cber/research/imaging/imageanalysis.htm.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bti531 
PMID: 15947019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

