
1. Med Sci Monit. 2005 Jul;11(7):RA221-8. Epub 2005 Jun 29.

Systemic effects of cancer: role of multiple proteases and their toxic peptide
products.

Rubin H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Life Sciences Addition, University
of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-3200, USA. hrubin@uclink4.berkeley.edu

Cachexia, or the loss of skeletal muscle, adipose tissue and immunological
competence, is a common systemic condition in advanced cases of cancer, and is a 
frequent cause of death. There have been many reports that small peptides
isolated from tumors induce systemic effects correlated with cachexia upon
injection into mice or addition to cell cultures. Only recently has evidence been
presented for the origin of these peptides from the large increase in proteolytic
enzymes found in tumors. Additional evidence is presented here for a major role
of tumor peptides in producing effects associated with cachexia. Such peptides of
low molecular weight were found to produce lipolysis in adipose tissue.
Fibrinogen degradation products from the plasma of cancer patients and other
chronic diseases suppress activation of the immune response. Some proteases of
the cathepsin class occur in high concentration at the surface of transformed
cells where the pH is low enough to allow digestion of pericellular proteins;
other cathepsins elevated in tumors are highly active at physiological pH.
Cathepsin L is the major excreted protein of cultured cells transformed by
viruses or chemicals and is likely to form toxic peptides by digestion of
extracellular proteins. Even normal liver and skeletal muscle of some cancer
patients and tumor-bearing animals exhibit significant increases in cathepsins
and components of the ubiquitin-proteasesome pathway which would add to
circulating peptides. These observations argue for a central role of multiple
proteases and their proteolytic products in producing the debilitating systemic
effects of cancer.


PMID: 15990698  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

