
1. Kidney Int. 2005 Aug;68(2):464-73.

NF-kappaB-dependent increase in intrarenal angiotensin II induced by proteinuria.

Takase O(1), Marumo T, Imai N, Hirahashi J, Takayanagi A, Hishikawa K, Hayashi M,
Shimizu N, Fujita T, Saruta T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, and Department of Molecular Biology, Keio
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Intrarenal activation of the renin-angiotensin system has been
suggested to play a pivotal role in the progression of various renal diseases,
but the regulation of each component has not been fully clarified. We
investigated the roles of nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) activation in the
intrarenal renin-angiotensin system changes induced by proteinuria.
METHODS: We used unilaterally nephrectomized rats loaded with bovine serum
albumin as a model of proteinuric renal injury. Renal NF-kappaB activation was
inhibited by gene transfer of the truncated form of IkappaBalpha via injection of
a recombinant adenovirus vector into the renal artery, as we reported previously.
RESULTS: Inhibition of renal NF-kappaB activation attenuated the increases in
intrarenal angiotensinogen protein (2.0-fold in rats with protein overloading and
saline injection to 1.3-fold in rats with protein overloading and injection of a 
truncated form of IkappaBalpha) and angiotensin II (1.8-fold to 1.2-fold), and
angiotensinogen mRNA. The increases in angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) and
angiotensin II receptor type 2 were unaffected by NF-kappaB inhibition. The
expression of ACE2, an enzyme that metabolizes angiotensins I and II, was
decreased by 37%, and NF-kappaB inhibition abolished the decrease.
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the angiotensinogen and ACE2
expression changes occurred mainly in proximal tubule cells (i.e., the target of 
adenoviral gene transfer).
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that proteinuria induces an increase in renal 
angiotensin II in an NF-kappaB-dependent manner. Induction of angiotensinogen and
decrease in ACE2 levels may be involved in this NF-kappaB-dependent increase in
angiotensin II.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1523-1755.2005.00424.x 
PMID: 16014023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

