
1. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2005 Aug 1;227(3):460-6.

Occurrence of Salmonella serotype Typhimurium DT104 on a commercial swine farm
before, during, and after depopulation and repopulation.

Erdman MM(1), Harris IT, Torremorell M, Wilt VM, Harris DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa
State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether depopulation-repopulation could be used to
eradicate Salmonella serotype Typhimurium DT104 from a commercial swine farm in
the midwestern United States.
DESIGN: Observational study
SAMPLE POPULATION: A commercial swine farm undergoing depopulation-repopulation
to eliminate porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus and Mycoplasma
hyopneumoniae.
PROCEDURE: Pooled fecal samples, tissue samples, and serum samples were collected
from pigs on the farm before and after depopulation-repopulation. When there were
no pigs on the farm, environmental swab specimens were collected for bacterial
culture. Serum was analyzed for anti-Salmonella antibodies with an indirect
ELISA. Salmonella isolates obtained by bacterial culture of fecal, tissue, and
environmental samples were characterized by means of serotyping, phage typing,
pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE), and antimicrobial susceptibility
testing.
RESULTS: 167 Salmonella isolates representing 9 serotypes were recovered from the
farm. Results of PFGE and antimicrobial susceptibility testing suggested that S. 
Typhimurium DT104 strain was not eradicated from the farm. However,
seroprevalence of anti-Salmonella antibodies and the percentage of pooled fecal
samples positive for Salmonella spp were significantly decreased following
repopulation.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Results suggested that
depopulation-repopulation in conjunction with stringent cleaning and
disinfection, attention to biosecurity procedures, control of other diseases, and
changes in feed management may reduce the occurrence of, but likely will not
eliminate, Salmonella spp in commercial swine herds.

DOI: 10.2460/javma.2005.227.460 
PMID: 16121615  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

