
1. Hepatology. 2005 Oct;42(4):915-24.

CTLA-4Ig suppresses liver injury by inhibiting acquired immune responses in a
mouse model of fulminant hepatitis.

Nakayama Y(1), Shimizu Y, Hirano K, Ebata K, Minemura M, Watanabe A, Sugiyama T.

Author information: 
(1)The Third Department of Internal Medicine, Toyama Medical and Pharmaceutical
University, Sugitani, Toyama, Japan.

Expression of costimulatory molecules is significantly upregulated in various
organs in an animal model of severe hepatitis induced by injection of
Propionibacterium acnes (P. acnes) and lipopolysaccharide (LPS). In the present
study, we examined whether blockade of costimulatory signals by CTLA-4Ig can
suppress the liver injury in this model. We injected an adenovirus encoding
CTLA-4Ig (AdCTLA-4Ig) into mice 7 days before, on the same day, or 3 days after
P. acnes priming. The virus was found to infect the liver preferentially, and
CTLA-4Ig was detected in the serum as early as 2 days after viral injection.
After injection of LPS, liver injury and survival rates were examined. Most of
the mice not injected with AdCTLA-4Ig died within 12 hours after injection of
LPS. In contrast, all the AdCTLA-4Ig-injected mice survived when the virus was
injected 7 days before or on the same day as P. acnes priming. Importantly,
hemorrhagic liver injury and serum alanine aminotransferase levels were
significantly reduced after LPS injection even when AdCTLA-4Ig was injected 3
days after P. acnes priming. Immunological analyses showed that CTLA-4Ig
inhibited the activation and expansion of P. acnes-specific CD4+ T cells in the
hepatic lymph nodes, leading to a reduction in the recruitment of the cells to
the liver. The total amounts of interferon-gamma, interleukin-12, and various
chemokines in the liver were then decreased, resulting in inhibition of the
secondary recruitment of not only T cells but also macrophages. In conclusion,
CTLA-4Ig could be useful for treatment of severe liver injury.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.20872 
PMID: 16175605  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

