
1. Cell Biochem Funct. 2007 Mar-Apr;25(2):185-8.

Seroprevalence study of Tick-borne encephalitis, Borrelia burgdorferi, Dengue and
Toscana virus in Turin Province.

Pugliese A(1), Beltramo T, Torre D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Section of Clinical Microbiology 
of Turin University, Amedeo di Savoia Hospital, Turin, Italy.
agostino.pugliese@unito.it

Tick borne encephalitis virus (TBEV) is present in some European countries and it
is transmitted by a tick bite. Ixodes ricinus is the main vector of the infection
in Italy, where fortunately clinical neurological manifestations, typical of the 
more serious phase of the disease, are very rarely observed. This behaviour is
different from other endemic Euroasiatic areas where numerous cases of
encephalitis are described. However TBE transmission has not been widely
investigated in Italy and available epidemiological data have been obtained only 
by studies performed in Central and Northern Regions of the country. In addition 
seroepidemiological researches were made prevalently on subjects at high risk of 
tick bite, such as hunters or forest guards from Trentin and Central Italy. No
precise information about TBE virus diffusion was available in the Piedmont
before our investigations. We found that hunters and wild boar breeders seem to
be particularly exposed to the risk of TBE virus infection in Turin Province and 
in particular in the Susa valley, although no neurological involvement was
observed in our population. In particular a seroprevalence of about 5% was
detected by the use of purified antigens ELISA test, amongst the subjects at high
risk of tick bite. Moreover low risk individuals showed a seroprevalence of below
2%. In addition a parallel seroepidemiological study was performed in Turin
Province for Borrelia burgdorferi, the aetiological agent of Lyme disease, also
transmitted by tick bite (e.g. Ixodes ricinus), for Dengue and Toscana (TOS)
arboviruses, respectively transmitted by Aedes mosquitoes and phlebotomes. Data
reported here demonstrate only a sporadic presence in our population of
antibodies against Borrelia and Dengue infection. Moreover using an ELISA test
performed with viral purified nucleoprotein, we reported a total percentage of
about 3% of subjects positive for TOSV.

Copyright 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cbf.1302 
PMID: 16312014  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

