
1. J Virol. 2006 Jan;80(1):236-45.

Changes in soluble factor-mediated CD8+ cell-derived antiviral activity in
cynomolgus macaques infected with simian immunodeficiency virus SIVmac251:
relationship to biological markers of progression.

Dioszeghy V(1), Benlhassan-Chahour K, Delache B, Dereuddre-Bosquet N, Aubenque C,
Gras G, Le Grand R, Vaslin B.

Author information: 
(1)CEA, Laboratoire d'Immunopathologie Expérimentale, Service de Neurovirologie, 
DSV/DRM, EPHE, IPSC, Université Paris XI UMRE01, 18, Route du Panorama, BP 6, 92 
265 Fontenay aux Roses, France.

Cross-sectional studies have shown that the capacity of CD8+ cells from human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected patients and simian immunodeficiency virus 
(SIV) SIVmac-infected macaques to suppress the replication of human and simian
immunodeficiency viruses in vitro depends on the clinical stage of disease, but
little is known about changes in this antiviral activity over time in individual 
HIV-infected patients or SIV-infected macaques. We assessed changes in the
soluble factor-mediated noncytolytic antiviral activity of CD8+ cells over time
in eight cynomolgus macaques infected with SIVmac251 to determine the
pathophysiological role of this activity. CD8+ cell-associated antiviral activity
increased rapidly in the first week after viral inoculation and remained
detectable during the early phase of infection. The net increase in antiviral
activity of CD8+ cells was correlated with plasma viral load throughout the 15
months of follow-up. CD8+ cells gradually lost their antiviral activity over time
and acquired virus replication-enhancing capacity. Levels of antiviral activity
correlated with CD4+ T-cell counts after viral set point. Concentrations of
beta-chemokines and interleukin-16 in CD8+ cell supernatants were not correlated 
with this antiviral activity, and alpha-defensins were not detected. The soluble 
factor-mediated antiviral activity of CD8+ cells was neither cytolytic nor
restricted to major histocompatibility complex. This longitudinal study strongly 
suggests that the increase in noncytolytic antiviral activity from baseline and
the maintenance of this increase over time in cynomolgus macaques depend on both 
viral replication and CD4+ T cells.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.80.1.236-245.2006 
PMCID: PMC1317544
PMID: 16352548  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

