
1. Ann Intern Med. 1992 Aug 15;117(4):314-24.

Pneumococcal disease during HIV infection. Epidemiologic, clinical, and
immunologic perspectives.

Janoff EN(1), Breiman RF, Daley CL, Hopewell PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Minneapolis, MN.

Comment in
    Ann Intern Med. 1993 Mar 1;118(5):393; author reply 394.
    Ann Intern Med. 1993 Mar 1;118(5):393-4.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize the epidemiology, clinical manifestations, and
immunologic risk factors for infections with Streptococcus pneumoniae among
persons infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV); and to delineate a
practical approach for diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of these infections.
DATA SOURCES: English-language articles from Index Medicus and their references
as well as abstracts from conference proceedings that compared rates as well as
clinical and microbiologic features of S. pneumoniae infections in HIV-infected
patients.
STUDY SELECTION: All human studies that included denominators, appropriate
control groups, or sufficient clinical descriptions and animal studies with key
immunologic observations were cited.
DATA EXTRACTION: We compared epidemiologic and clinical responses to pneumococcal
disease in HIV-infected patients and control subjects and correlated clinical and
experimental data on immunologic defects associated with HIV infection with those
on regulation of pneumococcal infections.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Among patients with HIV infection, the incidence of invasive
pneumococcal disease is high, bacteremia is a common complication of pneumonia,
and relapses occur frequently. However, the clinical presentation, response to
therapy, and serotypes isolated are similar to those in persons without HIV
infection, and mortality is similar or lower. Specific local and systemic defects
in host defense, particularly humoral immunity, may contribute to the high
incidence of invasive pneumococcal disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Streptococcus pneumoniae is the leading cause of invasive bacterial 
respiratory disease in adults and children with HIV infection. Prompt diagnosis
and antimicrobial therapy are associated with a favorable clinical outcome.
Characterizing the specific immunologic defects associated with invasive
pneumococcal disease in HIV-infected patients may facilitate development of
successful, cost-effective strategies for prophylaxis.

DOI: 10.7326/0003-4819-117-4-314 
PMID: 1637028  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

