
1. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2006 Jan;13(1):59-67.

Recombinant multiepitope protein for early detection of dengue infections.

Anandarao R(1), Swaminathan S, Fernando S, Jana AM, Khanna N.

Author information: 
(1)RGP Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology,
P.O. Box 10504, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi-110067, India.

Dengue fever is a mosquito-borne viral disease prevalent mainly in tropical
countries. As the clinical manifestations of dengue are not very unique,
laboratory diagnosis is crucial in identifying cases of dengue infection.
Detection of dengue infection based on the identification of antidengue
antibodies has emerged as a practical and reliable means of diagnosing dengue
fever. We recently developed a customized recombinant dengue multiepitope protein
(r-DME-G) that can specifically detect the immunoglobulin G (IgG) class of
antidengue antibodies in patient sera. Using this strategy, we have now created
another dengue multiepitope protein, r-DME-M, with specificity for the IgM class 
of antidengue antibodies. A synthetic gene encoding the r-DME-M protein was
expressed as a maltose-binding protein fusion in Escherichia coli. The
recombinant protein was purified in a single affinity chromatographic step to
obtain yields of approximately 15 mg purified protein/liter of culture. The
purified protein was used to develop an in-house IgM enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay (ELISA) and tested using a panel of 172 patient sera characterized using
the commercially available Dengue Duo rapid strip test from PanBio, Australia.
The IgM ELISA results showed that the r-DME-M protein not only recognized all
IgM(+) samples identified by the PanBio test but also identified samples missed
by the latter test. We also successfully adapted the r-DME-M protein to a rapid
strip test format. This approach of creating customized antigens coupled to
overexpression in E. coli and simple purification offers a promising alternative 
option to dengue diagnosis with the potential to circumvent the drawbacks of the 
whole virus antigen-based commercial kits.

DOI: 10.1128/CVI.13.1.59-67.2006 
PMCID: PMC1356612
PMID: 16426001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

