
1. Crit Rev Immunol. 1991;11(1):33-63.

Hodgkin's disease revisited: Reed-Sternberg cells as natural hybridomas.

Sinkovics JG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Institute, St. Joseph's Hospital, Tampa, FL.

The formation of natural hybridomas during the course of malignant
lymphoproliferative diseases was first observed in 1969, and many times
thereafter. This natural phenomenon remains experimentally unexplored even though
it exerts fundamental influence on the natural history and outcome of neoplastic 
cell proliferations. Instead, hybridomas artificially constructed in the
laboratory from 1975 on are being extensively studied and utilized for the
production of highly specific monoclonal antibodies in the diagnosis and
treatment of infectious and malignant diseases. This review lists examples of
natural hybridomas formed in murine and human neoplasms. Indirect evidence
supports the notion that hybridomas are generated in African Burkitt's lymphoma
(BL) in the form of large, immunoresistant tetraploid BL cells emerging in
immunoreactive relapsed patients; and in Hodgkin's disease (HD) in the form of
Reed-Sternberg (RS) cells. RS cells may be formed when retroviral antigens
expressed by the mononuclear HD cell attract reactive B and T cells, and instead 
of an immune attack by reactive cells, fusion with reactive cells takes place.
The resulting RS cells may further fuse with other reactive cells (e.g., with two
B cells, one expressing kappa, the other lambda light chains) or with each other,
forming quadromas. RS cells appear multinucleated and hyperploid; they express
the products of activated genes of the interdigitating dendritic cell (the
retrovirally infected mononuclear HD cell) and those of reactive B and/or T
cells. Thus, RS cells present themselves with a great variety of marker
expression. Molecular mediators and immunoglobulins released from RS cells are
responsible for the activities of proliferating polyclonal reactive cells and/or 
for the depletion of these cells in HD lesions. Multinucleated giant RS cells in 
anaplastic lymphomas and the syncytial subtype of RS cells of nodular sclerosing 
HD should be studied first for retro- or herpes viral antigen expressions and for
fusion with reactive cells or with other RS cells.


PMID: 1652972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

