
1. Laryngoscope. 2006 Mar;116(3):488-93.

Antimeasles immunoglobulin g for serologic diagnosis of otosclerotic hearing
loss.

Karosi T(1), K贸nya J, Petk贸 M, Szab贸 LZ, Pytel J, J贸ri J, Sziklai I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University Medical School 
of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary.

HYPOTHESIS: Persistent measles virus infection of the otic capsule is suggested
to be an etiologic factor in otosclerosis. Otosclerosis is a disease of complex
unknown etiology causing progressive conductive and/or sensorineural hearing loss
(HL).
BACKGROUND: Diagnostic methods of otosclerosis are sensitive to ossicular chain
fixation with low specificity for otosclerotic stapes ankylosis.
METHODS: Nucleic acid was extracted from stapes foot plates of clinically stapes 
fixation patients (N = 213). Measles virus nucleoprotein RNA was amplified by
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. Amplification results were
correlated to histologic findings in 49 cases. Antimeasles IgG levels of all
clinically stapes fixation as well as control sera specimens were measured by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: Among clinically stapes fixation patients, 141 stapes foot plates
contained measles virus RNA. Among 49 histologic specimens, viral RNA was
detectable only in histologically otosclerotic stapes foot plates (n = 35).
Histology for virus-negative foot plates (n = 14) excluded otosclerosis.
Antimeasles IgG levels were significantly lower in the sera of patients with
virus-positive stapes than in control sera.
CONCLUSIONS: Combination of decreased antimeasles IgG serum level and conductive 
HL has a great specificity and sensitivity as a diagnostic method in the
preoperative evaluation of ossicular chain fixations otosclerosis. Low
antimeasles IgG level indicates otosclerosis, whereas high level suggests
non-otosclerotic ossicular chain fixations. Preoperative elucidation of the cause
of a conductive HL may suggest optional medical treatment in preference to
surgical methods.

DOI: 10.1097/01.mlg.0000204142.80263.2b 
PMID: 16540914  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

