
1. Viral Immunol. 2006 Spring;19(1):10-32.

Development of a live attenuated dengue virus vaccine using reverse genetics.

Blaney JE Jr(1), Durbin AP, Murphy BR, Whitehead SS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, LID, Bethesda, Maryland
20892-8133, USA. jblaney@niaid.nih.gov

There are four serotypes of dengue (DEN1-DEN4) virus that are endemic in most
areas of Southeast Asia, Central and South America, and other subtropical
regions. The number of cases of severe disease associated with DEN virus
infection is growing because of the continued spread of the mosquito vector,
Aedes aegypti, which transmits the virus to humans. Infection with DEN virus can 
result in an asymptomatic infection, a febrile illness called dengue fever (DF), 
and the very severe disease called dengue hemorrhagic fever/dengue shock syndrome
(DHF/DSS). Currently, a licensed vaccine is not available. However, a tetravalent
vaccine is urgently needed to prevent DF and DHF/DSS, the latter of which occurs 
predominantly in partially immune individuals. A live attenuated, tetravalent DEN
virus vaccine candidate has been generated using reverse genetics that is able to
provide immunity to each of the four serotypes of DEN. Attenuation has been
achieved by generating recombinant DEN (rDEN) viruses which are modified by
deletion or, alternatively, by antigenic chimerization between two related DEN
viruses using the following two strategies: 1) introduction of an attenuating 30 
nucleotide deletion (Delta30) mutation into the 3' untranslated region of DEN1
and DEN4; and 2) replacement of structural proteins of the attenuated
rDEN4Delta30 vaccine candidate with those from DEN2 or DEN3. Attenuation of the
four monovalent vaccine candidates has been achieved for rhesus monkeys or humans
and an immunogenic tetravalent vaccine candidate has been formulated. The level
of attenuation of each dengue vaccine component can be increased, if needed, by
introduction of additional attenuating mutations that have been well
characterized.

DOI: 10.1089/vim.2006.19.10 
PMID: 16553547  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

