
1. Zhonghua Yan Ke Za Zhi. 2006 Mar;42(3):212-7.

[Anti-proliferative effect of herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase gene system
on human Tenon capsule fibroblasts in vitro].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang JB(1), Ge J, Liu BQ, Huang B, Wei YT.

Author information: 
(1)Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510060, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe anti-proliferative effect of herpes simplex virus thymidine
kinase gene system (HSV-tk) on human Tenon capsule fibroblasts (HTFs) and it's
mechanism.
METHODS: Retroviral vector was constructed containing HSV-tk gene and transfer to
packaging cell line PT67. The positive clones was selected with G418 and the
supernatant was collected which contains virus particles. The titer of the virus 
was also calculated. The virus particles were verified by transmission electron
microscope (TEM). PCR was carried out to detect the integrity of tk gene into
viral DNA genome. HTFs cells were infected with the virus and the positive clones
were selected for propagation culture. RT-PCR and Western blot were used to
detect tk gene expression. The anti-proliferative effect of tk gene on HTFs cells
was determined by MTT. Apoptosis of cells was detected by Hoechst 33258 DNA
staining and flow cytometry. The morphologic changes of the cell were observed by
TEM.
RESULTS: The retroviral vector pL (tk) SN was constructed successfully which was 
verified by enzyme cutting. The shape of virus particles derived from the package
cells appeared to be oval or spherical under TEM with the diameter around 100 nm.
The tk gene was detected in the viral DNA genome by PCR. The virus titer was 4 x 
10(7) cfu/ml. The expression of tk gene was detected by RT-PCR and Western blot
both in mRNA and protein level. The anti-proliferative effect of tk gene on HTFs 
cells was dose-dependent, all cells were died 5 days after 5 x 10(-3) g/L GCV
being added, IC50 = 6 x 10(-4) g/L. Both necrosis and apoptosis were observed in 
this study and the apoptosis rate was increased with increasing dose of GCV.
CONCLUSIONS: The proliferation of HTFs cells in vitro could be effectively
inhibited by the killing effect of HSV-tk-GCV system through the pathway of
necrosis and apoptosis.


PMID: 16643751  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

