
1. Cell Immunol. 1991 Mar;133(1):234-52.

CD4-positive T lymphocytes are required for the generation of the primary but not
the secondary CD8-positive cytolytic T lymphocyte response to herpes simplex
virus in C57BL/6 mice.

Jennings SR(1), Bonneau RH, Smith PM, Wolcott RM, Chervenak R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Louisiana State University Medical 
Center, School of Medicine, Shreveport 71130.

To understand the cellular basis for recovery from HSV infection, it is critical 
to identify functional interactions between HSV-specific T lymphocyte
subpopulations involved in the generation of the optimal response. To this end,
the requirement for CD4+ (L3T4+) T lymphocytes in the development of the primary 
and secondary CD8+ (Lyt-2+) cytolytic T lymphocyte (CTL) response following HSV
infection in C57BL/6 mice was investigated. It was found that chronic depletion
of CD4+ cells in vivo by treatment with the mAb GK1.5, which resulted in greater 
than 95% depletion of peripheral CD4+ T lymphocytes in treated animals, caused a 
profound decrease in the levels of cytolytic activity obtained during the primary
response in the draining popliteal lymph nodes of mice responding to infection in
the hind footpads. However, treatment did not affect the levels of in vivo
secondary CTL activity in the popliteal lymph nodes, nor the in vitro secondary
response in the spleen. The decreased CTL activity observed during the primary
response was not due to an inability to prime HSV-specific CTL precursors (CTLp),
as full cytolytic activity was obtained following culture of lymphocytes in the
presence of exogenous IL-2 and antigen, and the response could be reconstituted
by treatment with recombinant IL-2 in vivo. Analysis of the secondary CTL
response in the spleen indicated that CD4+ cells were not required for either the
generation or maintenance of this aspect of the response. However, blockade of
IL-2 utilization by CTL using anti-IL-2R antibodies indicated that this
lymphokine was absolutely essential for secondary CTL expansion in vitro.
Finally, mice that had been infected 12 months previously exhibited a decreased
ability to generate secondary HSV-specific CTL in vitro following CD4-depletion
in vivo. Taken together, these results suggest two distinct stages of CTL
development during the response: an early primary stage dependent upon the
presence of CD4+ cells, and a later, CD4-independent stage operative during the
secondary response, which decays with time postinfection.

DOI: 10.1016/0008-8749(91)90194-g 
PMID: 1671342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

