
1. J Gen Virol. 2006 Jul;87(Pt 7):1997-2003.

Phylogeography of the deer mouse (Peromyscus maniculatus) provides a predictive
framework for research on hantaviruses.

Dragoo JW(1), Lackey JA, Moore KE, Lessa EP, Cook JA, Yates TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Museum of Southwestern Biology, The University of New
Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA. jdragoo@unm.edu

Phylogeographical partitioning of Sin Nombre and Monongahela viruses
(hantaviruses) may reflect that of their primary rodent host, the deer mouse
(Peromyscus maniculatus). Lack of a comprehensive assessment of phylogeographical
variation of the host has precluded the possibility of predicting spatial limits 
of existing strains of these viruses or geographical regions where novel viral
strains might emerge. The complete cytochrome b gene was sequenced for 206 deer
mice collected from sites throughout North America to provide a foundation for
future studies of spatial structure and evolution of this ubiquitous host.
Bayesian analyses of these sequences partitioned deer mice into six largely
allopatric lineages, some of which may represent unrecognized species. The
geographical distributions of these lineages were probably shaped by Quaternary
climatic events. Populations of mice were apparently restricted to refugia during
glacial advances, where they experienced genetic divergence. Expansion of these
populations, following climatic amelioration, brought genetically distinctive
forms into contact. Occurrence of parallel changes in virus strains can now be
explored in appropriate regions. In New Mexico, for example, near the location
where Sin Nombre virus was first discovered, there are three genetically
distinctive lineages of deer mice whose geographical ranges need to be delineated
precisely. The phylogeography of P. maniculatus provides a framework for
interpreting geographical variability, not only in hosts, but also in associated 
viral variants and disease transmission, and an opportunity to predict the
potential geographical distribution of newly emerging viral strains.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.81576-0 
PMID: 16760402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

