
1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2006 Jun 16;2(6):e64. Epub 2006 Jun 16.

On modeling HIV and T cells in vivo: assessing causal estimators in vaccine
trials.

Wick WD(1), Gilbert PB, Self SG.

Author information: 
(1)Statistical Center for HIV and AIDS Research and Prevention, Fred Hutchinson
Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, USA. wick@scharp.org

The first efficacy trials--named STEP--of a T cell vaccine against HIV/AIDS began
in 2004. The unprecedented structure of these trials raised new modeling and
statistical challenges. Is it plausible that memory T cells, as opposed to
antibodies, can actually prevent infection? If they fail at prevention, to what
extent can they ameliorate disease? And how do we estimate efficacy in a vaccine 
trial with two primary endpoints, one traditional, one entirely novel (viral load
after infection), and where the latter may be influenced by selection bias due to
the former? In preparation for the STEP trials, biostatisticians developed novel 
techniques for estimating a causal effect of a vaccine on viral load, while
accounting for post-randomization selection bias. But these techniques have not
been tested in biologically plausible scenarios. We introduce new stochastic
models of T cell and HIV kinetics, making use of new estimates of the rate that
cytotoxic T lymphocytes--CTLs; the so-called killer T cells--can kill
HIV-infected cells. Based on these models, we make the surprising discovery that 
it is not entirely implausible that HIV-specific CTLs might prevent infection--as
the designers explicitly acknowledged when they chose the endpoints of the STEP
trials. By simulating thousands of trials, we demonstrate that the new
statistical methods can correctly identify an efficacious vaccine, while
protecting against a false conclusion that the vaccine exacerbates disease. In
addition to uncovering a surprising immunological scenario, our results
illustrate the utility of mechanistic modeling in biostatistics.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020064 
PMCID: PMC1479086
PMID: 16789816  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

