
1. J Exp Med. 2006 Aug 7;203(8):1963-75. Epub 2006 Jul 17.

Adoptive immunotherapy induces CNS dendritic cell recruitment and antigen
presentation during clearance of a persistent viral infection.

Lauterbach H(1), Zuniga EI, Truong P, Oldstone MB, McGavern DB.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Integrative Neurosciences Department, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Given the global impact of persistent infections on the human population, it is
of the utmost importance to devise strategies to noncytopathically purge tissues 
of infectious agents. The central nervous system (CNS) poses a unique challenge
when considering such strategies, as it is an immunologically specialized
compartment that contains a nonreplicative cell population. Administration of
exogenously derived pathogen-specific memory T cells (referred to as adoptive
immunotherapy) to mice burdened with a persistent lymphocytic choriomeningitis
virus (LCMV) infection from birth results in eradication of the pathogen from all
tissues, including the CNS. In this study, we sought mechanistic insights into
this highly successful therapeutic approach. By monitoring the migration of
traceable LCMV-specific memory CD8+ T cells after immunotherapy, it was revealed 
that cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) distributed widely throughout the CNS
compartment early after immunotherapy, which resulted in a dramatic elevation in 
the activity of CNS antigen-presenting cells (APCs). Immunotherapy induced
microglia activation as well as the recruitment of macrophages and dendritic
cells (DCs) into the brain parenchyma. However, DCs emerged as the only CNS APC
population capable of inducing memory CTLs to preferentially produce the
antiviral cytokine tumor necrosis factor-alpha, a cytokine demonstrated to be
required for successful immunotherapeutic clearance. DCs were also found to be an
essential element of the immunotherapeutic process because in their absence,
memory T cells failed to undergo secondary expansion, and viral clearance was not
attained in the CNS. These experiments underscore the importance of DCs in the
immunotherapeutic clearance of a persistent viral infection and suggest that
strategies to elevate the activation/migration of DCs (especially within the CNS)
may facilitate pathogen clearance.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20060039 
PMCID: PMC2118382
PMID: 16847068  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

