
1. Med Sci Monit. 2006 Sep;12(9):CR368-71.

Correlation of clinical and surgical findings to histological features
(koilocytosis, papillary hyperplasia) suggesting papillomavirus involvement in
the pathogenesis of cholesteatoma.

Ferekidis E(1), Nikolopoulos TP, Yiotakis J, Ferekidou E, Kandiloros D,
Papadimitriou K, Tzangaroulakis A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Athens University, Ippokration Hospital,
Athens, Greece.

BACKGROUND: The clinical course of cholesteatoma is rather unpredictable, as some
cases show aggressive development, while others have a mild, more 'benign'
nature. The aim was to correlate the clinical course and surgical findings of
cholesteatomas with histological features.
MATERIAL/METHODS: The study included 45 patients with cholesteatoma, 29 of whom
had surgically aggressive and 16 simple (not surgically aggressive)
cholesteatoma. All patients underwent mastoid surgery and the cholesteatoma
specimens were sent for histological examination.
RESULTS: The clinical course of the cholesteatomas had a statistically
significant association (p < 0.001) with the 'aggressiveness' found in surgery,
suggesting that clinical history correlates well with surgical findings. All 29
specimens of patients with surgically aggressive cholesteatoma had characteristic
papillary hyperplasia of the epithelium and marked koilocytosis, suggesting
papillomavirus-incduced lesions. In contrast, none of the specimens of the 16
patients with simple (non-aggressive) cholesteatoma had papillary hyperplasia and
there was no marked koilocytosis, as few koilocytes could occasionally be found. 
The difference was statistically significant (p < 0.001). In situ hybridization
for human papillomnavirus (HPV) was performed in 14 specimens (7 each with
aggressive and simple cholesteatomna). Positive staining was found in three
aggressive cholesteatomas. All seven simple cholesteatomas were negative for HPV.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the present paper suggest that papillomaviruses may
play an important role in the pathogenesis of cholesteatomas. Further studies
with controls and the development of new methods to identify known and unknown
types of papillomavirus are needed to explore their exact role.


PMID: 16940929  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

