
1. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Surg. 2006;13(5):382-92.

Liver transplantation for hepatitis C.

Marubashi S(1), Dono K, Miyamoto A, Takeda Y, Nagano H, Umeshita K, Monden M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-2
Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is the leading cause of endstage liver disease 
in Western and Asian countries. However, after liver transplantation, HCV recurs 
in virtually all patients, and estimated HCV-related graft cirrhosis at 5-year
follow-up is 30%. Although immunosuppression accounts for a major part of the
accelerated progression of HCV in the transplant population, the best
immunosuppression for recipients with HCV that could avoid such complication
remains unknown at present. Combination therapy of interferon and ribavirin is
thought to be the most effective for the treatment or prophylaxis of HCV
infection. However, who should be treated, when treatment should be initiated,
and with what agent should patients with HCV infection be treated are still
unknown. The current data on HCV recurrence in patients who have received either 
living- or deceased-donor liver transplantation are controversial, but they are, 
presumably, similar. Thus, to avoid HCV recurrence in living-donor liver
transplantation, we have to take approaches similar to those used for patients
receiving deceased-donor liver transplantation. Based on reports from major
transplant centers around the world, we consider the best strategy for liver
transplantation-related HCV infection is steroid-free immunosuppression and
preemptive low-dose interferon and ribavirin combination therapy. Here we
describe our experience with living-donor liver transplantion for patients with
hepatitis C at Osaka University. There is a need for standardizing the treatment 
for HCV infection. This can only be achieved through collaborative work between
various liver transplant centers worldwide.

DOI: 10.1007/s00534-005-1078-9 
PMID: 17013711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

