
1. J Med Chem. 1991 Jan;34(1):329-37.

Preparation and anti-HIV activities of aurintricarboxylic acid fractions and
analogues: direct correlation of antiviral potency with molecular weight.

Cushman M(1), Wang PL, Chang SH, Wild C, De Clercq E, Schols D, Goldman ME, Bowen
JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy, School of Pharmacy and
Pharmacal Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907.

Aurintricarboxylic acid (ATA) was fractionated by a combination of dialysis,
ultrafiltration, and gel permeation chromatography. The number average and weight
average molecular weights of the ATA fractions were determined by the universal
calibration method. The sulfonic acid analogue of ATA was prepared and separated 
in high and low molecular weight fractions. The phosphonic acid analogue of ATA
was also synthesized. All of the ATA fractions were tested for prevention of the 
cytopathic effect of HIV-1 and HIV-2 in MT-4 cell culture as well as against
HIV-1 in CEM cell culture. The abilities of the fractions and analogues to
inhibit syncytium formation between HIV-1- and HIV-2-infected HUT-78 cells and
uninfected MOLT-4 cells were evaluated. In addition, the fractions and analogues 
were tested for cytotoxicity in mock-infected MT-4 cells, prevention of the
binding of the OKT4A monoclonal antibody to the CD4 receptor, inhibition of the
binding of anti-gp120 monoclonal antibody to gp120, inhibition of attachment of
HIV-1 virions to MT-4 cells, and inhibition of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase. In
all of these assays except cytotoxicity, there was a correlation of potency with 
molecular weight. The higher the molecular weight, the higher the activity.
Several of the lower molecular weight fractions of ATA, which bound to gp120 but 
not to CD4, prevented HIV-1 and HIV-2 cytopathicity. A similar profile was
observed for the phosphonic acid analogue of ATA and the lower molecular weight
fraction of the sulfonic acid analogue. The results on the ATA fractions indicate
that the binding of ATA to gp120 in the absence of CD4 binding is sufficient for 
anti-HIV activity. The active compounds bind more avidly to gp120 than to CD4.
The anti-HIV activity of the ATA fractions is due to inhibition of virus binding 
due to an interference with the gp120-CD4 interaction.

DOI: 10.1021/jm00105a052 
PMID: 1704065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

