
1. Antivir Chem Chemother. 2006;17(4):193-213.

AZT and AZT-monophosphate prodrugs incorporating HIV-protease substrate fragment:
synthesis and evaluation as specific drug delivery systems.

Liotard JF(1), Mehiri M, Di Giorgio A, Boggetto N, Reboud-Ravaux M, Aubertin AM, 
Condom R, Patino N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie des Molecules Bioactives et des Arômes, UMR-CNRS 6001,
Institut de Chimie de Nice, Université de Nice-Sophia Antipolis, France

With the view to deliver anti-HIV nucleoside and nucleoside-monophosphate (MP)
analogues specifically into HIV-infected cells, we synthesized a series of ester 
and phosphoramidate peptide conjugates of zidovudine (AZT) and of AZT-MP,
respectively, wherein the peptide sequences derive from a HIV-protease (PR)
hydrolysable substrate. Their in vitro stability with respect to hydrolysis,
anti-HIV activity and cytotoxicity, and ability to inhibit the HIV-PR activity
were investigated. Concerning the ester AZT-peptide conjugates, their antiviral
activity level in thymidine kinase-expressing (TK+) CEM-SS and MT-4 cells was in 
most cases closely correlated to their hydrolysis rate: the faster the
hydrolysis, the closer the anti-HIV activity to that of AZT. None of them was a
HIV-PR substrate, indicating that their antiviral activity was not related to
their intracellular hydrolysis by this enzyme. None of them inhibited HIV in
TK-deficient (TK-) CEM cells, demonstrating that they probably act as prodrugs of
AZT. Most of the phosphoramidate peptide conjugates of AZT-MP were rapidly
degraded in a physiological buffer into several metabolites including AZT. Their 
anti-HIV activity in TK+ CEM-SS and MT-4 cells was much lower than that of AZT,
indicating that only low amounts of AZT or AZT-MP were released into cells during
incubation. Antiviral activities measured on TK- CEM cells for some
phosphoramidates suggest that low amounts of AZT-MP could be released
intracellularly. However, this AZT-MP release was not initiated by a HIV-PR
hydrolysis, as no evidence for peptide cleavage was obtained by HPLC analysis of 
one representative compound after incubation with HIV-PR.

DOI: 10.1177/095632020601700404 
PMID: 17066898  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

