
1. Vet Pathol. 2006 Nov;43(6):943-55.

Experimental vesicular stomatitis virus infection in horses: effect of route of
inoculation and virus serotype.

Howerth EW(1), Mead DG, Mueller PO, Duncan L, Murphy MD, Stallknecht DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA. ehowerth@vet.uga.edu

Horses were inoculated with Vesicular stomatitis New Jersey and Indiana viruses
by routes simulating contact and vector transmission. Clinical signs, lesions,
antibody development, viral shedding and persistence, and viremia were monitored.
Horses were infected with both viruses by all routes as confirmed by
seroconversion. Salivation, primary lesions at inoculation sites, and secondary
oral lesions were the most common clinical findings. Viral shedding was most
often from the oral cavity, followed by the nasal cavity; titers were highest
from oral cavity samples. Virus was rarely isolated from the conjunctival sac and
never from feces or blood. Development of neutralizing antibody coincided with
cessation of lesion development and detection of virus by isolation. Circulating 
virus-specific IgM, IgG, IgA, and neutralizing antibodies developed in most
animals postinoculation (PI) days 6 to 12, depending on the route of inoculation.
At postmortem (PI days 12 to 15), lesions were healing, were not vesicular, and
did not contain detectable virus by isolation, reverse transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction, or immunohistochemistry. Numerous infiltrating lymphocytes and
plasma cells suggested that lesion resolution was partially due to local
immunity. Detection of viral RNA from tonsil and lymph nodes of head at necropsy 
suggests that these tissues play a role in the pathogenesis of the disease;
molecular techniques targeting these tissues may be useful for confirming
infection in resolving stages of disease. The routes of inoculation used in this 
study reflect the diversity of transmission routes that may occur during
outbreaks and can be used to further study contact and vector transmission,
vaccine development, and clarify pathogenesis of the disease in horses.

DOI: 10.1354/vp.43-6-943 
PMID: 17099151  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

