
1. Vaccine. 2007 Apr 30;25(17):3319-27. Epub 2007 Jan 16.

DNA vaccines expressing glycoprotein complex II antigens gM and gN elicited
neutralizing antibodies against multiple human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) isolates.

Shen S(1), Wang S, Britt WJ, Lu S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Nucleic Acid Vaccines, Department of Medicine, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, 364 Plantation Street, Lazare Research Building,
Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) glycoprotein complex II (gcII) consists of two
glycoproteins, gM and gN. Although gcII specific IgG purified from HCMV positive 
patient sera can neutralize HCMV, there has been no report describing the
generation of virus-neutralizing antibodies by immunization with individual
recombinant gM or gN antigens. In the current study, gM and gN antigens were
expressed by the mammalian expression vector pJW4303 and used as DNA vaccines to 
determine the immunogenicity of these proteins. Sera from mice or rabbits
immunized with individual or combinations of gM and gN DNA vaccines contained gM 
and gN specific antibodies as confirmed by ELISA and Western blot analyses. The
combined gM and gN antigens induced the strongest antibody responses that
recognized both gM and gcII complex while gM DNA vaccine alone could only elicit 
antibody specific for gM antigen. When given alone, the gN DNA vaccine did not
induce detectable gcII specific antibody even though in vitro gN expression was
confirmed by the formation of gM/gN complex in FSK cells using a gN-specific
monoclonal antibody 14-16A. The neutralizing antibody titer of anti-gM/gN sera
(1:128) was higher than that of anti-gM sera (1:32) against the autologous virus,
HCMV AD169. Heterologous HCMV strains including Towne and Davis could also be
neutralized by the anti-gM/gN antisera. Our data supported the rationale for the 
use of the HCMV gM/gN protein complex as protective antigens for subunit based
HCMV vaccine development. DNA vaccination is an effective approach to express the
gM/gN antigen complex in vivo without the need to express and purify these highly
insoluble and structurally complicated antigens.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2007.01.011 
PMID: 17287056  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

