
1. Antivir Chem Chemother. 2007;18(1):49-59.

Antiviral profiles of novel iminocyclitol compounds against bovine viral diarrhea
virus, West Nile virus, dengue virus and hepatitis B virus.

Gu B(1), Mason P, Wang L, Norton P, Bourne N, Moriarty R, Mehta A, Despande M,
Shah R, Block T.

Author information: 
(1)Drexel Institute for Biotechnology and Virology Research, Drexel University,
College of Medicine, Doylestown, PA, USA. baohua.gu@drexel.edu

The antiviral activity of iminocyclitol compounds with a deoxynojirimycin (DNJ)
head group and either a straight chain alkyl or alkylcycloalkyl group attached to
the nitrogen atom have been tested in vitro against multiple-enveloped viruses.
Several of these analogues were superior to previously reported DNJ compounds.
Iminocyclitols that inhibit the glycan-processing enzyme endoplasmic-reticular
glucosidase have been shown to inhibit the morphogenesis of viruses that bud from
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) at non-cytotoxic concentrations. Bovine viral
diarrhoea virus (BVDV) has been used as a surrogate system for study of the
hepatitis C virus, which belong to the virus family (Flaviviridae) as West Nile
virus (WNV) and dengue virus (DV). N-Nonyl-DNJ (NNDNJ) was previously reported to
have micromolar antiviral activity against BVDV, but a limiting toxicity profile.
N-Butylcyclohexyl-DNJ (SP169) was shown to be as potent as NNDNJ in assays
against BVDV and less toxic. However, it was inactive against hepatitis B virus
(HBV). The present study reports efforts to improve the performance profiles of
these compounds. Introduction of an oxygen atom into the N-alkyl side chain of
DNJ, either as an ether or a hydroxyl functionality, reduced toxicity but
sacrificed potency. Introduction of a hydroxyl group at the tertiary carbon
junction of the cycloalkyl and linear alkyl group, as in
N-pentyl-(1-hydroxycyclohexyl)-DNJ (OSL-9511), led to a structure that was as
well tolerated as DNJ (CC50>500 microM), but retained micromolar antiviral
activity against all ER morphogenesis budding viruses tested: BVDV, WNV, DV and
HBV. The implication of this modification to the development of broad-spectrum
antiviral agents is discussed.

DOI: 10.1177/095632020701800105 
PMID: 17354651  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

