
1. Mol Microbiol. 2006 Dec;62(6):1752-63.

Hypermutagenesis in mutA cells is mediated by mistranslational corruption of
polymerase, and is accompanied by replication fork collapse.

Al Mamun AA(1), Gautam S, Humayun MZ.

Author information: 
(1)University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, New Jersey Medical School,
Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, International Center for
Public Health, 225 Warren Street, Newark, NJ 07101-1709, USA.

Elevated mistranslation induces a mutator response termed translational
stress-induced mutagenesis (TSM) that is mediated by an unidentified modification
of DNA polymerase III. Here we address two questions: (i) does TSM result from
direct polymerase corruption, or from an indirect pathway triggered by increased 
protein turnover? (ii) Why are homologous recombination functions required for
the expression of TSM under certain conditions, but not others? We show that
replication of bacteriophage T4 in cells expressing the mutA allele of the
glyVtRNA gene (Asp-Gly mistranslation), leads to both increased mutagenesis, and 
to an altered mutational specificity, results that strongly support
mistranslational corruption of DNA polymerase. We also show that expression of
mutA, which confers a recA-dependent mutator phenotype, leads to increased
lambdoid prophage induction (selectable in vivo expression technology assay),
suggesting that replication fork collapse occurs more frequently in mutA cells
relative to control cells. No such increase in prophage induction is seen in
cells expressing alaVGlu tRNA (Glu-->Ala mistranslation), in which the mutator
phenotype is recA-independent. We propose that replication fork collapse
accompanies episodic hypermutagenic replication cycles in mutA cells, requiring
homologous recombination functions for fork recovery, and therefore, for mutation
recovery. These findings highlight hitherto under-appreciated links among
translation, replication and recombination, and suggest that translational
fidelity, which is affected by genetic and environmental signals, is a key
modulator of replication fidelity.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2006.05490.x 
PMID: 17427291  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

