
1. J Virol. 2007 Sep;81(18):9693-706. Epub 2007 Jul 3.

Productive human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection in peripheral blood
predominantly takes place in CD4/CD8 double-negative T lymphocytes.

Kaiser P(1), Joos B, Niederöst B, Weber R, Günthard HF, Fischer M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Hospital Epidemiology, University Hospital
Zürich Rämistrasse, 100 8091 Zürich, Switzerland.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) transcription is subject to
substantial fluctuation during the viral life cycle. Due to the low frequencies
of HIV-1-infected cells, and because latently and productively infected cells
collocate in vivo, little quantitative knowledge has been attained about the
range of in vivo HIV-1 transcription in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMC). By combining cell sorting, terminal dilution of intact cells, and highly 
sensitive, patient-specific PCR assays, we divided PBMC obtained from
HIV-1-infected patients according to their degree of viral transcription activity
and their cellular phenotype. Regardless of a patient's treatment status, the
bulk of infected cells exhibited a CD4+ phenotype but transcribed HIV-1 provirus 
at low levels, presumably insufficient for virion production. Furthermore, the
expression of activation markers on the surface of these CD4+ T lymphocytes
showed little or no association with enhancement of viral transcription. In
contrast, HIV-infected T lymphocytes of a CD4-/CD8- phenotype, occurring
exclusively in untreated patients, exhibited elevated viral transcription rates. 
This cell type harbored a substantial proportion of all HIV RNA+ cells and
intracellular viral RNAs and the majority of cell-associated virus particles. In 
conjunction with the observation that the HIV quasispecies in CD4+ and CD4-)/CD8-
T cells were phylogenetically closely related, these findings provide evidence
that CD4 expression is downmodulated during the transition to productive
infection in vivo. The abundance of viral RNA in CD4-/CD8- T cells from viremic
patients and the almost complete absence of viral DNA and RNA in this cell type
during antiretroviral treatment identify HIV+ CD4-/CD8 T cells as the major cell 
type harboring productive infection in peripheral blood.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00492-07 
PMCID: PMC2045436
PMID: 17609262  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

