
1. J Virol. 2007 Oct;81(19):10379-88. Epub 2007 Jul 18.

Modification of small RNAs associated with suppression of RNA silencing by
tobamovirus replicase protein.

Vogler H(1), Akbergenov R, Shivaprasad PV, Dang V, Fasler M, Kwon MO, Zhanybekova
S, Hohn T, Heinlein M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Physiology, Botanical Institute, University of Basel,
Switzerland.

Plant viruses act as triggers and targets of RNA silencing and have evolved
proteins to suppress this plant defense response during infection. Although
Tobacco mosaic tobamovirus (TMV) triggers the production of virus-specific small 
interfering RNAs (siRNAs), this does not lead to efficient silencing of TMV nor
is a TMV-green fluorescent protein (GFP) hybrid able to induce silencing of a
GFP-transgene in Nicotiana benthamiana, indicating that a TMV silencing
suppressor is active and acts downstream of siRNA production. On the other hand, 
TMV-GFP is unable to spread into cells in which GFP silencing is established,
suggesting that the viral silencing suppressor cannot revert silencing that is
already established. Although previous evidence indicates that the tobamovirus
silencing suppressing activity resides in the viral 126-kDa small replicase
subunit, the mechanism of silencing suppression by this virus family is not
known. Here, we connect the silencing suppressing activity of this protein with
our previous finding that Oilseed rape mosaic tobamovirus infection leads to
interference with HEN1-mediated methylation of siRNA and micro-RNA (miRNA). We
demonstrate that TMV infection similarly leads to interference with HEN1-mediated
methylation of small RNAs and that this interference and the formation of
virus-induced disease symptoms are linked to the silencing suppressor activity of
the 126-kDa protein. Moreover, we show that also Turnip crinkle virus interferes 
with the methylation of siRNA but, in contrast to tobamoviruses, not with the
methylation of miRNA.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00727-07 
PMCID: PMC2045474
PMID: 17634237  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

