
1. Cell Transplant. 2007;16(5):527-37.

Cell loss during pseudoislet formation hampers profound improvements in islet
lentiviral transduction efficacy for transplantation purposes.

Callewaert H(1), Gysemans C, Cardozo AK, Elsner M, Tiedge M, Eizirik DL, Mathieu 
C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Medicine and Endocrinology (LEGENDO), UZ
Gasthuisberg O&N, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Islet transplantation is a promising treatment in type 1 diabetes, but the need
for chronic immunosuppression is a major hurdle to broad applicability. Ex vivo
introduction of agents by lentiviral vectors-improving beta-cell resistance
against immune attack-is an attractive path to pursue. The aim of this study was 
to investigate whether dissociation of islets to single cells prior to viral
infection and reaggregation before transplantation would improve viral
transduction efficacy without cytotoxicity. This procedure improved transduction 
efficacy with a LV-pWPT-CMV-EGFP construct from 11.2 +/- 4.1% at MOI 50 in whole 
islets to 80.0 +/- 2.8% at MOI 5. Viability (as measured by Hoechst/PI) and
functionality (as measured by glucose challenge) remained high. After
transplantation, the transfected pseudoislet aggregates remained EGFP positive
for more than 90 days and the expression of EGFP colocalized primarily with the
insulin-positive beta-cells. No increased vulnerability to immune attack was
observed in vitro or in vivo. These data demonstrate that dispersion of islets
prior to lentiviral transfection and reaggregation prior to transplantation is a 
highly efficient way to introduce genes of interest into islets for
transplantation purposes in vitro and in vivo, but the amount of beta-cells
needed for normalization of glycemia was more than eightfold higher when using
dispersed cell aggregates versus unmanipulated islets. The high price to pay to
reach stable and strong transgene expression in islet cells is certainly an
important cell loss.

DOI: 10.3727/000000007783464948 
PMID: 17708342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

