
1. BMC Biotechnol. 2007 Sep 17;7:59.

Scarless and site-directed mutagenesis in Salmonella enteritidis chromosome.

Cox MM(1), Layton SL, Jiang T, Cole K, Hargis BM, Berghman LR, Bottje WG, Kwon
YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR, USA. 
mmcox@uark.edu

BACKGROUND: A variety of techniques have been described which introduce scarless,
site-specific chromosomal mutations. These techniques can be applied to make
point mutations or gene deletions as well as insert heterologous DNA into
bacterial vectors for vaccine development. Most methods use a multi-step approach
that requires cloning and/or designing repeat sequences to facilitate homologous 
recombination. We have modified previously published techniques to develop a
simple, efficient PCR-based method for scarless insertion of DNA into Salmonella 
enteritidis chromosome.
RESULTS: The final product of this mutation strategy is the insertion of DNA
encoding a foreign epitope into the S. enteritidis genome without the addition of
any unwanted sequence. This experiment was performed by a two-step mutation
process via PCR fragments, Red recombinase and counter-selection with the I-SceI 
enzyme site. First, the I-SceI site and kanamycin resistance gene were introduced
into the genome of cells expressing Red recombinase enzymes. Next, this sequence 
was replaced by a chosen insertion sequence. DNA fragments used for recombination
were linear PCR products which consisted of the foreign insertion sequence
flanked by homologous sequences of the target gene. Described herein is the
insertion of a section of the M2e epitope (LM2) of Influenza A virus, a domain of
CD154 (CD154s) or a combination of both into the outer membrane protein LamB of
S. enteritidis.
CONCLUSION: We have successfully used this method to produce multiple mutants
with no antibiotic gene on the genome or extra sequence except those nucleotides 
required for expression of epitope regions. This method is advantageous over
other protocols in that it does not require cloning or creating extra duplicate
regions to facilitate homologous recombination, contains a universal construct in
which an epitope of choice can be placed to check for cell surface expression,
and shows high efficiency when screening for positive mutants. Other
opportunities of this mutational strategy include creating attenuated mutants and
site-specific, chromosomal deletion mutations. Furthermore, this method should be
applicable in other gram-negative bacterial species where Red recombinase enzymes
can be functionally expressed.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6750-7-59 
PMCID: PMC2096622
PMID: 17875218  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

