
1. J Virol. 2007 Dec;81(24):13801-8. Epub 2007 Oct 17.

Protective immunity to pseudomonas aeruginosa induced with a capsid-modified
adenovirus expressing P. aeruginosa OprF.

Worgall S(1), Krause A, Qiu J, Joh J, Hackett NR, Crystal RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill Medical College of Cornell University,
New York, New York 10021, USA. geneticmedicine@med.cornell.edu

This study focuses on the development of a new clinical vaccine candidate
(AdOprF.RGD.Epi8) against Pseudomonas aeruginosa using an E1(-) E3(-) adenovirus 
(Ad) vector expressing OprF (AdOprF.RGD.Epi8) and modifications of the Ad genome 
providing two capsid changes: (i) modification of the Ad hexon gene to
incorporate an immune-dominant OprF epitope (Epi8) into loop 1 of the hexon,
enabling repeat administration to boost the anti-OprF immune response, and (ii)
modification of the fiber gene to incorporate an integrin-binding RGD sequence to
enhance gene delivery to antigen-presenting cells. Western analysis confirmed
that AdOprF.RGD.Epi8 expresses OprF, contains Epi8 in the hexon protein, and
enhances gene transfer to dendritic cells compared to AdOprF, a comparable Ad
vector expressing OprF with an unmodified capsid. Intramuscular immunization of
C57BL/6 mice with AdOprF.RGD.Epi8 resulted in the generation of anti-OprF
antibodies at comparable levels to those induced following immunization with
AdOprF, but immunization with AdOprF.RGD.Epi8 was associated with increased CD4
and CD8 gamma interferon T-cell responses against OprF as well as increased
survival against lethal pulmonary challenge with agar-encapsulated P. aeruginosa.
Importantly, repeat administration of AdOprF.RGD.Epi8 resulted in boosting of the
humoral anti-OprF response as well as increased protection, whereas no boosting
could be achieved with repeat administration of AdOprF. This suggests that the
capsid-modified AdOprF.RGD.Epi8 vector is a more effective immunogen compared to 
a comparable wild-type Ad capsid, making it a good candidate for an anti-P.
aeruginosa vaccine.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01246-07 
PMCID: PMC2168865
PMID: 17942539  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

