
1. J Photochem Photobiol B. 2007 Dec 14;89(2-3):110-6. Epub 2007 Sep 20.

Near-ultraviolet photolysis of beta-phenylpyruvic acid generates free radicals
and results in DNA damage.

Hargreaves A(1), Taiwo FA, Duggan O, Kirk SH, Ahmad SI.

Author information: 
(1)School of Science and Technology, Nottingham Trent University, Clifton Lane,
Nottingham NG11 8NS, UK.

Ultraviolet A (UVA) light (315-400 nm) is ubiquitously found in our environment
and constitutes about 95% of the total solar UV; all UVC and most UVB being
absorbed by the stratospheric ozone layer. Compared with UVB and C, UVA does not 
show any direct effect on biological systems. Indirect effects of UVA, however,
have been recognised overwhelmingly and this includes photosensitization of
biological and non-biological compounds and production of free radicals many of
which include oxygen and are hence known as reactive oxygen species or ROS.
Several types of free radicals have been identified although their impacts on
various macro- and micro-biomolecules are yet to be fully elucidated.
beta-Phenylpyruvic acid is ubiquitously found in eukaryotic cells as a metabolite
of phenylalanine, which is subsequently converted to phenyllactate and/or to
2-hydroxyphenylacetate and mandelate. In patients suffering from phenylketonuria 
the hydroxylation of phenylalanine to tyrosine is defective due to lack of
phenylalanine hydroxylase. These result in accumulation and excretion of this
compound in the urine. Here we present evidence that photolysis of
beta-phenylpyruvic acid by a skin tanning lamp, emitting 99% UVA (315-400 nm) and
1% UVB (290-315 nm) generates carboxyl radicals (CO(2)(*)) and also possibly
causes direct electron transfer (or type 1) reactions. Electron paramagnetic
resonance was used to detect the free radicals. To determine the biological
effects of this photolytic reaction, T7 was exposed to these photolytic reactive 
agents and found to lead to high levels of phage inactivation. Damage to DNA
and/or components such as tail fibre proteins may be involved in T7 inactivation.
In addition, our unpublished data suggest that certain phenylketonuria cell lines
are more sensitive to PPA+NUV, lending importance to photolytic studies of this
agent.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2007.09.007 
PMID: 17977740  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

