
1. Sex Transm Dis. 2008 Jan;35(1):78-83.

A delicate balance: risk factors for acquisition of bacterial vaginosis include
sexual activity, absence of hydrogen peroxide-producing lactobacilli, black race,
and positive herpes simplex virus type 2 serology.

Cherpes TL(1), Hillier SL, Meyn LA, Busch JL, Krohn MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. rsitc@mwri.magee.edu

BACKGROUND: The etiology of bacterial vaginosis (BV) is poorly understood, but
better definition of the risk factors associated with its acquisition should
improve our understanding of this complex disease entity.
METHODS: A longitudinal cohort study of young sexually active women was conducted
to identify variables associated with BV acquisition. Seven hundred seventy-three
women without BV at enrollment were followed at 4-month intervals for 1 year. At 
each visit, demographic and behavioral interview data, a vaginal smear for the
Gram stain diagnosis of BV, and a serum sample for detection of herpes simplex
virus type 1 (HSV-1) and HSV-2 type-specific antibodies were collected.
RESULTS: The overall incidence of BV acquisition was 36 cases/100 woman-years
(223 acquisitions of BV during 619 woman-years of follow-up). Acquisition of BV
was independently associated with black race, cigarette smoking, vaginal
intercourse, receptive anal sex before vaginal intercourse, sex with an
uncircumcised male partner, lack of vaginal H2O2-producing lactobacilli, and the 
detection of HSV-2 serum antibodies at the visit before BV acquisition.
Longitudinal analyses revealed that HSV-2 serum antibodies were independently
associated with loss of H2O2-producing lactobacilli.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that multiple and diverse risk factors can
contribute to BV acquisition. They also illustrate why a more complete
understanding of BV pathogenesis and the formulation of effective BV prevention
strategies have been elusive. Further work will be needed to determine the
specific effects of HSV-2 infection on vaginal flora composition and the
acquisition of BV.

DOI: 10.1097/OLQ.0b013e318156a5d0 
PMID: 17989585  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

