
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1976 Jun;73(6):2047-51.

Temperature-sensitive changes in surface modulating assemblies of fibroblasts
transformed by mutants of Rous sarcoma virus.

Edelman GM, Yahara I.

The hypothesis that surface modulating assemblies containing microfilaments and
microtubules and altered after cellular transformation was tested on cells
infected with temperature-sensitive mutants of avian sarcoma virus. Untransformed
cells (mouse 3T3 and chick fibroblasts), cells transformed by simian virus 40 (SV
3T3), and chick fibroblasts infected with Schmidt-Ruppin strain of Rous sarcoma
virus (SR-RSV-A-infected cells) were first compared for differences in
microfilament and microtubule patterns after treatment with fluorescein-labeled
antibodies to actin and tubulin. Transformed cells showed disappearance of
ordered stress microfilaments and thickened or diffuse alterations of
microtubular arrays. At restrictive temperatures (41 degrees), chick fibroblasts 
infected with a temperature-sensitive mutant (ts 68) of Rous sarcoma virus showed
normal patterns of stress fialments and radial microtubular arrays originating in
1 or 2 centrioles. At permissive temperatures (37 degrees), these patterns were
disordered and resembled those of SR-RSV-A-infected cells. After a shift from 41 
degrees to 37 degrees, the changes in microtubules were observed in the majority 
of cells within 1 hr. These changes were reversible and did not result from the
inability of tubulin to polymerize. In ts 68-infected cells at permissive
temperatures, concanavalin A induced much less surface modulation (inhibition of 
receptor mobility) than at restrictive temperatures. These results suggest that
cellular transformation alters both the structure and function of surface
modulating assemblies and prompt the hypothesis that products of viral
transforming genes may affect these assemblies with a consequent loss of growth
control.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.73.6.2047 
PMCID: PMC430445
PMID: 180536  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

