
1. J Pain. 2008 Jan;9(1 Suppl 1):S31-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2007.10.007.

Vaccination to prevent herpes zoster in older adults.

Gnann JW Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, Pediatrics, and Microbiology, University of Alabama
at Birmingham, 908 20th Street South, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. jgnann@uab.edu

Herpes zoster causes substantial morbidity, especially among older adults.
Although the acute cutaneous manifestations can be painful and troublesome, the
most important consequence of herpes zoster (shingles) is the chronic pain
syndrome known as postherpetic neuralgia (PHN). Previous studies have suggested
that declining varicella-zoster virus (VZV)-specific cell-mediated immune (CMI)
responses account for the increased frequency of herpes zoster seen in older
adults. This led to the idea that immunization designed to boost VZV-specific CMI
responses might reduce the risk of herpes zoster. This hypothesis was tested in a
large, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial called the Shingles
Prevention Study (SPS). Compared with the placebo group, herpes zoster vaccine
recipients had a 61.1% reduction in zoster "burden of illness" (an index
incorporating incidence and severity of herpes zoster); a 66.5% reduction in the 
incidence of postherpetic neuralgia; and a 51.3% reduction in the incidence of
herpes zoster. The incidence of serious adverse events was not different between 
the overall vaccine and placebo populations. The most frequently encountered
adverse event among vaccine recipients was local reactogenicity, with
self-limited and generally mild tenderness, warmth, or erythema occurring at the 
injection site in about one-half of vaccine recipients. The zoster vaccine was
approved by the US Food and Drug Administration in 2006 and is indicated for
prevention of herpes zoster in immunocompetent persons aged 60 years and
older.PERSPECTIVE: The herpes zoster vaccine provides physicians with an
effective means for reducing a patient's risk for developing shingles and its
attendant complications. No significant safety concerns regarding the vaccine
have been identified. Indications for use of the attenuated-virus vaccine in
special subpopulations continue to evolve.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpain.2007.10.007 
PMID: 18166463  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

