
1. J Virol. 2008 Apr;82(8):4091-101. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02552-07. Epub 2008 Feb 13.

CD4+ target cell availability determines the dynamics of immune escape and
reversion in vivo.

Petravic J(1), Loh L, Kent SJ, Davenport MP.

Author information: 
(1)Complex Systems in Biology Group, Centre for Vascular Research, University of 
New South Wales, Kensington, NSW 2052, Australia.

Infections with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and the closely related monkey
viruses simian-human immunodeficiency virus (SHIV) and simian immunodeficiency
virus (SIV) are characterized by progressive waves of immune responses, followed 
by viral mutation and "immune escape." However, escape mutation usually leads to 
lower replicative fitness, and in the absence of immune pressure, an escape
mutant (EM) virus "reverts" to the wild-type phenotype. Analysis of the dynamics 
of immune escape and reversion has suggested it is a mechanism for identifying
the immunogens best capable of controlling viremia. We have analyzed and modeled 
data of the dynamics of wild-type (WT) and EM viruses during SHIV infection of
macaques. Modeling suggests that the dynamics of reversion and immune escape
should be determined by the availability of target cells for infection.
Consistent with this suggestion, we find that the rate of reversion of cytotoxic 
T-lymphocyte (CTL) EM virus strongly correlates with the number of CD4(+) T cells
available for infection. This phenomenon also affects the rate of immune escape, 
since this rate is determined by the balance of CTL killing and the WT fitness
advantage. This analysis predicts that the optimal timing for the selection of
immune escape variants will be immediately after the peak of viremia and that the
development of escape variants at later times will lead to slower selection. This
has important implications for comparative studies of immune escape and reversion
in different infections and for identifying epitopes with high fitness cost for
use as vaccine targets.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02552-07 
PMCID: PMC2293002
PMID: 18272587  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

