
1. Brain Res. 2008 May 7;1208:25-34. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.02.065. Epub 2008 
Mar 4.

TAT-PAX6 protein transduction in neural progenitor cells: a novel approach for
generation of dopaminergic neurones in vitro.

Spitere K(1), Toulouse A, O'Sullivan DB, Sullivan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience/Anatomy, Biosciences Research Institute, National
University of Ireland Cork, College Road, Cork, Ireland.

Neural stem cells (NSCs) have the potential to be used for the treatment of
Parkinson's disease (PD), as they can be expanded, manipulated and differentiated
in vitro to generate dopaminergic neurones which are suitable for
transplantation. Since NSCs have a tendency to follow an astrocytic lineage after
differentiation in vitro, researchers are investigating ways to induce a neuronal
phenotype in these cells. In this study, the human immunodeficiency virus 1
(HIV-1) transactivator of transcription (TAT) protein transduction domain (PTD)
system was used in an attempt to promote neuronal differentiation in rodent NSCs.
A fusion protein that incorporated both the TAT PTD and the Pax6 protein (a
determinant of neurogenesis) was created and added to the differentiation phase
of embryonic day (E) 12 rat ventral mesencephalic (VM) neurosphere cultures.
Subsequently, application of dopaminergic growth factors (GFs) was used in an
attempt to induce the newly-generated neuronal progenitors to adopt a
dopaminergic phenotype. In addition, a technique involving the differentiation of
intact neurospheres (instead of the differentiation of neurosphere-derived
dissociated cells) was investigated for its ability to promote dopaminergic
neurogenesis. Immunocytochemical analysis of the differentiated neurosphere
cultures indicated that both of these techniques had a significant effect on the 
emergence of dopaminergic neurones. Moreover, upon combination of these
techniques, a further increase in dopaminergic neuronal generation was observed. 
Based on the findings of the present study, it is clear that NSCs are greatly
influenced by their environment and that optimised in vitro conditions can
support the potential of these cells to differentiate into dopaminergic neurones.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.02.065 
PMID: 18387597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

