
1. Virology. 1991 Feb;180(2):633-47.

Vaccinia virus homologues of the Shope fibroma virus inverted terminal repeat
proteins and a discontinuous ORF related to the tumor necrosis factor receptor
family.

Howard ST(1), Chan YS, Smith GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Nucleotide sequencing data from a region extending 35 kb inward from the right
inverted terminal repeat (ITR) of the vaccinia virus (VV) genome established the 
presence of VV homologues of the Shope fibroma virus (SFV) ITR proteins. The
nucleotide sequences, comprising a total of 8.6 kb, and the amino acid
translations for nine predicted open reading frames (ORFs) (designated SalF4L,
SalF 19R, SalF21R, B4R, B8R, B9R, B10R, and B14R) are presented. Eight of the
nine VV genes and all the SFV ORFs are transcribed towards their genomic termini.
However, the relative positions of the VV genes (genus Orthopoxvirus) are
different than those of the corresponding ORFs in SFV (genus Leporipoxvirus),
indicating complex rearrangements of DNA in the genome of one or both of these
viruses subsequent to their divergence from a common ancestor. Several other
features of the VV ORFs were noted. SalF4L, B7R, B8R, and B9R have hydrophobic
amino-terminal signal sequences but lack discernible membrane anchor domains
suggesting that the proteins may be secreted. VV ORF SalF19R has a single
cysteine-rich region homologous to the multiple domains of nerve growth factor
receptor (NGFR), CD40, OX40 (a glycoprotein from the surface of activated murine 
T lymphocytes), and the recently described tumor necrosis factor receptors. Just 
downstream of the ORF SalF19R and in a different reading frame, there are another
two related cysteine-rich domains, indicating that SalF19R was once a larger
gene. B4R has homology to the host range gene of cowpox virus and to related
genes near the opposite end of the vaccinia virus genome, and contains regions
homologous to the repeat domains of erythrocyte ankyrin. In addition, several of 
the VV ORFs have homology to ORFs from near the opposite end of the VV genome,
thus increasing the number of known VV gene families.

DOI: 10.1016/0042-6822(91)90077-o 
PMID: 1846491  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

