
1. Indian J Med Res. 1991 Mar;93:62-6.

Psychiatric morbidity in HIV infected individuals.

Jacob KS(1), Eapen V, John JK, John TJ.

Author information: 
(1)National AIDS Reference & Surveillance Centre, Christian Medical College
Hospital, Vellore.

Forty six subjects infected with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) were
followed up, for recording psychiatric morbidity if any, before and after the
information regarding their HIV status was revealed to them. Among these, four
patients had the AIDS syndrome, while 42 individuals were HIV carriers. The
pre-information morbidity in the AIDS group included two individuals who
presented with delirium and one with an adjustment disorder. The psychiatric
diagnosis among the HIV carriers revealed one patient with major depression, four
with adjustment disorders and four with alcohol dependence syndrome. The
additional morbidity after the diagnoses was revealed included major depression
and adjustment disorders which could be managed by psychological intervention and
counselling in most cases. The individual who developed major depression later,
committed suicide. The study though preliminary in nature, suggests that it may
be beneficial to include psychiatric management as part of the general care of
individuals with HIV infection.

PIP: 46 subjects infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) were followed
up to determine psychiatric morbidity, both prior to and after information
regarding their HIV status was revealed to them. Among these patients, 4 had AIDS
syndrome while 42 individuals were HIV carriers. The preinformation morbidity in 
the AIDS group included 2 individuals who presented with delirium and 1 with an
adjustment disorder. The psychiatric diagnosis among the HIV carriers revealed 1 
patient with major depression, 4 with adjustment disorders, and 4 with alcohol
dependence syndrome. The additional morbidity after the diagnosis was revealed
and included major depression and adjustment disorders which could be managed by 
psychological intervention and counseling in most instance. The individual who
later developed major depression committed suicide. The study, though preliminary
in nature, suggests that it may be beneficial to include psychiatric management
as past of the general care of individuals with HIV infection.

PMID: 1855820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

