
1. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2008;46(7):926-32. doi: 10.1515/CCLM.2008.176.

Strategies of bacteria screening in cellular blood components.

Montag T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Paul Ehrlich Institute, Section Microbial Safety, Langen, Germany.
month@pei.de

Since the impressive reduction of transfusion-transmitted virus infections,
bacterial infections by blood transfusion represent the most important infection 
risk. Platelet concentrates are the current focus of attention, as they are
stored under temperature conditions which allow growth of contaminating bacteria 
up to 10(10) and more microbes per platelet bag. This paper does not consider the
pathogen reduction methods but will assess suitable screening methods. Beside
conventional microbiological approaches or surrogate markers, several efficient
methods able to detect bacterial contamination in platelets are available on the 
market. They need to be divided into two different methodological principles: the
cultivation methods and rapid methods. Cultivation or incubation methods require 
some time for signal production as they depend on growth of microbes. Thus, they 
have to be combined with early sampling, i.e., the sample to be examined has to
be drawn from the blood component 1 day after donation. Their advantage is the
relatively uncomplicated implementation into the logistics of blood banks.
Because of the initially very low count of bacteria after donation, a certain
small sampling error in application of that strategy remains. Rapid methods are
able to produce the diagnosis within a short time. Therefore, they allow
postponing of sample drawing, ideally up to the time immediately before
transfusion. However, this procedure causes logistic complications. On the other 
hand, late sampling combined with a rapid method will prevent the transfusion of 
highly contaminated platelet concentrates leading to acute septic shock up to the
death of the patient. Considering the sum of different aspects including the
supply of patients, the potential improvement of microbial safety of platelet
concentrates is comparable in both strategies.

DOI: 10.1515/CCLM.2008.176 
PMID: 18624615  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

