
1. Adv Anat Pathol. 2008 Sep;15(5):263-78. doi: 10.1097/PAP.0b013e318183234b.

Diagnostic problems in anal pathology.

Longacre TA(1), Kong CS, Welton ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
longacre@stanford.edu

Anal squamous cell carcinoma and its precursor lesions are increasing in
incidence in the United States and Europe. This trend predates human
immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune deficiency syndrome and has been
associated with persistent high-risk human papilloma virus (HPV) genotype
infection, previous lower genital tract dysplasia/carcinoma, high frequency
anoreceptive intercourse, heavy cigarette smoking, immunosuppression in solid
organ transplant and immune disorders, and human immunodeficiency virus
seropositivity. Screening protocols for at-risk patients are under active
investigation and pathologists are often asked to assess anal canal and perianal 
biopsies for the presence of dysplasia and/or invasive carcinoma. Because
underdiagnosis and overdiagnosis of anal cancer and precancer may lead to
inappropriate treatment, it is important for the pathologist to be aware of
current screening strategies, specific risk lesions, and the role of pathology in
initial diagnosis and evaluation of anal biopsy and/or resection specimens.
Standardized histologic criteria and uniform terminology should be used for
reporting all anal canal and perianal squamous intraepithelial lesions. HPV
subtyping, anal cytology, and recently identified biomarkers, such as p16 and
Becton Dickinson ProEx C may provide additional information in problematic cases,
but it is important to be aware of the limitations of these assays. HPV has been 
linked to all the major histologic subtypes of anal carcinoma (eg, basaloid,
cloacogenic, transitional, etc.) and this association is strongest for anal canal
lesions. With the possible exception of the microcystic pattern, histologic
subtype does not seem to predict prognosis; and anal squamous cell carcinomas
should be classified as either keratinizing or nonkeratinizing. Poorly
differentiated squamous cell carcinomas have a worse prognosis and should be
distinguished from poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, melanoma, and
neuroendocrine tumors. Very well differentiated squamous cell carcinoma with
pushing margins (so-called giant condyloma of Buschke and Lowenstein) should be
classified as verrucous carcinoma; this tumor shows aggressive local infiltration
but does not metastasize. As all anal condylomata may harbor foci of high-grade
dysplasia or invasive carcinoma, careful sectioning and complete histologic
examination is required.

DOI: 10.1097/PAP.0b013e318183234b 
PMID: 18724100  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

