
1. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Mar;37(3):145-9.

[Histopathologic study of avian influenza H5N1 infection in humans].

[Article in Chinese]

Lu M(1), Xie ZG, Gao ZC, Wang C, Li N, Li M, Shao HQ, Wang YP, Gao ZF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing
100083, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify histopathologic changes of major organs and to correlate
clinical symptoms in patients infected by avian influenza H5N1.
METHODS: Autopsy study was performed in two patients died of avian influenza HSN1
infection, following conventional protocols and strict safety procedures. Tissue 
samples from all major organs of two cases and lung samples of one case were
collected and fixed in 4% formaldehyde. Histopathologic changes were evaluated by
light microscope.
RESULTS: Diffuse alveolar damage (DAD) of the lung was seen in both cases.
Lesions at various stages of development were seen involving different areas of
the lung. At the early stages, the lungs exhibited exudative changes, including
capillary congestion, necrosis of alveolar epithelial cells, and intra-alveolar
edema. Hyaline membranes were prominent and diffusely distributed along alveoli. 
In the middle-late stages of the disease, the lungs exhibited proliferative and
fibrotic changes, including proliferation of pneumocytes and bronchial
epithelium, fibrosis of the interstitium and alveolar spaces. Lung biopsy tissue 
of one case showed DAD and interstitial fibrosis in a background of
bronchiectasis. Lymph nodes and spleens showed quantity reduction of lymphocytes 
and active hemophagocytosis. Other changes in major organs included interstitial 
carditis in one case and acute renal tubular necrosis in one case. In one case,
the brain showed edema with cytoplasmic eosinophilia, loss of structure, axon
welling and focal necrosis around ventricle. Multiple foci of trophoblastic
necrosis with dystrophic calcification were observed in placenta of one pregnant 
patient. Acute necrotizing deciduitis was found focally. Sections of fetal lung
showed edema and scattered interstitial neutrophils were consistent with acute
interstitial pneumonitis.
CONCLUSIONS: The respiratory tract is the major target of avian influenza A H5N1 
virus infection. The changes of DAD in the lungs resulted in hypoxia, leading to 
multiple organ failure and death.


PMID: 18788588  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

