
1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Dec 5;283(49):33826-37. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806897200. Epub 2008 
Oct 10.

The cotranslational maturation program for the type II membrane glycoprotein
influenza neuraminidase.

Wang N(1), Glidden EJ, Murphy SR, Pearse BR, Hebert DN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst, MA 01003, USA.

The earliest steps in nascent protein maturation greatly affect its overall
efficiency. Constraints placed on maturing proteins at these early stages limit
available conformations and help to direct the native maturation process. For
type II membrane proteins, these cotranslational constraints include N- and
C-terminal membrane tethering, chaperone binding, and disulfide bond formation.
The cotranslational maturation process for the type II membrane glycoprotein
influenza neuraminidase (NA) was investigated to provide a deeper understanding
of these initial endoplasmic reticulum events. The type II orientation provides
experimental advantages to monitor the first maturation steps. Calnexin was shown
to cotranslationally interact with NA prior to calreticulin. These interactions
were required for the efficient maturation of NA as it prematurely formed
intramolecular disulfides and aggregated when calnexin and calreticulin
interactions were abolished. Lectin chaperone binding slowed the NA maturation
process, increasing its fidelity. Carbohydrates were required for NA maturation
in a regio-specific manner. A subset of NA formed intermolecular disulfides and
oligomerized cotranslationally. This fraction increased in the absence of
calnexin and calreticulin binding. NA dimerization also occurred for an NA mutant
lacking the critical large loop disulfide bond, indicating that dimerization did 
not require proper NA oxidation. The strict evaluation of proper maturation
carried out by the quality control machinery was instilled at the tetramerization
step. This study illustrates the type II membrane protein maturation process and 
shows how important cotranslational events contribute to the proper cellular
maturation of glycoproteins.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M806897200 
PMCID: PMC2590707
PMID: 18849342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

