
1. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2009 Jun;4(2):190-9. doi: 10.1007/s11481-009-9152-8.
Epub 2009 Mar 17.

Increased accumulation of intraneuronal amyloid beta in HIV-infected patients.

Achim CL(1), Adame A, Dumaop W, Everall IP, Masliah E; Neurobehavioral Research
Center.

Collaborators: Grant I, Atkinson JH, Ellis RJ, McCutchan JA, Marcotte TD, Sherman
M, Hale BR, Ellis RJ, McCutchan JA, Letendre S, Capparelli E, Schrier R,
Marquie-Beck J, Alexander T, Durelle J, Heaton RK, Cherner M, Woods SP, Moore DJ,
Dawson M, Jernigan T, Fennema-Notestine C, Archibald SL, Hesselink J, Annese J,
Taylor MJ, Schweinsburg B, Masliah E, Everall IP, Achim CL, Richman D, Smith DM, 
McCutchan JA, Everall IP, Lipton S, McCutchan JA, Atkinson JH, Ellis RJ, Letendre
S, Atkinson JH, von Jaeger R, Gamst AC, Cushman C, Masys DR, Abramson I, Vaida F,
Ake C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, CA 92093-0624, 
USA.

In recent years, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected patients under
highly active anti-retroviral therapy (HAART) regimens have shown a markedly
improved general clinical status; however, the prevalence of mild cognitive
disorders has increased. We propose that increased longevity with HIV-mediated
chronic inflammation combined with the secondary effects of HAART may increase
the risk of early brain aging as shown by intraneuronal accumulation of abnormal 
protein aggregates like amyloid beta (Abeta), which might participate in
worsening the neurodegenerative process and cognitive impairment in older
patients with HIV. For this purpose, levels and distribution of Abeta
immunoreactivity were analyzed in the frontal cortex of 43 patients with HIV
(ages 38-60) and HIV- age-matched controls. Subcellular localization of the
Abeta-immunoreactive material was analyzed by double labeling and confocal
microscopy and by immunono-electron microscopy (EM). Compared to HIV- cases, in
HIV+ cases, there was abundant intracellular Abeta immunostaining in pyramidal
neurons and along axonal tracts. Cases with HIV encephalitis (HIVE) had higher
levels of intraneuronal Abeta immunoreactivity compared to HIV+ cases with no
HIVE. Moreover, levels of intracellular Abeta correlated with age in the group
with HIVE. Double-labeling analysis showed that the Abeta-immunoreactive granules
in the neurons co-localized with lysosomal markers such as cathepsin-D and LC3.
Ultrastructural analysis by immuno-EM has confirmed that in these cases,
intracellular Abeta was often found in structures displaying morphology similar
to autophagosomes. These findings suggest that long-term survival with HIV might 
interfere with clearance of proteins such as Abeta and worsen neuronal damage and
cognitive impairment in this population.

DOI: 10.1007/s11481-009-9152-8 
PMCID: PMC3055557
PMID: 19288297  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

