
1. PLoS One. 2009 Jul 7;4(7):e6149. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006149.

Evolutionary insights from a genetically divergent hantavirus harbored by the
European common mole (Talpa europaea).

Kang HJ(1), Bennett SN, Sumibcay L, Arai S, Hope AG, Mocz G, Song JW, Cook JA,
Yanagihara R.

Author information: 
(1)Pacific Center for Emerging Infectious Diseases Research, John A Burns School 
of Medicine, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI, USA.

BACKGROUND: The discovery of genetically distinct hantaviruses in shrews (Order
Soricomorpha, Family Soricidae) from widely separated geographic regions
challenges the hypothesis that rodents (Order Rodentia, Family Muridae and
Cricetidae) are the primordial reservoir hosts of hantaviruses and also predicts 
that other soricomorphs harbor hantaviruses. Recently, novel hantavirus genomes
have been detected in moles of the Family Talpidae, including the Japanese shrew 
mole (Urotrichus talpoides) and American shrew mole (Neurotrichus gibbsii). We
present new insights into the evolutionary history of hantaviruses gained from a 
highly divergent hantavirus, designated Nova virus (NVAV), identified in the
European common mole (Talpa europaea) captured in Hungary.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Pair-wise alignment and comparison of the
full-length S- and L-genomic segments indicated moderately low sequence
similarity of 54-65% and 46-63% at the nucleotide and amino acid levels,
respectively, between NVAV and representative rodent- and soricid-borne
hantaviruses. Despite the high degree of sequence divergence, the predicted
secondary structure of the NVAV nucleocapsid protein exhibited the characteristic
coiled-coil domains at the amino-terminal end, and the L-segment motifs,
typically found in hantaviruses, were well conserved. Phylogenetic analyses,
using maximum-likelihood and Bayesian methods, showed that NVAV formed a distinct
clade that was evolutionarily distant from all other hantaviruses.
CONCLUSIONS: Newly identified hantaviruses harbored by shrews and moles support
long-standing virus-host relationships and suggest that ancestral soricomorphs,
rather than rodents, may have been the early or original mammalian hosts.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006149 
PMCID: PMC2702001
PMID: 19582155  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

