
1. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2009 Aug 12;9:31. doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-9-31.

Acupuncture in acute herpes zoster pain therapy (ACUZoster) - design and protocol
of a randomised controlled trial.

Fleckenstein J(1), Kramer S, Hoffrogge P, Thoma S, Lang PM, Lehmeyer L, Schober
GM, Pfab F, Ring J, Weisenseel P, Schotten KJ, Mansmann U, Irnich D.

Author information: 
(1)Multidisciplinary Pain Centre, Department of Anaesthesiology, University of
Munich, Munich, Germany. johannes.fleckenstein@med.uni-muenchen.de

BACKGROUND: Acute herpes zoster is a prevalent condition. One of its major
symptoms is pain, which can highly influence patient's quality of life. Pain
therapy is limited. Acupuncture is supposed to soften neuropathic pain conditions
and might therefore act as a therapeutic alternative. Objective of the present
study is to investigate whether a 4 week semi-standardised acupuncture is
non-inferior to sham laser acupuncture and the anticonvulsive drug gabapentine in
the treatment of pain associated with herpes zoster.
METHODS/DESIGN: Three-armed, randomised, placebo-controlled trial with a total
follow-up time of 6 months. Up to estimated 336 patients (interim analyses) with 
acute herpes zoster pain (VAS > 30 mm) will be randomised to one of three groups 
(a) semi-standardised acupuncture (168 patients); (b) gabapentine with
individualised dosage between 900-3600 mg/d (84 patients); (c) sham laser
acupuncture. Intervention takes place over 4 weeks, all patients will receive
analgesic therapy (non-opioid analgesics: metamizol or paracetamol and opioids:
tramadol or morphine). Therapy phase includes 4 weeks in which group (a) and (c) 
consist of 12 sessions per patient, (b) visits depend on patients needs. Main
outcome measure is to assess the alteration of pain intensity before and 1 week
after treatment sessions (visual analogue scale VAS 0-100 mm). Secondary outcome 
measure are: alteration of pain intensity and frequency of pain attacks;
alteration of different aspects of pain evaluated by standardised pain
questionnaires (NPI, PDI, SES); effects on quality of life (SF 36); analgesic
demand; alteration of sensoric perception by systematic quantitative sensory
testing (QST); incidence of postherpetic neuralgia; side effects and cost
effectiveness. Credibility of treatments will be assessed.
DISCUSSION: This study is the first large-scale randomised placebo controlled
trial to evaluate the efficacy of acupuncture compared to gabapentine and sham
treatment and will provide valuable new information about the clinical and
physiological effects of acupuncture and gabapentine in the treatment of acute
herpes zoster pain. The study has been pragmatically designed to ensure that the 
study findings can be implemented into clinical practice if acupuncture can be
shown to be an effective treatment strategy in acute herpes zoster pain.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT00885586.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6882-9-31 
PMCID: PMC2739152
PMID: 19674449  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

