
1. J Clin Microbiol. 1990 Apr;28(4):724-33.

Detection and quantitation of human immunodeficiency virus-infected peripheral
blood mononuclear cells by flow cytometry.

McSharry JJ(1), Costantino R, Robbiano E, Echols R, Stevens R, Lehman JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Albany Medical College, New York 12208.

A flow cytometric assay has been developed to detect and quantitate human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected peripheral blood mononuclear cells obtained
from HIV-seropositive patients. Peripheral blood was obtained from patients
attending an acquired immune deficiency syndrome clinic, and mononuclear cells
were separated by centrifugation onto Ficoll-Hypaque. The cell layer at the
interface was removed, washed in phosphate-buffered saline without Ca2+ and Mg2+,
and fixed with 90% methanol, and intracellular HIV antigens were detected by
indirect immunofluorescence with monoclonal antibodies to HIV antigens as the
primary antibody and fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated goat anti-mouse
immunoglobulin G F(ab')2 antibody as the secondary antibody. DNA content was
determined by propidium diiodide staining after RNase treatment. These
fluorochrome-treated cells were analyzed for two-color fluorescence by flow
cytometry. The results showed that HIV-infected cells in peripheral blood that
have been treated with monoclonal antibodies to the p24 or nef antigens of HIV
can be detected and quantitated by flow cytometry. The percentage of p24
antigen-positive mononuclear cells had a significant correlation (P = 0.0001)
with the clinical status of the patient, i.e., those with a high percentage of
p24 antigen-positive cells had a poorer prognosis than those with a lower
percentage of p24 antigen-positive mononuclear cells. In addition, for those in
Centers for Disease Control groups III and IV, there was an inverse correlation
between the percentage of p24 antigen-positive mononuclear cells and the number
of T4 cells. However, cell-associated antigen detection by flow cytometry did not
correlate with detection of antigen in sera of HIV-seropositive patients by the
standard antigen capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. This lack of
correlation was probably due to the presence of immune complexes in the sera of
HIV-seropositive patients. These results suggest that flow cytometry can be used 
as a rapid, sensitive, and quantitative assay system for the determination of the
antigen status of HIV-seropositive patients and that it may be more useful as an 
indicator of disease progression than the currently used antigen detection
methods.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.28.4.724-733.1990 
PMCID: PMC267784
PMID: 1970576  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

