
1. PLoS One. 2010 Mar 5;5(3):e9567. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009567.

TGFbeta1 stimulates the over-production of white matter astrocytes from
precursors of the "brain marrow" in a rodent model of neonatal encephalopathy.

Bain JM(1), Ziegler A, Yang Z, Levison SW, Sen E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurosciences, UH Cancer Center and the Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences, New Jersey Medical School, University of Medicine 
and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: In children born prematurely and those surviving cerebral ischemia
there are white matter abnormalities that correlate with neurological
dysfunction. Since this injury occurs in the immature brain, when the majority of
subventricular zone (SVZ) cells generate white matter oligodendrocytes, we sought
to study the effect this injury has on gliogenesis from the SVZ. We hypothesized 
that there is aberrant glial cell generation from the SVZ after neonatal hypoxia 
ischemia (H/I) that contributes to an increased astrogliogenesis with concomitant
oligodendroglial insufficiency. Mechanistically we hypothesized that an increase 
in specific locally produced cytokines during recovery from injury were modifying
the differentiation of glial progenitors towards astrocytes at the expense of the
more developmentally-appropriate oligodendrocytes.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDING: For these studies we used the Vannucci H/I rat
model where P6 rats are subjected to unilateral common carotid ligation followed 
by 75 min of systemic hypoxia. Retroviral lineage tracing studies combined with
morphological and immunohistochemical analyses revealed the preferential
generation of SVZ-derived white matter astrocytes instead of oligodendrocytes
post hypoxia/ischemia. Microarray and QRT-PCR analyses of the damaged SVZ showed 
increased expression of several cytokines and receptors that are known to promote
astrocyte differentiation, such as EGF, LIF and TGFbeta1 signaling components.
Using gliospheres to model the neonatal SVZ, we evaluated the effects of these
cytokines on signal transduction pathways regulating astrocyte generation,
proliferation and differentiation. These studies demonstrated that combinations
of EGF, LIF and TGFbeta1 reconstituted the increased astrogliogenesis.
TGFbeta1-induced Smad 2/3 phosphorylation and the combination of EGF, LIF and
TGFbeta1 synergistically increased STAT3 phosphorylation over single or double
cytokine combinations. Pharmacologically inhibiting ALK5 signaling in vitro
antagonized the TGFbeta1-induced increase in astrocyte generation and
antagonizing ALK5 signaling in vivo similarly inhibited astrogliogenesis within
the SVZ during recovery from H/I.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Altogether, these data indicate that there is aberrant
specification of glial precursors within the neonatal SVZ during recovery from
neonatal H/I that is a consequence of altered cytokine signaling. Our studies
further suggest that antagonizing the ALK5 receptor will restore the normal
pattern of cell differentiation after injury to the immature brain.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009567 
PMCID: PMC2832687
PMID: 20221422  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

