
1. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2010 Feb;33(2):86-92.

[Report of 2 cases of novel influenza A (H1N1) virus infection complicated with
pneumonia and hypoxemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Dai JH(1), Cai HR, Yang YF, Teng CQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, the Affiliated Gulou Hospital of Nanjing
University, Nanjing 210008, China.

OBJECTIVE: to improve understanding of the novel influenza A (H1N1) virus
infection complicated with pneumonia.
METHOD: clinical presentations, radiological data, laboratory data and treatments
of 2 patients with pneumonia caused by the novel influenza A (H1N1) virus were
retrospectively analyzed.
RESULTS: one patient was a middle-aged woman, and the other was a young man with 
a history of asthma. Both patients had fever (temperatures more than 39 degrees
C), cough, and dyspnea. At the time of admission, both patients had hypoxemia.
Chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed patchy distribution of consolidation
and ground-glass opacity mainly in peripheral subpleural regions, as well as
peribrochovascular lesions with air-bronchogram. The decreased and lymphocytes,
elevated lactate dehydrogenase and creatine kinase were found in both patients.
After admission, the patients received oseltamivir with a dose of 75 mg twice a
day for a minimum of 5 days. Other treatments included antibiotics and
methylprednisolone. One patient needed intermittent non-invasive ventilation for 
respiratory distress. Both patients recovered and the opacities on their chest CT
were almost absorbed. WBC counts increased to normal and the levels of LDH and CK
decreased.
CONCLUSIONS: patients with the novel influenza A (H1N1) virus infection may
develop pneumonia. The manifestations are non-specific. Chest CT scan reveals
patchy distribution of consolidation and ground-glass opacity. In addition to
antiviral therapy, glucocorticoids may have some effects on the pulmonary lesions
and be useful for improving the clinical conditions.


PMID: 20367946  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

