
1. J Neurosci. 2010 Oct 20;30(42):14153-64. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1042-10.2010.

Human immunodeficiency virus-1 Tat activates calpain proteases via the ryanodine 
receptor to enhance surface dopamine transporter levels and increase
transporter-specific uptake and Vmax.

Perry SW(1), Barbieri J, Tong N, Polesskaya O, Pudasaini S, Stout A, Lu R,
Kiebala M, Maggirwar SB, Gelbard HA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neural Development and Disease, Department of Neurology, Child
Neurology Division, Graduate Program in Pathology, and Department of Microbiology
and Immunology, University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry,
Rochester, New York 14642, USA. seth_perry@urmc.rochester.edu

Human immunodeficiency virus-associated neurological disease (HAND) still causes 
significant morbidity, despite success reducing viral loads with combination
antiretroviral therapy. The dopamine (DA) system is particularly vulnerable in
HAND. We hypothesize that early, "reversible" DAergic synaptic dysfunction occurs
long before DAergic neuron loss. As such, aging human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV)-infected individuals may be vulnerable to other age-related
neurodegenerative diseases like Parkinson's disease (PD), underscoring the need
to understand shared molecular targets in HAND and PD. Previously, we reported
that the neurotoxic HIV-1 transactivating factor (Tat) acutely disrupts
mitochondrial and endoplasmic reticulum calcium homeostasis via ryanodine
receptor (RyR) activation. Here, we further report that Tat disrupts DA
transporter (DAT) activity and function, resulting in increased plasma membrane
(PM) DAT and increased DAT V(max), without changes in K(m) or total DAT protein. 
Tat also increases calpain protease activity at the PM, demonstrated by total
internal reflection fluorescence microscopy of a cleavable fluorescent calpain
substrate. Tat-increased PM DAT and calpain activity are blocked by the RyR
antagonists ryanodine and dantrolene, the calpain inhibitor calpastatin, and by a
specific inhibitor of GSK-3β. We conclude that Tat activates RyRs via a calcium- 
and calpain-mediated mechanism that upregulates DAT trafficking to the PM, and is
independent of DAT protein synthesis, reinforcing the feasibility of RyR and
GSK-3β inhibition as clinical therapeutic approaches for HAND. Finally, we
provide key translational relevance for these findings by highlighting published 
human data of increased DAT levels in striata of HAND patients and by
demonstrating similar findings in Tat-expressing transgenic mice.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1042-10.2010 
PMCID: PMC2972730
PMID: 20962236  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

