
1. Biotechnol Prog. 2011 Mar-Apr;27(2):483-93. doi: 10.1002/btpr.565. Epub 2011 Mar 
18.

Intracellular localization of adeno-associated viral proteins expressed in insect
cells.

Gallo-Ramírez LE(1), Ramírez OT, Palomares LA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Medicina Molecular y Bioprocesos, Instituto de Biotecnología, 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Apdo. Postal. 510-3, Cuernavaca Morelos 
CP. 62250, México.

Production of vectors derived from adeno-associated virus (AAVv) in insect cells 
represents a feasible option for large-scale applications. However, transducing
particles yields obtained in this system are low compared with total capsid
yields, suggesting the presence of genome encapsidation bottlenecks. Three
components are required for AAVv production: viral capsid proteins (VP), the
recombinant AAV genome, and Rep proteins for AAV genome replication and
encapsidation. Little is known about the interaction between the three components
in insect cells, which have intracellular conditions different to those in
mammalian cells. In this work, the localization of AAV proteins in insect cells
was assessed for the first time with the purpose of finding potential limiting
factors. Unassembled VP were located either in the cytoplasm or in the nucleus.
Their transport into the nucleus was dependent on protein concentration. Empty
capsids were located in defined subnuclear compartments. Rep proteins expressed
individually were efficiently translocated into the nucleus. Their intranuclear
distribution was not uniform and differed from VP distribution. While Rep52
distribution and expression levels were not affected by AAV genomes or VP, Rep78 
distribution and stability changed during coexpression. Expression of all AAV
components modified capsid intranuclear distribution, and assembled VP were found
in vesicles located in the nuclear periphery. Such vesicles were related to
baculovirus infection, highlighting its role in AAVv production in insect cells. 
The results obtained in this work suggest that the intracellular distribution of 
AAV proteins allows their interaction and does not limit vector production in
insect cells.

Copyright © 2011 American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE).

DOI: 10.1002/btpr.565 
PMID: 21425251  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

