
1. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2012 Jan;71(1):15-27. doi:
10.1097/NEN.0b013e31823cfac5.

Lentiviral infection of rhesus macaques causes long-term injury to cortical and
hippocampal projections of prostaglandin-expressing cholinergic basal forebrain
neurons.

Depboylu C(1), Weihe E, Eiden LE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
Philipps University, Marburg, Germany.

The simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) macaque model resembles human
immunodeficiency virus-acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and associated
brain dysfunction. Altered expression of synaptic markers and transmitters in
neuro-AIDS has been reported, but limited data exist for the cholinergic system
and lipid mediators such as prostaglandins. Here, we analyzed cholinergic basal
forebrain neurons with their telencephalic projections and the rate-limiting
enzymes for prostaglandin synthesis, cyclooxygenase isotypes 1 and 2 (COX1 and
COX2) in the brains of SIV-infected macaques with or without encephalitis and
antiretroviral therapy and uninfected controls.Cyclooxygenase isotype 1, but not 
COX2, was coexpressed with markers of cholinergic phenotype, that is, choline
acetyltransferase and vesicular acetylcholine transporter (VAChT), in basal
forebrain neurons of monkey, as well as human, brain. Cyclooxygenase isotype 1
was decreased in basal forebrain neurons in macaques with AIDS versus uninfected 
and asymptomatic SIV-infected macaques. The VAChT-positive fiber density was
reduced in frontal, parietal, and hippocampal-entorhinal cortex. Although brain
SIV burden and associated COX1- and COX2-positive mononuclear and endothelial
inflammatory reactions were mostly reversed in AIDS-diseased macaques that
received 6-chloro-2',3'-dideoxyguanosine treatment, decreased VAChT-positive
terminal density and reduced cholinergic COX1 expression were not. Thus, COX1
expression is a feature of primate cholinergic basal forebrain neurons; it may be
functionally important and a critical biomarker of cholinergic dysregulation
accompanying lentiviral encephalopathy. These results further imply that
insufficiently prompt initiation of antiretroviral therapy in lentiviral
infection may lead to neurostructurally unremarkable but neurochemically
prominent irreversible brain damage.

DOI: 10.1097/NEN.0b013e31823cfac5 
PMCID: PMC3258462
PMID: 22157616  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

