
1. J Vis Exp. 2011 Dec 1;(58). pii: 3264. doi: 10.3791/3264.

Prediction of HIV-1 coreceptor usage (tropism) by sequence analysis using a
genotypic approach.

Sierra S(1), Kaiser R, Lübke N, Thielen A, Schuelter E, Heger E, Däumer M, Reuter
S, Esser S, Fätkenheuer G, Pfister H, Oette M, Lengauer T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, University of Cologne.

Maraviroc (MVC) is the first licensed antiretroviral drug from the class of
coreceptor antagonists. It binds to the host coreceptor CCR5, which is used by
the majority of HIV strains in order to infect the human immune cells (Fig. 1).
Other HIV isolates use a different coreceptor, the CXCR4. Which receptor is used,
is determined in the virus by the Env protein (Fig. 2). Depending on the
coreceptor used, the viruses are classified as R5 or X4, respectively. MVC binds 
to the CCR5 receptor inhibiting the entry of R5 viruses into the target cell.
During the course of disease, X4 viruses may emerge and outgrow the R5 viruses.
Determination of coreceptor usage (also called tropism) is therefore mandatory
prior to administration of MVC, as demanded by EMA and FDA. The studies for MVC
efficiency MOTIVATE, MERIT and 1029 have been performed with the Trofile assay
from Monogram, San Francisco, U.S.A. This is a high quality assay based on
sophisticated recombinant tests. The acceptance for this test for daily routine
is rather low outside of the U.S.A., since the European physicians rather tend to
work with decentralized expert laboratories, which also provide concomitant
resistance testing. These laboratories have undergone several quality assurance
evaluations, the last one being presented in 2011. For several years now, we have
performed tropism determinations based on sequence analysis from the HIV env-V3
gene region (V3). This region carries enough information to perform a reliable
prediction. The genotypic determination of coreceptor usage presents advantages
such as: shorter turnover time (equivalent to resistance testing), lower costs,
possibility to adapt the results to the patients' needs and possibility of
analysing clinical samples with very low or even undetectable viral load (VL),
particularly since the number of samples analysed with VL < 1000 copies/μl
roughly increased in the last years (Fig. 3). The main steps for tropism testing 
(Fig. 4) demonstrated in this video: Collection of a blood sample Isolation of
the HIV RNA from the plasma and/or HIV proviral DNA from blood mononuclear cells 
Amplification of the env region Amplification of the V3 region Sequence reaction 
of the V3 amplicon Purification of the sequencing samples Sequencing the purified
samples Sequence editing Sequencing data interpretation and tropism prediction.

DOI: 10.3791/3264 
PMCID: PMC3369655
PMID: 22157596  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

