
1. Vaccine. 2012 Jan 20;30(5):837-45. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.12.034. Epub 2011 
Dec 15.

Protective immunity to DENV2 after immunization with a recombinant NS1 protein
using a genetically detoxified heat-labile toxin as an adjuvant.

Amorim JH(1), Diniz MO, Cariri FA, Rodrigues JF, Bizerra RS, Gonçalves AJ, de
Barcelos Alves AM, de Souza Ferreira LC.

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine Development Laboratory, Department of Microbiology, University of São 
Paulo, Brazil.

The dengue virus non-structural 1 (NS1) protein contributes to evasion of host
immune defenses and represents a target for immune responses. Evidences generated
in experimental models, as well as the immune responses elicited by infected
individuals, showed that induction of anti-NS1 immunity correlates with
protective immunity but may also result in the generation of cross-reactive
antibodies that recognize platelets and proteins involved in the coagulation
cascade. In the present work, we evaluated the immune responses, protection to
type 2 dengue virus (DENV2) challenges and safety parameters in BALB/c mice
vaccinated with a recombinant NS1 protein in combination with three different
adjuvants: aluminum hydroxide (alum), Freund's adjuvant (FA) or a genetically
detoxified derivative of the heat-labile toxin (LT(G33D)), originally produced by
some enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) strains. Mice were subcutaneously
(s.c.) immunized with different vaccine formulations and the induced NS1-specific
responses, including serum antibodies and T cell responses, were measured. Mice
were also subjected to lethal challenges with the DENV2 NGC strain. The results
showed that maximal protective immunity (50%) was achieved in mice vaccinated
with NS1 in combination with LT(G33D). Analyses of the NS1-specific immune
responses showed that the anti-virus protection correlated mainly with the serum 
anti-NS1 antibody responses including higher avidity to the target antigen. Mice 
immunized with LT(G33D) elicited a prevailing IgG2a subclass response and
generated antibodies with stronger affinity to the antigen than those generated
in mice immunized with the other vaccine formulations. The vaccine formulations
were also evaluated regarding induction of deleterious side effects and, in
contrast to mice immunized with the FA-adjuvanted vaccine, no significant hepatic
damage or enhanced C-reactive protein levels were detected in mice immunized with
NS1 and LT(G33D.) Similarly, no detectable alterations in bleeding time and
hematological parameters were detected in mice vaccinated with NS1 and LT(G33D). 
Altogether, these results indicate that the combination of a purified recombinant
NS1 and a nontoxic LT derivative is a promising alternative for the generation of
safe and effective protein-based anti-dengue vaccine.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.12.034 
PMID: 22178517  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

