
1. J Pharm Pharm Sci. 2012;15(1):52-72.

Nonclassical biological activities of quinolone derivatives.

Ahmed A(1), Daneshtalab M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's,
Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada.

Quinolones are considered as a big family of multi-faceted drugs; their chemical 
synthesis is flexible and can be easily adapted to prepare new congeners with
rationally devised structures. This is shown by the description of many thousands
of derivatives in the literature. Scientists could accurately describe their
QSAR, which is essential for effective drug design. This also gave them the
chance to discover new and unprecedented activities, which makes quinolones an
endless source of hope and enables further development of new clinically useful
drugs. Quinolones are among the most common frameworks present in the bioactive
molecules that have dominated the market for more than four decades. Since 1962, 
4(1H)-quinolone-3-carboxylic acid derivatives are widely used as antibacterial
agents. Quinolones have a broad and potent spectrum of activity and are also used
as second-line drugs to treat tuberculosis (TB). Recently, quinolones have been
reported to display "nonclassical" biological activities, such as antitumor,
anti-HIV-1 integrase, anti-HCV-NS3 helicase and -NS5B-polymerase activities. The 
present review focuses on the structural modifications responsible for the
transformation of an antibacterial into an anticancer agent and/or an antiviral
agent. Indeed, quinolones' antimicrobial action is distinguishable among
antibacterial agents, because they target different type II topoisomerase
enzymes. Many derivatives of this family show high activity against bacterial
topoisomerases and eukaryotic topoisomerases, and are also toxic to cultured
mammalian cells and in vivo tumor models. Moreover, quinolones have shown
antiviral activity against HIV and HCV viruses. In this context the quinolones
family of drugs seem to link three different biological activities
(antibacterial, anticancer, and the antiviral profiles) and the review will also 
provide an insight into the different mechanisms responsible for these activities
among different species.

DOI: 10.18433/j3302n 
PMID: 22365088  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

