
1. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2011;12(11):2811-7.

Enhanced induction of anti-tumor CTLs in vitro by a lentivirus-transduced
dendritic cell vaccine expressing secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine and mucin
1.

Wang B(1), Zhu Y, Zhang JJ, Chen Z, Liang WB, Xu ZK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China.

AIMS: Dendritic cell (DC)-based cancer immunotherapy requires an immunogenic
tumor associated antigen (TAA) and an effective strategy for its presentation to 
lymphocytes. Here, we explored whether transduction of DCs with lentiviruses
(LVs) expressing a fusion protein of secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine (SLC)
and mucin 1 (MUC1) could stimulate antigen-specific cytotoxic T cells (CTLs) to
human cancer cells in vitro.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: HLA-A2+ peripheral blood monocyte-derived DCs were
transduced with recombinant lentiviruses LV at different multiplicities of
infection (MOI), and MUC1, SLC or SLC-MUC1 mRNA and protein were detected by
RT-PCR and Western blotting, respectively. Transduction efficiencies and
phenotypes of DCs were evaluated by flow cytometry. Induction of T lymphocyte
proliferation by DCs was examined with a Cell Count Kit-8 (CCK-8). CTL activities
against tumor cells were analyzed by lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) cytotoxicity and
enzyme-linked immunospot (ELISPOT) assays.
RESULTS: Stable expression of MUC1, SLC and SLC-MUC1 was obtained in DCs
transduced with recombinant LVs, and the transduction efficiencies were
dose-dependent. Transduction with LVs did not appreciably change the DC
phenotype. CTL induced by LV MUC1 DCs potently and specifically lysed the
HLA-A2+, MUC1+colon cancer cell line HCT-116. Moreover, this cytolytic activity
against HCT-116 was enhanced with CTL stimulated by LV SLC-MUC1 DCs.
CONCLUSIONS: DCs transduced with MUC1 could induce effective cytolytic activity
against tumor cells in an antigen-specific and HLA-restricted fashion in vitro,
and SLC promoted MUC1-specific anti-tumor activity. The transduction of DCs with 
LV SLC- MUC1 may be a promising strategy in DC-based cancer immunotherapy.


PMID: 22393946  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

