
1. Pharmacotherapy. 2012 Feb;32(2):173-90. doi: 10.1002/PHAR.1046.

Boceprevir: a novel NS3/4 protease inhibitor for the treatment of hepatitis C.

Klibanov OM(1), Vickery SB, Olin JL, Smith LS, Williams SH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Wingate University, Wingate, North Carolina 28174, USA.
o.klibanov@wingate.edu

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection affects over 170 million people worldwide and
is the most common blood-borne infection in the United States. Standard treatment
with peginterferon alfa-ribavirin results in low sustained virologic response
(SVR) rates in many patients, especially those who are African-American, are
coinfected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), or have liver cirrhosis.
Because of suboptimal SVR rates, new direct-acting antiviral agents that target
HCV viral replication steps are in development. Boceprevir is one of the novel
NS3/4A protease inhibitors that was recently approved by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration. We evaluated the literature regarding boceprevir by performing a 
MEDLINE search (January 1996-July 2011) to identify relevant clinical trials.
Abstracts and poster and oral presentations from hepatology and HIV conferences
were also reviewed. Potent anti-HCV activity was seen in clinical trials with
boceprevir when it was studied in HCV genotype 1-infected patients who were naïve
to or had experience with HCV therapy. Data with boceprevir in HIV-HCV-coinfected
patients are currently lacking; however, initial data on drug-drug interactions
between boceprevir and antiretrovirals have become available. Resistance to
boceprevir has been evaluated in trials as well, although more data are needed in
this area. The most common adverse events with boceprevir included anemia and
dysgeusia. Based on available data, boceprevir is one of the promising novel
direct-acting antiviral agents that will likely reshape the treatment of patients
with HCV infection.

© 2012 Pharmacotherapy Publications, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/PHAR.1046 
PMID: 22392426  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

