
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;890:289-303. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-876-4_17.

Application of quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation monitoring technology
for studying interactions of poxviral proteins with their ligands.

Kulkarni AP(1), Kellaway LA, Kotwal GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Anatomical Pathology, Department of Clinical Laboratory sciences, 
Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.

Poxviruses are one of the most complex of animal viruses and encode for over 150 
proteins. The interactions of many of the poxviral-encoded proteins with host
proteins, as well as with other proteins, such as transcription complexes, have
been well characterized at the qualitative level. Some have also been
characterized quantitatively by two hybrid systems and surface plasmon resonance 
approaches. Presented here is an alternative approach that can enable the
understanding of complex interactions with multiple ligands. The example given is
that of vaccinia virus complement control protein (VCP). The complement system
forms the first line of defense against microorganisms and a failure to
appropriately regulate it is implicated in many inflammatory disorders, such as
traumatic brain injury, Alzheimer's disease (AD), and rheumatoid arthritis. The
complement component C3 is central to the complement activation. Complement
regulatory proteins, capable of binding to the central complement component C3,
may therefore effectively be employed for the treatment and prevention of these
disorders. There are many biochemical and/or immunoassays available to study the 
interaction of proteins with complement components. However, protocols for many
of them are time consuming, and not all assays are useful for multiple screening.
In addition, most of these assays may not give information regarding the nature
of binding, the number of molecules interacting with the complement component C3,
as well as kinetics of binding. Some of the assays may require labeling which may
induce changes in protein confirmation. We report a protocol for an assay based
on quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation monitoring (QCM-D) technology,
which can effectively be employed to study poxviral proteins for their ability to
interact with their ligand. A protocol was developed in our laboratories to study
the interaction of VCP with the complement component C3 using Q-sense (D-300),
equipment based on QCM-D technology. The protocol can also be used as a prototype
for studying both proteins and small-sized compounds (for use as anti-poxvirals) 
for their ability to interact with and/or inhibit the activity of their ligands.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-61779-876-4_17 
PMID: 22688774  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

