
1. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2012 Sep;19(9):1416-25. doi: 10.1128/CVI.00131-12. Epub
2012 Jul 11.

Enhanced priming of adaptive immunity by Mycobacterium smegmatis mutants with
high-level protein secretion.

Taylor N(1), Bahunde F, Thompson A, Yu JS, Jacobs WR Jr, Letvin NL, Haynes BF,
Lee S.

Author information: 
(1)Duke University School of Medicine, Human Vaccine Institute, Durham, NC, USA.

Mycobacteria have features that make them attractive as potential vaccine
vectors. The nonpathogenic and rapidly growing Mycobacterium smegmatis can
express both Mycobacterium tuberculosis antigens and heterologous antigens from
other pathogens, and it has been used as a viable vector for the development of
live vaccines. In order to further improve antigen-specific immunogenicity of M. 
smegmatis, we screened a random transposon mutant library for mutants displaying 
enhanced efficiency of protein secretion ("high secretors") and isolated 61
mutants showing enhanced endogenic and transgenic protein secretion. Sequence
analysis identified a total of 54 genes involved in optimal secretion of insert
proteins, as well as multiple independent transposon insertions localized within 
the same genomic loci and operons. The majority of transposon insertions occurred
in genes that have no known protein secretion function. These transposon mutants 
were shown to prime antigen-specific CD8(+) T cell responses better than the
parental strain. Specifically, upon introducing the simian immunodeficiency virus
(SIV) gag gene into these transposon mutant strains, we observed that they primed
SIV Gag-specific CD8(+) T cell responses significantly better than the control
prime immunization in a heterologous prime/boost regimen. Our results reveal a
dependence on bacterial secretion of mycobacterial and foreign antigens for the
induction of antigen-specific CD8(+) T cells in vivo. The data also suggest that 
these M. smegmatis transposon mutants could be used as novel live attenuated
vaccine strains to express foreign antigens, such as those of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1), and induce strong antigen-specific T cell 
responses.

DOI: 10.1128/CVI.00131-12 
PMCID: PMC3428392
PMID: 22787192  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

