
1. Curr Drug Deliv. 2013 Feb;10(1):122-33.

Cobalt(II)-polybenzimidazole complexes as a nonviral gene carrier: effects of
charges and benzimidazolyl groups.

Jiang R(1), Yin J, Hu S, Meng X, Liu C.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Pesticide and Chemical Biology, Ministry of Education, and
School of Chemistry, Central China Normal University, Wuhan 430079, China.

The successful delivery of nucleic acids into cells and their availability at the
intracellular sites of action remain a major challenge in gene therapy, because
cells are resistant to the uptake of genetic materials and contain a variety of
mechanisms that degrade nucleic acids. To develop a nonviral carrier, we have
recently designed a series of metal complexes with polybenzimidazole (pbzim) that
serve as DNA-condensing agents. In this study, we prepared a group of
Co(II)-pbzim complexes that bear variable numbers of both positive charges and
benzimidazole (bzim) groups. First, the formation of condensates at varied molar 
ratios of complex to DNA was examined by multiple biophysical measurements at pH 
7.4. The results showed that the size, morphology, and surface charge of the
condensates formed via a Co(II) complex dose-dependent process can be controlled 
by utilization of different complexes. Then, the imaging examination performed
with both confocal and fluorescence microscope indicated that the DNA condensates
can be internalized into cells. Luciferase activity assay showed that the DNA
condensates formed at 1:1 of molar ratio are in favor of cell transfection
because of their appropriate size, profile, and positive surface charges. The
addition of the helper lipid DOPE can enhance both cellular uptake of the
condensates and expression of the transferred genes. The MTT data indicated that 
cytotoxicity of both Co(II) complexes and condensates is enhanced with increasing
positive charges and bzim groups. All the results revealed that the physical
properties, cell transfection, and cytotoxicity of the condensates are regulated 
by the positive charges and bzim groups on the metal complexes.

DOI: 10.2174/1567201811310010018 
PMID: 22812394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

