
1. BMC Public Health. 2012 Oct 9;12:853. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-12-853.

Analyzing the spatio-temporal relationship between dengue vector larval density
and land-use using factor analysis and spatial ring mapping.

Sarfraz MS(1), Tripathi NK, Tipdecho T, Thongbu T, Kerdthong P, Souris M.

Author information: 
(1)Remote Sensing and GIS, School of Engineering and Technology, Asian Institute 
of Technology (AIT), P,O, Box 4, Pathumthani 12120, Klong Luang, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: Dengue, a mosquito-borne febrile viral disease, is found in tropical 
and sub-tropical regions and is now extending its range to temperate regions. The
spread of the dengue viruses mainly depends on vector population (Aedes aegypti
and Aedes albopictus), which is influenced by changing climatic conditions and
various land-use/land-cover types. Spatial display of the relationship between
dengue vector density and land-cover types is required to describe a near-future 
viral outbreak scenario. This study is aimed at exploring how land-cover types
are linked to the behavior of dengue-transmitting mosquitoes.
METHODS: Surveys were conducted in 92 villages of Phitsanulok Province Thailand. 
The sampling was conducted on three separate occasions in the months of March,
May and July. Dengue indices, i.e. container index (C.I.), house index (H.I.) and
Breteau index (B.I.) were used to map habitats conducible to dengue vector
growth. Spatial epidemiological analysis using Bivariate Pearson's correlation
was conducted to evaluate the level of interdependence between larval density and
land-use types. Factor analysis using principal component analysis (PCA) with
varimax rotation was performed to ascertain the variance among land-use types.
Furthermore, spatial ring method was used as to visualize spatially referenced,
multivariate and temporal data in single information graphic.
RESULTS: Results of dengue indices showed that the settlements around gasoline
stations/workshops, in the vicinity of marsh/swamp and rice paddy appeared to be 
favorable habitat for dengue vector propagation at highly significant and
positive correlation (p = 0.001) in the month of May. Settlements around the
institutional areas were highly significant and positively correlated (p = 0.01) 
with H.I. in the month of March. Moreover, dengue indices in the month of March
showed a significant and positive correlation (p <= 0.05) with deciduous forest. 
The H.I. of people living around horticulture land were significantly and
positively correlated (p = 0.05) during the month of May, and perennial
vegetation showed a highly significant and positive correlation (p = 0.001) in
the month of March with C.I. and significant and positive correlation (p <= 0.05)
with B.I., respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The study concluded that gasoline stations/workshops, rice paddy,
marsh/swamp and deciduous forests played highly significant role in dengue vector
growth. Thus, the spatio-temporal relationships of dengue vector larval density
and land-use types may help to predict favorable dengue habitat, and thereby
enables public healthcare managers to take precautionary measures to prevent
impending dengue outbreak.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2458-12-853 
PMCID: PMC3598814
PMID: 23043443  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

