
1. FASEB J. 2013 Feb;27(2):725-37. doi: 10.1096/fj.12-215079. Epub 2012 Nov 12.

Neurosteroid-mediated regulation of brain innate immunity in HIV/AIDS: DHEA-S
suppresses neurovirulence.

Maingat FG(1), Polyak MJ, Paul AM, Vivithanaporn P, Noorbakhsh F, Ahboucha S,
Baker GB, Pearson K, Power C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

Neurosteroids are cholesterol-derived molecules synthesized within the brain,
which exert trophic and protective actions. Infection by human and feline
immunodeficiency viruses (HIV and FIV, respectively) causes neuroinflammation and
neurodegeneration, leading to neurological deficits. Secretion of
neuroinflammatory host and viral factors by glia and infiltrating leukocytes
mediates the principal neuropathogenic mechanisms during lentivirus infections,
although the effect of neurosteroids on these processes is unknown. We
investigated the interactions between neurosteroid-mediated effects and
lentivirus infection outcomes. Analyses of HIV-infected (HIV(+)) and uninfected
human brains disclosed a reduction in neurosteroid synthesis enzyme expression.
Human neurons exposed to supernatants from HIV(+) macrophages exhibited
suppressed enzyme expression without reduced cellular viability. HIV(+) human
macrophages treated with sulfated dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA-S) showed
suppression of inflammatory gene (IL-1β, IL-6, TNF-α) expression. FIV-infected
(FIV(+)) animals treated daily with 15 mg/kg body weight. DHEA-S treatment
reduced inflammatory gene transcripts (IL-1β, TNF-α, CD3ε, GFAP) in brain
compared to vehicle-(β-cyclodextrin)-treated FIV(+) animals similar to levels
found in vehicle-treated FIV(-) animals. DHEA-S treatment also increased CD4(+)
T-cell levels and prevented neurobehavioral deficits and neuronal loss among
FIV(+) animals, compared to vehicle-treated FIV(+) animals. Reduced neuronal
neurosteroid synthesis was evident in lentivirus infections, but treatment with
DHEA-S limited neuroinflammation and prevented neurobehavioral deficits.
Neurosteroid-derived therapies could be effective in the treatment of virus- or
inflammation-mediated neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.12-215079 
PMID: 23150523  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

