
1. J Invertebr Pathol. 2013 Feb;112(2):184-91. doi: 10.1016/j.jip.2012.11.014. Epub 
2012 Dec 8.

Development of a viral biopesticide for the control of the Guatemala potato tuber
moth Tecia solanivora.

Carpio C(1), Dangles O, Dupas S, Léry X, López-Ferber M, Orbe K, Páez D, Rebaudo 
F, Santillán A, Yangari B, Zeddam JL.

Author information: 
(1)Pontificia Universidad Católica del Ecuador, Facultad de Ciencias Naturales y 
Biológicas, Quito, Ecuador. fccarpio@yahoo.com

The Guatemala potato tuber moth Tecia solanivora (Povolny) (Lep. Gelechiidae) is 
an invasive species from Mesoamerica that has considerably extended its
distribution area in recent decades. While this species is considered to be a
major potato pest in Venezuela, Colombia, and Ecuador, currently no specific
control methods are available for farmers. To address this issue we developed a
biopesticide formulation to be used in integrated pest management of T.
solanivora, following three steps. First, search for entomopathogenic viruses
were carried out through extensive bioprospections in 12 countries worldwide. As 
a result, new Phthorimaea operculella granulovirus (PhopGV) isolates were found
in T. solanivora and five other gelechid species. Second, twenty PhopGV isolates,
including both previously known and newly found isolates, were genetically and/or
biologically characterized in order to choose the best candidate for a
biopesticide formulation. Sequence data were obtained for the ecdysteroid
UDP-glucosyltransferase (egt) gene, a single copy gene known to play a role in
pathogenicity. Three different sizes (1086, 1305 and 1353 bp) of egt were found
among the virus isolates analyzed. Unexpectedly, no obvious correlation between
egt size and pathogenicity was found. Bioassays on T. solanivora neonates showed 
a maximum of a 14-fold difference in pathogenicity among the eight PhopGV
isolates tested. The most pathogenic PhopGV isolate, JLZ9f, had a medium lethal
concentration (LC(50)) of 10 viral occlusion bodies per square mm of consumed
tuber skin. Third, we tested biopesticide dust formulations by mixing a dry
carrier (calcium carbonate) with different adjuvants (magnesium chloride or an
optical brightener or soya lecithin) and different specific amounts of JLZ9f.
During laboratory experiments, satisfactory control of the pest (>98% larva
mortality compared to untreated control) was achieved with a formulation
containing 10 macerated JLZ9f-dead T. solanivora larvae per kg of calcium
carbonate mixed with 50 mL/kg of soya lecithin. The final product provides an
interesting alternative to chemical pesticides for Andean farmers affected by
this potato pest.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jip.2012.11.014 
PMID: 23232473  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

