
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2013 Feb;79(4):1325-32. doi: 10.1128/AEM.03457-12. Epub
2012 Dec 14.

Mechanisms of human adenovirus inactivation by sunlight and UVC light as examined
by quantitative PCR and quantitative proteomics.

Bosshard F(1), Armand F, Hamelin R, Kohn T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Chemistry, School of Architecture, Civil and
Environmental Engineering (ENAC), École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Human adenoviruses (HAdV) are important pathogens in both industrialized and
developing nations. HAdV has been shown to be relatively resistant to
monochromatic UVC light. Polychromatic UVC light, in contrast, is a more
effective means of disinfection, presumably due to the involvement of viral
proteins in the inactivation mechanism. Solar disinfection of HAdV, finally, is
only poorly understood. In this paper, the kinetics and mechanism of HAdV
inactivation by UVC light and direct and indirect solar disinfection are
elucidated. PCR and mass spectrometry were employed to quantify the extent of
genome and protein degradation and to localize the affected regions in the HAdV
proteins. For this purpose, we used for the first time an approach involving
stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) of a human virus. 
Inactivation by UVC light and the full sunlight spectrum were found to
efficiently inactivate HAdV, whereas UVA-visible light only caused inactivation
in the presence of external sensitizers (indirect solar disinfection). Genome
damage was significant for UVC but was less important for solar disinfection. In 
contrast, indirect solar disinfection exhibited extensive protein degradation. In
particular, the fiber protein and the amino acids responsible for host binding
within the fiber protein were shown to degrade. In addition, the central domain
of the penton protein was damaged, which may inhibit interactions with the fiber 
protein and lead to a disruption of the initial stages of infection. Damage to
the hexon protein, however, appeared to affect only regions not directly involved
in the infectious cycle.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.03457-12 
PMCID: PMC3568621
PMID: 23241978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

