
1. ISME J. 2013 May;7(5):1003-15. doi: 10.1038/ismej.2012.171. Epub 2013 Jan 10.

A novel approach, based on BLSOMs (Batch Learning Self-Organizing Maps), to the
microbiome analysis of ticks.

Nakao R(1), Abe T, Nijhof AM, Yamamoto S, Jongejan F, Ikemura T, Sugimoto C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Collaboration and Education, Research Center for Zoonosis Control,
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Hokkaido, Japan.

Erratum in
    ISME J. 2014 Aug;8(8):1752.

Ticks transmit a variety of viral, bacterial and protozoal pathogens, which are
often zoonotic. The aim of this study was to identify diverse tick microbiomes,
which may contain as-yet unidentified pathogens, using a metagenomic approach.
DNA prepared from bacteria/archaea-enriched fractions obtained from seven tick
species, namely Amblyomma testudinarium, Amblyomma variegatum, Haemaphysalis
formosensis, Haemaphysalis longicornis, Ixodes ovatus, Ixodes persulcatus and
Ixodes ricinus, was subjected to pyrosequencing after whole-genome amplification.
The resulting sequence reads were phylotyped using a Batch Learning
Self-Organizing Map (BLSOM) program, which allowed phylogenetic estimation based 
on similarity of oligonucleotide frequencies, and functional annotation by BLASTX
similarity searches. In addition to bacteria previously associated with
human/animal diseases, such as Anaplasma, Bartonella, Borrelia, Ehrlichia,
Francisella and Rickettsia, BLSOM analysis detected microorganisms belonging to
the phylum Chlamydiae in some tick species. This was confirmed by pan-Chlamydia
PCR and sequencing analysis. Gene sequences associated with bacterial
pathogenesis were also identified, some of which were suspected to originate from
horizontal gene transfer. These efforts to construct a database of tick microbes 
may lead to the ability to predict emerging tick-borne diseases. Furthermore, a
comprehensive understanding of tick microbiomes will be useful for understanding 
tick biology, including vector competency and interactions with pathogens and
symbionts.

DOI: 10.1038/ismej.2012.171 
PMCID: PMC3635243
PMID: 23303373  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

