
1. J Virol. 2013 Apr;87(7):3655-67. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02667-12. Epub 2013 Jan 9.

Inflammasome adaptor protein Apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing
CARD (ASC) is critical for the immune response and survival in west Nile virus
encephalitis.

Kumar M(1), Roe K, Orillo B, Muruve DA, Nerurkar VR, Gale M Jr, Verma S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tropical Medicine, Medical Microbiology and Pharmacology,
University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA.

Erratum in
    J Virol. 2018 Jul 17;92(15):.

West Nile virus (WNV) is a neurotropic flavivirus that has emerged globally as a 
significant cause of viral encephalitis in humans. The WNV-induced innate immune 
response, including production of antiviral cytokines, is critical for
controlling virus infection. The adaptor protein ASC mediates a critical step in 
innate immune signaling by bridging the interaction between the pathogen
recognition receptors and caspase 1 in inflammasome complexes, but its role in
WNV immunopathogenesis is not defined. Here, we demonstrate that ASC is essential
for interleukin-1β (IL-1β) production and development of effective host immunity 
against WNV. ASC-deficient mice exhibited increased susceptibility to WNV
infection, and reduced survival was associated with enhanced virus replication in
the peripheral tissues and central nervous system (CNS). Infection of cultured
bone marrow-derived dendritic cells showed that ASC was essential for the
activation of caspase 1, a key component of inflammasome assembly. ASC(-/-) mice 
exhibited attenuated levels of proinflammatory cytokines in the serum.
Intriguingly, infected ASC(-/-) mice also displayed reduced levels of alpha
interferon (IFN-α) and IgM in the serum, indicating the overall protective role
of ASC in restricting WNV infection. However, brains from ASC(-/-) mice displayed
unrestrained inflammation, including elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines
and chemokines, such as IFN-γ, CCL2, and CCL5, which correlated with more
pronounced activation of the astrocytes, enhanced infiltration of peripheral
immune cells in the CNS, and increased neuronal cell death. Collectively, our
data provide new insights into the role of ASC as an essential modulator of
inflammasome-dependent and -independent immune responses to effectively control
WNV infection.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02667-12 
PMCID: PMC3624239
PMID: 23302887  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

