
1. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2013 May;29(5):826-36. doi: 10.1089/AID.2012.0205.
Epub 2013 Feb 5.

Altered expression of degranulation-related genes in CD8+ T cells in human T
lymphotropic virus type I infection.

Malta TM(1), Silva IT, Pinheiro DG, Santos AR, Pinto MT, Panepucci RA,
Takayanagui OM, Tanaka Y, Covas DT, Kashima S.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Science and Technology in Stem Cell and Cell Therapy,
Center for Cell Therapy and Regional Blood Center, Blood Center of Ribeirão
Preto, Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo, Brazil.

Human T lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-1) is the etiological agent of
HTLV-1-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP). CD8+ T cells
may contribute to the protection or development of HAM/TSP. In this study we used
SAGE methodology to screen for differentially expressed genes in CD8+ T cells
isolated from HTLV-1 asymptomatic carriers (HAC) and from HAM/TSP patients to
identify genes involved in HAM/TSP development. SAGE analysis was conducted by
pooling samples according to clinical status. The comparison of gene expression
profiles between HAC and HAM/TSP libraries identified 285 differentially
expressed tags. We focus on cytotoxicity and cytokine-related genes due to their 
potential biological role in HTLV-1 infection. Our results showed that patients
with HAM/TSP have high expression levels of degranulation-related genes, namely
GZMH and PRF1, and of the cytoskeletal adaptor PXN. We found that GZMB and ZAP70 
were overexpressed in HTLV-infected patients compared to the noninfected group.
We also detected that CCL5 was higher in the HAM/TSP group compared to the HAC
and CT groups. Our findings showed that CD8+ T cells of HAM/TSP patients have an 
inflammatory and active profile. PXN and ZAP70 overexpression in HTLV-1-infected 
patients was described for the first time here and reinforces this concept.
However, although active and abundant, CD8+ T cells are not able to completely
eliminate infected cells and prevent the development of HAM/TSP and, moreover,
these cells might contribute to the pathogenesis of the disease by migrating to
the central nervous system (CNS). These results should be further tested with
biological functional assays to increase our understanding on the role of these
molecules in the development of HTLV-1-related diseases.

DOI: 10.1089/aid.2012.0205 
PMID: 23301858  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

