
1. Curr Opin HIV AIDS. 2013 Mar;8(2):111-6. doi: 10.1097/COH.0b013e32835d6e1c.

Tracking replication-competent HIV reservoirs in infected individuals.

Chun TW(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. twchun@nih.gov

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Prolonged suppression of plasma viremia is now achievable in a
majority of HIV-infected individuals receiving antiretroviral therapy (ART).
However, ART alone cannot eradicate HIV in infected individuals. The purpose of
this review is to discuss the importance of tracking levels of infected CD4(+) T 
cells carrying replication-competent HIV in basic and clinical research and how
the use of this virologic marker could help determine the efficacy of ART and
several novel therapeutic strategies that are being proposed for eliminating
persistent viral reservoir in infected individuals receiving ART.
RECENT FINDINGS: In recent years, there has been a growing interest within the
HIV/AIDS scientific community to develop therapeutic strategies aimed at
eliminating persistently infected CD4(+) T cells in order to achieve a cure for
HIV in infected individuals receiving ART. These approaches include
administration of HIV-activating agents, modification of the genetics of CD4(+) T
cells, stem cell transplantation, and therapeutic vaccination. Such approaches
would ultimately require careful and accurate assessments of the effect of
therapeutic agents on HIV burden in infected individuals.
SUMMARY: Given that the majority of infected CD4(+) T cells in vivo carry
replication-defective HIV, longitudinal measurements of the frequency of cells
carrying replication-competent HIV along with other quantitative virologic
parameters, such as levels of plasma viremia and cell-associated viral nucleic
acid, can provide critical insight into the dynamics of the persistent viral
reservoirs. Information related to HIV pathogenesis and the feasibility of
eradicating the virus in infected individuals receiving ART in combination with
novel therapeutic agents can also be gained from these analyses.

DOI: 10.1097/COH.0b013e32835d6e1c 
PMID: 23380652  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

