
1. Indian J Med Res. 2013 Mar;137(3):549-59.

Pupal productivity of dengue vectors in Kolkata, India: implications for vector
management.

Banerjee S(1), Aditya G, Saha GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Calcutta, Kolkata, India.
soumyajitb@gmail.com

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVES: Entomological surveillance of the dengue vectors using
pupal productivity as indicators can be helpful in effective management. On this 
basis, an assessment was made on the relative importance of the larval habitats
of Aedes mosquitoes in Kolkata, an endemic zone for dengue in West Bengal, India.
METHODS: Monthly collection of larvae and pupae of Aedes from larval habitats
categorized as earthen, plastic and porcelain containers and tyres, was carried
out from selected sites. Pupal weight was recorded and degree of sexual
dimorphism was calculated. The data on pupal weight, sexual dimorphism and
immature density were used for regression analysis.
RESULTS: The number of positive sites for each type of larval habitats varied
with months and mosquito species. Based on mean density per month, the plastic
containers were the most productive habitats and the tyres were least productive 
for both Aedes species. The pupal weight of both Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus
varied with the relative density and type of larval habitats. Significant
differences in pupal productivity, positive sites and the proportion of pupae
were observed in the habitats. Species-specific differences in the degree of
dimorphism were noted with the females being larger in size than males,
irrespective of the habitats.
INTERPRETATION & CONCLUSIONS: Pupal productivity of Aedes mosquitoes in Kolkata
differed in terms of the type of the larval habitats with the immature density
affecting the body size of the adults. This habitat-based study is a pioneer
effort considering Kolkata and calls for a management plan for source reduction
of these habitats to minimize Aedes mosquitoes and thus potential risk of dengue.


PMCID: PMC3705664
PMID: 23640563  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

