
1. Microbiol Educ. 2004 May;5:3-12.

Three-Dimensional Visualizations in Teaching Genomics and Bioinformatics:
Mutations in HIV Envelope Proteins and Their Consequences for Vaccine Design.

Takayama KM(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, The University of New South
Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia.

This project addresses the need to provide a visual context to teach the
practical applications of genome sequencing and bioinformatics. Present-day
research relies on indirect visualization techniques (e.g., fluorescence-labeling
of DNA in sequencing reactions) and sophisticated computer analysis. Such methods
are impractical and prohibitively expensive for laboratory classes. More
importantly, there is a need for curriculum resources that visually demonstrate
the application of genome sequence information rather than the DNA sequencing
methodology itself. This project is a computer-based lesson plan that engages
students in collaborative, problem-based learning. The specific example focuses
on approaches to Human Immunodeficiency Virus-1 (HIV-1) vaccine design based on
HIV-1 genome sequences using a case study. Students performed comparative
alignments of variant HIV-1 sequences available from a public database. Students 
then examined the consequences of HIV-1 mutations by applying the alignments to
three-dimensional images of the HIV-1 envelope protein structure, thus
visualizing the implications for applications such as vaccine design. The lesson 
enhances problem solving through the application of one type of information
(genomic or protein sequence) into concrete visual conceptualizations. Assessment
of student comprehension and problem-solving ability revealed marked improvement 
after the computer tutorial. Furthermore, contextual presentation of these
concepts within a case study resulted in student responses that demonstrated
higher levels of cognitive ability than was expected by the instructor.

DOI: 10.1128/jmbe.v5.72 
PMCID: PMC3633129
PMID: 23653552 

