
1. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2013 Jul 1;243(1):131-5. doi: 10.2460/javma.243.1.131.

Impact of bovine leukemia virus infection on neutrophil and lymphocyte
concentrations in dairy cattle.

Swenson CL(1), Erskine RJ, Bartlett PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology and Diagnostic Investigation and Diagnostic Center 
for Population and Animal Health, College of Veterinary Medicine, Michigan State 
University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA. swenson@cvm.msu.edu

OBJECTIVE: To determine the effect of bovine leukemia virus (BLV) infection on
absolute neutrophil and lymphocyte concentrations in healthy lactating Holstein
dairy cattle.
DESIGN: Observational cross-sectional survey.
ANIMALS: 311 healthy lactating Holstein dairy cattle from herds in Michigan (n = 
2), Wisconsin (1), Iowa (1), and Pennsylvania (1).
PROCEDURES: Whole and anticoagulated (EDTA) blood samples were collected. Serum
samples were tested for antibody against BLV by use of an ELISA. Absolute
neutrophil and lymphocyte concentrations were measured in EDTA blood samples with
an automated hematology analyzer and manual differential cell counts.
RESULTS: 208 cows tested positive and 103 cows tested negative for anti-BLV
antibodies. Neutrophil concentration was not significantly different between
BLV-positive versus BLV-negative cattle. The distribution of lymphocyte
concentration was positively skewed for the entire cow population (n = 311) and
the BLV-positive subset (208). In contrast, lymphocyte concentration distribution
was approximately normal for BLV-negative cows (n = 103). Consequently, the
presence or absence of BLV infection strongly influenced the calculated
neutrophil-to-lymphocyte concentration ratio.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Results indicated that absolute lymphocyte
concentration is significantly affected by BLV infection in dairy cattle.
Accordingly, hematologic reference intervals should be derived from healthy
animals that are not infected with BLV and patient BLV status must be considered 
for meaningful interpretation of lymphocyte concentration. We recommend that the 
calculated neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio be abandoned because it does not
provide more information than direct comparison of patient absolute leukocyte
concentration with updated reference intervals from healthy BLV-negative cattle.

DOI: 10.2460/javma.243.1.131 
PMID: 23786202  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

