
1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2013 Jun 25;14:206. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-14-206.

Infection status outcome, machine learning method and virus type interact to
affect the optimised prediction of hepatitis virus immunoassay results from
routine pathology laboratory assays in unbalanced data.

Richardson AM(1), Lidbury BA.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Education, Science, Technology & Mathematics, University of
Canberra ACT 2601, Canberra, Australia. alice.richardson@canberra.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Advanced data mining techniques such as decision trees have been
successfully used to predict a variety of outcomes in complex medical
environments. Furthermore, previous research has shown that combining the results
of a set of individually trained trees into an ensemble-based classifier can
improve overall classification accuracy. This paper investigates the effect of
data pre-processing, the use of ensembles constructed by bagging, and a simple
majority vote to combine classification predictions from routine pathology
laboratory data, particularly to overcome a large imbalance of negative Hepatitis
B virus (HBV) and Hepatitis C virus (HCV) cases versus HBV or HCV immunoassay
positive cases. These methods were illustrated using a never before analysed data
set from ACT Pathology (Canberra, Australia) relating to HBV and HCV patients.
RESULTS: It was easier to predict immunoassay positive cases than negative cases 
of HBV or HCV. While applying an ensemble-based approach rather than a single
classifier had a small positive effect on the accuracy rate, this also varied
depending on the virus under analysis. Finally, scaling data before prediction
also has a small positive effect on the accuracy rate for this dataset. A
graphical analysis of the distribution of accuracy rates across ensembles
supports these findings.
CONCLUSIONS: Laboratories looking to include machine learning as part of their
decision support processes need to be aware that the infection outcome, the
machine learning method used and the virus type interact to affect the enhanced
laboratory diagnosis of hepatitis virus infection, as determined by primary
immunoassay data in concert with multiple routine pathology laboratory variables.
This awareness will lead to the informed use of existing machine learning
methods, thus improving the quality of laboratory diagnosis via informatics
analyses.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-14-206 
PMCID: PMC3697984
PMID: 23800244  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

