
1. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2013 Dec;9(12):2578-83. doi: 10.4161/hv.26096. Epub 2013
Aug 16.

Infection-enhancing lipopeptides do not improve intranasal immunization of cotton
rats with a delta-G candidate live-attenuated human respiratory syncytial virus
vaccine.

Tien Nguyen D(1), Boes J(2), van Amerongen G(3), van Remmerden Y(2), Yüksel S(1),
Guichelaar T(2), Osterhaus AD(1), de Swart RL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viroscience; Erasmus MC; Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)National Institute of Public Health and the Environment; Bilthoven, The
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Viroscience; Erasmus MC; Rotterdam, The Netherlands; National
Institute of Public Health and the Environment; Bilthoven, The Netherlands.

Development of live-attenuated human respiratory syncytial virus (HRSV) vaccines 
has proven to be difficult. Several vaccine candidates were found to be
over-attenuated and displayed limited immunogenicity. Recently, we identified
three synthetic cationic lipopeptides that enhanced paramyxovirus infections in
vitro. The infection enhancement proved to be mediated by enhanced virus binding 
to target cells. We hypothesized that these lipopeptides can be used as adjuvants
to promote immune responses induced by live-attenuated paramyxovirus vaccines.
This hypothesis was tested in a vaccination and challenge model in cotton rats,
using a previously described recombinant live-attenuated candidate HRSV vaccine
lacking the gene encoding the G glycoprotein (rHRSVΔG). Surprisingly, intranasal 
vaccination of cotton rats with rHRSVΔG formulated in infection-enhancing
lipopeptides resulted in reduced virus loads in nasopharyngeal lavages, reduced
seroconversion levels and reduced protection from wild-type HRSV challenge. In
conclusion, we were unable to demonstrate the feasibility of lipopeptides as
adjuvants for a candidate live-attenuated HRSV vaccine in the cotton rat model.

DOI: 10.4161/hv.26096 
PMCID: PMC4162065
PMID: 23955280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

