
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2013 Dec 26;7(12):e2580. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002580.
eCollection 2013.

Detection of serotype-specific antibodies to the four dengue viruses using an
immune complex binding (ICB) ELISA.

Emmerich P(1), Mika A(2), Schmitz H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine,
Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Diagnostics Development Group, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine,
Hamburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Dengue virus (DENV) infections are preferentially diagnosed by
detection of specific IgM antibodies, DENV NS1 antigen assays or by amplification
of viral RNA in serum samples of the patients. The type-specific immunity to the 
four worldwide circulating DENV serotypes can be determined by neutralization
assays. An alternative to the complicated neutralization assays would be helpful 
to study the serotype-specific immune response in people in DENV hyperendemic
areas but also in subjects upon DENV vaccination.
METHODS: In consecutive samples of patients with DENV-1- 4 infection
type-specific antibodies were detected using an immune complex binding (ICB)
ELISA. During incubation of serum samples and enzyme- labeled recombinant
envelope domain III (EDIII) antigens immune complexes (ICs) are formed, which are
simultaneously bound to a solid phase coated with an Fc-receptor (CD32). After a 
single washing procedure the bound labeled ICs can be determined. To further
improve type-specific reactions high concentrations of competing heterologous
unlabeled ED III proteins were added to the labeled antigens.
RESULTS: Follow-up serum samples of 64 patients with RT-PCR confirmed primary
DENV-1, -2, -3 or -4 infections were tested against four enzyme-labeled
recombinant DENV EDIII antigens. Antibodies to the EDIII antigens were found in
55 patients (sensitivity 86%). A complete agreement between the serotype detected
by PCR in early samples and the serotype-specific antibody in later samples was
found. Type-specific anti-EDIII antibodies were first detected 9-20 days after
onset of the disease. In 21% of the samples collected from people in Vietnam
secondary infections with antibodies to two serotypes could be identified.
CONCLUSIONS: The data obtained with the ICB-ELISA show that after primary DENV
infection the corresponding type-specific antibodies are detected in almost all
samples collected at least two weeks after onset of the disease. The method will 
be of value to determine the distribution of the various type-specific anti-DENV 
antibodies in DENV endemic areas.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002580 
PMCID: PMC3873247
PMID: 24386498  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

