
1. J Virol. 2014 Apr;88(8):4543-57. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03685-13. Epub 2014 Feb 5.

Flexibility in surface-exposed loops in a virus capsid mediates escape from
antibody neutralization.

Kolawole AO(1), Li M, Xia C, Fischer AE, Giacobbi NS, Rippinger CM, Proescher JB,
Wu SK, Bessling SL, Gamez M, Yu C, Zhang R, Mehoke TS, Pipas JM, Wolfe JT, Lin
JS, Feldman AB, Smith TJ, Wobus CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

New human norovirus strains emerge every 2 to 3 years, partly due to mutations in
the viral capsid that allow escape from antibody neutralization and herd
immunity. To understand how noroviruses evolve antibody resistance, we
investigated the structural basis for the escape of murine norovirus (MNV) from
antibody neutralization. To identify specific residues in the MNV-1 protruding
(P) domain of the capsid that play a role in escape from the neutralizing
monoclonal antibody (MAb) A6.2, 22 recombinant MNVs were generated with amino
acid substitutions in the A'B' and E'F' loops. Six mutations in the E'F' loop
(V378F, A382K, A382P, A382R, D385G, and L386F) mediated escape from MAb A6.2
neutralization. To elucidate underlying structural mechanisms for these results, 
the atomic structure of the A6.2 Fab was determined and fitted into the
previously generated pseudoatomic model of the A6.2 Fab/MNV-1 virion complex.
Previously, two distinct conformations, A and B, of the atomic structures of the 
MNV-1 P domain were identified due to flexibility in the two P domain loops. A
superior stereochemical fit of the A6.2 Fab to the A conformation of the MNV P
domain was observed. Structural analysis of our observed escape mutants indicates
changes toward the less-preferred B conformation of the P domain. The shift in
the structural equilibrium of the P domain toward the conformation with poor
structural complementarity to the antibody strongly supports a unique mechanism
for antibody escape that occurs via antigen flexibility instead of direct
antibody-antigen binding.IMPORTANCE: Human noroviruses cause the majority of all 
nonbacterial gastroenteritis worldwide. New epidemic strains arise in part by
mutations in the viral capsid leading to escape from antibody neutralization.
Herein, we identify a series of point mutations in a norovirus capsid that
mediate escape from antibody neutralization and determine the structure of a
neutralizing antibody. Fitting of the antibody structure into the virion/antibody
complex identifies two conformations of the antibody binding domain of the viral 
capsid: one with a superior fit and the other with an inferior fit to the
antibody. These data suggest a unique mode of antibody neutralization. In
contrast to other viruses that largely escape antibody neutralization through
direct disruption of the antibody-virus interface, we identify mutations that
acted indirectly by limiting the conformation of the antibody binding loop in the
viral capsid and drive the antibody binding domain into the conformation unable
to be bound by the antibody.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.03685-13 
PMCID: PMC3993751
PMID: 24501415  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

