
1. Mol Biol Evol. 2014 Jun;31(6):1546-53. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msu113. Epub 2014 Mar 
28.

Strong epistatic interactions within a single protein.

Parera M(1), Martinez MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Fundació irsiCaixa, Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol, Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Badalona, Spain.
(2)Fundació irsiCaixa, Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol, Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Badalona, Spain mmartinez@irsicaixa.es.

A central question in protein molecular evolution is whether an amino acid that
occurs at a given site makes an independent contribution to fitness or whether
its contribution depends on other amino acid sites in the protein sequence, a
phenomenon known as intragenic epistasis. In the absence of intragenic epistasis,
natural selection acts on a protein mutation independent of its genetic
background, and the experimentally determined fitness for a mutation should be
the same across all genetic backgrounds. We tested this hypothesis by using
site-directed mutagenesis to introduce a well-characterized deleterious single
amino acid substitution in 56 different hepatitis C virus NS3 protease variants. 
The catalytic efficiency of the mutated proteases was determined and compared
with the corresponding wild-type protein. Fitness effects ranged from lethality
to significantly beneficial. Although primarily deleterious and lethal effects
were observed (41 and 5 out of 56 tested variants, respectively), deleterious
effects ranged from near neutral (-26.7% reduction of fitness) to near lethal
(-98.5%). Our findings demonstrate that the introduced amino acid substitution
has different fitness effects in different protein variants and provide
independent support for the relevant role of intragenic epistasis in protein
evolution.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msu113 
PMID: 24682281  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

