
1. J Virol. 2014 Jul;88(14):8016-27. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00913-14. Epub 2014 May 7.

Role of CD8+ T cells and lymphoid dendritic cells in protection from ocular
herpes simplex virus 1 challenge in immunized mice.

Matundan H(1), Mott KR(1), Ghiasi H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurobiology and Vaccine Development, Ophthalmology Research,
Department of Surgery, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(2)Center for Neurobiology and Vaccine Development, Ophthalmology Research,
Department of Surgery, Los Angeles, California, USA ghiasih@cshs.org.

The development of immunization strategies to protect against ocular infection
with herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) must address the issue of the effects of the 
strategy on the establishment of latency in the trigeminal ganglia (TG). It is
the reactivation of this latent virus that can cause recurrent disease and
corneal scarring. CD8(+) T cells and dendritic cells (DCs) have been implicated
in the establishment and maintenance of latency through several lines of inquiry.
The objective of the current study was to use CD8α(-/-) and CD8β(-/-) mice to
further evaluate the contributions of CD8(+) T cells and the CD8α(+) and CD8α(-) 
subpopulations of DCs to the protection afforded against ocular infection by
immunization against HSV-1 and their potential to increase latency. Neutralizing 
antibody titers were similar in immunized CD8α(-/-), CD8β(-/-), and wild-type
(WT) mice, as was virus replication in the eye. However, on day 3 postinfection
(p.i.), the copy number of HSV-1 glycoprotein B (gB) was higher in the corneas
and TG of CD8α(-/-) mice than those of WT mice, whereas on day 5 p.i. it was
lower. As would be anticipated, the lack of CD8α(+) or CD8β(+) cells affected the
levels of type I and type II interferon transcripts, but the effects were
markedly time dependent and tissue specific. The levels of latent virus in the
TG, as estimated by measurement of LAT transcripts and in vitro explant
reactivation assays, were lower in the immunized, ocularly challenged CD8α(-/-)
and WT mice than in their CD8β(-/-) counterparts. Immunization reduced the
expression of PD-1, a marker of T-cell exhaustion, in the TG of ocularly
challenged mice, and mock-immunized CD8α(-/-) mice had lower levels of PD-1
expression and latency than mock-immunized WT or CD8β(-/-) mice. The expansion of
the CD8α(-) subpopulation of DCs through injection of WT mice with
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) DNA reduced the amount 
of latency and PD-1 expression in the TG of infected mice. In contrast, injection
of FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 ligand (Flt3L) DNA, which expanded both
subpopulations, was less effective. Our results suggest that the absence of both 
CD8α(+) T cells and CD8α(+) DCs does not reduce vaccine efficacy, either directly
or indirectly, in challenged mice and that administration of GM-CSF appears to
play a beneficial role in reducing latency and T-cell exhaustion. Importance: In 
the past 2 decades, two large clinical HSV vaccine trials were performed, but
both vaccine studies failed to reach their goals. Thus, as an alternative to
conventional vaccine studies, we have used a different strategy to manipulate the
host immune responses in an effort to induce greater protection against HSV
infection. In lieu of the pleiotropic effect of CD8α(+) DCs in HSV-1 latency, in 
this report, we show that the absence of CD8α(+) T cells and CD8α(+) DCs has no
adverse effect on vaccine efficacy. In line with our hypothesis, we found that
pushing DC subpopulations from CD8α(+) DCs toward CD8α(-) DCs by injection of
GM-CSF reduced the amount of latent virus and T-cell exhaustion in TG. While
these studies point to the lack of a role for CD8α(+) T cells in vaccine
efficacy, they in turn point to a role for GM-CSF in reducing HSV-1 latency.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00913-14 
PMCID: PMC4097799
PMID: 24807710  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

