
1. Arab J Gastroenterol. 2009 Mar;10(1):10-3. doi: 10.1016/j.ajg.2009.03.003. Epub
2009 May 3.

Serum HCV-RNA levels in patients with chronic hepatitis C: Correlation with
histological features.

Al-Khurri LE(1), Al-Khafaji KR(1), Al-Salihi SA(2), Alwaysi SA(3), Al-Akayshi
RJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Department, College of Medicine, Baghdad University, Baghdad, Iraq.
(2)Laboratory Department, Gastroenterology and Hepatology Teaching Hospital,
Medical City, Baghdad, Iraq. Electronic address: suhairalsalihi@yahoo.com.
(3)Laboratory Department, Gastroenterology and Hepatology Teaching Hospital,
Medical City, Baghdad, Iraq.
(4)Medical Department, Gastroenterology and Hepatology Teaching Hospital, Medical
City, Baghdad, Iraq.

BACKGROUND AND STUDY AIMS: Liver disease in chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV)
infection ranges from minimal lesion to liver cirrhosis and sometimes eventually 
evolving hepatocellular carcinoma. Whether and how HCV determines the different
clinical and histological manifestation of the disease is not fully understood.
It has not been clearly elucidated whether the extent of liver injury induced by 
HCV is influenced mainly by direct cytopathic damage or by an immune-mediated
response against HCV-infected hepatocytes. The aim of this study is to verify
whether the amount of virus in individual patient's serum could be related to the
severity of liver injury.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This study was carried out in the Gastroenterology and
Hepatology Teaching Hospital, Medical City, Baghdad. Serum levels of HCV-RNA were
measured in 27 patients with chronic HCV using b-DNA assay. Core liver biopsies
of the patients were evaluated according to Ishak histological activity index
system.
RESULTS: The serum HCV RNA concentrations in the patients ranged from 3.2×10(3)
to 1.2×10(7)copies/ml. In all patients no correlation was observed between the
variable levels of viraemia and the age of the patients. Furthermore no
correlations were observed between the serum HCV RNA concentrations and the
biochemical liver function test levels: Total serum bilirubin, AST, ALT, and
alkaline phosphatase. Histologically; patients were categorized into four
subgroups: four patients (14.8%) had minimal activity, 17 patients (63%) had mild
activity, and six patients (22.2%) had moderate activity. No significant
correlation was found between viraemic levels and these histological findings or 
their individual components: Interface hepatitis, confluent necrosis,
intralobular liver cell necrosis and portal inflammation. According to the stage 
of the fibrosis, the patients were categorized into seven subgroups: one patient 
(3.7%) with stage zero, seven patients with stage one (25.9%), four patients with
stage two (14.9%), eight patients with stage three (29.6%), three patients with
stage four (11.1%), two patients with stage five (7.4%), and two patients in
cirrhotic stage six (7.4%). There was no correlation between the serum HCV RNA
concentration and the stage of fibrosis. Hepatic steatosis was observed in 16/27 
patients. It was mild in nine patients, moderate in five patients, and severe in 
two patients. Correlation has not been observed between the serum HCV RNA
viraemic level and the severity of steatosis.
CONCLUSION: Serum HCV-RNA level does not determine the degree of hepatic injury
precisely and liver biopsy is necessary to accurately evaluate the extent of
liver damage.

Copyright © 2009 Arab Journal of Gastroenterology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajg.2009.03.003 
PMID: 24842130 

