
1. Breastfeed Med. 2014 Nov;9(9):450-7. doi: 10.1089/bfm.2014.0049. Epub 2014 Sep 4.

Support for relactation among mothers of HIV-infected children: a pilot study in 
Soweto.

Nyati M(1), Kim HY, Goga A, Violari A, Kuhn L, Gray G.

Author information: 
(1)1 Perinatal HIV Research Unit, Chris Hani Baragwanath Hospital and University 
of the Witwatersrand , Soweto, Gauteng, South Africa .

OBJECTIVES: Breastfeeding is accepted as the healthiest practice for human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected infants, but decisions about infant feeding
are made before the child's HIV status is known. We examined the feasibility of
counseling to support breastfeeding for newly diagnosed HIV-infected infants,
including relactation for those who had never initiated or who had stopped
breastfeeding before the infant's HIV status was known.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Mothers of 30 HIV-infected infants <12 weeks of age were
enrolled in Soweto, South Africa. Mothers were offered lactation counseling,
including support for relactation. Mother-infant pairs were followed for 24 weeks
with regular counseling. We evaluated feeding practices, attitudes, and maternal 
and infant outcomes, including morbidity and growth. All infants and mothers who 
met local eligibility criteria were started on antiretroviral therapy.
RESULTS: Mother-infant pairs (19 of the original 30) were followed up for 24
weeks. Ten of 19 women (53%) reported some breastfeeding at enrollment, two had
stopped, and seven had never breastfed. At 24 weeks post-enrollment, 11 of 19
(58%) were providing breastmilk for all milk feeds. All women produced milk and
provided some breastfeeds during the initial weeks of the study, but eight
reported difficulty overcoming infant latching problems and stopped all
breastfeeding. Attitudes toward breastfeeding were positive at the outset but
became more negative in those who did not establish or sustain breastfeeding.
Three of the seven who had never breastfed before enrollment into the study were 
fully breastfeeding at 24 weeks post-enrollment.
CONCLUSIONS: Support for breastfeeding and relactation is possible among mothers 
of newly diagnosed HIV-infected infants but requires motivation from mothers and 
clinicians. Lactation counseling at the time of infant diagnosis is challenging
as other issues predominate at this time. Improvements in antenatal infant
feeding counseling are essential.

DOI: 10.1089/bfm.2014.0049 
PMID: 25188674  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

