
1. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 22;9(10):e110883. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110883.
eCollection 2014.

Long-term central and effector SHIV-specific memory T cell responses elicited
after a single immunization with a novel lentivector DNA vaccine.

Arrode-Brusés G(1), Moussa M(1), Baccard-Longere M(2), Villinger F(3), Chebloune 
Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)INRA, ANRS, Université Joseph Fourier, PAVAL Lab./Nanobio 2, UJF Grenoble,
Grenoble, France.
(2)Institut de Biologie et Pathologie, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire de
Grenoble, Grenoble, France.
(3)Division of Pathology, Yerkes National Primate Research Center, Emory
University, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America.

Prevention of HIV acquisition and replication requires long lasting and effective
immunity. Given the state of HIV vaccine development, innovative vectors and
immunization strategies are urgently needed to generate safe and efficacious HIV 
vaccines. Here, we developed a novel lentivirus-based DNA vector that does not
integrate in the host genome and undergoes a single-cycle of replication. Viral
proteins are constitutively expressed under the control of Tat-independent LTR
promoter from goat lentivirus. We immunized six macaques once only with
CAL-SHIV-IN- DNA using combined intramuscular and intradermal injections plus
electroporation. Antigen-specific T cell responses were monitored for 47 weeks
post-immunization (PI). PBMCs were assessed directly ex vivo or after 6 and 12
days of in vitro culture using antigenic and/or homeostatic proliferation. IFN-γ 
ELISPOT was used to measure immediate cytokine secretion from antigen specific
effector cells and from memory precursors with high proliferative capacity
(PHPC). The memory phenotype and functions (proliferation, cytokine expression,
lytic content) of specific T cells were tested using multiparametric FACS-based
assays. All immunized macaques developed lasting peripheral CD8+ and CD4+ T cell 
responses mainly against Gag and Nef antigens. During the primary expansion
phase, immediate effector cells as well as increasing numbers of proliferating
cells with limited effector functions were detected which expressed markers of
effector (EM) and central (CM) memory phenotypes. These responses contracted but 
then reemerged later in absence of antigen boost. Strong PHPC responses
comprising vaccine-specific CM and EM T cells that readily expanded and acquired 
immediate effector functions were detected at 40/47 weeks PI. Altogether, our
study demonstrated that a single immunization with a replication-limited DNA
vaccine elicited persistent vaccine-specific CM and EM CD8+ and CD4+ T cells with
immediate and readily inducible effector functions, in the absence of ongoing
antigen expression.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110883 
PMCID: PMC4206452
PMID: 25337803  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

