
1. Plant Cell. 1989 Mar;1(3):301-11.

Visualizing mRNA expression in plant protoplasts: factors influencing efficient
mRNA uptake and translation.

Gallie DR(1), Lucas WJ, Walbot V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Stanford University, California 94305-5020.

In this paper we demonstrate that RNA sequences present upstream and downstream
of a reporter gene coding region play an important role in determining the amount
of protein produced from an mRNA. A translational enhancer, omega, derived from
tobacco mosaic virus, when present at the 5'-end of beta-glucuronidase mRNA
increased the efficiency of translation 16-fold to 18-fold in electroporated
tobacco or carrot protoplasts, and threefold to 11-fold in maize or rice
protoplasts. The presence of omega did not alter the half-life of the mRNA in
vivo. We also demonstrate for the first time that a minimum polyadenylated tail
length of 25 adenylate residues is sufficient to substantially increase the
expression and half-life of the reporter mRNA in plants. When in vitro-produced
mRNAs were synthesized such that extra sequence was added to the 3'-end of the
poly(A) tail, however, the final level of expression was decreased up to 80%.
Omega, the translational enhancer, and a poly(A) tail function independently of
each other; their combined effect on translation, when both are present in an
mRNA, is the multiplication of their individual effects. Histochemical analysis
for the presence of beta-glucuronidase in tobacco established that virtually all 
viable cells receive mRNA during electroporation. Video image analysis of tobacco
protoplasts electroporated with luciferase mRNA demonstrated that there is a wide
range in the level of expression of this marker. Carrier RNA, when present during
electroporation, had only a modest effect on increasing mRNA uptake. Reporter
mRNA expression in electroporated protoplasts was directly proportional to the
input mRNA up to at least 30 micrograms/ml.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.1.3.301 
PMCID: PMC159763
PMID: 2535505  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

