
1. J Virol. 1989 Feb;63(2):504-12.

Augmentation of retrovirus-induced lymphoid leukosis by Marek's disease
herpesviruses in White Leghorn chickens.

Bacon LD(1), Witter RL, Fadly AM.

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Department of Agriculture-Agricultural Research Service Regional Poultry 
Research Laboratory, East Lansing, Michigan 48823.

Our objective was to determine whether the cell-associated herpesvirus vaccines
used in chickens to control Marek's disease tumors can augment development of
lymphoid leukosis (LL) induced by exogenous avian leukosis virus (ALV). Various
single or mixed Marek's disease vaccines were inoculated at day 1, and ALV was
injected at 1 to 10 days, with chickens of several experimental or commercial
strains. Development of LL was monitored at 16 to 48 weeks in various
experiments. In several strains of chickens we repeatedly found that the widely
used serotype 3 turkey herpesvirus vaccine did not augment LL in comparison with 
unvaccinated controls. However, LL development and incidence were prominently
augmented in several chicken strains vaccinated with serotype 2 vaccines, used
alone or as mixtures with other serotypes. In one chicken strain, augmentation
was demonstrated after natural exposure to ALV or serotype 2 Marek's disease
virus viremic shedder chickens. Augmentation of LL by virulent or attenuated
Marek's disease viruses of serotype 1 was intermediate in effect. Serotype 2
Marek's disease virus augmentation of LL was prominent in three laboratory lines 
and one commercial strain of White Leghorns, but it was not observed in an
LL-resistant laboratory line or four commercial strains susceptible to ALV
infection. Chickens developed similar levels of viremia and neutralizing
antibodies to ALV regardless of the presence of augmentation of LL, suggesting
that the mechanism of enhanced LL did not result from differences in
susceptibility or immune response to ALV. We postulate that the serotype 2
herpesviruses may augment LL through one of several possible influences on bursal
cells that are subsequently transformed by exogenous ALV.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.63.2.504-512.1989 
PMCID: PMC247718
PMID: 2536088  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

