
1. BMC Genomics. 2015 Jan 22;16:12. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1212-2.

Integrated transcriptome catalogue and organ-specific profiling of gene
expression in fertile garlic (Allium sativum L.).

Kamenetsky R(1), Faigenboim A(2), Shemesh Mayer E(3)(4), Ben Michael T(5)(6),
Gershberg C(7), Kimhi S(8), Esquira I(9), Rohkin Shalom S(10)(11), Eshel D(12),
Rabinowitch HD(13), Sherman A(14).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plant Sciences, ARO, The Volcani Center, Bet Dagan, Israel.
vhrkamen@volcani.agri.gov.il.
(2)Institute of Plant Sciences, ARO, The Volcani Center, Bet Dagan, Israel.
adif@volcani.agri.gov.il.
(3)Institute of Plant Sciences, ARO, The Volcani Center, Bet Dagan, Israel.
einat.shemesh@mail.huji.ac.il.
(4)Robert H. Smith Faculty of Agricultural, Food, and Environmental Quality
Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
einat.shemesh@mail.huji.ac.il.
(5)Institute of Plant Sciences, ARO, The Volcani Center, Bet Dagan, Israel.
tomerbetmem@gmail.com.
(6)Robert H. Smith Faculty of Agricultural, Food, and Environmental Quality
Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
tomerbetmem@gmail.com.
(7)Institute of Plant Sciences, ARO, The Volcani Center, Bet Dagan, Israel.
chen.bernath@gmail.com.
(8)Institute of Plant Sciences, ARO, The Volcani Center, Bet Dagan, Israel.
sagiekimhi@gmail.com.
(9)Classeed Ltd., Gibraltar, British. esquirai@gmail.com.
(10)Institute of Plant Sciences, ARO, The Volcani Center, Bet Dagan, Israel.
saritr@volcani.agri.gov.il.
(11)Institute of Postharvest and The Food Sciences, ARO, The Volcani Center, Bet 
Dagan, Israel. saritr@volcani.agri.gov.il.
(12)Institute of Postharvest and The Food Sciences, ARO, The Volcani Center, Bet 
Dagan, Israel. dani@agri.gov.il.
(13)Robert H. Smith Faculty of Agricultural, Food, and Environmental Quality
Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
Haim.Rabinowitch@mail.huji.ac.il.
(14)Institute of Plant Sciences, ARO, The Volcani Center, Bet Dagan, Israel.
asherman@volcani.agri.gov.il.

BACKGROUND: Garlic is cultivated and consumed worldwide as a popular condiment
and green vegetable with medicinal and neutraceutical properties. Garlic
cultivars do not produce seeds, and therefore, this plant has not been the
subject of either classical breeding or genetic studies. However, recent
achievements in fertility restoration in a number of genotypes have led to
flowering and seed production, thus enabling genetic studies and breeding in
garlic.
RESULTS: A transcriptome catalogue of fertile garlic was produced from
multiplexed gene libraries, using RNA collected from various plant organs,
including inflorescences and flowers. Over 32 million 250-bp paired-end reads
were assembled into an extensive transcriptome of 240,000 contigs. An abundant
transcriptome assembled separately from 102,000 highly expressed contigs was
annotated and analyzed for gene ontology and metabolic pathways. Organ-specific
analysis showed significant variation of gene expression between plant organs,
with the highest number of specific reads in inflorescences and flowers. Analysis
of the enriched biological processes and molecular functions revealed
characteristic patterns for stress response, flower development and
photosynthetic activity. Orthologues of key flowering genes were differentially
expressed, not only in reproductive tissues, but also in leaves and bulbs,
suggesting their role in flower-signal transduction and the bulbing process. More
than 100 variants and isoforms of enzymes involved in organosulfur metabolism
were differentially expressed and had organ-specific patterns. In addition to
plant genes, viral RNA of at least four garlic viruses was detected, mostly in
the roots and cloves, whereas only 1-4% of the reads were found in the foliage
leaves.
CONCLUSIONS: The de novo transcriptome of fertile garlic represents a new
resource for research and breeding of this important crop, as well as for the
development of effective molecular markers for useful traits, including fertility
and seed production, resistance to pests and neutraceutical characteristics.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-015-1212-2 
PMCID: PMC4307630
PMID: 25609311  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

