
1. PLoS One. 2015 Jan 23;10(1):e0116262. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116262.
eCollection 2015.

Data mining strategies to improve multiplex microbead immunoassay tolerance in a 
mouse model of infectious diseases.

Mani A(1), Ravindran R(1), Mannepalli S(2), Vang D(1), Luciw PA(3), Hogarth M(4),
Khan IH(3), Krishnan VV(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Comparative Medicine, University of California Davis, Davis,
California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Chemistry, California State University, Fresno, California,
United States of America.
(3)Center for Comparative Medicine, University of California Davis, Davis,
California, United States of America; Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, University of California School of Medicine, Davis, California, United 
States of America.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California
School of Medicine, Davis, California, United States of America.
(5)Center for Comparative Medicine, University of California Davis, Davis,
California, United States of America; Department of Chemistry, California State
University, Fresno, California, United States of America; Department of Pathology
and Laboratory Medicine, University of California School of Medicine, Davis,
California, United States of America.

Multiplex methodologies, especially those with high-throughput capabilities
generate large volumes of data. Accumulation of such data (e.g., genomics,
proteomics, metabolomics etc.) is fast becoming more common and thus requires the
development and implementation of effective data mining strategies designed for
biological and clinical applications. Multiplex microbead immunoassay (MMIA), on 
xMAP or MagPix platform (Luminex), which is amenable to automation, offers a
major advantage over conventional methods such as Western blot or ELISA, for
increasing the efficiencies in serodiagnosis of infectious diseases. MMIA allows 
detection of antibodies and/or antigens efficiently for a wide range of
infectious agents simultaneously in host blood samples, in one reaction vessel.
In the process, MMIA generates large volumes of data. In this report we
demonstrate the application of data mining tools on how the inherent large volume
data can improve the assay tolerance (measured in terms of sensitivity and
specificity) by analysis of experimental data accumulated over a span of two
years. The combination of prior knowledge with machine learning tools provides an
efficient approach to improve the diagnostic power of the assay in a continuous
basis. Furthermore, this study provides an in-depth knowledge base to study
pathological trends of infectious agents in mouse colonies on a multivariate
scale. Data mining techniques using serodetection of infections in mice,
developed in this study, can be used as a general model for more complex
applications in epidemiology and clinical translational research.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116262 
PMCID: PMC4304816
PMID: 25614982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

