
1. Foodborne Pathog Dis. 2015 Apr;12(4):335-44. doi: 10.1089/fpd.2014.1856.

Expert elicitation as a means to attribute 28 enteric pathogens to foodborne,
waterborne, animal contact, and person-to-person transmission routes in Canada.

Butler AJ(1), Thomas MK, Pintar KD.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Foodborne , Environmental, and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, Public
Health Agency of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada .

Enteric illness contributes to a significant burden of illness in Canada and
globally. Understanding its sources is a critical step in identifying and
preventing health risks. Expert elicitation is a powerful tool, used previously, 
to obtain information about enteric illness source attribution where information 
is difficult or expensive to obtain. Thirty-one experts estimated transmission of
28 pathogens via major transmission routes (foodborne, waterborne, animal
contact, person-to-person, and other) at the point of consumption. The
elicitation consisted of a (snowball) recruitment phase; administration of a
pre-survey to collect background information, an introductory webinar, an
elicitation survey, a 1-day discussion, survey readministration, and a feedback
exercise, and surveys were administered online. Experts were prompted to quantify
changes in contamination at the point of entry into the kitchen versus point of
consumption. Estimates were combined via triangular probability distributions,
and medians and 90% credible-interval estimates were produced. Transmission was
attributed primarily to food for Bacillus cereus, Clostridium perfringens,
Cyclospora cayetanensis, Trichinella spp., all three Vibrio spp. categories
explored, and Yersinia enterocolitica. Multisource pathogens (e.g., transmitted
commonly through both water and food) such as Campylobacter spp., four
Escherichia coli categories, Listeria monocytogenes, Salmonella spp., and
Staphylococcus aureus were also estimated as mostly foodborne. Water was the
primary pathway for Giardia spp. and Cryptosporidium spp., and person-to-person
transmission dominated for six enteric viruses and Shigella spp. Consideration of
the point of attribution highlighted the importance of food handling and
cross-contamination in the transmission pathway. This study provides source
attribution estimates of enteric illness for Canada, considering all possible
transmission routes. Further research is necessary to improve our understanding
of poorly characterized pathogens such as sapovirus and E. coli subgroups in
Canada.

DOI: 10.1089/fpd.2014.1856 
PMID: 25835810  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

