
1. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Apr 27;11(4):e1004848. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004848.
eCollection 2015 Apr.

A neuron-specific antiviral mechanism prevents lethal flaviviral infection of
mosquitoes.

Xiao X(1), Zhang R(2), Pang X(3), Liang G(4), Wang P(5), Cheng G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, School of Medicine, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, People's Republic of China; Collaborative Innovation Center for
Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, Hangzhou, People's Republic of
China.
(2)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, School of Medicine, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, People's Republic of China; School of Life Science, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, School of Medicine, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(4)Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious
Diseases, Hangzhou, People's Republic of China; State Key Laboratory for
Infectious Disease Prevention and Control, National Institute for Viral Disease
Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, 
Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, New York
Medical College, Valhalla, New York, United States of America.

Mosquitoes are natural vectors for many etiologic agents of human viral diseases.
Mosquito-borne flaviviruses can persistently infect the mosquito central nervous 
system without causing dramatic pathology or influencing the mosquito behavior
and lifespan. The mechanism by which the mosquito nervous system resists
flaviviral infection is still largely unknown. Here we report that an Aedes
aegypti homologue of the neural factor Hikaru genki (AaHig) efficiently restricts
flavivirus infection of the central nervous system. AaHig was predominantly
expressed in the mosquito nervous system and localized to the plasma membrane of 
neural cells. Functional blockade of AaHig enhanced Dengue virus (DENV) and
Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV), but not Sindbis virus (SINV), replication in
mosquito heads and consequently caused neural apoptosis and a dramatic reduction 
in the mosquito lifespan. Consistently, delivery of recombinant AaHig to
mosquitoes reduced viral infection. Furthermore, the membrane-localized AaHig
directly interfaced with a highly conserved motif in the surface envelope
proteins of DENV and JEV, and consequently interrupted endocytic viral entry into
mosquito cells. Loss of either plasma membrane targeting or virion-binding
ability rendered AaHig nonfunctional. Interestingly, Culex pipien pallens Hig
also demonstrated a prominent anti-flavivirus activity, suggesting a functionally
conserved function for Hig. Our results demonstrate that an evolutionarily
conserved antiviral mechanism prevents lethal flaviviral infection of the central
nervous system in mosquitoes, and thus may facilitate flaviviral transmission in 
nature.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004848 
PMCID: PMC4411065
PMID: 25915054  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

