
1. J Virol. 2015 Jul;89(14):7385-400. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00567-15. Epub 2015 May 13.

Vinexin β Interacts with Hepatitis C Virus NS5A, Modulating Its
Hyperphosphorylation To Regulate Viral Propagation.

Xiong W(1), Yang J(1), Wang M(1), Wang H(1), Rao Z(1), Zhong C(1), Xin X(1), Mo
L(1), Yu S(1), Shen C(2), Zheng C(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, China China Center for Type Culture Collection, Wuhan University, Wuhan,
China cctcc202@whu.edu.cn shenchao@whu.edu.cn.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, China Hubei Provincial Cooperative Innovation Center of Industrial
Fermentation, Wuhan, China China Center for Type Culture Collection, Wuhan
University, Wuhan, China cctcc202@whu.edu.cn shenchao@whu.edu.cn.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) nonstructural protein 5A (NS5A) is essential for HCV
genome replication and virion production and is involved in the regulation of
multiple host signaling pathways. As a proline-rich protein, NS5A is capable of
interacting with various host proteins containing Src homology 3 (SH3) domains.
Previous studies have suggested that vinexin, a member of the sorbin homology
(SoHo) adaptor family, might be a potential binding partner of NS5A by yeast
two-hybrid screening. However, firm evidence for this interaction is lacking, and
the significance of vinexin in the HCV life cycle remains unclear. In this study,
we demonstrated that endogenously and exogenously expressed vinexin β
coimmunoprecipitated with NS5A derived from different HCV genotypes. Two
residues, tryptophan (W307) and tyrosine (Y325), in the third SH3 domain of
vinexin β and conserved Pro-X-X-Pro-X-Arg motifs at the C terminus of NS5A were
indispensable for the vinexin-NS5A interaction. Furthermore, downregulation of
endogenous vinexin β significantly suppressed NS5A hyperphosphorylation and
decreased HCV replication, which could be rescued by expressing a vinexin β short
hairpin RNA-resistant mutant. We also found that vinexin β modulated the
hyperphosphorylation of NS5A in a casein kinase 1α-dependent on manner. Taken
together, our findings suggest that vinexin β modulates NS5A phosphorylation via 
its interaction with NS5A, thereby regulating HCV replication, implicating
vinexin β in the viral life cycle.IMPORTANCE: Hepatitis C virus (HCV)
nonstructural protein NS5A is a phosphoprotein, and its phosphorylation states
are usually modulated by host kinases and other viral nonstructural elements.
Additionally, cellular factors containing Src homology 3 (SH3) domains have been 
reported to interact with proline-rich regions of NS5A. However, it is unclear
whether there are any relationships between NS5A phosphorylation and the NS5A-SH3
interaction, and little is known about the significance of this interaction in
the HCV life cycle. In this work, we demonstrate that vinexin β modulates NS5A
hyperphosphorylation through the NS5A-vinexin β interaction. Hyperphosphorylated 
NS5A induced by vinexin β is casein kinase 1α dependent and is also crucial for
HCV propagation. Overall, our findings not only elucidate the relationships
between NS5A phosphorylation and the NS5A-SH3 interaction but also shed new
mechanistic insight on Flaviviridae NS5A (NS5) phosphorylation. We believe that
our results may afford the potential to offer an antiviral therapeutic strategy.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00567-15 
PMCID: PMC4473562
PMID: 25972535  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

