
1. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 26;10(6):e0131000. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131000.
eCollection 2015.

Innovative Technological Approach to Ebola Virus Disease Outbreak Response in
Nigeria Using the Open Data Kit and Form Hub Technology.

Tom-Aba D(1), Olaleye A(2), Olayinka AT(3), Nguku P(4), Waziri N(4), Adewuyi
P(4), Adeoye O(4), Oladele S(5), Adeseye A(6), Oguntimehin O(7), Shuaib F(8).

Author information: 
(1)African Field Epidemiology Network, Abuja Office, Abuja, Nigeria.
(2)UNICEF Office, Lagos, Nigeria.
(3)Nigeria Field Epidemiology and Laboratory Training Programme, Abuja, Nigeria; 
Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, Nigeria.
(4)Nigeria Field Epidemiology and Laboratory Training Programme, Abuja, Nigeria.
(5)WHO Country Office, Abuja, Nigeria.
(6)Lagos State Ministry of Health, Lagos, Nigeria.
(7)Lagos State Primary Health Care Board, Lagos, Nigeria.
(8)Federal Ministry of Health, Abuja, Nigeria.

The recent outbreak of Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) in West Africa has ravaged many 
lives. Effective containment of this outbreak relies on prompt and effective
coordination and communication across various interventions; early detection and 
response being critical to successful control. The use of information and
communications technology (ICT) in active surveillance has proved to be effective
but its use in Ebola outbreak response has been limited. Due to the need for
timeliness in reporting and communication for early discovery of new EVD cases
and promptness in response; it became imperative to empower the response team
members with technologies and solutions which would enable smooth and rapid data 
flow. The Open Data Kit and Form Hub technology were used in combination with the
Dashboard technology and ArcGIS mapping for follow up of contacts, identification
of cases, case investigation and management and also for strategic planning
during the response. A remarkable improvement was recorded in the reporting of
daily follow-up of contacts after the deployment of the integrated real time
technology. The turnaround time between identification of symptomatic contacts
and evacuation to the isolation facility and also for receipt of laboratory
results was reduced and informed decisions could be taken by all concerned.
Accountability in contact tracing was ensured by the use of a GPS enabled device.
The use of innovative technologies in the response of the EVD outbreak in Nigeria
contributed significantly to the prompt control of the outbreak and containment
of the disease by providing a valuable platform for early warning and guiding
early actions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131000 
PMCID: PMC4482726
PMID: 26115402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

