
1. J Virol. 2015 Sep;89(18):9465-76. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00996-15. Epub 2015 Jul 8.

Human and Murine IFIT1 Proteins Do Not Restrict Infection of Negative-Sense RNA
Viruses of the Orthomyxoviridae, Bunyaviridae, and Filoviridae Families.

Pinto AK(1), Williams GD(1), Szretter KJ(1), White JP(1), Proença-Módena JL(2),
Liu G(3), Olejnik J(4), Brien JD(1), Ebihara H(5), Mühlberger E(4), Amarasinghe
G(3), Diamond MS(6), Boon AC(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA Department of Genetics, Evolution and Bioagents, Institute of
Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, SP, Brazil.
(3)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA National Emerging Infectious Diseases Laboratories, Boston
University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Laboratory of Virology, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rocky Mountain
Laboratories, Hamilton, Montana, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA Department of Pathology and Immunology,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA Department of Pathology and Immunology,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA
jboon@dom.wustl.edu.

Interferon-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 1 (IFIT1) is a host
protein with reported cell-intrinsic antiviral activity against several RNA
viruses. The proposed basis for the activity against negative-sense RNA viruses
is the binding to exposed 5'-triphosphates (5'-ppp) on the genome of viral RNA.
However, recent studies reported relatively low binding affinities of IFIT1 for
5'-ppp RNA, suggesting that IFIT1 may not interact efficiently with this moiety
under physiological conditions. To evaluate the ability of IFIT1 to have an
impact on negative-sense RNA viruses, we infected Ifit1(-/-) and wild-type
control mice and primary cells with four negative-sense RNA viruses (influenza A 
virus [IAV], La Crosse virus [LACV], Oropouche virus [OROV], and Ebola virus)
corresponding to three distinct families. Unexpectedly, a lack of Ifit1 gene
expression did not result in increased infection by any of these viruses in cell 
culture. Analogously, morbidity, mortality, and viral burdens in tissues were
identical between Ifit1(-/-) and control mice after infection with IAV, LACV, or 
OROV. Finally, deletion of the human IFIT1 protein in A549 cells did not affect
IAV replication or infection, and reciprocally, ectopic expression of IFIT1 in
HEK293T cells did not inhibit IAV infection. To explain the lack of antiviral
activity against IAV, we measured the binding affinity of IFIT1 for RNA
oligonucleotides resembling the 5' ends of IAV gene segments. The affinity for
5'-ppp RNA was approximately 10-fold lower than that for non-2'-O-methylated (cap
0) RNA oligonucleotides. Based on this analysis, we conclude that IFIT1 is not a 
dominant restriction factor against negative-sense RNA viruses.IMPORTANCE:
Negative-sense RNA viruses, including influenza virus and Ebola virus, have been 
responsible for some of the most deadly outbreaks in recent history. The host
interferon response and induction of antiviral genes contribute to the control of
infections by these viruses. IFIT1 is highly induced after virus infection and
reportedly has antiviral activity against several RNA and DNA viruses. However,
its role in restricting infection by negative-sense RNA viruses remains unclear. 
In this study, we evaluated the ability of IFIT1 to inhibit negative-sense RNA
virus replication and pathogenesis both in vitro and in vivo. Detailed cell
culture and animal studies demonstrated that IFIT1 is not a dominant restriction 
factor against three different families of negative-sense RNA viruses.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00996-15 
PMCID: PMC4542382
PMID: 26157117  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

