
1. J Virol. 2015 Nov;89(21):10891-900. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01514-15. Epub 2015 Aug 19.

Unique Determinants of Neuraminidase Inhibitor Resistance among N3, N7, and N9
Avian Influenza Viruses.

Song MS(1), Marathe BM(2), Kumar G(3), Wong SS(2), Rubrum A(2), Zanin M(2), Choi 
YK(4), Webster RG(2), Govorkova EA(2), Webby RJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee, USA College of Medicine and Medical Research Institute,
Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee, USA.
(3)Department of Structural Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee, USA.
(4)College of Medicine and Medical Research Institute, Chungbuk National
University, Cheongju, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee, USA Richard.Webby@stjude.org.

Human infections with avian influenza viruses are a serious public health
concern. The neuraminidase (NA) inhibitors (NAIs) are the frontline
anti-influenza drugs and are the major option for treatment of newly emerging
influenza. Therefore, it is essential to identify the molecular markers of NAI
resistance among specific NA subtypes of avian influenza viruses to help guide
clinical management. NAI-resistant substitutions in NA subtypes other than N1 and
N2 have been poorly studied. Here, we identified NA amino acid substitutions
associated with NAI resistance among influenza viruses of N3, N7, and N9 subtypes
which have been associated with zoonotic transmission. We applied random
mutagenesis and generated recombinant influenza viruses carrying single or double
NA substitution(s) with seven internal genes from A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 (H1N1)
virus. In a fluorescence-based NA inhibition assay, we identified three
categories of NA substitutions associated with reduced inhibition by NAIs
(oseltamivir, zanamivir, and peramivir): (i) novel subtype-specific substitutions
in or near the enzyme catalytic site (R152W, A246T, and D293N, N2 numbering),
(ii) subtype-independent substitutions (E119G/V and/or D and R292K), and (iii)
substitutions previously reported in other subtypes (Q136K, I222M, and E276D).
Our data show that although some markers of resistance are present across NA
subtypes, other subtype-specific markers can only be determined
empirically.IMPORTANCE: The number of humans infected with avian influenza
viruses is increasing, raising concerns of the emergence of avian influenza
viruses resistant to neuraminidase (NA) inhibitors (NAIs). Since most studies
have focused on NAI-resistance in human influenza viruses, we investigated the
molecular changes in NA that could confer NAI resistance in avian viruses grown
in immortalized monolayer cells, especially those of the N3, N7, and N9 subtypes,
which have caused human infections. We identified not only numerous NAI-resistant
substitutions previously reported in other NA subtypes but also several novel
changes conferring reduced susceptibility to NAIs, which are subtype specific.
The findings indicate that some resistance markers are common across NA subtypes,
but other markers need to be determined empirically for each subtype. The study
also implies that antiviral surveillance monitoring could play a critical role in
the clinical management of influenza virus infection and an essential component
of pandemic preparedness.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01514-15 
PMCID: PMC4621141
PMID: 26292325  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

