
1. J Clin Transl Hepatol. 2014 Jun;2(2):134-9. doi: 10.14218/JCTH.2013.00028. Epub
2014 Jun 15.

Interaction Between the Neglected Tropical Disease Human Schistosomiasis and HCV 
Infection in Egypt: a Puzzling Relationship.

Bahgat MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology and Infectious Diseases Group, Therapeutic Chemistry Department,
the Centre of Excellence for Advanced Sciences, the National Research Centre,
Dokki, Cairo, Egypt ; Research Group of Biomarkers for Infection and Immunity,
Institute of Experimental Infection Research, TWINCORE Centre for Experimental
and Clinical Infection Research, Hannover, Germany.

Egypt has the highest prevalence of chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection and
seropositivity worldwide, and it has been proposed that this enhanced
susceptibility to HCV is related to coinfection with schistosomiasis. Although
currently, there are no studies regarding the actual prevalence of both human
schistosomiasis and schistosomiasis/HCV coinfection evidences strongly support
that eliminating human schistosomiasis from Egypt is necessary to reduce both HCV
prevalence and liver pathology. The present review highlights the significant
impact of the neglected tropical disease human schistosomiasis on both
susceptibility of Egyptians to HCV coinfection, severity of the resulting liver
pathology, and poor response to antiviral therapy. The immune evasion mechanisms 
exerted by the HCV-NS3/4A protease domain, and the possible impact of immune
evasion mechanisms exerted by proteases of larval, worm and egg stages of the
parasite Schistosoma on human susceptibility to HCV infection are discussed. In
addition, schistosome immune evasion mechanisms may include immunosuppression
that in turn prevents clearance of HCV viremia and leads to relapsing HCV
infection and severe liver pathology. I propose the generation of a replicon
system from the most prevailing genotype (HCV-4a) in Egypt and establishing its
replication on hepatoplastoma or immune cells in presence of bilharzial antigens.
Finally, the use of a humanized small animal model that can acquire both HCV and 
S. mansoni infections will be important to further understand in real time the
impact of coinfection on both the immune system and liver pathology.

DOI: 10.14218/JCTH.2013.00028 
PMCID: PMC4521266
PMID: 26356794 

