
1. BMC Public Health. 2015 Sep 14;15:888. doi: 10.1186/s12889-015-2229-9.

Australian health care providers' views on opt-out HIV testing.

Leidel S(1), McConigley R(2), Boldy D(3), Wilson S(4), Girdler S(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, Midwifery and Paramedicine, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Curtin University, Perth, WA, Australia. stacy.leidel@student.curtin.edu.au.
(2)School of Nursing, Midwifery and Paramedicine, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Curtin University, Perth, WA, Australia. r.mcconigley@curtin.edu.au.
(3)School of Nursing, Midwifery and Paramedicine, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Curtin University, Perth, WA, Australia. d.boldy@curtin.edu.au.
(4)School of Nursing, Midwifery and Paramedicine, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Curtin University, Perth, WA, Australia. sally.wilson@curtin.edu.au.
(5)School of Occupational Therapy and Social Work, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Curtin University, Perth, WA, Australia. sonya.girdler@curtin.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Opt-out HIV testing is a novel concept in Australia. In the opt-out
approach, health care providers (HCPs) routinely test patients for HIV unless
they explicitly decline or defer. Opt-out HIV testing is only performed with the 
patients' consent, but pre-test counselling is abbreviated. Australian national
testing guidelines do not currently recommend opt-out HIV testing for the general
population. Non-traditional approaches to HIV testing (such as opt-out) could
identify HIV infections and facilitate earlier treatment, which is particularly
important now that HIV is a chronic, manageable disease. Our aim was to explore
HCPs' attitudes toward opt-out HIV testing in an Australian context, to further
understanding of its acceptability and feasibility.
METHODS: In this qualitative study, we used purposeful sampling to recruit HCPs
who were likely to have experience with HIV testing in Western Australia. We
interviewed them using a semi-structured guide and used content analysis as per
Graneheim to code the data. Codes were then merged into subcategories and finally
themes that unified the underlying concepts. We refined these themes through
discussion among the research team.
RESULTS: Twenty four HCPs participated. Eleven participants had a questioning
attitude toward opt-out HIV testing, while eleven favoured the approach. The
remaining two participants had more nuanced perspectives that incorporated some
characteristics of the questioning and favouring attitudes. Participants' views
about opt-out HIV testing largely fell into two contrasting themes: normalisation
and routinisation versus exceptionalism; and a need for proof versus openness to 
new approaches.
CONCLUSION: Most HCPs in this study had dichotomous attitudes toward opt-out HIV 
testing, reflecting contrasting analytical styles. While some HCPs viewed it
favourably, with the perceived benefits outweighing the perceived costs, others
preferred to have evidence of efficacy and cost-effectiveness.

DOI: 10.1186/s12889-015-2229-9 
PMCID: PMC4570459
PMID: 26369954  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

