
1. J Virol. 2015 Nov 11;90(3):1190-205. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01973-15. Print 2016 Feb 1.

Characterization of Recombinant Human Cytomegaloviruses Encoding IE1 Mutants
L174P and 1-382 Reveals that Viral Targeting of PML Bodies Perturbs both
Intrinsic and Innate Immune Responses.

Scherer M(1), Otto V(1), Stump JD(2), Klingl S(3), Müller R(1), Reuter N(1),
Muller YA(3), Sticht H(2), Stamminger T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical and Molecular Virology, Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 
Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Division of Bioinformatics, Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(3)Division of Biotechnology, Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(4)Institute for Clinical and Molecular Virology, Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 
Erlangen, Germany thomas.stamminger@viro.med.uni-erlangen.de.

PML is the organizer of cellular structures termed nuclear domain 10 (ND10) or
PML-nuclear bodies (PML-NBs) that act as key mediators of intrinsic immunity
against human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) and other viruses. The antiviral function of
ND10 is antagonized by viral regulatory proteins such as the immediate early
protein IE1 of HCMV. IE1 interacts with PML through its globular core domain
(IE1CORE) and induces ND10 disruption in order to initiate lytic HCMV infection. 
Here, we investigate the consequences of a point mutation (L174P) in IE1CORE,
which was shown to abrogate the interaction with PML, for lytic HCMV infection.
We found that a recombinant HCMV encoding IE1-L174P displays a severe growth
defect similar to that of an IE1 deletion virus. Bioinformatic modeling based on 
the crystal structure of IE1CORE suggested that insertion of proline into the
highly alpha-helical domain severely affects its structural integrity.
Consistently, L174P mutation abrogates the functionality of IE1CORE and results
in degradation of the IE1 protein during infection. In addition, our data provide
evidence that IE1CORE as expressed by a recombinant HCMV encoding IE1 1-382 not
only is required to antagonize PML-mediated intrinsic immunity but also affects a
recently described function of PML in innate immune signaling. We demonstrate a
coregulatory role of PML in type I and type II interferon-induced gene expression
and provide evidence that upregulation of interferon-induced genes is inhibited
by IE1CORE. In conclusion, our data suggest that targeting PML by viral
regulatory proteins represents a strategy to antagonize both intrinsic and innate
immune mechanisms.IMPORTANCE: PML nuclear bodies (PML-NBs), which represent
nuclear multiprotein complexes consisting of PML and additional proteins,
represent important cellular structures that mediate intrinsic resistance against
many viruses, including human cytomegalovirus (HCMV). During HCMV infection, the 
major immediate early protein IE1 binds to PML via a central globular domain
(IE1CORE), and we have shown previously that this is sufficient to antagonize
intrinsic immunity. Here, we demonstrate that modification of PML by IE1CORE not 
only abrogates intrinsic defense mechanisms but also attenuates the interferon
response during infection. Our data show that PML plays a novel coregulatory role
in type I as well as type II interferon-induced gene expression, which is
antagonized by IE1CORE. Importantly, our finding supports the view that targeting
of PML-NBs by viral regulatory proteins has evolved as a strategy to inhibit both
intrinsic and innate immune defense mechanisms.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01973-15 
PMCID: PMC4719593
PMID: 26559840  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

