
1. Germs. 2015 Dec 2;5(4):134-40. doi: 10.11599/germs.2015.1081. eCollection 2015
Dec.

Identification of occult hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection and viral antigens in 
healthcare workers who presented low to moderate levels of anti-HBs after HBV
vaccination.

Borzooy Z(1), Jazayeri SM(2), Mirshafiey A(3), Khamseh A(4), Mahmoudie MK(4),
Azimzadeh P(5), Geravand B(6), Boroumand MA(7), Afshar M(8), Poortahmasebi V(9), 
Hosseini M(10), Streinu-Cercel A(11).

Author information: 
(1)PhD student, Ms, Department of Infectious Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, Carol
Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania; Department of
Immunology and Department of Virology, School of Public Health, Tehran University
of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)MD, PhD, Clinical virologist, Hepatitis B Molecular Laboratory, Department of 
Virology, School of Public Health, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
Iran.
(3)Ms, PhD, Head of the Department of Pathobiology, School of Public Health,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Bs, Department of Virology, School of Public Health, Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Ms, Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases Research Center, Shahid Beheshti
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Ms, Ministry of Health and Medical Education, Tehran, Iran.
(7)MD, Pathologist, Department of Pathology, Tehran Heart Center, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(8)Bs, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Mirza Kouchak Khan Hospital,
Tehran, Iran.
(9)Ms, PhD student, Virologist, Department of Virology, School of Public Health, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(10)Ms, PhD, Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics School of Public
Health, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(11)MD, PhD, Professor, Department of Infectious Diseases, Carol Davila
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania; National Institute of
Infectious Diseases, "Prof. Dr. Matei Balş", Bucharest, Romania.

BACKGROUND: Worldwide, healthcare workers (HCWs) show different levels of
response to hepatitis B virus (HBV) vaccine. One of the factors associated with
vaccine unresponsiveness may be the existence of current or past HBV infection.
Regardless of the presence of HBsAg (overt infection), occult HBV infection (OBI,
defined as presence of HBV DNA in the absence of HBsAg) might also account for
some non- or hypo-response cases.
METHODS: Sera from 120 HBsAg-negative HCWs with low and moderate levels of
anti-HBs, <10 IU/mL (group I) and <100 IU/mL (group II) respectively, were
selected and were examined for OBI by sensitive real-time PCR regardless of HBV
serological profiles. Direct sequencing on surface genes was carried out in
OBI-positive cases.
RESULTS: Four (3.3%) were positive for OBI. All were negative for anti-HBc. Two
of the positive cases had moderate levels of anti-HBs (>10 to <100 IU/mL). No
significant differences were found between the two groups in terms of risk
factors or serological data. No mutations were found in surface proteins of OBI
cases.
CONCLUSION: OBI in these subjects might be due to other factors rather than
presence of "a" determinant mutations. Healthcare workers with inadequate to
moderate levels of anti-HBs (<100 IU/mL) following vaccination, regardless of
their serological profile for HBV, should be tested for the presence of HBV DNA
by sensitive molecular tests. Anti-HBc is not a reliable marker for suspicion of 
OBI, especially in high-risk group individuals.

DOI: 10.11599/germs.2015.1081 
PMCID: PMC4691194
PMID: 26716102 

