
1. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 1;11(2):e0147869. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0147869.
eCollection 2016.

Effect of O. porcinus Tick Salivary Gland Extract on the African Swine Fever
Virus Infection in Domestic Pig.

Bernard J(1)(2), Hutet E(1), Paboeuf F(1), Randriamparany T(3), Holzmuller P(2), 
Lancelot R(2), Rodrigues V(2), Vial L(2), Le Potier MF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unité Virologie et Immunologie Porcines, Laboratoire de Ploufragan-Plouzané,
Agence Nationale de Sécurité Sanitaire (Anses), Univ Bretagne Loire, Ploufragan, 
France.
(2)UMR CMAEE "Contrôle des maladies animales exotiques et émergentes", Centre de 
coopération internationale en recherche agronomique pour le développement
(CIRAD), Montpellier, France.
(3)Laboratoire National de Diagnostic Vétérinaire, Antananarivo, Madagascar.

African swine fever is a haemorrhagic disease in pig production that can have
disastrous financial consequences for farming. No vaccines are currently
available and animal slaughtering or area zoning to restrict risk-related
movements are the only effective measures to prevent the spread of the disease.
Ornithodoros soft ticks are known to transmit the African swine fever virus
(ASFV) to pigs in farms, following the natural epidemiologic cycle of the virus. 
Tick saliva has been shown to modulate the host physiological and immunological
responses during feeding on skin, thus affecting viral infection. To better
understand the interaction between soft tick, ASFV and pig at the bite location
and the possible influence of tick saliva on pig infection by ASFV, salivary
gland extract (SGE) of Ornithodoros porcinus, co-inoculated or not with ASFV, was
used for intradermal auricular inoculation. Our results showed that, after the
virus triggered the disease, pigs inoculated with virus and SGE presented greater
hyperthermia than pigs inoculated with virus alone. The density of Langerhans
cells was modulated at the tick bite or inoculation site, either through
recruitment by ASFV or inhibition by SGE. Additionally, SGE and virus induced
macrophage recruitment each. This effect was enhanced when they were
co-inoculated. Finally, the co-inoculation of SGE and virus delayed the early
local spread of virus to the first lymph node on the inoculation side. This study
has shown that the effect of SGE was powerful enough to be quantified in pig both
on the systemic and local immune response. We believe this model should be
developed with infected tick and could improve knowledge of both tick vector
competence and tick saliva immunomodulation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0147869 
PMCID: PMC4734713
PMID: 26828597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

