
1. J Vector Borne Dis. 2016 Mar;53(1):1-7.

Epidemiology of dengue in Nepal: History of incidence, current prevalence and
strategies for future control.

Subedi D, Taylor-Robinson AW(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical and Applied Sciences, Central Queensland University,
Rockhampton, Australia.

Dengue is now established as one of the most important arboviral infections. As
the epidemic continues unabated globally, this Aedes mosquito-transmitted
pathogen is considered a major re-emerging tropical disease and significant
public health concern. Four well-established distinct serotypes of dengue virus, 
with a fifth one recently proposed, are responsible for causing a spectrum of
clinical symptoms in humans ranging from mild fever to severe haemorrhagic
manifestations. Indigenous cases of dengue were first recognised in Nepal, a
Himalayan country bordered by India and China, just a decade ago in a cluster of 
tropical and subtropical areas. Subsequently, the range of infection has extended
all over the country and now comprises not only low lying regions, but also hilly
locations including the capital city Kathmandu. The two major epidemics to date, 
in 2010 and 2013, have demonstrated the capacity of infection outbreaks to be
explosive and challenging to currently available disease control measures. There 
is a pressing need to undertake effective vector surveillance studies supported
by provision of well-equipped diagnostic virology laboratories. However, sincere 
efforts are being made to map the nationwide prevalence and understand the
epidemiology of dengue infection. Yet, the precise burden of dengue in Nepal
remains unknown, since most reports are confined to economically affluent areas
and do not account for regions of relative social deprivation in which disease is
more likely to occur. This review presents a current overview of dengue in Nepal 
and discusses future prospects for control of this debilitating disease in the
country.


PMID: 27004572  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

