
1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Apr 20;7:509. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00509. eCollection
2016.

Development of Monoclonal Antibody and Diagnostic Test for Middle East
Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Using Cell-Free Synthesized Nucleocapsid
Antigen.

Yamaoka Y(1), Matsuyama S(2), Fukushi S(3), Matsunaga S(4), Matsushima Y(5),
Kuroyama H(6), Kimura H(7), Takeda M(2), Chimuro T(6), Ryo A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Yokohama City
UniversityYokohama, Japan; Isehara Research Laboratory, Technology and
Development Division, Kanto Chemical Co., Inc.Isehara, Japan.
(2)Department of Virology III, National Institute of Infectious Diseases
Musashimurayama, Japan.
(3)Department of Virology I, National Institute of Infectious Diseases
Musashimurayama, Japan.
(4)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Yokohama City University
Yokohama, Japan.
(5)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Yokohama City
UniversityYokohama, Japan; Division of Virology, Kawasaki City Institute for
Public HealthKawasaki, Japan.
(6)Isehara Research Laboratory, Technology and Development Division, Kanto
Chemical Co., Inc. Isehara, Japan.
(7)Infectious Disease Surveillance Center, National Institute of Infectious
Diseases Musashimurayama, Japan.

Protein nativity is one of the most critical factors for the quality of antigens 
used as immunogens and the reactivities of the resultant antibodies. The
preparation and purification of native viral antigens in conventional cell-based 
protein expression systems are often accompanied by technical hardships. These
challenges are attributable mainly to protein aggregation and insolubility during
expression and purification, as well as to very low expression levels associated 
with the toxicity of some viral proteins. Here, we describe a novel approach for 
the production of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against nucleocapsid protein (NP) 
of the Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV). Using a wheat
germ cell-free protein synthesis system, we successfully prepared large amounts
of MERS-CoV NP antigen in a state that was highly soluble and intact for
immunization. Following mouse immunization and hybridoma generation, we selected 
seven hybridoma clones that produced mAbs with exclusive reactivity against
MERS-CoV NP. Epitope mapping and subsequent bioinformatic analysis revealed that 
these mAbs recognized epitopes located within relatively highly conserved regions
of the MERS-CoV amino-acid sequence. Consistently, the mAbs exhibited no obvious 
cross-reactivity with NPs derived from other related viruses, including SARS
coronavirus. After determining the optimal combinations of these mAbs, we
developed an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and a rapid immunochromatographic 
antigen detection test that can be reliably used for laboratory diagnosis of
MERS-CoV. Thus, this study provides strong evidence that the wheat germ cell-free
system is useful for the production of diagnostic mAbs against emerging
pathogens.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00509 
PMCID: PMC4837155
PMID: 27148198 

