
1. PLoS One. 2016 May 18;11(5):e0155897. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0155897.
eCollection 2016.

JC Polyomavirus Abundance and Distribution in Progressive Multifocal
Leukoencephalopathy (PML) Brain Tissue Implicates Myelin Sheath in Intracerebral 
Dissemination of Infection.

Wharton KA Jr(1), Quigley C(1), Themeles M(1), Dunstan RW(1), Doyle K(2),
Cahir-McFarland E(2), Wei J(3), Buko A(3), Reid CE(4), Sun C(4), Carmillo P(4),
Sur G(4), Carulli JP(4), Mansfield KG(5), Westmoreland SV(5), Staugaitis SM(6),
Fox RJ(7), Meier W(8), Goelz SE(9).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Pathology Laboratory, Biogen Inc., Cambridge, MA, United States 
of America.
(2)Immunology, Biogen Inc., Cambridge, MA, United States of America.
(3)Bioanalytical Chemistry, Biogen Inc., Cambridge, MA, United States of America.
(4)Molecular Discovery, Biogen Inc., Cambridge, MA, United States of America.
(5)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, New England Primate Research 
Center, Southborough, MA, United States of America.
(6)Departments of Pathology, Neurosciences, and Mellen Center for Multiple
Sclerosis, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, United States of America.
(7)Mellen Center for Multiple Sclerosis, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, United 
States of America.
(8)Discovery Sciences, Biogen Inc, Cambridge, MA, United States of America.
(9)Neurology, Biogen Inc, Cambridge, MA, United States of America.

Over half of adults are seropositive for JC polyomavirus (JCV), but rare
individuals develop progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), a
demyelinating JCV infection of the central nervous system. Previously, PML was
primarily seen in immunosuppressed patients with AIDS or certain cancers, but it 
has recently emerged as a drug safety issue through its association with diverse 
immunomodulatory therapies. To better understand the relationship between the JCV
life cycle and PML pathology, we studied autopsy brain tissue from a 70-year-old 
psoriasis patient on the integrin alpha-L inhibitor efalizumab following a ~2
month clinical course of PML. Sequence analysis of lesional brain tissue
identified PML-associated viral mutations in regulatory (non-coding control
region) DNA, capsid protein VP1, and the regulatory agnoprotein, as well as 9
novel mutations in capsid protein VP2, indicating rampant viral evolution. Nine
samples, including three gross PML lesions and normal-appearing adjacent tissues,
were characterized by histopathology and subject to quantitative genomic,
proteomic, and molecular localization analyses. We observed a striking
correlation between the spatial extent of demyelination, axonal destruction, and 
dispersion of JCV along white matter myelin sheath. Our observations in this
case, as well as in a case of PML-like disease in an immunocompromised rhesus
macaque, suggest that long-range spread of polyomavirus and axonal destruction in
PML might involve extracellular association between virus and the white matter
myelin sheath.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0155897 
PMCID: PMC4871437
PMID: 27191595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

