
1. mSphere. 2016 May 18;1(3). pii: e00086-16. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00086-16.
eCollection 2016 May-Jun.

Engineering Recombinant Reoviruses To Display gp41 Membrane-Proximal
External-Region Epitopes from HIV-1.

Boehme KW(1), Ikizler M(1), Iskarpatyoti JA(1), Wetzel JD(1), Willis J(2), Crowe 
JE Jr(3), LaBranche CC(4), Montefiori DC(4), Wilson GJ(1), Dermody TS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee, USA; Elizabeth B. Lamb Center for Pediatric Research, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, USA;
Vanderbilt Vaccine Center, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee, USA; Vanderbilt Vaccine Center, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, Tennessee, USA; Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(4)Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina,
USA; Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina, USA; Laboratory for AIDS Vaccine Research and Development, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee, USA; Elizabeth B. Lamb Center for Pediatric Research, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA; Department of Pathology,
Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee, USA.

The gp41 membrane-proximal external region (MPER) is a target for broadly
neutralizing antibody responses against human immunodeficiency virus type 1
(HIV-1). However, replication-defective virus vaccines currently under evaluation
in clinical trials do not efficiently elicit MPER-specific antibodies. Structural
modeling suggests that the MPER forms an α-helical coiled coil that is required
for function and immunogenicity. To maintain the native MPER conformation, we
used reverse genetics to engineer replication-competent reovirus vectors that
displayed MPER sequences in the α-helical coiled-coil tail domain of viral
attachment protein σ1. Sequences in reovirus strain type 1 Lang (T1L) σ1 were
exchanged with sequences encoding HIV-1 strain Ba-L MPER epitope 2F5 or the
entire MPER. Individual 2F5 or MPER substitutions were introduced at
virion-proximal or virion-distal sites in the σ1 tail. Recombinant reoviruses
containing heterologous HIV-1 sequences were viable and produced progeny yields
comparable to those with wild-type virus. HIV-1 sequences were retained following
10 serial passages in cell culture, indicating that the substitutions were
genetically stable. Recombinant viruses engineered to display the 2F5 epitope or 
full-length MPER in σ1 were recognized by purified 2F5 antibody. Inoculation of
mice with 2F5-containing vectors or rabbits with 2F5- or MPER-containing vectors 
elicited anti-reovirus antibodies, but HIV-1-specific antibodies were not
detected. Together, these findings indicate that heterologous sequences that form
α-helices can functionally replace native sequences in the α-helical tail domain 
of reovirus attachment protein σ1. However, although these vectors retain native 
antigenicity, they were not immunogenic, illustrating the difficulty of
experimentally inducing immune responses to this essential region of HIV-1.
IMPORTANCE Vaccines to protect against HIV-1, the causative agent of AIDS, are
not approved for use. Antibodies that neutralize genetically diverse strains of
HIV-1 bind to discrete regions of the envelope glycoproteins, including the gp41 
MPER. We engineered recombinant reoviruses that displayed MPER epitopes in
attachment protein σ1 (REO-MPER vectors). The REO-MPER vectors replicated with
wild-type efficiency, were genetically stable, and retained native antigenicity. 
However, we did not detect HIV-1-specific immune responses following inoculation 
of the REO-MPER vectors into small animals. This work provides proof of principle
for engineering reovirus to express antigenic epitopes and illustrates the
difficulty in eliciting MPER-specific immune responses.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00086-16 
PMCID: PMC4888892
PMID: 27303748 

