
1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Jun 17;7:962. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00962. eCollection
2016.

Human Oncogenic Herpesvirus and Post-translational Modifications -
Phosphorylation and SUMOylation.

Chang PC(1), Campbell M(2), Robertson ES(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming University
Taipei, China.
(2)UC Davis Cancer Center, University of California, Davis, Davis CA, USA.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Tumor Virology Program, Abramson Cancer 
Center, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia PA, USA.

Pathogens, especially viruses, evolve abilities to utilize cellular machineries
to facilitate their survival and propagation. Post-translational modifications
(PTMs), especially phosphorylation and SUMOylation, that reversibly modulate the 
function and interactions of target proteins are among the most important
features in cell signaling pathways. PTM-dependent events also serve as one of
the favorite targets for viruses. Among the seven unambiguous human oncogenic
viruses, hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV), Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV), Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV), human papillomavirus
(HPV), Human T lymphotrophic virus-1 (HTLV-1), and Merkel cell polyomavirus
(MCPyV), two are herpesviruses. The life cycle of herpesviruses consists of
latent and lytic phases and the rapid switch between these states includes global
remodeling of the viral genome from heterochromatin-to-euchromatin. The balance
between lytic replication and latency is essential for herpesvirus to maintain a 
persistent infection through a combination of viral propagation and evasion of
the host immune response, which consequently may contribute to tumorigenesis. It 
is no surprise that the swift reversibility of PTMs, especially SUMOylation, a
modification that epigenetically regulates chromatin structure, is a major hijack
target of the host for oncogenic herpesviruses. In this brief review, we
summarize the varied ways in which herpesviruses engage the host immune
components through PTMs, focusing on phosphorylation and SUMOylation.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00962 
PMCID: PMC4911386
PMID: 27379086 

