
1. In Vivo. 2016 09-10;30(5):677-80.

Remission of Psoriasis in a Patient with Hepatocellular Carcinoma Treated with
Sorafenib.

Antoniou EA(1), Koutsounas I(2), Damaskos C(3), Koutsounas S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Propedeutic Surgery, "Laiko" General Hospital, National
and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Medical School, Athens, Greece.
(2)Academic Department of Gastroenterology, Ethnikon and Kapodistriakon
University, School of Medical Sciences, Laikon General Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(3)Second Department of Propedeutic Surgery, "Laiko" General Hospital, National
and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Medical School, Athens, Greece
x_damaskos@yahoo.gr.
(4)First Department of Internal Medicine, Sismanogleion General Hospital, Athens,
Greece.

BACKGROUND: Psoriasis is a chronic, immune-mediated and angiogenesis-dependent
disease. Activated keratinocytes in psoriatic lesions produce pro-angiogenic
cytokines, including vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which binds to
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR) and promotes cell
proliferation and angiogenesis. Sorafenib (BAY 43-9006) is a molecular
multikinase inhibitor of RAF kinase, platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF),
VEGFR-1, -2, -3, platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR)-β and c-Kit.
This molecule inhibits tumor cell proliferation and angiogenesis and it is
currently approved for the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
CASE REPORT: We present the complete remission of resistant psoriasis in a
hepatitis C virus (HCV)-infected cirrhotic patient who was treated with
sorafenib, for recurrent HCC.
CONCLUSION: Several targeted therapies have demonstrated efficacy against
psoriasis. More research and well-designed studies, both in novel drugs and those
already marketed for other indications, are needed to determine their value as
potential novel therapies for psoriasis.

Copyright © 2016 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.


PMID: 27566090  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

