
1. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2016 Oct;135:27-35. doi:
10.1016/j.cmpb.2016.07.018. Epub 2016 Jul 14.

Computational determination of the effects of virulent Escherichia coli and
salmonella bacteriophages on human gut.

Mostafa MM(1), Nassef M(2), Badr A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Computers and Information, Cairo
University, Egypt. Electronic address: m.mostafa_fci@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Computers and Information, Cairo
University, Egypt. Electronic address: m.nassef@fci-cu.edu.eg.
(3)Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Computers and Information, Cairo
University, Egypt. Electronic address: amr.badr@fci-cu.edu.eg.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Salmonella and Escherichia coli are different types of 
bacteria that cause food poisoning in humans. In the elderly, infants and people 
with chronic conditions, it is very dangerous if Salmonella or E. coli gets into 
the bloodstream and then they must be treated by phage therapy. Treating
Salmonella and E. coli by phage therapy affects the gut flora. This research
paper presents a system for detecting the effects of virulent E. coli and
Salmonella bacteriophages on human gut.
METHODS: A method based on Domain-Domain Interactions (DDIs) model is implemented
in the proposed system to determine the interactions between the proteins of
human gut bacteria and the proteins of bacteriophages that infect virulent E.
coli and Salmonella. The system helps gastroenterologists to realize the effect
of injecting bacteriophages that infect virulent E. coli and Salmonella on the
human gut.
RESULTS: By testing the system over Enterobacteria phage 933W, Enterobacteria
phage VT2-Sa and Enterobacteria phage P22, it resulted in four interactions
between the proteins of the bacteriophages that infect E. coli O157:H7, E. coli
O104:H4 and Salmonella typhimurium and the proteins of human gut bacterium
strains.
CONCLUSION: Several effects were detected such as: antibacterial activity against
a number of bacterial species in human gut, regulation of cellular
differentiation and organogenesis during gut, lung, and heart development,
ammonia assimilation in bacteria, yeasts, and plants, energizing defense system
and its function in the detoxification of lipopolysaccharide, and in the
prevention of bacterial translocation in human gut.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2016.07.018 
PMID: 27586477  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

