
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2017 Oct;64(5):1371-1379. doi: 10.1111/tbed.12555. Epub
2016 Sep 11.

An Update on Canine, Feline and Bovine Papillomaviruses.

Gil da Costa RM(1)(2), Peleteiro MC(3), Pires MA(4), DiMaio D(5)(6)(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)LEPABE, Chemical Engineering Department, Faculty of Engineering, University of
Porto (FEUP), Porto, Portugal.
(2)Molecular Oncology and Viral Pathology Group, CI-IPOP, Portuguese Institute of
Oncology, Porto, Portugal.
(3)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, CIISA, University of Lisbon, Lisboa, Portugal.
(4)Veterinary Sciences Department, CECAV, University of Trás-os-Montes e Alto
Douro (UTAD), Vila Real, Portugal.
(5)Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(6)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New
Haven, CT, USA.
(7)Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT,
USA.
(8)Yale Cancer Center, New Haven, CT, USA.

Over recent years, a growing number of papillomaviruses have been identified,
which cause a wide range of lesions in domestic and wild animals.
Papillomavirus-induced lesions may have a great impact on animal health, and some
diseases observed in farm animals are associated with significant economic
losses. This concise review brings together recent advancements on animal
papillomavirus research, providing the scientific community and veterinary
practitioners with an update on this rapidly evolving field. Among others,
bovine, canine and feline papillomaviruses (BPV, CPV and FcaPV) are most
extensively discussed, in view of the recent discovery of new viral types and
their worldwide importance for animal health. Feline papillomaviruses 2 is an
emerging, highly prevalent pathogen in domestic cats, associated with a subset of
malignant skin lesions. Aspects related to cross-species infection by BPV and its
environmental co-factors are also addressed. Animal papillomaviruses are also
fascinating models for studying molecular and cell biology and have recently
inspired some major breakthroughs. Overall, it is clear that additional,
international and systematic efforts are needed to clarify which lesions are
caused by which viral types and to develop experimental models for studying
animal papillomavirus.

© 2016 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.12555 
PMID: 27615361  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

