
1. JCI Insight. 2016 Aug 4;1(12):e88787. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.88787.

Decreases in thymopoiesis of astronauts returning from space flight.

Benjamin CL(1), Stowe RP(2), St John L(3), Sams CF(4), Mehta SK(5), Crucian
BE(4), Pierson DL(4), Komanduri KV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Adult Stem Cell Transplant Program, University of Miami Sylvester Cancer
Center, Miami, Florida, USA.
(2)Microgen Laboratories, La Marque, Texas, USA.
(3)University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(4)NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(5)Jestech, Houston, Texas, USA.

Following the advent of molecular assays that measure T cell receptor excision
circles (TRECs) present in recent thymic emigrants, it has been conclusively
shown that thymopoiesis persists in most adults, but that functional output
decreases with age, influencing the maintenance of a diverse and functional T
cell receptor (TCR) repertoire. Space flight has been shown to result in a
variety of phenotypic and functional changes in human T cells and in the
reactivation of latent viruses. While space flight has been shown to influence
thymic architecture in rodents, thymopoiesis has not previously been assessed in 
astronauts. Here, we assessed thymopoiesis longitudinally over a 1-year period
prior to and after long-term space flight (median duration, 184 days) in 16
astronauts. While preflight assessments of thymopoiesis remained quite stable in 
individual astronauts, we detected significant suppression of thymopoiesis in all
subjects upon return from space flight. We also found significant increases in
urine and plasma levels of endogenous glucocorticoids coincident with the
suppression of thymopoiesis. The glucocorticoid induction and thymopoiesis
suppression were transient, and they normalized shortly after return to Earth.
This is the first report to our knowledge to prospectively demonstrate a
significant change in thymopoiesis in healthy individuals in association with a
defined physiologic emotional and physical stress event. These results suggest
that suppression of thymopoiesis has the potential to influence the maintenance
of the TCR repertoire during extended space travel. Further studies of
thymopoiesis and endogenous glucocorticoids in other stress states, including
illness, are warranted.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.88787 
PMCID: PMC5033888
PMID: 27699228  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

