
1. J Zhejiang Univ Sci B. 2016 Nov.;17(11):874-881.

Fungal spondylodiscitis in a patient recovered from H7N9 virus infection: a case 
study and a literature review of the differences between Candida and Aspergillus 
spondylodiscitis.

Yu LD(1), Feng ZY(1), Wang XW(1), Ling ZH(1), Lin XJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310003, China.

To report a rare case of fungal spondylodiscitis in a patient recovered from H7N9
virus infection and perform a literature review of the different characteristics 
of Candida and Aspergillus spondylodiscitis, we reviewed cases of
spondylodiscitis caused by Candida and Aspergillus species. Data, including
patients' information, pathogenic species, treatment strategy, outcomes, and
relapses, were collected and summarized. The characteristics of Candida and
Aspergillus spondylodiscitis were compared to see if any differences in clinical 
features, management, or consequences could be detected. The subject of the case 
study was first misdiagnosed as having a vertebral tumor, and then, following
open biopsy, was diagnosed as having fungal spondylodiscitis. The patient made a 
good recovery following radical debridement. Seventy-seven additional cases of
Candida spondylodiscitis and 94 cases of Aspergillus spondylodiscitis were
identified in the literature. Patients with Candida spondylodiscitis tended to
have a better outcome than patients with Aspergillus spondylodiscitis (cure rate 
92.3% vs. 70.2%). Candida was found more frequently (47.8%) than Aspergillus
(26.7%) in blood cultures, while neurological deficits were observed more often
in patients with Aspergillus spondylodiscitis (43.6% vs. 25.6%). Candida spinal
infections were more often treated by radical debridement (60.5% vs. 39.6%).
Patients with Candida spondylodiscitis have better outcomes, which may be
associated with prompt recognition, radical surgical debridement, and azoles
therapy. A good outcome can be expected in fungal spondylodiscitis with
appropriate operations and anti-fungal drugs.

DOI: 10.1631/jzus.B1600077 
PMCID: PMC5120229
PMID: 27819134  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Compliance with ethics guidelines: Lie-dao YU,
Zhi-yun FENG, Xuan-wei WANG, Zhi-heng LING, and Xiang-jin LIN declared that they 
have no conflict of interest. All procedures followed were in accordance with the
ethical standards of the responsible committee on human experimentation
(institutional and national) and with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as
revised in 2008 (5). Informed consent was obtained from the patient for being
included in the study and the work was approved by the ethical committee of the
First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University (Hangzhou,
China).

