
1. Dis Aquat Organ. 2017 Jan 24;122(3):213-221. doi: 10.3354/dao03076.

Transmission potential of infectious hematopoietic necrosis virus in
APEX-IHN®-vaccinated Atlantic salmon.

Long A(1), Richard J, Hawley L, LaPatra SE, Garver KA.

Author information: 
(1)Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Pacific Biological Station, Nanaimo, BC V9T 6N7, 
Canada.

Infectious hematopoietic necrosis virus (IHNV) outbreaks have had a significant
negative impact on Atlantic salmon Salmo salar production in British Columbia,
Canada, since the first outbreak was reported in 1992. In 2005, the APEX-IHN®
vaccine was approved for use in Canada for prevention of IHN. The vaccine was
proven to be safe and efficacious prior to approval; however, it is unknown as to
whether APEX-IHN®-vaccinated Atlantic salmon infected with IHNV can support
replication and virus shedding in sufficient quantities to provide an infectious 
dose to a nearby susceptible host. To determine whether vaccinated, infected fish
are able to transmit an infectious dose of IHNV, vaccinated Atlantic salmon were 
injected with IHNV (104 plaque-forming units per fish) and cohabitated with
either naïve Atlantic salmon or naïve sockeye salmon Oncorhynchus nerka.
APEX-IHN®-vaccinated fish were significantly protected against IHNV with
mortality occurring in only 2.6% of the population as opposed to 97% in
unvaccinated controls. Vaccination in IHNV-infected Atlantic salmon completely
abolished disease transmission to cohabitating naïve sockeye salmon and reduced
virus spread among cohabitating naïve Atlantic salmon. At 7 mo post-vaccination, 
IHNV-neutralizing antibodies were detected in nearly all vaccinated fish (94%)
with similar titer occurring between vaccinated, infected fish and vaccinated,
uninfected fish, indicating APEX-IHN® vaccination induces a robust seroconversion
response. Taken together, these results demonstrate that vaccination greatly
reduces the infectious load and potential for IHNV transmission. As such,
APEX-IHN® should be included in fish health management strategies when culturing 
Atlantic salmon in IHNV endemic areas.

DOI: 10.3354/dao03076 
PMID: 28117300  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

