
1. J Virol. 1988 Jan;62(1):188-95.

A human cytomegalovirus function inhibits replication of herpes simplex virus.

Cockley KD(1), Shiraki K, Rapp F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine,
Hershey 17033.

Human embryonic lung (HEL) cells infected with human cytomegalovirus (HCMV)
restricted the replication of herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1). A delay in HSV
replication of 15 h as well as a consistent, almost 3 log inhibition of HSV
replication in HCMV-infected cell cultures harvested 24 to 72 h after
superinfection were observed compared with controls infected with HSV alone.
Treatment of HCMV-infected HEL cells with cycloheximide (100 micrograms/ml) for 3
or 24 h, conditions known to result in accumulation of HCMV immediate-early and
early mRNA, was demonstrated effective in blocking HCMV protein synthesis, as
shown by immunoprecipitation with HCMV antibody-positive polyvalent serum.
Cycloheximide treatment of HCMV-infected HEL cells and removal of the
cycloheximide block before superinfection inhibited HSV-1 replication more
efficiently than non-drug-treated superinfected controls. HCMV DNA-negative
temperature-sensitive mutants restricted HSV as efficiently as wild-type HCMV
suggesting that immediate-early and/or early events which occur before viral DNA 
synthesis are sufficient for inhibition of HSV. Inhibition of HSV-1 in
HCMV-infected HEL cells was unaffected by elevated temperature (40.5 degrees C). 
However, prior UV irradiation of HCMV removed the block to HSV replication,
demonstrating the requirement for an active HCMV genome. HSV-2 replication was
similarly inhibited in HCMV-infected HEL cells. However, replication of
adenovirus, another DNA virus, was not restricted in these cells under the same
conditions. Superinfection of HCMV-infected HEL cells with HSV-1 labeled with
[3H]thymidine provided evidence that the labeled virus could penetrate to the
nucleus of cells after superinfection. Evidence for penetration of superinfecting
HSV into HCMV-infected cells was also provided by blot hybridization of HSV DNA
synthesized in cells infected with HSV alone versus superinfected cell cultures
at 0 and 48 h after superinfection. In addition, superinfection with vesicular
stomatitis virus ruled out a role for interferon in restriction of HSV
replication in this system.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.62.1.188-195.1988 
PMCID: PMC250518
PMID: 2824846  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

