
1. Travel Med Infect Dis. 2017 Jul - Aug;18:57-66. doi: 10.1016/j.tmaid.2017.05.004.
Epub 2017 May 6.

Mapping the ecoepidemiology of Zika virus infection in urban and rural areas of
Pereira, Risaralda, Colombia, 2015-2016: Implications for public health and
travel medicine.

Rodriguez-Morales AJ(1), Ruiz P(2), Tabares J(2), Ossa CA(3), Yepes-Echeverry
MC(4), Ramirez-Jaramillo V(4), Galindo-Marquez ML(4), García-Loaiza CJ(4),
Sabogal-Roman JA(4), Parra-Valencia E(5), Lagos-Grisales GJ(6), Lozada-Riascos
CO(7), de Pijper CA(8), Grobusch MP(9).

Author information: 
(1)Public Health and Infection Research Group, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Universidad Tecnologica de Pereira, Pereira, Risaralda, Colombia; Committee on
Travel Medicine, Asociación Panamericana de Infectología, Quito, Ecuador;
Colombian Collaborative Network of Zika (RECOLZIKA), Pereira, Risaralda,
Colombia. Electronic address: arodriguezm@utp.edu.co.
(2)Colombian Collaborative Network of Zika (RECOLZIKA), Pereira, Risaralda,
Colombia; Secretary of Health and Social Security of Pereira, Pereira, Risaralda,
Colombia.
(3)Secretary of Health and Social Security of Pereira, Pereira, Risaralda,
Colombia.
(4)Public Health and Infection Research Group, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Universidad Tecnologica de Pereira, Pereira, Risaralda, Colombia.
(5)Colombian Collaborative Network of Zika (RECOLZIKA), Pereira, Risaralda,
Colombia; Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Católica de la Santísima Concepción, 
Concepción, Chile.
(6)Public Health and Infection Research Group, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Universidad Tecnologica de Pereira, Pereira, Risaralda, Colombia; Colombian
Collaborative Network of Zika (RECOLZIKA), Pereira, Risaralda, Colombia.
(7)Public Health and Infection Research Group, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Universidad Tecnologica de Pereira, Pereira, Risaralda, Colombia; Colombian
Collaborative Network of Zika (RECOLZIKA), Pereira, Risaralda, Colombia; Regional
Information System, Universidad Tecnológica de Pereira, Pereira, Risaralda,
Colombia.
(8)Center of Tropical Medicine and Travel Medicine, Department of Infectious
Diseases, Division of Internal Medicine, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(9)Colombian Collaborative Network of Zika (RECOLZIKA), Pereira, Risaralda,
Colombia; Center of Tropical Medicine and Travel Medicine, Department of
Infectious Diseases, Division of Internal Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Geographical information systems (GIS) have been demonstrated earlier 
to be of great use to inform public health action against vector-borne infectious
diseases.
METHODS: Using surveillance data on the ongoing ZIKV outbreak from Pereira,
Colombia (2015-2016), we estimated incidence rates (cases/100,000 population),
and developed maps correlating with the ecoepidemiology of the area.
RESULTS: Up to October 8, 2016, 439 cases of ZIKV were reported in Pereira (93
cases/100,000 pop.), with highest rates in the South-West area. At the
corregiments (sub-municipalities) of Pereira, Caimalito presented the highest
rate. An urban area, Cuba, has 169 cases/100,000 pop., with a low economical
level and the highest Aedic index (9.1%). Entomological indexes were associated
with ZIKV incidence at simple and multiple non-linear regressions (r2 > 0.25;
p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Combining entomological, environmental, human population density,
travel patterns and case data of vector-borne infections, such as ZIKV, leads to 
a valuable tool that can be used to pinpoint hotspots also for infections such as
dengue, chikungunya and malaria. Such a tool is key to planning mosquito control 
and the prevention of mosquito-borne diseases in local populations. Such data
also enable microepidemiology and the prediction of risk for travelers who visit 
specific areas in a destination country.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tmaid.2017.05.004 
PMID: 28487212  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

