
1. Indian J Ophthalmol. 2017 Apr;65(4):276-281. doi: 10.4103/ijo.IJO_761_15.

Coexistence of herpes simplex virus infection in microsporidial stromal keratitis
associated with granulomatous inflammation.

Mittal R(1), Balne PK(2), Sahu S(3), Das S(3), Sharma S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dalmia Ophthalmic Pathology Services, L. V. Prasad Eye Institute, Bhubaneswar,
Orissa, India.
(2)Ocular Microbiology Services, L. V. Prasad Eye Institute, Bhubaneswar, Orissa;
Jhaveri Microbiology Centre, L. V. Prasad Eye Institute, Hyderabad, Telangana,
India.
(3)Department of Cornea and Anterior Segment Services, Tej Kohli Cornea
Institute, L. V. Prasad Eye Institute, Bhubaneswar, Orissa, India.

BACKGROUND: Microsporidial stromal keratitis poses several diagnostic challenges.
Patients may present with corneal ulceration, marked stromal thinning, or even as
a quite corneal scar. The presentation of microsporidial stromal keratitis
commonly mimics viral keratitis. Microbiology scrapings are usually helpful;
however, scraping and culture-negative cases pose a significant diagnostic
dilemma. Histopathological examination is diagnostic but shows varying degree of 
inflammation, predominantly composed of polymorphonuclear leukocytes.
Granulomatous inflammation, in microsporidial stromal keratitis, is never well
described, and the authors in this article aim to describe the presence of
granulomatous inflammation in microsporidial stromal keratitis, in patients with 
associated herpes simplex virus (HSV) keratitis.
METHODS: This was a retrospective and observational study conducted at a tertiary
eye care center.
RESULTS: Of 263 patients who underwent therapeutic penetrating keratoplasty for
infectious keratitis, during 2011-2013, seven patients were diagnosed as
microsporidial stromal keratitis. Microsporidial spores could be demonstrated on 
microbiological scrapings in 5/7 (71%) of cases, but identified on
histopathological examination and also confirmed on polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) for microsporidium in 100% of cases. There was evidence of diffuse stromal 
necrosis with markedly severe degree of polymorphonuclear leukocytic infiltrates,
with granulomatous inflammation in 42% of cases. Interestingly, these were
positive for HSV-1 DNA on PCR. Review of medical records revealed much severe
clinical presentations in patients with granulomatous inflammation, in comparison
to cases without granulomatous inflammation.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors hereby recommend that severe clinical presentation in
patients with microsporidial stromal keratitis, markedly dense polymorphonuclear 
leukocytic infiltrates or the presence of granulomatous inflammation on the
histopathological examination, should be investigated further for the presence of
HSV-1 DNA for better patient management and good visual outcome.

DOI: 10.4103/ijo.IJO_761_15 
PMCID: PMC5452578
PMID: 28513490  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

