
1. Hepatology. 2018 Jan;67(1):71-85. doi: 10.1002/hep.29409. Epub 2017 Nov 15.

Hepatocyte-derived exosomes promote T follicular regulatory cell expansion during
hepatitis C virus infection.

Cobb DA(1), Kim OK(1), Golden-Mason L(2), Rosen HR(2), Hahn YS(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Beirne B. Carter Center for Immunology Research, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
Aurora, CO.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Cancer Biology, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a global health concern that can cause severe liver
disease, such as cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Control of HCV requires 
vigorous T-cell responses, yet CD4+ T cells in chronic HCV patients are
dysfunctional. T follicular regulatory (Tfr) cells are a subset of regulatory T
cells that suppress T follicular helper (Tfh) cells and the generation of high
affinity antibody-producing B cells. In this study, we examined the accumulation 
of Tfr cells in the liver compartment during chronic HCV infection and defined
the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying their expansion. Our analysis
revealed a substantial population of Tfr cells in livers of chronic HCV patients 
that is absent in liver tissues from nonviral hepatitis or healthy subjects.
Coculture of PBMCs from healthy subjects with HCV-infected hepatoma cells
resulted in preferential expansion of circulating Tfr cells, leading to
suppression of Tfh cells. Additionally, coculture of tonsillar cells with
infected hepatoma cells lead to an expansion of germinal center Tfr. Notably,
expansion was mediated by transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β)-containing
exosomes released from HCV-infected hepatocytes given that blockade of
exosome-associated TGF-β or inhibition of exosome release abrogated Tfr
expansion.CONCLUSION: These results show that liver-derived exosomes play a
pivotal role in the accumulation of Tfr cells, likely leading to suppression of
Tfh responses in HCV-infected patients. Our study identifies a novel pathway in
which HCV infection in hepatocytes exacerbates Tfr cell responses to subvert
antiviral immunity. (Hepatology 2018;67:71-85).

© 2017 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.29409 
PMCID: PMC5739980
PMID: 28749570  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

