
1. Pathogens. 2017 Aug 4;6(2). pii: E34. doi: 10.3390/pathogens6020034.

KSHV and the Role of Notch Receptor Dysregulation in Disease Progression.

DeCotiis JL(1), Lukac DM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry, and Molecular Genetics, and Rutgers 
School of Graduate Studies, Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences, Rutgers
University, New Jersey Medical School, 225 Warren St., ICPH E 350 C, Newark, NJ
07103 USA. Decotijl@njms.rutgers.edu.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry, and Molecular Genetics, and Rutgers 
School of Graduate Studies, Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences, Rutgers
University, New Jersey Medical School, 225 Warren St., ICPH E 350 C, Newark, NJ
07103 USA. Lukacdm@njms.rutgers.edu.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is the causative agent of two
human cancers, Kaposi's Sarcoma (KS) and primary effusion lymphoma (PEL), and a
lymphoproliferation, Multicentric Castleman's Disease (MCD). Progression to tumor
development in KS is dependent upon the reactivation of the virus from its latent
state. We, and others, have shown that the Replication and transcriptional
activator (Rta) protein is the only viral gene product that is necessary and
sufficient for viral reactivation. To induce the reactivation and transcription
of viral genes, Rta forms a complex with the cellular DNA binding component of
the canonical Notch signaling pathway, recombination signal binding protein for
Jk (RBP-Jk). Formation of this Rta:RBP-Jk complex is necessary for viral
reactivation to occur. Expression of activated Notch has been shown to be
dysregulated in KSHV infected cells and to be necessary for cell growth and
disease progression. Studies into the involvement of activated Notch in viral
reactivation have yielded varied results. In this paper, we review the current
literature regarding Notch dysregulation by KSHV and its role in viral infection 
and cellular pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens6020034 
PMID: 28788110 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

