
1. Int J Pharm. 2017 Oct 5;531(1):118-133. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2017.08.061. Epub 
2017 Aug 7.

Multipurpose tenofovir disoproxil fumarate electrospun fibers for the prevention 
of HIV-1 and HSV-2 infections in vitro.

Tyo KM(1), Vuong HR(2), Malik DA(3), Sims LB(4), Alatassi H(5), Duan J(6), Watson
WH(7), Steinbach-Rankins JM(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Medicine, University of
Louisville, KY, United States; Center for Predictive Medicine, Louisville, KY,
United States.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of Louisville, KY, 
United States.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Medicine, University of
Louisville, KY, United States.
(4)Department of Bioengineering, Speed School of Engineering, University of
Louisville, Louisville, KY, United States.
(5)Department of Pathology, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, United
States.
(6)Department of Bioengineering, Speed School of Engineering, University of
Louisville, Louisville, KY, United States; Center for Predictive Medicine,
Louisville, KY, United States.
(7)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Medicine, University of
Louisville, KY, United States; Department of Medicine, Division of
Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, School of Medicine, University of
Louisville, KY, United States.
(8)Department of Bioengineering, Speed School of Engineering, University of
Louisville, Louisville, KY, United States; Department of Pharmacology and
Toxicology, School of Medicine, University of Louisville, KY, United States;
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of
Louisville, KY, United States; Center for Predictive Medicine, Louisville, KY,
United States. Electronic address: jill.steinbach@louisville.edu.

Sexually transmitted infections affect hundreds of millions of people worldwide. 
Both human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1 and -2) and herpes simplex virus-2
(HSV-2) remain incurable, urging the development of new prevention strategies.
While current prophylactic technologies are dependent on strict user adherence to
achieve efficacy, there is a dearth of delivery vehicles that provide discreet
and convenient administration, combined with prolonged-delivery of active agents.
To address these needs, we created electrospun fibers (EFs) comprised of
FDA-approved polymers, poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) and
poly(DL-lactide-co-ε-caprolactone) (PLCL), to provide sustained-release and in
vitro protection against HIV-1 and HSV-2. PLGA and PLCL EFs, incorporating the
antiretroviral, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF), exhibited sustained-release 
for up to 4 weeks, and provided complete in vitro protection against HSV-2 and
HIV-1 for 24h and 1 wk, respectively, based on the doses tested. In vitro cell
culture and EpiVaginal tissue tests confirmed the safety of fibers in vaginal and
cervical cells, highlighting the potential of PLGA and PLCL EFs as multipurpose
next-generation drug delivery vehicles.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2017.08.061 
PMCID: PMC5812024
PMID: 28797967  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

