
1. Front Biosci (Schol Ed). 2018 Jan 1;10:21-47.

miRNA as viral transcription tuners in HPV-mediated cervical carcinogenesis.

Shishodia G(1), Verma G(2), Das BC(3), Bharti AC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Institute of Cytology and Preventive Oncology 
(ICMR), Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India, and Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center, Shreveport, Louisiana, USA.
(2)Division of Molecular Oncology, Institute of Cytology and Preventive Oncology 
(ICMR), Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(3)Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Centre for Biomedical Research, University of Delhi, Delhi, 
India ,and Amity Institute of Molecular Medicine and Stem Cell Research
(AIMMSCR), Amity University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(4)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Department of Zoology, University of Delhi,
Delhi 110007, India, and Division of Molecular Oncology, National Institute of
Cancer Prevention and Research (ICMR), Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India,
alokchandrab@yahoo.com.

High-risk human papillomaviruses (HPVs) are oncogenic DNA viruses that promote
carcinogenic signaling by their oncoproteins mainly E6 and E7. A well-defined
promoter regulates expression and enhancer region on HPV genome containing number
of cis elements that essentially require a set of cognate host transcription
factors to regulate viral promoter gene activity. Expression of these host
factors is tightly regulated at multiple levels such as transcriptional,
post-transcriptional and post-translational level. Discovery of microRNAs (miRs) 
in recent years and differential expression of a set of specific miRs in HPV
infection and cervical lesions indicate that among various regulatory mechanisms,
role of these differentially expressed miRs in the post-transcriptional control
is pivotal. Present review analyses and attempts to compile currently available
miR data related to HPV infection and cervical carcinogenesis with a special
focus on miRs that may regulate expression of the host and viral factors
particularly responsible for viral transcription leading to carcinogenic
progression of the lesion. Further, the review attempts to assess the therapeutic
potential of miR-based strategies in therapeutic targeting of HPV infection
during cervical carcinogenesis.

DOI: 10.2741/s499 
PMID: 28930517  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

