
1. Adv Appl Microbiol. 2017;101:169-200. doi: 10.1016/bs.aambs.2017.05.002. Epub
2017 Jun 19.

The Contribution of Bacteriophages to the Biology and Virulence of Pathogenic
Clostridia.

Fortier LC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada. Electronic address:
Louis-Charles.Fortier@USherbrooke.ca.

Bacteriophages are key players in the evolution of most bacteria. Temperate
phages have been associated with virulence of some of the deadliest pathogenic
bacteria. Among the most notorious cases, the genes encoding the botulinum
neurotoxin produced by Clostridium botulinum types C and D and the α-toxin (TcnA)
produced by Clostridium novyi are both encoded within prophage genomes.
Clostridium difficile is another important human pathogen and the recent
identification of a complete binary toxin locus (CdtLoc) carried on a C.
difficile prophage raises the potential for horizontal transfer of toxin genes by
mobile genetic elements. Although the TcdA and TcdB toxins produced by C.
difficile have never been found outside the pathogenicity locus (PaLoc), some
prophages can still influence their production. Prophages can alter the
expression of several metabolic and regulatory genes in C. difficile, as well as 
cell surface proteins such as CwpV, which confers phage resistance. Homologs of
an Agr-like quorum sensing system have been identified in a C. difficile
prophage, suggesting that it could possibly participate in cell-cell
communication. Yet, other C. difficile prophages contain riboswitches predicted
to recognize the secondary messenger molecule c-di-GMP involved in bacterial
multicellular behaviors. Altogether, recent findings on clostridial phages
underline the diversity of mechanisms and intricate relationship linking phages
with their host. Here, milestone discoveries linking phages and virulence of some
of the most pathogenic clostridial species will be retraced, with a focus on C.
botulinum, C. novyi, C. difficile, and Clostridium perfringens phages, for which 
evidences are mostly available.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.aambs.2017.05.002 
PMID: 29050666  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

