
1. J Virol. 2018 Feb 15;92(4). pii: e01556-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01556-17.

Cryo-Electron Microscopy Structure of Porcine Deltacoronavirus Spike Protein in
the Prefusion State

Shang J(#)(1), Zheng Y(1), Yang Y(#)(1), Liu C(1), Geng Q(1), Tai W(2)(3), Du
L(2), Zhou Y(#)(3), Zhang W(4)(5), Li F(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, University of Minnesota,
Saint Paul, Minnesota, USA.
(2)Lindsley F. Kimball Research Institute, New York Blood Center, New York, New
York, USA.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of
Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Diagnostic and Biological Sciences, School of Dentistry,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA zhangwei@umn.edu
lifang@umn.edu.
(5)Characterization Facility, College of Science and Engineering, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(6)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, University of Minnesota,
Saint Paul, Minnesota, USA zhangwei@umn.edu lifang@umn.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Coronavirus spike proteins from different genera are divergent, although they all
mediate coronavirus entry into cells by binding to host receptors and fusing
viral and cell membranes. Here, we determined the cryo-electron microscopy
structure of porcine deltacoronavirus (PdCoV) spike protein at 3.3-Å resolution. 
The trimeric protein contains three receptor-binding S1 subunits that tightly
pack into a crown-like structure and three membrane fusion S2 subunits that form 
a stalk. Each S1 subunit contains two domains, an N-terminal domain (S1-NTD) and 
C-terminal domain (S1-CTD). PdCoV S1-NTD has the same structural fold as alpha-
and betacoronavirus S1-NTDs as well as host galectins, and it recognizes sugar as
its potential receptor. PdCoV S1-CTD has the same structural fold as
alphacoronavirus S1-CTDs, but its structure differs from that of betacoronavirus 
S1-CTDs. PdCoV S1-CTD binds to an unidentified receptor on host cell surfaces.
PdCoV S2 is locked in the prefusion conformation by structural restraint of S1
from a different monomeric subunit. PdCoV spike possesses several structural
features that may facilitate immune evasion by the virus, such as its compact
structure, concealed receptor-binding sites, and shielded critical epitopes.
Overall, this study reveals that deltacoronavirus spikes are structurally and
evolutionally more closely related to alphacoronavirus spikes than to
betacoronavirus spikes; it also has implications for the receptor recognition,
membrane fusion, and immune evasion by deltacoronaviruses as well as
coronaviruses in general. IMPORTANCE In this study, we determined the
cryo-electron microscopy structure of porcine deltacoronavirus (PdCoV) spike
protein at a 3.3-Å resolution. This is the first atomic structure of a spike
protein from the deltacoronavirus genus, which is divergent in amino acid
sequences from the well-studied alpha- and betacoronavirus spike proteins. Here, 
we described the overall structure of the PdCoV spike and the detailed structure 
of each of its structural elements. Moreover, we analyzed the functions of each
of the structural elements. Based on the structures and functions of these
structural elements, we discussed the evolution of PdCoV spike protein in
relation to the spike proteins from other coronavirus genera. This study combines
the structure, function, and evolution of PdCoV spike protein and provides many
insights into its receptor recognition, membrane fusion, and immune evasion.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01556-17 
PMCID: PMC5790952
PMID: 29070693  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

