
1. Vet Res Forum. 2017 Summer;8(3):209-213. Epub 2017 Jun 15.

Expression of G1- epitope of bovine ephemeral fever virus in E. coli : A novel
candidate to develop ELISA kit.

Yazdani F(1), Bakhshesh M(1), Esmaelizad M(2), Sadigh ZA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Virology, Research and Diagnosis, Razi Vaccine and
Serum Research Institute, Agricultural Research, Education and
Organization Extension (AREEO), Karaj, Iran.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Razi Vaccine and Serum Research Institute,
Agricultural Research, Education and Organization Extension (AREEO), Karaj, Iran.
(3)Department of Human Vaccine Production, Razi Vaccine and Serum Research
Institute, Agricultural Research, Education and Organization Extension (AREEO),
Karaj, Iran.

Bovine ephemeral fever is an acute and arthropod-borne viral disease of cattle
and water buffalo which occurs seasonally in most of the world tropical and
subtropical regions. The epizootic feature of the disease has been reported in
Iran with serious economic consequences. The surface glycoprotein G of bovine
ephemeral fever virus (BEFV) is composed of 4 antigenic sites (G1-G4) and plays
the main role for eliciting neutralizing antibodies and protective immunity. The 
G1 - epitope is a linear antigenic site and conserved among BEFV strains. In
order to develop an ELISA test based on G1-epitope as coating antigen, this study
was carried out to express the recombinant G1-epitope of BEFV in prokaryotic
system. Using PCR and specific primers, a length of 88 amino acid of the G
glycoprotein of BEFV including G1- epitope was amplified and cloned into the
expression vector pGEX-4T-1, with the GST moiety. The recombinant plasmid
(pGEX-4T-1-G1) was then transformed into Escherichia coli BL21 and expression of 
fusion protein was induced by 0.10 mM IPTG. The maximum expression of the fusion 
protein was obtained at 16 hr post induction as verified by SDS-PAGE
electrophoresis, and it was also confirmed that this protein bearing G1- epitope 
is sufficiently biologically active to bind to anti-BEFV serum in western blot
experiment.


PMCID: PMC5653884
PMID: 29085608 

