
1. Front Immunol. 2017 Oct 26;8:1372. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01372. eCollection
2017.

Transcriptome Analysis of Circulating Immune Cell Subsets Highlight the Role of
Monocytes in Zaire Ebola Virus Makona Pathogenesis.

Menicucci AR(1), Versteeg K(2)(3), Woolsey C(2)(3), Mire CE(2)(3), Geisbert
JB(2)(3), Cross RW(2)(3), Agans KN(2)(3), Jankeel A(4), Geisbert TW(2)(3),
Messaoudi I(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biomedical Sciences, University of California, Riverside,
Riverside, CA, United States.
(2)Galveston National Laboratory, Galveston, TX, United States.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX, United States.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, College of Biological
Sciences, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, United States.

Existing models of Ebola virus disease (EVD) suggest antigen-presenting cells are
initial targets of Zaire ebolavirus (ZEBOV). In vitro studies have shown that
ZEBOV infection of monocytes and macrophages results in the production of
inflammatory mediators, which may cause lymphocyte apoptosis. However, these
findings have not been corroborated by in vivo studies. In this study, we report 
the first longitudinal analysis of transcriptional changes in purified monocytes,
T-cells, and B-cells isolated from cynomolgus macaques following infection with
ZEBOV-Makona. Our data reveal monocytes as one of the major immune cell subsets
that supports ZEBOV replication in vivo. In addition, we report a marked increase
in the transcription of genes involved in inflammation, coagulation, and vascular
disease within monocytes, suggesting that monocytes contribute to EVD
manifestations. Further, genes important for antigen presentation and regulation 
of immunity were downregulated, potentially subverting development of adaptive
immunity. In contrast, lymphocytes, which do not support ZEBOV replication,
showed transcriptional changes limited to a small number of interferon-stimulated
genes (ISGs) and a failure to upregulate genes associated with an antiviral
effector immune response. Collectively, these data suggest that ZEBOV-infected
monocytes play a significant role in ZEBOV-Makona pathogenesis and strategies to 
suppress virus replication or modify innate responses to infection in these cells
should be a priority for therapeutic intervention.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01372 
PMCID: PMC5662559
PMID: 29123522 

