
1. EBioMedicine. 2017 Dec;26:25-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.11.001. Epub 2017 Nov 
3.

Evaluation of Different Parameters of Humoral and Cellular Immune Responses in
HIV Serodiscordant Heterosexual Couples: Humoral Response Potentially Implicated 
in Modulating Transmission Rates.

Ruiz MJ(1), Salido J(1), Abusamra L(2), Ghiglione Y(1), Cevallos C(1), Damilano
G(1), Rodriguez AM(1), Trifone C(1), Laufer N(3), Giavedoni LD(4), Sued O(5),
Salomón H(1), Gherardi MM(1), Turk G(6).

Author information: 
(1)CONICET- Universidad de Buenos Aires, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas 
en Retrovirus y Sida (INBIRS), Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Fundación Huésped, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)CONICET- Universidad de Buenos Aires, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas 
en Retrovirus y Sida (INBIRS), Buenos Aires, Argentina; Hospital Juan A.
Fernández, Unidad Enfermedades Infecciosas, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(4)Department of Virology and Immunology, Southwest National Primate Research
Center, Texas Biomedical Research Institute, San Antonio, TX, USA.
(5)Fundación Huésped, Buenos Aires, Argentina; Hospital Juan A. Fernández, Unidad
Enfermedades Infecciosas, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(6)CONICET- Universidad de Buenos Aires, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas 
en Retrovirus y Sida (INBIRS), Buenos Aires, Argentina. Electronic address:
gturk@fmed.uba.ar.

Comment in
    EBioMedicine. 2017 Dec;26:2-3.

As the HIV/AIDS pandemic still progresses, understanding the mechanisms governing
viral transmission as well as protection from HIV acquisition is fundamental. In 
this context, cohorts of HIV serodiscordant heterosexual couples (SDC) represent 
a unique tool. The present study was aimed to evaluate specific parameters of
innate, cellular and humoral immune responses in SDC. Specifically, plasma levels
of cytokines and chemokines, HIV-specific T-cell responses, gp120-specific IgG
and IgA antibodies, and HIV-specific antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity
(ADCC) activity were assessed in nine HIV-exposed seronegative individuals (ESN) 
and their corresponding HIV seropositive partners (HIV+-P), in eighteen
chronically infected HIV subjects (C), nine chronically infected subjects known
to be HIV transmitters (CT) and ten healthy HIV- donors (HD). Very low magnitude 
HIV-specific cellular responses were found in two out of six ESN. Interestingly, 
HIV+-P had the highest ADCC magnitude, the lowest IgA levels and the highest
IgG/IgA ratio, all compared to CT. Positive correlations between CD4+ T-cell
counts and both IgG/IgA ratios and %ADCC killing uniquely distinguished HIV+-P.
Additionally, evidence of IgA interference with ADCC responses from HIV+-P and CT
is provided. These data suggest for the first time a potential role of ADCC
and/or gp120-specific IgG/IgA balance in modulating heterosexual transmission. In
sum, this study provides key information to understand the host factors that
influence viral transmission, which should be considered in both the development 
of prophylactic vaccines and novel immunotherapies for HIV-1 infection.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.11.001 
PMCID: PMC5832641
PMID: 29129698  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

