
1. Gynecol Obstet Fertil Senol. 2017 Dec;45(12):691-704. doi:
10.1016/j.gofs.2017.10.005. Epub 2017 Nov 11.

[Neonatal herpes: Epidemiology, clinical manifestations and management.
Guidelines for clinical practice from the French College of Gynecologists and
Obstetricians (CNGOF)].

[Article in French]

Renesme L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unité de néonatalogie soins intensifs-pédiatrie de maternité, centre Aliénor
d'Aquitaine, groupe hospitalier Pellegrin, centre hospitalier universitaire de
Bordeaux, place Amélie-Raba-Léon, 33000 Bordeaux, France. Electronic address:
Laurent.renesme@chu-bordeaux.fr.

Erratum in
    Gynecol Obstet Fertil Senol. 2018 Mar 9;:.

OBJECTIVES: To describe the epidemiology of neonatal herpes and its risk factors,
clinical and paraclinic manifestations, propose guidelines for a newborn at risk 
of neonatal herpes, describe treatment modalities, describe post-natal
transmission and its prevention.
METHODS: Bibliographic search from Medline, Cochrane Library databases and
research of international clinical practice guidelines.
RESULTS: Neonatal herpes is rare (about 20 cases per year in France) and mainly
due to HSV 1 (level of evidence LE3). The main risk factors for mother-to-child
transmission are maternal primary episode of genital herpes close to delivery and
serotype HSV 1 (LE3). There are three clinical forms of neonatal herpes : SEM
infection for skin, eyes and mucosa, central nervous system (CNS) associated
infection, and the disseminated infection. Neurological mortality and morbidity
depend on the clinical form and the HSV serotype (LE3). In most of the case of
neonatal herpes, the mothers have no history of genital herpes (LE3). Fever and
vesicular rash may be absent at the time of diagnosis (LE3). In case of suspicion
of neonatal herpes, different samples (blood and cerebrospinal fluid) for HSV PCR
must be carried out to confirm the diagnosis (Professional consensus). Any
newborn suspected of neonatal herpes should be treated with intravenous aciclovir
(Grade A) prior to the results of HSV PCR (Professional consensus). In case of
maternal genital herpes at delivery, the management of an asymptomatic newborn
depends on the evaluation of the risk of transmission. In case of maternal
reactivation (low risk of transmission), HSV PCR samples are taken at 24hours of 
life and the newborn must be follow closely until results. In the case of
maternal primary episode or non-primary infection first episode (high risk of
transmission), the samples are taken at 24hours of life and intravenous treatment
with aciclovir is started (Professional consensus). The treatment of neonatal
herpes is based on intravenous aciclovir (60mg/kg/day divided into 3 injections) 
(Grade C). The duration of the treatment depends on the clinical form (14 days
for the SEM infection, 21 days for the other forms) (Professional consensus). A
relay with aciclovir per os (300mg/m2/day) for 6 months is recommended to improve
the neurological outcome and reduce the risk of reactivation (grade B).
Post-natal transmission is mainly due to HSV 1. The rules for the prevention of
post-natal transmission must be known by parents and family, but also by nursing 
staff (Professional consensus). Breastfeeding is not contraindicated in cases of 
maternal herpes, except if there is herpetic lesion on the nipple (Professional
consensus). Parents of newborns at risk for neonatal herpes should receive
information on the clinical signs to be monitored at home after hospital
discharge (Professional consensus).
CONCLUSIONS: Neonatal herpes is a rare disease with a high morbidity and
mortality. The management of a newborn at risk requires good coordination between
the obstetric and pediatric teams and parent's information.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gofs.2017.10.005 
PMID: 29132771  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

