
1. Mar Biotechnol (NY). 2018 Feb;20(1):35-44. doi: 10.1007/s10126-017-9785-1. Epub
2017 Dec 5.

Identification of Inhibitory Compounds Against Singapore Grouper Iridovirus
Infection by Cell Viability-Based Screening Assay and Droplet Digital PCR.

Jia K(1), Yuan Y(2), Liu W(1), Liu L(1), Qin Q(3), Yi M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Marine Resources and Coastal
Engineering, Zhuhai Key Laboratory of Marine Bioresources and Environment, School
of Marine Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, Science
Drive 4, Singapore, 117543, Singapore.
(3)College of Marine Sciences, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou,
510642, China. qinqw@scsio.ac.cn.
(4)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Marine Resources and Coastal
Engineering, Zhuhai Key Laboratory of Marine Bioresources and Environment, School
of Marine Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
yimsh@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Singapore grouper iridovirus (SGIV) is one of the major causative agents of fish 
diseases and has caused significant economic losses in the aquaculture industry. 
There is currently no commercial vaccine or effective antiviral treatment against
SGIV infection. Annually, an increasing number of small molecule compounds from
various sources have been produced, and many are proved to be potential
inhibitors against viruses. Here, a high-throughput in vitro cell viability-based
screening assay was developed to identify antiviral compounds against SGIV using 
the luminescent-based CellTiter-Glo reagent in cultured grouper spleen cells by
quantificational measurement of the cytopathic effects induced by SGIV infection.
This assay was utilized to screen for potential SGIV inhibitors from five
customized compounds which had been reported to be capable of inhibiting other
viruses and 30 compounds isolated from various marine organisms, and three of
them [ribavirin, harringtonine, and 2-hydroxytetradecanoic acid (2-HOM)] were
identified to be effective on inhibiting SGIV infection, which was further
confirmed with droplet digital PCR (ddPCR). In addition, the ddPCR results
revealed that ribavirin and 2-HOM inhibited SGIV replication and entry in a
dose-dependent manner, and harringtonine could reduce SGIV replication rather
than entry at the working concentration without significant toxicity. These
findings provided an easy and reliable cell viability-based screening assay to
identify compounds with anti-SGIV effect and a way of studying the anti-SGIV
mechanism of compounds.

DOI: 10.1007/s10126-017-9785-1 
PMID: 29209860  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

