
1. N Engl J Med. 2017 Dec 28;377(26):2519-2530. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1708483. Epub
2017 Dec 9.

AAV5-Factor VIII Gene Transfer in Severe Hemophilia A.

Rangarajan S(1), Walsh L(1), Lester W(1), Perry D(1), Madan B(1), Laffan M(1), Yu
H(1), Vettermann C(1), Pierce GF(1), Wong WY(1), Pasi KJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)From Hampshire Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Basingstoke (S.R.), University 
Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, Edgbaston (W.L.), Cambridge University
Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge (D.P.), and the 
Centre for Haemostasis and Thrombosis, St. Thomas' Hospital (B.M.), Imperial
College London and NIHR Clinical Research Facility at Imperial College Healthcare
NHS Trust (M.L.), and Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry
(K.J.P.), London - all in the United Kingdom; and BioMarin Pharmaceutical, Novato
(L.W., H.Y., C.V., W.Y.W.), and private consultant, La Jolla (G.F.P.) - both in
California.

BACKGROUND: Patients with hemophilia A rely on exogenous factor VIII to prevent
bleeding in joints, soft tissue, and the central nervous system. Although
successful gene transfer has been reported in patients with hemophilia B, the
large size of the factor VIII coding region has precluded improved outcomes with 
gene therapy in patients with hemophilia A.
METHODS: We infused a single intravenous dose of a codon-optimized
adeno-associated virus serotype 5 (AAV5) vector encoding a B-domain-deleted human
factor VIII (AAV5-hFVIII-SQ) in nine men with severe hemophilia A. Participants
were enrolled sequentially into one of three dose cohorts (low dose [one
participant], intermediate dose [one participant], and high dose [seven
participants]) and were followed through 52 weeks.
RESULTS: Factor VIII activity levels remained at 3 IU or less per deciliter in
the recipients of the low or intermediate dose. In the high-dose cohort, the
factor VIII activity level was more than 5 IU per deciliter between weeks 2 and 9
after gene transfer in all seven participants, and the level in six participants 
increased to a normal value (>50 IU per deciliter) that was maintained at 1 year 
after receipt of the dose. In the high-dose cohort, the median annualized
bleeding rate among participants who had previously received prophylactic therapy
decreased from 16 events before the study to 1 event after gene transfer, and
factor VIII use for participant-reported bleeding ceased in all the participants 
in this cohort by week 22. The primary adverse event was an elevation in the
serum alanine aminotransferase level to 1.5 times the upper limit of the normal
range or less. Progression of preexisting chronic arthropathy in one participant 
was the only serious adverse event. No neutralizing antibodies to factor VIII
were detected.
CONCLUSIONS: The infusion of AAV5-hFVIII-SQ was associated with the sustained
normalization of factor VIII activity level over a period of 1 year in six of
seven participants who received a high dose, with stabilization of hemostasis and
a profound reduction in factor VIII use in all seven participants. In this small 
study, no safety events were noted, but no safety conclusions can be drawn.
(Funded by BioMarin Pharmaceutical; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02576795 ;
EudraCT number, 2014-003880-38 .).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1708483 
PMID: 29224506  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

