
1. J Virol. 2018 Feb 12;92(5). pii: e01304-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01304-17. Print 2018
Mar 1.

Structure of the Paramyxovirus Parainfluenza Virus 5 Nucleoprotein in Complex
with an Amino-Terminal Peptide of the Phosphoprotein.

Aggarwal M(1)(2), Leser GP(1)(2), Kors CA(1)(2), Lamb RA(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Northwestern University, Evanston,
Illinois, USA.
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, 
USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Northwestern University, Evanston,
Illinois, USA ralamb@northwestern.edu.

Parainfluenza virus 5 (PIV5) belongs to the family Paramyxoviridae, which
consists of enveloped viruses with a nonsegmented negative-strand RNA genome
encapsidated by the nucleoprotein (N). Paramyxovirus replication is regulated by 
the phosphoprotein (P) through protein-protein interactions with N and the RNA
polymerase (L). The chaperone activity of P is essential to maintain the
unassembled RNA-free form of N in order to prevent nonspecific RNA binding and
premature N oligomerization. Here, we determined the crystal structure of
unassembled PIV5 N in complex with a P peptide (N0P) derived from the N terminus 
of P (P50) at 2.65 Å. The PIV5 N0P consists of two domains: an N-terminal domain 
(NTD) and a C-terminal domain (CTD) separated by a hinge region. The cleft at the
hinge region of RNA-bound PIV5 N was previously shown to be an RNA binding site. 
The N0P structure shows that the P peptide binds to the CTD of N and extends
toward the RNA binding site to inhibit N oligomerization and, hence, RNA binding.
Binding of P peptide also keeps the PIV5 N in the open form. A molecular dynamics
(MD) analysis of both the open and closed forms of N shows the flexibility of the
CTD and the preference of the N protein to be in an open conformation. The
gradual opening of the hinge region, to release the RNA, was also observed.
Together, these results advance our knowledge of the conformational swapping of N
required for the highly regulated paramyxovirus replication.IMPORTANCE
Paramyxovirus replication is regulated by the interaction of P with N and L
proteins. Here, we report the crystal structure of unassembled parainfluenza
virus 5 (PIV5) N chaperoned with P peptide. Our results provide a detailed
understanding of the binding of P to N. The conformational switching of N between
closed and open forms during its initial interaction with P, as well as during
RNA release, was analyzed. Our data also show the plasticity of the CTD and the
importance of domain movement for conformational switching. The results improve
our understanding of the mechanism of interchanging N conformations for RNA
replication and release.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01304-17 
PMCID: PMC5809748
PMID: 29237836  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

