
1. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2018 Apr;70(4):566-577. doi: 10.1002/art.40399. Epub 2018
Mar 7.

Increased Expression and Modulated Regulatory Activity of Coinhibitory Receptors 
PD-1, TIGIT, and TIM-3 in Lymphocytes From Patients With Systemic Sclerosis.

Fleury M(1), Belkina AC(1), Proctor EA(2), Zammitti C(1), Simms RW(1),
Lauffenburger DA(2), Snyder-Cappione JE(1), Lafyatis R(3), Dooms H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge.
(3)Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, and University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

OBJECTIVE: Immune dysfunction is an important component of the disease process
underlying systemic sclerosis (SSc), but the mechanisms contributing to altered
immune cell function in SSc remain poorly defined. This study was undertaken to
measure the expression and function of the coinhibitory receptors (co-IRs)
programmed cell death 1 (PD-1), T cell immunoglobulin and ITIM domain (TIGIT), T 
cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain 3 (TIM-3), and lymphocyte activation gene 3 
(LAG-3) in lymphocyte subsets from the peripheral blood of patients with SSc.
METHODS: Co-IR expression levels on subsets of immune cells were analyzed using a
16-color flow cytometry panel. The functional role of co-IRs was determined by
measuring cytokine production after in vitro stimulation of SSc and healthy
control peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in the presence of
co-IR-blocking antibodies. Supernatants from cultures of stimulated PBMCs were
added to SSc fibroblasts, and their impact on fibroblast gene expression was
measured. Mathematical modeling was used to reveal differences between co-IR
functions in SSc patients and healthy controls.
RESULTS: Levels of the co-IRs PD-1 and TIGIT were increased, and each was
coexpressed, in distinct T cell subsets from SSc patients compared to healthy
controls. Levels of TIM-3 were increased in SSc natural killer cells. PD-1,
TIGIT, and TIM-3 antibody blockade revealed patient-specific roles of each of
these co-IRs in modulating activation-induced T cell cytokine production. In
contrast to healthy subjects, blockade of TIGIT and TIM-3, but not PD-1, failed
to reverse inhibited cytokine production in SSc patients, indicating that
enhanced T cell exhaustion is present in SSc. Finally, cytokines secreted in
anti-TIM-3-treated PBMC cultures distinctly changed the gene expression profile
in SSc fibroblasts.
CONCLUSION: The altered expression and regulatory capacity of co-IRs in SSc
lymphocytes may contribute to disease pathophysiology by modulating the
cytokine-mediated cross-talk of immune cells and fibroblasts at sites of
inflammation and/or fibrosis.

© 2017, American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/art.40399 
PMCID: PMC5876093
PMID: 29245183  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

