
1. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2018 Jul;37(7):678-685. doi: 10.1097/INF.0000000000001875.

Risk for Speech and Language Impairments in Preschool Age HIV-exposed Uninfected 
Children With In Utero Combination Antiretroviral Exposure.

Rice ML(1), Russell JS(2), Frederick T(3), Purswani M(4), Williams PL(2), Siberry
GK(5), Redmond SM(6), Hoffman HJ(7), Yao TJ(2); Pediatric HIV/AIDS Cohort Study
(PHACS).

Author information: 
(1)From the Child Language Doctoral Program, University of Kansas, Lawrence,
Kansas.
(2)Center for Biostatistics in AIDS Research, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public 
Health, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Maternal, Child & Adolescent Center for Infectious Diseases and Virology, Keck
School of Medicine of the University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
California.
(4)Division of Pediatric Infectious Disease, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, Bronx-Lebanon Hospital Center, Bronx, New York.
(5)Maternal and Pediatric Infectious Disease Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(6)Communication Sciences and Disorders, University of Utah, Salt Lake City,
Utah.
(7)Epidemiology and Statistics Program, National Institute on Deafness and Other 
Communication Disorders, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.

BACKGROUND: Perinatally HIV-exposed but uninfected (HEU) children have elevated
risk of late language emergence at 1 year of age, with possible links to in utero
antiretroviral (ARV) exposure. We investigated possible risks for speech
impairments (SIs) and language impairments (LI) in preschool monolingual HEU
children in the United States.
METHODS: Speech and language assessments were conducted as part of the Pediatric 
HIV/AIDS Cohort Study Surveillance Monitoring of ART Toxicities study at ages 3
(N = 208) and 5 (N = 429) years. Domains of speech, overall language, vocabulary 
and grammar were assessed. SI and LI were defined by standardized scores <15th
percentile and categorized as primary (normal nonverbal IQ ≥ 85 without hearing
loss) and concomitant (low nonverbal IQ and/or presence of hearing loss).
Logistic regression models were used to estimate odds of SI and LI for different 
ARV exposures, adjusted for confounding variables.
RESULTS: The risk for language impairments in HEU children was higher than
population norms; risk for SIs was not elevated. Risk factors for impairments
included male sex, black race and other socioeconomic measures, although these
varied by age, primary (P) versus concomitant (C) impairment and by speech or
language measure. Adjusted logistic regression models revealed lower and
increased risk for specific ARVs. Tenofovir exposure was associated with
increased risk for SI at 3 years of age but was associated with decreased risk
for concomitant language impairment at 5 years of age.
CONCLUSIONS: Further investigation of combination ARV exposure and
speech/language impairment among preschool children is needed to confirm
associations.

DOI: 10.1097/INF.0000000000001875 
PMCID: PMC5995619
PMID: 29278615  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

