
1. Rev Neurol. 2018 Mar 1;66(5):154-156.

[Occipital condyle syndrome as the first symptom of a metastatic hepatocellular
carcinoma. Two case reports].

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Garcia-Madrona S(1), Corral-Corral I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Universitario Ramon y Cajal, 28034 Madrid, Espana.

INTRODUCTION: Occipital condyle syndrome consists of the presence of unilateral
occipital headache exacerbated by moving the head and is accompanied by paralysis
of the ipsilateral hypoglossal nerve. One of its causes is infiltration of the
base of the skull by bone metastases, especially those affecting the hypoglossal 
nerve due to infiltration as it passes through the osseous canal.
CASE REPORTS: We report two clinical cases of occipital condyle syndrome
secondary to metastatic hepatocarcinoma. The first is that of a 52-year-old male 
with liver cirrhosis secondary to liver pathology caused by hepatitis C virus
with occipital condyle syndrome as the presenting symptom in disseminated
hepatocarcinoma. The second case is that of a 56-year-old male after recurrence
of hepatocarcinoma following a liver transplant, despite not fulfilling the Milan
criteria.
CONCLUSION: Occipital condyle syndrome is an alarm symptom and requires a
thorough study by means of imaging tests, since it may be the first symptom of an
undetected hepatocarcinoma.

Publisher: Sindrome del condilo occipital como primera manifestacion de un
carcinoma hepatocelular metastasico. Presentacion de dos casos.Introduccion. El
sindrome del condilo occipital consiste en la presencia de cefalea occipital
unilateral que empeora con los movimientos cefalicos y se acompaña de paralisis
del XII par ipsilateral. La infiltracion de la base del craneo por metastasis
oseas se encuentra entre sus etiologias, especialmente las que afectan por
infiltracion al nervio hipogloso en su paso a traves del canal oseo. Casos
clinicos. Se presentan dos casos clinicos de sindrome del condilo occipital
secundario a un hepatocarcinoma metastasico. El primero, un varon de 52 años con 
cirrosis hepatica secundaria a hepatopatia por virus de la hepatitis C, con
sindrome del condilo occipital como sintoma inicial en un hepatocarcinoma
diseminado; y el segundo, un varon de 56 años, tras recidiva de un
hepatocarcinoma despues de un trasplante hepatico, a pesar de no cumplir los
criterios de Milan. Conclusion. El sindrome del condilo occipital es un sintoma
de alarma y requiere realizar un estudio completo mediante pruebas de imagen,
puesto que puede ser la primera manifestacion de un hepatocarcinoma oculto.

PMID: 29480511  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

