
1. Front Immunol. 2018 Mar 22;9:593. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00593. eCollection
2018.

A New In Vivo Model to Study Protective Immunity to Zika Virus Infection in Mice 
With Intact Type I Interferon Signaling.

Nazerai L(1), Schøller AS(1), Rasmussen POS(1), Buus S(1), Stryhn A(1),
Christensen JP(1), Thomsen AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark.

The association between recent Zika virus (ZIKV) infection and neurological
complications, microcephaly in the fetus, and Guillain-Barré syndrome in adults
underscores the necessity for a protective vaccine. Rational vaccine development 
requires an in-depth understanding of the mechanisms which could protect against 
infection with this virus. However, so far, such an analysis has been hampered by
the absence of a suitable small animal model. Unlike the situation in humans,
ZIKV only replicates effectively in the peripheral organs of mice, if type I IFN 
signaling is interrupted. As type I IFN also impacts the adaptive immune
response, mice with such a defect are not optimal for a comprehensive
immunological analysis. In this report, we show that even in wild-type (WT) mice 
i.c. infection with low doses of virus causes marked local virus replication and 
lethal encephalitis in naïve mice. Furthermore, peripheral infection of WT mice
with low doses of virus induces a significant immune response, which provides
long-lasting protection of WT mice from a fatal outcome of subsequent i.c.
challenge. Therefore, combining peripheral priming with later i.c. challenge
represents a new approach for studying the adaptive immune response to ZIKV in
mice with an intact type I IFN response. In this study, we focused on the
mechanisms underlying resistance to reinfection. Using a combination of adoptive 
transfer, antibody-based cell depletion, and gene targeting, we show that the key
protective factor in type I IFN replete mice is humoral immunity. CD8 T cells are
not essential in mice with preformed specific antibodies, but under conditions
where initial antibody levels are low, effector CD8 T cells may play a role as a 
back-up system. These results have important implications for our understanding
of natural immunity to ZIKV infection and for Zika vaccine design.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00593 
PMCID: PMC5874300
PMID: 29623081  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

