
1. Front Public Health. 2018 May 18;6:111. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2018.00111.
eCollection 2018.

Serosurvey of Human Antibodies Recognizing Aedes aegypti D7 Salivary Proteins in 
Colombia.

Londono-Renteria BL(1), Shakeri H(2), Rozo-Lopez P(1), Conway MJ(3), Duggan N(4),
Jaberi-Douraki M(2)(5), Colpitts TM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, United
States.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Institute of Computational Comparative
Medicine, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, United States.
(3)Central Michigan University College of Medicine, Mount Pleasant, MI, United
States.
(4)Department of Cell Biology, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,
Miami, FL, United States.
(5)Department of Mathematics, Institute of Computational Comparative Medicine,
Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, United States.
(6)National Emerging Infectious Diseases Laboratories (NEIDL), Department of
Microbiology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States.

Background: Dengue is one of the most geographically significant mosquito-borne
viral diseases transmitted by Aedes mosquitoes. During blood feeding, mosquitoes 
deposit salivary proteins that induce antibody responses. These can be related to
the intensity of exposure to bites. Some mosquito salivary proteins, such as D7
proteins, are known as potent allergens. The antibody response to D7 proteins can
be used as a marker to evaluate the risk of exposure and disease transmission and
provide critical information for understanding the dynamics of vector-host
interactions.
Methods: The study was conducted at the Los Patios Hospital, Cucuta, Norte de
Santander, Colombia. A total of 63 participants were enrolled in the study.
Participants were categorized into three disease status groups, age groups, and
socioeconomic strata. The level of IgG antibodies against D7 Aedes proteins was
determined by ELISA. We used a statistical approach to determine if there is an
association between antibody levels and factors such as age, living conditions,
and dengue virus (DENV) infection.
Results: We found that IgG antibodies against D7 proteins were higher in non-DENV
infected individuals in comparison to DENV-infected participants. Also, the age
factor showed a significant positive correlation with IgG antibodies against D7
proteins, and the living conditions (socioeconomic stratification), in people
aged 20 years or older, are a statistically significant factor in the variability
of IgG antibodies against D7 proteins.
Conclusion: This pilot study represents the first approximation to elucidate any 
correlation between the antibody response against mosquito D7 salivary proteins
and its correlation with age, living conditions, and DENV infection in a dengue
endemic area.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2018.00111 
PMCID: PMC5968123
PMID: 29868532 

