
1. Exp Cell Res. 1985 Sep;160(1):184-96.

Further characterization of the phenotype of ts20, a DNAts mutant of BALB/3T3
cells.

Zeng GC, Ozer HL, Hand R.

Ts20 is a temperature-sensitive mutant cell line derived from BALB/3T3 cells that
is blocked at a step in DNA synthesis involving chain elongation. Following a
shift from 33 degrees to 39 degrees C, mutant cells lost ability to grow or form 
colonies. When mutant cells were infected with polyomavirus, both cell and virus 
DNA synthesis were inhibited at the restrictive temperature of 39 degrees C. When
cell extracts from wild-type cells were added in vitro to lysed infected mutant
cells that had been incubated in vivo at 39 degrees C for expression of the
mutation, cell DNA synthesis was increased 3-fold (similar to the effect in
uninfected mutant cells), whereas virus DNA synthesis was increased only 60%.
With harsher lysis conditions, the effect of added extract on virus DNA synthesis
was greater, although baseline DNA synthesis (prior to addition of extracts) was 
much lower. Analysis by alkaline sucrose gradients showed that the addition of
cell extract converted small cellular DNA molecules into larger ones, while it
increased the synthesis of small virus DNA molecules rather than completed
genomes. Analysis of cytosol extracts (in which the activity stimulating DNA
synthesis resides) showed that DNA topo-isomerase I activity was more heat-labile
when assayed in mutant extracts compared to wild-type extracts. In contrast,
cytosol DNA polymerase activity was equally heat-labile in mutant and wild-type
extract. This suggested the factor in extract was likely associated with the
activity of DNA topo-isomerase I. Analysis of virus DNA synthesized in vitro in
restricted mutant cells by gel electrophoresis and fluorography showed an
accumulation of topo-isomers migrating between form I and II. These topo-isomers,
thought to be a manifestation of the ts defect, did not disappear when extract
from wild-type cells was added back in vitro or when mutant cells were shifted
back to permissive temperature prior to lysis for in vitro synthesis. The results
indicate that polyoma DNA synthesis and cell DNA synthesis differ in their
response to the mutant gene product in ts20, although both are inhibited at a
step early in DNA chain elongation that may involve DNA topo-isomerase I.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-4827(85)90247-2 
PMID: 2995094  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

