
1. Vaccine. 2018 Aug 23;36(35):5282-5287. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2018.07.045. Epub
2018 Jul 27.

Predictors of hepatitis B vaccination completion among people who use drugs
participating in a national program of targeted vaccination.

Raven S(1), Urbanus A(2), de Gee A(3), Hoebe C(4), van Steenbergen J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Public Health Service West Brabant, Breda, 
The Netherlands; Department of Medical Microbiology, School of Public Health and 
Primary Care (CAPHRI), Maastricht University Medical Center (MUMC+), Maastricht, 
The Netherlands. Electronic address: Stijn.Raven@radboudumc.nl.
(2)Centre for Infectious Disease Control, National Institute for Public Health
and the Environment, Bilthoven, The Netherlands.
(3)Network Infectious Diseases and Harm Reduction, Trimbos Institute, Utrecht,
The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology, School of Public Health and Primary Care
(CAPHRI), Maastricht University Medical Center (MUMC+), Maastricht, The
Netherlands; Department of Sexual Health, Infectious Diseases and Environmental
Health, South Limburg Public Health Service, The Netherlands.
(5)Centre for Infectious Disease Control, National Institute for Public Health
and the Environment, Bilthoven, The Netherlands; Centre of Infectious Diseases,
Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Targeted vaccination strategies are necessary to prevent people who
use drugs (PWUD) becoming infected with hepatitis B virus (HBV). The aims of this
study were to provide an overview of the activities for PWUD in a decentralised
vaccination program in the Netherlands and to explore the determinants associated
with completing a standard hepatitis B vaccination series.
METHODS: We used data for behavioural risk groups from the register of the
national vaccination program. The data concerned PWUD who were immunised against 
hepatitis B in the Netherlands between 2002 and 2011. A standard series of three 
vaccinations (at 0, 1, and 6 months) was offered at inclusion and was continued
if serological markers for past or chronic HBV infection were absent. Completion 
of a vaccination series (at least three vaccinations, irrespective of timing) was
a dependent variable in our logistic regression analysis.
RESULTS: The program reached 18,054 PWUD. Of the 15,746 participants eligible for
vaccination (i.e. they were neither carriers of hepatitis B nor immune to
hepatitis B), 9089 (58%) completed a series of three hepatitis B vaccinations.
Factors associated with a higher completion rate of a vaccination series
(p < 0.01) were: starting vaccination in the earlier years of the program, older 
age of PWUD, intravenous drug use, vaccine administration by addiction care
centres, and flexibility in location of vaccine delivery.
CONCLUSION: Despite using a standard HBV vaccination schedule and no financial
incentives, vaccination completion among PWUD was relatively high. Our results
suggest that flexibility of vaccination location and administration of vaccines
by healthcare workers with sustainable contact with PWUD could improve
vaccination programs for this risk group.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2018.07.045 
PMID: 30061025  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

