
1. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2019 May;38(5):496-499. doi: 10.1097/INF.0000000000002181.

Maintaining Concentration of Ribavirin in Cerebrospinal Fluid by a New Dosage
Method; 3 Cases of Subacute Sclerosing Panencephalitis Treated Using a
Subcutaneous Continuous Infusion Pump.

Miyazaki K(1), Hashimoto K, Suyama K, Sato M, Abe Y, Watanabe M, Kanno S, Maeda
H, Kawasaki Y, Hosoya M.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pediatrics, Fukushima Medical University, Fukushima,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE) is a slow virus infectious
disease resulting from persistent infection with mutant measles virus. At
present, there is no effective treatment for SSPE. Interferon-α and inosine
pranobex have both been used for the treatment of SSPE, and partial success has
been reported for the antiviral drug, ribavirin (RBV). The standardization of
dosage method is necessary to carry out treatment with RBV more safely and
effectively. In this study, RBV concentrations in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) were 
monitored during the intraventricular administration using a subcutaneous
continuous infusion pump.
METHODS: Three patients with new-onset SSPE were treated with RBV using a
subcutaneous continuous infusion pump. On days 3-10 after the start of RBV
infusion, CSFs were obtained by lumbar tap, and the concentration of RBV in the
CSF was measured using high-performance liquid chromatography.
RESULTS: RBV concentration increased in a dose-dependent manner in all 3
patients, and the target concentration could be generally maintained without any 
severe side effects. We observed that the clinical symptoms were temporarily
relieved in each case. In the 2 cases for whom treatment is continuing, the
patients remain in stage III, while the patient who discontinued the therapy
progressed to stage IV.
CONCLUSION: The target RBV concentration in the CSF could be maintained
continuously by intraventricular administration using a subcutaneous continuous
infusion pump. The accumulation of further cases is necessary to confirm the
safety and efficacy of this medical treatment.

DOI: 10.1097/INF.0000000000002181 
PMID: 30153227  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

