
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1986 Dec 10;884(3):520-30.

Protein glycosylation regulates the externalization of two distinct classes of
glucocorticoid-induced glycoproteins in rat hepatoma cells.

Haffar OK, Edwards CP, Firestone GL.

The relationship of protein glycosylation to the externalization of
glucocorticoid inducible alpha1-acid glycoprotein and mouse mammary tumor virus
glycoproteins was examined in M1.54, a clonal population of mouse mammary tumor
virus-infected rat hepatoma cells. Multiple freeze-thaw of isolated microsomes
revealed that while alpha 1-acid glycoprotein is carried through the cell as a
soluble component of vesicles, extracellular viral glycoproteins are initially
membrane-associated. At concentrations of tunicamycin that specifically inhibited
N-linked protein glycosylation, alpha 1-acid glycoprotein fractionated between
the cellular and extracellular compartments. Thus, approximately one half of the 
newly synthesized, nonglycosylated (22,000 Mr) alpha 1-acid glycoprotein was
rapidly secreted with kinetics similar to its glycosylated counterpart (release
half-time of 60 min), while the remaining species first localized in an undefined
intracellular compartment prior to its slow secretion (release half-time of 24
h). The same distribution of nonglycosylated alpha 1-acid glycoprotein was
observed at various absolute levels of polypeptide, suggesting that this was not 
due simply to the saturation of an efficient secretory pathway at high
polypeptide levels. In contrast to alpha 1-acid glycoprotein, no labeled viral
antigens were released by tunicamycin-treated M1.54, while a nonglycosylated
viral precursor glycopolyprotein was expressed intracellularly. Taken together,
these results suggest that carbohydrate attachment strongly regulates the
externalization of both alpha 1-acid glycoprotein and mouse mammary tumor virus
species, which represent two distinct classes of extracellular glycoproteins.

DOI: 10.1016/0304-4165(86)90204-7 
PMID: 3022823  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

