
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1986 Jun;6(6):2068-79.

Lymphoid and other tissue-specific phenotypes of polyomavirus enhancer
recombinants: positive and negative combinational effects on enhancer specificity
and activity.

Campbell BA, Villarreal LP.

Heterologous enhancer recombinants and deletions of the polyomavirus (Py)
noncoding region were constructed and analyzed for tissue specificity of DNA
replication and transcription in a number of lymphoid and other cell lines. The
simian virus 40 72-base-pair repeat, mouse immunoglobulin heavy-chain enhancer,
and Moloney murine leukemia virus enhancer were inserted into the PvuII-D locus
(nucleotides 5128 through 5265) of Py. The ability of these recombinants and the 
parental PvuII-D deletion mutant to replicate in permissive 3T6 cells and MOP-6
cells as well as in nonpermissive mouse B lymphoid, T lymphoid, mastocyte, and
embryonal carcinoma cells was determined. Wild-type Py DNA was not permissive for
replication in most lymphoid cell lines, except one hybridoma line. Simply
deleting the Py PvuII-D region, however, gave Py an expanded host range, allowing
high-level replication in some T lymphoid and mastocytoma cell lines, indicating 
that this element can be a tissue-specific negative as well as positive element. 
Substitution of the murine leukemia virus enhancer for Py PvuII-D yielded a Py
genome which retained the ability to replicate in 3T6 cells but also replicated
well in B lymphoid cells. Substitution with the immunoglobulin heavy-chain
enhancer allowed replication in B lymphoid cells but interfered with replication 
in 3T6 cells and mastocytomas. Surprisingly, substitution with the simian virus
40 72-base-pair enhancer repeat gave a recombinant which would not replicate in
any cell line tried, including MOP-6 cells, even though other recombinants with
this enhancer would replicate. Thus, we observed both cooperation and
interference in these combinations between enhancer components and the Py genome 
and that these combined activities were cell specific. These results are
presented as evidence that there may be a positional dependence, or syntax, for
the recognition of genetic elements controlling Py tissue specificity.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.6.6.2068 
PMCID: PMC367747
PMID: 3023917  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

