
1. Transpl Infect Dis. 2019 Feb;21(1):e13009. doi: 10.1111/tid.13009. Epub 2018 Nov 
5.

Risk of hepatitis B reactivation in hepatitis B surface antigen seronegative and 
core antibody seropositive kidney transplant recipients.

Querido S(1), Weigert A(1), Adragão T(1), Rodrigues L(2), Jorge C(1), Bruges
M(1), Machado D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nephrology, Centro Hospitalar de Lisboa Ocidental, Hospital de Santa Cruz,
Carnaxide, Portugal.
(2)Pathology, Centro Hospitalar de Lisboa Ocidental, Hospital de Santa Cruz,
Carnaxide, Portugal.

BACKGROUND: Previous contact with Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is common in patients
undergoing hemodialysis. Literature has shown conflicting results on the risk of 
HBV reactivation in kidney transplant (KT) recipients with serologic evidence of 
past HBV infection.
METHODS: We reviewed 631 consecutive KT recipients and selected 70 patients
simultaneously HBsAg negative and anti-HBc positive before KT, regardless of
hepatitis B surface antibody (anti-HBs) status. Demographic characteristics,
coinfection with other viruses, the presence of a previous KT, induction and
maintenance immunosuppression, length of follow up, biopsy-proven acute rejection
episodes, incidence of impaired liver function, and causes of graft loss and
mortality were collected. Hepatitis B virus reactivation was defined as detection
of HBV DNA viral load >2000 IU/mL during follow up. Outcome data included HBV
reactivation episodes, graft function, and patient survival.
RESULTS: Median follow-up was 151 months; 91.4% of patients were positive to
anti-HBs prior to KT. No patient received HBV prophylaxis and 11 patients (15.7%)
received rituximab as part of induction therapy. Anti-HBs titers remained stable 
in all patients throughout the observation period but two patient showed evidence
of HBV reactivation after KT.
CONCLUSION: Hepatitis B virus reactivation in HBsAg-negative and
anti-HBc-positive after KT is rare but possible. We suggest evaluating HBV
serologies, HBV DNA viral load, and liver enzymes before KT and routinely
monitoring serologic HBV markers after KT. As only two patients experienced HBV
reactivation, it is neither possible to define risk factors for HBV reactivation 
nor to evaluate the impact of different immunosuppressants or the benefit of
prophylactic regimens. Further studies regarding HBV reactivation in solid organ 
transplant recipients are necessary.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tid.13009 
PMID: 30295412  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

