
1. Sci Rep. 2018 Oct 15;8(1):15254. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-33498-5.

Distinct co-expression networks using multi-omic data reveal novel interventional
targets in HPV-positive and negative head-and-neck squamous cell cancer.

Costa RL(1)(2), Boroni M(3), Soares MA(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Oncovirologia, Instituto Nacional de C창ncer, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil. quelopes@lncc.br.
(2)Bioinformatics and Computational Biology Lab, Instituto Nacional de C창ncer,
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. quelopes@lncc.br.
(3)Bioinformatics and Computational Biology Lab, Instituto Nacional de C창ncer,
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(4)Programa de Oncovirologia, Instituto Nacional de C창ncer, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil.
(5)Department of Genetics, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.

The human papillomavirus (HPV) is present in a significant fraction of
head-and-neck squamous cell cancer (HNSCC). The main goal of this study was to
identify distinct co-expression patterns between HPV+ and HPV- HNSCC and to
provide insights into potential regulatory mechanisms/effects within the analyzed
networks. We selected cases deposited in The Cancer Genome Atlas database
comprising data of gene expression, methylation profiles and mutational patterns,
in addition to clinical information. The intersection among differentially
expressed and differentially methylated genes showed the negative correlations
between the levels of methylation and expression, suggesting that these genes
have their expression levels regulated by methylation alteration patterns in
their promoter. Weighted correlation network analysis was used to identify
co-expression modules and a systematic approach was applied to refine them and
identify key regulatory elements integrating results from the other omics. Three 
distinct co-expression modules were associated with HPV status and molecular
signatures. Validation using independent studies reporting biological
experimental data converged for the most significant genes in all modules. This
study provides insights into complex genetic and epigenetic particularities in
the development and progression of HNSCC according to HPV status, and contribute 
to unveiling specific genes/pathways as novel therapeutic targets in HNSCC.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-33498-5 
PMCID: PMC6189122
PMID: 30323202  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

