
1. PeerJ. 2018 Nov 19;6:e5888. doi: 10.7717/peerj.5888. eCollection 2018.

Exploratory investigation of region level risk factors of Ebola Virus Disease in 
West Africa.

Levy B(1), Odoi A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics, Fitchburg State University, Fitchburg, MA, United
States of America.
(2)Department of Biomedical and Diagnostic Sciences, University of
Tennessee-Knoxville, Knoxville, TN, United States of America.

Background: Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) is a highly infectious disease that has
produced over 25,000 cases in the past 50 years. While many past outbreaks
resulted in relatively few cases, the 2014 outbreak in West Africa was the most
deadly occurrence of EVD to date, producing over 15,000 confirmed cases.
Objective: In this study, we investigated population level predictors of EVD risk
at the regional level in Sierra Leone, Liberia, and Guinea.
Methods: Spatial and descriptive analyses were conducted to assess distribution
of EVD cases. Choropleth maps showing the spatial distribution of EVD risk across
the study area were generated in ArcGIS. Poisson and negative binomial models
were then used to investigate population and regional predictors of EVD risk.
Results: Results indicated that the risk of EVD was significantly lower in areas 
with higher proportions of: (a) the population living in urban areas, (b)
households with a low quality or no toilets, and (c) married men working in blue 
collar jobs. However, risk of EVD was significantly higher in areas with high
mean years of education.
Conclusions: The identified significant predictors of high risk were associated
with areas with higher levels of urbanization. This may be due to higher
population densities in the more urban centers and hence higher potential of
infectious contact. However, there is need to better understand the role of
urbanization and individual contact structure in an Ebola outbreak. We discuss
shortcomings in available data and emphasize the need to consider spatial scale
in future data collection and epidemiological studies.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.5888 
PMCID: PMC6250096
PMID: 30488016 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing
interests.

