
1. Dev Neurobiol. 2019 Feb;79(2):155-174. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22661. Epub 2019 Jan 2.

Role of BMP Signaling for the Formation of Auditory Brainstem Nuclei and Large
Auditory Relay Synapses.

Kronander E(1), Clark C(1), Schneggenburger R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Synaptic Mechanisms, Brain Mind Institute, School of Life
Science, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, 1015,
Switzerland.

Large excitatory synapses are found at specific points in the neuronal circuits
of the auditory brainstem, to enable fast information transfer and the
preservation of acoustic timing information. The extracellular cues and signaling
mechanisms that lead to the development of these specialized synaptic
connections, exemplified by the calyx of Held in the medial nucleus of the
trapezoid body (MNTB), are still largely unknown. Here, we investigate the role
of BMP signaling for the early development of the ventral cochlear nucleus (VCN) 
and MNTB, and for the initial formation of the calyx of Held synaptic connection.
We used conditional alleles of two BMP type-1 receptors in the background of a
constitutive BMPR1b knock-out (KO), or else a conditional allele of SMAD4. The
conditional alleles were recombined by the Krox20Cre mouse line that is active
around mid-gestation in rhombomeres (r) 3 and 5 from which the VCN and MNTB are
derived; alternatively, virus-mediated Cre-expression was performed early
postnatally in the VCN. The data show that embryonic SMAD-dependent BMP-signaling
in r3 and r5 contributes to the histogenesis of auditory brainstem nuclei. On the
other hand, BMP-receptor signaling early postnatally in presynaptic neurons of
the calyx of Held projection is necessary for correct axon branch retraction,
which suggests a cell-autonomous role of presynaptic BMP-receptors in synapse
elimination at the developing calyx of Held. Thus, our work dissects
developmentally early and late roles of BMP-signaling for the formation of
auditory brainstem nuclei, and the highly specialized synaptic connectivity in
these structures.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/dneu.22661 
PMID: 30548566  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

