
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2018 Dec 14;12(12):e0007011. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0007011. eCollection 2018 Dec.

A high throughput neutralization test based on GFP expression by recombinant
rabies virus.

Burgado J(1), Greenberg L(1), Niezgoda M(1), Kumar A(2), Olson V(1), Wu X(1),
Satheshkumar PS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Poxvirus and Rabies Branch, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America.
(2)Influenza Division, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta,
Georgia, United States of America.

The effectiveness of rabies vaccination in both humans and animals is determined 
by the presence of virus neutralizing antibodies (VNAs). The Rapid Fluorescent
Focus Inhibition Test (RFFIT) is the method traditionally used for detection and 
quantification of VNAs. It is a functional in vitro test for assessing the
ability of antibodies in serum to bind and prevent infection of cultured cells
with rabies virus (RABV). The RFFIT is a labor intensive, low throughput and
semi-quantitative assay performed by trained laboratorians. It requires staining 
of RABV-infected cells by rabies specific fluorescent antibodies and manual
quantification of fluorescent fields for titer determination. Although the
quantification of fluorescent fields observed in each sample is recorded, the
corresponding images are not stored or captured to be used for future analysis.
To circumvent several of these disadvantages, we have developed an alternative,
automated high throughput neutralization test (HTNT) for determination of rabies 
VNAs based on green fluorescent protein (GFP) expression by a recombinant RABV
and compared with the RFFIT. The HTNT assay utilizes the recombinant RABV ERA
variant expressing GFP with a nuclear localization signal (NLS) for efficient
quantification. The HTNT is a quantitative method where the number of
RABV-infected cells are determined and the images are stored for future analysis.
Both RFFIT and HTNT results correlated 100% for a panel of human and animal
positive and negative rabies serum samples. Although, the VNA titer values are
generally agreeable, HTNT titers tend to be lower than that of RFFIT, probably
due to the differences in quantification methods. Our data demonstrates the
potential for HTNT assays in determination of rabies VNA titers.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0007011 
PMCID: PMC6310286
PMID: 30550592  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

