
1. Virology. 1988 Nov;167(1):233-41.

Association of Autographa californica nuclear polyhedrosis virus (AcMNPV) with
the nuclear matrix.

Wilson ME(1), Price KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, University of Kentucky, Lexington 40546-0091.

Nuclear matrices from uninfected Spodoptera frugiperda cells and those infected
with Autographa californica nuclear polyhedrosis virus (AcMNPV) were isolated and
their protein constituents were compared. Proteins were characterized according
to size and several different antibodies to Drosophila nuclear proteins were
employed in an attempt to identify the proteins comprising this nuclear
substructure. Three species of lamins were identified as major constituents of
the nuclear matrix of Spodoptera cells. Two DNA-binding proteins having molecular
weights of 54 and 36 kDa were also identified as components of the nuclear matrix
of uninfected cells. Infection resulted in a superimposition of viral proteins
upon the nuclear matrix of the host cell. Polyhedrin, the basic viral DNA-binding
protein (p6.9), and the major capsid protein of AcMNPV were identified
immunologically as components of the nuclear matrix fraction of infected cells.
Infection also resulted in the increased association of cellular histones with
the nuclear matrix. DNA-binding assays demonstrated histones and p6.9 were the
predominant DNA-binding proteins associated with the nuclear matrix of infected
cells. Nuclear matrices from uninfected cells and cells infected with AcMNPV for 
10 and 24 hr were examined using transmission electron microscopy.
Morphologically, the nuclear matrix of the uninfected cell consists of the outer 
nuclear lamina (including nuclear pore complexes), an internal fibrogranular
protein constituent, and a residual nucleolar structure. Numerous viral capsids
were observed associated with the nuclear matrix in cells infected with either
wild-type AcMNPV or a polyhedrin-deletion mutant by 10 hr p.i. The capsids
appeared to be attached in an end-on association with the internal fibrogranular 
protein network of the nuclear matrix. The matrix-associated capsids were similar
in width and length to those packaged within the polyhedra. In addition to the
capsids, polyhedra in various stages of maturation were seen at 24 hr following
infection of the cells with the wild-type virus. The nuclear matrix of the
infected cell appears to play an important role in baculovirus assembly.

DOI: 10.1016/0042-6822(88)90073-6 
PMID: 3055664  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

