
1. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2019 Apr;54(4):497-506. doi: 10.1002/ppul.24246. Epub 2019 Jan 
8.

Airway microenvironment alterations and pathogen growth in cystic fibrosis.

Rossi GA(1), Morelli P(2), Galietta LJ(3), Colin AA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Pulmonary and Allergy Disease Unit and Cystic
Fibrosis Center, Genoa, Italy.
(2)Microbiology Laboratory, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy.
(3)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, Italy.
(4)Division of Pediatric Pulmonology, Miller School of Medicine, University of
Miami, Miami, FL.

Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Regulator (CFTR) dysfunction is associated with
epithelial cell vulnerability and with dysregulation of the local inflammatory
responses resulting in excessive airway neutrophilic inflammation and pathogen
growth. In combination with impaired mucociliary clearance, and dysregulation of 
defense function, bacterial infection follows with eventual airway damage and
remodeling. Because of these inherent vulnerabilities, viral infections are also 
more severe and prolonged and appear to render the airway even more prone to
bacterial infection. Airway acidity, deficient nitric oxide production and
increased iron concentrations, further enhance the airway milieu's susceptibility
to infection. Novel diagnostic techniques of the airway microbiome elucidate the 
coexistence of an array of non-virulent taxa beyond the recognized virulent
organisms, predominantly Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The complex interplay between
these two bacterial populations, including upregulation of virulence genes and
utilization of mucin as a nutrient source, modulates the action of pathogens,
modifies the CF airway milieu and contributes to the processes leading to airway 
derangement. The review provides an update on recent advances of the complex
mechanisms that render the CF airway vulnerable to inflammation, infection and
ultimately structural damage, the key pathogenetic elements of CF. The recent
contributions on CF pathogenesis will hopefully help in identifying new
prophylactic measures and therapeutic targets for this highly destructive
disorder.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ppul.24246 
PMID: 30620146  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

