
1. Virus Evol. 2019 Jan 30;5(1):vey038. doi: 10.1093/ve/vey038. eCollection 2019
Jan.

Link between the numbers of particles and variants founding new HIV-1 infections 
depends on the timing of transmission.

Thompson RN(1)(2)(3), Wymant C(4), Spriggs RA(5), Raghwani J(1)(4), Fraser C(4), 
Lythgoe KA(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford, UK.
(2)Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford, Andrew Wiles Building, Radcliffe
Observatory Quarter, Oxford, UK.
(3)Christ Church, University of Oxford, St Aldates, Oxford, UK.
(4)Big Data Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre for Health Information and Discovery,
Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(5)Department of Plant Sciences, University of Cambridge, Downing Street,
Cambridge, UK.

Understanding which HIV-1 variants are most likely to be transmitted is important
for vaccine design and predicting virus evolution. Since most infections are
founded by single variants, it has been suggested that selection at transmission 
has a key role in governing which variants are transmitted. We show that the
composition of the viral population within the donor at the time of transmission 
is also important. To support this argument, we developed a probabilistic model
describing HIV-1 transmission in an untreated population, and parameterised the
model using both within-host next generation sequencing data and population-level
epidemiological data on heterosexual transmission. The most basic HIV-1
transmission models cannot explain simultaneously the low probability of
transmission and the non-negligible proportion of infections founded by multiple 
variants. In our model, transmission can only occur when environmental conditions
are appropriate (e.g. abrasions are present in the genital tract of the potential
recipient), allowing these observations to be reconciled. As well as reproducing 
features of transmission in real populations, our model demonstrates that,
contrary to expectation, there is not a simple link between the number of viral
variants and the number of viral particles founding each new infection. These
quantities depend on the timing of transmission, and infections can be founded
with small numbers of variants yet large numbers of particles. Including
selection, or a bias towards early transmission (e.g. due to treatment), acts to 
enhance this conclusion. In addition, we find that infections initiated by
multiple variants are most likely to have derived from donors with intermediate
set-point viral loads, and not from individuals with high set-point viral loads
as might be expected. We therefore emphasise the importance of considering viral 
diversity in donors, and the timings of transmissions, when trying to discern the
complex factors governing single or multiple variant transmission.

DOI: 10.1093/ve/vey038 
PMCID: PMC6354028
PMID: 30723550 

