
1. Transpl Infect Dis. 2019 Jun;21(3):e13068. doi: 10.1111/tid.13068. Epub 2019 Mar 
27.

Epstein-Barr virus-associated smooth muscle tumors after lung transplantation.

Hirama T(1)(2)(3), Tikkanen J(1)(2), Pal P(4), Cleary S(5)(6), Binnie M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respirology, Department of Medicine, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Lung Transplant Program, Toronto General Hospital, University Health Network, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Institute of Development, Aging and Cancer,
Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine & Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Department of Surgery, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health
Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Department of Surgery, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota.

BACKGROUND: Recipients of solid organ transplants are prone to various
complications that are seldom encountered in immunocompetent individuals.
Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD) is the best known and
commonest Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV)-associated malignancy post solid organ
transplant. EBV-associated smooth muscle tumors (EBV-SMT) including leiomyomas
and leiomyosarcomas are rare and much less studied than PTLD. We recently
encountered two cases of EBV-SMT post lung transplantation and here we summarize 
their clinical features and course together with a literature review.
METHOD: Clinical data and treatment details of two patients who developed EBV-SMT
were reviewed and retrieved up to December 31, 2017. English literature was
searched through the PubMed database from 1965 to 2017 for studies of the
association between lung transplant and EBV-SMT.
RESULTS: The incidence of PTLD is higher among lung transplant recipients
compared to kidney transplant recipients, an observation that has been attributed
to stronger immune suppression in the lung patients. EBV-SMT showed a higher
incidence among kidney recipients than among lung recipients, suggesting that the
degree of immunosuppression may be a less important factor in the development of 
EBV-SMT. EBV-SMT has most often been seen among lung transplant recipients with
EBV mismatch.
CONCLUSIONS: Because EBV-SMT is a rare tumor, its incidence, risk factors, and
optimal management have not been well-defined and further study is needed.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tid.13068 
PMID: 30864272  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

