
1. PLoS One. 2019 Apr 11;14(4):e0214968. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0214968.
eCollection 2019.

Inhibitors of signal peptide peptidase and subtilisin/kexin-isozyme 1 inhibit
Ebola virus glycoprotein-driven cell entry by interfering with activity and
cellular localization of endosomal cathepsins.

Plegge T(1)(2), Spiegel M(1)(3), Krüger N(4)(5), Nehlmeier I(1), Winkler M(1),
González Hernández M(1)(2), Pöhlmann S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Infection Biology Unit, German Primate Center-Leibniz Institute for Primate
Research, Göttingen, Germany.
(2)Faculty of Biology and Psychology, University Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(3)Institute of Microbiology and Virology, Brandenburg Medical School Theodor
Fontane, Senftenberg, Germany.
(4)Institute of Virology, University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Hannover,
Germany.
(5)Research Center for Emerging Infections and Zoonoses, University of Veterinary
Medicine Hannover, Hannover, Germany.

Emerging viruses such as severe fever and thrombocytopenia syndrome virus (SFTSV)
and Ebola virus (EBOV) are responsible for significant morbidity and mortality.
Host cell proteases that process the glycoproteins of these viruses are potential
targets for antiviral intervention. The aspartyl protease signal peptide
peptidase (SPP) has recently been shown to be required for processing of the
glycoprotein precursor, Gn/Gc, of Bunyamwera virus and for viral infectivity.
Here, we investigated whether SPP is also required for infectivity of particles
bearing SFTSV-Gn/Gc. Entry driven by the EBOV glycoprotein (GP) and the Lassa
virus glycoprotein (LASV-GPC) depends on the cysteine proteases cathepsin B and L
(CatB/CatL) and the serine protease subtilisin/kexin-isozyme 1 (SKI-1),
respectively, and was examined in parallel for control purposes. We found that
inhibition of SPP and SKI-1 did not interfere with SFTSV Gn + Gc-driven entry
but, unexpectedly, blocked entry mediated by EBOV-GP. The inhibition occurred at 
the stage of proteolytic activation and the SPP inhibitor was found to block
CatL/CatB activity. In contrast, the SKI-1 inhibitor did not interfere with
CatB/CatL activity but disrupted CatB localization in endo/lysosomes, the site of
EBOV-GP processing. These results underline the potential of protease inhibitors 
for antiviral therapy but also show that previously characterized compounds might
exert broader specificity than initially appreciated and might block viral entry 
via diverse mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0214968 
PMCID: PMC6459477
PMID: 30973897  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

