
1. BMJ Open. 2019 May 1;9(4):e024085. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-024085.

'Just another vial…': a qualitative study to explore the acceptability and
feasibility of routine blood-borne virus testing in an emergency department
setting in the UK.

Cullen L(1)(2), Grenfell P(1)(2), Rodger A(2)(3), Orkin C(4), Mandal S(2)(5),
Rhodes T(1)(2)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, Environments and Society, Faculty of Public
Health and Policy, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(2)National Institute for Health Research (NIHR), Health Protection Research Unit
(HPRU) in Blood Borne and SexuallyTransmitted Infections, London, UK.
(3)Infection & Population Health, Institute for Global Health, University College
London, London, UK.
(4)HIV Medicine, Barts Health NHS Trust, London, UK.
(5)Immunisation, Hepatitis, Blood Safety and Countermeasures Response, Public
Health England, London, UK.
(6)National Centre for Social Research on Health, University of New South Wales, 
Sydney, Australia.

OBJECTIVES: Increased test uptake for HIV and viral hepatitis is fast becoming a 
health priority at both national and global levels. Late diagnosis of these
infections remains a critical public health concern in the UK. Recommendations
have been issued to expand blood-borne virus (BBV) testing in alternative
settings. Emergency departments (EDs) offer a potentially important point of
testing. This paper presents findings from a qualitative study which aimed to
explore the acceptability and feasibility of a routine opt-out combined BBV
testing intervention implemented at an inner London ED.
METHODS: We conducted 22 semistructured interviews with patients and service
providers in the ED over a 4-month period during the intervention pilot. A
grounded analytical approach was employed to conduct thematic analysis of
qualitative study data.
RESULTS: Core interrelating thematic areas, identified and analytically developed
in relation to test intervention implementation and experience, included the
following: the remaking of routine test procedure; notions of responsibility in
relation to status knowledge and test engagement; the opportunity and constraints
of the ED as a site for testing; and the renegotiation of testing cultures within
and beyond the clinic space.
CONCLUSION: Study findings demonstrate how relational and spatial dynamics
specific to the ED setting shape test meaning and engagement. We found
acceptability of the test practice was articulated through narratives of situated
responsibility, with the value of the test offset by perceptions of health need
and justification of the test expense. Participant accounts indicate that the
nontargeted approach of the test affords a productive disruption to 'at-risk'
identities, yet they also reveal limits to the test intervention's 'normalising' 
effect. Evaluation of the intervention must attend to the situated dynamics of
the test practice if opportunities of an opt-out BBV test procedure are to be
fully realised. Findings also highlight the critical need to further evaluate
post-test intervention practices and experiences.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-024085 
PMCID: PMC6501954
PMID: 31048425  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: CO has received research
grants, lecture fees, travel grants and honoraria towards advisory boards from
MSD, Gilead, Viiv and Janssen. Towards this work, CO received funding for the
testing project by a Gilead Fellowship grant. AR receives nonrestricted grant
funding from Gilead. LC, PG, SM and TR declare no conflicts of interest in
relation to this work and its submission. The paper has not been previously
published and neither is it being considered for publication elsewhere.

