
1. Biomacromolecules. 2019 Oct 14;20(10):3641-3647. doi: 10.1021/acs.biomac.9b00512.
Epub 2019 Aug 29.

Nature of Amorphous Hydrophilic Block Affects Self-Assembly of an Artificial
Viral Coat Polypeptide.

Willems L, van Westerveld L, Roberts S(1), Weitzhandler I(1), Calcines Cruz C(2),
Hernandez-Garcia A(2), Chilkoti A(1), Mastrobattista E(3), van der Oost J, de
Vries R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering , Duke University , Durham , North
Carolina 27708 , United States.
(2)Institute of Chemistry, Department of Chemistry of Biomacromolecules ,
National Autonomous University of Mexico , 04510 Mexico City , Mexico.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutics, Utrecht Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences
(UIPS), Faculty of Science , Utrecht University , Universiteitsweg 99 , 3584 CG
Utrecht , The Netherlands.

Consensus motifs for sequences of both crystallizable and amorphous blocks in
silks and natural structural analogues of silks vary widely. To design novel
silklike polypeptides, an important question is therefore how the nature of
either the crystallizable or the amorphous block affects the self-assembly and
resulting physical properties of silklike polypeptides. We address herein the
influence of the amorphous block on the self-assembly of a silklike polypeptide
that was previously designed to encapsulate single DNA molecules into rod-shaped 
viruslike particles. The polypeptide has a triblock architecture, with a long
N-terminal amorphous block, a crystallizable midblock, and a C-terminal
DNA-binding block. We compare the self-assembly behavior of a triblock with a
very hydrophilic collagen-like amorphous block (GXaaYaa)132 to that of a triblock
with a less hydrophilic elastin-like amorphous block (GSGVP)80. The amorphous
blocks have similar lengths and both adopt a random coil structure in solution.
Nevertheless, atomic force microscopy revealed significant differences in the
self-assembly behavior of the triblocks. If collagen-like amorphous blocks are
used, there is a clear distinction between very short polypeptide-only fibrils
and much longer fibrils with encapsulated DNA. If elastin-like amorphous blocks
are used, DNA is still encapsulated, but the polypeptide-only fibrils are now
much longer and their size distribution partially overlaps with that of the
encapsulated DNA fibrils. We attribute the difference to the more hydrophilic
nature of the collagen-like amorphous block, which more strongly opposes the
growth of polypeptide-only fibrils than the elastin-like amorphous blocks. Our
work illustrates that differences in the chemical nature of amorphous blocks can 
strongly influence the self-assembly and hence the functionality of engineered
silklike polypeptides.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biomac.9b00512 
PMCID: PMC6794640
PMID: 31418550  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

