
1. J Clin Virol. 2019 Nov;120:6-11. doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2019.08.012. Epub 2019 Aug
27.

Multiplex analysis of Human Polyomavirus diversity in kidney transplant
recipients with BK virus replication.

Wang Y(1), Strassl R(2), Helanterä I(3), Aberle SW(4), Bond G(2), Hedman K(5),
Weseslindtner L(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, University of Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Department of Medicine III, Division of Nephrology and Dialysis, Medical
University of Vienna, Austria.
(3)University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Transplantation and
Liver Surgery, Finland.
(4)Center for Virology, Medical University of Vienna, Austria.
(5)Department of Virology, University of Helsinki, Finland; Helsinki University
Hospital, HUSLAB, Helsinki, Finland.
(6)Department of Virology, University of Helsinki, Finland; Center for Virology, 
Medical University of Vienna, Austria. Electronic address:
lukas.weseslindtner@meduniwien.ac.at.

BACKGROUND: While the pathogenicity of the two initially identified Human
Polyomaviruses (HPyVs), BK Virus (BKPyV) and JC Virus (JCPyV) has been intensely 
studied, there is only limited data, on whether the occurrence of the recently
discovered HPyVs correlates with high level BKPyV replication and progression
towards Polyomavirus associated nephropathy (PVAN).
METHODS: Therefore, we performed a comprehensive longitudinal genoprevalence
analysis of 13 HPyVs using a novel multiplex assay including 400 serum and 388
urine samples obtained from 99 kidney transplant recipients (KTRs), grouped by
quantitative BKPyV DNA loads and evidence of manifest BKPyV associated disease
(histologically verified PVAN, high urinary decoy cell levels and concurrent
decrease of renal function).
RESULTS: In total, 3 different non-BKPyV/JCPyV HPyVs, Human Polyomavirus 9,
Merkel Cell Polyomavirus (MCPyV) and Trichodysplasia Spinulosa associated
Polyomavirus were detected in 11 blood and 21 urine samples from 21 patients.
Although DNAemia of these viruses occurred more frequently during high level
BKPyV DNAemia and PVAN, the increase of the detection frequency due to
progression of BKPyV replication did not reach statistical significance for blood
samples. The positive detection rate of MCPyV in urine, however, was
significantly higher during BKPyV DNAemia in 19 KTRs of our cohort who suffered
from histologically verified PVAN (p = 0.005). In one individual with PVAN,
continuous long-term shedding of MCPyV in urine was observed.
CONCLUSION: In our cohort the recently discovered HPyVs HPyV9, TSPyV and MCPyV
emerged in blood from KTRs with variable kinetics, while detection of MCPyV
DNAuria occurred more frequently during BKPyV DNAemia in patients with PVAN.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2019.08.012 
PMID: 31505316  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

