
1. J Vis Exp. 2019 Sep 10;(151). doi: 10.3791/60115.

Immunofluorescence Labelling of Human and Murine Neutrophil Extracellular Traps
in Paraffin-Embedded Tissue.

Abu Abed U(1), Brinkmann V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Microscopy Core Facility, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology; Cellular
Microbiology, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology.
(2)Microscopy Core Facility, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology;
brinkmann@mpiib-berlin.mpg.de.

Neutrophil granulocytes, also called polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN) due to
their lobulated nucleus, are the most abundant type of leukocytes. They mature in
the bone marrow and are released into the peripheral blood, where they circulate 
for about 6-8 h; however, in tissue, they can survive for days. By diapedesis
through the endothelium, they leave the blood stream, enter tissues, and migrate 
towards the site of an infection following chemotactic gradients. Neutrophils can
combat invading microorganisms by phagocytosis, degranulation, and generation of 
neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs). This protocol will help to detect NETs in 
paraffin-embedded tissue. NETs are the result of a process called NETosis, which 
leads to the release of nuclear, granular, and cytoplasmic components either from
living (vital NETosis) or dying (suicidal NETosis) neutrophils. In vitro, NETs
form cloud-like structures, which occupy a space several times larger than that
of the cells from which they descended. The backbone of NETs is chromatin, to
which a selection of proteins and peptides originating from granules and
cytoplasm are bound. Thereby, a high local concentration of toxic compounds is
maintained so that NETs can capture and inactivate a variety of pathogens
including bacteria, fungi, viruses, and parasites, while diffusion of the highly 
active NET components leading to damage in neighboring tissue is limited.
Nevertheless, in recent years it has become apparent that NETs, if generated in
abundance or cleared insufficiently, do have pathological potential ranging from 
autoimmune diseases to cancer. Thus, detection of NETs in tissue samples may have
diagnostic significance, and the detection of NETs in diseased tissue can
influence the treatment of patients. Since paraffin-embedded tissue samples are
the standard specimen used for pathological analysis, it was sought to establish 
a protocol for fluorescent staining of NET components in paraffin-embedded tissue
using commercially available antibodies.

DOI: 10.3791/60115 
PMID: 31566594  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

