
1. Trop Med Infect Dis. 2019 Oct 17;4(4). pii: E130. doi:
10.3390/tropicalmed4040130.

Cutaneous Pyogranulomas Associated with Nocardia jiangxiensis in a Cat from the
Eastern Caribbean.

Silkworth A(1)(2), Cavanaugh R(3), Bolfa P(4), Becker AAMJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Ross University School of Veterinary
Medicine, St. Kitts KN0602, West Indies. ASilkworth@rossvet.edu.kn.
(2)Ross University Veterinary Clinic (RUVC), Ross University School of Veterinary
Medicine, St. Kitts KN0602, West Indies. ASilkworth@rossvet.edu.kn.
(3)Department of Clinical Sciences, Ross University School of Veterinary
Medicine, St. Kitts KN0602, West Indies. RCavanaugh@rossvet.edu.kn.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ross University School of Veterinary
Medicine, St. Kitts KN0602, West Indies. PBolfa@rossvet.edu.kn.
(5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ross University School of Veterinary
Medicine, St. Kitts KN0602, West Indies.

Nocardia spp. are worldwide, ubiquitous zoonotic bacteria that have the ability
to infect humans as well as domestic animals. Herein, we present a case of a
five-year-old female spayed domestic shorthair cat (from the island of Nevis)
with a history of a traumatic skin wound on the ventral abdomen approximately two
years prior to presenting to the Ross University Veterinary Clinic. The cat
presented with severe dermatitis and cellulitis on the ventral caudal abdomen,
with multiple draining tracts and sinuses exuding purulent material. Initial
bacterial culture yielded Corynebacterum spp. The patient was treated
symptomatically with antibiotics for 8 weeks. The cat re-presented 8 weeks after 
the initial visit with worsening of the abdominal lesions. Surgical intervention 
occurred at that time, and histopathology and tissue cultures confirmed the
presence of Nocardia spp.-induced pyogranulomatous panniculitis, dermatitis, and 
cellulitis. Pre-operatively, the patient was found to be feline immunodeficiency 
virus (FIV)-positive. The patient was administered trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole 
(TMS) after antimicrobial sensitivity testing. PCR amplification and 16S rRNA
gene sequencing confirmed Nocardia jiangxiensis as the causative agent. To our
knowledge, N. jiangxiensis has not been previously associated with disease. This 
case report aims to highlight the importance of a much-needed One Health approach
using advancements in technology to better understand the zoonotic potential of
Nocardia spp. worldwide.

DOI: 10.3390/tropicalmed4040130 
PMCID: PMC6958412
PMID: 31627308 

