
1. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 1987 Dec;1(4):801-39.

Management of infections in children with cancer.

Barson WJ(1), Brady MT.

Author information: 
(1)Ohio State University College of Medicine and Pharmacy, Columbus.

Infectious complications remain a frequent cause of morbidity and mortality in
children with cancer, especially in those who are granulocytopenic. Physicians
caring for these children must approach each new febrile episode as if it were
life threatening. Questions concerning the present illness must be comprehensive.
The physical examination should be done in a compulsive manner because the more
obvious signs of inflammation are often absent because of granulocytopenia.
Immediate initiation of broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotic coverage is
required once the appropriate specimens for diagnostic microbiology studies have 
been obtained. Because these patients may exhibit either dramatic or, more often,
only subtle clinical findings, they must be monitored closely and have a complete
physical examination at least daily. The laboratory studies frequently determine 
the etiology of the fever. Therapy can then be modified, based upon the
particular pathogen isolated or the type of infection identified. Because
bacterial infections are responsible for most infectious febrile episodes in the 
granulocytopenic child with cancer, appropriate antibiotic therapy usually is
curative. However, some patients remain febrile and granulocytopenic without
explanation. These patients frequently have a fungal infection and respond to
amphotericin B therapy. Our present armamentarium of antimicrobial agents against
the common pathogens encountered in cancer patients, except for cytomegalovirus, 
is adequate. Future advances in therapy of infections in children with cancer
will probably be in the area of immunotherapy. This would include both passive
administration of products to strengthen a debilitated immune system, together
with active immunization with the aim to prevent infectious complications.
Prevention of infection in the cancer population may be one of the keys to
producing longer remissions and prolonged overall survival, by enabling pediatric
oncologists to administer more intensive induction chemotherapy.


PMID: 3323184  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

