
1. J Med Assoc Thai. 1986 Sep;69(9):505-10.

Vaccine requirements and priorities for developing countries.

Thongcharoen P.

PIP: The situation of viral vaccines used in Asian countries is reviewed,
focusing on the following vaccines: smallpox, rabies, polio, measles, rubella,
mumps, influenza, Japanese encephalitis, hepatitis B, varicella, dengue, and
rotavirus. Vaccinations are among the most important strategies to combat
communicable diseases caused by bacteria, fungi, parasites, and viruses. Active
immunizations are more preferable in most instances than passive ones. It has
taken almost 2 centuries to eradicate the highly contagious infection of smallpox
from the world. In 1979 the World Health Organization (WHO) announced the global 
eradication of smallpox. Smallpox vaccination was 1st practiced in 1840 by Dr.
Dan Beach Bradley, with the last 2 cases of smallpox reported in Thailand in
1962. Despite the achievement for many years of more ideal rabies vaccine, Semple
vaccine continues to be used in developing countries. Attempts should be
intensified to produce newer tissue culture vaccines in developing countries
themselves and to eradicate vectors. Instances of poliomyelitis were reported in 
Indonesia, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, India, and Thailand as late as 1983-84,
but only a few sporadic cases have occurred in Malaysia since 1980. This mixed
record results from polio vaccine having been incorporated into national Expanded
Program on Immunization (EPI) programs in many countries. Measles remains 1 of
the most common viral infections in children in most developing nations, but
morbidity and mortality rates are not accurately obtainable in these countries.
Rubella outbreaks have been reported from many countries in Southeast Asia with
congenital rubella syndromes due to maternal rubella on the increase in many
countries, including Thailand. Children who receive the mumps vaccination are
those receiving the combined MMR vaccines. Monovalent mumps vaccine is not
obtainable in developing countries. Influenza vaccine is impracticable in most
developing countries. Japanese encephalitis vaccine has been used in Japan since 
1954. Because of the high cost of Hepatitis B vaccine, mass immunization cannot
be practiced in any developing country. Current data suggest that OKA strain of
varicella vaccine will be a useful vaccine to protect against chickenpox in
immunocompromised children as well as normal children living in some settings.
More years are needed to determine the feasibility of dengue immunization. At
present, only rotaviruses are the enteric viral agents causing human diarrhea for
which vaccination is indicated and feasible. Requirements for vaccines used in
developing countries are outlined.

PMID: 3794567  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

