
1. J Mol Biol. 1985 Sep 5;185(1):125-43.

The structure of the adenovirus capsid. II. The packing symmetry of hexon and its
implications for viral architecture.

Burnett RM.

The orientation and location of the 240 hexons comprising the outer protein shell
of adenovirus have been determined. Electron micrographs of the capsid and its
fragments were inspected for the features of hexon known from the X-ray
crystallographic model as described in the accompanying paper. A capsid model is 
proposed with each facet comprising a small p3 net of 12 hexons, arranged as a
triangular sextet with three outer hexon pairs. The sextet is centrally placed
about the icosahedral threefold axis, with its edges parallel to those of the
facet. The outer pairs project over the facet edges on one side of the
icosahedral twofold axes at each edge. The model capsid is defined by the
underlying icosahedron, of edge 445 A, upon which hexons are arranged. The hexons
are thus bounded by icosahedra with insphere radii of 336 A and 452 A. A quartet 
of hexons forms the asymmetric unit of an icosahedral hexon shell, which can be
closed by the addition of pentons at the 12 vertices. Considering the hexon
trimer as a complex structure unit, its interactions in the four topologically
distinct environments are very similar, with conservation of at least two-thirds 
of the inter-hexon bonding. The crystal-like construction explains the flat
facets and sharp edges characteristic of adenovirus. Larger "adenovirus-like"
capsids of any size could be formed using only one additional topologically
different environment. The construction of adenovirus illustrates how an
impenetrable protein shell can be formed, with highly conserved intermolecular
bonding, by using the geometry of an oligomeric structure unit and symmetry
additional to that of the icosahedral point group. This contrasts with the manner
suggested by Caspar & Klug (1962), in which the polypeptide is the structure
unit, and for which the number of possible bonding configurations required of a
structure unit tends to infinity as the continuously curved capsid increases in
size. The known structures of polyoma and the plant viruses with triangulation
number equal to 3 are evaluated in terms of hexamer-pentamer packing, and
evidence is presented for the existence of larger subunits than the polypeptide
in both cases. It is suggested that spontaneous assembly can occur only when
exact icosahedral symmetry relates structure units or sub-assemblies, which would
themselves have been formed by self-limiting closed interactions. Without such
symmetry, the presence of scaffolding proteins or nucleic acid is necessary to
limit aggregation.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(85)90187-1 
PMID: 4046035  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

