
1. J Virol. 1970 Jan;5(1):51-9.

Type 1 and type 2 herpes simplex viruses: serological and biological differences.

Plummer G, Waner JL, Phuangsab A, Goodheart CR.

Forty isolates of herpes simplex virus were compared by means of
cross-neutralization curves. The 11 oral isolates were serotype 1, and all 29
genital/anal isolates were serotype 2. The cytopathic effects of the two
serotypes were consistently different. Passage of strains of type 1 and type 2 in
mice and in rabbits yielded two variants, although the majority of the strains
remained unchanged serologically and in their cytopathic effects. The two
variants were derived from type 1 strains and differed from the parent strains in
their cytopathic effects, each of them producing syncytia and enlarged plaques.
They had, however, retained the serotypic properties and the deoxyribonucleic
acid (DNA) densities of their parent strains. The Roizman syncytial/macroplaque
strain of herpes simplex virus was also included in the study; the density of its
DNA (1.727 g/ml) was typical of type 1 strains, and serologically it seemed to be
basically a type 1 strain, although it was neutralized by type 2 antiserum
slightly better than were other type 1 strains. Growth curves were performed of
the two serotypes in rabbit kidney, human fibroblast, and mouse embryo tissue
cultures. The type 2 strains attained lower titers of infectivity in these three 
cell systems; the levels of infectivity of type 2 virus in the culture fluid
decreased much more rapidly after the maximum had been attained than did the
levels of infectivity of the type 1 strains, due to the greater instability of
the type 2 virus. Parallel titrations of different strains in tissue cultures and
intracerebrally in mice indicated that the latter assay system was usually more
sensitive for type 2 strains than it was for type 1 strains. The paralytic
sequelae and inflammatory changes of lumbar ganglia and spinal cord in young
rabbits inoculated extraneurally with strains of the two serotypes also indicate 
that the type 2 virus is more virulent in laboratory animals than is type 1
virus.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.5.1.51-59.1970 
PMCID: PMC375969
PMID: 4315160  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

