
1. J Gen Virol. 1980 Apr;47(2):343-53.

Alterations in virus protein synthesis and capsid production in infection with DI
particles of herpesvirus.

Henry BE, Newcomb WW, O'Callaghan DJ.

High multiplicity, undiluted passage of equine herpesvirus type 1 (EHV-1) in L-M 
cells resulted in the rapid production of virus particles whose genome was
genetically less complex, contained more reiterated DNA sequences and exhibited a
greater buoyant density (rho = 1.724 g/ml) than the DNA (rho = 1.716 g/ml) of
standard virus. These data and the finding that these particles inhibited the
replication of standard virus in interference assays confirmed that these were
defective interfering (DI) particles (Henry et al. 1979). Additional evidence for
this has been obtained from the pattern of cyclic fluctuation in infectious virus
titre through 17 serial passages as well as from the pronounced variation in the 
particle to plaque ratio for each passage. Total particle production was markedly
reduced in cells infected with virus preparations containing DI particles and
quantification of major cell-associated EHV-1 capsid species by electron
microscopy and analysis in Renografin density gradients indicated that this
reduction occurred at the level of capsid assembly. Although total capsid
production was reduced in cells infected with DI particle preparations, the
synthesis of I (immature) capsids increased relative to that of L (empty) capsids
and these alterations in the assembly of capsid species could be related to
changes in the synthesis of capsid proteins. In cells infected with EHV-1
preparations rich in DI particles, the synthesis of major capsid protein 150000
was greatly reduced, whereas core protein 46000, a major component of I capsids, 
was overproduced as compared to standard virus infection. Capsids produced in
cells infected with virus preparations rich in DI particles were identical in
polypeptide composition to those made in standard virus infection.

DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-47-2-343 
PMID: 6245174  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

