
1. Hum Pathol. 1981 Dec;12(12):1097-1106.

Hepatitis A virus: virologic, clinical, and epidemiologic studies.

Dienstag JL.

The last decade has borne witness to accelerated expansion of our understanding
of hepatitis A virus. The agent of type A hepatitis is an RNA virus with a mean
diameter of 27 nm. and biochemical-biophysical properties of an enterovirus. A
variety of sensitive specific serologic techniques have been developed with which
to identify hepatitis A virus and antibody, and both chimpanzees and marmosets
have been studied extensively as experimental animal models. As a result of these
studies, in vitro cultivation of hepatitis A virus has finally been accomplished,
and a commercial radioimmunoassay for IgM antibody to hepatitis A virus has been 
developed for the rapid diagnosis of hepatitis A virus infection during acute
illness. Clinically the illness caused by hepatitis A virus is relatively mild,
often subclinical, and of limited duration and does not progress to chronic liver
disease. This relative clinical benignity is reflected, according to preliminary 
histologic observations, in the sparing of the centrozonal area of the liver
lobule. Rarely, however, hepatitis A virus can cause fulminant hepatitis. Type A 
hepatitis is transmitted almost exclusively by the fecal-oral route, and its
spread is enhanced by epidemiologic settings favoring dissemination of enteric
infections. Hepatitis A virus does not contribute to transfusion associated or
other types of percutaneously transmitted hepatitis. Exposure to the virus
increases as a function of age and decreasing socioeconomic class, but the
incidence of hepatitis A virus infection in urbanized societies is decreasing.
There is no evidence for the existence of chronic hepatitis A virus carriage;
natural perpetuation of hepatitis A virus in urban communities appears to depend 
on a reservoir of nonepidemic, clinically inapparent cases. Until a vaccine, now 
being developed, becomes available, prevention of hepatitis A virus infection
will continue to depend on maintenance of high standards of environmental and
personal hygiene and on timely administration of immune serum globulin. Such
prophylaxis may confer long lasting passive-active immunity but more frequently
prevents infection entirely.

DOI: 10.1016/s0046-8177(81)80330-9 
PMID: 6277764  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

