
1. Cancer Res. 1984 Mar;44(3):1288-300.

Immunological characterization of Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma patients
with high antibody titers against Epstein-Barr virus-associated antigens.

Masucci G, Mellstedt H, Masucci MG, Szigeti R, Ernberg I, Björkholm M, Tsukuda K,
Henle G, Henle W, Pearson G, et al.

We have studied nine Hodgkin's lymphoma (HD) and ten non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL)
patients with extraordinarily high anti-viral capsid antigen (VCA) titers
(greater than 5120). Controls were 13 HD and 23 NHL patients with anti-VCA titers
between 40 and 2560. High anti-VCA titers were present in NHL patients at the
time of diagnosis or within 16 months, whereas the rise of anti-VCA titers in HD 
patients appeared to be a late event during the clinical course of the disease
(mean time from diagnosis, 68 months). In particular, we have asked whether the
exceptionally high anti-Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) titers in some HD and NHL
patients can be correlated to some of the EBV-specific and -nonspecific
parameters of cell-mediated immunity. The battery of non-EBV-specific
immunological tests included the assessment of natural killer cell activity and
the analysis of T-lymphocyte subclasses according to surface markers, together
with spontaneous and mitogen-induced DNA synthesis and their helper or suppressor
activity on PWM-generated immunoglobulin synthesis. Outgrowth inhibition (Ol) and
leukocyte migration inhibition were used to assess EBV-specific cell-mediated
immunity. The majority of the high-titer HD and NHL patients showed a drastically
reduced OKT4:OKT8 ratio in their peripheral lymphocyte population. Low-titer HD
and NHL patients showed no such reduction. There was no strict correlation
between the number of OKT8-positive cells and suppressor activity in the
functional PWM-induced immunoglobulin production test. Part of the high-titer HD 
patients showed defective cellular responses in the outgrowth inhibition test,
directed against the proliferation of EBV-transformed (EBV-determined nuclear
antigen-positive) cells. Some of them showed also a deficient leukocyte migration
inhibition response to EBV-determined nuclear antigen but, interestingly, not to 
early antigen-VCA. In the NHL group, only one of the high-titer patients showed a
similar defect. None of the low-titer HD and NHL patients showed such defects.


PMID: 6318984  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

