
1. J Clin Lab Anal. 1993;7(6):353-64.

Detection of antibody IgG to HIV-1 in urine by sensitive enzyme immunoassay
(immune complex transfer enzyme immunoassay) using recombinant proteins as
antigens for diagnosis of HIV-1 infection.

Hashida S(1), Hirota K, Hashinaka K, Saitoh A, Nakata A, Shinagawa H, Oka S,
Shimada K, Mimaya J, Matsushita S, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medical College of Miyazaki, Japan.

For diagnosis of HIV-1 infection, attempts were made to detect anti-HIV-1 IgG in 
urine by sensitive enzyme immunoassay (immune complex transfer enzyme
immunoassay) using recombinant reverse transcriptase (RT) and p17 as antigens.
Anti-HIV-1 IgG in urine was reacted simultaneously with 2,4-dinitrophenyl-bovine 
serum albumin-recombinant protein conjugate and recombinant protein-enzyme
conjugate. The enzymes used as labels were horseradish peroxidase for RT and
Escherichia coli beta-D-galactosidase for p17. The complex formed, consisting of 
the three components, was trapped onto polystyrene balls coated with
affinity-purified (anti-2,4-dinitrophenyl group) IgG, eluted with epsilon
N-2,4-dinitrophenyl-L-lysine and transferred to polystyrene balls coated with
affinity-purified (anti-human IgG gamma-chain) IgG. Finally, bound enzyme
activity was assayed by fluorometry. Urine samples were collected from 100
seronegative subjects and 70 seropositive subjects. The sensitivity and
specificity were both 100% with unconcentrated urine samples. The positivity was 
confirmed by preincubation of urine samples with excess of the antigens. The
positivity and negativity with one of the two antigens could be confirmed with
the other antigen. The positivity with low signals could be confirmed by
concentration of urine samples. Detection of anti-HIV-1 IgG in urine by the
immune complex transfer enzyme immunoassay using different antigens would make
diagnosis of HIV-1 infection possible.

DOI: 10.1002/jcla.1860070610 
PMID: 7506305  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

