
1. Baillieres Clin Gastroenterol. 1994 Jun;8(2):233-53.

Treatment of chronic viral hepatitis.

Marcellin P(1), Benhamou JP.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Hépatologie et INSERM U24, Hôpital Beaujon, Clichy, France.

Recent advances have been made in the treatment of chronic viral hepatitis,
mainly with recombinant interferon (IFN) alpha. However, the present treatment of
chronic viral hepatitis is not entirely satisfactory because the efficacy is
inconstant and/or incomplete. In chronic hepatitis B IFN-alpha induces a
sustained interruption of hepatitis B virus (HBV) replication, with a HBeAg to
anti-HBe seroconversion in about 30% of patients. Patients most likely to respond
are those with no immunosuppression, HBV infection acquired during adulthood or
active liver disease with low HBV replication. Responders usually show a
significant decrease in serum HBV DNA levels during the first 2 months of
therapy, followed by a significant increase in the level of aminotransferases.
New nucleoside analogues might be useful in combination with IFN-alpha in the
treatment of those who do not respond to IFN therapy. In chronic hepatitis B-D,
the rate of sustained response to IFN-alpha therapy is low. To be effective,
IFN-alpha must be used at a high dosage (9-10 mega units) with a long duration (1
year). In chronic hepatitis C, IFN-alpha at a dosage of 3 mega units over 6
months, induces a sustained response in about 20% of patients. A higher dosage of
IFN (5-10 mega units) and a longer duration of treatment increases the rate of
sustained response but is associated with poor tolerance. Non-responders to a
first course of IFN do not respond to a second course of treatment. In patients
who respond but relapse after treatment, the rate of sustained response after a
second course of IFN needs to be assessed. Ribavirin, which has a significant
antiviral effect on hepatitis C virus, might be useful in combination with
IFN-alpha. At the dosage (3-6 mega units) usually used, IFN-alpha is relatively
well tolerated. In about 10% of the patients therapy is interrupted, mainly
because of severe fatigue, thyroid dysfunction or depression.

DOI: 10.1016/0950-3528(94)90003-5 
PMID: 7949457  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

