
1. Virology. 1994 Aug 15;203(1):20-8.

Site-directed mutagenesis of the P2 region of the Rous sarcoma virus gag gene:
effects on Gag polyprotein processing.

Bowles N(1), Bonnet D, Mulhauser F, Spahr PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Geneva, Switzerland.

The Pr76Gag and Pr180Gag-Pol polyprotein precursors of Rous sarcoma virus contain
a 22-amino-acid spacer peptide, called p2, located between the amino acid
sequences of the mature Gag proteins MA and p10. This spacer peptide is present
in stoichiometric amounts in the virion, albeit cleaved into two parts, but its
function is unknown. The primary sequence of this peptide includes a region that 
is highly conserved among retroviruses, consisting of four prolines followed by
tyrosine. We have investigated the role of p2, particularly the polyproline
motif, in the virus life cycle by site-directed mutagenesis. Mutations in this
region result in the intracellular accumulation of a truncated Gag precursor, due
either to a block in the intracellular processing of the precursor or to the
premature activation of the viral protease. Since in cells infected by Rous
Sarcoma Virus there is no significant intracellular processing of the Gag
polyprotein precursor, our data suggest that the p2 domain plays a role in
controlling the activation of the protease. These mutations also result in a
reduction in virus particle release, probably as a direct consequence of the
aberrant precursor processing since a construct in with both p2 and the protease 
active site were mutated did not exhibit aberrant processing of the Gag
polyproteins and formed particles with an efficiency similar to that of the wild 
type. This indicates that it is the viral protease that is responsible for the
aberrant processing and suggests that the p2 region is not required for assembly.
Although the virus genomic RNA packaged into virions produced by the p2 mutants
is more susceptible to degradation, it appears that the p2 domain does not have a
direct role in RNA packaging and protection.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1994.1450 
PMID: 8030280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

