
1. Hepatology. 1994 Jun;19(6):1337-41.

Quantitative detection of hepatitis C virus RNA with a solid-phase signal
amplification method: definition of optimal conditions for specimen collection
and clinical application in interferon-treated patients.

Davis GL(1), Lau JY, Urdea MS, Neuwald PD, Wilber JC, Lindsay K, Perrillo RP,
Albrecht J.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hepatobiliary Diseases, University of Florida College of Medicine, 
Gainesville 32610.

To determine the optimal conditions for preparation of serum specimens for
quantitative hepatitis C virus RNA determination, patient samples were processed 
such that differences in time from clot formation to centrifugation,
centrifugation to separation of serum and collection of serum until freezing
could be independently assessed. The effects of multiple cycles of freezing and
thawing were also determined. There was progressive and significant loss of
hepatitis C virus RNA activity when the time from the formation of the clot until
centrifugation was longer than 2 hr. This reduction reached 32% after 6 hr and
49% after 24 hr. If centrifugation was performed immediately after formation of
the clot, loss of hepatitis C virus RNA activity was reduced to less than 10%
even though the serum remained unseparated from the clot for up to 6 hr.
Centrifugation of blood through a paraffin plug (serum separator tube) prevented 
loss of hepatitis C virus RNA activity for up to 24 hr. There was no loss of
hepatitis C virus RNA activity with up to three freeze-thaw cycles. When patient 
specimens were prepared under these optimal conditions, the sensitivity of the
quantitative branched DNA signal amplification assay in patients with hepatitis C
virus infection was 83% and the specificity in patients with liver disease was
100%. Fluctuations in hepatitis C virus RNA levels were shown to correlate with
biochemical changes observed in patients treated with recombinant
interferon-alpha 2b. These data demonstrate that improper or inconsistent methods
of serum preparation may result in falsely low and unreliable levels of hepatitis
C virus RNA.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)


PMID: 8188164  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

