
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Dec 11;21(24):5705-11.

An unstructured mRNA region and a 5' hairpin represent important elements of the 
E. coli translation initiation signal determined by using the bacteriophage T7
gene 1 translation start site.

Helke A(1), Geisen RM, Vollmer M, Sprengart ML, Fuchs E.

Author information: 
(1)University of Heidelberg, Germany.

Gene 1 of bacteriophage T7 early region--the RNA polymerase gene--is very
actively translated during the infectious cycle of this phage. A 29 base pair
fragment of its ribosome binding site containing the initiation triplet, the
Shine-Dalgarno sequence (S-D), 10 nucleotides (nt) upstream and 6 nt downstream
of these central elements was cloned into a vector to control the expression of
the mouse dihydrofolate reductase gene (dhfr). Although all essential parts of
this translation initiation region (TIR) should be present, this fragment showed 
only very low activity. Computer analysis revealed a potentially inhibitory
hairpin binding the S-D sequence into its stem base paired to vector-derived
upstream sequences. Mutational alterations demonstrated that this hairpin was not
responsible for the low activity. However, addition of 21 nt of the T7 gene 1
upstream sequence to the 29 base pair fragment were capable of increasing the
translational efficiency by one order of magnitude. Computer analysis of this
sequence, including nucleotide shuffling, revealed that it contains a highly
unstructured region lacking mRNA secondary structures but with a hairpin at its
5' end, here formed solely by T7 sequences. There was not much difference in
activity whether the mRNA included or lacked vector-derived sequences upstream of
the hairpin. Such highly unstructured mRNA regions were found in all very
efficiently expressed T7 genes without any obvious sequence homologies. The delta
G values of these regions were higher, i.e. potential secondary structural
elements were fewer, than in TIR of genes from E. coli. This is likely due to the
fact that T7 as a lytic phage is relying for successful infection on much
stronger signals which a cell cannot afford because of the indispensable balanced
equilibria of its interdependent biochemical processes. When the 5' ends of
efficient T7 gene mRNA are formed by the action of RNase III they generally start
with an unstructured region. Efficiently expressed T7 genes within a
polycistronic mRNA, however, always contain a hairpin preceding the structure
free sequence. We suggest that the formation of this 5' hairpin is releasing
enough energy to keep the unstructured regions free of secondary RNA structures
for sufficient time to give ribosomes and factors a good chance for binding to
the TIR. In addition, sequences further downstream of the start codon give rise
to an additional increase in efficiency of the TIR by almost two orders of
magnitude.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/21.24.5705 
PMCID: PMC310538
PMID: 8284218  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

