
1. Cytometry. 1995 Sep 15;22(3):200-10.

Standardization of absolute CD4+ lymphocyte counts across laboratories: an
evaluation of the Ortho CytoronAbsolute flow cytometry system on normal donors.

Connelly MC(1), Knight M, Giorgi JV, Kagan J, Landay AL, Parker JW, Page E, Spino
C, Wilkening C, Mercolino TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Immunocytometry Research and Development, Ortho Diagnostic Systems, Raritan,
New Jersey 08869, USA.

The Ortho CytoronAbsolute is a flow cytometer designed to provide direct absolute
counts of lymphocytes and their subsets from a single instrument. This study was 
designed to determine the performance of four geographically separated
CytoronAbsolute instruments using 24-h-old, shipped, whole blood samples and to
compare the results obtained on the CytoronAbsolute to those obtained using
combinations of hematology instruments and other flow cytometers. The absolute
count feature of the CytoronAbsolutes located at the four sites were cross
calibrated and gave across-site coefficients of variation (CVs) of <4.0% for
absolute count and 8.2% for absolute lymphocyte count. The calibration was stable
for at least 2 months. Absolute lymphocyte counts and lymphocyte percentage
immunophenotypes were determined on blood from 50 healthy human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV)-seronegative donors. There were no significant site-to-site
differences (each P > .05) in CD3+/CD4+ absolute lymphocyte counts determined on 
the CytoronAbsolute. In contrast, there was a significant site-to-site difference
(P < .001) between sites 2 and 3 and sites 3 and 4 in the absolute CD3+/CD4+
lymphocyte counts determined via the conventional method of combining a flow
cytometry-derived percentage with a hematology instrument-derived lymphocyte
count. There was no significant difference (P = .388) in CD3+/CD4+ lymphocyte
percent determinations between the CytoronAbsolute and the FACScan or Profile II 
flow cytometers used in this study. These results demonstrate that different
operators can cross calibrate CytoronAbsolutes for absolute CD3+/CD4+ lymphocyte 
subset determinations, even over large geographic distances.

DOI: 10.1002/cyto.990220307 
PMID: 8556951  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

