
1. Virology. 1996 Mar 1;217(1):220-9.

Persistence of Japanese encephalitis virus is associated with abnormal expression
of the nonstructural protein NS1 in host cells.

Chen LK(1), Liao CL, Lin CG, Lai SC, Liu CI, Ma SH, Huang YY, Lin YL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Preventive Medicine, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Persistent infection with Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) was established in
murine neuroblastoma N18 cells, and the persistency has been maintained in cell
culture for over 6 months. From the persistently infected cells, a clone named
C2-2 was selected and expanded to form a stable cell line. The vast majority of
C2-2 cells showed viral protein staining by immunofluorescence and continuously
produced low levels of virus (10(3) to 10(4) PFU/ml) without marked cytopathic
effects or cyclic variations. In addition to the wild-type viral proteins,
truncated forms of the viral nonstructural protein 1 (NS1) as well as its
derivative NS1' were produced in C2-2 cells. Both truncated NS1 and NS1' contain 
deletions at their N-termini; however, the analyses by RT-PCR and direct
sequencing of the viral RNA failed to detect any truncations or mutations within 
the NS1 region, suggesting that NS1 truncation was a result of a unique
posttranslational proteolytic cleavage of NS1 in the persistently infected cells.
Similar but not identical truncation of NS1 was also observed in two other
persistently infected cell lines established in Vero and DBT (murine astrocytoma)
cells. However, viruses released from C2-2 cells did not produce truncated NS1
upon infection of N18 cells, suggesting that NS1 truncations were the result of
virus-cell interaction in persistently infected cells. These data indicate a
strong association between abnormal NS1 expression and JEV persistency. A
probable involvement of dysfunctional NS1 in the establishment and/or maintenance
of JEV persistency in tissue culture is discussed.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1996.0109 
PMID: 8599206  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

