
1. J Gen Virol. 1996 Feb;77 ( Pt 2 ):359-68.

The three human T-lymphotropic virus type I subtypes arose from three
geographically distinct simian reservoirs.

Liu HF(1), Goubau P, Van Brussel M, Van Laethem K, Chen YC, Desmyter J, Vandamme 
AM.

Author information: 
(1)Rega Institute for Medical Research, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Belgium.

To investigate the origin of human T-lymphotropic virus I (HTLV-I), strains of
diverse geographical origin were analysed. We sequenced the LTR and env genes of 
HTLV-I strains from Brazil, Central African Republic, Taiwan and Zaire, and the
simian T-lymphotropic virus type I (STLV-I) strain PHSu1 from a baboon from the
Sukhumi primate centre. We performed phylogenetic analyses using
neighbour-joining, parsimony and maximum likelihood methods. Three separate
HTLV-I clusters were identified interspersed between STLV-I clusters. The
Brazilian and the Taiwanese strains were within the first well-supported cluster 
containing all cosmopolitan HTLV-I strains flanked by west African STLV-I
strains. The HTLV-I strains from Central African Republic and Zaire fell into a
central African cluster close to the chimpanzee STLV-I isolates. The third
well-supported cluster included all Melanesian HTLV-I strains and had Indonesian 
STLV-I strains as closest neighbours. Therefore, currently known HTLV-I strains
represent three HTLV-I subtypes that most probably have originated from three
geographically distinct interspecies transmission events. The highly divergent
PHSu1, isolated from Papio hamadryas, was closely related to PCY-991, isolated
from Papio cynocephalus, both from the Sukhumi primate centre. Both clustered
together with Asian wild-caught rhesus macaque STLV-I strains suggesting recent
interspecies transmission of virus from rhesus macaques to colony-bred African
baboons at the Sukhumi primate centre. In the rooted env trees obtained using the
STLV strain PH969 as an outgroup, the Asian strains branched off before the
African strains, implying an Asian origin for HTLV/STLV type I based on presently
available strains.

DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-77-2-359 
PMID: 8627240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

