
1. Int J Epidemiol. 1996 Jun;25(3):679-84.

Verbal autopsy as a tool for diagnosing HIV-related adult deaths in rural Uganda.

Kamali A(1), Wagner HU, Nakiyingi J, Sabiiti I, Kengeya-Kayondo JF, Mulder DW.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research council (UK) Programme on AIDS in Uganda, Uganda Virus
Research Institute, PO Box 49, Entebbe, Uganda.

BACKGROUND: In general, information on the causes of adult deaths in developing
countries is scarce. More specifically, relatively little is known about the
effect of HIV-1 associated disease on adult mortality in general populations. In 
this study we have used a verbal autopsy technique to ascertain whether adult
deaths were associated with HIV-1 in a rural population with a prevalence of
HIV-1 infection of 8%, and used HIV-1 antibody status to validate the verbal
autopsy findings.
METHODS: All adult deaths in the population cohort that occurred between December
1990 and November 1993 were identified through a monthly death registration
system. Approximately 2 months after death, a relative of the deceased was
interviewed by a trained nurse, and questionnaires were assessed by at least two 
independent clinicians; all were unaware of the HIV serostatus of the deceased.
RESULTS: A total of 155 adult deaths was assessed, i.e. 53% of all recorded adult
deaths. Of those assessed half were HIV-1 positive. In all 47% of deaths were
classified as HIV-related. The overall specificity and positive predictive value 
of the verbal autopsy tool were both 92%; in those aged 13-44 years (83 adults)
the corresponding values were 85% and 95% respectively. The verbal autopsy
estimated HIV-1 attributable mortality fraction was similar to the calculated
fraction based on prospective data.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study suggest that verbal autopsy studies may
assist in providing data on HIV-associated mortality in general populations and
may be useful as surveillance tools.

PIP: The verbal autopsy technique represents a means for increasing the accuracy 
of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)-related mortality statistics in
sub-Saharan Africa, where many deaths occur at home. A structured interview,
adapted to local disease perceptions, is administered by lay personnel to
relatives or friends of the deceased. This technique was evaluated in a rural
area of Uganda's Masaka district with a human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1
seroprevalence rate of 8%. All adult deaths occurring in the 15 index villages
from December 1990 to November 1993 were identified through a monthly
village-based death registration system. A nurse paid an initial condolence visit
to the bereaved family and returned about two months later with the
questionnaire. Interviews were conducted with families or friends of 155 (53%) of
the 293 adult deaths for which HIV serostatus was known. At least two clinicians 
unaware of serostatus results assessed each questionnaire and indicated the
likely causes of death. There was agreement on whether the death was or was not
HIV-related in 141 (91%) of these deaths. The 14 cases with discordant
assessments were reviewed by a third clinician. Overall, 73 (47%) of deaths were 
attributed to HIV-related causes. Using HIV serostatus as a standard of
comparison, the overall specificity and predictive value of the verbal autopsy
were both 92%. These findings suggest that the method can be relied upon to
estimate HIV-associated mortality in populations with a relatively high HIV
prevalence.
DOI: 10.1093/ije/25.3.679 
PMID: 8671573  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

