
1. J Virol. 1996 Sep;70(9):6151-6.

Amino acids essential for RNase H activity of hepadnaviruses are also required
for efficient elongation of minus-strand viral DNA.

Chen Y(1), Marion PL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Geographic Medicine, University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, USA.

The hepadnavirus P gene contains amino acid sequences which share homology with
all known RNases H. In this study, we made four mutants in which single amino
acids of the duck hepatitis B virus (DHBV) RNase H region were altered. In two of
them, amino acids at locations comprising the putative catalytic site were
changed, while the remaining mutants had alterations at amino acids conserved
among hepadnaviruses. Transfection of these mutant genomes into permissive cells 
resulted in synthesis of several discrete viral nucleic acid species, ranging in 
apparent sizes from approximately 500 to 3,000 bp, numbered I, II, III, IV, and
V. While the locations of the species were similar in all mutants, the
proportions of the species varied among the mutants. Analysis of the nucleic acid
species revealed that they were hybrid molecules of RNA and minus-strand DNA,
indicating that the RNase H activity was missing or greatly reduced in these
mutants. Primer extension experiments showed that the mutant viruses initiated
minus-strand viral DNA synthesis normally. The 3' termini of minus-strand DNA in 
species II, III, and IV were mapped just downstream of nucleotides 1659, 1220,
and 721, respectively. Species V contained essentially full-length minus-strand
viral DNA. A parallel amino acid change in the putative catalytic site of the HBV
RNase H domain resulted in accumulation of low-molecular-weight hybrid molecules 
consisting of RNA and minus-strand DNA and similar in size and pattern to those
seen with DHBV. These studies demonstrate experimentally the involvement of the
C-terminal portion of the P gene in RNase H activity in both DHBV and human
hepatitis B virus and indicate that the amino acids essential for RNase H
activity of hepadnavirus P protein are also important for the efficient
elongation of minus-strand viral DNA.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.70.9.6151-6156.1996 
PMCID: PMC190638
PMID: 8709240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

