
1. J Clin Invest. 1996 Oct 1;98(7):1684-91.

Dominant recognition by human CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes of dengue virus
nonstructural proteins NS3 and NS1.2a.

Mathew A(1), Kurane I, Rothman AL, Zeng LL, Brinton MA, Ennis FA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Department of Medicine,
University of Massachusetts Medical Center, Worcester 01655, USA.

A severe complication of dengue virus infection, dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF), 
is hypothesized to be immunologically mediated and virus-specific cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTLs) may trigger DHF. It is also likely that dengue virus-specific 
CTLs are important for recovery from dengue virus infections. There is little
available information on the human CD8+ T cell responses to dengue viruses.
Memory CD8+CTL responses were analyzed to determine the diversity of the T cell
response to dengue virus and to identify immunodominant proteins using PBMC from 
eight healthy adult volunteers who had received monovalent, live-attenuated
candidate vaccines of the four dengue serotypes. All the donors had specific T
cell proliferation to dengue and to other flaviviruses that we tested. CTLs were 
generated from the stimulated PBMC of all donors, and in the seven donors tested,
dengue virus-specific CD8+CTL activity was demonstrated. The nonstructural (NS3
and NS1.2a) and envelope (E) proteins were recognized by CD8+CTLs from six, five,
and three donors, respectively. All donors recognized either NS3 or NS1.2a. In
one donor who received a dengue 4 vaccine, CTL killing was seen in bulk culture
against the premembrane protein (prM). This is the first demonstration of a CTL
response against the prM protein. The CTL responses using the PBMC of two donors 
were serotype specific, whereas all other donors had serotype-cross-reactive
responses. For one donor, CTLs specific for E, NS1.2a, and NS3 proteins were all 
HLA-B44 restricted. For three other donors tested, the potential restricting
alleles for recognition of NS3 were B38, A24, and/or B62 and B35. These results
indicate that the CD8+CTL responses of humans after immunization with one
serotype of dengue virus are diverse and directed against a variety of proteins. 
The NS3 and NS1.2a proteins should be considered when designing subunit vaccines 
for dengue.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI118964 
PMCID: PMC507603
PMID: 8833919  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

