
1. Mod Pathol. 1996 Aug;9(8):849-53.

A nonradioactive method for rapid and sensitive detection of polymerase chain
reaction products by use of bromo-deoxyuridine.

Dakhama A(1), Hegele RG.

Author information: 
(1)University of British Columbia, Pulmonary Research Laboratory, St. Paul's
Hospital, Vancouver, Canada.

A highly sensitive and nonradioactive method that allows for rapid detection of
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products, without the need for hybridization with
oligonucleotide probes, is described. In this method, a 410-bp sequence of the
human respiratory syncytial virus nucleocapsid cDNA was amplified by PCR in the
presence of bromo-deoxyuridine-triphosphate, an analog of
deoxythymidine-triphosphate. After agarose gel electrophoresis and Southern
blotting, the PCR product was directly identified by
immunoenzyme-chemiluminescent reaction after binding with an
antibromodeoxyuridine antibody. The results show that substitution of
bromo-deoxyuridine-triphosphate for deoxythymidine-triphosphate does not affect
the efficiency of PCR, and as low as one copy-equivalent of the target DNA
sequence could be detected within 2 hours, whereas it required 1 to 5 days to
reach comparable sensitivity level after hybridization with a 32P-labeled
oligonucleotide probe and autoradiography. Compared with the use of
digoxygenin-11-deoxyuridine-triphosphate, the sensitivity of detection was
100-fold higher with the use of Bromo-deoxyuridine-triphosphate. When applied to 
the diagnosis by use of reverse transcription-PCR of respiratory syncytial virus 
infections in nasopharyngeal washes from children with symptoms of acute upper
respiratory tract infection, the current method detected respiratory syncytial
virus genome in 29 of 100 specimens, and there was a complete concordance with
the results of hybridization of reverse transcription-PCR products by use of a
radiolabeled oligonucleotide probe. Thus, in addition to its rapidity of
detection and high sensitivity, this method provides safety of use and can be
readily applied to the clinical diagnosis of viral respiratory tract infections.


PMID: 8871927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

