
1. Eur J Biochem. 1979 Jul;97(2):529-40.

Immunochemical studies of beef pancreas tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase and its
fragments. Determination of the number of antigenic determinants and a comparison
with tryptophanyl- tRNA synthetases from other sources and with reverse
transcriptase from avian myeloblastosis virus.

Scheinker VS, Beresten SF, Mazo AM, Ambartsumyan NS, Rokhlin OV, Favorova OO,
Kisselev LL.

The immunoglobulin G (IgG) fraction of the antiserum from rabbits immunized with 
homogeneous beef pancreas tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase inhibits the enzyme
activity in the reactions of both tRNATrp aminoacylation and tryptophan
activation. Fab fragments of IgG act in a similar way. Common antigenic
determinants have been detected in tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetases from beef, pig, 
chicken and rat livers using pure antibodies against beef pancreas
tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase. This observation indicates the evolutional
stability of certain structural features of tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetases. The
interaction of antibodies with the fragments of beef tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase
produced by endogenous and tryptic proteolysis of the enzyme has been studied. On
third of the antiserum antibodies interacting with the C-terminal fragment of the
enzyme (Mr approximately equal to 40000) inhibits its activity whereas the
antibodies to the N-terminal fragment (Mr approximately equal to 20000) have no
effect on the enzyme activity. The immunochemical identity of the two synthetase 
fragments differing in their enzymatic activity supports the assumption that the 
loss of enzymatic activity of the tryptic fragment is caused by lack of a small
peptide which is retained in case of endogenous proteolysis; probably the amino
acid residues of this peptide participate in formation of active centre of
tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase. A radioimmunochemical method is described for
determining the number of antigenic determinants. One molecule of
tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase was found to bind 9 (+/- 1) molecules of Fab
fragments. Antibodies against tryptophanyl-tRNA snythetase from beef pancreas do 
not inhibit noticeably the activity of reverse transcriptase from avian
myeloblastosis virus. No antigenic determinants in common have been detected in
reverse transcriptase and tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase by radioimmunochemical
assays.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1979.tb13141.x 
PMID: 89031  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

