
1. Virology. 1996 Nov 1;225(1):196-212.

Gradual shutdown of virus production resulting in latency is the norm during the 
chronic phase of human immunodeficiency virus replication and differential rates 
and mechanisms of shutdown are determined by viral sequences.

Li XD(1), Moore B, Cloyd MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston 77555-1019, USA.

Most CD4+ lymphocytes in lymph nodes of both asymptomatic HIV-1-infected
individuals and AIDS patients are nonproductively or latently infected. It is not
clear how these cells come about because infection of resting lymphocytes results
in abortive infection and infection of activated lymphocytes results in
productive infection. The frequency and mechanisms underlying nonproductive or
latent HIV infections of normal CD4+ lymphocytes largely remain unexplored, and
because HIV latency has principally been studied in latently infected cell clones
of established cell lines, it is not even clear how often this type of infection 
occurs in cell lines. We demonstrate herein that chronic HIV replication in
populations of normal phytohemagglutinin-stimulated peripheral blood
CD4(+)-enriched lymphocytes, as well as an established T-cell line (CEM),
gradually shuts down in the vast majority of cells. The nonproducing cells in
these cultures still harbored HIV provirus, and HIV could be reactivated in CEM
cells by treatment with phorbol ester, showing that this was latent infection.
Thus, HIV's life cycle should probably be considered as consisting of two phases 
an acute exponential rise in production of virus progeny which levels at some
peak, followed by a gradual decline of progeny production during the chronic
phase leading to viral latency. Temporal analyses of the steady-state levels of
viral mRNAs in populations of chronically infected CEM cells as virus production 
declined revealed the two mechanisms of HIV latency which have previously been
described in the OM-10.1 and U1 or ACH-2 latently infected cell clones (i.e.,
apparent overall shutdown of HIV transcription and "blocked early-stage latency" 
involving enhanced splicing of viral pre-mRNAs) However, which mechanism was
employed, as well as the rate of shutdown, depended on the virus strain.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1996.0588 
PMID: 8918547  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

