
1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 1996 Sep;53(1-2):147-61.

Local antibody production in the oviduct and gut of hens infected with a variant 
strain of infectious bronchitis virus.

Raj GD(1), Jones RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathology, University of Liverpool, Leahurst, Neston,
South Wirral, UK.

Following infection of 16-week old specific pathogen-free (SPF) female chickens
with an enterotropic variant of infectious bronchitis virus (IBV) strain G,
IBV-specific Immunoglobulin G (IgG) and IgA were detected in tears, tracheal
washes, oviduct washes, duodenal and caecal contents using class-specific
monoclonal antibodies in enzyme linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA). IgG antibody
content was highest in tears on Day 7 post-infection (p.i.) and was still
detectable on Day 23 p.i. Significant levels of IgG antibody were present in
oviduct washes on Days 7 and 23 p.i. Tears showed the highest IgA antibody
concentration of any sample on Day 7 p.i. but this decreased to an insignificant 
level by Day 17 p.i. Oviduct and tracheal washes had IgA antibodies on Day 7 p.i.
Significant levels of both antibody classes were detected in duodenal contents on
Day 17 p.i. only but neither was present in caecal contents. Using a method which
compares titre of antibody produced from pieces of tissue at 4 degrees C with
that at 37 degrees C as an indicator of local secretion, IgG and IgA antibody
synthesis was demonstrated in the Harderian gland on Days 7 and 17 p.i. Local IgG
antibody synthesis was seen in the oviduct on Day 7 p.i. but on Day 23 p.i. the
optical density at 4 degrees C was higher than at 37 degrees C, suggestive of
high concentrations of extracellular antibody. In a separate experiment,
passively administered IBV antibody transuded from serum into oviduct washes but 
did not do so in the trachea. In a third experiment, ELISA and
haemagglutination-inhibition (HI) titres of serum and oviduct washes from ten
hens previously infected when day-old were compared with egg production. Maximum 
positive correlation was seen between HI titres of oviduct washes and egg
production.

DOI: 10.1016/0165-2427(95)05545-2 
PMID: 8941976  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

