
1. Arch Dermatol. 1996 Dec;132(12):1443-7.

Porphyrin abnormalities in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.

O'Connor WJ(1), Murphy GM, Darby C, Fogarty J, Mulcahy F, O'Moore R, Barnes L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, St James's Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.

Comment in
    Arch Dermatol. 1996 Dec;132(12):1503-4.
    Arch Dermatol. 1997 Sep;133(9):1170-1.

OBJECTIVE: To examine prospectively porphyrin metabolism in a human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-positive population.
SETTING: Specialist referral unit at the Department of Genitourinary Medicine, St
James's Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
PATIENTS: Twenty-eight men and 5 women (age range, 18-35 years). Twenty-nine were
current or previous intravenous drug abusers. Four were thought to have sexually 
acquired HIV infection. All had a history of acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome-defining illnesses. The patients were selected as a consecutive sample
from the inpatient department. Eligibility criteria were cooperation with urine
and stool collection and confirmed HIV seropositivity. The patients were matched 
to 2 groups: 1 with normal results of porphyrin studies and the other with
abnormal findings from porphyrin studies.
INTERVENTION: None.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Plasma, urine, and stool porphyrin excretion patterns.
RESULTS: Of the 33 patients in the study, 13 (40%) had increased urinary
porphyrin excretion. All but 2 of these patients were seropositive for hepatitis 
C virus. No study patient had clinical evidence of porphyria. Four patients
(12%), however, had urine and stool porphyrin excretion patterns that were
classic for porphyria cutanea tarda. All 4 of these patients were hepatitis C
virus-positive. Patients with porphyrinuria had a greater degree of
immunosuppression (P = .002) than those with normal porphyrin metabolism, and
they were more likely to be taking zidovudine (P = .009).
CONCLUSIONS: Commonly, porphyrin metabolism is abnormal in persons with
established HIV infection. Hepatitis C may contribute to abnormal porphyrin
metabolism. An unexpected number of patients studied had porphyrin excretion
patterns that were characteristic of porphyria cutanea tarda, and all of these
were hepatitis C virus-positive. A diagnosis of porphyria cutanea tarda,
especially in a young patient, should prompt investigation for underlying HIV and
hepatitis C virus infections. Dermatologists should be aware of the infectious
risk associated with the vesicles and erosions in these patients. Porphyrin
studies should be performed in any patient with HIV and photosensitivity.


PMID: 8961872  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

