
1. Am J Gastroenterol. 1997 Jan;92(1):73-8.

Patterns of hepatitis C viremia in patients receiving hemodialysis.

Umlauft F(1), Gruenewald K, Weiss G, Kessler H, Urbanek M, Haun M, Santner B,
Koenig P, Keeffe EB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Innsbruck, Austria.

OBJECTIVES: Chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is common in patients who
receive hemodialysis (HD). The aim of this study was to determine the natural
history of hepatitis C viremia and the clinical utility of quantitation and
genotyping of HCV in this population of patients.
METHODS: Consecutive sera from two groups of HD patients who were HCV RNA
positive, a group of 33 patients treated with interferon alfa (5 MU, three times 
a week for 4 months) and a group of 31 untreated patients, were analyzed by
qualitative polymerase chain reaction, quantitative polymerase chain reaction,
and a line probe assay for genotyping.
RESULTS: Serum HCV RNA was detected continuously in 20 of 31 untreated patients
(65%), and 11 patients (35%) showed a fluctuating pattern of viremia with
virus-free intervals of up to 4 wk. Twenty-five of 33 patients (76%) treated with
interferon alfa became HCV RNA negative during therapy; eight of these 25
patients had a breakthrough, which was transient in seven patients and persistent
in one. Of the remaining 24 end-of-treatment responders, 17 relapsed after
completion of therapy, and seven (21%) had a sustained response with undetectable
serum HCV RNA for 1 yr of follow-up. Initial serum HCV RNA levels in HD patients 
were generally low (median, 1 x 10(5) genome eq/ml). Sustained responders had
significantly lower median levels of viremia (4 x 10(4) eq/ml) than relapsers and
nonresponders (9 x 10(4) and 1.8 x 10(5) eq/ml, respectively). Genotyping
revealed a predominance of genotype 1a (33%) and 1b (48%).
CONCLUSIONS: This study documents that fluctuating hepatitis C viremia with
periods of undetectable HCV RNA is common and that low viral load predicts a
sustained response to interferon therapy in HD patients. Diagnosis of chronic
hepatitis C and monitoring of interferon therapy in HD patients should include
initial HCV RNA quantitation and repeated qualitative measurements of HCV RNA.


PMID: 8995941  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

