
1. J Virol. 1997 Feb;71(2):965-70.

Identification of a cis-acting element in the class I major histocompatibility
complex gene promoter responsive to activation by retroviral sequences.

Choi SY(1), van de Mark K, Faller DV.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Center, Department of Medicine, Boston University School of
Medicine, Massachusetts 02118, USA.

The infection of cells with Moloney murine leukemia virus (M-MuLV) causes an
increase in specific cellular gene products, including the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I antigens. This upregulation occurs
through a transactivation process mediated by the long terminal repeat (LTR) of
M-MuLV, and we show here that the gene activation response to the LTR requires at
least one specific cis element within the MHC proximal promoter region. Nested
deletions of MHC class I H-2Kb gene promoter sequence were subcloned into a
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter vector and then transiently
introduced into BALB/c-3T3 cells expressing M-MuLV or cotransfected into
BALB/c-3T3 cells with a vector containing subgenomic portions of the virus,
including the LTR. CAT activity assays demonstrated that a minimal H-2Kb gene
promoter (-64 to +12) contained elements sufficient for this transactivation.
DNase I footprinting assays located a protein-binding site in the region of -64
to -34 bp from the transcriptional start site, and point mutation analysis
confirmed the location of this cis-acting element, designated the let response
element (LRE), and defined a binding motif. This LRE is distinct from binding
sites for currently known transcription factors in the class I MHC gene promoter 
and is conserved in the promoters of human and murine MHC class I genes. Mutation
of the LRE resulted in dramatic reduction in both DNA-protein binding activity in
electrophoretic mobility shift assay and in the ability of the mutated promoter
to respond to retroviral transactivation. Addition of the LRE to a heterologous
promoter conferred the ability to respond to retroviral transactivation.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.71.2.965-970.1997 
PMCID: PMC191145
PMID: 8995614  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

