
1. FEBS Lett. 1997 Jan 2;400(1):15-8.

Ceramides induce a form of apoptosis in human acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells 
that is inhibited by Bcl-2, but not by CrmA.

Geley S(1), Hartmann BL, Kofler R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for General and Experimental Pathology, Division of Molecular
Pathophysiology, University of Innsbruck, Medical School, Austria.

The generation of ceramides by the action of acidic and/or neutral
sphingomyelinases has been implicated in many forms of apoptosis. We investigated
whether exposure to ceramides is sufficient to induce apoptosis in human leukemia
cells and, if so, what the characteristics of this form of apoptosis might be.
Treatment of the acute lymphoblastic T-cell line CEM-C7H2 with short- and
medium-chain ceramide analogs (C2-, C6-, and C8-ceramide) resulted in apoptosis, 
whereas the inactive C2-dihydroceramide had no effect on cell survival. Induction
of apoptosis was relatively slow (approximately 40% after 24 h) and required high
concentrations of ceramide analogs (40-100 microM). To investigate a possible
involvement of interleukin 1-beta-converting enzyme (ICE) or ICE-related
proteases, we treated CEM-C7H2 sublines constitutively expressing the vaccinia
virus protease inhibitor crmA with ceramide analogs. Although such cells were
completely resistant to apoptosis induced by antibodies to the Apo-1/Fas surface 
receptor (a form of apoptosis known to be inhibitable by CrmA), they were not
protected from ceramide-induced cell death. In contrast, tetracycline-regulated
overexpression of Bcl-2 protected CEM-C7H2 sublines stably transfected with
corresponding constructs from ceramide-induced apoptosis. Thus, in these human
leukemia cells, ceramides induce a relatively slow death response that can be
prevented by Bcl-2, but is independent of CrmA-inhibitable proteases. These
characteristics distinguish ceramide-induced from other forms of apoptosis, such 
as Apo-1/Fas-induced cell death where ceramide production has been causally
implicated.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(96)01284-7 
PMID: 9000505  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

