
1. J Virol. 1997 Mar;71(3):2127-37.

Mutational analyses of the intergenic dinucleotide and the transcriptional start 
sequence of vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) define sequences required for
efficient termination and initiation of VSV transcripts.

Stillman EA(1), Whitt MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Tennessee, Memphis
38163, USA.

We have used dicistronic vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) minigenomes to dissect 
the functional importance of the nontranscribed intergenic dinucleotide and the
conserved transcription start sequence found at the beginning of all VSV genes.
The minigenomes were generated entirely from cDNA and contained the G and M
protein genes, flanked by the leader and trailer regions from the Indiana
serotype of VSV. All mutations were made either within the nontranscribed M-G
intergenic dinucleotide or within the transcription start sequence of the
downstream G gene. Immunofluorescence microscopy and immunoprecipitation analysis
of the mutated minigenomes indicated that the first three nucleotides of the
transcriptional start sequence are the most critical for efficient VSV gene
expression, whereas the nontranscribed, intergenic dinucleotide and the other
conserved nucleotides found at the 5' mRNA start sequence can tolerate
significant sequence variability without affecting G protein production. RNA
analysis indicated that nucleotide changes in the transcriptional start sequence 
which resulted in reduced G protein expression correlated with the amount of
transcript present. Therefore, this conserved sequence appears to be required for
efficient transcript initiation following polyadenylation of the upstream mRNA.
While the minimum sequence for efficient transcription (3'-UYGnn-5') is similar
to that of other rhabdoviruses, it is not homologous to the start sites for
viruses from the Paramyxoviridae or Filoviridae families. Using Northern blot
analysis, we also found that some nucleotide changes in the nontranscribed
intergenic region resulted in higher levels of read-through transcription.
Therefore, the nontranscribed intergenic dinucleotide plays a role in transcript 
termination.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.71.3.2127-2137.1997 
PMCID: PMC191313
PMID: 9032346  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

