
1. Blood. 1997 Jul 15;90(2):783-94.

Cytokine expression and tumorigenicity of large granular lymphocytic leukemia
cells from mice transgenic for the tax gene of human T-cell leukemia virus type
I.

Grossman WJ(1), Ratner L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO
63110, USA.

The human T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I) regulatory protein, Tax, has been
speculated to play a major role in HTLV-I leukemogenesis. Indeed, several studies
have suggested that upregulation of various cellular oncogenes and cytokines by
Tax may explain the pathogenesis observed in HTLV-I-infected individuals, as well
as several Tax-transgenic animal models. We report here the analysis of cytokine 
expression in a Tax-transgenic animal model with large granular lymphocytic (LGL)
leukemia. Two different transgenic mice showed identical expression of
interleukin-1alpha (IL-1alpha), IL-1beta, interferon gamma (IFNgamma), and
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) in peripheral tail
tumors. Interestingly, LGL cell lines derived from these same tumors expressed
high levels of both IFNgamma and GM-CSF, which correlated with the level of Tax
expression. These same LGL cell lines also expressed high levels of lymphocyte
function-associated antigen-1 (LFA-1) and intracellular adhesion molecule-1
(ICAM-1). Engraftment of these LGL cell lines into severe combined
immunodeficient (SCID) mice led to the development of leukemia and lymphomas.
Examination of these SCID mice showed that their pathology was nearly identical
to that observed in the original Tax-transgenic mouse model. Both the
Tax-transgenic and engrafted SCID mouse models allow for the analysis of cellular
events that are required for tumor development associated with HTLV infection and
suggest that Tax expression may be responsible for the upregulation of certain
cytokines and adhesion molecules that affect the infiltrating capabilities of
HTLV-I-infected cells.


PMID: 9226179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

