
1. J Virol. 1997 Sep;71(9):6582-92.

Membrane binding of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 matrix protein in vivo
supports a conformational myristyl switch mechanism.

Spearman P(1), Horton R, Ratner L, Kuli-Zade I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232-2581, USA. paul.spearman@mcmail.vanderbilt.edu

The interaction of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) Gag protein with the
plasma membrane of a cell is a critical event in the assembly of HIV particles.
The matrix protein region (MA) of HIV type 1 (HIV-1) Pr55Gag has previously been 
demonstrated to confer membrane-binding properties on the precursor polyprotein. 
Both the myristic acid moiety and additional determinants within MA are essential
for plasma membrane binding and subsequent particle formation. In this study, we 
demonstrated the myristylation-dependent membrane interaction of MA in an in vivo
membrane-binding assay. When expressed within mammalian cells, MA was found both 
in association with cellular membranes and in a membrane-free form. In contrast, 
the intact precursor Pr55Gag molecule analyzed in an identical manner was found
almost exclusively bound to membranes. Both membrane-bound and membrane-free
forms of MA were myristylated and phosphorylated. Differential membrane binding
was not due to the formation of multimers, as dimeric and trimeric forms of MA
were also found in both membrane-bound and membrane-free fractions. To define the
requirements for membrane binding of MA, we analyzed the membrane binding of a
series of MA deletion mutants. Surprisingly, deletions within alpha-helical
regions forming the globular head of MA led to a dramatic increase in overall
membrane binding. The stability of the MA-membrane interaction was not affected
by these deletions, and no deletion eliminated membrane binding of the molecule. 
These results establish that myristic acid is a primary determinant of the
stability of the Gag protein-membrane interaction and provide support for the
hypothesis that a significant proportion of HIV-1 MA molecules may adopt a
conformation in which myristic acid is hidden and unavailable for membrane
interaction.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.71.9.6582-6592.1997 
PMCID: PMC191936
PMID: 9261380  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

