
1. J Virol. 1997 Dec;71(12):9065-74.

Rotaviruses induce an early membrane permeabilization of MA104 cells and do not
require a low intracellular Ca2+ concentration to initiate their replication
cycle.

Cuadras MA(1), Arias CF, López S.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética y Fisiología Molecular, Instituto de Biotecnología,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Morelos.

In this work, we found that rotavirus infection induces an early membrane
permeabilization of MA104 cells and promotes the coentry of toxins, such as
alpha-sarcin, into the cell. This cell permeability was shown to depend on
infectious virus and was also shown to be virus dose dependent, with 10
infectious particles per cell being sufficient to achieve maximum permeability;
transient, lasting no more than 15 min after virus entry and probably occurring
concomitantly with virus penetration; and specific, since cells that are poorly
permissive for rotavirus were not permeabilized. The rotavirus-mediated coentry
of toxins was not blocked by the endocytosis inhibitors dansylcadaverine and
cytochalasin D or by the vacuolar proton-ATPase inhibitor bafilomycin A1,
suggesting that neither endocytocis nor an intraendosomal acidic pH or a proton
gradient is required for permeabilization of the cells. Compounds that raise the 
intracellular concentration of calcium ([Ca2+]i) by different mechanisms, such as
the calcium ionophores A23187 and ionomycin and the endoplasmic reticulum
calcium-ATPase inhibitor thapsigargin, did not block the coentry of alpha-sarcin 
or affect the onset of viral protein synthesis, suggesting that a low [Ca2+]i is 
not essential for the initial steps of the virus life cycle. Since the entry of
alpha-sarcin correlates with virus penetration in all parameters tested, the
assay for permeabilization to toxins might be a useful tool for studying and
characterizing the route of entry and the mechanism used by rotaviruses to
traverse the cell membrane and initiate a productive replication cycle.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.71.12.9065-9074.1997 
PMCID: PMC230207
PMID: 9371563  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

