
1. Blood. 1997 Dec 15;90(12):4894-900.

Association of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus-positive primary effusion 
lymphoma with expression of the CD138/syndecan-1 antigen.

Gaidano G(1), Gloghini A, Gattei V, Rossi MF, Cilia AM, Godeas C, Degan M, Perin 
T, Canzonieri V, Aldinucci D, Saglio G, Carbone A, Pinto A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Internal Medicine, Department of Medical Sciences, University of
Torino at Novara, Novara, Italy.

Primary effusion lymphoma (PEL) represents a novel B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma 
(NHL) type associated with Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus infection and 
typically growing as lymphomatous effusions in the body cavities. The precise
B-cell subset from which PEL originates as well as the biologic mechanisms
responsible for its peculiar growth pattern are unclear. In this study, we have
analyzed PEL for the expression status of CD138/syndecan-1, a molecule
selectively associated with late stages of B-cell differentiation and implicated 
in cell-to-cell and cell-to-extracellular matrix interactions. PEL patient
samples (n = 7) and cell lines (n = 5) were investigated by multiple approaches, 
including immunocytochemistry, flow cytometry, RNA analysis, and Western blot
studies. For comparison, lymphomatous effusions other than PEL (n = 13) and
tissue-based NHL (n = 103) were also tested. Expression of CD138/syndecan-1
associates at high frequency with PEL (5 of 7 patient samples and 5 of 5 cell
lines), whereas it is consistently absent among other lymphomatous effusions (n =
13). The CD138/syndecan-1 isoform expressed by PEL has an average molecular
weight of 420 kD, which is substantially different from that of CD138/syndecan-1 
molecules generally expressed by plasma cells. These data, along with previous
immunophenotypic evidence, unequivocally define that PEL cells represent a
preterminal stage of B-cell differentiation and may bear implications for the
peculiar growth pattern of this lymphoma.


PMID: 9389706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

