
1. Virology. 1997 Nov 24;238(2):231-42.

Direct effect of type 1 human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) on intestinal
epithelial cell differentiation: relationship to HIV-1 enteropathy.

Delézay O(1), Yahi N, Tamalet C, Baghdiguian S, Boudier JA, Fantini J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie et Biologie de la Nutrition, UPRESA-CNRS 6033,
Faculté des Sciences de St Jérôme, Marseille.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected patients display severe impairments
of gastrointestinal functions, including diarrhea and malabsorption, even in the 
absence of opportunistic infections. Since HIV-1 proteins and nucleic acids have 
been detected in several cell types of the intestinal mucosa, it has been
postulated that HIV-1 itself could alter enterocytic functions. In the present
study, we analyzed the effect of HIV-1 on the differentiation process of the
epithelial intestinal cell clone HT-29-D4, which mimics the maturation of
enterocytes along the crypt-villus axis of the small intestine. We found that
HIV-1 infection impairs cellular differentiation (i) by affecting the barrier
function of the epithelium, as evidenced by a decrease in the transepithelial
electrical resistance, and (ii) by inhibiting the activity of one major glucose
absorption function, i.e., sodium/glucose cotransport. At the morphological
level, HIV-1 infection of HT-29-D4 cells was associated with the formation of
lumina, which are representative of a defect in cellular organization. These
morphofunctional perturbations induced by HIV-1 could be mimicked by nocodazole, 
a microtubule-disrupting agent. Correspondingly, HIV-1 exposure of HT-29-D4 cells
evoked a massive disruption of microtubules, as revealed by alpha-tubulin
indirect immunofluorescence staining. A similar effect was observed after
incubation of the cells with either recombinant gp120 or a monoclonal antibody
against galactosylceramide (GalCer), the intestinal receptor for HIV-1 gp120,
suggesting that the effect of HIV-1 was mediated by the binding of gp120 to
GalCer. Based on these data, we propose that HIV-1 may selectively alter
enterocytic functions through a direct effect on the intracellular architecture
of the cells. In contrast with previous theories for HIV-1 enteropathy, our data 
support the concept that HIV-1 may perturb intestinal functions without
necessarily infecting intestinal epithelial cells.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1997.8829 
PMID: 9400596  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

