
1. Clin Diagn Virol. 1998 Jan;9(1):29-35.

Prevalence of infection with HIV, hepatitis B and C viruses, in four high risk
groups in Eritrea.

Ghebrekidan H(1), Cox S, Wahren B, Grandien M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Swedish Institute for Infectious Disease Control,
Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Little is known about the prevalence of infections in different
population groups in Africa, and about the influence of living conditions on the 
spread of infections. This study is the first of its kind in the state of Eritrea
and is expected to serve as an evaluation of the situation in the country.
OBJECTIVE: A serosurvey for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B virus
(HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) was carried out during the summer of 1995 in
Massawa, a small sea port in Eritrea (East Africa) in four groups considered to
be at risk for these infections.
STUDY DESIGN: The study subjects were former Guerrilla Fighters, Female Sex
Workers, Truck Drivers, and Port Workers. Participants from a tribe called
Rashaida were believed to be at low risk, and thus served as a control.
RESULTS: The Female Sex Workers had the highest incidence of HIV-1 infection,
29%, compared to 10% for Port Workers, and 3% for Guerrilla Fighters. On the
other hand presence of HBsAg, indicating a high prevalence of hepatitis B carrier
status, was highest in the Guerrilla Fighters, followed by the Rashaidas, and
lowest in the Female Sex Workers. The Female Sex Workers were further tested for 
antibodies against HBV and the results revealed that 53% of them, 5%, had
antibodies against HBcoreAg. Excluding the possibility of an acute infection at
sampling time, three of them became HBsAg carriers. Surprisingly, our group of
Truck Drivers did not show HIV-1 infection, and no HIV-2 infections were seen in 
the whole cohort.
CONCLUSION: The study shows that the described groups have different prevalences 
of infection with HIV, hepatitis B and C which can partly be explained by their
living conditions.

DOI: 10.1016/s0928-0197(97)10013-7 
PMID: 9562856  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

