
1. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 29;273(22):13430-6.

Intracellular transport of the glycoproteins gE and gI of the varicella-zoster
virus. gE accelerates the maturation of gI and determines its accumulation in the
trans-Golgi network.

Alconada A(1), Bauer U, Baudoux L, Piette J, Hoflack B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie de Lille (IFR3), Institut Pasteur de Lille, 59021 Lille, 
France.

The varicella-zoster virus (VZV) is the etiological agent of two different human 
pathologies, chickenpox (varicella) and shingles (zoster). This alphaherpesvirus 
is believed to acquire its lipidic envelope in the trans-Golgi network (TGN).
This is consistent with previous data showing that the most abundant VZV envelope
glycoprotein gE accumulates at steady-state in this organelle when expressed from
cloned cDNA. In the present study, we have investigated the intracellular
trafficking of gI, another VZV envelope glycoprotein. In transfected cells, this 
protein shows a very slow biosynthetic transport to the cell surface where it
accumulates. However, upon co-expression of gE, gI experiences a dramatic
increase in its exit rate from the endoplasmic reticulum, it accumulates in a
sialyltransferase-positive compartment, presumably the TGN, and cycles between
this compartment and the cell surface. This differential behavior results from
the ability of gE and gI to form a complex in the early stages of the
biosynthetic pathway whose intracellular traffic is exclusively determined by the
sorting information in the tail of gE. Thus, gI provides the first example of a
molecule localized to the TGN by means of its association with another TGN
protein. We also show that, during the early stages of VZV infection, both
proteins are also found in the TGN of the host cell. This suggests the existence 
of an intermediate stage during VZV biogenesis in which the envelope
glycoproteins, transiently arrested in the TGN, could promote the envelopment of 
newly synthesized nucleocapsids into this compartment and, therefore, the
assembly of infective viruses.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.22.13430 
PMID: 9593675  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

