
1. J Virol. 1998 Nov;72(11):9267-77.

Inhibition of NF-kappaB activation in combination with bcl-2 expression allows
for persistence of first-generation adenovirus vectors in the mouse liver.

Lieber A(1), He CY, Meuse L, Himeda C, Wilson C, Kay MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington 98115, USA.

NF-kappaB is a key regulator of the innate antiviral immune response, due in part
to its transcriptional activation of cytokines and adhesion molecules, which, in 
turn, function in chemotaxis and activation of inflammatory cells. We reported
earlier that viral gene expression in hepatocytes transduced with
first-generation (E1-deleted) adenoviruses induced NF-kappaB activation,
elevation of serum cytokines, and hepatocellular apoptosis during the first days 
postinfusion. These events did not occur in mice infused with an adenovirus
vector deleted for E1, E2, E3, and late gene expression. In the present study, we
used an adenovirus expressing an IkappaBalpha supersuppressor (Ad.IkappaBM) and
bcl-2 transgenic mice to unravel the role of virus-induced NF-kappaB activation
and apoptosis in the clearance of recombinant adenovirus vectors from the liver. 
The combined action of IkappaBM and Bcl-2 allowed for vector persistence in
livers of C57BL/6 x C3H mice. In the absence of Bcl-2, IkappaBM expression in
mouse livers significantly reduced NF-kappaB activation, cytokine expression,
leukocyte infiltration, and the humoral immune response against the transgene
product; however, this was not sufficient to prevent the decline of vector DNA in
transduced cells. Infusion of Ad.IkappaBM caused extended apoptosis predominantly
in periportal liver regions, indicating that NF-kappaB activation may protect
transduced hepatocytes from apoptosis induced by adenovirus gene products. To
confer vector persistence, bcl-2 transgene expression was required to block
virus-induced apoptosis if NF-kappaB protection was inactivated by IkappaBM.
Expression of gene products involved in early stages of apoptotic pathways was
up-regulated in response to virus infusion in bcl-2 transgenic mice, which may
represent a compensatory effect. Our study supports the idea that the suppression
of innate defense mechanisms improves vector persistence.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.72.11.9267-9277.1998 
PMCID: PMC110346
PMID: 9765474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

