
1. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 1998 Oct 30;123(44):1308-12.

[Juvenile cerebral ischaemia caused by designer drugs].

[Article in German]

Giess R(1), Rieckmann P, Müllges W.

Author information: 
(1)Neurologische Klinik, Universität Würzburg. neuk156@mail.uni-wuerzburg.de

HISTORY AND CLINICAL FINDINGS: A 29-year-old man reported two episodes, 3 months 
apart, of dysarthria, each lasting for several hours. It was associated with
hypaesthesia over the cheeks. Neurological examination several hours later was
unremarkable. On direct questioning the patient reported that he had been taking 
marihuana and cocaine immediately before each episode. There was also a history
of regular abuse of various drugs over several years by this socially well
integrated young man.
INVESTIGATIONS: Cranial computed tomography, cranial magnetic resonance imaging
and cerebral scintigraphy indicated multiple cortical and subcortical ischaemic
lesions of different sizes and ages. ECG, long-term ECG monitoring,
transoesophageal echocardiography and upper abdominal sonography were normal.
Cerebrospinal fluid revealed a slightly abnormal blood-brain barrier (5.3 g/l
protein, albumin ratio of 7.3). Auto-antibody titres and coagulation and
serological tests for neurotropic bacteria and viruses were normal. Urinary drug 
screening was positive for cannabinoids.
DIAGNOSIS, TREATMENT AND COURSE: We assume that the patient had transitory
cocaine-induced ischaemic attacks (TIA) and clinically silent cerebrovascular
accidents (CVA). He was discharged without specific treatment after being
informed of the severe neurological sequelae of his drug abuse.
CONCLUSIONS: The rising abuse of "designer drugs" is of increasing diagnostic
significance in TIA-like symptoms and CVAs in young adults, which may be of
haemorrhagic or ischaemic aetiology. Thromboembolic, vasospastic or vasculitic
factors play a pathogenetic role. Early performance of appropriate blood and
urine tests is of great diagnostic importance.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-1024172 
PMID: 9824966  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

