
1. Cell Biol Int. 1998;22(2):95-103.

Rapid syncytium formation between human T-cell leukaemia virus type-I
(HTLV-I)-infected T-cells and human nervous system cells: a possible implication 
for tropical spastic paraparesis/HTLV-I associated myelopathy.

Mor-Vaknin N(1), Turgeman H, Torgeman A, Wolfson M, Huleihel M, Aboud M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben
Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, 84105, Israel.

Tropical spastic paraparesis/HTLV-I associated myelopathy (TSP/HAM), is
characterized by infiltration of human T cell leukaemia virus type-I
(HTLV-I)-infected T-cells, anti-HTLV-I cytotoxic T cells and macrophages into the
patients' cerebrospinal fluid and by intrathecally formed anti-HTLV-I antibodies.
This implies that the disease involves a breakdown of the blood-brain barrier.
Since astrocytes play a central role in establishing this barrier, the authors
investigated the hypothesis that the HTLV-I infected T cells disrupt this barrier
by damaging the astrocytes. The present study revealed the HTLV-I-producing T
cells conferred a severe cytopathic effect upon monolayers of astrocytoma cell
line in co-cultures. Following co-cultivation, HTLV-I DNA and proteins appeared
in the monolayer cells, but after reaching a peak their level gradually declined.
This appearance of the viral components was proved to result from a fusion of the
astrocytic cells with the virus-producing T cells, whereas their subsequent
decline reflected the destruction of the resulting syncytia. This fusion could be
specifically blocked by anti HTLV-I Env antibodies, indicating that it was
mediated by the viral Env proteins expressed on the surface of the
virus-producing cells. Similar fusion was observed between the HTLV-I-producing
cells and certain other human nervous system cell lines. If such fusion of
HTLV-I-infected T cells occurs also with astrocytes and other nervous system
cells in TSP/HAM patients, it may account, at least partially, for the
blood-brain barrier breakdown and some of the neural lesions in this syndrome.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press

DOI: 10.1006/cbir.1998.0241 
PMID: 9878096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

