
1. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 30;5(12):e14470. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014470.

Promiscuous expression of α-tubulin II in maturing male and female Plasmodium
falciparum gametocytes.

Schwank S(1), Sutherland CJ, Drakeley CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infection, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical
Diseases, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Antimalarial interventions designed to impact on the transmissible
sexual stages of Plasmodium falciparum are evaluated by measurement of peripheral
gametocyte carriage in vivo and infectivity to mosquitoes. Drug or
vaccine-elicited effects may differentially affect the relative abundance of
mature male and female sexual forms, and this can be measured by estimation of
sex ratios before and after intervention in vivo and in vitro. Measuring the
impact of anti-gametocyte drugs on sexual commitment of immature gametocyte
stages in vitro is not currently possible as male and female parasites cannot be 
distinguished by morphology alone prior to stage IV.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have modified an existing
immunofluorescence-based approach for distinguishing male and female gametocytes 
during development in vitro, by using highly synchronised magnetically-enriched
gametocyte preparations at different stages of maturity. Antibodies recognising
α-tubulin II (males) and Pfg377 (females) were used to attempt to discriminate
the sexes. Transcription of these two proteins was not coordinated during in
vitro development, with pfg377 transcripts accumulating only late in development,
immediately prior to immunofluorescent signals from the PfG377 protein appearing 
in stage IV gametocytes. Contrary to previous descriptions of this protein as
male-specific in P. falciparum, α-tubulin II recognised both male and female
gametocytes at stages I to IV, but evidence of differential expression levels of 
this protein in late stage male and female gametocytes was found. Using
antibodies recognising PfG377 as the primary marker and α-tubulin II as a
secondary marker, robust estimates of sex ratio in in vitro cultures were
obtained for gametocytes at stage IV or later, and validated by light microscopic
counts. However, sex ratio estimation was not possible for early stage
gametocytes due to the promiscuity of α-tubulin II protein expression, and the
relatively late accumulation of PfG377 during the development process.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This approach is a feasible method for the evaluation
of drug impacts on late-stage gametocyte sex ratio in in vitro studies.
Additional sex-specific antigens need to be evaluated for sex ratio estimation in
early stage gametocyte preparations.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014470 
PMCID: PMC3012678
PMID: 21209927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

