
1. Bioinformatics. 2011 Mar 1;27(5):655-61. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btr002. Epub
2011 Jan 21.

Recovering key biological constituents through sparse representation of gene
expression.

Prat Y(1), Fromer M, Linial N, Linial M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.

MOTIVATION: Large-scale RNA expression measurements are generating enormous
quantities of data. During the last two decades, many methods were developed for 
extracting insights regarding the interrelationships between genes from such
data. The mathematical and computational perspectives that underlie these methods
are usually algebraic or probabilistic.
RESULTS: Here, we introduce an unexplored geometric view point where expression
levels of genes in multiple experiments are interpreted as vectors in a
high-dimensional space. Specifically, we find, for the expression profile of each
particular gene, its approximation as a linear combination of profiles of a few
other genes. This method is inspired by recent developments in the realm of
compressed sensing in the machine learning domain. To demonstrate the power of
our approach in extracting valuable information from the expression data, we
independently applied it to large-scale experiments carried out on the yeast and 
malaria parasite whole transcriptomes. The parameters extracted from the sparse
reconstruction of the expression profiles, when fed to a supervised learning
platform, were used to successfully predict the relationships between genes
throughout the Gene Ontology hierarchy and protein-protein interaction map.
Extensive assessment of the biological results shows high accuracy in both
recovering known predictions and in yielding accurate predictions missing from
the current databases. We suggest that the geometrical approach presented here is
suitable for a broad range of high-dimensional experimental data.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btr002 
PMID: 21258061  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

