
1. Parasite. 2010 Dec;17(4):273-83.

Bioinformatic strategies to provide functional clues to the unknown genes in
Plasmodium falciparum genome.

Florent I(1), Maréchal E, Gascuel O, Bréhélin L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique/Muséum National d'Histoire
Naturelle, FRE3206, Molécules de Communication et Adaptation des
Micro-organismes, Adaptation des Protozoaires à leur Environnent, CP 52, 61, rue 
Buffon, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France. florent@mnhn.fr

The fight against Plasmodium falciparum, the species responsible for 90% of the
lethal forms of human malaria, took a new direction with the publication of its
genome in 2002. However, the hopes that the genome should help bringing to the
foreground the expected new "vaccines candidates" or "targets of new medicines"
were disappointed by the low number of genes that could be functionally
annotated--less than 40% upon the genome publication, just over 50% eight years
later. This 10% gain of knowledge was made possible by the efforts of the entire 
scientific community in many directions which include: the production of
transcriptomic and proteomic profiles at various stages of the parasite
development and in response to drug or stress treatments; the proteomic study of 
subcellular compartments; the sequencing of numerous Plasmodium related species
(allowing whole genome comparisons) and the sequencing of numerous P. falciparum 
strains (allowing investigations of gene polymorphism). In parallel with this
production of experimental biological data, the development of original mining
tools adapted to the P falciparum specificities quickly appeared as a priority,
as the performances of "classical" bioinformatic tools, used successfully for
other genomes, had limited efficacy. This was the aim of the PlasmoExplore
project launched in 2007. This brief review does not cover all efforts made by
the international community to decipher the P falciparum genome but focuses on
improvements and novel mining methods investigated by the PlasmoExplore
consortium, and some of the lessons we could learn from these efforts.

DOI: 10.1051/parasite/2010174273 
PMID: 21275233  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

