
1. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 24;6(1):e16123. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016123.

Population genetics of GYPB and association study between GYPB*S/s polymorphism
and susceptibility to P. falciparum infection in the Brazilian Amazon.

Tarazona-Santos E(1), Castilho L, Amaral DR, Costa DC, Furlani NG, Zuccherato LW,
Machado M, Reid ME, Zalis MG, Rossit AR, Santos SE, Machado RL, Lustigman S.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia Geral, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo
Horizonte, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Merozoites of Plasmodium falciparum invade through several pathways
using different RBC receptors. Field isolates appear to use a greater variability
of these receptors than laboratory isolates. Brazilian field isolates were shown 
to mostly utilize glycophorin A-independent invasion pathways via glycophorin B
(GPB) and/or other receptors. The Brazilian population exhibits extensive
polymorphism in blood group antigens, however, no studies have been done to
relate the prevalence of the antigens that function as receptors for P.
falciparum and the ability of the parasite to invade. Our study aimed to
establish whether variation in the GYPB*S/s alleles influences susceptibility to 
infection with P. falciparum in the admixed population of Brazil.
METHODS: Two groups of Brazilian Amazonians from Porto Velho were studied: P.
falciparum infected individuals (cases); and uninfected individuals who were born
and/or have lived in the same endemic region for over ten years, were exposed to 
infection but have not had malaria over the study period (controls). The GPB Ss
phenotype and GYPB*S/s alleles were determined by standard methods. Sixty two
Ancestry Informative Markers were genotyped on each individual to estimate
admixture and control its potential effect on the association between frequency
of GYPB*S and malaria infection.
RESULTS: GYPB*S is associated with host susceptibility to infection with P.
falciparum; GYPB*S/GYPB*S and GYPB*S/GYPB*s were significantly more prevalent in 
the in the P. falciparum infected individuals than in the controls (69.87% vs.
49.75%; P<0.02). Moreover, population genetics tests applied on the GYPB exon
sequencing data suggest that natural selection shaped the observed pattern of
nucleotide diversity.
CONCLUSION: Epidemiological and evolutionary approaches suggest an important role
for the GPB receptor in RBC invasion by P. falciparum in Brazilian Amazons.
Moreover, an increased susceptibility to infection by this parasite is associated
with the GPB S+ variant in this population.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016123 
PMCID: PMC3026040
PMID: 21283638  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

