
1. J Clin Invest. 2011 Mar;121(3):1119-29. doi: 10.1172/JCI43457. Epub 2011 Feb 7.

NSR-seq transcriptional profiling enables identification of a gene signature of
Plasmodium falciparum parasites infecting children.

Vignali M(1), Armour CD, Chen J, Morrison R, Castle JC, Biery MC, Bouzek H, Moon 
W, Babak T, Fried M, Raymond CK, Duffy PE.

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, USA.

Malaria caused by Plasmodium falciparum results in approximately 1 million annual
deaths worldwide, with young children and pregnant mothers at highest risk.
Disease severity might be related to parasite virulence factors, but expression
profiling studies of parasites to test this hypothesis have been hindered by
extensive sequence variation in putative virulence genes and a preponderance of
host RNA in clinical samples. We report here the application of RNA sequencing to
clinical isolates of P. falciparum, using not-so-random (NSR) primers to
successfully exclude human ribosomal RNA and globin transcripts and enrich for
parasite transcripts. Using NSR-seq, we confirmed earlier microarray studies
showing upregulation of a distinct subset of genes in parasites infecting
pregnant women, including that encoding the well-established pregnancy malaria
vaccine candidate var2csa. We also describe a subset of parasite transcripts that
distinguished parasites infecting children from those infecting pregnant women
and confirmed this observation using quantitative real-time PCR and mass
spectrometry proteomic analyses. Based on their putative functional properties,
we propose that these proteins could have a role in childhood malaria
pathogenesis. Our study provides proof of principle that NSR-seq represents an
approach that can be used to study clinical isolates of parasites causing severe 
malaria syndromes as well other blood-borne pathogens and blood-related diseases.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI43457 
PMCID: PMC3046638
PMID: 21317536  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

