
1. J Cell Biochem. 2011 May;112(5):1295-310. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23034.

Two nucleus-localized CDK-like kinases with crucial roles for malaria parasite
erythrocytic replication are involved in phosphorylation of splicing factor.

Agarwal S(1), Kern S, Halbert J, Przyborski JM, Baumeister S, Dandekar T, Doerig 
C, Pradel G.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Infectious Diseases, University of Würzburg,
Josef-Schneider-Strasse 2, Building D15, 97080 Würzburg, Germany.

The kinome of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum comprises
representatives of most eukaryotic protein kinase groups, including kinases which
regulate proliferation and differentiation processes. Despite extensive research 
on most plasmodial enzymes, little information is available regarding the four
identified members of the cyclin-dependent kinase-like kinase (CLK) family. In
other eukaryotes, CLKs regulate mRNA splicing through phosphorylation of
Serine/Arginine-rich proteins. Here, we investigate two of the PfCLKs, the Lammer
kinase homolog PfCLK-1, and PfCLK-2. Both PfCLKs show homology with the yeast
Serine/Arginine protein kinase Sky1p and are transcribed throughout the asexual
blood stages and in gametocytes. PfCLK-1/Lammer possesses two nuclear
localization signal sites and PfCLK-2 possesses one of these signal sites
upstream of the C-terminal catalytic domains. Indirect immunofluorescence,
Western blot, and electron microscopy data confirm that the kinases are primarily
localized in the parasite nucleus, and PfCLK-2 is further present in the
cytoplasm. The two kinases are important for completion of the asexual
replication cycle of P. falciparum, as demonstrated by reverse genetics
approaches. In vitro kinase assays show substrate phosphorylation by the PfCLKs, 
including the Sky1p substrate, splicing factor Npl3p, and the plasmodial
alternative splicing factor PfASF-1. Mass spectrometric analysis of
co-immunoprecipitated proteins indicates assembly of the two PfCLKs with proteins
with predicted nuclease, phosphatase, or helicase functions. Our data indicate a 
crucial role of PfCLKs for malaria blood stage parasites, presumably by
participating in gene regulation through the post-transcriptional modification of
mRNA.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.23034 
PMID: 21312235  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

