
1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Feb;7(2):e1001292. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001292. Epub 2011
Feb 17.

Expression of P. falciparum var genes involves exchange of the histone variant
H2A.Z at the promoter.

Petter M(1), Lee CC, Byrne TJ, Boysen KE, Volz J, Ralph SA, Cowman AF, Brown GV, 
Duffy MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Royal Melbourne Hospital, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia.

Plasmodium falciparum employs antigenic variation to evade the human immune
response by switching the expression of different variant surface antigens
encoded by the var gene family. Epigenetic mechanisms including histone
modifications and sub-nuclear compartmentalization contribute to transcriptional 
regulation in the malaria parasite, in particular to control antigenic variation.
Another mechanism of epigenetic control is the exchange of canonical histones
with alternative variants to generate functionally specialized chromatin domains.
Here we demonstrate that the alternative histone PfH2A.Z is associated with the
epigenetic regulation of var genes. In many eukaryotic organisms the histone
variant H2A.Z mediates an open chromatin structure at promoters and facilitates
diverse levels of regulation, including transcriptional activation. Throughout
the asexual, intraerythrocytic lifecycle of P. falciparum we found that the P.
falciparum ortholog of H2A.Z (PfH2A.Z) colocalizes with histone modifications
that are characteristic of transcriptionally-permissive euchromatin, but not with
markers of heterochromatin. Consistent with this finding, antibodies to PfH2A.Z
co-precipitate the permissive modification H3K4me3. By
chromatin-immunoprecipitation we show that PfH2A.Z is enriched in nucleosomes
around the transcription start site (TSS) in both transcriptionally active and
silent stage-specific genes. In var genes, however, PfH2A.Z is enriched at the
TSS only during active transcription in ring stage parasites. Thus, in contrast
to other genes, temporal var gene regulation involves histone variant exchange at
promoter nucleosomes. Sir2 histone deacetylases are important for var gene
silencing and their yeast ortholog antagonises H2A.Z function in subtelomeric
yeast genes. In immature P. falciparum parasites lacking Sir2A or Sir2B high var 
transcription levels correlate with enrichment of PfH2A.Z at the TSS. As Sir2A
knock out parasites mature the var genes are silenced, but PfH2A.Z remains
enriched at the TSS of var genes; in contrast, PfH2A.Z is lost from the TSS of
de-repressed var genes in mature Sir2B knock out parasites. This result indicates
that PfH2A.Z occupancy at the active var promoter is antagonized by PfSir2A
during the intraerythrocytic life cycle. We conclude that PfH2A.Z contributes to 
the nucleosome architecture at promoters and is regulated dynamically in active
var genes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001292 
PMCID: PMC3040674
PMID: 21379342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

