
1. BMC Evol Biol. 2011 Mar 15;11:70. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-11-70.

Mitochondrial genes support a common origin of rodent malaria parasites and
Plasmodium falciparum's relatives infecting great apes.

Blanquart S(1), Gascuel O.

Author information: 
(1)Méthodes et Algorithmes pour la Bioinformatique, LIRMM, UMR 5506,
CNRS-Université de Montpellier 2, Montpellier, France. samuel.blanquart@inria.fr

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium falciparum is responsible for the most acute form of human
malaria. Most recent studies demonstrate that it belongs to a monophyletic
lineage specialized in the infection of great ape hosts. Several other Plasmodium
species cause human malaria. They all belong to another distinct lineage of
parasites which infect a wider range of primate species. All known mammalian
malaria parasites appear to be monophyletic. Their clade includes the two
previous distinct lineages of parasites of primates and great apes, one lineage
of rodent parasites, and presumably Hepatocystis species. Plasmodium falciparum
and great ape parasites are commonly thought to be the sister-group of all other 
mammal-infecting malaria parasites. However, some studies supported contradictory
origins and found parasites of great apes to be closer to those of rodents, or to
those of other primates.
RESULTS: To distinguish between these mutually exclusive hypotheses on the origin
of Plasmodium falciparum and its great ape infecting relatives, we performed a
comprehensive phylogenetic analysis based on a data set of three mitochondrial
genes from 33 to 84 malaria parasites. We showed that malarial mitochondrial
genes have evolved slowly and are compositionally homogeneous. We estimated their
phylogenetic relationships using Bayesian and maximum-likelihood methods.
Inferred trees were checked for their robustness to the (i) site selection, (ii) 
assumptions of various probabilistic models, and (iii) taxon sampling. Our
results robustly support a common ancestry of rodent parasites and Plasmodium
falciparum's relatives infecting great apes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results refute the most common view of the origin of great ape
malaria parasites, and instead demonstrate the robustness of a less
well-established phylogenetic hypothesis, under which Plasmodium falciparum and
its relatives infecting great apes are closely related to rodent parasites. This 
study sheds light on the evolutionary history of Plasmodium falciparum, a major
issue for human health.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2148-11-70 
PMCID: PMC3070646
PMID: 21406081  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

