
1. J Vector Borne Dis. 2011 Mar;48(1):27-36.

Comparative evolutionary analyses of beta globin gene in eutherian, dinosaurian
and neopterygii taxa.

Awasthi G(1), Srivastava G, Das A.

Author information: 
(1)Evolutionary Genomics and Bioinformatics Laboratory, National Institute of
Malaria Research, New Delhi, India.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVES: Comparative genomics and evolutionary analyses of
conserved genes have enabled us to understand the complexity of genomes of
closely related species. For example: β-globin gene present in human hemoglobin
is one such gene that has experienced many genetic changes in many related taxa
and produced more than 600 variants. One of the variant, HBS causes sickle-cell
anemia in humans but offers protection against severe malaria due to Plasmodium
falciparum. In the present study, we characterized and performed evolutionary
comparative analyses of the ?-globin gene in different related and unrelated taxa
to have a comprehensive view of its evolution.
METHODS: DNA and protein sequences of β-globin gene were downloaded from NCBI and
characterized in detail in nine eutherian (Homo sapiens, Pan troglodytes, Macaca 
mulatta, Mus musculus, Rattus norvegicus, Bos taurus, Canis familiaris, Equus
caballus, Oryctolagus cuniculus), a dinosaurian (Gallus gallus) and a neopterygii
(Danio rerio) taxa. Three more eutherian (Papio anubis, Ovis aries and Sus
scrofa) taxa were included for an analysis at the protein level but not included 
at the gene level owing to lack of genomic information. Computational and
phylogenetic analyses were performed using evolutionary comparative approach.
RESULTS: Results of comparative and phylogenetic analyses revealed less
conservation of genetic architecture of β-globin compared to its protein
architecture in all eutherian taxa. Both dinosaurian and neopterygii taxa served 
as outgroups and varied at gene and protein levels.
INTERPRETATION & CONCLUSION: Most remarkably, all primates from eutherian taxa
including P. anubis showed only nine codon position differences and an absolute
similarity between H. sapiens and P. troglodytes. Absolute conservation of coding
region in Equus caballus (horse) was observed. The results were discussed with an
inference on the role of evolutionary forces in maintaining such close
similarities and variations across closely related taxa. Further, the need to
utilize more comparative approaches in understanding the disease causing genes'
evolution in closely related taxa is hoped for.


PMID: 21406734  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

