
1. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 25;6(3):e17849. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017849.

Regulatory T cell induction during Plasmodium chabaudi infection modifies the
clinical course of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Farias AS(1), Talaisys RL, Blanco YC, Lopes SC, Longhini AL, Pradella F, Santos
LM, Costa FT.

Author information: 
(1)Departmento de Genética, Evolução e Bioagentes, Universidade Estadual de
Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. asfarias@unicamp.br

BACKGROUND: Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) is used as an animal 
model for human multiple sclerosis (MS), which is an inflammatory demyelinating
autoimmune disease of the central nervous system characterized by activation of
Th1 and/or Th17 cells. Human autoimmune diseases can be either exacerbated or
suppressed by infectious agents. Recent studies have shown that regulatory T
cells play a crucial role in the escape mechanism of Plasmodium spp. both in
humans and in experimental models. These cells suppress the Th1 response against 
the parasite and prevent its elimination. Regulatory T cells have been largely
associated with protection or amelioration in several autoimmune diseases, mainly
by their capacity to suppress proinflammatory response.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, we verified that CD4(+)CD25(+)
regulatory T cells (T regs) generated during malaria infection (6 days after EAE 
induction) interfere with the evolution of EAE. We observed a positive
correlation between the reduction of EAE clinical symptoms and an increase of
parasitemia levels. Suppression of the disease was also accompanied by a decrease
in the expression of IL-17 and IFN-γ and increases in the expression of IL-10 and
TGF-β1 relative to EAE control mice. The adoptive transfer of CD4(+)CD25(+) cells
from P. chabaudi-infected mice reduced the clinical evolution of EAE, confirming 
the role of these T regs.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These data corroborate previous findings showing that
infections interfere with the prevalence and evolution of autoimmune diseases by 
inducing regulatory T cells, which regulate EAE in an apparently non-specific
manner.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017849 
PMCID: PMC3064572
PMID: 21464982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

