
1. Clin Infect Dis. 2011 May;52(10):1248-56. doi: 10.1093/cid/cir119.

Duffy-null-associated low neutrophil counts influence HIV-1 susceptibility in
high-risk South African black women.

Ramsuran V(1), Kulkarni H, He W, Mlisana K, Wright EJ, Werner L, Castiblanco J,
Dhanda R, Le T, Dolan MJ, Guan W, Weiss RA, Clark RA, Karim SS, Ahuja SK, Ndung'u
T.

Author information: 
(1)HIV Pathogenesis Programme, Doris Duke Medical Research Institute, Nelson R
Mandela School of Medicine, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa.

BACKGROUND: The Duffy-null trait and ethnic netropenia are both highly prevalent 
in Africa. The influence of pre-seroconversion levels of peripheral blood cell
counts (PBCs) on the risk of acquiring human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1
infection among Africans is unknown.
METHODS: The triangular relationship among pre-seroconversion PBC counts, host
genotypes, and risk of HIV acquisition was determined in a prospective cohort of 
black South African high-risk female sex workers. Twenty-seven women had
seroconversion during follow-up, and 115 remained HIV negative for 2 years,
despite engaging in high-risk activity.
RESULTS: Pre-seroconversion neutrophil counts in women who subsequently had
seroconversion were significantly lower, whereas platelet counts were higher,
compared with those who remained HIV negative. Comprising 27% of the cohort,
subjects with pre-seroconversion neutrophil counts of <2500 cells/mm(3) had a
∼3-fold greater risk of acquiring HIV infection. In a genome-wide association
analyses, an African-specific polymorphism (rs2814778) in the promoter of Duffy
Antigen Receptor for Chemokines (DARC -46T > C) was significantly associated with
neutrophil counts (P = 7.9 × 10(-11)). DARC -46C/C results in loss of DARC
expression on erthyrocytes (Duffy-null) and resistance to Plasmodium vivax
malaria, and in our cohort, only subjects with this genotype had
pre-seroconversion neutrophil counts of <2500 cells/mm(3). The risk of acquiring 
HIV infection was ∼3-fold greater in those with the trait of
Duffy-null-associated low neutrophil counts, compared with all other study
participants.
CONCLUSIONS: Pre-seroconversion neutrophil and platelet counts influence risk of 
HIV infection. The trait of Duffy-null-associated low neutrophil counts
influences HIV susceptibility. Because of the high prevalence of this trait among
persons of African ancestry, it may contribute to the dynamics of the HIV
epidemic in Africa.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/cir119 
PMCID: PMC3115278
PMID: 21507922  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

