
1. Malar J. 2011 May 14;10:126. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-126.

Population genetic analysis of the Plasmodium falciparum 6-cys protein Pf38 in
Papua New Guinea reveals domain-specific balancing selection.

Reeder JC(1), Wapling J, Mueller I, Siba PM, Barry AE.

Author information: 
(1)Burnet Institute, Melbourne, Australia. jreeder@burnet.edu.au

BACKGROUND: The Plasmodium falciparum merozoite surface protein Pf38 is targeted 
by antibodies of malaria immune adults and has been shown to be under balancing
(immune) selection in a Gambian parasite population, indicating potential as a
malaria vaccine candidate. This study explores the population genetics of Pf38 in
Papua New Guinea, to determine the extent and geographic distribution of
diversity and to measure selective pressure along the length of the gene.
METHODS: Using samples collected during community-based cross-sectional surveys
in the Mugil and Wosera regions, the Pf38 genes of 59 P. falciparum isolates were
amplified and sequenced. These sequences, along with previously sequenced Gambian
and laboratory isolates, were then subjected to an array of population genetic
analyses, examining polymorphisms, haplotype diversity and balancing selection.
In addition to whole-gene analysis, the two 6-cys domains were considered
separately, to investigate domain specific polymorphism and selection.
RESULTS: Nineteen polymorphic sites were identified in the Pf 38 gene. Of these, 
13 were found in the Gambia, 10 in Mugil and 8 in Wosera. Notably, the majority
of common polymorphisms were confined to domain I. Although only moderate levels 
of nucleotide diversity were observed, the haplotype diversity was high in all
populations, suggesting extensive recombination. Analyses of the full-length
sequence provided only modest evidence for balancing selection. However, there
was a strong contrast between domain I, which showed strong evidence for positive
balancing selection, and domain II which was neutral. Analyses of the geographic 
distribution of Pf38 haplotypes showed that four haplotypes accounted for the
majority of sequences found world-wide, but there were many more haplotypes
unique to the African than the PNG populations.
CONCLUSION: This study confirmed previous findings that Pf38 is a polymorphic
gene under balancing selection. However, analysing polymorphism and selection
across the length of the gene painted a considerably different picture. Domain I 
is highly polymorphic and the target of significant balancing selection. In
contrast, domain II is relatively conserved and does not show evidence of immune 
selective pressure. The findings have implications for future population genetic 
studies on vaccine candidates, showing that the biological context must also be
considered as a framework for analysis.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-126 
PMCID: PMC3112457
PMID: 21569602  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

