
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e19651. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019651. Epub 2011 May 16.

Platelets alter gene expression profile in human brain endothelial cells in an in
vitro model of cerebral malaria.

Barbier M(1), Faille D, Loriod B, Textoris J, Camus C, Puthier D, Flori L,
Wassmer SC, Victorero G, Alessi MC, Fusaï T, Nguyen C, Grau GE, Rihet P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Pharmacogenétique des Maladies Parasitaires-EA 864, IFR 48,
Faculté de Pharmacie, Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille, France.

Platelet adhesion to the brain microvasculature has been associated with cerebral
malaria (CM) in humans, suggesting that platelets play a role in the pathogenesis
of this syndrome. In vitro co-cultures have shown that platelets can act as a
bridge between Plasmodium falciparum-infected red blood cells (pRBC) and human
brain microvascular endothelial cells (HBEC) and potentiate HBEC apoptosis. Using
cDNA microarray technology, we analyzed transcriptional changes of HBEC in
response to platelets in the presence or the absence of tumor necrosis factor
(TNF) and pRBC, which have been reported to alter gene expression in endothelial 
cells. Using a rigorous statistical approach with multiple test corrections, we
showed a significant effect of platelets on gene expression in HBEC. We also
detected a strong effect of TNF, whereas there was no transcriptional change
induced specifically by pRBC. Nevertheless, a global ANOVA and a two-way ANOVA
suggested that pRBC acted in interaction with platelets and TNF to alter gene
expression in HBEC. The expression of selected genes was validated by RT-qPCR.
The analysis of gene functional annotation indicated that platelets induce the
expression of genes involved in inflammation and apoptosis, such as genes
involved in chemokine-, TREM1-, cytokine-, IL10-, TGFβ-, death-receptor-, and
apoptosis-signaling. Overall, our results support the hypothesis that platelets
play a pathogenic role in CM.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019651 
PMCID: PMC3095604
PMID: 21603600  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

