
1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 May;7(5):e1002043. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002043. Epub 2011
May 19.

Wolbachia infections are virulent and inhibit the human malaria parasite
Plasmodium falciparum in Anopheles gambiae.

Hughes GL(1), Koga R, Xue P, Fukatsu T, Rasgon JL.

Author information: 
(1)The W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology,
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland,
United States of America.

Endosymbiotic Wolbachia bacteria are potent modulators of pathogen infection and 
transmission in multiple naturally and artificially infected insect species,
including important vectors of human pathogens. Anopheles mosquitoes are
naturally uninfected with Wolbachia, and stable artificial infections have not
yet succeeded in this genus. Recent techniques have enabled establishment of
somatic Wolbachia infections in Anopheles. Here, we characterize somatic
infections of two diverse Wolbachia strains (wMelPop and wAlbB) in Anopheles
gambiae, the major vector of human malaria. After infection, wMelPop disseminates
widely in the mosquito, infecting the fat body, head, sensory organs and other
tissues but is notably absent from the midgut and ovaries. Wolbachia initially
induces the mosquito immune system, coincident with initial clearing of the
infection, but then suppresses expression of immune genes, coincident with
Wolbachia replication in the mosquito. Both wMelPop and wAlbB significantly
inhibit Plasmodium falciparum oocyst levels in the mosquito midgut. Although not 
virulent in non-bloodfed mosquitoes, wMelPop exhibits a novel phenotype and is
extremely virulent for approximately 12-24 hours post-bloodmeal, after which
surviving mosquitoes exhibit similar mortality trajectories to control
mosquitoes. The data suggest that if stable transinfections act in a similar
manner to somatic infections, Wolbachia could potentially be used as part of a
strategy to control the Anopheles mosquitoes that transmit malaria.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002043 
PMCID: PMC3098226
PMID: 21625582  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

