
1. Eukaryot Cell. 2011 Aug;10(8):1013-22. doi: 10.1128/EC.05103-11. Epub 2011 Jun
17.

Protein arginine methylation in parasitic protozoa.

Fisk JC(1), Read LK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine and Biomedical
Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14214, USA.

Protozoa constitute the earliest branch of the eukaryotic lineage, and several
groups of protozoans are serious parasites of humans and other animals. Better
understanding of biochemical pathways that are either in common with or divergent
from those of higher eukaryotes is integral in the defense against these
parasites. In yeast and humans, the posttranslational methylation of arginine
residues in proteins affects myriad cellular processes, including transcription, 
RNA processing, DNA replication and repair, and signal transduction. The protein 
arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs) that catalyze these reactions, which are
unique to the eukaryotic kingdom of organisms, first become evident in protozoa. 
In this review, we focus on the current understanding of arginine methylation in 
multiple species of parasitic protozoa, including Trichomonas, Entamoeba,
Toxoplasma, Plasmodium, and Trypanosoma spp., and discuss how arginine
methylation may play important and unique roles in each type of parasite. We mine
available genomic and transcriptomic data to inventory the families of PRMTs in
different parasites and the changes in their abundance during the life cycle. We 
further review the limited functional studies on the roles of arginine
methylation in parasites, including epigenetic regulation in Apicomplexa and RNA 
processing in trypanosomes. Interestingly, each of the parasites considered
herein has significantly differing sets of PRMTs, and we speculate on the
importance of this diversity in aspects of parasite biology, such as
differentiation and antigenic variation.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.05103-11 
PMCID: PMC3165437
PMID: 21685318  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

