
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2011 Jun;5(6):e1192. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001192. Epub 
2011 Jun 21.

Duffy negative antigen is no longer a barrier to Plasmodium vivax--molecular
evidences from the African West Coast (Angola and Equatorial Guinea).

Mendes C(1), Dias F, Figueiredo J, Mora VG, Cano J, de Sousa B, do Rosário VE,
Benito A, Berzosa P, Arez AP.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Malária e Outras Doenças Tropicais, Unidade de Parasitologia,
Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Lisbon,
Portugal.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium vivax shows a small prevalence in West and Central Africa 
due to the high prevalence of Duffy negative people. However, Duffy negative
individuals infected with P. vivax have been reported in areas of high prevalence
of Duffy positive people who may serve as supply of P. vivax strains able to
invade Duffy negative erythrocytes. We investigated the presence of P. vivax in
two West African countries, using blood samples and mosquitoes collected during
two on-going studies.
METHODOLOGY/FINDINGS: Blood samples from a total of 995 individuals were
collected in seven villages in Angola and Equatorial Guinea, and 820 Anopheles
mosquitoes were collected in Equatorial Guinea. Identification of the Plasmodium 
species was achieved by nested PCR amplification of the small-subunit rRNA genes;
P. vivax was further characterized by csp gene analysis. Positive P. vivax-human 
isolates were genotyped for the Duffy blood group through the analysis of the
DARC gene. Fifteen Duffy-negative individuals, 8 from Equatorial Guinea (out of
97) and 7 from Angola (out of 898), were infected with two different strains of
P. vivax (VK210 and VK247).
CONCLUSIONS: In this study we demonstrated that P. vivax infections were found
both in humans and mosquitoes, which means that active transmission is occurring.
Given the high prevalence of infection in mosquitoes, we may speculate that this 
hypnozoite-forming species at liver may not be detected by the peripheral blood
samples analysis. Also, this is the first report of Duffy negative individuals
infected with two different strains of P. vivax (VK247 and classic strains) in
Angola and Equatorial Guinea. This finding reinforces the idea that this parasite
is able to use receptors other than Duffy to invade erythrocytes, which may have 
an enormous impact in P. vivax current distribution.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001192 
PMCID: PMC3119644
PMID: 21713024  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

