
1. PLoS Biol. 2011 Jul;9(7):e1001094. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001094. Epub 2011
Jul 5.

Gene gain and loss during evolution of obligate parasitism in the white rust
pathogen of Arabidopsis thaliana.

Kemen E(1), Gardiner A, Schultz-Larsen T, Kemen AC, Balmuth AL,
Robert-Seilaniantz A, Bailey K, Holub E, Studholme DJ, Maclean D, Jones JD.

Author information: 
(1)The Sainsbury Laboratory, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2011 Jul;9(7):e1001097.

Biotrophic eukaryotic plant pathogens require a living host for their growth and 
form an intimate haustorial interface with parasitized cells. Evolution to
biotrophy occurred independently in fungal rusts and powdery mildews, and in
oomycete white rusts and downy mildews. Biotroph evolution and molecular
mechanisms of biotrophy are poorly understood. It has been proposed, but not
shown, that obligate biotrophy results from (i) reduced selection for maintenance
of biosynthetic pathways and (ii) gain of mechanisms to evade host recognition or
suppress host defence. Here we use Illumina sequencing to define the genome,
transcriptome, and gene models for the obligate biotroph oomycete and Arabidopsis
parasite, Albugo laibachii. A. laibachii is a member of the Chromalveolata, which
incorporates Heterokonts (containing the oomycetes), Apicomplexa (which includes 
human parasites like Plasmodium falciparum and Toxoplasma gondii), and four other
taxa. From comparisons with other oomycete plant pathogens and other
chromalveolates, we reveal independent loss of molybdenum-cofactor-requiring
enzymes in downy mildews, white rusts, and the malaria parasite P. falciparum.
Biotrophy also requires "effectors" to suppress host defence; we reveal RXLR and 
Crinkler effectors shared with other oomycetes, and also discover and verify a
novel class of effectors, the "CHXCs", by showing effector delivery and effector 
functionality. Our findings suggest that evolution to progressively more intimate
association between host and parasite results in reduced selection for retention 
of certain biosynthetic pathways, and particularly reduced selection for
retention of molybdopterin-requiring biosynthetic pathways. These mechanisms are 
not only relevant to plant pathogenic oomycetes but also to human pathogens
within the Chromalveolata.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001094 
PMCID: PMC3130010
PMID: 21750662  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

