
1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Oct;7(10):e1002280. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002280. Epub
2011 Oct 6.

Evolutionarily divergent, unstable filamentous actin is essential for gliding
motility in apicomplexan parasites.

Skillman KM(1), Diraviyam K, Khan A, Tang K, Sept D, Sibley LD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.

Apicomplexan parasites rely on a novel form of actin-based motility called
gliding, which depends on parasite actin polymerization, to migrate through their
hosts and invade cells. However, parasite actins are divergent both in sequence
and function and only form short, unstable filaments in contrast to the stability
of conventional actin filaments. The molecular basis for parasite actin filament 
instability and its relationship to gliding motility remain unresolved. We
demonstrate that recombinant Toxoplasma (TgACTI) and Plasmodium (PfACTI and
PfACTII) actins polymerized into very short filaments in vitro but were induced
to form long, stable filaments by addition of equimolar levels of phalloidin.
Parasite actins contain a conserved phalloidin-binding site as determined by
molecular modeling and computational docking, yet vary in several residues that
are predicted to impact filament stability. In particular, two residues were
identified that form intermolecular contacts between different protomers in
conventional actin filaments and these residues showed non-conservative
differences in apicomplexan parasites. Substitution of divergent residues found
in TgACTI with those from mammalian actin resulted in formation of longer, more
stable filaments in vitro. Expression of these stabilized actins in T. gondii
increased sensitivity to the actin-stabilizing compound jasplakinolide and
disrupted normal gliding motility in the absence of treatment. These results
identify the molecular basis for short, dynamic filaments in apicomplexan
parasites and demonstrate that inherent instability of parasite actin filaments
is a critical adaptation for gliding motility.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002280 
PMCID: PMC3188518
PMID: 21998582  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

