
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e26364. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026364. Epub 2011 Nov 3.

Impact of changing drug treatment and malaria endemicity on the heritability of
malaria phenotypes in a longitudinal family-based cohort study.

Loucoubar C(1), Goncalves B, Tall A, Sokhna C, Trape JF, Diène Sarr F, Faye J,
Badiane A, Ly AB, Diop A, Bar-Hen A, Bureau JF, Sakuntabhai A, Paul R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Unité de Génétique Fonctionnelle des Maladies Infectieuses, 
Paris, France.

Despite considerable success of genome wide association (GWA) studies in
identifying causal variants for many human diseases, their success in unraveling 
the genetic basis to complex diseases has been more mitigated. Pathogen
population structure may impact upon the infectious phenotype, especially with
the intense short-term selective pressure that drug treatment exerts on
pathogens. Rigorous analysis that accounts for repeated measures and disentangles
the influence of genetic and environmental factors must be performed. Attempts
should be made to consider whether pathogen diversity will impact upon host
genetic responses to infection.We analyzed the heritability of two Plasmodium
falciparum phenotypes, the number of clinical malaria episodes (PFA) and the
proportion of these episodes positive for gametocytes (Pfgam), in a family-based 
cohort followed for 19 years, during which time there were four successive drug
treatment regimes, with documented appearance of drug resistance. Repeated
measures and variance components analyses were performed with fixed
environmental, additive genetic, intra-individual and maternal effects for each
drug period. Whilst there was a significant additive genetic effect underlying
PFA during the first drug period of study, this was lost in subsequent periods.
There was no additive genetic effect for Pfgam. The intra-individual effect
increased significantly in the chloroquine period.The loss of an additive genetic
effect following novel drug treatment may result in significant loss of power to 
detect genes in a GWA study. Prior genetic analysis must be a pre-requisite for
more detailed GWA studies. The temporal changes in the individual genetic and the
intra-individual estimates are consistent with those expected if there were
specific host-parasite interactions. The complex basis to the human response to
malaria parasite infection likely includes dominance/epistatic genetic effects
encompassed within the intra-individual variance component. Evaluating their role
in influencing the outcome of infection through host genotype by parasite
genotype interactions warrants research effort.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026364 
PMCID: PMC3207815
PMID: 22073159  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

