
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jan 3;109(1):E23-31. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1116932108.
Epub 2011 Nov 28.

Wolbachia induces reactive oxygen species (ROS)-dependent activation of the Toll 
pathway to control dengue virus in the mosquito Aedes aegypti.

Pan X(1), Zhou G, Wu J, Bian G, Lu P, Raikhel AS, Xi Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology and Genetics Program, Michigan State University, East
Lansing, MI 48824, USA.

Wolbachia are maternally transmitted symbiotic bacteria that can spread within
insect populations because of their unique ability to manipulate host
reproduction. When introduced to nonnative mosquito hosts, Wolbachia induce
resistance to a number of human pathogens, including dengue virus (DENV),
Plasmodium, and filarial nematodes, but the molecular mechanism involved is
unclear. In this study, we have deciphered how Wolbachia infection affects the
Aedes aegypti host in inducing resistance to DENV. The microarray assay indicates
that transcripts of genes with functions related to immunity and
reduction-oxidation (redox) reactions are up-regulated in Ae. aegypti infected
with Wolbachia. Infection with this bacterium leads to induction of oxidative
stress and an increased level of reactive oxygen species in its mosquito host.
Reactive oxygen species elevation is linked to the activation of the Toll
pathway, which is essential in mediating the expression of antioxidants to
counterbalance oxidative stress. This immune pathway also is responsible for
activation of antimicrobial peptides-defensins and cecropins. We provide evidence
that these antimicrobial peptides are involved in inhibition of DENV
proliferation in Wolbachia-infected mosquitoes. Utilization of transgenic Ae.
aegypti and the RNAi depletion approach has been instrumental in proving the role
of defensins and cecropins in the resistance of Wolbachia-infected Ae. aegypti to
DENV. These results indicate that a symbiotic bacterium can manipulate the host
defense system to facilitate its own persistent infection, resulting in a
compromise of the mosquito's ability to host human pathogens. Our discoveries
will aid in the development of control strategies for mosquito-transmitted
diseases.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1116932108 
PMCID: PMC3252928
PMID: 22123956  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

