
1. J Vis Exp. 2012 Jan 3;(59):e3122. doi: 10.3791/3122.

Selection of Plasmodium falciparum parasites for cytoadhesion to human brain
endothelial cells.

Claessens A(1), Rowe JA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Immunity, Infection and Evolution, University of Edinburgh.

Most human malaria deaths are caused by blood-stage Plasmodium falciparum
parasites. Cerebral malaria, the most life-threatening complication of the
disease, is characterised by an accumulation of Plasmodium falciparum infected
red blood cells (iRBC) at pigmented trophozoite stage in the microvasculature of 
the brain(2-4). This microvessel obstruction (sequestration) leads to acidosis,
hypoxia and harmful inflammatory cytokines (reviewed in (5)). Sequestration is
also found in most microvascular tissues of the human body(2, 3). The mechanism
by which iRBC attach to the blood vessel walls is still poorly understood. The
immortalized Human Brain microvascular Endothelial Cell line (HBEC-5i) has been
used as an in vitro model of the blood-brain barrier(6). However, Plasmodium
falciparum iRBC attach only poorly to HBEC-5i in vitro, unlike the dense
sequestration that occurs in cerebral malaria cases. We therefore developed a
panning assay to select (enrich) various P. falciparum strains for adhesion to
HBEC-5i in order to obtain populations of high-binding parasites, more
representative of what occurs in vivo. A sample of a parasite culture (mixture of
iRBC and uninfected RBC) at the pigmented trophozoite stage is washed and
incubated on a layer of HBEC-5i grown on a Petri dish. After incubation, the dish
is gently washed free from uRBC and unbound iRBC. Fresh uRBC are added to the few
iRBC attached to HBEC-5i and incubated overnight. As schizont stage parasites
burst, merozoites reinvade RBC and these ring stage parasites are harvested the
following day. Parasites are cultured until enough material is obtained
(typically 2 to 4 weeks) and a new round of selection can be performed. Depending
on the P. falciparum strain, 4 to 7 rounds of selection are needed in order to
get a population where most parasites bind to HBEC-5i. The binding phenotype is
progressively lost after a few weeks, indicating a switch in variant surface
antigen gene expression, thus regular selection on HBEC-5i is required to
maintain the phenotype. In summary, we developed a selection assay rendering P.
falciparum parasites a more "cerebral malaria adhesive" phenotype. We were able
to select 3 out of 4 P. falciparum strains on HBEC-5i. This assay has also
successfully been used to select parasites for binding to human dermal and
pulmonary endothelial cells. Importantly, this method can be used to select
tissue-specific parasite populations in order to identify candidate parasite
ligands for binding to brain endothelium. Moreover, this assay can be used to
screen for putative anti-sequestration drugs(7).

DOI: 10.3791/3122 
PMCID: PMC3369769
PMID: 22230803  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

