
1. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2011 Sep-Oct;45(5):817-24.

Cloning and characterization of trichome-specific promoter of cpr71av1 gene
involved in artemisinin biosynthesis in Artemisia annua L.

Wang Y(1), Yang K, Jing F, Li M, Deng T, Huang R, Wang B, Wang G, Sun X, Tang KX.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Biotechnology Research Center, School of Agriculture and Biology,
Fudan-SJTU-Nottingham Plant Biotechnology R&D Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200240, China.

Artemisinin, a sesquiterpene lactone endoperoxide derived from Artemisia annua L.
(Asteraceae), is the most effective antimalarial drug. We used two methods:
genome walking and thermal asymmetric interlaced polymerase chain reaction, to
isolate the unknown 5'-flanking sequence of the cyp71av1 gene. The subsequent
sequence analysis using bioinformatics software revealed that there are several
cis-acting elements inside the cyp71av1 promoter. The 5'-rapid amplification of
the cDNA ends method was used to determine the transcription start site of the
cyp71av1 gene. We then mapped it at the 18 base upstream of the ATG initiation
codon. For simple functional characterization, we built fusion vectors between
the 5'-deletion promoter and the gas reporter gene. The expression levels of the 
transferred vectors into A. annua L. were analyzed by the transient expression
way. The beta-glucuronidase assay results indicated that deletion of the region
to -1551 bp did not lead to much damage in the GUS activity, whereas further
deletion, to -1155 bp, resulted in a 5.5-fold reduction of GUS activity. In
stabilized transgenic A. annua L. seedlings we observed that GUS expression was
restricted to trichomes, which means that the promoter of the cyp71av1 gene is
trichome-specific. Compared with the constitutive CaMV 35S promoter, which can
express genes throughout the plant, influence on the trichome system through the 
trichome-specific expression promoter merely imperils plant growth. In addition, 
the promoter of the cyp71av1 gene contains several binding sites for
transcription factors, which implies that the cyp71av1 promoter responds to more 
than one form of stimulation.


PMID: 22393777  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

