
1. Eukaryot Cell. 2012 May;11(5):615-25. doi: 10.1128/EC.00039-12. Epub 2012 Mar 30.

Analysis of the conformation and function of the Plasmodium falciparum merozoite 
proteins MTRAP and PTRAMP.

Uchime O(1), Herrera R, Reiter K, Kotova S, Shimp RL Jr, Miura K, Jones D,
Lebowitz J, Ambroggio X, Hurt DE, Jin AJ, Long C, Miller LH, Narum DL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria Immunology and Vaccinology, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville,
Maryland, USA.

Thrombospondin repeat (TSR)-like domains are structures involved with cell
adhesion. Plasmodium falciparum proteins containing TSR domains play crucial
roles in parasite development. In particular, the preerythrocytic P. falciparum
circumsporozoite protein is involved in hepatocyte invasion. The importance of
these domains in two other malaria proteins, the merozoite-specific
thrombospondin-related anonymous protein (MTRAP) and the thrombospondin-related
apical membrane protein (PTRAMP), were assessed using near-full-length
recombinant proteins composed of the extracellular domains produced in
Escherichia coli. MTRAP is thought to be released from invasive organelles
identified as micronemes during merozoite invasion to mediate motility and host
cell invasion through an interaction with aldolase, an actin binding protein
involved in the moving junction. PTRAMP function remains unknown. In this study, 
the conformation of recombinant MTRAP (rMTRAP) appeared to be a highly extended
protein (2 nm by 33 nm, width by length, respectively), whereas rPTRAMP had a
less extended structure. Using an erythrocyte binding assay, rMTRAP but not
rPTRAMP bound human erythrocytes; rMTRAP binding was mediated through the TSR
domain. MTRAP- and in general PTRAMP-specific antibodies failed to inhibit P.
falciparum development in vitro. Altogether, MTRAP is a highly extended
bifunctional protein that binds to an erythrocyte receptor and the merozoite
motor.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.00039-12 
PMCID: PMC3346429
PMID: 22467743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

