
1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2012 Apr 4;13:54. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-13-54.

Mining biological information from 3D short time-series gene expression data: the
OPTricluster algorithm.

Tchagang AB(1), Phan S, Famili F, Shearer H, Fobert P, Huang Y, Zou J, Huang D,
Cutler A, Liu Z, Pan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Knowledge Discovery Group, Institute for Information Technology, National
Research Council Canada, 1200 Montréal Road, Ottawa, ON K1A 0R6, Canada.
alain.tchagang@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca

BACKGROUND: Nowadays, it is possible to collect expression levels of a set of
genes from a set of biological samples during a series of time points. Such data 
have three dimensions: gene-sample-time (GST). Thus they are called 3D microarray
gene expression data. To take advantage of the 3D data collected, and to fully
understand the biological knowledge hidden in the GST data, novel subspace
clustering algorithms have to be developed to effectively address the biological 
problem in the corresponding space.
RESULTS: We developed a subspace clustering algorithm called Order Preserving
Triclustering (OPTricluster), for 3D short time-series data mining. OPTricluster 
is able to identify 3D clusters with coherent evolution from a given 3D dataset
using a combinatorial approach on the sample dimension, and the order preserving 
(OP) concept on the time dimension. The fusion of the two methodologies allows
one to study similarities and differences between samples in terms of their
temporal expression profile. OPTricluster has been successfully applied to four
case studies: immune response in mice infected by malaria (Plasmodium chabaudi), 
systemic acquired resistance in Arabidopsis thaliana, similarities and
differences between inner and outer cotyledon in Brassica napus during seed
development, and to Brassica napus whole seed development. These studies showed
that OPTricluster is robust to noise and is able to detect the similarities and
differences between biological samples.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analysis showed that OPTricluster generally outperforms other
well known clustering algorithms such as the TRICLUSTER, gTRICLUSTER and K-means;
it is robust to noise and can effectively mine the biological knowledge hidden in
the 3D short time-series gene expression data.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-13-54 
PMCID: PMC3376030
PMID: 22475802  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

