
1. Curr Pharm Des. 2012;18(24):3480-9.

Lipoic acid metabolism of Plasmodium--a suitable drug target.

Storm J(1), Müller S.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Molecular Parasitology, Institute of Infection,
Immunity & Inflammation, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences,
University of Glasgow, 120 University Place, Glasgow G12 8TA, UK.

α-Lipoic acid (6,8-thioctic acid; LA) is a vital co-factor of α-ketoacid
dehydrogenase complexes and the glycine cleavage system. In recent years it was
shown that biosynthesis and salvage of LA in Plasmodium are necessary for the
parasites to complete their complex life cycle. LA salvage requires two lipoic
acid protein ligases (LplA1 and LplA2). LplA1 is confined to the mitochondrion
while LplA2 is located in both the mitochondrion and the apicoplast. LplA1
exclusively uses salvaged LA and lipoylates α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase,
branched chain α-ketoacid dehydrogenase and the H-protein of the glycine cleavage
system. LplA2 cannot compensate for the loss of LplA1 function during blood stage
development suggesting a specific function for LplA2 that has yet to be
elucidated. LA salvage is essential for the intra-erythrocytic and liver stage
development of Plasmodium and thus offers great potential for future drug or
vaccine development. LA biosynthesis, comprising octanoyl-acyl carrier protein
(ACP) : protein N-octanoyltransferase (LipB) and lipoate synthase (LipA), is
exclusively found in the apicoplast of Plasmodium where it generates LA de novo
from octanoyl-ACP, provided by the type II fatty acid biosynthesis (FAS II)
pathway also present in the organelle. LA is the co-factor of the
acetyltransferase subunit of the apicoplast located pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH),
which generates acetyl-CoA, feeding into FAS II. LA biosynthesis is not vital for
intra-erythrocytic development of Plasmodium, but the deletion of several genes
encoding components of FAS II or PDH was detrimental for liver stage development 
of the parasites indirectly suggesting that the same applies to LA biosynthesis. 
These data provide strong evidence that LA salvage and biosynthesis are vital for
different stages of Plasmodium development and offer potential for drug and
vaccine design against malaria.

DOI: 10.2174/138161212801327266 
PMCID: PMC3426790
PMID: 22607141  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

