
1. Curr Pharm Des. 2012;18(24):3522-30.

Inhibition of protein-protein interactions in Plasmodium falciparum: future drug 
targets.

Pierrot C(1), Fréville A, Olivier C, Souplet V, Khalife J.

Author information: 
(1)CIIL, Inserm U 1019, CNRS UMR 8204, Universite Lille Nord de France, Institut 
Pasteur de Lille, 1 rue du Professeur Calmette, 59019 Lille, France.

The rapid development by malaria parasites of resistance to almost all the
chemotherapeutic agents so far used for their control means that constant efforts
to develop new drugs are necessary. In this review, we propose that the
exploration of protein-protein interactions as a new strategy to identify
antimalarial drug targets is an attractive and a promising area of research.
Nevertheless, one of the most important criteria is that the targeted gene should
encode an essential protein within a complex that is able to affect parasite
survival. Recently, our research on the biology of Plasmodium falciparum allowed 
us to identify the interaction of Protein Phosphatase type 1 and actin with two
essential partners, PfLRR1 and PfLRR7 respectively, both of which belong to the
Leucine Rich Repeat (LRR) protein family. LRR-containing proteins are composed of
several consensus LRR motifs LXLXXNXL (where X is any amino acid) that provide
sites for the assembly of protein interactions. The LRR combines structural
versatility, adaptability and more importantly a high degree of interaction
specificity. In addition, it has been shown that a single mutation in a
particular LRR motif abolishes the protein-protein interaction and contributes to
the expression of severe pathology in humans. This clearly infers that blocking
the interaction related to 'hot spots' of LRR motifs can be considered as good
targets to block parasite growth and development. Thus, the inhibition of
protein-protein interactions by peptides, peptidomimetics or small-molecule
inhibitors that interfere with binding domains can contribute to defining new
potential drug targets.


PMID: 22607144  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

