
1. BMC Genomics. 2012 May 30;13:207. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-207.

Transcriptome of the adult female malaria mosquito vector Anopheles albimanus.

Martínez-Barnetche J(1), Gómez-Barreto RE, Ovilla-Muñoz M, Téllez-Sosa J, García 
López DE, Dinglasan RR, Ubaida Mohien C, MacCallum RM, Redmond SN, Gibbons JG,
Rokas A, Machado CA, Cazares-Raga FE, González-Cerón L, Hernández-Martínez S,
Rodríguez López MH.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación sobre Enfermedades Infecciosas, Instituto Nacional de 
Salud Pública, Cuernavaca, Morelos, México. jmbarnet@insp.mx

BACKGROUND: Human Malaria is transmitted by mosquitoes of the genus Anopheles.
Transmission is a complex phenomenon involving biological and environmental
factors of humans, parasites and mosquitoes. Among more than 500 anopheline
species, only a few species from different branches of the mosquito evolutionary 
tree transmit malaria, suggesting that their vectorial capacity has evolved
independently. Anopheles albimanus (subgenus Nyssorhynchus) is an important
malaria vector in the Americas. The divergence time between Anopheles gambiae,
the main malaria vector in Africa, and the Neotropical vectors has been estimated
to be 100 My. To better understand the biological basis of malaria transmission
and to develop novel and effective means of vector control, there is a need to
explore the mosquito biology beyond the An. gambiae complex.
RESULTS: We sequenced the transcriptome of the An. albimanus adult female. By
combining Sanger, 454 and Illumina sequences from cDNA libraries derived from the
midgut, cuticular fat body, dorsal vessel, salivary gland and whole body, we
generated a single, high-quality assembly containing 16,669 transcripts, 92% of
which mapped to the An. darlingi genome and covered 90% of the core eukaryotic
genome. Bidirectional comparisons between the An. gambiae, An. darlingi and An.
albimanus predicted proteomes allowed the identification of 3,772 putative
orthologs. More than half of the transcripts had a match to proteins in other
insect vectors and had an InterPro annotation. We identified several protein
families that may be relevant to the study of Plasmodium-mosquito interaction. An
open source transcript annotation browser called GDAV (Genome-Delinked Annotation
Viewer) was developed to facilitate public access to the data generated by this
and future transcriptome projects.
CONCLUSIONS: We have explored the adult female transcriptome of one important New
World malaria vector, An. albimanus. We identified protein-coding transcripts
involved in biological processes that may be relevant to the Plasmodium lifecycle
and can serve as the starting point for searching targets for novel control
strategies. Our data increase the available genomic information regarding An.
albimanus several hundred-fold, and will facilitate molecular research in medical
entomology, evolutionary biology, genomics and proteomics of anopheline mosquito 
vectors. The data reported in this manuscript is accessible to the community via 
the VectorBase website (http://www.vectorbase.org/Other/AdditionalOrganisms/).

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-207 
PMCID: PMC3442982
PMID: 22646700  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

