
1. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(6):e1002737. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002737. Epub 2012 Jun
7.

Anopheles Imd pathway factors and effectors in infection intensity-dependent
anti-Plasmodium action.

Garver LS(1), Bahia AC, Das S, Souza-Neto JA, Shiao J, Dong Y, Dimopoulos G.

Author information: 
(1)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology,
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland,
United States of America.

The Anopheles gambiae immune response against Plasmodium falciparum, an
etiological agent of human malaria, has been identified as a source of potential 
anti-Plasmodium genes and mechanisms to be exploited in efforts to control the
malaria transmission cycle. One such mechanism is the Imd pathway, a conserved
immune signaling pathway that has potent anti-P. falciparum activity. Silencing
the expression of caspar, a negative regulator of the Imd pathway, or
over-expressing rel2, an Imd pathway-controlled NFkappaB transcription factor,
confers a resistant phenotype on A. gambiae mosquitoes that involves an array of 
immune effector genes. However, unexplored features of this powerful mechanism
that may be essential for the implementation of a malaria control strategy still 
remain. Using RNA interference to singly or dually silence caspar and other
components of the Imd pathway, we have identified genes participating in the
anti-Plasmodium signaling module regulated by Caspar, each of which represents a 
potential target to achieve over-activation of the pathway. We also determined
that the Imd pathway is most potent against the parasite's ookinete stage, yet
also has reasonable activity against early oocysts and lesser activity against
late oocysts. We further demonstrated that caspar silencing alone is sufficient
to induce a robust anti-P. falciparum response even in the relative absence of
resident gut microbiota. Finally, we established the relevance of the Imd pathway
components and regulated effectors TEP1, APL1, and LRIM1 in parasite infection
intensity-dependent defense, thereby shedding light on the relevance of
laboratory versus natural infection intensity models. Our results highlight the
physiological considerations that are integral to a thoughtful implementation of 
Imd pathway manipulation in A. gambiae as part of an effort to limit the malaria 
transmission cycle, and they reveal a variety of previously unrecognized nuances 
in the Imd-directed immune response against P. falciparum.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002737 
PMCID: PMC3369948
PMID: 22685401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

