
1. Bioinformatics. 2012 Jun 15;28(12):i242-9. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts206.

NORMAL: accurate nucleosome positioning using a modified Gaussian mixture model.

Polishko A(1), Ponts N, Le Roch KG, Lonardi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California,
Riverside, CA 92521, USA. polishka@cs.ucr.edu

MOTIVATION: Nucleosomes are the basic elements of chromatin structure. They
control the packaging of DNA and play a critical role in gene regulation by
allowing physical access to transcription factors. The advent of
second-generation sequencing has enabled landmark genome-wide studies of
nucleosome positions for several model organisms. Current methods to determine
nucleosome positioning first compute an occupancy coverage profile by mapping
nucleosome-enriched sequenced reads to a reference genome; then, nucleosomes are 
placed according to the peaks of the coverage profile. These methods are quite
accurate on placing isolated nucleosomes, but they do not properly handle more
complex configurations. Also, they can only provide the positions of nucleosomes 
and their occupancy level, whereas it is very beneficial to supply molecular
biologists additional information about nucleosomes like the probability of
placement, the size of DNA fragments enriched for nucleosomes and/or whether
nucleosomes are well positioned or 'fuzzy' in the sequenced cell sample.
RESULTS: We address these issues by providing a novel method based on a
parametric probabilistic model. An expectation maximization algorithm is used to 
infer the parameters of the mixture of distributions. We compare the performance 
of our method on two real datasets against Template Filtering, which is
considered the current state-of-the-art. On synthetic data, we show that our
method can resolve more accurately complex configurations of nucleosomes, and it 
is more robust to user-defined parameters. On real data, we show that our method 
detects a significantly higher number of nucleosomes.
AVAILABILITY: Visit http://www.cs.ucr.edu/~polishka.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts206 
PMCID: PMC3371838
PMID: 22689767  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

