
1. Acta Trop. 2012 Oct;124(1):27-32. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2012.05.016. Epub
2012 Jun 15.

The genetic diversity of Plasmodium malariae and Plasmodium brasilianum from
human, simian and mosquito hosts in Brazil.

Guimarães LO(1), Bajay MM, Wunderlich G, Bueno MG, Röhe F, Catão-Dias JL, Neves
A, Malafronte RS, Curado I, Kirchgatter K.

Author information: 
(1)Núcleo de Estudos em Malária, Superintendência de Controle de
Endemias/Instituto de Medicina Tropical de São Paulo, Universidade de São Paulo, 
Brazil.

Plasmodium malariae is a protozoan parasite that causes malaria in humans and is 
genetically indistinguishable from Plasmodium brasilianum, a parasite infecting
New World monkeys in Central and South America. P. malariae has a wide and patchy
global distribution in tropical and subtropical regions, being found in South
America, Asia, and Africa. However, little is known regarding the genetics of
these parasites and the similarity between them could be because until now there 
are only a very few genomic sequences available from simian Plasmodium species.
This study presents the first molecular epidemiological data for P. malariae and 
P. brasilianum from Brazil obtained from different hosts and uses them to explore
the genetic diversity in relation to geographical origin and hosts. By using
microsatellite genotyping, we discovered that of the 14 human samples obtained
from areas of the Atlantic forest, 5 different multilocus genotypes were
recorded, while in a sample from an infected mosquito from the same region a
different haplotype was found. We also analyzed the longitudinal change of
circulating plasmodial genetic profile in two untreated non-symptomatic patients 
during a 12-months interval. The circulating genotypes in the two samples from
the same patient presented nearly identical multilocus haplotypes (differing by a
single locus). The more frequent haplotype persisted for almost 3 years in the
human population. The allele Pm09-299 described previously as a genetic marker
for South American P. malariae was not found in our samples. Of the 3 non-human
primate samples from the Amazon Region, 3 different multilocus genotypes were
recorded indicating a greater diversity among isolates of P. brasilianum compared
to P. malariae and thus, P. malariae might in fact derive from P. brasilianum as 
has been proposed in recent studies. Taken together, our data show that based on 
the microsatellite data there is a relatively restricted polymorphism of P.
malariae parasites as opposed to other geographic locations.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2012.05.016 
PMID: 22705349  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

