
1. Malar J. 2012 Jun 22;11:213.

Entomologic investigation of Plasmodium knowlesi vectors in Kuala Lipis, Pahang, 
Malaysia.

Jiram AI(1), Vythilingam I, NoorAzian YM, Yusof YM, Azahari AH, Fong MY.

Author information: 
(1)Parasitology Unit, Infectious Diseases Research Centre, Institute for Medical 
Research, Jalan Pahang, 50588 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

BACKGROUND: The first natural infection of Plasmodium knowlesi in humans was
recorded in 1965 in peninsular Malaysia. Extensive research was then conducted
and it was postulated that it was a rare incident and that simian malaria will
not be easily transmitted to humans. However, at the turn of the 21st century,
knowlesi malaria was prevalent throughout Southeast Asia and is life threatening.
Thus, a longitudinal study was initiated to determine the vectors, their seasonal
variation and preference to humans and macaques.
METHODS: Monthly mosquito collections were carried out in Kuala Lipis, Pahang,
peninsular Malaysia, using human-landing collection and monkey-baited traps at
ground and canopy levels. All mosquitoes were identified and all anopheline
mosquitoes were dissected and the gut and gland examined for oocysts and
sporozoites. Nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was conducted on positive
samples, followed by sequencing of the csp gene.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Anopheles cracens was the predominant mosquito biting
humans as well as the macaques. It comprised 63.2% of the total collection and
was the only species positive for sporozoites of P. knowlesi. It was exophagic
and did not enter houses. Besides An. cracens, Anopheles kochi was also found in 
the monkey-bait trap. Both species preferred to bite monkeys at ground level
compared to canopy.
CONCLUSION: Anopheles cracens, which belongs to the Dirus complex, Leucosphyrus
subgroup, Leucosphyrus group of mosquitoes, has been confirmed to be the only
vector for this site from Pahang during this study. It was the predominant
mosquito at the study sites and with deforestation humans and villages are
entering deeper in the forests, and nearer to the mosquitoes and macacques. The
close association of humans with macaques and mosquitoes has led to zoonotic
transmission of malaria.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-213 
PMCID: PMC3476358
PMID: 22727041  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

