
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38320. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038320. Epub 2012 Jun 22.

The fragmented mitochondrial ribosomal RNAs of Plasmodium falciparum.

Feagin JE(1), Harrell MI, Lee JC, Coe KJ, Sands BH, Cannone JJ, Tami G, Schnare
MN, Gutell RR.

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, United States of
America. feagin@u.washington.edu

BACKGROUND: The mitochondrial genome in the human malaria parasite Plasmodium
falciparum is most unusual. Over half the genome is composed of the genes for
three classic mitochondrial proteins: cytochrome oxidase subunits I and III and
apocytochrome b. The remainder encodes numerous small RNAs, ranging in size from 
23 to 190 nt. Previous analysis revealed that some of these transcripts have
significant sequence identity with highly conserved regions of large and small
subunit rRNAs, and can form the expected secondary structures. However, these
rRNA fragments are not encoded in linear order; instead, they are intermixed with
one another and the protein coding genes, and are coded on both strands of the
genome. This unorthodox arrangement hindered the identification of transcripts
corresponding to other regions of rRNA that are highly conserved and/or are known
to participate directly in protein synthesis.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The identification of 14 additional small mitochondrial
transcripts from P. falciparum and the assignment of 27 small RNAs (12 SSU RNAs
totaling 804 nt, 15 LSU RNAs totaling 1233 nt) to specific regions of rRNA are
supported by multiple lines of evidence. The regions now represented are highly
similar to those of the small but contiguous mitochondrial rRNAs of
Caenorhabditis elegans. The P. falciparum rRNA fragments cluster on the
interfaces of the two ribosomal subunits in the three-dimensional structure of
the ribosome.
SIGNIFICANCE: All of the rRNA fragments are now presumed to have been identified 
with experimental methods, and nearly all of these have been mapped onto the SSU 
and LSU rRNAs. Conversely, all regions of the rRNAs that are known to be directly
associated with protein synthesis have been identified in the P. falciparum
mitochondrial genome and RNA transcripts. The fragmentation of the rRNA in the P.
falciparum mitochondrion is the most extreme example of any rRNA fragmentation
discovered.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038320 
PMCID: PMC3382252
PMID: 22761677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

