
1. Malar J. 2012 Jul 16;11:230. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-230.

Genetic diversity of expressed Plasmodium falciparum var genes from Tanzanian
children with severe malaria.

Mugasa J(1), Qi W, Rusch S, Rottmann M, Beck HP.

Author information: 
(1)Ifakara Health Institute, Ifakara, Tanzania.

BACKGROUND: Severe malaria has been attributed to the expression of a restricted 
subset of the var multi-gene family, which encodes for Plasmodium falciparum
erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1). PfEMP1 mediates cytoadherence and
sequestration of infected erythrocytes into the post-capillary venules of vital
organs such as the brain, lung or placenta. var genes are highly diverse and can 
be classified in three major groups (ups A, B and C) and two intermediate groups 
(B/A and B/C) based on the genomic location, gene orientation and upstream
sequences. The genetic diversity of expressed var genes in relation to severity
of disease in Tanzanian children was analysed.
METHODS: Children with defined severe (SM) and asymptomatic malaria (AM) were
recruited. Full-length var mRNA was isolated and reversed transcribed into var
cDNA. Subsequently, the DBL and N-terminal domains, and up-stream sequences were 
PCR amplified, cloned and sequenced. Sequences derived from SM and AM isolates
were compared and analysed.
RESULTS: The analysis confirmed that the var family is highly diverse in natural 
Plasmodium falciparum populations. Sequence diversity of amplified var DBL-1α and
upstream regions showed minimal overlap among isolates, implying that the var
gene repertoire is vast and most probably indefinite in endemic areas. var DBL-1α
sequences from AM isolates were more diverse with more singletons found (p<0.05) 
than those from SM infections. Furthermore, few var DBL-1α sequences from SM
patients were rare and restricted suggesting that certain PfEMP1 variants might
induce severe disease.
CONCLUSIONS: The genetic sequence diversity of var genes of P. falciparum
isolates from Tanzanian children is large and its relationship to disease
severity has been studied. Observed differences suggest that different var genes 
might have fundamentally different roles in the host-parasite interaction.
Further research is required to examine clear disease-associations of var gene
subsets in different geographical settings. The importance of very strict
clinical definitions and appropriate large control groups needs to be emphasized 
for future studies on disease associations of PfEMP1.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-230 
PMCID: PMC3488018
PMID: 22799500  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

