
1. BMC Genomics. 2012 Aug 2;13:366. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-366.

Translational regulation of Anopheles gambiae mRNAs in the midgut during
Plasmodium falciparum infection.

Mead EA(1), Li M, Tu Z, Zhu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA.

BACKGROUND: Malaria is caused by Plasmodium parasites, which are transmitted via 
the bites of infected Anopheline mosquitoes. Midgut invasion is a major
bottleneck for Plasmodium development inside the mosquito vectors. Malaria
parasites in the midgut are surrounded by a hostile environment rich in digestive
enzymes, while a rapidly responding immune system recognizes Plasmodium ookinetes
and recruits killing factors from the midgut and surrounding tissues,
dramatically reducing the population of invading ookinetes before they can
successfully traverse the midgut epithelium. Understanding molecular details of
the parasite-vector interactions requires precise measurement of nascent protein 
synthesis in the mosquito during Plasmodium infection. Current expression
profiling primarily monitors alterations in steady-state levels of mRNA, but does
not address the equally critical issue of whether the proteins encoded by the
mRNAs are actually synthesized.
RESULTS: In this study, we used sucrose density gradient centrifugation to
isolate actively translating Anopheles gambiae mRNAs based upon their association
with polyribosomes (polysomes). The proportion of individual gene transcripts
associated with polysomes, which is determined by RNA deep sequencing, reflects
mRNA translational status. This approach led to identification of 1017 mosquito
transcripts that were primarily regulated at the translational level after
ingestion of Plasmodium falciparum-infected blood. Caspar, a negative regulator
of the NF-kappaB transcription factor Rel2, appears to be substantially activated
at the translational levels during Plasmodium infection. In addition, transcripts
of Dcr1, Dcr2 and Drosha, which are involved in small RNA biosynthesis, exhibited
enhanced associations with polysomes after P. falciparum challenge. This
observation suggests that mosquito microRNAs may play an important role in
reactions against Plasmodium invasion.
CONCLUSIONS: We analyzed both total cellular mRNAs and mRNAs that are associated 
with polysomes to simultaneously monitor transcriptomes and nascent protein
synthesis in the mosquito. This approach provides more accurate information
regarding the rate of protein synthesis, and identifies some mosquito factors
that might have gone unrecognized because expression of these proteins is
regulated mainly at the translational level rather than at the transcriptional
level after mosquitoes ingest a Plasmodium-infected blood meal.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-366 
PMCID: PMC3443010
PMID: 22857387  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

