
1. Malar J. 2012 Aug 6;11:265. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-265.

Remarkable stability in patterns of blood-stage gene expression during episodes
of non-lethal Plasmodium yoelii malaria.

Cernetich-Ott A(1), Daly TM, Vaidya AB, Bergman LW, Burns JM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Parasitology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 
Drexel University College of Medicine, 2900 Queen Lane, Philadelphia, PA 19129,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Microarray studies using in vitro cultures of synchronized,
blood-stage Plasmodium falciparum malaria parasites have revealed a
'just-in-time' cascade of gene expression with some indication that these
transcriptional patterns remain stable even in the presence of external
stressors. However, direct analysis of transcription in P. falciparum blood-stage
parasites obtained from the blood of infected patients suggests that parasite
gene expression may be modulated by factors present in the in vivo environment of
the host. The aim of this study was to examine changes in gene expression of the 
rodent malaria parasite, Plasmodium yoelii 17X, while varying the in vivo setting
of replication.
METHODS: Using P. yoelii 17X parasites replicating in vivo, differential gene
expression in parasites isolated from individual mice, from independent
infections, during ascending, peak and descending parasitaemia and in the
presence and absence of host antibody responses was examined using P. yoelii DNA 
microarrays. A genome-wide analysis to identify coordinated changes in groups of 
genes associated with specific biological pathways was a primary focus, although 
an analysis of the expression patterns of two multi-gene families in P. yoelii,
the yir and pyst-a families, was also completed.
RESULTS: Across experimental conditions, transcription was surprisingly stable
with little evidence for distinct transcriptional states or for consistent
changes in specific pathways. Differential gene expression was greatest when
comparing differences due to parasite load and/or host cell availability.
However, the number of differentially expressed genes was generally low. Of genes
that were differentially expressed, many involved biologically diverse pathways. 
There was little to no differential expression of members of the yir and pyst-a
multigene families that encode polymorphic proteins associated with the membrane 
of infected erythrocytes. However, a relatively large number of these genes were 
expressed during blood-stage infection regardless of experimental condition.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these results indicate that 1) P. yoelii gene
expression remains stable in the presence of a changing host environment, and 2) 
concurrent expression of a large number of the polymorphic yir and pyst-a genes, 
rather than differential expression in response to specific host factors, may in 
itself limit the effectiveness of host immune responses.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-265 
PMCID: PMC3489522
PMID: 22866913  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

