
1. Int J Med Microbiol. 2012 Oct;302(4-5):225-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmm.2012.07.005.
Epub 2012 Aug 14.

The glyoxalase pathway in protozoan parasites.

Sousa Silva M(1), Ferreira AE, Gomes R, Tomás AM, Ponces Freire A, Cordeiro C.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Química e Bioquímica, Departamento de Química e Bioquímica,
Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal.

The glyoxalase system is the main catabolic route for methylglyoxal, a
non-enzymatic glycolytic byproduct with toxic and mutagenic effects. This pathway
includes two enzymes, glyoxalase I and glyoxalase II, which convert methylglyoxal
to d-lactate by using glutathione as a catalytic cofactor. In protozoan parasites
the glyoxalase system shows marked deviations from this model. For example, the
functional replacement of glutathione by trypanothione (a spermidine-glutathione 
conjugate) is a characteristic of trypanosomatids. Also interesting are the lack 
of glyoxalase I and the presence of two glyoxalase II enzymes in Trypanosoma
brucei. In Plasmodium falciparum the glyoxalase pathway is glutathione-dependent,
and glyoxalase I is an atypical monomeric enzyme with two active sites. Although 
it is tempting to exploit these differences for their potential therapeutic
value, they provide invaluable clues regarding methylglyoxal metabolism and the
evolution of protozoan parasites. Glyoxalase enzymes have been characterized in
only a few protozoan parasites, namely Plasmodium falciparum and the
trypanosomatids Leishmania and Trypanosoma. In this review, we will focus on the 
key features of the glyoxalase pathway in major human protozoan parasites, with
particular emphasis on the characterized systems in Plasmodium falciparum,
Trypanosoma brucei, Trypanosoma cruzi, and Leishmania spp. We will also search
for genes encoding glyoxalase I and II in Toxoplasma gondii, Entamoeba
histolytica, and Giardia lamblia.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmm.2012.07.005 
PMID: 22901378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

