
1. Malar J. 2012 Aug 20;11:281.

Genetic polymorphisms associated with anti-malarial antibody levels in a low and 
unstable malaria transmission area in southern Sri Lanka.

Dewasurendra RL(1), Suriyaphol P, Fernando SD, Carter R, Rockett K, Corran P,
Kwiatkowski D, Karunaweera ND; 7 MalariaGEN Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Colombo,
Colombo, Sri Lanka.

BACKGROUND: The incidence of malaria in Sri Lanka has significantly declined in
recent years. Similar trends were seen in Kataragama, a known malaria endemic
location within the southern province of the country, over the past five years.
This is a descriptive study of anti-malarial antibody levels and selected host
genetic mutations in residents of Kataragama, under low malaria transmission
conditions.
METHODS: Sera were collected from 1,011 individuals residing in Kataragama and
anti-malarial antibodies and total IgE levels were measured by a standardized
ELISA technique. Host DNA was extracted and used for genotyping of selected SNPs 
in known genes associated with malaria. The antibody levels were analysed in
relation to the past history of malaria (during past 10 years), age, sex, the
location of residence within Kataragama and selected host genetic markers.
RESULTS: A significant increase in antibodies against Plasmodium falciparum
antigens AMA1, MSP2, NANP and Plasmodium vivax antigen MSP1 in individuals with
past history of malaria were observed when compared to those who did not. A
marked increase of anti-MSP1(Pf) and anti-AMA1(Pv) was also evident in
individuals between 45-59 years (when compared to other age groups). Allele
frequencies for two SNPs in genes that code for IL-13 and TRIM-5 were found to be
significantly different between those who have experienced one or more malaria
attacks within past 10 years and those who did not. When antibody levels were
classified into a low-high binary trait, significant associations were found with
four SNPs for anti-AMA1(Pf); two SNPs for anti-MSP1(Pf); eight SNPs for
anti-NANP(Pf); three SNPs for anti-AMA1(Pv); seven SNPs for anti-MSP1(Pv); and
nine SNPs for total IgE. Eleven of these SNPs with significant associations with 
anti-malarial antibody levels were found to be non-synonymous.
CONCLUSIONS: Evidence is suggestive of an age-acquired immunity in this study
population in spite of low malaria transmission levels. Several SNPs were in
linkage disequilibrium and had a significant association with elevated antibody
levels, suggesting that these host genetic mutations might have an individual or 
collective effect on inducing or/and maintaining high anti-malarial antibody
levels.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-281 
PMCID: PMC3459805
PMID: 22905743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

