
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e44617. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044617. Epub 2012 Sep 5.

A unique Kelch domain phosphatase in Plasmodium regulates ookinete morphology,
motility and invasion.

Philip N(1), Vaikkinen HJ, Tetley L, Waters AP.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Molecular Parasitology, Institute of Infection,
Immunity and Inflammation, Sir Graeme Davies Building, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, United Kingdom. Nisha.philip@glasgow.ac.uk

Signalling through post-translational modification (PTM) of proteins is a process
central to cell homeostasis, development and responses to external stimuli. The
best characterised PTM is protein phosphorylation which is reversibly catalysed
at specific residues through the action of protein kinases (addition) and
phosphatases (removal). Here, we report characterisation of an orphan protein
phosphatase that possesses a domain architecture previously only described in
Plantae. Through gene disruption and the production of active site mutants, the
enzymatically active Protein Phosphatase containing Kelch-Like domains (PPKL,
PBANKA_132950) is shown to play an essential role in the development of an
infectious ookinete. PPKL is produced in schizonts and female gametocytes, is
maternally inherited where its absence leads to the development of a malformed,
immotile, non-infectious ookinete with an extended apical protrusion. The
distribution of PPKL includes focussed localization at the ookinete apical tip
implying a link between its activity and the correct deployment of the apical
complex and microtubule cytoskeleton. Unlike wild type parasites, ppkl(-)
ookinetes do not have a pronounced apical distribution of their micronemes yet
secretion of microneme cargo is unaffected in the mutant implying that release of
microneme cargo is either highly efficient at the malformed apical prominence or 
secretion may also occur from other points of the parasite, possibly the
pellicular pores.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044617 
PMCID: PMC3434153
PMID: 22957089  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

