
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2012;6(9):e1811. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001811. Epub 2012
Sep 6.

Whole genome sequencing of field isolates provides robust characterization of
genetic diversity in Plasmodium vivax.

Chan ER(1), Menard D, David PH, Ratsimbasoa A, Kim S, Chim P, Do C, Witkowski B, 
Mercereau-Puijalon O, Zimmerman PA, Serre D.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research Institute,
Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

BACKGROUND: An estimated 2.85 billion people live at risk of Plasmodium vivax
transmission. In endemic countries vivax malaria causes significant morbidity and
its mortality is becoming more widely appreciated, drug-resistant strains are
increasing in prevalence, and an increasing number of reports indicate that P.
vivax is capable of breaking through the Duffy-negative barrier long considered
to confer resistance to blood stage infection. Absence of robust in vitro
propagation limits our understanding of fundamental aspects of the parasite's
biology, including the determinants of its dormant hypnozoite phase, its
virulence and drug susceptibility, and the molecular mechanisms underlying red
blood cell invasion.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here, we report results from whole genome
sequencing of five P. vivax isolates obtained from Malagasy and Cambodian
patients, and of the monkey-adapted Belem strain. We obtained an average 70-400 X
coverage of each genome, resulting in more than 93% of the Sal I reference
sequence covered by 20 reads or more. Our study identifies more than 80,000 SNPs 
distributed throughout the genome which will allow designing association studies 
and population surveys. Analysis of the genome-wide genetic diversity in P. vivax
also reveals considerable allele sharing among isolates from different
continents. This observation could be consistent with a high level of gene flow
among parasite strains distributed throughout the world.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study shows that it is feasible to perform whole genome
sequencing of P. vivax field isolates and rigorously characterize the genetic
diversity of this parasite. The catalogue of polymorphisms generated here will
enable large-scale genotyping studies and contribute to a better understanding of
P. vivax traits such as drug resistance or erythrocyte invasion, partially
circumventing the lack of laboratory culture that has hampered vivax research for
years.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001811 
PMCID: PMC3435244
PMID: 22970335  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

