
1. J Infect Dis. 2013 Jan 1;207(1):164-74. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jis645. Epub 2012 Oct
24.

Radiation-induced cellular and molecular alterations in asexual intraerythrocytic
Plasmodium falciparum.

Oakley MS(1), Gerald N, Anantharaman V, Gao Y, Majam V, Mahajan B, Pham PT,
Lotspeich-Cole L, Myers TG, McCutchan TF, Morris SL, Aravind L, Kumar S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bacterial, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, Food and 
Drug Administration, Rockville, USA.

BACKGROUND: γ-irradiation is commonly used to create attenuation in Plasmodium
parasites. However, there are no systematic studies on the survival, reversion of
virulence, and molecular basis for γ-radiation-induced cell death in malaria
parasites.
METHODS: The effect of γ-irradiation on the growth of asexual Plasmodium
falciparum was studied in erythrocyte cultures. Cellular and ultrastructural
changes within the parasite were studied by fluorescence and electron microscopy,
and genome-wide transcriptional profiling was performed to identify parasite
biomarkers of attenuation and cell death.
RESULTS: γ-radiation induced the death of P. falciparum in a dose-dependent
manner. These parasites had defective mitosis, sparse cytoplasm, fewer ribosomes,
disorganized and clumped organelles, and large vacuoles-observations consistent
with "distressed" or dying parasites. A total of 185 parasite genes were
transcriptionally altered in response to γ-irradiation (45.9% upregulated, 54.1% 
downregulated). Loss of parasite survival was correlated with the downregulation 
of genes encoding translation factors and with upregulation of genes associated
with messenger RNA-sequestering stress granules. Genes pertaining to cell-surface
interactions, host-cell remodeling, and secreted proteins were also altered.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies provide a framework to assess the safety of
γ-irradiation attenuation and promising targets for genetic deletion to produce
whole parasite-based attenuated vaccines.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jis645 
PMCID: PMC3523796
PMID: 23100570  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

