
1. Cell Microbiol. 2013 Apr;15(4):647-59. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12062. Epub 2012 Nov 21.

Early gametocytes of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum specifically
remodel the adhesive properties of infected erythrocyte surface.

Tibúrcio M(1), Silvestrini F, Bertuccini L, Sander AF, Turner L, Lavstsen T,
Alano P.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Malattie Infettive, Parassitarie ed Immunomediate, Istituto
Superiore di Sanità, viale Regina Elena 299, 00161, Rome, Italy.

In Plasmodium falciparum infections the parasite transmission stages, the
gametocytes, mature in 10 days sequestered in internal organs. Recent studies
suggest that cell mechanical properties rather than adhesive interactions play a 
role in sequestration during gametocyte maturation. It remains instead obscure
how sequestration is established, and how the earliest sexual stages,
morphologically similar to asexual trophozoites, modify the infected erythrocytes
and their cytoadhesive properties at the onset of gametocytogenesis. Here,
purified P. falciparum early gametocytes were used to ultrastructurally and
biochemically analyse parasite-induced modifications on the red blood cell
surface and to measure their functional consequences on adhesion to human
endothelial cells. This work revealed that stage I gametocytes are able to deform
the infected erythrocytes like asexual parasites, but do not modify its surface
with adhesive 'knob' structures and associated proteins. Reduced levels of the P.
falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1) adhesins are exposed on the
red blood cell surface by these parasites, and the expression of the var gene
family, which encodes 50-60 variants of PfEMP1, is dramatically downregulated in 
the transition from asexual development to gametocytogenesis. Cytoadhesion assays
show that such gene expression changes and host cell surface modifications
functionally result in the inability of stage I gametocytes to bind the host
ligands used by the asexual parasite to bind endothelial cells. In conclusion,
these results identify specific differences in molecular and cellular mechanisms 
of host cell remodelling and in adhesive properties, leading to clearly distinct 
host parasite interplays in the establishment of sequestration of stage I
gametocytes and of asexual trophozoites.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12062 
PMID: 23114006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

