
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2013 Jan;57(1):425-35. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00920-12.
Epub 2012 Nov 5.

A class of tricyclic compounds blocking malaria parasite oocyst development and
transmission.

Eastman RT(1), Pattaradilokrat S, Raj DK, Dixit S, Deng B, Miura K, Yuan J,
Tanaka TQ, Johnson RL, Jiang H, Huang R, Williamson KC, Lambert LE, Long C,
Austin CP, Wu Y, Su XZ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Malaria is a deadly infectious disease in many tropical and subtropical
countries. Previous efforts to eradicate malaria have failed, largely due to the 
emergence of drug-resistant parasites, insecticide-resistant mosquitoes and, in
particular, the lack of drugs or vaccines to block parasite transmission.
ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters are known to play a role in drug
transport, metabolism, and resistance in many organisms, including malaria
parasites. To investigate whether a Plasmodium falciparum ABC transporter
(Pf14_0244 or PfABCG2) modulates parasite susceptibility to chemical compounds or
plays a role in drug resistance, we disrupted the gene encoding PfABCG2, screened
the recombinant and the wild-type 3D7 parasites against a library containing
2,816 drugs approved for human or animal use, and identified an antihistamine
(ketotifen) that became less active against the PfABCG2-disrupted parasite in
culture. In addition to some activity against asexual stages and gametocytes,
ketotifen was highly potent in blocking oocyst development of P. falciparum and
the rodent parasite Plasmodium yoelii in mosquitoes. Tests of structurally
related tricyclic compounds identified additional compounds with similar
activities in inhibiting transmission. Additionally, ketotifen appeared to have
some activity against relapse of Plasmodium cynomolgi infection in rhesus
monkeys. Further clinical evaluation of ketotifen and related compounds,
including synthetic new derivatives, in blocking malaria transmission may provide
new weapons for the current effort of malaria eradication.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00920-12 
PMCID: PMC3535893
PMID: 23129054  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

