
1. Malar J. 2012 Nov 7;11:369. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-369.

ATP and luciferase assays to determine the rate of drug action in in vitro
cultures of Plasmodium falciparum.

Khan T(1), van Brummelen AC, Parkinson CJ, Hoppe HC.

Author information: 
(1)CSIR Biosciences, PO Box 365, Pretoria 0001, South Africa.

BACKGROUND: Knowledge of the rate of action of compounds against cultured malaria
parasites is required to determine the optimal time-points for drug mode of
action studies, as well as to predict likely in vivo parasite clearance rates in 
order to select optimal hit compounds for further development. In this study,
changes in parasite ATP levels and transgenic luciferase reporter activity were
explored as means to detect drug-induced stress in cultured parasites.
METHODS: In vitro cultures of Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 wild-type or firefly
luciferase-expressing parasites were incubated with a panel of six anti-malarial 
compounds for 10 hours and parasite ATP levels or luciferase activity determined 
at two-hour intervals using luminescence-based reagents. For comparative
purposes, parasite morphology changes were evaluated by light microscopy, as well
as the extent to which parasites recover after 48 hours from a six-hour drug
treatment using a parasite lactate dehydrogenase assay.
RESULTS: Changes in parasite ATP levels displayed three phenotypes: mild or no
change (chloroquine, DFMO); 2-4 fold increase (mefloquine, artemisinin); severe
depletion (ritonavir, gramicidin). The respective phenotypes and the rate at
which they manifested correlated closely with the extent to which parasites
recovered from a six-hour drug treatment (with the exception of chloroquine) and 
the appearance and severity of morphological changes observed by light
microscopy. Luciferase activity decreased profoundly in parasites treated with
mefloquine, artemisinin and ritonavir (34-67% decrease in 2 hours), while
chloroquine and DFMO produced only mild changes over 10 hours. Gramicidin yielded
intermediate decreases in luciferase activity.
CONCLUSIONS: ATP levels and luciferase activity respond rapidly to incubation
with anti-malarial drugs and provide quantitative read-outs to detect the
appearance and magnitude of drug-induced stress in cultured parasites. The
correlation between the observed changes and irreversible parasite toxicity is
not yet sufficiently clear to predict clinical clearance rates, but may be useful
for ranking compounds against each other and standard drugs vis-à-vis rate of
action and for determining early time-points for drug mode of action studies.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-369 
PMCID: PMC3505462
PMID: 23134617  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

