
1. BMC Evol Biol. 2012 Nov 14;12:219. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-12-219.

Molecular evolution and phylogenetics of rodent malaria parasites.

Ramiro RS(1), Reece SE, Obbard DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United 
Kingdom. rramiro@igc.gulbenkian.pt

BACKGROUND: Over the last 6 decades, rodent Plasmodium species have become key
model systems for understanding the basic biology of malaria parasites. Cell and 
molecular parasitology have made much progress in identifying genes underpinning 
interactions between malaria parasites, hosts, and vectors. However, little
attention has been paid to the evolutionary genetics of parasites, which provides
context for identifying potential therapeutic targets and for understanding the
selective forces shaping parasites in natural populations. Additionally,
understanding the relationships between species, subspecies, and strains, is
necessary to maximize the utility of rodent malaria parasites as medically
important infectious disease models, and for investigating the evolution of
host-parasite interactions.
RESULTS: Here, we collected multi-locus sequence data from 58 rodent malaria
genotypes distributed throughout 13 subspecies belonging to P. berghei, P.
chabaudi, P. vinckei, and P. yoelii. We employ multi-locus methods to infer the
subspecies phylogeny, and use population-genetic approaches to elucidate the
selective patterns shaping the evolution of these organisms. Our results reveal a
time-line for the evolution of rodent Plasmodium and suggest that all the
subspecies are independently evolving lineages (i.e. species). We show that
estimates of species-level polymorphism are inflated if subspecies are not
explicitly recognized, and detect purifying selection at most loci.
CONCLUSIONS: Our work resolves previous inconsistencies in the phylogeny of
rodent malaria parasites, provides estimates of important parameters that relate 
to the parasite's natural history and provides a much-needed evolutionary context
for understanding diverse biological aspects from the cross-reactivity of immune 
responses to parasite mating patterns.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2148-12-219 
PMCID: PMC3538709
PMID: 23151308  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

