
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49540. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049540. Epub 2012 Nov 15.

Temporal expression and localization patterns of variant surface antigens in
clinical Plasmodium falciparum isolates during erythrocyte schizogony.

Bachmann A(1), Petter M, Tilly AK, Biller L, Uliczka KA, Duffy MF, Tannich E,
Bruchhaus I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Parasitology, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical
Medicine, Hamburg, Germany. bachmann@bni-hamburg.de

Avoidance of antibody-mediated immune recognition allows parasites to establish
chronic infections and enhances opportunities for transmission. The human malaria
parasite Plasmodium falciparum possesses a number of multi-copy gene families,
including var, rif, stevor and pfmc-2tm, which encode variant antigens believed
to be expressed on the surfaces of infected erythrocytes. However, most studies
of these antigens are based on in vitro analyses of culture-adapted isolates,
most commonly the laboratory strain 3D7, and thus may not be representative of
the unique challenges encountered by P. falciparum in the human host. To
investigate the expression of the var, rif-A, rif-B, stevor and pfmc-2tm family
genes under conditions that mimic more closely the natural course of infection,
ex vivo clinical P. falciparum isolates were analyzed using a novel quantitative 
real-time PCR approach. Expression patterns in the clinical isolates at various
time points during the first intraerythrocytic developmental cycle in vitro were 
compared to those of strain 3D7. In the clinical isolates, in contrast to strain 
3D7, there was a peak of expression of the multi-copy gene families rif-A, stevor
and pfmc-2tm at the young ring stage, in addition to the already known expression
peak in trophozoites. Furthermore, most of the variant surface antigen families
were overexpressed in the clinical isolates relative to 3D7, with the exception
of the pfmc-2tm family, expression of which was higher in 3D7 parasites.
Immunofluorescence analyses performed in parallel revealed two stage-dependent
localization patterns of RIFIN, STEVOR and PfMC-2TM. Proteins were exported into 
the infected erythrocyte at the young trophozoite stage, whereas they remained
inside the parasite membrane during schizont stage and were subsequently observed
in different compartments in the merozoite. These results reveal a complex
pattern of expression of P. falciparum multi-copy gene families during clinical
progression and are suggestive of diverse functional roles of the respective
proteins.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049540 
PMCID: PMC3499489
PMID: 23166704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

