
1. Zhongguo Xue Xi Chong Bing Fang Zhi Za Zhi. 2012 Aug;24(4):445-9.

[Detection of Plasmodium sporozoites in mosquitoes by using fluorescent
quantitative PCR].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu YB(1), Zhou HY, Wang SQ, Li JL, Zhu HW, Zhu GD, Gu YP, Wang WM, Cao J, Gao Q.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Key Laboratory on Technology for
Parasitic Disease Prevention and Control, Ministry of Health, Wuxi 214064, China.

OBJECTIVE: To establish a fluorescent quantitative PCR (FQ-PCR) method for
quantitative detection and species identification of Plasmodium sporozoites in
Anopheles mosquitoes.
METHODS: One pair of human Plasmodium genus-specific primers based on 18S rRNA
genes were used and the reaction system and reaction condition of FQ-PCR were
optimized by using the mixture of Plasmodium 18S rRNA gene recombinant plasmids
and Anopheles DNA as a template. The specificity was verified by using four
Plasmodium spp. 18S rRNA gene plasmid DNA as well as mosquito DNA and the
Plasmodium species was identified according to the value of melting temperature
(Tm). The standard curve was made by using P. vivax 18S rRNA gene recombinant
plasmids which were serially diluted by negative Anopheles DNA as a template. The
sensitivity was analysed by using plasmid DNA and laboratory infected sporozoite 
positive mosquito DNA, respectively. The different parts and different amounts of
Anopheles DNA were added into the reaction system to investigate the influence of
Anopheles DNA on the assessment.
RESULTS: There was no specific amplification for mosquito DNA and human blood
DNA. There was specific amplification for Plasmodium 18S RNA gene recombinant
plasmids and the Tm(s) of P. malariae, P. falciparum, P. ovale and P. vivax were 
71.0, 72.7, 73.9 degrees C and 75.9 degrees C, respectively, which were easy to
be identified. The standard curve indicated a good linear relationship between
the cycle threshold (Ct) and template concentration (r = -0.99). The sensitivity 
was 50 copies of plasmid DNA or one sporozoite positive mosquito DNA diluted by
32 times of mosquito DNA. Anopheles DNA could inhibite the FQ-PCR reaction. The
Ct value of amplification showed a good reproducibility both within the same
experiment and among different experiments.
CONCLUSION: The novel SYBR Green I based FQ-PCR method developed in this study
shows a high sensitivity and specificity and it can be used for quantitative
detection and species identification of sporozoites in mosquitoes.


PMID: 23236795  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

