
1. Stat Med. 2013 Jul 30;32(17):3020-38. doi: 10.1002/sim.5706. Epub 2012 Dec 19.

Analysing malaria drug trials on a per-individual or per-clone basis:
a comparison of methods.

Jaki T(1), Parry A, Winter K, Hastings I.

Author information: 
(1)Medical and Pharmaceutical Research Unit, Department of Mathematics and
Statistics, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK.

There are a variety of methods used to estimate the effectiveness of antimalarial
drugs in clinical trials, invariably on a per-person basis. A person, however,
may have more than one malaria infection present at the time of treatment. We
evaluate currently used methods for analysing malaria trials on a per-individual 
basis and introduce a novel method to estimate the cure rate on a per-infection
(clone) basis. We used simulated and real data to highlight the differences of
the various methods. We give special attention to classifying outcomes as cured, 
recrudescent (infections that never fully cleared) or ambiguous on the basis of
genetic markers at three loci. To estimate cure rates on a per-clone basis, we
used the genetic information within an individual before treatment to determine
the number of clones present. We used the genetic information obtained at the
time of treatment failure to classify clones as recrudescence or new infections. 
On the per-individual level, we find that the most accurate methods of
classification label an individual as newly infected if all alleles are different
at the beginning and at the time of failure and as a recrudescence if all or some
alleles were the same. The most appropriate analysis method is survival analysis 
or alternatively for complete data/per-protocol analysis a proportion estimate
that treats new infections as successes. We show that the analysis of drug
effectiveness on a per-clone basis estimates the cure rate accurately and allows 
more detailed evaluation of the performance of the treatment.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/sim.5706 
PMID: 23258694  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

