
1. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2013 May;48(5):589-600. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2012-0450OC.

Hemozoin induces lung inflammation and correlates with malaria-associated acute
respiratory distress syndrome.

Deroost K(1), Tyberghein A, Lays N, Noppen S, Schwarzer E, Vanstreels E, Komuta
M, Prato M, Lin JW, Pamplona A, Janse CJ, Arese P, Roskams T, Daelemans D,
Opdenakker G, Van den Steen PE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunobiology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Rega
Institute for Medical Research, KU Leuven–University of Leuven, Leuven 3000,
Belgium.

Malaria-associated acute respiratory distress syndrome (MA-ARDS) is a deadly
complication of malaria, and its pathophysiology is insufficiently understood.
Both in humans and in murine models, MA-ARDS is characterized by marked pulmonary
inflammation. We investigated the role of hemozoin in MA-ARDS in C57Bl/6 mice
infected with Plasmodium berghei NK65, P. berghei ANKA, and P. chabaudi AS. By
quantifying hemozoin in the lungs and measuring the disease parameters of
MA-ARDS, we demonstrated a highly significant correlation between pulmonary
hemozoin concentrations, lung weights, and alveolar edema. Histological analysis 
of the lungs demonstrated that hemozoin is localized in phagocytes and infected
erythrocytes, and only occasionally in granulocytes. Species-specific differences
in hemozoin production, as measured among individual schizonts, were associated
with variations in pulmonary pathogenicity. Furthermore, both pulmonary hemozoin 
and lung pathology were correlated with the number of infiltrating inflammatory
cells, an increased pulmonary expression of cytokines, chemokines, and enzymes,
and concentrations of alveolar vascular endothelial growth factor. The causal
relationship between hemozoin and inflammation was investigated by injecting P.
falciparum-derived hemozoin intravenously into malaria-free mice. Hemozoin
potently induced the pulmonary expression of proinflammatory chemokines
(interferon-γ inducible protein-10/CXC-chemokine ligand (CXCL)10, monocyte
chemotactic protein-1/CC-chemokine ligand 2, and keratinocyte-derived
chemokine/CXCL1), cytokines (IL-1β, IL-6, IL-10, TNF, and transforming growth
factor-β), and other inflammatory mediators (inducible nitric oxide synthase,
heme oxygenase-1, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate- oxidase-2, and
intercellular adhesion molecule-1). Thus, hemozoin correlates with MA-ARDS and
induces pulmonary inflammation.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2012-0450OC 
PMID: 23328641  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

