
1. Vet Res. 2013 Feb 11;44:10. doi: 10.1186/1297-9716-44-10.

Modulation of the host Th1 immune response in pigeon protozoal encephalitis
caused by Sarcocystis calchasi.

Olias P(1), Meyer A, Klopfleisch R, Lierz M, Kaspers B, Gruber AD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Pathology, Freie Universität Berlin,
Robert-von-Ostertag-Str, 15, Berlin 14163, Germany. philipp.olias@fu-berlin.de.

Pigeon protozoal encephalitis (PPE) is an emerging central-nervous disease of
domestic pigeons (Columba livia f. domestica) reported in Germany and the United 
States. It is caused by the apicomplexan parasite Sarcocystis calchasi which is
transmitted by Accipter hawks. In contrast to other members of the Apicomplexa
such as Toxoplasma and Plasmodium, the knowledge about the pathophysiology and
host manipulation of Sarcocystis is scarce and almost nothing is known about PPE.
Here we show by mRNA expression profiling a significant down-modulation of the
interleukin (IL)-12/IL-18/interferon (IFN)-γ axis in the brains of experimentally
infected pigeons during the schizogonic phase of disease. Concomitantly, no
cellular immune response was observed in histopathology while
immunohistochemistry and nested PCR detected S. calchasi. In contrast, in the
late central-nervous phase, IFN-γ and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) α-related
cytokines were significantly up-modulated, which correlated with a prominent
MHC-II protein expression in areas of mononuclear cell infiltration and necrosis.
The mononuclear cell fraction was mainly composed of T-lymphocytes, fewer
macrophages and B-lymphocytes. Surprisingly, the severity and composition of the 
immune cell response appears unrelated to the infectious dose, although the
severity and onset of the central nervous signs clearly was dose-dependent. We
identified no or only very few tissue cysts by immunohistochemistry in pigeons
with severe encephalitis of which one pigeon repeatedly remained negative by PCR 
despite severe lesions. Taken together, these observations may suggest an immune 
evasion strategy of S. calchasi during the early phase and a delayed-type
hypersensitivity reaction as cause of the extensive cerebral lesions during the
late neurological phase of disease.

DOI: 10.1186/1297-9716-44-10 
PMCID: PMC3598538
PMID: 23398807  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

