
1. Bioinform Biol Insights. 2013;7:35-54. doi: 10.4137/BBI.S10053. Epub 2013 Jan 23.

A Statistical Method without Training Step for the Classification of Coding Frame
in Transcriptome Sequences.

Carels N(1), Frías D.

Author information: 
(1)Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (FIOCRUZ), Instituto Oswaldo Cruz (IOC), Laboratório de 
Genômica Funcional e Bioinformática, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.

In this study, we investigated the modalities of coding open reading frame (cORF)
classification of expressed sequence tags (EST) by using the universal feature
method (UFM). The UFM algorithm is based on the scoring of purine bias (Rrr) and 
stop codon frequencies. UFM classifies ORFs as coding or non-coding through a
score based on 5 factors: (i) stop codon frequency; (ii) the product of the
probabilities of purines occurring in the three positions of nucleotide triplets;
(iii) the product of the probabilities of Cytosine (C), Guanine (G), and Adenine 
(A) occurring in the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd positions of triplets, respectively; (iv) 
the probabilities of a G occurring in the 1st and 2nd positions of triplets; and 
(v) the probabilities of a T occurring in the 1st and an A in the 2nd position of
triplets. Because UFM is based on primary determinants of coding sequences that
are conserved throughout the biosphere, it is suitable for cORF classification of
any sequence in eukaryote transcriptomes without prior knowledge. Considering the
protein sequences of the Protein Data Bank (RCSB PDB or more simply PDB) as a
reference, we found that UFM classifies cORFs of ≥200 bp (if the coding strand is
known) and cORFs of ≥300 bp (if the coding strand is unknown), and releases them 
in their coding strand and coding frame, which allows their automatic translation
into protein sequences with a success rate equal to or higher than 95%. We first 
established the statistical parameters of UFM using ESTs from Plasmodium
falciparum, Arabidopsis thaliana, Oryza sativa, Zea mays, Drosophila
melanogaster, Homo sapiens and Chlamydomonas reinhardtii in reference to the
protein sequences of PDB. Second, we showed that the success rate of cORF
classification using UFM is expected to apply to approximately 95% of higher
eukaryote genes that encode for proteins. Third, we used UFM in combination with 
CAP3 to assemble large EST samples into cORFs that we used to analyze
transcriptome phenotypes in rice, maize, and humans. We discuss the error rate
and the interference of noisy sequences such as pseudogenes, transposons, and
retrotransposons. This method is suitable for rapid cORF extraction from
transcriptome data and allows correct description of the genome phenotypes of
plant genomes without prior knowledge. Additional care is necessary when
addressing the human transcriptome due to the interference caused by large
amounts of noisy sequences. UFM can be regarded as a low complexity tool for
prior knowledge extraction concerning the coding fraction of the transcriptome of
any eukaryote. Due to its low level of complexity, UFM is also very robust to
variations of codon usage.

DOI: 10.4137/BBI.S10053 
PMCID: PMC3561939
PMID: 23400232 

