
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e57014. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057014. Epub 2013 Feb 18.

The role of reactive oxygen species in Anopheles aquasalis response to Plasmodium
vivax infection.

Bahia AC(1), Oliveira JH, Kubota MS, Araújo HR, Lima JB, Ríos-Velásquez CM,
Lacerda MV, Oliveira PL, Traub-Csekö YM, Pimenta PF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Biologia Molecular de Parasitas e Vetores, Instituto Oswaldo
Cruz, Fiocruz, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Malaria affects millions of people worldwide and hundreds of thousands of people 
each year in Brazil. The mosquito Anopheles aquasalis is an important vector of
Plasmodium vivax, the main human malaria parasite in the Americas. Reactive
oxygen species (ROS) have been shown to have a role in insect innate immune
responses as a potent pathogen-killing agent. We investigated the mechanisms of
free radicals modulation after A. aquasalis infection with P. vivax. ROS
metabolism was evaluated in the vector by studying expression and activity of
three key detoxification enzymes, one catalase and two superoxide dismutases
(SOD3A and SOD3B). Also, the involvement of free radicals in the mosquito
immunity was measured by silencing the catalase gene followed by infection of A. 
aquasalis with P. vivax. Catalase, SOD3A and SOD3B expression in whole A.
aquasalis were at the same levels of controls at 24 h and upregulated 36 h after 
ingestion of blood containing P. vivax. However, in the insect isolated midgut,
the mRNA for these enzymes was not regulated by P. vivax infection, while
catalase activity was reduced 24 h after the infectious meal. RNAi-mediated
silencing of catalase reduced enzyme activity in the midgut, resulted in
increased P. vivax infection and prevalence, and decreased bacterial load in the 
mosquito midgut. Our findings suggest that the interactions between A. aquasalis 
and P. vivax do not follow the model of ROS-induced parasite killing. It appears 
that P. vivax manipulates the mosquito detoxification system in order to allow
its own development. This can be an indirect effect of fewer competitive bacteria
present in the mosquito midgut caused by the increase of ROS after catalase
silencing. These findings provide novel information on unique aspects of the main
malaria parasite in the Americas interaction with one of its natural vectors.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057014 
PMCID: PMC3575503
PMID: 23441231  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

