
1. Int J Parasitol. 2013 May;43(6):503-14. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2013.01.010. Epub
2013 Mar 13.

A new approach to generate a safe double-attenuated Plasmodium liver stage
vaccine.

Nagel A(1), Prado M, Heitmann A, Tartz S, Jacobs T, Deschermeier C, Helm S,
Stanway R, Heussler V.

Author information: 
(1)Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, Bernhard-Nocht-Str. 74, 20359 
Hamburg, Germany.

Recently it has been shown in rodent malaria models that immunisation with
genetically attenuated Plasmodium parasites can confer sterile protection against
challenge with virulent parasites. For the mass production of live attenuated
Plasmodium parasites for vaccination, safety is a prerequisite. Knockout of a
single gene is not sufficient for such a strategy since the parasite can likely
compensate for such a genetic modification and a single surviving parasite is
sufficient to kill an immunised individual. Parasites must therefore be at least 
double-attenuated when generating a safe vaccine strain. Genetic
double-attenuation can be achieved by knocking out two essential genes or by
combining a single gene knockout with the expression of a protein toxic for the
parasite. We generated a double-attenuated Plasmodium berghei strain that is
deficient in fatty acid synthesis by the knockout of the pdh-e1α gene,
introducing a second attenuation by the liver stage-specific expression of the
pore-forming bacterial toxin perfringolysin O. With this double genetically
attenuated parasite strain, a superior attenuation was indeed achieved compared
with single-attenuated strains that were either deficient in pyruvate
dehydrogenase (PDH)-E1 or expressed perfringolysin O. In vivo, both
single-attenuated strains resulted in breakthrough infections even if low to
moderate doses of sporozoites (2,000-5,000) were administered. In contrast, the
double genetically attenuated parasite strain, given at moderate doses of 5,000
sporozoites, did not result in blood stage infection and even when administered
at 5- to 20-fold higher doses, only single and delayed breakthrough infections
were observed. Prime booster immunisation with the double genetically attenuated 
parasite strain completely protected a susceptible mouse strain from malaria and 
even a single immunisation conferred protection in some cases and lead to a
markedly delayed onset of blood stage infection in others. Importantly, premature
rupture of the parasitophorous vacuole membrane by liver stage-specific
perfringolysin O expression did not induce host cell death and soluble parasite
proteins, which are released into the host cell cytoplasm, have the potential to 
be processed and presented via MHC class I molecules. This, in turn, might
support immunological responses against Plasmodium-infected hepatocytes.

Copyright © 2013 Australian Society for Parasitology Inc. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2013.01.010 
PMID: 23500072  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

