
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59264. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059264. Epub 2013 Mar 13.

Next-generation site-directed transgenesis in the malaria vector mosquito
Anopheles gambiae: self-docking strains expressing germline-specific phiC31
integrase.

Meredith JM(1), Underhill A, McArthur CC, Eggleston P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Entomology and Parasitology, School of Life Sciences, Keele
University, Keele, Staffordshire, United Kingdom.

Diseases transmitted by mosquitoes have a devastating impact on global health and
the situation is complicated due to difficulties with both existing control
measures and the impact of climate change. Genetically modified mosquitoes that
are refractory to disease transmission are seen as having great potential in the 
delivery of novel control strategies. The Streptomyces phage phiC31 integrase
system has been successfully adapted for site-directed transgene integration in a
range of insects, thus overcoming many limitations due to size constraints and
random integration associated with transposon-mediated transformation. Using this
technology, we previously published the first site-directed transformation of
Anopheles gambiae, the principal vector of human malaria. Mosquitoes were
initially engineered to incorporate the phiC31 docking site at a defined genomic 
location. A second phase of genetic modification then achieved site-directed
integration of an anti-malarial effector gene. In the current publication we
report improved efficiency and utility of the phiC31 integrase system following
the generation of Anopheles gambiae self-docking strains. Four independent
strains, with docking sites at known locations on three different chromosome
arms, were engineered to express integrase under control of the regulatory
regions of the nanos gene from Anopheles gambiae. The resulting protein
accumulates in the posterior oocyte to provide integrase activity at the site of 
germline development. Two self-docking strains, exhibiting significantly
different levels of integrase expression, were assessed for site-directed
transgene integration and found to demonstrate greatly improved survival and
efficiency of transformation. In the fight against malaria, it is imperative to
establish a broad repertoire of both anti-malarial effector genes and
tissue-specific promoters to regulate their expression, enabling those offering
maximum effect with minimum fitness cost to be identified. The improved
technology we describe here will facilitate comparative studies of effector
transgenes, allowing informed choices to be made that potentially lead to
transmission blockade.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059264 
PMCID: PMC3596282
PMID: 23516619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

