
1. BMC Genomics. 2013 Apr 3;14:218. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-218.

Extensive circadian and light regulation of the transcriptome in the malaria
mosquito Anopheles gambiae.

Rund SS(1), Gentile JE, Duffield GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Eck Institute for Global Health, Galvin 
Life Science Center, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame IN 46556, USA.

BACKGROUND: Mosquitoes exhibit 24 hr rhythms in flight activity, feeding,
reproduction and development. To better understand the molecular basis for these 
rhythms in the nocturnal malaria vector Anopheles gambiae, we have utilized
microarray analysis on time-of-day specific collections of mosquitoes over 48 hr 
to explore the coregulation of gene expression rhythms by the circadian clock and
light, and compare these with the 24 hr rhythmic gene expression in the diurnal
Aedes aegypti dengue vector mosquito.
RESULTS: In time courses from An. gambiae head and body collected under
light:dark cycle (LD) and constant dark (DD) conditions, we applied three
algorithms that detect sinusoidal patterns and an algorithm that detects spikes
in expression. This revealed across four experimental conditions 393 probes newly
scored as rhythmic. These genes correspond to functions such as metabolic
detoxification, immunity and nutrient sensing. This includes glutathione
S-transferase GSTE5, whose expression pattern and chromosomal location are shared
with other genes, suggesting shared chromosomal regulation; and pulsatile
expression of the gene encoding CYP6M2, a cytochrome P450 that metabolizes
pyrethroid insecticides. We explored the interaction of light and the circadian
clock and highlight the regulation of odorant binding proteins (OBPs), important 
components of the olfactory system. We reveal that OBPs have unique expression
patterns as mosquitoes make the transition from LD to DD conditions. We compared 
rhythmic expression between An. gambiae and Ae. aegypti heads collected under LD 
conditions using a single cosine fitting algorithm, and report distinct
similarities and differences in the temporal regulation of genes involved in tRNA
priming, the vesicular-type ATPase, olfaction and vision between the two species.
CONCLUSIONS: These data build on our previous analyses of time-of-day specific
regulation of the An. gambiae transcriptome to reveal additional rhythmic genes, 
an improved understanding of the co-regulation of rhythms in gene expression by
the circadian clock and by light, and an understanding of the time-of-day
specific regulation of some of these rhythmic processes in comparison with a
different species of mosquito. Improved understanding of biological timing at the
molecular level that underlies key physiological aspects of mosquito vectors may 
prove to be important to successful implementation of established and novel
insect control methods.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-218 
PMCID: PMC3642039
PMID: 23552056  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

