
1. Infect Immun. 2013 Jun;81(6):2206-16. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01331-12. Epub 2013 Apr 8.

Molecular characterization of the carboxypeptidase B1 of Anopheles stephensi and 
its evaluation as a target for transmission-blocking vaccines.

Raz A(1), Dinparast Djadid N, Zakeri S.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.

Malaria is one of the most important infectious diseases in the world, and it has
many economic and social impacts on populations, especially in poor countries.
Transmission-blocking vaccines (TBVs) are valuable tools for malaria eradication.
A study on Anopheles gambiae revealed that polyclonal antibodies to
carboxypeptidase B1 of A. gambiae can block sexual parasite development in the
mosquito midgut. Hence, it was introduced as a TBV target in regions where A.
gambiae is the main malaria vector. However, in Iran and neighboring countries as
far as China, the main malaria vector is Anopheles stephensi. Also, the genome of
this organism has not been sequenced yet. Therefore, in this study,
carboxypeptidase B1 of A. stephensi was characterized by genomic and proteomic
approaches. Furthermore, its expression pattern after ingestion of Plasmodium
falciparum gametocytes and the effect of anti-CPBAs1 antibodies on sexual
parasite development were evaluated. Our results revealed that the cpbAs1
expression level was increased after ingestion of the mature gametocytes of P.
falciparum and that anti-CPBAs1 directed antibodies could significantly reduce
the mosquito infection rate in the test group compared with the control group.
Therefore, according to our findings and with respect to the high similarity of
carboxypeptidase enzymes between the two main malaria vectors in Africa (A.
gambiae) and Asia (A. stephensi) and the presence of other sympatric vectors,
CPBAs1 could be introduced as a TBV candidate in regions where A. stephensi is
the main malaria vector, and this will broaden the scope for the potential wider 
application of CPBAs1 antigen homologs/orthologs.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01331-12 
PMCID: PMC3676044
PMID: 23569111  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

