
1. Parasit Vectors. 2013 Apr 19;6:111. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-6-111.

A multi-locus approach to barcoding in the Anopheles strodei subgroup (Diptera:
Culicidae).

Bourke BP(1), Oliveira TP, Suesdek L, Bergo ES, Sallum MA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Epidemiologia, Faculdade de Saúde Pública, Universidade de São
Paulo, São Paulo-SP, Brazil. bpbourke@usp.br

BACKGROUND: The ability to successfully identify and incriminate pathogen vectors
is fundamental to effective pathogen control and management. This task is
confounded by the existence of cryptic species complexes. Molecular markers can
offer a highly effective means of species identification in such complexes and
are routinely employed in the study of medical entomology. Here we evaluate a
multi-locus system for the identification of potential malaria vectors in the
Anopheles strodei subgroup.
METHODS: Larvae, pupae and adult mosquitoes (n = 61) from the An. strodei
subgroup were collected from 21 localities in nine Brazilian states and sequenced
for the COI, ITS2 and white gene. A Bayesian phylogenetic approach was used to
describe the relationships in the Strodei Subgroup and the utility of COI and
ITS2 barcodes was assessed using the neighbor joining tree and "best close match"
approaches.
RESULTS: Bayesian phylogenetic analysis of the COI, ITS2 and white gene found
support for seven clades in the An. strodei subgroup. The COI and ITS2 barcodes
were individually unsuccessful at resolving and identifying some species in the
Subgroup. The COI barcode failed to resolve An. albertoi and An. strodei but
successfully identified approximately 92% of all species queries, while the ITS2 
barcode failed to resolve An. arthuri and successfully identified approximately
60% of all species queries. A multi-locus COI-ITS2 barcode, however, resolved all
species in a neighbor joining tree and successfully identified all species
queries using the "best close match" approach.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study corroborates the existence of An. albertoi, An. CP Form
and An. strodei in the An. strodei subgroup and identifies four species under An.
arthuri informally named A-D herein. The use of a multi-locus barcode is proposed
for species identification, which has potentially important utility for vector
incrimination. Individuals previously found naturally infected with Plasmodium
vivax in the southern Amazon basin and reported as An. strodei are likely to have
been from An. arthuri C identified in this study.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-6-111 
PMCID: PMC3641011
PMID: 23597081  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

