
1. BMC Genomics. 2013 Apr 19;14:267. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-267.

Analysis of the spatial and temporal arrangement of transcripts over intergenic
regions in the human malarial parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

Russell K(1), Hasenkamp S, Emes R, Horrocks P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Science and Technology in Medicine, Keele University, Huxley
Building, Staffordshire ST5 5BG, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: The ability of the human malarial parasite Plasmodium falciparum to
invade, colonise and multiply within diverse host environments, as well as to
manifest its virulence within the human host, are activities tightly linked to
the temporal and spatial control of gene expression. Yet, despite the wealth of
high throughput transcriptomic data available for this organism there is very
little information regarding the location of key transcriptional landmarks or
their associated cis-acting regulatory elements. Here we provide a systematic
exploration of the size and organisation of transcripts within intergenic regions
to yield surrogate information regarding transcriptional landmarks, and to also
explore the spatial and temporal organisation of transcripts over these poorly
characterised genomic regions.
RESULTS: Utilising the transcript data for a cohort of 105 genes we demonstrate
that the untranscribed regions of mRNA are large and apportioned predominantly to
the 5' end of the open reading frame. Given the relatively compact size of the P.
falciparum genome, we suggest that whilst transcriptional units are likely to
spatially overlap, temporal co-transcription of adjacent transcriptional units is
actually limited. Critically, the size of intergenic regions is directly
dependent on the orientation of the two transcriptional units arrayed over them, 
an observation we extend to an analysis of the complete sequences of twelve
additional organisms that share moderately compact genomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides a theoretical framework that extends our current 
understanding of the transcriptional landscape across the P. falciparum genome.
Demonstration of a consensus gene-spacing rule that is shared between P.
falciparum and ten other moderately compact genomes of apicomplexan parasites
reveals the potential for our findings to have a wider impact across a phylum
that contains many organisms important to human and veterinary health.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-267 
PMCID: PMC3681616
PMID: 23601558  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

