
1. Mol Biol Evol. 2013 Jul;30(7):1653-64. doi: 10.1093/molbev/mst078. Epub 2013 Apr 
22.

Lateral gene transfer of family A DNA polymerases between thermophilic viruses,
aquificae, and apicomplexa.

Schoenfeld TW(1), Murugapiran SK, Dodsworth JA, Floyd S, Lodes M, Mead DA,
Hedlund BP.

Author information: 
(1)Lucigen, Middleton, WI, USA. tschoenfeld@lucigen.com

Bioinformatics and functional screens identified a group of Family A-type DNA
Polymerase (polA) genes encoded by viruses inhabiting circumneutral and alkaline 
hot springs in Yellowstone National Park and the US Great Basin. The proteins
encoded by these viral polA genes (PolAs) shared no significant sequence
similarity with any known viral proteins but were remarkably similar to PolAs
encoded by two of three families of the bacterial phylum Aquificae and by several
apicoplast-targeted PolA-like proteins found in the eukaryotic phylum
Apicomplexa, which includes the obligate parasites Plasmodium, Babesia, and
Toxoplasma. The viral gene products share signature elements previously
associated only with Aquificae and Apicomplexa PolA-like proteins and were
similar to proteins encoded by prophage elements of a variety of otherwise
unrelated Bacteria, each of which additionally encoded a prototypical bacterial
PolA. Unique among known viral DNA polymerases, the viral PolA proteins of this
study share with the Apicomplexa proteins large amino-terminal domains with
putative helicase/primase elements but low primary sequence similarity. The
genomic context and distribution, phylogeny, and biochemistry of these PolA
proteins suggest that thermophilic viruses transferred polA genes to the
Apicomplexa, likely through secondary endosymbiosis of a virus-infected
proto-apicoplast, and to the common ancestor of two of three Aquificae families, 
where they displaced the orthologous cellular polA gene. On the basis of
biochemical activity, gene structure, and sequence similarity, we speculate that 
the xenologous viral-type polA genes may have functions associated with
diversity-generating recombination in both Bacteria and Apicomplexa.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/mst078 
PMCID: PMC3684859
PMID: 23608703  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

