
1. ACS Synth Biol. 2014 Dec 19;3(12):915-28. doi: 10.1021/sb300079h. Epub 2012 Dec
28.

Novel synthetic Medea selfish genetic elements drive population replacement in
Drosophila; a theoretical exploration of Medea-dependent population suppression.

Akbari OS(1), Chen CH, Marshall JM, Huang H, Antoshechkin I, Hay BA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, MC 156-29, California Institute of Technology , Pasadena,
California 91125, United States.

Insects act as vectors for diseases of plants, animals, and humans. Replacement
of wild insect populations with genetically modified individuals unable to
transmit disease provides a potentially self-perpetuating method of disease
prevention. Population replacement requires a gene drive mechanism in order to
spread linked genes mediating disease refractoriness through wild populations. We
previously reported the creation of synthetic Medea selfish genetic elements able
to drive population replacement in Drosophila. These elements use
microRNA-mediated silencing of myd88, a maternally expressed gene required for
embryonic dorso-ventral pattern formation, coupled with early zygotic expression 
of a rescuing transgene, to bring about gene drive. Medea elements that work
through additional mechanisms are needed in order to be able to carry out cycles 
of population replacement and/or remove existing transgenes from the population, 
using second-generation elements that spread while driving first-generation
elements out of the population. Here we report the synthesis and population
genetic behavior of two new synthetic Medea elements that drive population
replacement through manipulation of signaling pathways involved in cellular
blastoderm formation or Notch signaling, demonstrating that in Drosophila Medea
elements can be generated through manipulation of diverse signaling pathways. We 
also describe the mRNA and small RNA changes in ovaries and early embryos
associated from Medea-bearing females. Finally, we use modeling to illustrate how
Medea elements carrying genes that result in diapause-dependent female lethality 
could be used to bring about population suppression.

DOI: 10.1021/sb300079h 
PMCID: PMC3742681
PMID: 23654248  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

