
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2013 Aug;18:87-93. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.05.009. Epub
2013 May 18.

Relation between HLA genes, human skin volatiles and attractiveness of humans to 
malaria mosquitoes.

Verhulst NO(1), Beijleveld H, Qiu YT, Maliepaard C, Verduyn W, Haasnoot GW, Claas
FH, Mumm R, Bouwmeester HJ, Takken W, van Loon JJ, Smallegange RC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Entomology, Wageningen University and Research Centre, P.O. Box 
8031, 6700 EH Wageningen, The Netherlands. Niels.Verhulst@wur.nl

Chemical cues are considered to be the most important cues for mosquitoes to find
their hosts and humans can be ranked for attractiveness to mosquitoes based on
the chemical cues they emit. Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) genes are considered
to be involved in the regulation of human body odor and may therefore affect
human attractiveness to mosquitoes, and hence, affect the force of malaria
transmission. In the present study the correlations between HLA profiles, human
skin volatiles and human attractiveness to the malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae
Giles sensu stricto were examined. Skin emanations of 48 volunteers were
collected by rubbing a foot over glass beads. Previously the attractiveness of
these emanations to An. gambiae was determined. In this study, the chemical
composition of these emanations was determined by gas chromatography-mass
spectroscopy (GC-MS) and blood samples of all volunteers were taken for HLA
analysis. Hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA), partial least squares discriminant
analysis (PLS-DA), Fisher's exact test and random forest regression were used to 
test for correlations between individuals classified as either highly or poorly
attractive to mosquitoes and their HLA profile and volatile composition. HLA
profiling suggests that people carrying HLA gene Cw∗07 are more attractive to
mosquitoes. GC-MS revealed that limonene, 2-phenylethanol and 2-ethyl-1-hexanol
were associated with individuals that were poorly attractive to An.gambiae and
lactic acid, 2-methylbutanoic acid, tetradecanoic acid and octanal with
individuals that were highly attractive. Such compounds offer potential for
disruption of mosquito behavior in malaria intervention programs.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.05.009 
PMID: 23688850  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

