
1. PLoS One. 2013 May 21;8(5):e63849. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063849. Print 2013.

Insecticide resistance alleles affect vector competence of Anopheles gambiae s.s.
for Plasmodium falciparum field isolates.

Alout H(1), Ndam NT, Sandeu MM, Djégbe I, Chandre F, Dabiré RK, Djogbénou LS,
Corbel V, Cohuet A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de recherche pour le développement (IRD), Maladies Infectieuses et
Vecteurs, Ecologie, Génétique, Evolution et Contrôle (MIVEGEC), UM1-UM2-CNRS 5290
IRD 224, Montpellier, France.

The widespread insecticide resistance raises concerns for vector control
implementation and sustainability particularly for the control of the main vector
of human malaria, Anopheles gambiae sensu stricto. However, the extent to which
insecticide resistance mechanisms interfere with the development of the malignant
malaria parasite in its vector and their impact on overall malaria transmission
remains unknown. We explore the impact of insecticide resistance on the outcome
of Plasmodium falciparum infection in its natural vector using three An. gambiae 
strains sharing a common genetic background, one susceptible to insecticides and 
two resistant, one homozygous for the ace-1(R) mutation and one for the kdr
mutation. Experimental infections of the three strains were conducted in parallel
with field isolates of P. falciparum from Burkina Faso (West Africa) by direct
membrane feeding assays. Both insecticide resistant mutations influence the
outcome of malaria infection by increasing the prevalence of infection. In
contrast, the kdr resistant allele is associated with reduced parasite burden in 
infected individuals at the oocyst stage, when compared to the susceptible
strain, while the ace-1 (R) resistant allele showing no such association. Thus
insecticide resistance, which is particularly problematic for malaria control
efforts, impacts vector competence towards P. falciparum and probably parasite
transmission through increased sporozoite prevalence in kdr resistant mosquitoes.
These results are of great concern for the epidemiology of malaria considering
the widespread pyrethroid resistance currently observed in Sub-Saharan Africa and
the efforts deployed to control the disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063849 
PMCID: PMC3660590
PMID: 23704944  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

