
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2013 Aug;51(8):2564-70. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00904-13. Epub 2013
May 29.

Optimization of a ligase detection reaction-fluorescent microsphere assay for
characterization of resistance-mediating polymorphisms in African samples of
Plasmodium falciparum.

LeClair NP(1), Conrad MD, Baliraine FN, Nsanzabana C, Nsobya SL, Rosenthal PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, California,
USA.

Genetic polymorphisms in the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum mediate
alterations in sensitivity to important antimalarial drugs. Surveillance for
these polymorphisms is helpful in assessing the prevalence of drug resistance and
designing strategies for malaria control. Multiple methods are available for the 
assessment of P. falciparum genetic polymorphisms, but they suffer from low
throughput, technical limitations, and high cost. We have optimized and tested a 
multiplex ligase detection reaction-fluorescent microsphere (LDR-FM) assay for
the identification of important P. falciparum genetic polymorphisms. For 84
clinical samples from Kampala, Uganda, a region where both transmission intensity
and infection complexity are high, DNA was extracted from dried blood spots,
genes of interest were amplified, amplicons were subjected to multiplex ligase
detection reactions to add bead-specific oligonucleotides and biotin, fragments
were hybridized to magnetic beads, and polymorphism prevalences were assessed
fluorometrically in a multiplex format. A total of 19 alleles from the pfcrt,
pfmdr1, pfmrp1, pfdhfr, and pfdhps genes were analyzed by LDR-FM and restriction 
fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analyses. Considering samples with results
from the two assays, concordance between the assays was good, with 78 to 100% of 
results identical at individual alleles, most nonconcordant results differing
only between a mixed and pure genotype call, and full disagreement at individual 
alleles in only 0 to 3% of results. We estimate that the LDR-FM assay offers much
higher throughput and lower cost than RFLP. Our results suggest that the LDR-FM
system offers an accurate high-throughput means of classifying genetic
polymorphisms in field samples of P. falciparum.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00904-13 
PMCID: PMC3719660
PMID: 23720790  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

