
1. Malar J. 2013 Jun 3;12:180. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-180.

Natural Plasmodium infection in monkeys in the state of Rondônia (Brazilian
Western Amazon).

Araújo MS(1), Messias MR, Figueiró MR, Gil LH, Probst CM, Vidal NM, Katsuragawa
TH, Krieger MA, Silva LH, Ozaki LS.

Author information: 
(1)Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Fiocruz Rondônia/Instituto de Pesquisa em Patologias
Tropicais, Fiocruz Rondônia, Rua da Beira 7671, Bairro Lagoa, Porto Velho, RO,
Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Simian malaria is still an open question concerning the species of
Plasmodium parasites and species of New World monkeys susceptible to the
parasites. In addition, the lingering question as to whether these animals are
reservoirs for human malaria might become important especially in a scenario of
eradication of the disease. To aid in the answers to these questions, monkeys
were surveyed for malaria parasite natural infection in the Amazonian state of
Rondônia, Brazil, a state with intense environmental alterations due to human
activities, which facilitated sampling of the animals.
METHODS: Parasites were detected and identified in DNA from blood of monkeys, by 
PCR with primers for the 18S rRNA, CSP and MSP1 genes and sequencing of the
amplified fragments. Multiplex PCR primers for the 18S rRNA genes were designed
for the parasite species Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax, Plasmodium
malariae/Plasmodium brasilianum and Plasmodium simium.
RESULTS: An overall infection rate of 10.9% was observed or 20 out 184 monkey
specimens surveyed, mostly by P. brasilianum. However, four specimens of monkeys 
were found infected with P. falciparum, two of them doubly infected with P.
brasilianum and P. falciparum. In addition, a species of monkey of the family
Aotidae, Aotus nigriceps, is firstly reported here naturally infected with P.
brasilianum. None of the monkeys surveyed was found infected with P. simium/P.
vivax.
CONCLUSION: The rate of natural Plasmodium infection in monkeys in the Brazilian 
state of Rondônia is in line with previous surveys of simian malaria in the
Amazon region. The fact that a monkey species was found that had not previously
been described to harbour malaria parasites indicates that the list of monkey
species susceptible to Plasmodium infection is yet to be completed. Furthermore, 
finding monkeys in the region infected with P. falciparum clearly indicates
parasite transfer from humans to the animals. Whether this parasite can be
transferred back to humans and how persistent the parasite is in monkeys in the
wild so to be efficient reservoirs of the disease, is yet to be evaluated.
Finding different species of monkeys infected with this parasite species suggests
indeed that these animals can act as reservoirs of human malaria.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-180 
PMCID: PMC3680335
PMID: 23731624  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

