
1. Parasitol Res. 2013 Aug;112(8):2983-90. doi: 10.1007/s00436-013-3470-8. Epub 2013
Jun 4.

Beyond heme detoxification: a role for hemozoin in iron transport in S.
japonicum.

Sun J(1), Hu W, Li C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Infectious Diseases and Vaccine Development, Tongji University
School of Medicine, Shanghai, People's Republic of China. swksj@tongji.edu.cn

Hemozoin (Hz) is considered a disposal product during the digestion of red blood 
cells by some blood-feeding parasites, such as Plasmodium, Schistosome, and
Rhodnius. The only function of Hz that has been reported is to detoxify the free 
heme (Fe((III))-protoporphyrin-IX) in worms. Here we report a new role for Hz in 
iron transport in Schistosoma japonicum. Using transmission electron microscopy
(TEM), we observed that S. japonicum hemozoin (sjHz) granules were a group of
electron-dense, globe-, and comma-shaped granules. At the anterior end of female 
worm gut, these dark brown granules were found to be mixed with biconcave
disc-shaped erythrocytes, in the middle portion of the gut these granules
attached to destroyed erythrocytes and in the posterior portion of the gut no
intact erythrocytes were observed except free sjHz granules. By energy dispersive
spectroscopy (EDS) and Prussian blue iron staining, we found that these
iron-containing sjHz granules are degraded near the microvilli adjacent to
vitelline glands, resulting in the accumulation of a large amount of iron in the 
vitelline cells and eggs of developed S. japonicum. The accumulation of iron in
vitelline glands was synchronized with the increase of sjHz granules in the gut. 
When S. japonicum just contained a little amount of sjHz granules in gut, hardly 
any accumulation of iron was detected in vitelline glands. However, when the
lumen of gut filled full with sjHz granules, large amounts of iron was detected
in vitelline glands. Solexa sequencing revealed that expression of iron store
protein, ferritin-1 (CAX77379.1), is just significantly up-regulated in worms
that contained a large amount of sjHz in gut. In contrast to the idea that sjHz
granules are simply by-product of heme detoxification, we found that formation
and degradation of sjHz granules in vivo likely serve for the iron transport. Our
findings provide new insights into the biological significance of Hz formation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-013-3470-8 
PMID: 23733233  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

