
1. Malar J. 2013 Jun 4;12:184. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-184.

Cloning and characterization of bifunctional enzyme farnesyl
diphosphate/geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase from Plasmodium falciparum.

Jordão FM, Gabriel HB, Alves JM, Angeli CB, Bifano TD, Breda A, de Azevedo MF,
Basso LA, Wunderlich G, Kimura EA, Katzin AM.

BACKGROUND: Isoprenoids are the most diverse and abundant group of natural
products. In Plasmodium falciparum, isoprenoid synthesis proceeds through the
methyl erythritol diphosphate pathway and the products are further metabolized by
farnesyl diphosphate synthase (FPPS), turning this enzyme into a key branch point
of the isoprenoid synthesis. Changes in FPPS activity could alter the flux of
isoprenoid compounds downstream of FPPS and, hence, play a central role in the
regulation of a number of essential functions in Plasmodium parasites.
METHODS: The isolation and cloning of gene PF3D7_18400 was done by amplification 
from cDNA from mixed stage parasites of P. falciparum. After sequencing, the
fragment was subcloned in pGEX2T for recombinant protein expression. To verify if
the PF3D7_1128400 gene encodes a functional rPfFPPS protein, its catalytic
activity was assessed using the substrate [4-14C] isopentenyl diphosphate and
three different allylic substrates: dimethylallyl diphosphate, geranyl
diphosphate or farnesyl diphosphate. The reaction products were identified by
thin layer chromatography and reverse phase high-performance liquid
chromatography. To confirm the product spectrum formed of rPfFPPS, isoprenic
compounds were also identified by mass spectrometry. Apparent kinetic constants
KM and Vmax for each substrate were determined by Michaelis-Menten; also,
inhibition assays were performed using risedronate.
RESULTS: The expressed protein of P. falciparum FPPS (rPfFPPS) catalyzes the
synthesis of farnesyl diphosphate, as well as geranylgeranyl diphosphate, being
therefore a bifunctional FPPS/geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase (GGPPS) enzyme.
The apparent KM values for the substrates dimethylallyl diphosphate, geranyl
diphosphate and farnesyl diphosphate were, respectively, 68 ± 5 μM, 7.8 ± 1.3 μM 
and 2.06 ± 0.4 μM. The protein is expressed constitutively in all
intra-erythrocytic stages of P. falciparum, demonstrated by using transgenic
parasites with a haemagglutinin-tagged version of FPPS. Also, the present data
demonstrate that the recombinant protein is inhibited by risedronate.
CONCLUSIONS: The rPfFPPS is a bifunctional FPPS/GGPPS enzyme and the structure of
products FOH and GGOH were confirmed mass spectrometry. Plasmodial FPPS
represents a potential target for the rational design of chemotherapeutic agents 
to treat malaria.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-184 
PMCID: PMC3679732
PMID: 23734739  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

