
1. Acta Trop. 2013 Oct;128(1):61-9. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2013.06.012. Epub
2013 Jun 24.

Novel genetic diversity within Anopheles punctimacula s.l.: phylogenetic
discrepancy between the Barcode cytochrome c oxidase I (COI) gene and the rDNA
second internal transcribed spacer (ITS2).

Loaiza JR(1), Scott ME, Bermingham E, Sanjur OI, Rovira JR, Dutari LC, Linton YM,
Bickersmith S, Conn JE.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biodiversidad y Descubrimiento de Drogas, Instituto de
Investigaciones Científicas y Servicios de Alta Tecnología, Clayton, Panama;
Programa Centroamericano de Maestría en Entomología, Vicerrectoría de
Investigación y Postgrado, Universidad de Panamá, Panama. Electronic address:
jloaiza@indicasat.org.pa.

Anopheles punctimacula s.l. is a regional malaria vector in parts of Central
America, but its role in transmission is controversial due to its unresolved
taxonomic status. Two cryptic species, An. malefactor and An. calderoni, have
been previously confused with this taxon, and evidence for further genetic
differentiation has been proposed. In the present study we collected and
morphologically identified adult female mosquitoes of An. punctimacula s.l. from 
10 localities across Panama and one in Costa Rica. DNA sequences from three
molecular regions, the three prime end of the mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase 
I gene (3' COI), the Barcode region in the five prime end of the COI (5' COI),
and the rDNA second internal transcribed spacer (ITS2) were used to test the
hypothesis of new molecular lineages within An. punctimacula s.l. Phylogenetic
analyses using the 3' COI depicted six highly supported molecular lineages (A-F),
none of which was An. malefactor. In contrast, phylogenetic inference with the 5'
COI demonstrated paraphyly. Tree topologies based on the combined COI regions and
ITS2 sequence data supported the same six lineages as the 3' COI alone. As a
whole this evidence suggests that An. punctimacula s.l. comprises two
geographically isolated lineages, but it is not clear whether these are true
species. The phylogenetic structure of the An. punctimacula cluster as well as
that of other unknown lineages (C type I vs C type II; D vs E) appears to be
driven by geographic partition, because members of these assemblages did not
overlap spatially. We report An. malefactor for the first time in Costa Rica, but
our data do not support the presence of An. calderoni in Panama.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2013.06.012 
PMCID: PMC3810288
PMID: 23806568  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

