
1. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 26;8(6):e67364. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067364. Print 2013.

Contrasted Fitness Costs of Docking and Antibacterial Constructs in the EE and
EVida3 Strains Validates Two-Phase Anopheles gambiae Genetic Transformation
System.

Paton D(1), Underhill A, Meredith J, Eggleston P, Tripet F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Entomology and Parasitology, School of Life Sciences, Keele
University, Keele, Staffordshire, United Kingdom.

The deployment of transgenic mosquitoes carrying genes for refractoriness to
malaria has long been seen as a futuristic scenario riddled with technical
difficulties. The integration of anti-malarial effector genes and a gene-drive
system into the mosquito genome without affecting mosquito fitness is recognized 
as critical to the success of this malaria control strategy. Here we conducted
detailed fitness studies of two Anopheles gambiae s.s. transgenic lines recently 
developed using a two-phase targeted genetic transformation system. In replicated
cage-invasion experiments, males and females of the EE Phase-1 docking strain and
EVida3 Phase-2 strain loaded with an antimicrobial peptide (AMP) expressed upon
blood-feeding, were mixed with individuals of a recently-colonized strain of the 
Mopti chromosomal form. The experimental design enabled us to detect initial
strain reproductive success differences, assortative mating and hybrid vigor that
may characterize mosquito release situations. In addition, the potential fitness 
costs of the unloaded Phase-1 and loaded Phase-2 genetic constructs, independent 
of the strains' original genetic backgrounds, were estimated between the 1(st)
instar larvae, pupae and adult stages over 10 generations. The Phase-1 unloaded
docking cassette was found to have significantly lower allelic fitness relative
to the wild type allele during larval development. However, overall genotypic
fitness was comparable to the wild type allele across all stages leading to
stable equilibrium in all replicates. In contrast, the Phase-2 construct
expressing EVida3 disappeared from all replicates within 10 generations due to
lower fitness of hemi- and homozygous larvae, suggesting costly background AMP
expression and/or of the DsRed2 marker. This is the first study to effectively
partition independent fitness stage-specific determinants in unloaded and loaded 
transgenic strains of a Phase-1-2 transformation system. Critically, the high
fitness of the Phase-1 docking strain makes it the ideal model system for
measuring the genetic load of novel candidate anti-malarial molecules in vivo.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067364 
PMCID: PMC3694017
PMID: 23840679  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

