
1. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 3;8(7):e67765. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067765. Print 2013.

Differential expression of three members of the multidomain adhesion CCp family
in Babesia bigemina, Babesia bovis and Theileria equi.

Bastos RG(1), Suarez CE, Laughery JM, Johnson WC, Ueti MW, Knowles DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, Washington, United States of America.
rgbastos@vetmed.wsu.edu

Members of the CCp protein family have been previously described to be expressed 
on gametocytes of apicomplexan Plasmodium parasites. Knocking out Plasmodium CCp 
genes blocks the development of the parasite in the mosquito vector, making the
CCp proteins potential targets for the development of a transmission-blocking
vaccine. Apicomplexans Babesia bovis and Babesia bigemina are the causative
agents of bovine babesiosis, and apicomplexan Theileria equi causes equine
piroplasmosis. Bovine babesiosis and equine piroplasmosis are the most
economically important parasite diseases that affect worldwide cattle and equine 
industries, respectively. The recent sequencing of the B. bovis and T. equi
genomes has provided the opportunity to identify novel genes involved in parasite
biology. Here we characterize three members of the CCp family, named CCp1, CCp2
and CCp3, in B. bigemina, B. bovis and T. equi. Using B. bigemina as an in vitro 
model, expression of all three CCp genes and proteins was demonstrated in
temperature-induced sexual stages. Transcripts for all three CCp genes were found
in vivo in blood stages of T. equi, and transcripts for CCp3 were detected in
vivo in blood stages of B. bovis. However, no protein expression was detected in 
T. equi blood stages or B. bovis blood stages or B. bovis tick stages.
Collectively, the data demonstrated a differential pattern of expression of three
orthologous genes of the multidomain adhesion CCp family by B. bigemina, B. bovis
and T. equi. The novel CCp members represent potential targets for innovative
approaches to control bovine babesiosis and equine piroplasmosis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067765 
PMCID: PMC3701008
PMID: 23844089  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

