
1. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 28;8(6):e67238. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067238. Print 2013.

The ETRAMP family member SEP2 is expressed throughout Plasmodium berghei life
cycle and is released during sporozoite gliding motility.

Currà C(1), Di Luca M, Picci L, de Sousa Silva Gomes dos Santos C, Siden-Kiamos
I, Pace T, Ponzi M.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Dipartimento di Malattie Infettive, Parassitarie
ed Immunomediate, Roma, Italy.

The early transcribed membrane proteins ETRAMPs belong to a family of small,
transmembrane molecules unique to Plasmodium parasite, which share a signal
peptide followed by a short lysine-rich stretch, a transmembrane domain and a
variable, highly charged C-terminal region. ETRAMPs are usually expressed in a
stage-specific manner. In the blood stages they localize to the parasitophorous
vacuole membrane and, in described cases, to vesicle-like structures exported to 
the host erythrocyte cytosol. Two family members of the rodent parasite
Plasmodium berghei, uis3 and uis4, localize to secretory organelles of
sporozoites and to the parasitophorous membrane vacuole of the liver stages. By
the use of specific antibodies and the generation of transgenic lines, we showed 
that the P. berghei ETRAMP family member SEP2 is abundantly expressed in
gametocytes as well as in mosquito and liver stages. In intracellular parasite
stages, SEP2 is routed to the parasitophorous vacuole membrane while, in invasive
ookinete and sporozoite stages, it localizes to the parasite surface. To date
SEP2 is the only ETRAMP protein detected throughout the parasite life cycle.
Furthermore, SEP2 is also released during gliding motility of salivary gland
sporozoites. A limited number of proteins are known to be involved in this key
function and the best characterized, the CSP and TRAP, are both promising
transmission-blocking candidates. Our results suggest that ETRAMP members may be 
viewed as new potential candidates for malaria control.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067238 
PMCID: PMC3696012
PMID: 23840634  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

