
1. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 4;8(7):e66115. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066115. Print 2013.

Molecular analysis of non-specific protection against murine malaria induced by
BCG vaccination.

Parra M(1), Liu X, Derrick SC, Yang A, Tian J, Kolibab K, Kumar S, Morris SL.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Review, USFDA, Bethesda, Maryland, United 
States of America.

Although the effectiveness of BCG vaccination in preventing adult pulmonary
tuberculosis (TB) has been highly variable, epidemiologic studies have suggested 
that BCG provides other general health benefits to vaccinees including reducing
the impact of asthma, leprosy, and possibly malaria. To further evaluate whether 
BCG immunization protects against malarial parasitemia and to define molecular
correlates of this non-specific immunity, mice were vaccinated with BCG and then 
challenged 2 months later with asexual blood stage Plasmodium yoelii 17XNL (PyNL)
parasites. Following challenge with PyNL, significant decreases in parasitemia
were observed in BCG vaccinated mice relative to naïve controls. To identify
immune molecules that may be associated with the BCG-induced protection, gene
expression was evaluated by RT-PCR in i) naïve controls, ii) BCG-vaccinated mice,
iii) PyNL infected mice and iv) BCG vaccinated/PyNL infected mice at 0, 1, 5, and
9 days after the P. yoelii infection. The expression results showed that i) BCG
immunization induces the expression of at least 18 genes including the
anti-microbial molecules lactoferrin, eosinophil peroxidase, eosinophil major
basic protein and the cathelicidin-related antimicrobial peptide (CRAMP); ii) an 
active PyNL infection suppresses the expression of important immune response
molecules; and iii) the extent of PyNL-induced suppression of specific genes is
reduced in BCG-vaccinated/PyNL infected mice. To validate the gene expression
data, we demonstrated that pre-treatment of malaria parasites with lactoferrin or
the cathelicidin LL-37 peptide decreases the level of PyNL parasitemias in mice. 
Overall, our study suggests that BCG vaccination induces the expression of
non-specific immune molecules including antimicrobial peptides which may provide 
an overall benefit to vaccinees by limiting infections of unrelated pathogens
such as Plasmodium parasites.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066115 
PMCID: PMC3701530
PMID: 23861742  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

