
1. Eur J Haematol. 2013 Oct;91(4):339-46. doi: 10.1111/ejh.12176. Epub 2013 Aug 20.

Lymphoma and myeloma cells are highly sensitive to growth arrest and apoptosis
induced by artesunate.

Holien T(1), Olsen OE, Misund K, Hella H, Waage A, Rø TB, Sundan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, KG Jebsen Center for
Myeloma Research, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim,
Norway.

OBJECTIVES: The use of new drugs has improved the treatment of multiple myeloma
and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Nevertheless, over time many patients 
relapse and develop resistance to treatment, and efforts are needed to overcome
drug resistance. The widely used malaria drug artesunate has been reported to
have antitumor activity, and we aimed to test the effects of artesunate on a
panel of myeloma and lymphoma cells.
METHODS: Myeloma and DLBCL cell lines were treated with artesunate in vitro. The 
effects of artesunate treatment were evaluated using ATP content measurements for
proliferation and annexin V/propidium iodide labeling for apoptosis. Western
blotting was used to look for artesunate-induced protein changes. In addition, we
measured artesunate effects on patient myeloma cells in the presence of bone
marrow stromal cells.
RESULTS: Artesunate treatment efficiently inhibited cell growth and induced
apoptosis in cell lines. Apoptosis was induced concomitantly with downregulation 
of MYC and anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins, as well as with cleavage of
caspase-3. The IC50 values of artesunate in cell lines varied between 0.3 and
16.6 μm. Furthermore, some primary myeloma cells were also sensitive to
artesunate at doses around 10 μm. Concentrations of this order are
pharmacologically relevant as they can be obtained in plasma after intravenous
administration of artesunate for malaria treatment.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that artesunate is a potential drug for
treatment of multiple myeloma and DLBCL at doses of the same order as currently
in use for treatment of malaria without serious adverse effects.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ejh.12176 
PMID: 23869695  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

