
1. BMC Dev Biol. 2013 Jul 22;13:29. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-13-29.

Stage-specific transcription during development of Aedes aegypti.

Harker BW(1), Behura SK, deBruyn BS, Lovin DD, Mori A, Romero-Severson J,
Severson DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Eck Institute for Global Health, University
of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA.

BACKGROUND: Aedes aegypti is the most important global vector of dengue virus
infection in humans. Availability of the draft genome sequence of this mosquito
provides unique opportunities to study different aspects of its biology,
including identification of genes and pathways relevant to the developmental
processes associated with transition across individual life stages. However,
detailed knowledge of gene expression patterns pertaining to developmental stages
of A. aegypti is largely lacking.
RESULTS: We performed custom cDNA microarray analyses to examine the expression
patterns among six developmental stages: early larvae, late larvae, early pupae, 
late pupae, and adult male and female mosquitoes. Results revealed 1,551
differentially expressed transcripts (DETs) showing significant differences in
levels of expression between these life stages. The data suggests that most of
the differential expression occurs in a stage specific manner in A. aegypti.
Based on hierarchical clustering of expression levels, correlated expression
patterns of DETs were also observed among developmental stages. Weighted gene
correlation network analysis revealed modular patterns of expression among the
DETs. We observed that hydrolase activity, membrane, integral to membrane, DNA
binding, translation, ribosome, nucleoside-triphosphatase activity, structural
constituent of ribosome, ribonucleoprotein complex and receptor activity were
among the top ten ranked GO (Gene Ontology) terms associated with DETs.
Significant associations of DETs were also observed with specific KEGG (Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) pathway modules. Finally, comparisons with the
previously reported developmental transcriptome of the malaria vector, Anopheles 
gambiae, indicated that gene expression patterns during developmental processes
reflect both species-specific as well as common components of the two mosquito
species.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study shows that genes involved in the developmental life cycle 
of A. aegypti are expressed in a highly stage-specific manner. This suggests that
transcriptional events associated with transition through larval, pupal and adult
stages are largely discrete.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-213X-13-29 
PMCID: PMC3728235
PMID: 23875547  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

