
1. Infect Immun. 2013 Oct;81(10):3825-34. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00570-13. Epub 2013 Jul
29.

CD8+ T cells specific for a malaria cytoplasmic antigen form clusters around
infected hepatocytes and are protective at the liver stage of infection.

Kimura K(1), Kimura D, Matsushima Y, Miyakoda M, Honma K, Yuda M, Yui K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology,
Nagasaki University, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan.

Following Anopheles mosquito-mediated introduction into a human host, Plasmodium 
parasites infect hepatocytes and undergo intensive replication. Accumulating
evidence indicates that CD8(+) T cells induced by immunization with attenuated
Plasmodium sporozoites can confer sterile immunity at the liver stage of
infection; however, the mechanisms underlying this protection are not clearly
understood. To address this, we generated recombinant Plasmodium berghei ANKA
expressing a fusion protein of an ovalbumin epitope and green fluorescent protein
in the cytoplasm of the parasite. We have shown that the ovalbumin epitope is
presented by infected liver cells in a manner dependent on a transporter
associated with antigen processing and becomes a target of specific CD8(+) T
cells from the T cell receptor transgenic mouse line OT-I, leading to protection 
at the liver stage of Plasmodium infection. We visualized the interaction between
OT-I cells and infected hepatocytes by intravital imaging using two-photon
microscopy. OT-I cells formed clusters around infected hepatocytes, leading to
the elimination of the intrahepatic parasites and subsequent formation of large
clusters of OT-I cells in the liver. Gamma interferon expressed in CD8(+) T cells
was dispensable for this protective response. Additionally, we found that
polyclonal ovalbumin-specific memory CD8(+) T cells induced by de novo
immunization were able to confer sterile protection, although the threshold
frequency of the protection was relatively high. These studies revealed a novel
mechanism of specific CD8(+) T cell-mediated protective immunity and demonstrated
that proteins expressed in the cytoplasm of Plasmodium parasites can become
targets of specific CD8(+) T cells during liver-stage infection.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00570-13 
PMCID: PMC3811763
PMID: 23897612  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

