
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2013 Dec;20:16-25. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.07.026. Epub
2013 Aug 8.

Genetic characterization of Plasmodium falciparum allelic variants infecting
mothers at delivery and their children during their first plasmodial infections.

Dechavanne C(1), Pierrat C, Renard E, Costes B, Martin N, Ladekpo R, Ahouangninou
C, Alvarez VM, Huynh BT, Garcia A, Migot-Nabias F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche Pour le Développement, UMR 216 Mère et Enfant Face Aux
Infections Tropicales, Paris, France; PRES Sorbonne Paris Cité, Université Paris 
Descartes, Faculté de Pharmacie, Paris, France. Electronic address:
celia.dechavanne@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: Infants born to mothers with placental malaria at delivery develop 
Plasmodium falciparum parasitemia earlier than those born to mothers without
placental infection. This phenomenon may be explained by the development of
immune tolerance due to exposure to P. falciparum antigens in utero. The
hypothesis of this study is that this increased susceptibility might be related
to infections by parasites expressing the same blood stage allele's antigens as
those to which the infants were exposed in utero.
METHODS: The comparison of P.falciparum msp2 (3D7 and FC27) and glurp gene
polymorphisms of infected mothers at delivery to those of their offspring's
infections during infancy was realized and the possible associations of the
different polymorphisms with clinical outcomes were assessed. A second approach
consisted in the use of a Geographic Information System to determine whether the 
antigen alleles were homogeneously distributed in the area of study. This was
necessary to analyze whether the biological observations were due to high
exposure to a particular antigen allelic form in the environment or to high
infant permissiveness to the same allelic antigen polymorphism as the placental
one.
RESULTS: Infants born to mothers with placental malaria at delivery were more
susceptible to infections by parasites carrying the same glurp allele as
encountered in utero compared to distinct alleles, independently of their
geographic distribution.
CONCLUSION: The increased permissiveness of infants to plasmodial infections with
shared placental-infant glurp alleles sheds light on the role that P. falciparum 
blood stage antigen polymorphisms may play in the first plasmodial infections in 
infancy.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.07.026 
PMID: 23932959  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

