
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2013 Jul 25;7(7):e2336. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002336.
Print 2013.

Whole-organ isolation approach as a basis for tissue-specific analyses in
Schistosoma mansoni.

Hahnel S(1), Lu Z, Wilson RA, Grevelding CG, Quack T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Parasitology, Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Giessen, Germany.

Erratum in
    PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2013;7(10). doi:
10.1371/annotation/7aad0212-557d-4121-a72f-da2c115ce534.

BACKGROUND: Schistosomiasis is one of the most important parasitic diseases
worldwide, second only to malaria. Schistosomes exhibit an exceptional
reproductive biology since the sexual maturation of the female, which includes
the differentiation of the reproductive organs, is controlled by pairing.
Pathogenicity originates from eggs, which cause severe inflammation in their
hosts. Elucidation of processes contributing to female maturation is not only of 
interest to basic science but also considering novel concepts combating
schistosomiasis.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To get direct access to the reproductive organs, 
we established a novel protocol using a combined detergent/protease-treatment
removing the tegument and the musculature of adult Schistosoma mansoni. All steps
were monitored by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and bright-field microscopy 
(BF). We focused on the gonads of adult schistosomes and demonstrated that
isolated and purified testes and ovaries can be used for morphological and
structural studies as well as sources for RNA and protein of sufficient amounts
for subsequent analyses such as RT-PCR and immunoblotting. To this end, first
exemplary evidence was obtained for tissue-specific transcription within the
gonads (axonemal dynein intermediate chain gene SmAxDynIC; aquaporin gene SmAQP) 
as well as for post-transcriptional regulation (SmAQP).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The presented method provides a new way of getting
access to tissue-specific material of S. mansoni. With regard to many still
unanswered questions of schistosome biology, such as elucidating the molecular
processes involved in schistosome reproduction, this protocol provides
opportunities for, e.g., sub-transcriptomics and sub-proteomics at the organ
level. This will promote the characterisation of gene-expression profiles, or
more specifically to complete knowledge of signalling pathways contributing to
differentiation processes, so discovering involved molecules that may represent
potential targets for novel intervention strategies. Furthermore, gonads and
other tissues are a basis for cell isolation, opening new perspectives for
establishing cell lines, one of the tools desperately needed in the post-genomic 
era.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002336 
PMCID: PMC3723596
PMID: 23936567  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

