
1. Malar J. 2013 Aug 30;12:304. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-304.

Molecular characterization and identification of members of the Anopheles
subpictus complex in Sri Lanka.

Surendran SN(1), Sarma DK, Jude PJ, Kemppainen P, Kanthakumaran N, Gajapathy K,
Peiris LB, Ramasamy R, Walton C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, University of Jaffna, Jaffna 40000,
Sri Lanka. noble@jfn.ac.lk.

BACKGROUND: Anopheles subpictus sensu lato is a major malaria vector in South and
Southeast Asia. Based initially on polytene chromosome inversion polymorphism,
and subsequently on morphological characterization, four sibling species A-D were
reported from India. The present study uses molecular methods to further
characterize and identify sibling species in Sri Lanka.
METHODS: Mosquitoes from Sri Lanka were morphologically identified to species and
sequenced for the ribosomal internal transcribed spacer-2 (ITS2) and the
mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit-I (COI) genes. These sequences,
together with others from GenBank, were used to construct phylogenetic trees and 
parsimony haplotype networks and to test for genetic population structure.
RESULTS: Both ITS2 and COI sequences revealed two divergent clades indicating
that the Subpictus complex in Sri Lanka is composed of two genetically distinct
species that correspond to species A and species B from India. Phylogenetic
analysis showed that species A and species B do not form a monophyletic clade but
instead share genetic similarity with Anopheles vagus and Anopheles sundaicus
s.l., respectively. An allele specific identification method based on ITS2
variation was developed for the reliable identification of species A and B in Sri
Lanka.
CONCLUSION: Further multidisciplinary studies are needed to establish the species
status of all chromosomal forms in the Subpictus complex. This study emphasizes
the difficulties in using morphological characters for species identification in 
An. subpictus s.l. in Sri Lanka and demonstrates the utility of an allele
specific identification method that can be used to characterize the differential 
bio-ecological traits of species A and B in Sri Lanka.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-304 
PMCID: PMC3766661
PMID: 24001126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

