
1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 30;8(8):e72647. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072647. eCollection
2013.

MHC-I affects infection intensity but not infection status with a frequent avian 
malaria parasite in blue tits.

Westerdahl H(1), Stjernman M, Råberg L, Lannefors M, Nilsson JÅ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

Host resistance against parasites depends on three aspects: the ability to
prevent, control and clear infections. In vertebrates the immune system consists 
of innate and adaptive immunity. Innate immunity is particularly important for
preventing infection and eradicating established infections at an early stage
while adaptive immunity is slow, but powerful, and essential for controlling
infection intensities and eventually clearing infections. Major
Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) molecules are central in adaptive immunity, and 
studies on parasite resistance and MHC in wild animals have found effects on both
infection intensity (parasite load) and infection status (infected or not). It
seems MHC can affect both the ability to control infection intensities and the
ability to clear infections. However, these two aspects have rarely been
considered simultaneously, and their relative importance in natural populations
is therefore unclear. Here we investigate if MHC class I genotype affects
infection intensity and infection status with a frequent avian malaria infection 
Haemoproteus majoris in a natural population of blue tits Cyanistes caeruleus. We
found a significant negative association between a single MHC allele and
infection intensity but no association with infection status. Blue tits that
carry a specific MHC allele seem able to suppress H. majoris infection intensity,
while we have no evidence that this allele also has an effect on clearance of the
H. majoris infection, a result that is in contrast with some previous studies of 
MHC and avian malaria. A likely explanation could be that the clearance rate of
avian malaria parasites differs between avian malaria lineages and/or between
avian hosts.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072647 
PMCID: PMC3758318
PMID: 24023631  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

