
1. Sci China Life Sci. 2013 Oct;56(10):968-74.

Systematic analysis of intron size and abundance parameters in diverse lineages.

Wu J, Xiao J, Wang L, Zhong J, Yin H, Wu S, Zhang Z, Yu J.

All eukaryotic genomes have genes with introns in variable sizes. As far as
spliceosomal introns are concerned, there are at least three basic parameters to 
stratify introns across diverse eukaryotic taxa: size, number, and sequence
context. The number parameter is highly variable in lower eukaryotes, especially 
among protozoan and fungal species, which ranges from less than 4% to 78% of the 
genes. Over greater evolutionary time scales, the number parameter undoubtedly
increases as observed in higher plants and higher vertebrates, reaching greater
than 12.5 exons per gene in average among mammalian genomes. The size parameter
is more complex, where multiple modes appear at work. Aside from intronless
genes, there are three other types of intron-containing genes: half-sized,
minimal, and size-expandable introns. The half-sized introns have only been found
in a limited number of genomes among protozoan and fungal lineages and the other 
two types are prevalent in all animal and plant genomes. Among the
size-expandable introns, the sizes of plant introns are expansion-limited in that
the large introns exceeding 1000 bp are fewer in numbers and transposon-free as
compared to the large introns among animals, where the larger introns are filled 
with transposable elements and appear expansion-flexible, reaching several
kilobasepairs (kbp) and even thousands of kbp in size. Most of the intron
parameters can be studied as signatures of the specific splicing machineries of
different eukaryotic lineages and are highly relevant to the regulation of gene
expression and functionality. In particular, the transcription-splicing-export
coupling of eukaryotic intron dispensing leads to a working hypothesis that all
intron parameters are evolved to be efficient and function-related in processing 
and routing the spliced transcripts.

DOI: 10.1007/s11427-013-4540-y 
PMID: 24022126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

