
1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 5;8(9):e74701. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074701. eCollection 
2013.

Identification of a novel and unique transcription factor in the
intraerythrocytic stage of Plasmodium falciparum.

Komaki-Yasuda K(1), Okuwaki M, Nagata K, Kawazu S, Kano S.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute, National Center for Global Health and Medicine,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

The mechanisms of stage-specific gene regulation in the malaria parasite
Plasmodium falciparum are largely unclear, with only a small number of specific
regulatory transcription factors (AP2 family) having been identified. In
particular, the transcription factors that function in the intraerythrocytic
stage remain to be elucidated. Previously, as a model case for stage-specific
transcription in the P. falciparum intraerythrocytic stage, we analyzed the
transcriptional regulation of pf1-cys-prx, a trophozoite/schizont-specific gene, 
and suggested that some nuclear factors bind specifically to the cis-element of
pf1-cys-prx and enhance transcription. In the present study, we purified nuclear 
factors from parasite nuclear extract by 5 steps of chromatography, and
identified a factor termed PREBP. PREBP is not included in the AP2 family, and is
a novel protein with four K-homology (KH) domains. The KH domain is known to be
found in RNA-binding or single-stranded DNA-binding proteins. PREBP is well
conserved in Plasmodium species and partially conserved in phylum Apicomplexa. To
evaluate the effects of PREBP overexpression, we used a transient overexpression 
and luciferase assay combined approach. Overexpression of PREBP markedly enhanced
luciferase expression under the control of the pf1-cys-prx cis-element. These
results provide the first evidence of a novel transcription factor that activates
the gene expression in the malaria parasite intraerythrocytic stage. These
findings enhance our understanding of the evolution of specific transcription
machinery in Plasmodium and other eukaryotes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074701 
PMCID: PMC3764013
PMID: 24040327  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

