
1. J Mol Evol. 2013 Sep;77(3):81-91. doi: 10.1007/s00239-013-9582-z. Epub 2013 Sep
27.

Accessible mutational trajectories for the evolution of pyrimethamine resistance 
in the malaria parasite Plasmodium vivax.

Jiang PP(1), Corbett-Detig RB, Hartl DL, Lozovsky ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA, 02138, USA, panpan.jiang@gmail.com.

Antifolate antimalarials, such as pyrimethamine, have experienced a dramatic
reduction in therapeutic efficacy as resistance has evolved in multiple malaria
species. We present evidence from one such species, Plasmodium vivax, which has
experienced sustained selection for pyrimethamine resistance at the dihydrofolate
reductase (DHFR) locus since the 1970s. Using a transgenic Saccharomyces
cerevisiae model expressing the P. vivax DHFR enzyme, we assayed growth rate and 
resistance of all 16 combinations of four DHFR amino acid substitutions. These
substitutions were selected based on their known association with drug
resistance, both in natural isolates and in laboratory settings, in the related
malaria species P. falciparum. We observed a strong correlation between the
resistance phenotypes for these 16 P. vivax alleles and previously observed
resistance data for P. falciparum, which was surprising since nucleotide
diversity levels and common polymorphic variants of DHFR differ between the two
species. Similar results were observed when we expressed the P. vivax alleles in 
a transgenic bacterial system. This suggests common constraints on enzyme
evolution in the orthologous DHFR proteins. The interplay of negative trade-offs 
between the evolution of novel resistance and compromised endogenous function
varies at different drug dosages, and so too do the major trajectories for DHFR
evolution. In simulations, it is only at very high drug dosages that the most
resistant quadruple mutant DHFR allele is favored by selection. This is in
agreement with common polymorphic DHFR data in P. vivax, from which this
quadruple mutant is missing. We propose that clinical dosages of pyrimethamine
may have historically been too low to select for the most resistant allele, or
that the fitness cost of the most resistant allele was untenable without a
compensatory mutation elsewhere in the genome.

DOI: 10.1007/s00239-013-9582-z 
PMID: 24071997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

