
1. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 11;8(10):e76535. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076535.
eCollection 2013.

Protein kinase C-dependent signaling controls the midgut epithelial barrier to
malaria parasite infection in anopheline mosquitoes.

Pakpour N(1), Camp L, Smithers HM, Wang B, Tu Z, Nadler SA, Luckhart S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine,
University of California Davis, Davis, California, United States of America.

Anopheline mosquitoes are the primary vectors of parasites in the genus
Plasmodium, the causative agents of malaria. Malaria parasites undergo a series
of complex transformations upon ingestion by the mosquito host. During this
process, the physical barrier of the midgut epithelium, along with innate immune 
defenses, functionally restrict parasite development. Although these defenses
have been studied for some time, the regulatory factors that control them are
poorly understood. The protein kinase C (PKC) gene family consists of
serine/threonine kinases that serve as central signaling molecules and regulators
of a broad spectrum of cellular processes including epithelial barrier function
and immunity. Indeed, PKCs are highly conserved, ranging from 7 isoforms in
Drosophila to 16 isoforms in mammals, yet none have been identified in
mosquitoes. Despite conservation of the PKC gene family and their potential as
targets for transmission-blocking strategies for malaria, no direct connections
between PKCs, the mosquito immune response or epithelial barrier integrity are
known. Here, we identify and characterize six PKC gene family members--PKCδ,
PKCε, PKCζ, PKD, PKN, and an indeterminate conventional PKC--in Anopheles gambiae
and Anopheles stephensi. Sequence and phylogenetic analyses of the anopheline
PKCs support most subfamily assignments. All six PKCs are expressed in the midgut
epithelia of A. gambiae and A. stephensi post-blood feeding, indicating
availability for signaling in a tissue that is critical for malaria parasite
development. Although inhibition of PKC enzymatic activity decreased
NF-κB-regulated anti-microbial peptide expression in mosquito cells in vitro, PKC
inhibition had no effect on expression of a panel of immune genes in the midgut
epithelium in vivo. PKC inhibition did, however, significantly increase midgut
barrier integrity and decrease development of P. falciparum oocysts in A.
stephensi, suggesting that PKC-dependent signaling is a negative regulator of
epithelial barrier function and a potential new target for transmission-blocking 
strategies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076535 
PMCID: PMC3795702
PMID: 24146884  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

