
1. Malar J. 2013 Nov 15;12:418. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-418.

Spatial distribution of G6PD deficiency variants across malaria-endemic regions.

Howes RE(1), Dewi M, Piel FB, Monteiro WM, Battle KE, Messina JP, Sakuntabhai A, 
Satyagraha AW, Williams TN, Baird JK, Hay SI.

Author information: 
(1)Spatial Ecology and Epidemiology Group, Department of Zoology, University of
Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford, UK. rosalind.howes@zoo.ox.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Primaquine is essential for malaria control and elimination since it 
is the only available drug preventing multiple clinical attacks by relapses of
Plasmodium vivax. It is also the only therapy against the sexual stages of
Plasmodium falciparum infectious to mosquitoes, and is thus useful in preventing 
malaria transmission. However, the difficulties of diagnosing glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase deficiency (G6PDd) greatly hinder primaquine's widespread use, as
this common genetic disorder makes patients susceptible to potentially severe and
fatal primaquine-induced haemolysis. The risk of such an outcome varies widely
among G6PD gene variants.
METHODS: A literature review was conducted to identify surveys of G6PD variant
frequencies among representative population groups. Informative surveys were
assembled into two map series: (1) those showing the relative proportions of the 
different variants among G6PDd individuals; and (2) those showing allele
frequencies of G6PD variants based on population surveys without prior G6PDd
screening.
RESULTS: Variants showed conspicuous geographic patterns. A limited repertoire of
variants was tested for across sub-Saharan Africa, which nevertheless indicated
low genetic heterogeneity predominated by the G6PD A(-202A) mutation, though
other mutations were common in western Africa. The severe G6PD Mediterranean
variant was widespread across western Asia. Further east, a sharp shift in
variants was identified, with high variant heterogeneity in the populations of
China and the Asia-Pacific where no single variant dominated.
CONCLUSIONS: G6PD variants exhibited distinctive region-specific distributions
with important primaquine policy implications. Relative homogeneity in the
Americas, Africa, and western Asia contrasted sharply with the heterogeneity of
variants in China, Southeast Asia and Oceania. These findings will inform
rational risk assessments for primaquine in developing public health strategies
for malaria control and elimination, and support the future development of
regionally targeted policies. The major knowledge gaps highlighted here strongly 
advocate for further investigation of G6PD variant diversity and their
primaquine-sensitivity phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-418 
PMCID: PMC3835423
PMID: 24228846  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

