
1. Autophagy. 2014 Jan;10(1):80-92. doi: 10.4161/auto.26743. Epub 2013 Nov 11.

The multifunctional autophagy pathway in the human malaria parasite, Plasmodium
falciparum.

Cervantes S(1), Bunnik EM(2), Saraf A(3), Conner CM(2), Escalante A(2), Sardiu
ME(3), Ponts N(2), Prudhomme J(2), Florens L(3), Le Roch KG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Cell, Molecular, and Developmental Biology; University of 
California, Riverside; Riverside, CA USA; Department of Cell Biology and
Neuroscience; University of California, Riverside; Riverside, CA USA.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience; University of California,
Riverside; Riverside, CA USA.
(3)Stowers Institute for Medical Research; Kansas City, MO USA.

Autophagy is a catabolic pathway typically induced by nutrient starvation to
recycle amino acids, but can also function in removing damaged organelles. In
addition, this pathway plays a key role in eukaryotic development. To date, not
much is known about the role of autophagy in apicomplexan parasites and more
specifically in the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Comparative
genomic analysis has uncovered some, but not all, orthologs of autophagy-related 
(ATG) genes in the malaria parasite genome. Here, using a genome-wide in silico
analysis, we confirmed that ATG genes whose products are required for vesicle
expansion and completion are present, while genes involved in induction of
autophagy and cargo packaging are mostly absent. We subsequently focused on the
molecular and cellular function of P. falciparum ATG8 (PfATG8), an autophagosome 
membrane marker and key component of the autophagy pathway, throughout the
parasite asexual and sexual erythrocytic stages. In this context, we showed that 
PfATG8 has a distinct and atypical role in parasite development. PfATG8 localized
in the apicoplast and in vesicles throughout the cytosol during parasite
development. Immunofluorescence assays of PfATG8 in apicoplast-minus parasites
suggest that PfATG8 is involved in apicoplast biogenesis. Furthermore, treatment 
of parasite cultures with bafilomycin A 1 and chloroquine, both lysosomotropic
agents that inhibit autophagosome and lysosome fusion, resulted in dramatic
morphological changes of the apicoplast, and parasite death. Furthermore, deep
proteomic analysis of components associated with PfATG8 indicated that it may
possibly be involved in ribophagy and piecemeal microautophagy of the nucleus.
Collectively, our data revealed the importance and specificity of the autophagy
pathway in the malaria parasite and offer potential novel therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.4161/auto.26743 
PMCID: PMC4028325
PMID: 24275162  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

