
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2013 Nov 21;7(11):e2489. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002489.
eCollection 2013 Nov.

Whole genome sequencing of field isolates reveals a common duplication of the
Duffy binding protein gene in Malagasy Plasmodium vivax strains.

Menard D(1), Chan ER, Benedet C, Ratsimbasoa A, Kim S, Chim P, Do C, Witkowski B,
Durand R, Thellier M, Severini C, Legrand E, Musset L, Nour BY,
Mercereau-Puijalon O, Serre D, Zimmerman PA.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Epidémiologie Moléculaire du Paludisme, Institut Pasteur du Cambodge, 
Phnom Penh, Cambodia.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium vivax is the most prevalent human malaria parasite,
causing serious public health problems in malaria-endemic countries. Until
recently the Duffy-negative blood group phenotype was considered to confer
resistance to vivax malaria for most African ethnicities. We and others have
reported that P. vivax strains in African countries from Madagascar to Mauritania
display capacity to cause clinical vivax malaria in Duffy-negative people. New
insights must now explain Duffy-independent P. vivax invasion of human
erythrocytes.
METHODS/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Through recent whole genome sequencing we obtained ≥ 
70× coverage of the P. vivax genome from five field-isolates, resulting in ≥ 93% 
of the Sal I reference sequenced at coverage greater than 20×. Combined with
sequences from one additional Malagasy field isolate and from five monkey-adapted
strains, we describe here identification of DNA sequence rearrangements in the P.
vivax genome, including discovery of a duplication of the P. vivax Duffy binding 
protein (PvDBP) gene. A survey of Malagasy patients infected with P. vivax showed
that the PvDBP duplication was present in numerous locations in Madagascar and
found in over 50% of infected patients evaluated. Extended geographic surveys
showed that the PvDBP duplication was detected frequently in vivax patients
living in East Africa and in some residents of non-African P. vivax-endemic
countries. Additionally, the PvDBP duplication was observed in travelers seeking 
treatment of vivax malaria upon returning home. PvDBP duplication prevalence was 
highest in west-central Madagascar sites where the highest frequencies of P.
vivax-infected, Duffy-negative people were reported.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The highly conserved nature of the sequence involved in
the PvDBP duplication suggests that it has occurred in a recent evolutionary time
frame. These data suggest that PvDBP, a merozoite surface protein involved in red
cell adhesion is rapidly evolving, possibly in response to constraints imposed by
erythrocyte Duffy negativity in some human populations.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002489 
PMCID: PMC3836732
PMID: 24278487  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

