
1. mBio. 2013 Nov 26;4(6):e00874-13. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00874-13.

Inhibitor of cysteine proteases is critical for motility and infectivity of
Plasmodium sporozoites.

Boysen KE(1), Matuschewski K.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Parasitology Unit, Berlin,
Germany.

Malaria is transmitted when motile sporozoites are injected into the dermis by an
infected female Anopheles mosquito. Inside the mosquito vector, sporozoites
egress from midgut-associated oocysts and eventually penetrate the acinar cells
of salivary glands. Parasite-encoded factors with exclusive vital roles in the
insect vector can be studied by classical reverse genetics. Here, we
characterized the in vivo roles of Plasmodium berghei falstatin/ICP (inhibitor of
cysteine proteases). This protein was previously suggested to act as a protease
inhibitor during erythrocyte invasion. We show by targeted gene disruption that
loss of ICP function does not affect growth inside the mammalian host but causes 
a complete defect in sporozoite transmission. Sporogony occurred normally in
icp(-) parasites, but hemocoel sporozoites showed a defect in continuous gliding 
motility and infectivity for salivary glands, which are prerequisites for
sporozoite transmission to the mammalian host. Absence of ICP correlates with
enhanced cleavage of circumsporozoite protein, in agreement with a role as a
protease regulator. We conclude that ICP is essential for only the final stages
of sporozoite maturation inside the mosquito vector. This study is the first
genetic evidence that an ICP is necessary for the productive motility of a
eukaryotic parasitic cell.IMPORTANCE: Cysteine proteases and their inhibitors are
considered ideal drug targets for the treatment of a wide range of diseases,
including cancer and parasitic infections. In protozoan parasites, including
Leishmania, Trypanosoma, and Plasmodium, cysteine proteases play important roles 
in life cycle progression. A mouse malaria model provides an unprecedented
opportunity to study the roles of a parasite-encoded inhibitor of cysteine
proteases (ICP) over the entire parasite life cycle. By precise gene deletion, we
found no evidence that ICP influences disease progression or parasite virulence. 
Instead, we discovered that this factor is necessary for parasite movement and
malaria transmission from mosquitoes to mammals. This finding in a fast-moving
unicellular protozoan has important implications for malaria intervention
strategies and the roles of ICPs in the regulation of eukaryotic cell migration.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00874-13 
PMCID: PMC3870247
PMID: 24281719  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

