
1. Eukaryot Cell. 2014 May;13(5):550-9. doi: 10.1128/EC.00264-13. Epub 2013 Dec 2.

Type II fatty acid biosynthesis is essential for Plasmodium falciparum sporozoite
development in the midgut of Anopheles mosquitoes.

van Schaijk BC(1), Kumar TR, Vos MW, Richman A, van Gemert GJ, Li T, Eappen AG,
Williamson KC, Morahan BJ, Fishbaugher M, Kennedy M, Camargo N, Khan SM, Janse
CJ, Sim KL, Hoffman SL, Kappe SH, Sauerwein RW, Fidock DA, Vaughan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical
Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

The prodigious rate at which malaria parasites proliferate during asexual
blood-stage replication, midgut sporozoite production, and intrahepatic
development creates a substantial requirement for essential nutrients, including 
fatty acids that likely are necessary for parasite membrane formation. Plasmodium
parasites obtain fatty acids either by scavenging from the vertebrate host and
mosquito vector or by producing fatty acids de novo via the type two fatty acid
biosynthesis pathway (FAS-II). Here, we study the FAS-II pathway in Plasmodium
falciparum, the species responsible for the most lethal form of human malaria.
Using antibodies, we find that the FAS-II enzyme FabI is expressed in mosquito
midgut oocysts and sporozoites as well as liver-stage parasites but not during
the blood stages. As expected, FabI colocalizes with the apicoplast-targeted acyl
carrier protein, indicating that FabI functions in the apicoplast. We further
analyze the FAS-II pathway in Plasmodium falciparum by assessing the functional
consequences of deleting fabI and fabB/F. Targeted deletion or disruption of
these genes in P. falciparum did not affect asexual blood-stage replication or
the generation of midgut oocysts; however, subsequent sporozoite development was 
abolished. We conclude that the P. falciparum FAS-II pathway is essential for
sporozoite development within the midgut oocyst. These findings reveal an
important distinction from the rodent Plasmodium parasites P. berghei and P.
yoelii, where the FAS-II pathway is known to be required for normal parasite
progression through the liver stage but is not required for oocyst development in
the Anopheles mosquito midgut.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.00264-13 
PMCID: PMC4060470
PMID: 24297444  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

