
1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2013;9(12):e1003392. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003392. Epub
2013 Dec 12.

Inferring developmental stage composition from gene expression in human malaria.

Joice R(1), Narasimhan V(2), Montgomery J(3), Sidhu AB(4), Oh K(2), Meyer E(1),
Pierre-Louis W(2), Seydel K(5), Milner D(6), Williamson K(7), Wiegand R(4),
Ndiaye D(8), Daily J(9), Wirth D(10), Taylor T(5), Huttenhower C(11), Marti M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America.
(3)Malawi-Liverpool-Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Programme, Blantyre, Malawi 
; Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(4)The Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United
States of America.
(5)College of Osteopathic Medicine, Michigan State University, East Lansing,
Michigan, United States of America ; Blantyre Malaria Project, University of
Malawi College of Medicine, Blantyre, Malawi.
(6)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America ; Department of
Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of 
America.
(7)Department of Biology, Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United
States of America.
(8)Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cheikh Anta Diop University, Dakar, Senegal.
(9)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America ; Department of Medicine,
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, New York, United States of 
America.
(10)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America ; The Broad Institute of 
Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(11)Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America ; The Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.

In the current era of malaria eradication, reducing transmission is critical.
Assessment of transmissibility requires tools that can accurately identify the
various developmental stages of the malaria parasite, particularly those required
for transmission (sexual stages). Here, we present a method for estimating
relative amounts of Plasmodium falciparum asexual and sexual stages from gene
expression measurements. These are modeled using constrained linear regression to
characterize stage-specific expression profiles within mixed-stage populations.
The resulting profiles were analyzed functionally by gene set enrichment analysis
(GSEA), confirming differentially active pathways such as increased mitochondrial
activity and lipid metabolism during sexual development. We validated model
predictions both from microarrays and from quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR)
measurements, based on the expression of a small set of key transcriptional
markers. This sufficient marker set was identified by backward selection from the
whole genome as available from expression arrays, targeting one sentinel marker
per stage. The model as learned can be applied to any new microarray or qRT-PCR
transcriptional measurement. We illustrate its use in vitro in inferring changes 
in stage distribution following stress and drug treatment and in vivo in
identifying immature and mature sexual stage carriers within patient cohorts. We 
believe this approach will be a valuable resource for staging lab and field
samples alike and will have wide applicability in epidemiological studies of
malaria transmission.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003392 
PMCID: PMC3861035
PMID: 24348235  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

