
1. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 31;8(12):e82631. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082631.
eCollection 2013.

Genetic and environmental factors associated with laboratory rearing affect
survival and assortative mating but not overall mating success in Anopheles
gambiae sensu stricto.

Paton D(1), Touré M(2), Sacko A(2), Coulibaly MB(2), Traoré SF(2), Tripet F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Entomology and Parasitology, Institute for Science and
Technology in Medicine, Keele University, Staffordshire, United Kingdom.
(2)Malaria Research and Training Centre, Faculty of Medicine Pharmacy and
Dentistry, University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako, Bamako,
Mali.

Anopheles gambiae sensu stricto, the main vector of malaria in Africa, is
characterized by its vast geographical range and complex population structure.
Assortative mating amongst the reproductively isolated cryptic forms that
co-occur in many areas poses unique challenges for programs aiming to decrease
malaria incidence via the release of sterile or genetically-modified mosquitoes. 
Importantly, whether laboratory-rearing affects the ability of An. gambiae
individuals of a given cryptic taxa to successfully mate with individuals of
their own form in field conditions is still unknown and yet crucial for
mosquito-releases. Here, the independent effects of genetic and environmental
factors associated with laboratory rearing on male and female survival, mating
success and assortative mating were evaluated in the Mopti form of An. gambiae
over 2010 and 2011. In semi-field enclosures experiments and despite strong
variation between years, the overall survival and mating success of male and
female progeny from a laboratory strain was not found to be significantly lower
than those of the progeny of field females from the same population. Adult
progeny from field-caught females reared at the larval stage in the laboratory
and from laboratory females reared outdoors exhibited a significant decrease in
survival but not in mating success. Importantly, laboratory individuals reared as
larvae indoors were unable to mate assortatively as adults, whilst field progeny 
reared either outdoors or in the laboratory, as well as laboratory progeny reared
outdoors all mated significantly assortatively. These results highlight the
importance of genetic and environment interactions for the development of An.
gambiae's full mating behavioral repertoire and the challenges this creates for
mosquito rearing and release-based control strategies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082631 
PMCID: PMC3877013
PMID: 24391719  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

