
1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Jan;10(1):e1003854. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003854. Epub
2014 Jan 2.

Recruitment of PfSET2 by RNA polymerase II to variant antigen encoding loci
contributes to antigenic variation in P. falciparum.

Ukaegbu UE(1), Kishore SP(1), Kwiatkowski DL(1), Pandarinath C(2),
Dahan-Pasternak N(3), Dzikowski R(3), Deitsch KW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, New York, United States of America.
(2)Program in Computational Biology, Weill Medical College of Cornell University,
New York, New York, United States of America.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, The Institute for Medical
Research Israel-Canada, The Kuvin Center for the Study of Infectious and Tropical
Diseases, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem, Israel.

Histone modifications are important regulators of gene expression in all
eukaryotes. In Plasmodium falciparum, these epigenetic marks regulate expression 
of genes involved in several aspects of host-parasite interactions, including
antigenic variation. While the identities and genomic positions of many histone
modifications have now been cataloged, how they are targeted to defined genomic
regions remains poorly understood. For example, how variant antigen encoding loci
(var) are targeted for deposition of unique histone marks is a mystery that
continues to perplex the field. Here we describe the recruitment of an ortholog
of the histone modifier SET2 to var genes through direct interactions with the
C-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II. In higher eukaryotes, SET2 is a
histone methyltransferase recruited by RNA pol II during mRNA transcription;
however, the ortholog in P. falciparum (PfSET2) has an atypical architecture and 
its role in regulating transcription is unknown. Here we show that PfSET2 binds
to the unphosphorylated form of the CTD, a property inconsistent with its
recruitment during mRNA synthesis. Further, we show that H3K36me3, the epigenetic
mark deposited by PfSET2, is enriched at both active and silent var gene loci,
providing additional evidence that its recruitment is not associated with mRNA
production. Over-expression of a dominant negative form of PfSET2 designed to
disrupt binding to RNA pol II induced rapid var gene expression switching,
confirming both the importance of PfSET2 in var gene regulation and a role for
RNA pol II in its recruitment. RNA pol II is known to transcribe non-coding RNAs 
from both active and silent var genes, providing a possible mechanism by which it
could recruit PfSET2 to var loci. This work unifies previous reports of histone
modifications, the production of ncRNAs, and the promoter activity of var introns
into a mechanism that contributes to antigenic variation by malaria parasites.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003854 
PMCID: PMC3879369
PMID: 24391504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

