
1. Pathog Glob Health. 2013 Dec;107(8):458-62. doi:
10.1179/2047772413Z.000000000174.

INFRAVEC: research capacity for the implementation of genetic control of
mosquitoes.

Crisanti A.

Mosquitoes represent a major and global cause of human suffering due to the
diseases they transmit. These include parasitic diseases, i.e. malaria and
filariasis, and viral infections such as dengue, encephalitis, and yellow fever. 
The threat of mosquito-borne diseases is not limited to tropical and subtropical 
regions of the world. Trade and climate changes have opened new niches to
tropical vectors in temperate areas of the world, thus putting previously
unaffected regions at risk of disease transmission. The most notable example is
the spread of Aedes species, particularly the Asian tiger mosquito Aedes
albopictus to southern Europe (reviewed in Ref. 1). Endogenous cases of
vector-borne diseases including West Nile fever, chikungunya, and dengue are
frequently being reported, highlighting the increased risk of tropical diseases
for the European population. Typically, vector control measures targetting
mosquitoes are in most cases carried with the use of insecticides. This approach 
has a number of limitations that constrain their effectiveness. Lack of
resources, inadequate logistics, and the insurgence of insecticide resistance are
some of the problems encountered in disease-endemic countries (DECs). More
recently in Africa, the widespread use of insecticide-treated bed nets has caused
a dramatic reduction in malaria mortality and morbidity. Bed nets however are a
temporary solution, a testimony of the failure to implement area-wide control
measures aimed at eradicating malaria. US and Europe, with well-developed
economies, have also failed to control the spread of mosquito vectors,
particularly Aedes species. This alarming situation clearly speaks for the need
to expand the knowledge on mosquito vectors and for the urgency of developing and
validating novel biological and genetic control measures that overcome the
limitations of current insecticide-based approaches. During the last 10 years,
significant advances have been made in understanding the biology, the genetics,
and the ecology of Anopheles and Aedes mosquitoes paralleled by the development
of new molecular tools for investigating gene function and mosquito ability to
transmit parasite and viral diseases. They offer a compelling opportunity to
design and validate new genetic vector control measures. The size and the
complexity of this undertaking require a high level of capacity, effort, and
technological platforms. No laboratory--or even institution--has the resources,
the infrastructure capacity, and the expertise to accomplish this task alone.
INFRAVEC addresses the need of the scientific community to share facilities and
integrate cutting-edge knowledge and technologies that are not readily accessible
but nevertheless critical to exploit genetic and genomic information in the
effort to control mosquito-borne diseases. Its objective is to provide
laboratories that currently operate individually with limited coordination and
little sharing of technologies, with the collective research capacity of the
laboratories forming the core project infrastructure. INFRAVEC has provided
resources to 31 institutions from European and African countries to enhance
collaborative links, to execute joint research activity, and most importantly to 
enable individual researchers (from PhD students to established academics) to
carry complex experimental activities by assigning research packages or
‘infrastructure access’ to be executed in the laboratory facilities and
infrastructures of INFRAVEC. I report here on the overall activities of INFRAVEC 
and its impact on the scientific community with the purpose to initiate a
dialogue with all stakeholders on its future evolution.

DOI: 10.1179/2047772413Z.000000000174 
PMCID: PMC4073526
PMID: 24428829  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

