
1. Parasit Vectors. 2014 Jan 20;7:36. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-7-36.

Evidence to support natural hybridization between Anopheles sinensis and
Anopheles kleini (Diptera: Culicidae): possibly a significant mechanism for gene 
introgression in sympatric populations.

Choochote W(1), Min GS, Intapan PM, Tantrawatpan C, Saeung A, Lulitanond V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai University, Chiang
Mai 50200, Thailand. wchoocho@mail.med.cmu.ac.th.

BACKGROUND: Malaria caused by Plasmodium vivax is still a public health problem
in the Republic of Korea (ROK), particularly regarding the recent re-emergence of
this malarial species near the demilitarized zone in northwestern Paju City,
Gyeonggi-do Province. Currently, at least 4 species (An. kleini, An. pullus, An. 
belenrae and An. lesteri) of the Hyrcanus Group are reported as possible natural 
vectors of vivax malaria in the ROK, and An. sinensis, which is the most dominant
species, has long been incriminated as an important natural vector of this P.
vivax. However, An. sinensis was ranked recently as a low potential vector.
According to the discovery of natural hybrids between An. sinensis (a low
potential vector for P. vivax) and An. kleini (a high potential vector for P.
vivax) in Paju City, intensive investigation of this phenomenon is warranted
under laboratory conditions.
METHODS: Mosquitoes were collected during 2010-2012 from Paju City, ROK.
Hybridization experiments used iso-female line colonies of these anophelines
together with DNA analysis of ribosomal DNA [second internal transcribed spacer
(ITS2)] and mitochondrial DNA [cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (COI)] of the
parental colonies, F1-hybrids and repeated backcross progenies were performed
intensively by using a PCR-based assay and pyrosequencing technology.
RESULTS: The results from hybridization experiments and molecular investigations 
revealed that the mitochondrial COI gene was introgressed from An. sinensis into 
An. kleini. The An. sinensis progenies obtained from consecutive repeated
backcrosses in both directions, i.e., F2-11 progeny [(An. sinensis x An. kleini) 
x An. sinensis] and F3-5 progeny [(An. kleini x An. sinensis) x An. kleini]
provided good supportive evidence.
CONCLUSIONS: This study revealed introgression of the mitochondrial COI gene
between An. sinensis and An. kleini through consecutive repeated backcrosses
under laboratory conditions. This new body of knowledge will be emphasized in
reliable promising strategies in order to replace the population of An. kleini as
a high potential vector for P. vivax, with that of a low potential vector, An.
sinensis, through the mechanism of gene introgression in nature.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-7-36 
PMCID: PMC3899613
PMID: 24443885  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

