
1. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 22;9(1):e86802. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086802. eCollection
2014.

Use of peptide nucleic acids to manipulate gene expression in the malaria
parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

Kolevzon N(1), Nasereddin A(2), Naik S(1), Yavin E(1), Dzikowski R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Drug Research, School of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, The
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, The institute for Medical
Research Israel - Canada, The Kuvin Center for the Study of Infectious and
Tropical Diseases, The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem,
Israel.

One of the major concerns in treating malaria by conventional small drug
molecules is the rapid emergence of drug resistance. Specific silencing of
essential genes by antisense oliogomers has been proposed as an alternative
approach that may result in antimalarial activity which is not associated with
drug resistance. In addition, such an approach could be an important biological
tool for studying many genes' function by reverse genetics. Here we present a
novel methodology of using peptide nucleic acids (PNAs) as a useful tool for gene
silencing in Plasmodium falciparum. PNAs, designed as specific antisense
molecules, were conjugated to a cell penetrating peptide (CPP); namely,
octa-D-lysine via the C-terminus, to allow facile delivery through cell
membranes. PNAs added to P. falciparum cultures were found exclusively in
infected erythrocytes and were eventually localized in nuclei of the parasites at
all stages of intra erythrocytic development. We show that these PNAs
specifically down regulated both a stably expressed transgene as well as an
endogenous essential gene, which significantly reduced parasites' viability. This
study paves the way for a simple approach to silence a variety of P. falciparum
genes as means of deciphering their function and potentially to develop highly
specific and potent antimalarial agents.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086802 
PMCID: PMC3899306
PMID: 24466246  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

