
1. Parasit Vectors. 2014 Jan 28;7:53. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-7-53.

The role played by alternative splicing in antigenic variability in human
endo-parasites.

Hull R, Dlamini Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of South Africa, College of Agriculture and Environmental Sciences,
College of Agriculture and Environmental Sciences, C/o Christiaan de Wet and
Pioneer Avenue, Private Bag X6, Florida Science Campus, Florida, Johannesburg
1710, South Africa. dlamizl@unisa.ac.za.

Endo-parasites that affect humans include Plasmodium, the causative agent of
malaria, which remains one of the leading causes of death in human beings.
Despite decades of research, vaccines to this and other endo-parasites remain
elusive. This is in part due to the hyper-variability of the parasites surface
proteins. Generally these surface proteins are encoded by a large family of
genes, with only one being dominantly expressed at certain life stages. Another
layer of complexity can be introduced through the alternative splicing of these
surface proteins. The resulting isoforms may differ from each other with regard
to cell localisation, substrate affinities and functions. They may even differ in
structure to the extent that they are no longer recognised by the host's immune
system. In many cases this leads to changes in the N terminus of these proteins. 
The geographical localisation of endo-parasitic infections around the tropics and
the highest incidences of HIV-1 infection in the same areas, adds a further layer
of complexity as parasitic infections affect the host immune system resulting in 
higher HIV infection rates, faster disease progression, and an increase in the
severity of infections and complications in HIV diagnosis. This review discusses 
some examples of parasite surface proteins that are alternatively spliced in
trypanosomes, Plasmodium and the parasitic worm Schistosoma as well as what role 
alternate splicing may play in the interaction between HIV and these
endo-parasites.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-7-53 
PMCID: PMC4015677
PMID: 24472559  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

