
1. Zhongguo Xue Xi Chong Bing Fang Zhi Za Zhi. 2013 Dec;25(6):598-603, 609.

[Population genetic study of Oncomelania hupensis from three provinces in lower
reaches of Yangtze River].

[Article in Chinese]

Cui B(1), Huo ZP(1), Yang K(2), Zhang L(3), Yang P(3), You P(1), Li SZ(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an 710119, China.
(2)Jiangsu Institute of Parasitic Diseases, China.
(3)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of
Health, WHO Collaborating Center of Malaria, Schistosomiasis and Filariasis,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the population genetic structure and genetic diversity of
Oncomelania hupensis population from Jiangxi, Anhui and Jiangsu provinces along
the lower reaches of the Yangzte River in order to explore the application values
of rDNA-ITS molecular markers in the surveillance of snail dispersal.
METHODS: The samples about 9 species of O. hupensis snails were collected
separately from Jiangxi, Anhui and Jiangsu provinces, and their genomes were
extracted, then the partial gene of rDNA-ITS was amplified, cloned and sequenced.
Next, the population genetic diversity parameters, including Fixation index
(F(st)), genetic distance, and genetic variation were calculated. By using the
neighbor-joining method, the family map was constructed based on the haplotype.
RESULTS: A total of 78 haplotypes among 93 sequences were acquired from 9
populations. The average haplotype diversity and nucleotide diversity of 9
populations were 0.988 and 0.012 88, respectively, which showed that the genetic 
diversity level of O. hupensis snail population was high. The variation was found
mainly among the samples, the genetic distances between populations were ranged
from 0.001 6 to 0.002 3, which showed a higher degree of genetic differentiation 
among snail populations. The family map showed that all the haploid types could
be divided into three major branches.
CONCLUSIONS: The genetic diversity of O. hupensis population in Jiangxi, Anhui
and Jiangsu provinces along the lower reaches of the Yangtze River mainly exists 
among individuals, and there are no obvious genetic differences among
populations. The application of rDNA-ITS molecular markers in surveillance of
snail dispersal is worth further discussing.


PMID: 24490393  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

