
1. Parasit Vectors. 2014 Feb 17;7:71. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-7-71.

Contrasting Plasmodium infection rates and insecticide susceptibility profiles
between the sympatric sibling species Anopheles parensis and Anopheles funestus
s.s: a potential challenge for malaria vector control in Uganda.

Mulamba C, Irving H, Riveron JM, Mukwaya LG, Birungi J, Wondji CS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vector Biology Department, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Pembroke
Place, Liverpool L3 5QA, UK. c.s.wondji@liverpool.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Although the An. funestus group conceals one of the major malaria
vectors in Africa, little is known about the dynamics of members of this group
across the continent. Here, we investigated the species composition, infection
rate and susceptibility to insecticides of this species group in Uganda.
METHODS: Indoor resting blood-fed Anopheles adult female mosquitoes were
collected from 3 districts in Uganda. Mosquitoes morphologically belonging to the
An. funestus group were identified to species by PCR. The sporozoite infection
rates were determined by TaqMan and a nested PCR. Susceptibility to major
insecticides was assessed using WHO bioassays. The potential role of four
candidate resistance genes was assessed using qRT-PCR.
RESULTS: An. funestus s.s. and An. parensis, were the only members of the An.
funestus group identified. Both species were sympatric in Masindi (North-West),
whereas only An. parensis was present in Mityana (Central) and Ntungamo
(South-West). The Plasmodium falciparum infection detected in An. parensis (4.2%)
by TaqMan could not be confirmed by nested PCR, whereas the 5.3% infection in An.
funestus s.s. was confirmed. An. parensis was susceptible to most insecticides,
however, a moderate resistance was observed against deltamethrin and DDT. In the 
sympatric population of Masindi, resistance was observed to pyrethroids
(permethrin and deltamethrin) and DDT, but all the resistant mosquitoes belonged 
to An. funestus s.s. No significant over-expression was observed for the four
P450 candidate genes CYP6M7, CYP9K1, CYP6P9 and CYP6AA4 between deltamethrin
resistant and control An. parensis. However, when compared with the susceptible
FANG An. funestus s.s strain, the CYP9K1 is significantly over-expressed in An.
parensis (15-fold change; P < 0.001), suggesting it could play a role in the
deltamethrin resistance.
CONCLUSION: The contrasting infection rates and insecticide susceptibility
profiles of both species highlights the importance of accurate species
identification for successful vector control programs.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-7-71 
PMCID: PMC3937429
PMID: 24533773  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

