
1. Genome Biol. 2014 Feb 25;15(2):R27. doi: 10.1186/gb-2014-15-2-r27.

A single mutation in the GSTe2 gene allows tracking of metabolically based
insecticide resistance in a major malaria vector.

Riveron JM, Yunta C, Ibrahim SS, Djouaka R, Irving H, Menze BD, Ismail HM,
Hemingway J, Ranson H, Albert A, Wondji CS.

BACKGROUND: Metabolic resistance to insecticides is the biggest threat to the
continued effectiveness of malaria vector control. However, its underlying
molecular basis, crucial for successful resistance management, remains poorly
characterized.
RESULTS: Here, we demonstrate that the single amino acid change L119F in an
upregulated glutathione S-transferase gene, GSTe2, confers high levels of
metabolic resistance to DDT in the malaria vector Anopheles funestus. Genome-wide
transcription analysis revealed that GSTe2 was the most over-expressed
detoxification gene in DDT and permethrin-resistant mosquitoes from Benin.
Transgenic expression of GSTe2 in Drosophila melanogaster demonstrated that
over-transcription of this gene alone confers DDT resistance and cross-resistance
to pyrethroids. Analysis of GSTe2 polymorphism established that the point
mutation is tightly associated with metabolic resistance to DDT and its
geographical distribution strongly correlates with DDT resistance patterns across
Africa. Functional characterization of recombinant GSTe2 further supports the
role of the L119F mutation, with the resistant allele being more efficient at
metabolizing DDT than the susceptible one. Importantly, we also show that GSTe2
directly metabolizes the pyrethroid permethrin. Structural analysis reveals that 
the mutation confers resistance by enlarging the GSTe2 DDT-binding cavity,
leading to increased DDT access and metabolism. Furthermore, we show that GSTe2
is under strong directional selection in resistant populations, and a restriction
of gene flow is observed between African regions, enabling the prediction of the 
future spread of this resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: This first DNA-based metabolic resistance marker in mosquitoes
provides an essential tool to track the evolution of resistance and to design
suitable resistance management strategies.

DOI: 10.1186/gb-2014-15-2-r27 
PMCID: PMC4054843
PMID: 24565444  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

