
1. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2014 Apr;108(4):221-7. doi: 10.1093/trstmh/tru021. Epub
2014 Feb 20.

Effect of Beauveria bassiana infection on detoxification enzyme transcription in 
pyrethroid resistant Anopheles arabiensis: a preliminary study.

Nardini L(1), Blanford S, Coetzee M, Koekemoer LL.

Author information: 
(1)Vector Control Reference Laboratory, Centre for Opportunistic, Tropical and
Hospital Infections, National Institute for Communicable Diseases, a Division of 
the National Health Laboratory Services, Private Bag X4, Sandringham, 2131,
Johannesburg, South Africa.

BACKGROUND: Fungal biopesticides are of great interest to vector control
scientists as they provide a novel and environmentally friendly alternative to
insecticide use. The aim of this study was to determine whether genes associated 
with pyrethroid resistance in Anopheles arabiensis from Sudan and South Africa
are further induced following exposure to the entomopathogenic fungus, Beauveria 
bassiana (strain GHA).
METHODS: Following B. bassiana bioassays, RNA was extracted from infected
mosquitoes and the transcription of four important insecticide resistance genes, 
CYP9L1, CYP6M2 and CYP4G16 (cytochrome P450s) and TPX4 (thioredoxin peroxidase)
was investigated using quantitative real-time PCR.
RESULTS: Beauveria bassiana strain GHA was highly infective and virulent against 
An. arabiensis. In terms of changes in gene transcription, overall, the fold
change (FC) values for each gene in the infected strains, were lower than 1.5.
The FC values of CYP9L1, CYP6M2 and TPX4, were significantly lower than the FC
values of the same genes in uninfected resistant An. arabiensis.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that B. bassiana does not enhance the pyrethroid
resistant phenotype on a molecular level as the two An. arabiensis strains used
here, with different pyrethroid resistance mechanisms, revealed no increase in
pre-existing metabolic transcripts. This supports the fact that fungal pathogens 
are suitable candidates for vector control, particularly with regard to the
development of novel vector control strategies.

DOI: 10.1093/trstmh/tru021 
PMID: 24561325  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

