
1. Parasit Vectors. 2014 Mar 3;7:92. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-7-92.

Insecticide resistance of Anopheles sinensis and An. vagus in Hainan Island, a
malaria-endemic area of China.

Qin Q, Li Y, Zhong D, Zhou N, Chang X, Li C, Cui L, Yan G, Chen XG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Prevention and Control for Emerging Infectious Diseases of
Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Department of Pathogen Biology, School of 
Public Health and Tropical Medicine, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou,
Guangdong 510515, China. xgchen2001@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Malaria is one of the most important public health problems in
Southeast Asia, including Hainan Island, China. Vector control is the main
malaria control measure, and insecticide resistance is a major concern for the
effectiveness of chemical insecticide control programs. The objective of this
study is to determine the resistance status of the main malaria vector species to
pyrethroids and other insecticides recommended by the World Health Organization
(WHO) for indoor residual sprays.
METHODS: The larvae and pupae of Anopheles mosquitoes were sampled from multiple 
sites in Hainan Island, and five sites yielded sufficient mosquitoes for
insecticide susceptibility bioassays. Bioassays of female adult mosquitoes three 
days after emergence were conducted in the two most abundant species, Anopheles
sinensis and An. vagus, using three insecticides (0.05% deltamethrin, 4% DDT, and
5% malathion) and following the WHO standard tube assay procedure. P450
monooxygenase, glutathione S-transferase and carboxylesterase activities were
measured. Mutations at the knockdown resistance (kdr) gene and the ace-1 gene
were detected by DNA sequencing and PCR-RFLP analysis, respectively.
RESULTS: An. sinensis and An. vagus were the predominant Anopheles mosquito
species. An. sinensis was found to be resistant to DDT and deltamethrin. An.
vagus was susceptible to deltamethrin but resistant to DDT and malathion. Low kdr
mutation (L1014F) frequency (<10%) was detected in An. sinensis, but no kdr
mutation was detected in An. vagus populations. Modest to high (45%-75%) ace-1
mutation frequency was found in An. sinensis populations, but no ace-1 mutation
was detected in An. vagus populations. Significantly higher P450 monooxygenase
and carboxylesterase activities were detected in deltamethrin-resistant An.
sinensis, and significantly higher P450 monooxygenase, glutathione S-transferase 
and carboxylesterase activities were found in malathion-resistant An. vagus
mosquitoes.
CONCLUSIONS: Multiple insecticide resistance was found in An. sinensis and An.
vagus in Hainan Island, a malaria-endemic area of China. Cost-effective
integrated vector control programs that go beyond synthetic insecticides are
urgently needed.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-7-92 
PMCID: PMC3975898
PMID: 24589247  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

