
1. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 24;9(2):e89473. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089473. eCollection
2014.

Modulation of Anopheles stephensi gene expression by nitroquine, an antimalarial 
drug against Plasmodium yoelii infection in the mosquito.

Zhang J(1), Zhang S(2), Wang Y(1), Xu W(1), Zhang J(1), Jiang H(2), Huang F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, The Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, 
P. R. China.
(2)Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology, Oklahoma State University,
Stillwater, Oklahoma, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Antimalarial drugs may impact mosquito's defense against Plasmodium
parasites. Our previous study showed nitroquine significantly reduced infection
of Anopheles stephensi by Plasmodium yoelii, but the underlying mechanism remains
unclear. In order to understand how transmission capacity of An. stephensi was
affected by nitroquine, we explored the transcriptome of adult females after
different treatments, examined changes in gene expression profiles, and
identified transcripts affected by the drug and parasite.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We extended massively parallel sequencing and
data analysis (including gene discovery, expression profiling, and function
prediction) to An. stephensi before and after Plasmodium infection with or
without nitroquine treatment. Using numbers of reads assembled into specific
contigs to calculate relative abundances (RAs), we categorized the assembled
contigs into four groups according to the differences in RA values infection
induced, infection suppressed, drug induced, and drug suppressed. We found both
nitroquine in the blood meal and Plasmodium infection altered transcription of
mosquito genes implicated in diverse processes, including pathogen recognition,
signal transduction, prophenoloxidase activation, cytoskeleton assembling, cell
adhesion, and oxidative stress. The differential gene expression may have
promoted certain defense responses of An. stephensi against the parasite and
decreased its infectivity.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our study indicated that nitroquine may regulate
several immune mechanisms at the level of gene transcription in the mosquito
against Plasmodium infection. This highlights the need for better understanding
of antimalarial drug's impact on parasite survival and transmission. In addition,
our data largely enriched the existing sequence information of An. stephensi, an 
epidemiologically important vector species.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089473 
PMCID: PMC3933544
PMID: 24586804  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

