
1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Mar 6;10(3):e1003897. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003897.
eCollection 2014 Mar.

Genetic dissection of Anopheles gambiae gut epithelial responses to Serratia
marcescens.

Stathopoulos S(1), Neafsey DE(2), Lawniczak MK(1), Muskavitch MA(3),
Christophides GK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(3)Boston College, Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(4)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom; 
The Cyprus Institute, Nicosia, Cyprus.

Genetic variation in the mosquito Anopheles gambiae profoundly influences its
ability to transmit malaria. Mosquito gut bacteria are shown to influence the
outcome of infections with Plasmodium parasites and are also thought to exert a
strong drive on genetic variation through natural selection; however, a link
between antibacterial effects and genetic variation is yet to emerge. Here, we
combined SNP genotyping and expression profiling with phenotypic analyses of
candidate genes by RNAi-mediated silencing and 454 pyrosequencing to investigate 
this intricate biological system. We identified 138 An. gambiae genes to be
genetically associated with the outcome of Serratia marcescens infection,
including the peptidoglycan recognition receptor PGRPLC that triggers activation 
of the antibacterial IMD/REL2 pathway and the epidermal growth factor receptor
EGFR. Silencing of three genes encoding type III fibronectin domain proteins
(FN3Ds) increased the Serratia load and altered the gut microbiota composition in
favor of Enterobacteriaceae. These data suggest that natural genetic variation in
immune-related genes can shape the bacterial population structure of the mosquito
gut with high specificity. Importantly, FN3D2 encodes a homolog of the
hypervariable pattern recognition receptor Dscam, suggesting that
pathogen-specific recognition may involve a broader family of immune factors.
Additionally, we showed that silencing the gene encoding the gustatory receptor
Gr9 that is also associated with the Serratia infection phenotype drastically
increased Serratia levels. The Gr9 antibacterial activity appears to be related
to mosquito feeding behavior and to mostly rely on changes of neuropeptide F
expression, together suggesting a behavioral immune response following Serratia
infection. Our findings reveal that the mosquito response to oral Serratia
infection comprises both an epithelial and a behavioral immune component.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003897 
PMCID: PMC3946313
PMID: 24603764  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

