
1. Malar J. 2014 Mar 15;13:99. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-99.

Rapid detection of Plasmodium falciparum with isothermal recombinase polymerase
amplification and lateral flow analysis.

Kersting S(1), Rausch V, Bier FF, von Nickisch-Rosenegk M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nanobiotechnology and Nanomedicine, Fraunhofer Institute for
Biomedical Engineering (IBMT), Branch Potsdam, Am Muehlenberg 13, 14476
Potsdam-Golm, Germany. sebastian.kersting@ibmt.fraunhofer.de.

BACKGROUND: Nucleic acid amplification is the most sensitive and specific method 
to detect Plasmodium falciparum. However the polymerase chain reaction remains
laboratory-based and has to be conducted by trained personnel. Furthermore, the
power dependency for the thermocycling process and the costly equipment necessary
for the read-out are difficult to cover in resource-limited settings. This study 
aims to develop and evaluate a combination of isothermal nucleic acid
amplification and simple lateral flow dipstick detection of the malaria parasite 
for point-of-care testing.
METHODS: A specific fragment of the 18S rRNA gene of P. falciparum was amplified 
in 10 min at a constant 38°C using the isothermal recombinase polymerase
amplification (RPA) method. With a unique probe system added to the reaction
solution, the amplification product can be visualized on a simple lateral flow
strip without further labelling. The combination of these methods was tested for 
sensitivity and specificity with various Plasmodium and other protozoa/bacterial 
strains, as well as with human DNA. Additional investigations were conducted to
analyse the temperature optimum, reaction speed and robustness of this assay.
RESULTS: The lateral flow RPA (LF-RPA) assay exhibited a high sensitivity and
specificity. Experiments confirmed a detection limit as low as 100 fg of genomic 
P. falciparum DNA, corresponding to a sensitivity of approximately four parasites
per reaction. All investigated P. falciparum strains (n=77) were positively
tested while all of the total 11 non-Plasmodium samples, showed a negative test
result. The enzymatic reaction can be conducted under a broad range of conditions
from 30-45°C with high inhibitory concentration of known PCR inhibitors. A time
to result of 15 min from start of the reaction to read-out was determined.
CONCLUSIONS: Combining the isothermal RPA and the lateral flow detection is an
approach to improve molecular diagnostic for P. falciparum in resource-limited
settings. The system requires none or only little instrumentation for the nucleic
acid amplification reaction and the read-out is possible with the naked eye.
Showing the same sensitivity and specificity as comparable diagnostic methods but
simultaneously increasing reaction speed and dramatically reducing assay
requirements, the method has potential to become a true point-of-care test for
the malaria parasite.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-99 
PMCID: PMC4004163
PMID: 24629133  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

