
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014 Mar 27;8(3):e2751. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002751.
eCollection 2014 Mar.

Enhanced protective efficacy of nonpathogenic recombinant leishmania tarentolae
expressing cysteine proteinases combined with a sand fly salivary antigen.

Zahedifard F(1), Gholami E(1), Taheri T(1), Taslimi Y(1), Doustdari F(1), Seyed
N(1), Torkashvand F(2), Meneses C(3), Papadopoulou B(4), Kamhawi S(3), Valenzuela
JG(3), Rafati S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology and Vaccine Research Laboratory, Pasteur Institute of
Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Vector Molecular Biology Section, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institute of
Health, Rockville, Maryland, United States of America.
(4)Research Centre in Infectious Disease, CHUL Research Centre (CHU de Québec
Research Centre) and Department of Microbiology, Infectious Disease and
Immunology, Laval University, Quebec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Novel vaccination approaches are needed to prevent leishmaniasis.
Live attenuated vaccines are the gold standard for protection against
intracellular pathogens such as Leishmania and there have been new developments
in this field. The nonpathogenic to humans lizard protozoan parasite, Leishmania 
(L) tarentolae, has been used effectively as a vaccine platform against visceral 
leishmaniasis in experimental animal models. Correspondingly, pre-exposure to
sand fly saliva or immunization with a salivary protein has been shown to protect
mice against cutaneous leishmaniasis.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here, we tested the efficacy of a novel
combination of established protective parasite antigens expressed by L.
tarentolae together with a sand fly salivary antigen as a vaccine strategy
against L. major infection. The immunogenicity and protective efficacy of
different DNA/Live and Live/Live prime-boost vaccination modalities with live
recombinant L. tarentolae stably expressing cysteine proteinases (type I and II, 
CPA/CPB) and PpSP15, an immunogenic salivary protein from Phlebotomus papatasi, a
natural vector of L. major, were tested both in susceptible BALB/c and resistant 
C57BL/6 mice. Both humoral and cellular immune responses were assessed before
challenge and at 3 and 10 weeks after Leishmania infection. In both strains of
mice, the strongest protective effect was observed when priming with PpSP15 DNA
and boosting with PpSP15 DNA and live recombinant L. tarentolae stably expressing
cysteine proteinase genes.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: The present study is the first to use a combination of
recombinant L. tarentolae with a sand fly salivary antigen (PpSP15) and
represents a novel promising vaccination approach against leishmaniasis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002751 
PMCID: PMC3967951
PMID: 24675711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

