
1. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 1;9(4):e93268. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093268. eCollection 
2014.

The contribution of natural killer complex loci to the development of
experimental cerebral malaria.

Hansen DS(1), Ryg-Cornejo V(2), Ioannidis LJ(1), Chiu CY(2), Ly A(1), Nie CQ(3), 
Scalzo AA(4), Schofield L(5).

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.
(2)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia; Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia.
(3)Burnet Institute, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(4)Centre for Experimental Immunology, Lions Eye Institute, Nedlands, Western
Australia, Australia; Centre for Ophthalmology and Visual Science, The University
of Western Australia, Nedlands, Western Australia, Australia.
(5)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia; Australian Institute of Tropical Health and Medicine, James Cook
University, Douglas, Queensland, Australia.

BACKGROUND: The Natural Killer Complex (NKC) is a genetic region of highly linked
genes encoding several receptors involved in the control of NK cell function. The
NKC is highly polymorphic and allelic variability of various NKC loci has been
demonstrated in inbred mice, providing evidence for NKC haplotypes. Using
BALB.B6-Cmv1r congenic mice, in which NKC genes from C57BL/6 mice were introduced
into the BALB/c background, we have previously shown that the NKC is a genetic
determinant of malarial pathogenesis. C57BL/6 alleles are associated with
increased disease-susceptibility as BALB.B6-Cmv1r congenic mice had increased
cerebral pathology and death rates during P. berghei ANKA infection than cerebral
malaria-resistant BALB/c controls.
METHODS: To investigate which regions of the NKC are involved in susceptibility
to experimental cerebral malaria (ECM), intra-NKC congenic mice generated by
backcrossing recombinant F2 progeny from a (BALB/c x BALB.B6-Cmv1r) F1 intercross
to BALB/c mice were infected with P. berghei ANKA.
RESULTS: Our results revealed that C57BL/6 alleles at two locations in the NKC
contribute to the development of ECM. The increased severity to severe disease in
intra-NKC congenic mice was not associated with higher parasite burdens but
correlated with a significantly enhanced systemic IFN-γ response to infection and
an increased recruitment of CD8+ T cells to the brain of infected animals.
CONCLUSIONS: Polymorphisms within the NKC modulate malarial pathogenesis and
acquired immune responses to infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093268 
PMCID: PMC3972225
PMID: 24691125  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

