
1. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 11;9(4):e94877. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094877. eCollection
2014.

Multi-strain infections and 'relapse' of Leucocytozoon sabrazesi gametocytes in
domestic chickens in southern China.

Zhao W(1), Cai B(1), Qi Y(2), Liu S(1), Hong L(1), Lu M(1), Chen X(1), Qiu C(3), 
Peng W(1), Li J(1), Su XZ(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, School of Life Sciences,
Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, the People's Republic of China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, School of Life Sciences,
Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, the People's Republic of China; Laboratory of 
Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, Maryland, United States 
of America.
(3)College of Life Sciences, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou, 
Fujian, the People's Republic of China.

Leucocytozoon parasites infect many species of avian hosts, including domestic
chicken, and can inflict heavy economic loss to the poultry industry. Although
the prevalence and distribution of two Leucocytozoon species (L. sabrazesi and L.
caulleryi) have been reported in China previously, there are many questions
related to the parasite infection that remain unanswered, including population
diversity and transmission dynamics in domestic chickens. Here we surveyed
chicken blood samples from seven sites in four provinces of China to identify
Leucocytozoon infection, characterized parasite diversity within individual
infected hosts and between sampling sites, and investigated the dynamics of
gametocytemia in chickens over time. We found high infection rates in three of
the seven sites. Clustering parasite sequences of the mitochondrial cytochrome
oxidase III (coxIII) and cytochrome b (cytb) genes showed lack of grouping
according to geographic origins and individual hosts carrying large numbers of L.
sabrazesi strains. Monitoring gametocytemia in blood samples from infected
chickens over time showed 'relapse' or persistence of low-level gametocytemia for
4-5 months, which could be explored as an in vivo model for testing drugs against
liver stages of Apicomplexan parasites. This study provides important information
on population diversity and transmission dynamics of L. sabrazesi and for disease
control.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094877 
PMCID: PMC3984278
PMID: 24728499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

