
1. Mol Biol Evol. 2014 Jul;31(7):1649-60. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msu140. Epub 2014 Apr 
16.

Origin of robustness in generating drug-resistant malaria parasites.

Kümpornsin K(1), Modchang C(2), Heinberg A(3), Ekland EH(4), Jirawatcharadech
P(1), Chobson P(1), Suwanakitti N(5), Chaotheing S(5), Wilairat P(1), Deitsch
KW(3), Kamchonwongpaisan S(5), Fidock DA(6), Kirkman LA(7), Yuthavong Y(5),
Chookajorn T(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
ThailandBiophysics Group, Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New 
York, NY.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University College of
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY.
(5)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, National Science
and Technology Development Agency, Pathum Thani, Thailand.
(6)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University College of
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NYDivision of Infectious Diseases, Department 
of Medicine, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York,
NY.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New 
York, NYDivision of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York, NY.
(8)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
ThailandCenter of Excellence in Malaria, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand thanat.cho@mahidol.edu.

Biological robustness allows mutations to accumulate while maintaining functional
phenotypes. Despite its crucial role in evolutionary processes, the mechanistic
details of how robustness originates remain elusive. Using an evolutionary
trajectory analysis approach, we demonstrate how robustness evolved in malaria
parasites under selective pressure from an antimalarial drug inhibiting the
folate synthesis pathway. A series of four nonsynonymous amino acid substitutions
at the targeted enzyme, dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), render the parasites
highly resistant to the antifolate drug pyrimethamine. Nevertheless, the stepwise
gain of these four dhfr mutations results in tradeoffs between pyrimethamine
resistance and parasite fitness. Here, we report the epistatic interaction
between dhfr mutations and amplification of the gene encoding the first upstream 
enzyme in the folate pathway, GTP cyclohydrolase I (GCH1). gch1 amplification
confers low level pyrimethamine resistance and would thus be selected for by
pyrimethamine treatment. Interestingly, the gch1 amplification can then be
co-opted by the parasites because it reduces the cost of acquiring drug-resistant
dhfr mutations downstream in the same metabolic pathway. The compensation of
compromised fitness by extra GCH1 is an example of how robustness can evolve in a
system and thus expand the accessibility of evolutionary trajectories leading
toward highly resistant alleles. The evolution of robustness during the gain of
drug-resistant mutations has broad implications for both the development of new
drugs and molecular surveillance for resistance to existing drugs.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msu140 
PMCID: PMC4069624
PMID: 24739308  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

