
1. BMC Biol. 2014 Apr 14;12:27. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-12-27.

Genomic composition and evolution of Aedes aegypti chromosomes revealed by the
analysis of physically mapped supercontigs.

Timoshevskiy VA, Kinney NA, deBruyn BS, Mao C, Tu Z, Severson DW, Sharakhov IV,
Sharakhova MV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Fralin Life Science Institute, Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, VA, USA. msharakh@vt.edu.

BACKGROUND: An initial comparative genomic study of the malaria vector Anopheles 
gambiae and the yellow fever mosquito Aedes aegypti revealed striking differences
in the genome assembly size and in the abundance of transposable elements between
the two species. However, the chromosome arms homology between An. gambiae and
Ae. aegypti, as well as the distribution of genes and repetitive elements in
chromosomes of Ae. aegypti, remained largely unexplored because of the lack of a 
detailed physical genome map for the yellow fever mosquito.
RESULTS: Using a molecular landmark-guided fluorescent in situ hybridization
approach, we mapped 624 Mb of the Ae. aegypti genome to mitotic chromosomes. We
used this map to analyze the distribution of genes, tandem repeats and
transposable elements along the chromosomes and to explore the patterns of
chromosome homology and rearrangements between Ae. aegypti and An. gambiae. The
study demonstrated that the q arm of the sex-determining chromosome 1 had the
lowest gene content and the highest density of minisatellites. A comparative
genomic analysis with An. gambiae determined that the previously proposed
whole-arm synteny is not fully preserved; a number of pericentric inversions have
occurred between the two species. The sex-determining chromosome 1 had a higher
rate of genome rearrangements than observed in autosomes 2 and 3 of Ae. aegypti.
CONCLUSIONS: The study developed a physical map of 45% of the Ae. aegypti genome 
and provided new insights into genomic composition and evolution of Ae. aegypti
chromosomes. Our data suggest that minisatellites rather than transposable
elements played a major role in rapid evolution of chromosome 1 in the Aedes
lineage. The research tools and information generated by this study contribute to
a more complete understanding of the genome organization and evolution in
mosquitoes.

DOI: 10.1186/1741-7007-12-27 
PMCID: PMC4021624
PMID: 24731704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

