
1. Malar J. 2014 Apr 19;13:150. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-150.

Biochemical and functional characterization of Plasmodium falciparum GTP
cyclohydrolase I.

Kümpornsin K, Kotanan N, Chobson P, Kochakarn T, Jirawatcharadech P,
Jaru-ampornpan P, Yuthavong Y, Chookajorn T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok
10400, Thailand. thanat.cho@mahidol.edu.

BACKGROUND: Antifolates are currently in clinical use for malaria preventive
therapy and treatment. The drugs kill the parasites by targeting the enzymes in
the de novo folate pathway. The use of antifolates has now been limited by the
spread of drug-resistant mutations. GTP cyclohydrolase I (GCH1) is the first and 
the rate-limiting enzyme in the folate pathway. The amplification of the gch1
gene found in certain Plasmodium falciparum isolates can cause antifolate
resistance and influence the course of antifolate resistance evolution. These
findings showed the importance of P. falciparum GCH1 in drug resistance
intervention. However, little is known about P. falciparum GCH1 in terms of
kinetic parameters and functional assays, precluding the opportunity to obtain
the key information on its catalytic reaction and to eventually develop this
enzyme as a drug target.
METHODS: Plasmodium falciparum GCH1 was cloned and expressed in bacteria.
Enzymatic activity was determined by the measurement of fluorescent converted
neopterin with assay validation by using mutant and GTP analogue. The genetic
complementation study was performed in ∆folE bacteria to functionally identify
the residues and domains of P. falciparum GCH1 required for its enzymatic
activity. Plasmodial GCH1 sequences were aligned and structurally modeled to
reveal conserved catalytic residues.
RESULTS: Kinetic parameters and optimal conditions for enzymatic reactions were
determined by the fluorescence-based assay. The inhibitor test against P.
falciparum GCH1 is now possible as indicated by the inhibitory effect by
8-oxo-GTP. Genetic complementation was proven to be a convenient method to study 
the function of P. falciparum GCH1. A series of domain truncations revealed that 
the conserved core domain of GCH1 is responsible for its enzymatic activity.
Homology modelling fits P. falciparum GCH1 into the classic Tunnelling-fold
structure with well-conserved catalytic residues at the active site.
CONCLUSIONS: Functional assays for P. falciparum GCH1 based on enzymatic activity
and genetic complementation were successfully developed. The assays in
combination with a homology model characterized the enzymatic activity of P.
falciparum GCH1 and the importance of its key amino acid residues. The potential 
to use the assay for inhibitor screening was validated by 8-oxo-GTP, a known GTP 
analogue inhibitor.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-150 
PMCID: PMC4005822
PMID: 24745605  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

