
1. Avian Dis. 2014 Mar;58(1):111-7.

Disease screening of three breeding populations of adult exhibition budgerigars
(Melopsittacus undulatus) in New Zealand reveals a high prevalence of a novel
polyomavirus and avian malaria infection.

Baron HR, Howe L, Varsani A, Doneley RJ.

Disease surveillance is vital to the management of New Zealand's endemic and
threatened avian species. Three infectious agents that are potential threats to
New Zealand's endemic birds include avian polyomavirus (APV), beak and feather
disease virus (BFDV), and avian malaria. All three agents have been reported in
New Zealand; however, possible reservoir populations have not been identified. In
this communication, we report the first study of APV, BFDV, and avian malaria in 
introduced adult exhibition budgerigars (Melopsittacus undulatus) in New Zealand.
Blood samples were collected from 90 living adult budgerigars from three breeding
locations in the North Island of New Zealand. An overall APV prevalence of 22%
was determined using a broad-spectrum nested PCR that amplified the major capsid 
protein VP1 gene of polyomavirus. Phylogenetic analysis of the VP1 gene revealed 
a unique isolate of APV, which had a sequence divergence of 32% to previously
reported budgerigar fledgling disease strains and 33% to the recently reported
New Zealand finch isolate. All of the budgerigars sampled were found to be PCR
negative for BFDV, and an overall prevalence of 30% was detected by PCR for avian
malaria. Sequencing revealed the presence of ubiquitous malarial strains and also
the potentially destructive Plasmodium relictum strain. The results of this study
suggest that both APV and avian malaria are present in New Zealand adult
budgerigars, and our study highlights the need for further studies to determine
whether these pathogens in captive bird populations may be a threat or spill over
into New Zealand's endemic and threatened avifauna and whether prevention and
control methods need to be implemented.

DOI: 10.1637/10604-063013-REG.1 
PMID: 24758122  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

