
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014 Apr 24;8(4):e2781. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002781.
eCollection 2014 Apr.

Characterization of the early inflammatory infiltrate at the feeding site of
infected sand flies in mice protected from vector-transmitted Leishmania major by
exposure to uninfected bites.

Teixeira C(1), Gomes R(1), Oliveira F(2), Meneses C(2), Gilmore DC(2), Elnaiem
DE(3), Valenzuela JG(2), Kamhawi S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Vector Molecular Biology Section, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Rockville, Maryland, United States of America; Centro de Pesquisas
Gonçalo Moniz, Fiocruz, Bahia, Brazil.
(2)Vector Molecular Biology Section, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Rockville, Maryland, United States of America.
(3)Department of Zoology, University of Maryland Eastern Shore, Princess Anne,
Maryland, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Mice exposed to sand fly saliva are protected against
vector-transmitted Leishmania major. Although protection has been related to
IFN-γ producing T cells, the early inflammatory response orchestrating this
outcome has not been defined.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Mice exposed to uninfected P. duboscqi bites and 
naïve mice were challenged with L. major-infected flies to characterize their
early immune response at the bite site. Mostly, chemokine and cytokine transcript
expression post-infected bites was amplified in exposed compared to naïve mice.
In exposed mice, induced chemokines were mostly involved in leukocyte recruitment
and T cell and NK cell activation; IL-4 was expressed at 6 h followed by IFN-γ
and iNOS2 as well as IL-5 and IL-10 expression. In naïve animals, the transcript 
expression following Leishmania-infected sand fly bites was suppressed.
Expression profiles translated to an earlier and significantly larger recruitment
of leukocytes including neutrophils, macrophages, Gr+ monocytes, NK cells and
CD4+ T cells to the bite site of exposed compared to naïve mice post-infected
bites. Additionally, up to 48 hours post-infected bites the number of
IFN-γ-producing CD4+ T cells and NK cells arriving at the bite site was
significantly higher in exposed compared to naïve mice. Thereafter, NK cells
become cytolytic and persist at the bite site up to a week post-bite.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: The quiet environment induced by a Leishmania-infected
sand fly bite in naïve mice was significantly altered in animals previously
exposed to saliva of uninfected flies. We propose that the enhanced recruitment
of Gr+ monocytes, NK cells and CD4 Th1 cells observed at the bite site of exposed
mice creates an inhospitable environment that counters the establishment of L.
major infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002781 
PMCID: PMC3998922
PMID: 24762408  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

