
1. PLoS Genet. 2014 May 8;10(5):e1004355. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004355.
eCollection 2014 May.

A lack of parasitic reduction in the obligate parasitic green alga
Helicosporidium.

Pombert JF(1), Blouin NA(2), Lane C(2), Boucias D(3), Keeling PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, Department of Botany, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Rhode Island, Kingston, Rhode
Island, United States of America.
(3)Entomology and Nematology Department, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida, United States of America.

The evolution of an obligate parasitic lifestyle is often associated with genomic
reduction, in particular with the loss of functions associated with increasing
host-dependence. This is evident in many parasites, but perhaps the most extreme 
transitions are from free-living autotrophic algae to obligate parasites. The
best-known examples of this are the apicomplexans such as Plasmodium, which
evolved from algae with red secondary plastids. However, an analogous transition 
also took place independently in the Helicosporidia, where an obligate parasite
of animals with an intracellular infection mechanism evolved from algae with
green primary plastids. We characterised the nuclear genome of Helicosporidium to
compare its transition to parasitism with that of apicomplexans. The
Helicosporidium genome is small and compact, even by comparison with the
relatively small genomes of the closely related green algae Chlorella and
Coccomyxa, but at the functional level we find almost no evidence for reduction. 
Nearly all ancestral metabolic functions are retained, with the single major
exception of photosynthesis, and even here reduction is not complete. The great
majority of genes for light-harvesting complexes, photosystems, and pigment
biosynthesis have been lost, but those for other photosynthesis-related
functions, such as Calvin cycle, are retained. Rather than loss of whole function
categories, the predominant reductive force in the Helicosporidium genome is a
contraction of gene family complexity, but even here most losses affect families 
associated with genome maintenance and expression, not functions associated with 
host-dependence. Other gene families appear to have expanded in response to
parasitism, in particular chitinases, including those predicted to digest the
chitinous barriers of the insect host or remodel the cell wall of
Helicosporidium. Overall, the Helicosporidium genome presents a fascinating
picture of the early stages of a transition from free-living autotroph to
parasitic heterotroph where host-independence has been unexpectedly preserved.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004355 
PMCID: PMC4014436
PMID: 24809511  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

