
1. PLoS One. 2014 May 8;9(5):e97185. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097185. eCollection 
2014.

Haemoproteus iwa in Great Frigatebirds (Fregata minor) in the Islands of the
Western Indian Ocean.

Bastien M(1), Jaeger A(2), Le Corre M(2), Tortosa P(3), Lebarbenchon C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche et de Veille sur les maladies émergentes dans l'Océan
Indien, Sainte Clotilde, Reunion Island; Laboratoire d'Ecologie Marine,
Université de La Réunion, Saint Denis, Reunion Island.
(2)Laboratoire d'Ecologie Marine, Université de La Réunion, Saint Denis, Reunion 
Island.
(3)Centre de Recherche et de Veille sur les maladies émergentes dans l'Océan
Indien, Sainte Clotilde, Reunion Island; Université de la Réunion, Saint Denis,
Reunion Island.

Blood parasites of the sub-genus Haemoproteus have been reported in seabirds, in 
particular in species in the Suliformes order. These parasites are transmitted by
hippoboscid flies of the genus Olfersia; strong specificity has been suggested
between the vector and its vertebrate host. We investigated the prevalence of
Haemoproteus infection in Suliformes and hippoboscid flies in two oceanic islands
of the Western Indian Ocean: Europa and Tromelin. In total, 209 blood samples
were collected from great frigatebirds (Fregata minor), masked boobies (Sula
dactylatra) and red-footed boobies (Sula sula). Forty-one hippoboscid flies were 
also collected from birds. Seventeen frigatebirds and one fly collected on Europa
tested positive for the presence of Haemoproteus parasites by polymerase chain
reaction. Phylogenetic analyses based on partial sequences of the Cytochrome b
gene showed that parasites were closely related to Haemoproteus iwa reported from
frigatebirds in the Pacific Ocean and in the Caribbean. Plasmodium was also
detected in a frigatebird on Europa; however, its placement on the phylogenetic
tree could not be resolved. We provide strong support for transmission of blood
parasites in seabirds in the Western Indian Ocean and suggest that migrations
between the Pacific and the Indian oceans could favor the large-scale
distribution of Haemoproteus iwa in frigatebird populations.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097185 
PMCID: PMC4014603
PMID: 24810172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

