
1. Avicenna J Med Biotechnol. 2014 Apr;6(2):72-80.

Development of a High-resolution Melting Analysis Method Based on SYBR Green-I
for rs7216389 Locus Genotyping in Asthmatic Child Patients.

Vali Z(1), Raz A(2), Bokharaei H(2), Nabavi M(3), Bemanian MH(3), Yazdi MS(4),
Djadid ND(2).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center,
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran ; Department of Pediatrics, Shahid
Sadoughi Hospital, School of Medicine, Shahid Sadoughi University of Medical
Sciences, Yazd, Iran.
(2)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center,
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department Allergy and Immunology, Hazrate Rasoul Akram Hospital, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Boo-Ali Polyclinic of Social Security Organization, Kashan, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Asthma is caused by the combination of different factors. Current
concepts of asthma pathogenesis emphasize on gene-environment interactions.
Mega-genome scanning projects revealed that different Single Nucleotide
Polymorphisms (SNPs) are related to asthma susceptibility. rs7216389-T is one of 
them that is related to childhood asthma and its effect on childhood asthma
severity has been proved in different nations, however no study has been
performed in Eastern Mediterranean and Middle East countries yet.
METHODS: To perform population genetic studies, a rapid and high-throughput
screening method is necessary. High-resolution melting analysis is a rapid,
powerful and accurate method, which is suitable for this type of studies.
Therefore, it has been decided to develop a high-resolution melting method for
rs7216389 locus genotyping in Iranian asthmatic children. In the current study, a
high-resolution melting analysis method based on SYBR Green-I was developed to
check the frequency of rs7216389-T mutation in Iranian asthmatic children for the
first time.
RESULTS: Second and third classes of intercalating dyes are commonly used for
high-resolution melting method. However, in this study, SYBR Green-I was used for
rs7216389 locus genotyping for the first time. Our results for 60 samples showed 
that SYBR Green-I has good efficacy for rs7216389 locus genotyping through
high-resolution melting method in comparison with PCR-RFLP and sequencing.
CONCLUSION: Comparison of our results based on HRM analysis with PCR-RFLP showed 
that our developed method is rapid, accurate, high-throughput and economic to
study the rs7216389 locus in asthmatic children and it is applicable for other
similar population genetic studies.


PMCID: PMC4009098
PMID: 24834309 

