
1. Mol Ecol. 2014 Apr;23(8):1979-93.

Patterns of selection on Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte-binding antigens after
the colonization of the New World.

Yalcindag E, Rougeron V, Elguero E, Arnathau C, Durand P, Brisse S, Diancourt L, 
Aubouy A, Becquart P, D'Alessandro U, Fontenille D, Gamboa D, Maestre A, Ménard
D, Musset L, Noya O, Veron V, Wide A, Carme B, Legrand E, Chevillon C, Ayala FJ, 
Renaud F, Prugnolle F.

Pathogens, which have recently colonized a new host species or new populations of
the same host, are interesting models for understanding how populations may
evolve in response to novel environments. During its colonization of South
America from Africa, Plasmodium falciparum, the main agent of malaria, has been
exposed to new conditions in distinctive new human populations (Amerindian and
populations of mixed origins) that likely exerted new selective pressures on the 
parasite's genome. Among the genes that might have experienced strong selective
pressures in response to these environmental changes, the eba genes
(erythrocyte-binding antigens genes), which are involved in the invasion of the
human red blood cells, constitute good candidates. In this study, we analysed, in
South America, the polymorphism of three eba genes (eba-140, eba-175, eba-181)
and compared it to the polymorphism observed in African populations. The aim was 
to determine whether these genes faced selective pressures in South America
distinct from what they experienced in Africa. Patterns of genetic variability of
these genes were compared to the patterns observed at two housekeeping genes
(adsl and serca) and 272 SNPs to separate adaptive effects from demographic
effects. We show that, conversely to Africa, eba-140 seemed to be under stronger 
diversifying selection in South America than eba-175. In contrast, eba-181 did
not show any sign of departure from neutrality. These changes in the patterns of 
selection on the eba genes could be the consequence of changes in the host immune
response, the host receptor polymorphisms and/or the ability of the parasite to
silence or express differentially its invasion proteins.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.12696 
PMID: 24834503  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

