
1. PLoS One. 2014 May 19;9(5):e97625. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097625. eCollection
2014.

Identifying novel cell cycle proteins in Apicomplexa parasites through
co-expression decision analysis.

Butler CL(1), Lucas O(1), Wuchty S(2), Xue B(1), Uversky VN(1), White M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Morsani College of Medicine, University of
South Florida, Tampa, Florida, United States of America.
(2)National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
(3)Department of Global Health, College of Public Health, University of South
Florida, Tampa, Florida, United States of America; Florida Center for Drug
Discovery and Innovation, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, United
States of America.

Hypothetical proteins comprise roughly half of the predicted gene complement of
Toxoplasma gondii and Plasmodium falciparum and represent the largest class of
uniquely functioning proteins in these parasites. Following the idea that
functional relationships can be informed by the timing of gene expression, we
devised a strategy to identify the core set of apicomplexan cell division cycling
genes with important roles in parasite division, which includes many
uncharacterized proteins. We assembled an expanded list of orthologs from the T. 
gondii and P. falciparum genome sequences (2781 putative orthologs), compared
their mRNA profiles during synchronous replication, and sorted the resulting set 
of dual cell cycle regulated orthologs (744 total) into protein pairs conserved
across many eukaryotic families versus those unique to the Apicomplexa. The
analysis identified more than 100 ortholog gene pairs with unknown function in T.
gondii and P. falciparum that displayed co-conserved mRNA abundance, dynamics of 
cyclical expression and similar peak timing that spanned the complete division
cycle in each parasite. The unknown cyclical mRNAs encoded a diverse set of
proteins with a wide range of mass and showed a remarkable conservation in the
internal organization of ordered versus disordered structural domains. A
representative sample of cyclical unknown genes (16 total) was epitope tagged in 
T. gondii tachyzoites yielding the discovery of new protein constituents of the
parasite inner membrane complex, key mitotic structures and invasion organelles. 
These results demonstrate the utility of using gene expression timing and dynamic
profile to identify proteins with unique roles in Apicomplexa biology.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097625 
PMCID: PMC4026381
PMID: 24841368  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

