
1. PLoS One. 2014 May 27;9(5):e98402. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098402. eCollection
2014.

Blood feeding and Plasmodium infection alters the miRNome of Anopheles stephensi.

Jain S(1), Rana V(1), Shrinet J(1), Sharma A(1), Tridibes A(2), Sunil S(1),
Bhatnagar RK(1).

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi,
India.
(2)National Institute of Malaria Research, Dwarka, New Delhi, India.

Blood feeding is an integral process required for physiological functions and
propagation of the malaria vector Anopheles. During blood feeding, presence of
the malaria parasite, Plasmodium in the blood induces several host effector
molecules including microRNAs which play important roles in the development and
maturation of the parasite within the mosquito. The present study was undertaken 
to elucidate the dynamic expression of miRNAs during gonotrophic cycle and
parasite development in Anopheles stephensi. Using next generation sequencing
technology, we identified 126 miRNAs of which 17 were novel miRNAs. The miRNAs
were further validated by northern hybridization and cloning. Blood feeding and
parasitized blood feeding in the mosquitoes revealed regulation of 13 and 16
miRNAs respectively. Expression profiling of these miRNAs revealed that
significant miRNAs were down-regulated upon parasitized blood feeding with a
repertoire of miRNAs showing stage specific up-regulation. Expression profiles of
significantly modulated miRNAs were further validated by real time PCR. Target
prediction of regulated miRNAs revealed overlapping targeting by different
miRNAs. These targets included several metabolic pathways including metabolic,
redox homeostasis and protein processing machinery components. Our analysis
revealed tight regulation of specific miRNAs post blood feeding and parasite
infection in An. stephensi. Such regulated expression suggests possible role of
these miRNAs during gonotrophic cycle in mosquito. Another set of miRNAs were
also significantly regulated at 42 h and 5 days post infection indicating
parasite stage-specific role of host miRNAs. This study will result in better
understanding of the role of miRNAs during gonotrophic cycle and parasite
development in mosquito and can probably facilitate in devising novel malaria
control strategies at vector level.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098402 
PMCID: PMC4035286
PMID: 24866389  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

