
1. Malar J. 2014 Jun 3;13:216. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-216.

New type of SSUrDNA sequence was detected from both Plasmodium ovale curtisi and 
Plasmodium ovale wallikeri samples.

Li M, Xia Z(1), Yan H.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Centre for Diseases Control 
and Prevention, Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of Public
Health, WHO Collaborating Centre for Malaria, Schistosomiasis and Filariasis,
Shanghai 200025, People's Republic of China. nipdxzhg@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium ovale is relatively unfamiliar to Chinese staff engaged in
malaria diagnosis. In 2013, dried blood spots of four unidentified but suspected 
ovale malaria samples were sent to the National Malaria Reference Laboratory
(NMRL) for reconfirmation.
METHODS: Partial and complete, small, subunit ribosomal DNA (SSU rDNA) sequences 
of four samples were obtained with PCR-cloning-sequencing method. Obtained
sequences were analyzed by aligning with each other and with nine SSU rDNA
sequences of six known Plasmodium parasites. A phylogenetic tree was constructed 
based on complete SSU rDNA sequences and 12 same gene sequences derived from six 
known Plasmodium parasites and three Babesia parasites. Primary structure of
conservative and variable regions of variant sequences was determined also by
comparing them with those of six known Plasmodium parasites. To confirm their
existence in genome, they were redetected with primers matching their variable
regions. PCR systems aimed to roughly detect any eukaryotes and prokaryotes
respectively were also applied to search for other pathogens in one of four
patients.
RESULTS: Totally, 19 partial and 23 complete SSU rDNA sequences obtained from
four samples. Except eight variant sequences, similarities among sequences from
same DNA sample were in general high (more than 98%). The phylogenetic analysis
revealed that three cases were infected by P. ovale wallikeri and one by P. ovale
curtisi. Four of the variant sequences which obtained from four samples
relatively showed high similarities with each other (98.5%-100%). Identical
variant sequences actually could be re-obtained from each DNA sample. Their
primary structure of conservative and variable regions showed quite fit with that
of six known Plasmodium parasites. The test for prokaryote pathogens showed
negative and the tests for eukaryotes only found DNA sequences of Human and P.
ovale parasites.
CONCLUSION: Both P. ovale wallikeri and P. ovale curtisi infections are present
in imported malaria cases of China. New type of partial SSU rDNA sequence which
assumed to express in a certain life stage of P. ovale was obtained from both P. 
ovale wallikeri and P. ovale curtisi samples. This discovery would supply
information and clues to identify and understand P. ovale parasites more
accurately.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-216 
PMCID: PMC4049480
PMID: 24893846  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

