
1. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 6;9(6):e98577. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098577. eCollection 
2014.

Dynamics in the cytoadherence phenotypes of Plasmodium falciparum infected
erythrocytes isolated during pregnancy.

Doritchamou J(1), Sossou-tchatcha S(2), Cottrell G(3), Moussiliou A(4), Hounton
Houngbeme C(5), Massougbodji A(2), Deloron P(3), Ndam NT(1).

Author information: 
(1)PRES Sorbonne Paris Cité, Faculté de Pharmacie, Université Paris Descartes,
Paris, France; UMR216 Mère et enfant face aux infections tropicales, Institut de 
Recherche pour le Développement, Paris, France; Centre d'Etude et de Recherche
sur le paludisme associé à la Grossesse et à l'Enfance, Université
d'Abomey-Calavi, Cotonou, Benin.
(2)Centre d'Etude et de Recherche sur le paludisme associé à la Grossesse et à
l'Enfance, Université d'Abomey-Calavi, Cotonou, Benin.
(3)PRES Sorbonne Paris Cité, Faculté de Pharmacie, Université Paris Descartes,
Paris, France; UMR216 Mère et enfant face aux infections tropicales, Institut de 
Recherche pour le Développement, Paris, France.
(4)UMR216 Mère et enfant face aux infections tropicales, Institut de Recherche
pour le Développement, Paris, France; ED Physiologie Physiopathologie et
thérapeutique Sorbone Université, Université Pierre Marie Curie, Paris, France.
(5)Hôpital de zone de Suru Lere, Cotonou, Benin.

Pregnant women become susceptible to malaria infection despite their acquired
immunity to this disease from childhood. The placental sequestration of
Plasmodium falciparum infected erythrocytes (IE) is the major feature of malaria 
during pregnancy, due to ability of these parasites to bind chondroitin sulfate A
(CSA) in the placenta through the VAR2CSA protein that parasites express on the
surface of IE. We collected parasites at different times of pregnancy and
investigated the adhesion pattern of freshly collected isolates on the three well
described host receptors (CSPG, CD36 and ICAM-1). Var genes transcription profile
and VAR2CSA surface-expression were assessed in these isolates. Although adhesion
of IE to CD36 and ICAM-1 was observed in some isolates, CSA-adhesion was the
predominant binding feature in all isolates analyzed. Co-existence in the
peripheral blood of several adhesion phenotypes in early pregnancy isolates was
observed, a diversity that gradually tightens with gestational age in favour of
the CSA-adhesion phenotype. Infections occurring in primigravidae were often by
parasites that adhered more to CSA than those from multigravidae. Data from this 
study further emphasize the specificity of CSA adhesion and VAR2CSA expression by
parasites responsible for pregnancy malaria, while drawing attention to the
phenotypic complexity of infections occurring early in pregnancy as well as in
multigravidae.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098577 
PMCID: PMC4048182
PMID: 24905223  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

