
1. J Insect Physiol. 2014 Aug;67:37-44. doi: 10.1016/j.jinsphys.2014.05.020. Epub
2014 Jun 6.

Ambient temperature and dietary supplementation interact to shape mosquito vector
competence for malaria.

Murdock CC(1), Blanford S(2), Luckhart S(3), Thomas MB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Disease Dynamics, Department of Entomology, Pennsylvania
State University, Merkle Lab, Orchard Road, University Park, PA 16802, United
States. Electronic address: ccm15@psu.edu.
(2)Center for Infectious Disease Dynamics, Department of Entomology, Pennsylvania
State University, Merkle Lab, Orchard Road, University Park, PA 16802, United
States. Electronic address: stb13@psu.edu.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine,
University of California Davis, Davis, CA 95616, United States. Electronic
address: sluckhart@ucdavis.edu.
(4)Center for Infectious Disease Dynamics, Department of Entomology, Pennsylvania
State University, Merkle Lab, Orchard Road, University Park, PA 16802, United
States. Electronic address: mbt13@psu.edu.

The extent to which environmental factors influence the ability of Anopheles
mosquitoes to transmit malaria parasites remains poorly explored. Environmental
variation, such as change in ambient temperature, will not necessarily influence 
the rates of host and parasite processes equivalently, potentially resulting in
complex effects on infection outcomes. As proof of principle, we used Anopheles
stephensi and the rodent malaria parasite, Plasmodium yoelii, to examine the
effects of a range of constant temperatures on one aspect of host defense
(detected as alterations in expression of nitric oxide synthase gene - NOS) to
parasite infection. We experimentally boosted mosquito midgut immunity to
infection through dietary supplementation with the essential amino acid
l-Arginine (l-Arg), which increases midgut nitric oxide (NO) levels by
infection-induced NOS catalysis in A. stephensi. At intermediate temperatures,
supplementation reduced oocyst prevalence, oocyst intensity, and sporozoite
prevalence suggesting that the outcome of parasite infection was potentially
dependent upon the rate of NOS-mediated midgut immunity. At low and high
temperature extremes, however, infection was severely constrained irrespective of
supplementation. The effects of l-Arg appeared to be mediated by NO-dependent
negative feedback on NOS expression, as evidenced by depressed NOS expression in 
l-Arg treated groups at temperatures where supplementation decreased parasite
infection. These results suggest the need to consider the direct (e.g. effects of
mosquito body temperature on parasite physiology) and indirect effects (e.g.
mediated through changes in mosquito physiology/immunity) of environmental
factors on mosquito-malaria interactions in order to understand natural variation
in vector competence.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinsphys.2014.05.020 
PMCID: PMC4107084
PMID: 24911425  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

