
1. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 11;9(6):e99213. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099213. eCollection
2014.

A survey of innovation through duplication in the reduced genomes of twelve
parasites.

DeBarry JD(1), Kissinger JC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tropical and Emerging Global Diseases, University of Georgia,
Athens, Georgia, United States of America; Department of Genetics, University of 
Georgia, Athens, Georgia, United States of America.
(2)Center for Tropical and Emerging Global Diseases, University of Georgia,
Athens, Georgia, United States of America; Department of Genetics, University of 
Georgia, Athens, Georgia, United States of America; Institute of Bioinformatics, 
University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, United States of America.

We characterize the prevalence, distribution, divergence, and putative functions 
of detectable two-copy paralogs and segmental duplications in the Apicomplexa, a 
phylum of parasitic protists. Apicomplexans are mostly obligate intracellular
parasites responsible for human and animal diseases (e.g. malaria and
toxoplasmosis). Gene loss is a major force in the phylum. Genomes are small and
protein-encoding gene repertoires are reduced. Despite this genomic streamlining,
duplications and gene family amplifications are present. The potential for
innovation introduced by duplications is of particular interest. We compared
genomes of twelve apicomplexans across four lineages and used orthology and
genome cartography to map distributions of duplications against genome
architectures. Segmental duplications appear limited to five species. Where
present, they correspond to regions enriched for multi-copy and species-specific 
genes, pointing toward roles in adaptation and innovation. We found a phylum-wide
association of duplications with dynamic chromosome regions and syntenic
breakpoints. Trends in the distribution of duplicated genes indicate that recent,
species-specific duplicates are often tandem while most others have been
dispersed by genome rearrangements. These trends show a relationship between
genome architecture and gene duplication. Functional analysis reveals: proteases,
which are vital to a parasitic lifecycle, to be prominent in putative recent
duplications; a pair of paralogous genes in Toxoplasma gondii previously shown to
produce the rate-limiting step in dopamine synthesis in mammalian cells, a
possible link to the modification of host behavior; and phylum-wide differences
in expression and subcellular localization, indicative of modes of divergence. We
have uncovered trends in multiple modes of duplicate divergence including
sequence, intron content, expression, subcellular localization, and functions of 
putative recent duplicates that highlight the role of duplications in the
continuum of forces that have shaped these genomes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099213 
PMCID: PMC4053351
PMID: 24919110  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

