
1. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 24;9(6):e100700. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100700.
eCollection 2014.

Pharmacological validation of an inward-rectifier potassium (Kir) channel as an
insecticide target in the yellow fever mosquito Aedes aegypti.

Rouhier MF(1), Raphemot R(2), Denton JS(3), Piermarini PM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Ohio Agricultural Research and Development Center,
The Ohio State University, Wooster, Ohio, United States of America.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America; Department of Pharmacology,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of 
America.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America; Department of Pharmacology,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of 
America; Institute of Chemical Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America; Institute for Global Health,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of 
America.

Mosquitoes are important disease vectors that transmit a wide variety of
pathogens to humans, including those that cause malaria and dengue fever.
Insecticides have traditionally been deployed to control populations of
disease-causing mosquitoes, but the emergence of insecticide resistance has
severely limited the number of active compounds that are used against mosquitoes.
Thus, to improve the control of resistant mosquitoes there is a need to identify 
new insecticide targets and active compounds for insecticide development.
Recently we demonstrated that inward rectifier potassium (Kir) channels and small
molecule inhibitors of Kir channels offer promising new molecular targets and
active compounds, respectively, for insecticide development. Here we provide
pharmacological validation of a specific mosquito Kir channel (AeKir1) in the
yellow fever mosquito Aedes aegypti. We show that VU590, a small-molecule
inhibitor of mammalian Kir1.1 and Kir7.1 channels, potently inhibits AeKir1 but
not another mosquito Kir channel (AeKir2B) in vitro. Moreover, we show that a
previously identified inhibitor of AeKir1 (VU573) elicits an unexpected agonistic
effect on AeKir2B in vitro. Injection of VU590 into the hemolymph of adult female
mosquitoes significantly inhibits their capacity to excrete urine and kills them 
within 24 h, suggesting a mechanism of action on the excretory system.
Importantly, a structurally-related VU590 analog (VU608), which weakly blocks
AeKir1 in vitro, has no significant effects on their excretory capacity and does 
not kill mosquitoes. These observations suggest that the toxic effects of VU590
are associated with its inhibition of AeKir1.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100700 
PMCID: PMC4069099
PMID: 24959745  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

