
1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014 Oct;13(10):2705-24. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M114.040956. Epub 
2014 Jul 23.

Sex-partitioning of the Plasmodium falciparum stage V gametocyte proteome
provides insight into falciparum-specific cell biology.

Tao D(1), Ubaida-Mohien C(2), Mathias DK(1), King JG(1), Pastrana-Mena R(1),
Tripathi A(1), Goldowitz I(3), Graham DR(2), Moss E(4), Marti M(3), Dinglasan
RR(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the ‡W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and
Immunology and the Malaria Research Institute, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of 
Public Health, 615 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, Maryland, USA;
(2)§Department of Molecular and Comparative Pathobiology, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, 733 N. Broadway, Baltimore, Maryland, USA;
(3)¶Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, 665 Huntington Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts, USA;
(4)‖The Broad Institute, 7 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)From the ‡W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and
Immunology and the Malaria Research Institute, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of 
Public Health, 615 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, Maryland, USA;
rdinglasan@jhu.edu.

One of the critical gaps in malaria transmission biology and surveillance is our 
lack of knowledge about Plasmodium falciparum gametocyte biology, especially
sexual dimorphic development and how sex ratios that may influence transmission
from the human to the mosquito. Dissecting this process has been hampered by the 
lack of sex-specific protein markers for the circulating, mature stage V
gametocytes. The current evidence suggests a high degree of conservation in
gametocyte gene complement across Plasmodium, and therefore presumably for
sex-specific genes as well. To better our understanding of gametocyte development
and subsequent infectiousness to mosquitoes, we undertook a Systematic
Subtractive Bioinformatic analysis (filtering) approach to identify sex-specific 
P. falciparum NF54 protein markers based on a comparison with the Dd2 strain,
which is defective in producing males, and with syntenic male and female proteins
from the reanalyzed and updated P. berghei (related rodent malaria parasite)
gametocyte proteomes. This produced a short list of 174 male- and 258
female-enriched P. falciparum stage V proteins, some of which appear to be under 
strong diversifying selection, suggesting ongoing adaptation to mosquito vector
species. We generated antibodies against three putative female-specific
gametocyte stage V proteins in P. falciparum and confirmed either conserved
sex-specificity or the lack of cross-species sex-partitioning. Finally, our study
provides not only an additional resource for mass spectrometry-derived evidence
for gametocyte proteins but also lays down the foundation for rational screening 
and development of novel sex-partitioned protein biomarkers and
transmission-blocking vaccine candidates.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M114.040956 
PMCID: PMC4188997
PMID: 25056935  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

