
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014 Aug 14;8(8):e3086. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003086.
eCollection 2014 Aug.

Disease progression in Plasmodium knowlesi malaria is linked to variation in
invasion gene family members.

Ahmed AM(1), Pinheiro MM(2), Divis PC(1), Siner A(1), Zainudin R(3), Wong IT(4), 
Lu CW(5), Singh-Khaira SK(6), Millar SB(2), Lynch S(7), Willmann M(8), Singh
B(1), Krishna S(9), Cox-Singh J(10).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Research Centre, University Malaysia Sarawak, Kuching, Sarawak,
Malaysia.
(2)School of Medicine, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, United Kingdom.
(3)Malaria Research Centre, University Malaysia Sarawak, Kuching, Sarawak,
Malaysia; Faculty of Resource Science and Technology, University Malaysia
Sarawak, Kuching, Sarawak, Malaysia.
(4)Sibu Hospital, Sibu, Sarawak, Malaysia.
(5)Sarikei Hospital, Sarikei, Sarawak, Malaysia.
(6)Division of Clinical Sciences, St. George's, University of London, London,
United Kingdom.
(7)Clinical Blood Sciences, St. George's, University of London, London, United
Kingdom.
(8)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany.
(9)Malaria Research Centre, University Malaysia Sarawak, Kuching, Sarawak,
Malaysia; Division of Clinical Sciences, St. George's, University of London,
London, United Kingdom.
(10)Malaria Research Centre, University Malaysia Sarawak, Kuching, Sarawak,
Malaysia; School of Medicine, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, United
Kingdom; Division of Clinical Sciences, St. George's, University of London,
London, United Kingdom.

Emerging pathogens undermine initiatives to control the global health impact of
infectious diseases. Zoonotic malaria is no exception. Plasmodium knowlesi, a
malaria parasite of Southeast Asian macaques, has entered the human population.
P. knowlesi, like Plasmodium falciparum, can reach high parasitaemia in human
infections, and the World Health Organization guidelines for severe malaria list 
hyperparasitaemia among the measures of severe malaria in both infections. Not
all patients with P. knowlesi infections develop hyperparasitaemia, and it is
important to determine why. Between isolate variability in erythrocyte invasion, 
efficiency seems key. Here we investigate the idea that particular alleles of two
P. knowlesi erythrocyte invasion genes, P. knowlesi normocyte binding protein
Pknbpxa and Pknbpxb, influence parasitaemia and human disease progression.
Pknbpxa and Pknbpxb reference DNA sequences were generated from five
geographically and temporally distinct P. knowlesi patient isolates. Polymorphic 
regions of each gene (approximately 800 bp) were identified by haplotyping 147
patient isolates at each locus. Parasitaemia in the study cohort was associated
with markers of disease severity including liver and renal dysfunction,
haemoglobin, platelets and lactate, (r = ≥ 0.34, p =  <0.0001 for all).
Seventy-five and 51 Pknbpxa and Pknbpxb haplotypes were resolved in 138 (94%) and
134 (92%) patient isolates respectively. The haplotypes formed twelve Pknbpxa and
two Pknbpxb allelic groups. Patients infected with parasites with particular
Pknbpxa and Pknbpxb alleles within the groups had significantly higher
parasitaemia and other markers of disease severity. Our study strongly suggests
that P. knowlesi invasion gene variants contribute to parasite virulence. We
focused on two invasion genes, and we anticipate that additional virulent loci
will be identified in pathogen genome-wide studies. The multiple sustained
entries of this diverse pathogen into the human population must give cause for
concern to malaria elimination strategists in the Southeast Asian region.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003086 
PMCID: PMC4133233
PMID: 25121807  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

