
1. J Virol. 2014 Nov;88(21):12882-94. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01460-14. Epub 2014 Aug 27.

Possible footprints of APOBEC3F and/or other APOBEC3 deaminases, but not
APOBEC3G, on HIV-1 from patients with acute/early and chronic infections.

Armitage AE(1), Deforche K(2), Welch JJ(3), Van Laethem K(2), Camacho R(4),
Rambaut A(5), Iversen AK(6).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Immunology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford 
University, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)KU Leuven-University of Leuven, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Rega Institute for Medical Research, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(4)KU Leuven-University of Leuven, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Rega Institute for Medical Research, Leuven, Belgium Centro de Malária e outras
Doenças Tropicais, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical, Universidade Nova de
Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(5)Institute of Evolutionary Biology. University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United 
Kingdom.
(6)MRC Human Immunology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford 
University, Oxford, United Kingdom Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences,
Division of Clinical Neurology, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
Oxford University, Oxford, United Kingdom astrid.iversen@ndcn.ox.ac.uk.

Members of the apolipoprotein B mRNA-editing enzyme-catalytic polypeptide-like-3 
(APOBEC3) innate cellular cytidine deaminase family, particularly APOBEC3F and
APOBEC3G, can cause extensive and lethal G-to-A mutations in HIV-1 plus-strand
DNA (termed hypermutation). It is unclear if APOBEC3-induced mutations in vivo
are always lethal or can occur at sublethal levels that increase HIV-1
diversification and viral adaptation to the host. The viral accessory protein Vif
counteracts APOBEC3 activity by binding to APOBEC3 and promoting proteasome
degradation; however, the efficiency of this interaction varies, since a range of
hypermutation frequencies are observed in HIV-1 patient DNA. Therefore, we
examined "footprints" of APOBEC3G and APOBEC3F activity in longitudinal HIV-1 RNA
pol sequences from approximately 3,000 chronically infected patients by
determining whether G-to-A mutations occurred in motifs that were favored or
disfavored by these deaminases. G-to-A mutations were more frequent in
APOBEC3G-disfavored than in APOBEC3G-favored contexts. In contrast, mutations in 
APOBEC3F-disfavored contexts were relatively rare, whereas mutations in contexts 
favoring APOBEC3F (and possibly other deaminases) occurred 16% more often than
average G-to-A mutations. These results were supported by analyses of >500 HIV-1 
env sequences from acute/early infection.IMPORTANCE: Collectively, our results
suggest that APOBEC3G-induced mutagenesis is lethal to HIV-1, whereas mutagenesis
caused by APOBEC3F and/or other deaminases may result in sublethal mutations that
might facilitate viral diversification. Therefore, Vif-specific cytotoxic T
lymphocyte (CTL) responses and drugs that manipulate the interplay between Vif
and APOBEC3 may have beneficial or detrimental clinical effects depending on how 
they affect the binding of Vif to various members of the APOBEC3 family.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01460-14 
PMCID: PMC4248940
PMID: 25165112  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

