
1. J Infect Dis. 2015 Mar 1;211(5):680-8. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiu467. Epub 2014 Sep 
1.

Absence of putative artemisinin resistance mutations among Plasmodium falciparum 
in Sub-Saharan Africa: a molecular epidemiologic study.

Taylor SM(1), Parobek CM(2), DeConti DK(3), Kayentao K(4), Coulibaly SO(5),
Greenwood BM(6), Tagbor H(7), Williams J(8), Bojang K(9), Njie F(9), Desai M(10),
Kariuki S(11), Gutman J(12), Mathanga DP(13), Mårtensson A(14), Ngasala B(15),
Conrad MD(16), Rosenthal PJ(16), Tshefu AK(17), Moormann AM(18), Vulule JM(19),
Doumbo OK(20), Ter Kuile FO(21), Meshnick SR(22), Bailey JA(23), Juliano JJ(24).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine Duke Global Health
Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham Department of Epidemiology,
Gillings School of Global Public Health.
(2)Curriculum in Genetics and Molecular Biology.
(3)Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences.
(4)Department of Epidemiology of Parasitic Diseases, Malaria Research and
Training Center, Faculty of Medicine, Pharmacy, and Odontostomatology, University
of Science, Techniques, and Technologies of Bamako, Mali Department of Clinical
Sciences, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine.
(5)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso.
(6)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, United Kingdom.
(7)Department of Community Health, School of Medical Sciences, Kwame Nkrumah
University of Science and Technology, Kumasi.
(8)Navrongo Health Research Centre, Ghana Health Service, Navrongo.
(9)Medical Research Council Laboratories, Banjul, Gambia.
(10)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Atlanta, Georgia
CDC-Kenya.
(11)KEMRI-CDC.
(12)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Atlanta, Georgia.
(13)Malaria Alert Center, University of Malawi College of Medicine, Blantyre
Department of Community Health, College of Medicine, Lilongwe, Malawi.
(14)Malaria Research, Department of Medicine Solna Global Health, Department of
Public Health Sciences, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(15)Department of Parasitology, Muhumbili University of Health and Allied
Sciences, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(16)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco.
(17)Ecole de Sante Publique, Faculte de Medicine, University of Kinshasa,
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(18)Department of Pediatrics.
(19)Center for Global Health Research, KEMRI, Kisumu, Kenya.
(20)Department of Epidemiology of Parasitic Diseases, Malaria Research and
Training Center, Faculty of Medicine, Pharmacy, and Odontostomatology, University
of Science, Techniques, and Technologies of Bamako, Mali.
(21)Department of Clinical Sciences, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine Center
for Global Health Research, KEMRI, Kisumu, Kenya.
(22)Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health.
(23)Division of Transfusion Medicine Program in Bioinformatics and Integrative
Biology, University of Massachusetts School of Medicine, Worcester.
(24)Curriculum in Genetics and Molecular Biology Divison of Infectious Diseases, 
School of Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.

Comment in
    J Infect Dis. 2015 Mar 1;211(5):667-9.

Plasmodium falciparum parasites that are resistant to artemisinins have been
detected in Southeast Asia. Resistance is associated with several polymorphisms
in the parasite's K13-propeller gene. The molecular epidemiology of these
artemisinin resistance genotypes in African parasite populations is unknown. We
developed an assay to quantify rare polymorphisms in parasite populations that
uses a pooled deep-sequencing approach to score allele frequencies, validated it 
by evaluating mixtures of laboratory parasite strains, and then used it to screen
P. falciparum parasites from >1100 African infections collected since 2002 from
14 sites across sub-Saharan Africa. We found no mutations in African parasite
populations that are associated with artemisinin resistance in Southeast Asian
parasites. However, we observed 15 coding mutations, including 12 novel
mutations, and limited allele sharing between parasite populations, consistent
with a large reservoir of naturally occurring K13-propeller variation. Although
polymorphisms associated with artemisinin resistance in P. falciparum in
Southeast Asia are not prevalent in sub-Saharan Africa, numerous K13-propeller
coding polymorphisms circulate in Africa. Although their distributions do not
support a widespread selective sweep for an artemisinin-resistant phenotype, the 
impact of these mutations on artemisinin susceptibility is unknown and will
require further characterization. Rapid, scalable molecular surveillance offers a
useful adjunct in tracking and containing artemisinin resistance.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiu467 
PMCID: PMC4402372
PMID: 25180240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

