
1. Curr Drug Targets. 2014;15(12):1089-93.

PfalDB: an integrated drug target and chemical database for Plasmodium
falciparum.

Kumar A, Agarwal N, Pant L, Singh JP, Ghosh I, Subbarao N(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Computational and Integrative Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University,
New Delhi - 110067, India. nsrao@mail.jnu.ac.in.

Plasmodium falciparum is one of the deadliest protozoan parasite species among
those that cause malaria. Uncontrolled use of antimalarial drugs has resulted in 
evolutionary selection pressure favoring high levels of resistance to
antimalarials; currently P.falciparum shows resistance to all classes of
antimalarials. Therefore it is essential to identify novel drug targets, and
design selective anti-malarials which can overcome resistance. While many drug
targets are freely available in various public domain resources, a single
comprehensive source of data containing easily searchable and retrievable
information is currently lacking. To facilitate the total integration and mining 
of data emerging from different drug consortia and also to prioritize drug
targets for structure-based drug design, an open-access, inclusive comprehensive 
database for Plasmodium falciparum was established. Meta data of known/modeled
structures along with binding site parameters of drug targets have been included 
in the database. Additionally, chemical compounds showing a positive inhibitory
assay against Plasmodium falciparum or known drug targets have also been
provided. The database is accessible at http://pfaldb.jnu.ac.in. The database
provides diverse information regarding the structure, sequence, stage specific
gene expression, pathway, action mechanism, essentiality and druggability for
each drug target, and literature to assess the validation status of individual
drug targets. It also includes information on individual anti-malarials with
their activity and bioassay.

DOI: 10.2174/1389450115666140908114939 
PMID: 25198774  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

