
1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Sep 11;10(9):e1004338. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004338.
eCollection 2014 Sep.

Plasmodium falciparum infection induces expression of a mosquito salivary protein
(Agaphelin) that targets neutrophil function and inhibits thrombosis without
impairing hemostasis.

Waisberg M(1), Molina-Cruz A(2), Mizurini DM(3), Gera N(4), Sousa BC(5), Ma D(2),
Leal AC(3), Gomes T(3), Kotsyfakis M(6), Ribeiro JM(2), Lukszo J(7), Reiter K(7),
Porcella SF(8), Oliveira CJ(5), Monteiro RQ(3), Barillas-Mury C(2), Pierce SK(4),
Francischetti IM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of
America; Department of Pathology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville,
Virginia, United States of America.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United
States of America.
(3)Instituto de Bioquimica Médica, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.
(4)Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of
America.
(5)Instituto de Ciências Biológicas e Naturais, Universidade Federal do Triângulo
Mineiro, Uberaba, Brazil.
(6)Institute of Parasitology, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, České
Budjovice, Czech Republic.
(7)Research Technology Branch, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, United States of
America.
(8)Genomics Unit, Research Technology Section, Rocky Mountain Labs, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Hamilton, Montana, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Invasion of mosquito salivary glands (SGs) by Plasmodium falciparum
sporozoites is an essential step in the malaria life cycle. How infection
modulates gene expression, and affects hematophagy remains unclear.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Using Affimetrix chip microarray, we found that at least 43
genes are differentially expressed in the glands of Plasmodium
falciparum-infected Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes. Among the upregulated genes,
one codes for Agaphelin, a 58-amino acid protein containing a single Kazal domain
with a Leu in the P1 position. Agaphelin displays high homology to orthologs
present in Aedes sp and Culex sp salivary glands, indicating an evolutionarily
expanded family. Kinetics and surface plasmon resonance experiments determined
that chemically synthesized Agaphelin behaves as a slow and tight inhibitor of
neutrophil elastase (K(D) ∼ 10 nM), but does not affect other enzymes, nor
promotes vasodilation, or exhibit antimicrobial activity. TAXIscan chamber assay 
revealed that Agaphelin inhibits neutrophil chemotaxis toward fMLP, affecting
several parameter associated with cell migration. In addition, Agaphelin reduces 
paw edema formation and accumulation of tissue myeloperoxidase triggered by
injection of carrageenan in mice. Agaphelin also blocks
elastase/cathepsin-mediated platelet aggregation, abrogates elastase-mediated
cleavage of tissue factor pathway inhibitor, and attenuates neutrophil-induced
coagulation. Notably, Agaphelin inhibits neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs)
formation and prevents FeCl3-induced arterial thrombosis, without impairing
hemostasis.
CONCLUSIONS: Blockade of neutrophil elastase emerges as a novel antihemostatic
mechanism in hematophagy; it also supports the notion that neutrophils and the
innate immune response are targets for antithrombotic therapy. In addition,
Agaphelin is the first antihemostatic whose expression is induced by Plasmodium
sp infection. These results suggest that an important interplay takes place in
parasite-vector-host interactions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004338 
PMCID: PMC4161438
PMID: 25211214  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

