
1. Mol Genet Genomics. 2015 Feb;290(1):201-15. doi: 10.1007/s00438-014-0910-9. Epub 
2014 Sep 12.

Parallel evolution or purifying selection, not introgression, explains similarity
in the pyrethroid detoxification linked GSTE4 of Anopheles gambiae and An.
arabiensis.

Wilding CS(1), Weetman D, Rippon EJ, Steen K, Mawejje HD, Barsukov I, Donnelly
MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vector Biology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Pembroke 
Place, Liverpool, L3 5QA, UK, c.s.wilding@ljmu.ac.uk.

Insecticide resistance is a major impediment to the control of vectors and pests 
of public health importance and is a strongly selected trait capable of rapid
spread, sometimes even between closely related species. Elucidating the
mechanisms generating insecticide resistance in mosquito vectors of disease, and 
understanding the spread of resistance within and between populations and species
are vital for the development of robust resistance management strategies. Here,
we studied the mechanisms of resistance in two sympatric members of the Anopheles
gambiae species complex-the major vector of malaria in sub-Saharan Africa-to
understand how resistance has developed and spread in eastern Uganda, a region
with some of the highest levels of malaria. In eastern Uganda, where the
mosquitoes Anopheles arabiensis and An. gambiae can be found sympatrically, low
levels of hybrids (0.4 %) occur, offering a route for introgression of adaptively
important variants between species. In independent microarray studies of
insecticide resistance, Gste4, an insect-specific glutathione S-transferase, was 
among the most significantly up-regulated genes in both species. To test the
hypothesis of interspecific introgression, we sequenced 2.3 kbp encompassing
Gste4. Whilst this detailed sequencing ruled out introgression, we detected
strong positive selection acting on Gste4. However, these sequences, followed by 
haplotype-specific qPCR, showed that the apparent up-regulation in An. arabiensis
is a result of allelic variation across the microarray probe binding sites which 
artefactually elevates the gene expression signal. Thus, face-value acceptance of
microarray data can be misleading and it is advisable to conduct a more detailed 
investigation of the causes and nature of such signal. The identification of
positive selection acting on this locus led us to functionally express and
characterise allelic variants of GSTE4. Although the in vitro data do not support
a direct role for GSTE4 in metabolism, they do support a role for this enzyme in 
insecticide sequestration. Thus, the demonstration of a role for an up-regulated 
gene in metabolic resistance to insecticides should not be limited to simply
whether it can metabolise insecticide; such a strict criterion would argue
against the involvement of GSTE4 despite the weight of evidence to the contrary.

DOI: 10.1007/s00438-014-0910-9 
PMCID: PMC4312195
PMID: 25213601  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

