
1. Anal Chem. 2014 Oct 21;86(20):10474-83. doi: 10.1021/ac5031682. Epub 2014 Oct 1.

Capture of the circulating Plasmodium falciparum biomarker HRP2 in a multiplexed 
format, via a wearable skin patch.

Lee KT(1), Muller DA, Coffey JW, Robinson KJ, McCarthy JS, Kendall MA, Corrie SR.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Queensland , Australian Institute for Bioengineering and
Nanotechnology, Delivery of Drugs and Genes Group (D2G2), St. Lucia, Queensland
4072, Australia.

Herein we demonstrate the use of a wearable device that can selectively capture
two distinct circulating protein biomarkers (recombinant P. falciparum rPfHRP2
and total IgG) from the intradermal fluid of live mice in situ, for subsequent
detection in vitro. The device comprises a microprojection array that, when
applied to the skin, penetrates the outer skin layers to interface directly with 
intradermal fluid. Because of the complexity of the biological fluid being
sampled, we investigated the effects of solution conditions on the attachment of 
capture antibodies, to optimize the assay detection limit both in vitro and on
live mice. For detection of the target antigen diluted in 20% serum,
immobilization conditions favoring high antibody surface density (low pH, low
ionic strength) resulted in 100-fold greater sensitivity in comparison to
standard conditions, yielding a detection limit equivalent to the plate
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). We also show that blocking the device 
surface to reduce nonspecific adsorption of target analyte and host proteins does
not significantly change sensitivity. After injecting mice with rPfHRP2 via the
tail vein, we compared analyte levels in both plasma and skin biopsies
(cross-sectional area same as the microprojection array), observing that skin
samples contained the equivalent of ∼8 μL of analyte-containing plasma. We then
applied the arrays to mice, showing that surfaces coated with a high density of
antibodies captured a significant amount of the rPfHRP2 target while the standard
surface showed no capture in comparison to the negative control. Next, we applied
a triplex device to both control and rPfHRP2-treated mice, simultaneously
capturing rPfHRP2 and total IgG (as a positive control for skin penetration) in
comparison to a negative control device. We conclude that such devices can be
used to capture clinically relevant, circulating protein biomarkers of infectious
disease via the skin, with potential applications as a minimally invasive and
lab-free biomarker detection platform.

DOI: 10.1021/ac5031682 
PMID: 25232916  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

