
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014 Dec;58(12):7390-7. doi: 10.1128/AAC.03337-14.
Epub 2014 Sep 29.

Complex polymorphisms in the Plasmodium falciparum multidrug resistance protein 2
gene and its contribution to antimalarial response.

Veiga MI(1), Osório NS(2), Ferreira PE(3), Franzén O(4), Dahlstrom S(5), Lum
JK(6), Nosten F(7), Gil JP(8).

Author information: 
(1)Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Health Sciences,
University of Minho, Braga, Portugal ICVS/3B's, PT Government Associate
Laboratory, Guimarães, Braga, Portugal Malaria Research Laboratory, Department of
Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden mariaveiga@ecsaude.uminho.pt.
(2)Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Health Sciences,
University of Minho, Braga, Portugal ICVS/3B's, PT Government Associate
Laboratory, Guimarães, Braga, Portugal.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Drug Resistance and Pharmacogenetics, Center for Biodiversity, Functional and
Integrative Genomics, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon,
Portugal.
(4)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.
(5)Malaria Research Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Harpur College of Arts and Sciences, Binghamton University, The State
University of New York, Binghamton, New York, USA.
(7)Shoklo Malaria Research Unit, Mae Sot, Tak, Thailand Faculty of Tropical
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand Centre for Clinical Vaccinology
and Tropical Medicine, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, University of
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(8)Drug Resistance and Pharmacogenetics, Center for Biodiversity, Functional and 
Integrative Genomics, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon,
Portugal Harpur College of Arts and Sciences, Binghamton University, The State
University of New York, Binghamton, New York, USA Division of Pharmacogenetics,
Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.

Plasmodium falciparum has the capacity to escape the actions of essentially all
antimalarial drugs. ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter proteins are known to 
cause multidrug resistance in a large range of organisms, including the
Apicomplexa parasites. P. falciparum genome analysis has revealed two genes
coding for the multidrug resistance protein (MRP) type of ABC transporters:
Pfmrp1, previously associated with decreased parasite drug susceptibility, and
the poorly studied Pfmrp2. The role of Pfmrp2 polymorphisms in modulating
sensitivity to antimalarial drugs has not been established. We herein report a
comprehensive account of the Pfmrp2 genetic variability in 46 isolates from
Thailand. A notably high frequency of 2.8 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs)/kb was identified for this gene, including some novel SNPs. Additionally, 
we found that Pfmrp2 harbors a significant number of microindels, some previously
not reported. We also investigated the potential association of the identified
Pfmrp2 polymorphisms with altered in vitro susceptibility to several
antimalarials used in artemisinin-based combination therapy and with parasite
clearance time. Association analysis suggested Pfmrp2 polymorphisms modulate the 
parasite's in vitro response to quinoline antimalarials, including chloroquine,
piperaquine, and mefloquine, and association with in vivo parasite clearance. In 
conclusion, our study reveals that the Pfmrp2 gene is the most diverse ABC
transporter known in P. falciparum with a potential role in antimalarial drug
resistance.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.03337-14 
PMCID: PMC4249497
PMID: 25267670  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

