
1. Malar J. 2014 Sep 26;13:382. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-382.

Transcriptome sequencing and analysis of Plasmodium gallinaceum reveals
polymorphisms and selection on the apical membrane antigen-1.

Lauron EJ(1), Oakgrove KS, Tell LA, Biskar K, Roy SW, Sehgal RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, San Francisco State University, San Francisco, CA
94132, USA. elauron@mail.sfsu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium erythrocyte invasion genes play a key role in malaria
parasite transmission, host-specificity and immuno-evasion. However, the
evolution of the genes responsible remains understudied. Investigating these
genes in avian malaria parasites, where diversity is particularly high, offers
new insights into the processes that confer malaria pathogenesis. These parasites
can pose a significant threat to birds and since birds play crucial ecological
roles they serve as important models for disease dynamics. Comprehensive
knowledge of the genetic factors involved in avian malaria parasite invasion is
lacking and has been hampered by difficulties in obtaining nuclear data from
avian malaria parasites. Thus the first Illumina-based de novo transcriptome
sequencing and analysis of the chicken parasite Plasmodium gallinaceum was
performed to assess the evolution of essential Plasmodium genes.
METHODS: White leghorn chickens were inoculated intravenously with erythrocytes
containing P. gallinaceum. cDNA libraries were prepared from RNA extracts
collected from infected chick blood and sequencing was run on the HiSeq2000
platform. Orthologues identified by transcriptome sequencing were characterized
using phylogenetic, ab initio protein modelling and comparative and
population-based methods.
RESULTS: Analysis of the transcriptome identified several orthologues required
for intra-erythrocytic survival and erythrocyte invasion, including the rhoptry
neck protein 2 (RON2) and the apical membrane antigen-1 (AMA-1). Ama-1 of avian
malaria parasites exhibits high levels of genetic diversity and evolves under
positive diversifying selection, ostensibly due to protective host immune
responses.
CONCLUSION: Erythrocyte invasion by Plasmodium parasites require AMA-1 and RON2
interactions. AMA-1 and RON2 of P. gallinaceum are evolutionarily and
structurally conserved, suggesting that these proteins may play essential roles
for avian malaria parasites to invade host erythrocytes. In addition, host-driven
selection presumably results in the high levels of genetic variation found in
ama-1 of avian Plasmodium species. These findings have implications for
investigating avian malaria epidemiology and population dynamics. Moreover, this 
work highlights the P. gallinaceum transcriptome as an important public resource 
for investigating the diversity and evolution of essential Plasmodium genes.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-382 
PMCID: PMC4182871
PMID: 25261185  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

