
1. BMC Med. 2014 Oct 16;12:183. doi: 10.1186/s12916-014-0183-5.

Limited antigenic diversity of Plasmodium falciparum apical membrane antigen 1
supports the development of effective multi-allele vaccines.

Terheggen U(1)(2), Drew DR(3), Hodder AN(4), Cross NJ(5), Mugyenyi CK(6), Barry
AE(7)(8), Anders RF(9), Dutta S(10), Osier FH(11), Elliott SR(12), Senn
N(13)(14), Stanisic DI(15)(16), Marsh K(17), Siba PM(18), Mueller I(19)(20)(21), 
Richards JS(22)(23)(24), Beeson JG(25)(26)(27).

Author information: 
(1)The Burnet Institute of Medical Research and Public Health, 85 Commercial
Road, Melbourne, Victoria, 3004, Australia. terheggen@gmx.de.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia. terheggen@gmx.de.
(3)The Burnet Institute of Medical Research and Public Health, 85 Commercial
Road, Melbourne, Victoria, 3004, Australia. damiendrew@burnet.edu.au.
(4)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, Melbourne, Australia. hodder@wehi.edu.au.
(5)The Burnet Institute of Medical Research and Public Health, 85 Commercial
Road, Melbourne, Victoria, 3004, Australia. cross.nadia@gmail.com.
(6)Centre for Geographic Medicine, Coast, Kenya Medical Research Institute,
Kilifi, Kenya. ckmugyenyi@gmail.com.
(7)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, Melbourne, Australia. barry@wehi.edu.au.
(8)Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia. barry@wehi.edu.au.
(9)La Trobe University, Melbourne, Australia. r.anders@latrobe.edu.au.
(10)Walter Reed Army Institute, Silver Spring, MD, USA.
sheetij.dutta@us.army.mil.
(11)Centre for Geographic Medicine, Coast, Kenya Medical Research Institute,
Kilifi, Kenya. sheetij.dutta@us.army.mil.
(12)The Burnet Institute of Medical Research and Public Health, 85 Commercial
Road, Melbourne, Victoria, 3004, Australia. salennaelliott@yahoo.com.
(13)Papua New Guinea Institute of Medical Research, Madang, Papua New Guinea.
nicolas.senn@gmail.com.
(14)Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland.
nicolas.senn@gmail.com.
(15)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, Melbourne, Australia.
d.stanisic@griffith.edu.au.
(16)Papua New Guinea Institute of Medical Research, Madang, Papua New Guinea.
d.stanisic@griffith.edu.au.
(17)Centre for Geographic Medicine, Coast, Kenya Medical Research Institute,
Kilifi, Kenya. kmarsh@kemri-wellcome.org.
(18)Papua New Guinea Institute of Medical Research, Madang, Papua New Guinea.
peter.siba@pngimr.org.pg.
(19)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, Melbourne, Australia. mueller@wehi.edu.au.
(20)Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia. mueller@wehi.edu.au.
(21)Papua New Guinea Institute of Medical Research, Madang, Papua New Guinea.
mueller@wehi.edu.au.
(22)The Burnet Institute of Medical Research and Public Health, 85 Commercial
Road, Melbourne, Victoria, 3004, Australia. Richards@burnet.edu.au.
(23)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia. Richards@burnet.edu.au.
(24)Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia. 
Richards@burnet.edu.au.
(25)The Burnet Institute of Medical Research and Public Health, 85 Commercial
Road, Melbourne, Victoria, 3004, Australia. beeson@burnet.edu.au.
(26)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia. beeson@burnet.edu.au.
(27)Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia. 
beeson@burnet.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Polymorphism in antigens is a common mechanism for immune evasion
used by many important pathogens, and presents major challenges in vaccine
development. In malaria, many key immune targets and vaccine candidates show
substantial polymorphism. However, knowledge on antigenic diversity of key
antigens, the impact of polymorphism on potential vaccine escape, and how
sequence polymorphism relates to antigenic differences is very limited, yet
crucial for vaccine development. Plasmodium falciparum apical membrane antigen 1 
(AMA1) is an important target of naturally-acquired antibodies in malaria
immunity and a leading vaccine candidate. However, AMA1 has extensive allelic
diversity with more than 60 polymorphic amino acid residues and more than 200
haplotypes in a single population. Therefore, AMA1 serves as an excellent model
to assess antigenic diversity in malaria vaccine antigens and the feasibility of 
multi-allele vaccine approaches. While most previous research has focused on
sequence diversity and antibody responses in laboratory animals, little has been 
done on the cross-reactivity of human antibodies.
METHODS: We aimed to determine the extent of antigenic diversity of AMA1, defined
by reactivity with human antibodies, and to aid the identification of specific
alleles for potential inclusion in a multi-allele vaccine. We developed an
approach using a multiple-antigen-competition enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) to examine cross-reactivity of naturally-acquired antibodies in Papua New
Guinea and Kenya, and related this to differences in AMA1 sequence.
RESULTS: We found that adults had greater cross-reactivity of antibodies than
children, although the patterns of cross-reactivity to alleles were the same.
Patterns of antibody cross-reactivity were very similar between populations
(Papua New Guinea and Kenya), and over time. Further, our results show that
antigenic diversity of AMA1 alleles is surprisingly restricted, despite extensive
sequence polymorphism. Our findings suggest that a combination of three different
alleles, if selected appropriately, may be sufficient to cover the majority of
antigenic diversity in polymorphic AMA1 antigens. Antigenic properties were not
strongly related to existing haplotype groupings based on sequence analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Antigenic diversity of AMA1 is limited and a vaccine including a
small number of alleles might be sufficient for coverage against
naturally-circulating strains, supporting a multi-allele approach for developing 
polymorphic antigens as malaria vaccines.

DOI: 10.1186/s12916-014-0183-5 
PMCID: PMC4212128
PMID: 25319190  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

