
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015 Jan;59(1):96-104. doi: 10.1128/AAC.04140-14.
Epub 2014 Oct 13.

Carboxymefloquine, the major metabolite of the antimalarial drug mefloquine,
induces drug-metabolizing enzyme and transporter expression by activation of
pregnane X receptor.

Piedade R(1), Traub S(1), Bitter A(1), Nüssler AK(2), Gil JP(3), Schwab M(4),
Burk O(5).

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart,
Germany.
(2)Department of Traumatology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(3)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Section of Pharmacogenetics,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden Drug Resistance and Pharmacogenetics,
Center for Biodiversity, Functional and Integrative Genomics, Faculdade de
Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal Harpur College of Arts and
Sciences, Binghamton University, The State University of New York, Binghamton,
New York, USA.
(4)Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart,
Germany Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Institute of Experimental and
Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen,
Germany.
(5)Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart,
Germany oliver.burk@ikp-stuttgart.de.

Malaria patients are frequently coinfected with HIV and mycobacteria causing
tuberculosis, which increases the use of coadministered drugs and thereby
enhances the risk of pharmacokinetic drug-drug interactions. Activation of the
pregnane X receptor (PXR) by xenobiotics, which include many drugs, induces drug 
metabolism and transport, thereby resulting in possible attenuation or loss of
the therapeutic responses to the drugs being coadministered. While several
artemisinin-type antimalarial drugs have been shown to activate PXR, data on
nonartemisinin-type antimalarials are still missing. Therefore, this study aimed 
to elucidate the potential of nonartemisinin antimalarial drugs and drug
metabolites to activate PXR. We screened 16 clinically used antimalarial drugs
and six major drug metabolites for binding to PXR using the two-hybrid PXR ligand
binding domain assembly assay; this identified carboxymefloquine, the major and
pharmacologically inactive metabolite of the antimalarial drug mefloquine, as a
potential PXR ligand. Two-hybrid PXR-coactivator and -corepressor interaction
assays and PXR-dependent promoter reporter gene assays confirmed
carboxymefloquine to be a novel PXR agonist which specifically activated the
human receptor. In the PXR-expressing intestinal LS174T cells and in primary
human hepatocytes, carboxymefloquine induced the expression of drug-metabolizing 
enzymes and transporters on the mRNA and protein levels. The crucial role of PXR 
for the carboxymefloquine-dependent induction of gene expression was confirmed by
small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown of the receptor. Thus, the
clinical use of mefloquine may result in pharmacokinetic drug-drug interactions
by means of its metabolite carboxymefloquine. Whether these in vitro findings are
of in vivo relevance has to be addressed in future clinical drug-drug interaction
studies.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.04140-14 
PMCID: PMC4291335
PMID: 25313206  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

