
1. Interdiscip Perspect Infect Dis. 2014;2014:969531. doi: 10.1155/2014/969531. Epub
2014 Oct 1.

Ecotope-based entomological surveillance and molecular xenomonitoring of
multidrug resistant malaria parasites in anopheles vectors.

Sorosjinda-Nunthawarasilp P(1), Bhumiratana A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Fundamentals of Public Health, Faculty of Public Health, Burapha
University, Chonburi 20131, Thailand.
(2)Department of Parasitology and Entomology, Faculty of Public Health, Mahidol
University, 420/1 Rajvithi Road, Rajthewee, Bangkok 10400, Thailand.

The emergence and spread of multidrug resistant (MDR) malaria caused by
Plasmodium falciparum or Plasmodium vivax have become increasingly important in
the Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS). MDR malaria is the heritable and hypermutable
property of human malarial parasite populations that can decrease in vitro and in
vivo susceptibility to proven antimalarial drugs as they exhibit dose-dependent
drug resistance and delayed parasite clearance time in treated patients. MDR
malaria risk situations reflect consequences of the national policy and strategy 
as this influences the ongoing national-level or subnational-level implementation
of malaria control strategies in endemic GMS countries. Based on our experience
along with current literature review, the design of ecotope-based entomological
surveillance (EES) and molecular xenomonitoring of MDR falciparum and vivax
malaria parasites in Anopheles vectors is proposed to monitor infection pockets
in transmission control areas of forest and forest fringe-related malaria, so as 
to bridge malaria landscape ecology (ecotope and ecotone) and epidemiology.
Malaria ecotope and ecotone are confined to a malaria transmission area
geographically associated with the infestation of Anopheles vectors and
particular environments to which human activities are related. This enables the
EES to encompass mosquito collection and identification, salivary gland DNA
extraction, Plasmodium- and species-specific identification, molecular
marker-based PCR detection methods for putative drug resistance genes, and data
management. The EES establishes strong evidence of Anopheles vectors carrying MDR
P. vivax in infection pockets epidemiologically linked with other data obtained
during which a course of follow-up treatment of the notified P. vivax patients
receiving the first-line treatment was conducted. For regional and global
perspectives, the EES would augment the epidemiological surveillance and
monitoring of MDR falciparum and vivax malaria parasites in hotspots or suspected
areas established in most endemic GMS countries implementing the National Malaria
Control Programs, in addition to what is guided by the World Health Organization.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/969531 
PMCID: PMC4198816
PMID: 25349605 

