
1. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 31;9(10):e111858. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111858.
eCollection 2014.

Antennal-expressed ammonium transporters in the malaria vector mosquito Anopheles
gambiae.

Pitts RJ(1), Derryberry SL Jr(2), Pulous FE(2), Zwiebel LJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville,
Tennessee, United States of America; Vanderbilt Institute for Global Health,
Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville,
Tennessee, United States of America.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville,
Tennessee, United States of America; Vanderbilt Institute for Global Health,
Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America; Department of Pharmacology,
Vanderbilt Brain Institute, Program in Developmental Biology and Institute of
Chemical Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee,
United States of America.

The principal Afrotropical malaria vector mosquito, Anopheles gambiae remains a
significant threat to human health. In this anthropophagic species, females
detect and respond to a range of human-derived volatile kairomones such as
ammonia, lactic acid, and other carboxylic acids in their quest for blood meals. 
While the molecular underpinnings of mosquito olfaction and host seeking are
becoming better understood, many questions remain unanswered. In this study, we
have identified and characterized two candidate ammonium transporter genes, AgAmt
and AgRh50 that are expressed in the mosquito antenna and may contribute to
physiological and behavioral responses to ammonia, which is an important host
kairomone for vector mosquitoes. AgAmt transcripts are highly enhanced in female 
antennae while a splice variant of AgRh50 appears to be antennal-specific.
Functional expression of AgAmt in Xenopus laevis oocytes facilitates inward
currents in response to both ammonium and methylammonium, while AgRh50 is able to
partially complement a yeast ammonium transporter mutant strain, validating their
conserved roles as ammonium transporters. We present evidence to suggest that
both AgAmt and AgRh50 are in vivo ammonium transporters that are important for
ammonia sensitivity in An. gambiae antennae, either by clearing ammonia from the 
sensillar lymph or by facilitating sensory neuron responses to environmental
exposure. Accordingly, AgAmt and AgRh50 represent new and potentially important
targets for the development of novel vector control strategies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111858 
PMCID: PMC4216128
PMID: 25360676  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

