
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015 Jan;59(1):365-71. doi: 10.1128/AAC.03395-14.
Epub 2014 Nov 3.

Detection of single-nucleotide polymorphisms in Plasmodium falciparum by PCR
primer extension and lateral flow immunoassay.

Moers AP(1), Hallett RL(2), Burrow R(2), Schallig HD(3), Sutherland CJ(4), van
Amerongen A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Biomolecular Sensing & Diagnostics, Food & Biobased Research, Wageningen
University and Research Centre, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Koninklijk Instituut voor de Tropen/Royal Tropical Institute, Biomedical
Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom PHE Malaria Reference Laboratory,
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Biomolecular Sensing & Diagnostics, Food & Biobased Research, Wageningen
University and Research Centre, Wageningen, The Netherlands
aart.vanamerongen@wur.nl.

The resistance of Plasmodium falciparum to some antimalarial drugs is linked to
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Currently, there are no methods for the
identification of resistant parasites that are sufficiently simple, cheap, and
fast enough to be performed at point-of-care, i.e., in local hospitals where
drugs are prescribed. Primer extension methods (PEXT) were developed to identify 
4 SNPs in P. falciparum positioned at amino acids 86, 184, and 1246 of the P.
falciparum multidrug resistance 1 gene (pfmdr1) and amino acid 76 of the
chloroquine resistance transporter gene (pfcrt). The PEXT products were
visualized by a nucleic acid lateral flow immunoassay (NALFIA) with carbon
nanoparticles as the detection labels. PCR-PEXT-NALFIAs showed good correlation
to the reference methods, quantitative PCR (qPCR) or direct amplicon sequence
analysis, in an initial open-label evaluation with 17 field samples. The tests
were further evaluated in a blind study design in a set of 150 patient isolates. 
High specificities of 98 to 100% were found for all 4 PCR-PEXT genotyping assays.
The sensitivities ranged from 75% to 100% when all PEXT-positive tests were
considered. A number of samples with a low parasite density were successfully
characterized by the reference methods but failed to generate a result in the
PCR-PEXT-NALFIA, particularly those samples with microscopy-negative subpatent
infections. This proof-of principle study validates the use of PCR-PEXT-NALFIA
for the detection of resistance-associated mutations in P. falciparum,
particularly for microscopy-positive infections. Although it requires a standard 
thermal cycler, the procedure is cheap and rapid and thus a potentially valuable 
tool for point-of-care detection in developing countries.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.03395-14 
PMCID: PMC4291373
PMID: 25367901  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

