
1. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 24;9(11):e113519. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113519.
eCollection 2014.

Hemozoin induces hepatic inflammation in mice and is differentially associated
with liver pathology depending on the Plasmodium strain.

Deroost K(1), Lays N(1), Pham TT(1), Baci D(2), Van den Eynde K(3), Komuta M(3), 
Prato M(4), Roskams T(3), Schwarzer E(5), Opdenakker G(1), Van den Steen PE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Laboratory of Immunobiology, Rega
Institute for Medical Research, KU Leuven - University of Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium.
(2)Department of Oncology, University of Torino, Torino, Italy; Department of
Biology, Tor Vergata Rome University, Rome, Italy.
(3)Translational Cell & Tissue Research, KU Leuven - University of Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, University of Torino, Torino, Italy.
(5)Department of Oncology, University of Torino, Torino, Italy; Department of
Genetics, Biology, and Biochemistry, University of Torino, Torino, Italy.

Malaria is a global disease that clinically affects more than two hundred million
people annually. Despite the availability of effective antimalarials, mortality
rates associated with severe complications are high. Hepatopathy is frequently
observed in patients with severe malarial disease and its pathogenesis is poorly 
understood. Previously, we observed high amounts of hemozoin or malaria pigment
in livers from infected mice. In this study, we investigated whether hemozoin is 
associated with liver injury in different mouse malaria models. C57BL/6J mice
infected with the rodent parasites Plasmodium berghei ANKA, P. berghei NK65 or P.
chabaudi AS had elevated serum liver enzymes without severe histological changes 
in the liver, in line with the observations in most patients. Furthermore, liver 
enzymes were significantly higher in serum of P. chabaudi AS-infected mice
compared to mice infected with the P. berghei parasite strains and a strong
positive correlation was found between hepatic hemozoin levels, hepatocyte damage
and inflammation in the liver with P. chabaudi AS. The observed liver injury was 
only marginally influenced by the genetic background of the host, since similar
serum liver enzyme levels were measured in infected C57BL/6J and BALB/c mice.
Intravenous injection of P. falciparum-derived hemozoin in malaria-free C57BL/6J 
mice induced inflammatory gene transcription in the liver, suggesting that
hemozoin may be involved in the pathogenesis of malaria hepatopathy by inducing
inflammation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113519 
PMCID: PMC4242621
PMID: 25419977  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

