
1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;844:59-84. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2095-2_4.

Systems biology of megakaryocytes.

Kaushansky A(1), Kaushansky K.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Program, Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, 307 Westlake Ave.,
North, Suite 500, 98109, Seattle, WA, USA, alexis.kaushansky@seattlebiomed.org.

The molecular pathways that regulate megakaryocyte production have historically
been identified through multiple candidate gene approaches. Several transcription
factors critical for generating megakaryocytes were identified by promoter
analysis of megakaryocyte-specific genes, and their biological roles then
verified by gene knockout studies; for example, GATA-1, NF-E2, and RUNX1 were
identified in this way. In contrast, other transcription factors important for
megakaryopoiesis were discovered through a systems approach; for example, c-Myb
was found to be critical for the erythroid versus megakaryocyte lineage decision 
by genome-wide loss-of-function studies. The regulation of the levels of these
transcription factors is, for the most part, cell intrinsic, although that
assumption has recently been challenged. Epigenetics also impacts megakaryocyte
gene expression, mediated by histone acetylation and methylation. Several
cytokines have been identified to regulate megakaryocyte survival, proliferation,
and differentiation, most prominent of which is thrombopoietin. Upon binding to
its receptor, the product of the c-Mpl proto-oncogene, thrombopoietin induces a
conformational change that activates a number of secondary messengers that
promote cell survival, proliferation, and differentiation, and down-modulate
receptor signaling. Among the best studied are the signal transducers and
activators of transcription (STAT) proteins; phosphoinositol-3-kinase;
mitogen-activated protein kinases; the phosphatases PTEN, SHP1, SHP2, and SHIP1; 
and the suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS) proteins. Additional signals
activated by these secondary mediators include mammalian target of rapamycin;
β(beta)-catenin; the G proteins Rac1, Rho, and CDC42; several transcription
factors, including hypoxia-inducible factor 1α(alpha), the homeobox-containing
proteins HOXB4 and HOXA9, and a number of signaling mediators that are reduced,
including glycogen synthase kinase 3α(alpha) and the FOXO3 family of forkhead
proteins. More recently, systematic interrogation of several aspects of
megakaryocyte formation have been conducted, employing genomics, proteomics, and 
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analyses, among others, and have yielded
many previously unappreciated signaling mechanisms that regulate megakaryocyte
lineage determination, proliferation, and differentiation. This chapter focuses
on these pathways in normal and neoplastic megakaryopoiesis, and suggests areas
that are ripe for further study.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2095-2_4 
PMID: 25480637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

