
1. Iran J Parasitol. 2013 Oct;8(4):522-9.

Sequence Diversity of pfmdr1 and Sequence Conserve of pldh in Plasmodium
falciparum from Indonesia: Its implications on Designing a Novel Antimalarial
Drug with Less Prone to Resistance.

Ali M(1), Hidayatullah TA(2), Alimuddin Z(3), Sabrina Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Microbiology and Biotechnology, Faculty of Animal Sciences,
Mataram University, Mataram, Indonesia.
(2)Laboratory of Microbiology Faculty of Medical, Mataram University, Mataram,
Indonesia.
(3)Faculty of Animal Science, Nahdathul Wathan University, Mataram, Indonesia.

BACKGROUND: pfmdr1 and its variants are molecular marker which are responsible
for antibiotics resistance in Plasmodium falciparum, a parasitic carrier for
malaria disease. A novel strategy to treat malaria disease is by disrupting
parasite lactate dehydrogenase (pLDH), a crucial enzyme for Plasmodium survival
during their erythrocytic stages. This research was aimed to investigate and
characterize the pfmdr1 and pldh genes of P. falciparum isolated from Nusa
Tenggara Indonesia.
METHODS: Genomic DNA of P.falciparum was isolated from malaria patients in Nusa
Tenggara Indonesia. pfmdr1 was amplified using nested PCR and genotyped using
Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (RFLP). pldh was amplified, sequenced,
and analyzed using NCBI public domain databases and alignment using Clustal W
ver. 1.83.
RESULTS: Genotyping of the pfmdr1 revealed that sequence diversity was extremely 
high among isolates. However, a sequence analysis of pldh indicated that open
reading frame of 316 amino acids of the gene showing 100% homology to the P.
falciparum 3D7 reference pldh (GeneBank: XM_001349953.1).
CONCLUSION: This is the first report which confirms the heterologous of pfmdr1
and the homologous sequences of P.falciparum pldh isolated from Nusa Tenggara
Islands of Indonesia, indicating that the chloroquine could not be used
effectively as antimalarial target in the region and the pLDH-targeted
antimalarial compound would have higher chance to be successful than using
chloroquine for curbing malaria worldwide.


PMCID: PMC4266115
PMID: 25516732 

