
1. Genome Med. 2014 Nov 29;6(11):110. doi: 10.1186/s13073-014-0110-6. eCollection
2014.

Plasmodium falciparum gene expression measured directly from tissue during human 
infection.

Van Tyne D(1), Tan Y(2), Daily JP(3), Kamiza S(4), Seydel K(5), Taylor T(5),
Mesirov JP(6), Wirth DF(7), Milner DA Jr(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA USA.
(2)Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA USA ; Graduate Program in Bioinformatics,
Boston University, Boston, MA USA.
(3)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY USA.
(4)University of Malawi College of Medicine, Blantyre, Malawi.
(5)Michigan State University, College of Osteopathic Medicine, East Lansing, MI
USA ; The Blantyre Malaria Project, Blantyre, Malawi.
(6)Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA USA.
(7)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA USA ; Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA USA.
(8)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA USA ; Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA USA ; University of
Malawi College of Medicine, Blantyre, Malawi ; The Blantyre Malaria Project,
Blantyre, Malawi ; Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA USA.

BACKGROUND: During the latter half of the natural 48-h intraerythrocytic life
cycle of human Plasmodium falciparum infection, parasites sequester deep in
endothelium of tissues, away from the spleen and inaccessible to peripheral
blood. These late-stage parasites may cause tissue damage and likely contribute
to clinical disease, and a more complete understanding of their biology is
needed. Because these life cycle stages are not easily sampled due to deep tissue
sequestration, measuring in vivo gene expression of parasites in the trophozoite 
and schizont stages has been a challenge.
METHODS: We developed a custom nCounter® gene expression platform and used this
platform to measure malaria parasite gene expression profiles in vitro and in
vivo. We also used imputation to generate global transcriptional profiles and
assessed differential gene expression between parasites growing in vitro and
those recovered from malaria-infected patient tissues collected at autopsy.
RESULTS: We demonstrate, for the first time, global transcriptional expression
profiles from in vivo malaria parasites sequestered in human tissues. We found
that parasite physiology can be correlated with in vitro data from an existing
life cycle data set, and that parasites in sequestered tissues show an expected
schizont-like transcriptional profile, which is conserved across tissues from the
same patient. Imputation based on 60 landmark genes generated global
transcriptional profiles that were highly correlated with genome-wide expression 
patterns from the same samples measured by microarray. Finally, differential
expression revealed a limited set of in vivo upregulated transcripts, which may
indicate unique parasite genes involved in human clinical infections.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study highlights the utility of a custom nCounter® P. falciparum
probe set, validation of imputation within Plasmodium species, and documentation 
of in vivo schizont-stage expression patterns from human tissues.

DOI: 10.1186/s13073-014-0110-6 
PMCID: PMC4269068
PMID: 25520756 

