
1. Tissue Antigens. 2015 Mar;85(3):190-9. doi: 10.1111/tan.12523. Epub 2015 Feb 6.

Killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptor (KIR) gene diversity in a population
naturally exposed to malaria in Porto Velho, Northern Brazil.

Perce-da-Silva DS(1), Silva LA, Lima-Junior JC, Cardoso-Oliveira J, Ribeiro-Alves
M, Santos F, Porto LC, Oliveira-Ferreira J, Banic DM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Simulids and Onchocerciasis "Malaria and Onchocerciasis
Research", Oswaldo Cruz Institute, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil.

Killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIR) are expressed mainly in natural
killer cells and specifically recognize human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I
molecules. The repertoire of KIR genes and KIR-HLA pairs is known to play a key
role in the susceptibilities to and the outcomes of several diseases, including
malaria. The aim of this study was to investigate the distribution of KIR genes, 
KIR genotypes and KIR-HLA pair combinations in a population naturally exposed to 
malaria from Brazilian Amazon. All 16 KIR genes investigated were present in the 
studied population. Overall, 46 KIR genotypes were defined. The two most common
genotypes in the Porto Velho communities, genotypes 1 and 2, were present at
similar frequencies as in the Americas. Principal component analysis based on the
frequencies of the KIR genes placed the Porto Velho population closer to the
Venezuela Mestizos, USA California hispanic and Brazil Paraná Mixed in terms of
KIR gene frequencies. This analysis highlights the multi-ethnic profile of the
Porto Velho population. Most of the individuals were found to have at least one
inhibitory KIR-HLA pair. Seventy-five KIR-HLA pair combinations were identified. 
The KIR-2DL2/3_HLA-C1, KIR3DL1_HLA-Bw4 and KIR2DL1_HLA-C2 pairs were the most
common. There was no association between KIR genes, KIR genotypes or KIR-HLA pair
combinations and malaria susceptibility in the studied population. This is the
first report on the distribution of KIR and known HLA ligands in the Porto Velho 
population. Taken together, these results should provide baseline information
that will be relevant to population evolutionary history, malaria and other
diseases studies in populations of the Brazilian Amazon.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tan.12523 
PMID: 25656387  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

