
1. mBio. 2015 Feb 10;6(1). pii: e02445-14. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02445-14.

Systems-based analysis of the Sarcocystis neurona genome identifies pathways that
contribute to a heteroxenous life cycle.

Blazejewski T(1), Nursimulu N, Pszenny V(2), Dangoudoubiyam S(3), Namasivayam
S(4), Chiasson MA(2), Chessman K, Tonkin M(5), Swapna LS(1), Hung SS, Bridgers
J(4), Ricklefs SM(6), Boulanger MJ(5), Dubey JP(6), Porcella SF(7), Kissinger JC,
Howe DK(3), Grigg ME(8), Parkinson J(9).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Structure and Function, Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Molecular Parasitology Section, Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, NIAID,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(3)Gluck Equine Research Center, Department of Veterinary Science, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA.
(4)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, Victoria,
British Columbia, Canada.
(6)U.S. Department of Agriculture, Animal Parasitic Diseases Laboratory,
Beltsville Agricultural Research Center, Agricultural Research Service,
Beltsville, Maryland, USA.
(7)Genomics Unit, Research Technologies Section, Rocky Mountain Laboratories,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Hamilton, Montana, USA.
(8)Molecular Parasitology Section, Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, NIAID,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA john.parkinson@utoronto.ca
griggm@niaid.nih.gov.
(9)john.parkinson@utoronto.ca griggm@niaid.nih.gov.

Sarcocystis neurona is a member of the coccidia, a clade of single-celled
parasites of medical and veterinary importance including Eimeria, Sarcocystis,
Neospora, and Toxoplasma. Unlike Eimeria, a single-host enteric pathogen,
Sarcocystis, Neospora, and Toxoplasma are two-host parasites that infect and
produce infectious tissue cysts in a wide range of intermediate hosts. As a
genus, Sarcocystis is one of the most successful protozoan parasites; all
vertebrates, including birds, reptiles, fish, and mammals are hosts to at least
one Sarcocystis species. Here we sequenced Sarcocystis neurona, the causal agent 
of fatal equine protozoal myeloencephalitis. The S. neurona genome is 127 Mbp,
more than twice the size of other sequenced coccidian genomes. Comparative
analyses identified conservation of the invasion machinery among the coccidia.
However, many dense-granule and rhoptry kinase genes, responsible for altering
host effector pathways in Toxoplasma and Neospora, are absent from S. neurona.
Further, S. neurona has a divergent repertoire of SRS proteins, previously
implicated in tissue cyst formation in Toxoplasma. Systems-based analyses
identified a series of metabolic innovations, including the ability to exploit
alternative sources of energy. Finally, we present an S. neurona model detailing 
conserved molecular innovations that promote the transition from a purely enteric
lifestyle (Eimeria) to a heteroxenous parasite capable of infecting a wide range 
of intermediate hosts.IMPORTANCE: Sarcocystis neurona is a member of the
coccidia, a clade of single-celled apicomplexan parasites responsible for major
economic and health care burdens worldwide. A cousin of Plasmodium,
Cryptosporidium, Theileria, and Eimeria, Sarcocystis is one of the most
successful parasite genera; it is capable of infecting all vertebrates (fish,
reptiles, birds, and mammals-including humans). The past decade has witnessed an 
increasing number of human outbreaks of clinical significance associated with
acute sarcocystosis. Among Sarcocystis species, S. neurona has a wide host range 
and causes fatal encephalitis in horses, marine mammals, and several other
mammals. To provide insights into the transition from a purely enteric parasite
(e.g., Eimeria) to one that forms tissue cysts (Toxoplasma), we present the first
genome sequence of S. neurona. Comparisons with other coccidian genomes highlight
the molecular innovations that drive its distinct life cycle strategies.

Copyright © 2015 Blazejewski et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02445-14 
PMCID: PMC4337577
PMID: 25670772  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

