
1. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2014 Aug 5;1(2):ofu059. doi: 10.1093/ofid/ofu059.
eCollection 2014 Sep.

Novel Mutation in Cytochrome B of Plasmodium falciparum in One of Two
Atovaquone-Proguanil Treatment Failures in Travelers Returning From Same Site in 
Nigeria.

Plucinski MM(1), Huber CS(2), Akinyi S(2), Dalton W(3), Eschete M(3), Grady K(2),
Silva-Flannery L(2), Mathison BA(2), Udhayakumar V(2), Arguin PM(2), Barnwell
JW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global Health ;
Epidemic Intelligence Service , Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ,
Atlanta, Georgia.
(2)Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global Health.
(3)Terrebonne General Medical Center, Houma, Louisiana.

BACKGROUND: Atovaquone-proguanil (AP) is the most commonly used treatment for
uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria in the United States. Apparent AP
treatment failures were reported 7 months apart in 2 American travelers who
stayed in the same compound for foreign workers in Rivers State, Nigeria.
METHODS: We analyzed pretreatment (day 0) and day of failure samples from both
travelers for mutations in the P falciparum cytochrome B (pfcytb) and
dihydrofolate reductase (pfdhfr) genes associated with resistance to atovaquone
and cycloguanil, the active metabolite of proguanil, respectively. We genotyped
the parasites and sequenced their mitochondrial genomes.
RESULTS: On day 0, both travelers had proguanil-resistant genotypes but
atovaquone-sensitive cytb sequences. Day of failure samples exhibited mutations
in cytb for both travelers. One traveler had the common Y268S mutation, whereas
the other traveler had a previously unreported mutation, I258M. The travelers had
unrelated parasite genotypes and different mitochondrial genomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the infections likely having been contracted in the same
site, there is no evidence that the cases were related. The mutations likely
arose independently during the acute infection or treatment. Our results
highlight the importance of genotyping parasites and sequencing the full cytb and
dhfr genes in AP failures to rule out transmission of AP-resistant strains and
identify novel mechanisms of AP resistance.

DOI: 10.1093/ofid/ofu059 
PMCID: PMC4281801
PMID: 25734129 

