
1. BMC Genomics. 2015 Feb 22;16:115. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1261-6.

Predicting functional and regulatory divergence of a drug resistance transporter 
gene in the human malaria parasite.

Siwo GH(1)(2), Tan A(3)(4), Button-Simons KA(5), Samarakoon U(6)(7), Checkley
LA(8), Pinapati RS(9), Ferdig MT(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Eck Institute for Global Health, University
of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA. siwomolbio@gmail.com.
(2)Geisel School of Medicine, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, USA.
siwomolbio@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Eck Institute for Global Health, University
of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA. asako926@gmail.com.
(4)Epicentre, Madison, WI, USA. asako926@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, Eck Institute for Global Health, University
of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA. Katrina.A.Button-Simons.1@nd.edu.
(6)Department of Biological Sciences, Eck Institute for Global Health, University
of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA. upeka.samarakoon@gmail.com.
(7)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. upeka.samarakoon@gmail.com.
(8)Department of Biological Sciences, Eck Institute for Global Health, University
of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA. Lisa.Checkley.2@nd.edu.
(9)Department of Biological Sciences, Eck Institute for Global Health, University
of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA. rpinapat@nd.edu.
(10)Department of Biological Sciences, Eck Institute for Global Health,
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA. ferdig.1@nd.edu.

BACKGROUND: The paradigm of resistance evolution to chemotherapeutic agents is
that a key coding mutation in a specific gene drives resistance to a particular
drug. In the case of resistance to the anti-malarial drug chloroquine (CQ), a
specific mutation in the transporter pfcrt is associated with resistance. Here,
we apply a series of analytical steps to gene expression data from our lab and
leverage 3 independent datasets to identify pfcrt-interacting genes. Resulting
networks provide insights into pfcrt's biological functions and regulation, as
well as the divergent phenotypic effects of its allelic variants in different
genetic backgrounds.
RESULTS: To identify pfcrt-interacting genes, we analyze pfcrt co-expression
networks in 2 phenotypic states - CQ-resistant (CQR) and CQ-sensitive (CQS)
recombinant progeny clones - using a computational approach that prioritizes gene
interactions into functional and regulatory relationships. For both phenotypic
states, pfcrt co-expressed gene sets are associated with hemoglobin metabolism,
consistent with CQ's expected mode of action. To predict the drivers of
co-expression divergence, we integrate topological relationships in the
co-expression networks with available high confidence protein-protein interaction
data. This analysis identifies 3 transcriptional regulators from the ApiAP2
family and histone acetylation as potential mediators of these divergences. We
validate the predicted divergences in DNA mismatch repair and histone acetylation
by measuring the effects of small molecule inhibitors in recombinant progeny
clones combined with quantitative trait locus (QTL) mapping.
CONCLUSIONS: This work demonstrates the utility of differential co-expression
viewed in a network framework to uncover functional and regulatory divergence in 
phenotypically distinct parasites. pfcrt-associated co-expression in the CQ
resistant progeny highlights CQR-specific gene relationships and possible
targeted intervention strategies. The approaches outlined here can be readily
generalized to other parasite populations and drug resistances.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-015-1261-6 
PMCID: PMC4352545
PMID: 25765049  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

