
1. BMC Genomics. 2015 Feb 19;16:100. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1257-2.

The germline of the malaria mosquito produces abundant miRNAs, endo-siRNAs,
piRNAs and 29-nt small RNAs.

Castellano L(1), Rizzi E(2), Krell J(3), Di Cristina M(4), Galizi R(5), Mori
A(6), Tam J(7), De Bellis G(8), Stebbing J(9), Crisanti A(10)(11), Nolan T(12).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial Centre for
Translational and Experimental Medicine, Imperial College, London, UK.
l.castellano@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)Istituto di Tecnologie Biomediche, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche
(ITB-CNR), Segrate, Milan, Italy. ermanno.rizzi@itb.cnr.it.
(3)Division of Oncology, Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial Centre for
Translational and Experimental Medicine, Imperial College, London, UK.
j.krell@imperial.ac.uk.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Biology and Biotechnology, University of Perugia,
Perugia, Italy. manlio.dicristina@unipg.it.
(5)Department of Life Sciences, South Kensington Campus, Imperial College London,
London, SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom. r.galizi11@imperial.ac.uk.
(6)Department of Life Sciences, South Kensington Campus, Imperial College London,
London, SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom. a.mori10@imperial.ac.uk.
(7)Department of Life Sciences, South Kensington Campus, Imperial College London,
London, SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom. tam.cy.j@gmail.com.
(8)Istituto di Tecnologie Biomediche, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche
(ITB-CNR), Segrate, Milan, Italy. gianluca.debellis@itb.cnr.it.
(9)Division of Oncology, Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial Centre for
Translational and Experimental Medicine, Imperial College, London, UK.
j.stebbing@imperial.ac.uk.
(10)Department of Life Sciences, South Kensington Campus, Imperial College
London, London, SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom. acrs@imperial.ac.uk.
(11)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale Via Gambuli, Centro di Genomica
Funzionale, University of Perugia, 06132, Perugia, Italy. acrs@imperial.ac.uk.
(12)Department of Life Sciences, South Kensington Campus, Imperial College
London, London, SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom. t.nolan@imperial.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Small RNAs include different classes essential for endogenous gene
regulation and cellular defence against genomic parasites. However, a
comprehensive analysis of the small RNA pathways in the germline of the mosquito 
Anopheles gambiae has never been performed despite their potential relevance to
reproductive capacity in this malaria vector.
RESULTS: We performed small RNA deep sequencing during larval and adult
gonadogenesis and find that they predominantly express four classes of regulatory
small RNAs. We identified 45 novel miRNA precursors some of which were sex-biased
and gonad-enriched , nearly doubling the number of previously known miRNA loci.
We also determine multiple genomic clusters of 24-30 nt Piwi-interacting RNAs
(piRNAs) that map to transposable elements (TEs) and 3'UTR of protein coding
genes. Unusually, many TEs and the 3'UTR of some endogenous genes produce an
abundant peak of 29-nt small RNAs with piRNA-like characteristics. Moreover, both
sense and antisense piRNAs from TEs in both Anopheles gambiae and Drosophila
melanogaster reveal novel features of piRNA sequence bias. We also discovered
endogenous small interfering RNAs (endo-siRNAs) that map to overlapping
transcripts and TEs.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first description of the germline miRNome in a mosquito 
species and should prove a valuable resource for understanding gene regulation
that underlies gametogenesis and reproductive capacity. We also provide the first
evidence of a piRNA pathway that is active against transposons in the germline
and our findings suggest novel piRNA sequence bias. The contribution of small RNA
pathways to germline TE regulation and genome defence in general is an important 
finding for approaches aimed at manipulating mosquito populations through the use
of selfish genetic elements.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-015-1257-2 
PMCID: PMC4345017
PMID: 25766668  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

