
1. mBio. 2015 Mar 17;6(2):e02330. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02330-14.

Cyclic GMP balance is critical for malaria parasite transmission from the
mosquito to the mammalian host.

Lakshmanan V(1), Fishbaugher ME(1), Morrison B(1), Baldwin M(1), Macarulay M(1), 
Vaughan AM(1), Mikolajczak SA(1), Kappe SH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute (Seattle BioMed), Seattle, Washington,
USA.
(2)stefan.kappe@seattlebiomed.org.

Transmission of malaria occurs during Anopheles mosquito vector blood meals, when
Plasmodium sporozoites that have invaded the mosquito salivary glands are
delivered to the mammalian host. Sporozoites display a unique form of motility
that is essential for their movement across cellular host barriers and invasion
of hepatocytes. While the molecular machinery powering motility and invasion is
increasingly well defined, the signaling events that control these essential
parasite activities have not been clearly delineated. Here, we identify a
phosphodiesterase (PDEγ) in Plasmodium, a regulator of signaling through cyclic
nucleotide second messengers. Reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) analysis and
epitope tagging of endogenous PDEγ detected its expression in blood stages and
sporozoites of Plasmodium yoelii. Deletion of PDEγ (pdeγ(-)) rendered sporozoites
nonmotile, and they failed to invade the mosquito salivary glands. Consequently, 
PDEγ deletion completely blocked parasite transmission by mosquito bite.
Strikingly, pdeγ(-) sporozoites showed dramatically elevated levels of cyclic GMP
(cGMP), indicating that a perturbation in cyclic nucleotide balance is involved
in the observed phenotypic defects. Transcriptome sequencing (RNA-Seq) analysis
of pdeγ(-) sporozoites revealed reduced transcript abundance of genes that encode
key components of the motility and invasion apparatus. Our data reveal a crucial 
role for PDEγ in maintaining the cyclic nucleotide balance in the malaria
parasite sporozoite stage, which in turn is essential for parasite transmission
from mosquito to mammal.IMPORTANCE: Malaria is a formidable threat to human
health worldwide, and there is an urgent need to identify novel drug targets for 
this parasitic disease. The parasite is transmitted by mosquito bite, inoculating
the host with infectious sporozoite stages. We show that cellular signaling by
cyclic nucleotides is critical for transmission of the parasite from the mosquito
vector to the mammalian host. Parasite phosphodiesterase γ is essential for
maintaining cyclic nucleotide balance, and its deletion blocks transmission of
sporozoites. A deeper understanding of the signaling mechanisms involved in
transmission might inform the discovery of novel drugs that interrupt this
essential step in the parasite life cycle.

Copyright © 2015 Lakshmanan et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02330-14 
PMCID: PMC4453516
PMID: 25784701  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

