
1. Mol Immunol. 2015 Sep;67(1):71-84. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2015.03.006. Epub 2015
Mar 26.

More than just immune evasion: Hijacking complement by Plasmodium falciparum.

Schmidt CQ(1), Kennedy AT(2), Tham WH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology of Natural Products and Clinical Pharmacology, Ulm
University, Helmholtzstraße 20, Ulm, Germany. Electronic address:
christoph.schmidt@uni-ulm.de.
(2)Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne and Division of
Infection and Immunity, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, Parkville, Victoria 
3052, Australia.
(3)Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne and Division of
Infection and Immunity, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, Parkville, Victoria 
3052, Australia. Electronic address: tham@wehi.edu.au.

Malaria remains one of the world's deadliest diseases. Plasmodium falciparum is
responsible for the most severe and lethal form of human malaria. P. falciparum's
life cycle involves two obligate hosts: human and mosquito. From initial entry
into these hosts, malaria parasites face the onslaught of the first line of host 
defence, the complement system. In this review, we discuss the complex
interaction between complement and malaria infection in terms of hosts immune
responses, parasite survival and pathogenesis of severe forms of malaria. We will
focus on the role of complement receptor 1 and its associated polymorphisms in
malaria immune complex clearance, as a mediator of parasite rosetting and as an
entry receptor for P. falciparum invasion. Complement evasion strategies of P.
falciparum parasites will also be highlighted. The sexual forms of the malaria
parasites recruit the soluble human complement regulator Factor H to evade
complement-mediated killing within the mosquito host. A novel evasion strategy is
the deployment of parasite organelles to divert complement attack from infective 
blood stage parasites. Finally we outline the future challenge to understand the 
implications of these exploitation mechanisms in the interplay between successful
infection of the host and pathogenesis observed in severe malaria.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2015.03.006 
PMID: 25816986  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

