
1. Malar J. 2015 Mar 13;14:110. doi: 10.1186/s12936-015-0612-8.

Plasmodium knowlesi gene expression differs in ex vivo compared to in vitro
blood-stage cultures.

Lapp SA(1), Mok S(2), Zhu L(3), Wu H(4), Preiser PR(5), Bozdech Z(6), Galinski
MR(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Emory Vaccine Center, Yerkes National Primate Research Center, Emory
University, Atlanta, GA, USA. salapp@emory.edu.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore,
Singapore. MOKS0007@ntu.edu.sg.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore,
Singapore. ZhuLei@ntu.edu.sg.
(4)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Rollins School of Public
Health, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA. hao.wu@emory.edu.
(5)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore,
Singapore. PRPREISER@ntu.edu.sg.
(6)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore,
Singapore. zbozdech@ntu.edu.sg.
(7)Emory Vaccine Center, Yerkes National Primate Research Center, Emory
University, Atlanta, GA, USA. mary.galinski@emory.edu.
(8)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Emory University,
Atlanta, GA, USA. mary.galinski@emory.edu.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium knowlesi is one of five Plasmodium species known to cause 
malaria in humans and can result in severe illness and death. While a zoonosis in
humans, this simian malaria parasite species infects macaque monkeys and serves
as an experimental model for in vivo, ex vivo and in vitro studies. It has
underpinned malaria discoveries relating to host-pathogen interactions, the
immune response and immune evasion strategies. This study investigated
differences in P. knowlesi gene expression in samples from ex vivo and in vitro
cultures.
METHODS: Gene expression profiles were generated using microarrays to compare the
stage-specific transcripts detected for a clone of P. knowlesi propagated in the 
blood of a rhesus macaque host and then grown in an ex-vivo culture, and the same
clone adapted to long-term in vitro culture. Parasite samples covering one
blood-stage cycle were analysed at four-hour intervals. cDNA was generated and
hybridized to an oligoarray representing the P. knowlesi genome. Two replicate
experiments were developed from in vitro cultures. Expression values were
filtered, normalized, and analysed using R and Perl language and applied to a
sine wave model to determine changes in equilibrium and amplitude. Differentially
expressed genes from ex vivo and in vitro time points were detected using limma
R/Bioconductor and gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA).
RESULTS: Major differences were noted between the ex vivo and in vitro time
courses in overall gene expression and the length of the cycle (25.5 hours ex
vivo; 33.5 hours in vitro). GSEA of genes up-regulated ex vivo showed an
enrichment of various genes including SICAvar, ribosomal- associated and histone 
acetylation pathway genes. In contrast, certain genes involved in metabolism and 
cell growth, such as porphobilinogen deaminase and tyrosine phosphatase, and one 
SICAvar gene, were significantly up-regulated in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates how gene expression in P. knowlesi
blood-stage parasites can differ dramatically depending on whether the parasites 
are grown in vivo, with only one cycle of development ex vivo, or as an adapted
isolate in long-term in vitro culture. These data bring emphasis to the
importance of studying the parasite, its biology and disease manifestations in
the context of the host.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-015-0612-8 
PMCID: PMC4369371
PMID: 25880967  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

