
1. Parasit Vectors. 2015 Mar 25;8:179. doi: 10.1186/s13071-015-0772-y.

Dynamic expression of miRNAs across immature and adult stages of the malaria
mosquito Anopheles stephensi.

Jain S(1), Rana V(2), Tridibes A(3), Sunil S(4), Bhatnagar RK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Insect Resistance Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, New Delhi, India. shanujain07@gmail.com.
(2)Insect Resistance Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, New Delhi, India. rana.vandita@gmail.com.
(3)National Institute of Malaria Research, Dwarka, New Delhi, India.
adak.mrc@gmail.com.
(4)Insect Resistance Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, New Delhi, India. sujatha@icgeb.res.in.
(5)Insect Resistance Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, New Delhi, India. raj@icgeb.res.in.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs are small non-coding RNAs that are involved in various
biological processes including insect development. Anopheles stephensi serves as 
primary vector of malaria parasite in Asia and exhibits holometabolous life cycle
that involves four different stages of development. Regulation and role of
mosquito miRNAs during various stages of mosquito development remain largely
unknown.
METHODS: High throughput small RNA sequencing was employed for identification and
profiling of miRNAs across immature and adult stages of malaria vector, which
were further validated using Northern hybridization and real time PCR. Target
prediction and pathway analysis was carried out to understand the role of
regulated miRNAs in insect development. Degradome sequencing was employed to
identify cleaved targets of some regulated miRNAs. Loss of function strategy was 
employed for miR-989 to understand its probable role in female reproductive
process.
RESULTS: Small RNA sequencing and data analysis revealed 111 and 14 known and
novel miRNAs respectively across all stages of Anopheles stephensi. Nine miRNAs
showed gender specific regulation across different stages of mosquito
development. Analysis of miRNAs revealed regulation of 24 and 26 miRNAs across
different stages of male and female mosquito development respectively. mRNA
targets and significant pathways targeted by regulated miRNAs were identified for
each stage of mosquito development. Degradome sequencing revealed twenty nine
cleaved targets of insect miRNAs. MicroRNA-989 showed significant up-regulation
in the adult female as compared to adult male mosquito. Knockdown of miR-989
expression in adult female using miRNA specific antagomir affected targets
playing roles in protein binding, proteolysis and nucleic acid binding in ovary
tissue of female mosquito post blood feeding.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first comprehensive effort to understand regulation of
Anopheles stephensi miRNAs across developmental stages of male and female
mosquito. Preliminary role of regulated miRNAs in mosquito development was
revealed by target prediction and pathway analysis. MicroRNA-989 emerged to have 
important roles in adult female mosquitoes showing significant up-regulation
which was further studied using miR-989 specific antagomir. This study provides
insights into mosquito development and reproductive process and has implications 
for effective control of mosquito population required for reducing spread of
mosquito-borne infectious diseases.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-015-0772-y 
PMCID: PMC4418096
PMID: 25888742  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

