
1. PLoS Pathog. 2015 May 19;11(5):e1004894. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004894.
eCollection 2015 May.

FCRL5 Delineates Functionally Impaired Memory B Cells Associated with Plasmodium 
falciparum Exposure.

Sullivan RT(1), Kim CC(2), Fontana MF(2), Feeney ME(2), Jagannathan P(3), Boyle
MJ(4), Drakeley CJ(5), Ssewanyana I(6), Nankya F(7), Mayanja-Kizza H(8), Dorsey
G(1), Greenhouse B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America.
(2)Division of Experimental Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America.
(3)Division of HIV/AIDS, Department of Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America.
(4)Division of Experimental Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America;
Center for Biomedical Research, The Burnet Institute, Melbourne, Australia.
(5)Department of Immunology and Infection, London School of Hygiene and Tropical 
Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Immunology and Infection, London School of Hygiene and Tropical 
Medicine, London, United Kingdom; Infectious Disease Research Collaboration,
Uganda.
(7)Infectious Disease Research Collaboration, Uganda.
(8)Infectious Disease Research Collaboration, Uganda; Infectious Diseases
Institute, Makerere University College of Health Sciences, Kampala, Uganda.

Exposure to Plasmodium falciparum is associated with circulating "atypical"
memory B cells (atMBCs), which appear similar to dysfunctional B cells found in
HIV-infected individuals. Functional analysis of atMBCs has been limited, with
one report suggesting these cells are not dysfunctional but produce protective
antibodies. To better understand the function of malaria-associated atMBCs, we
performed global transcriptome analysis of these cells, obtained from individuals
living in an area of high malaria endemicity in Uganda. Comparison of gene
expression data suggested down-modulation of B cell receptor signaling and
apoptosis in atMBCs compared to classical MBCs. Additionally, in contrast to
previous reports, we found upregulation of Fc receptor-like 5 (FCRL5), but not
FCRL4, on atMBCs. Atypical MBCs were poor spontaneous producers of antibody ex
vivo, and higher surface expression of FCRL5 defined a distinct subset of atMBCs 
compromised in its ability to produce antibody upon stimulation. Moreover, higher
levels of P. falciparum exposure were associated with increased frequencies of
FCRL5+ atMBCs. Together, our findings suggest that FCLR5+ identifies a
functionally distinct, and perhaps dysfunctional, subset of MBCs in individuals
exposed to P. falciparum.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004894 
PMCID: PMC4438005
PMID: 25993340  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

