
1. J Infect Dis. 2015 Dec 15;212(12):1999-2010. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiv306. Epub
2015 May 27.

Induction of Inhibitory Receptors on T Cells During Plasmodium vivax Malaria
Impairs Cytokine Production.

Costa PA(1), Leoratti FM(1), Figueiredo MM(1), Tada MS(2), Pereira DB(2),
Junqueira C(1), Soares IS(3), Barber DL(4), Gazzinelli RT(5), Antonelli LR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Immunopatologia, Centro de Pesquisas René Rachou, Fundação
Oswaldo Cruz, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais.
(2)Centro de Pesquisas em Medicina Tropical de Rondônia, Porto Velho.
(3)Departamento de Análises Clínicas e Toxicológicas, Faculdade de Ciências
Farmacêuticas, Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)T Lymphocyte Biology Unit, Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland.
(5)Laboratório de Immunopatologia, Centro de Pesquisas René Rachou, Fundação
Oswaldo Cruz, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais Departamento de Bioquímica e
Imunologia, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.

The function and regulation of the immune response triggered during malaria is
complex and poorly understood, and there is a particular paucity of studies
conducted in humans infected with Plasmodium vivax. While it has been proposed
that T-cell-effector responses are crucial for protection against blood-stage
malaria in mice, the mechanisms behind this in humans remain poorly understood.
Experimental models of malaria have shown that the regulatory molecules,
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte attenuator-4 (CTLA-4), lymphocyte activation gene-3
(LAG-3), and programmed death-1 (PD-1) are involved in the functional impairment 
of T cells during infection. Our goal was to define the role of these molecules
during P. vivax malaria. We demonstrate that infection triggers the expression of
regulatory molecules on T cells. The pattern of expression differs in CD4(+) and 
CD8(+) T cells. Higher frequencies of CD4(+) express more than 1 regulatory
molecule compared to CD8(+) T cells. Moreover, lower proportions of CD4(+) T
cells coexpress regulatory molecules, but are still able to proliferate.
Importantly, simultaneously blockade of the CLTA-4, PD-1, and T-cell
immunoglobulin and mucin-3 signaling restores the cytokine production by
antigen-specific cells. These data support the hypothesis that upregulation of
inhibitory receptors on T cells during P. vivax malaria impairs parasite-specific
T-cell effector function.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiv306 
PMCID: PMC4655853
PMID: 26019284  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

