
1. Parasit Vectors. 2015 May 29;8:296. doi: 10.1186/s13071-015-0908-0.

Expression of active trypsin-like serine peptidases in the midgut of
sugar-feeding female Anopheles aquasalis.

Dias-Lopes G(1), Borges-Veloso A(2), Saboia-Vahia L(3), Domont GB(4), Britto
C(5), Cuervo P(6), De Jesus JB(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Biologia Molecular e Doenças Endêmicas - Instituto Oswaldo
Cruz, FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. geovane.dl@gmail.com.
(2)Laboratório de Biologia Molecular e Doenças Endêmicas - Instituto Oswaldo
Cruz, FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. abv@ioc.fiocruz.br.
(3)Laboratório de Pesquisa em Leishmaniose - Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, FIOCRUZ, Av.
Brasil 4365, Manguinhos, Pav. 26, Sala 509, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
leovahia@ioc.fiocruz.br.
(4)Laboratório de Química de Proteínas, Departamento de Química, UFRJ, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil. gilberto@iq.ufrj.br.
(5)Laboratório de Biologia Molecular e Doenças Endêmicas - Instituto Oswaldo
Cruz, FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. cbritto@ioc.fiocruz.br.
(6)Laboratório de Pesquisa em Leishmaniose - Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, FIOCRUZ, Av.
Brasil 4365, Manguinhos, Pav. 26, Sala 509, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
pcuervo@fiocruz.br.
(7)Laboratório de Biologia Molecular e Doenças Endêmicas - Instituto Oswaldo
Cruz, FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. jbj@ioc.fiocruz.br.
(8)Departamento de Medicina, Faculdade de Medicina - Universidade Federal de São 
João Del Rey, São João del Rei, MG, Brazil. jbj@ioc.fiocruz.br.

BACKGROUND: Anopheles aquasalis is a dipteran of the family Culicidae that is
widely distributed in the coastal regions of South and Central America. This
species acts as a vector of Plasmodium vivax, an important etiological agent of
malaria, which represents a serious public health problem. In mosquitoes,
trypsin-like serine proteases are important in blood meal digestion, immune
responses and reproductive functions. The study of peptidases expressed in the
mosquito midgut is essential to understanding the mechanisms of parasite-host
interaction and the physiological process of nutrient digestion.
METHODS: Our study aimed to identify and characterize the proteolytic activities 
in the midgut of sugar-fed An. aquasalis females using zymographic analyses
(substrate-SDS-PAGE), in-solution assays and mass spectrometry.
RESULTS: Here, we used a zymographic analysis to further biochemically
characterize the proteolytic profile of the midgut of sugar-feeding An. aquasalis
females. The trypsin peptidases migrated between ~17 and ~76 kDa and displayed
higher proteolytic activities between pH 7.5 and 10 and at temperatures between
37 °C and 50 °C. Four putative trypsin-like serine peptidases were identified
using mass spectrometry and data mining. The molecular masses of these peptidases
were similar to those observed using zymography, which suggested that these
peptidases could be responsible for some of the observed proteolytic bands.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our results contribute to the gene annotation of the
unknown genome of this species, to the tissue location of these peptidases, and
to the functional prediction of these crucial enzymes, which all impact further
studies of this species.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-015-0908-0 
PMCID: PMC4459661
PMID: 26021986  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

