
1. Parasit Vectors. 2015 Jun 6;8:307. doi: 10.1186/s13071-015-0912-4.

A standard cytogenetic map of Culex quinquefasciatus polytene chromosomes in
application for fine-scale physical mapping.

Unger MF(1), Sharakhova MV(2)(3), Harshbarger AJ(4), Glass P(5), Collins FH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN,
USA. Munger1@alumni.nd.edu.
(2)Department of Entomology, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA. Msharakh@vt.edu.
(3)Laboratory of Evolutionary Cytogenetics, Tomsk State University, 36 Lenina
Avenue, Tomsk, 634050, Russia. Msharakh@vt.edu.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN,
USA. Aharshba@alumni.nd.edu.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN,
USA. Patrick.Glass13@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN,
USA. Frank@nd.edu.

BACKGROUND: Southern house mosquito Culex quinquefasciatus belongs to the C.
pipiens cryptic species complex, with global distribution and unclear taxonomy.
Mosquitoes of the complex can transmit human and animal pathogens, such as
filarial worm, West Nile virus and avian malarial Plasmodium. Physical gene
mapping is crucial to understanding genome organization, function, and systematic
relationships of cryptic species, and is a basis for developing new vector
control strategies. However, physical mapping was not established previously for 
Culex due to the lack of well-structured polytene chromosomes.
METHODS: Inbreeding was used to diminish inversion polymorphism and asynapsis of 
chromosomal homologs. Identification of larvae of the same developmental stage
using the shape of imaginal discs allowed achievement of uniformity in
chromosomal banding pattern. This together with high-resolution phase-contrast
photography enabled the development of a cytogenetic map. Fluorescent in situ
hybridization was used for gene mapping.
RESULTS: A detailed cytogenetic map of C. quinquefasciatus polytene chromosomes
was produced. Landmarks for chromosome recognition and cytological boundaries for
two inversions were identified. Locations of 23 genes belonging to 16 genomic
supercontigs, and 2 cDNA were established. Six supercontigs were oriented and one
was found putatively misassembled. The cytogenetic map was linked to the
previously developed genetic linkage groups by corresponding positions of 2
genetic markers and 10 supercontigs carrying genetic markers. Polytene
chromosomes were numbered according to the genetic linkage groups.
CONCLUSIONS: This study developed a new standard cytogenetic photomap of the
polytene chromosomes for C. quinquefasciatus and was applied for the fine-scale
physical mapping. It allowed us to infer chromosomal position of 1333 of
annotated genes belonging to 16 genomic supercontigs and find orientation of 6 of
these supercontigs; the new cytogenetic and previously developed genetic linkage 
maps were integrated based on 12 matches. The map will further assist in finding 
chromosomal position of the medically important and other genes, contributing
into improvement of the genome assembly. Better assembled C. quinquefasciatus
genome can serve as a reference for studying other vector species of C. pipiens
complex and will help to resolve their taxonomic relationships. This, in turn,
will contribute into future development of vector and disease control strategies.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-015-0912-4 
PMCID: PMC4465148
PMID: 26048143  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

