
1. Indian J Med Microbiol. 2015 Jul-Sep;33(3):401-5. doi: 10.4103/0255-0857.158565.

Population genetic study of Plasmodium falciparum parasites pertaining to dhps
gene sequence in malaria endemic areas of Assam.

Sharma J(1), Dutta P, Khan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Entomology and Filariasis Division, Regional Medical Research Centre (ICMR),
Dibrugarh, Assam, India.

Plasmodium falciparum malaria parasite had developed resistance to almost all the
currently used antimalarial drugs. The purpose of the study was to come across
the genetic distances in P. falciparum dhps gene sequences circulating in Assam. 
A partial fragment of P. falciparum dhps gene containing major single nucleotide 
polymorphisms associated with sulphadoxine resistance were amplified and
sequenced. Thereafter specific bioinformatics tools like BioEdit v7.0.9, ClustalW
in Mega 5, DnaSP version v.5.10.01 etc were used for the analysis. A total of 100
P. falciparum positive cases in different malaria endemic areas of Assam were
included for the study. Based upon the mutation analysis, a total of seven
different P. falciparum dhps genotypes were observed with five variable sites.
Maximum five haplotypes were found in the P. falciparum isolates from Jorhat
district of Assam. Four polymorphic sites were observed in the P. falciparum dhps
gene sequences in Karbi Anglong, NC Hills, Chirang and Jorhat whereas the
isolates from other study areas had three polymorphic sites. A statistically
significant positive value of Tajima's D were observed among the P. falciparum
field isolates in Assam indicating that there is an excess of intermediate
frequency alleles and can result from population bottlenecks, structure and/or
balancing selection. Extensive gene flow took place among the P. falciparum
population of Jorhat with Sivasagar, Chirang with Sivasagar and Chirang with
Karbi Anglong. However, large genetic differentiation was observed among the P.
falciparum isolates of NC Hills with Lakhimpur, Tinsukia, Dibrugarh and Golaghat 
and also the parasite population of Karbi Anglong with Lakhimpur and Tinsukia
signifying little gene flow among the population. This finding has shown that
mutant Pfdhps gene associated with sulphadoxine resistance is circulating in
Assam. It is believed that, the parasite population may have undergone high level
of breeding.

DOI: 10.4103/0255-0857.158565 
PMID: 26068343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

