
1. Iran J Public Health. 2015 Jan;44(1):89-99.

High-Level Expression of Immunogenic Recombinant Plasmodium vivax Merozoite
Surface Protein (Pvmsp-142 kDa) in pGEX 6P1 Vector.

Mirahmadi H(1), Fallahi S(2), Fallah Omrani V(3), Kazemi B(3), Haghighi A(3),
Seyyed Tabaei SJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)1. Dept. of Parasitology and Mycology, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical
Sciences , Tehran, Iran . ; 2. Dept. of Parasitology and Mycology, Zahedan
University of Medical Sciences , Zahedan, Iran.
(2)3. Dept. of Parasitology and Mycology, Lorestan University of Medical Sciences
, Khoramabad, Iran.
(3)1. Dept. of Parasitology and Mycology, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical
Sciences , Tehran, Iran .

BACKGROUND: Detection of Plasmodium vivax specific antibodies with serological
tests could be a valuable tool for epidemiological researches. Whereas P. vivax
cannot be simply obtained in vitro, serological tests using total or
semi-purified antigens are infrequently used. Given this restriction, the present
study investigated whether recombinant P. vivax merozoite surface protein 1
(PvMSP-1 42 kDa) could be useful in detection of antibodies from the serums of a 
P. vivax infected person using serological tests.
METHODS: Parasite DNA was extracted from blood sample of an Iranian P.
vivax-infected patient. The region of PvMSP-142 kDa was amplified by PCR then
cloned into pTZ57R/T vector and sequenced. The insert was sub cloned into pGEX
6P1 expression vector. Afterwards, it was transformed into E. coli BL21 and
cultured massively. Sub cloning of gene was confirmed by PCR and enzyme digestion
and sequencing finally. Production of recombinant protein was confirmed by
SDS-PAGE. Western blot was performed by human sera to appraisal binding ability
to the IgG antibodies of P. vivax infected patients. Recombinant protein was
purified and estimated by Bradford assay.
RESULTS: The specialty values of the Western blot determined with 10 sera from
naturally infected individuals, 10 sera from healthy individuals and 7 sera from 
individuals with other infectious diseases.
CONCLUSION: For the Iranian population, using a Western blot assay for MSP-142
recombinant protein can be used as the foundation for promotion of serological
assay for the detection of P. vivax malaria such as ELISA.


PMCID: PMC4450018
PMID: 26060780 

