
1. BMC Med Ethics. 2015 Jun 16;16:42. doi: 10.1186/s12910-015-0035-7.

Understandings of genomic research in developing countries: a qualitative study
of the views of MalariaGEN participants in Mali.

Traore K(1), Bull S(2), Niare A(3), Konate S(4), Thera MA(5), Kwiatkowski D(6),
Parker M(7), Doumbo OK(8).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Research and Training Center, DEAP/FMPOS, UMI3189, Université des
Sciences, des Techniques et des Technologies de Bamako, BP 1805, Bamako, Mali.
karim@icermali.org.
(2)The Ethox Centre, Nuffield Department of Population Health, University of
Oxford, Oxford, OX3 7LF, UK. susan.bull@ethox.ox.ac.uk.
(3)Malaria Research and Training Center, DEAP/FMPOS, UMI3189, Université des
Sciences, des Techniques et des Technologies de Bamako, BP 1805, Bamako, Mali.
flanyalass@yahoo.fr.
(4)Malaria Research and Training Center, DEAP/FMPOS, UMI3189, Université des
Sciences, des Techniques et des Technologies de Bamako, BP 1805, Bamako, Mali.
sakonate@icermali.org.
(5)Malaria Research and Training Center, DEAP/FMPOS, UMI3189, Université des
Sciences, des Techniques et des Technologies de Bamako, BP 1805, Bamako, Mali.
mthera@icermali.org.
(6)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, OX3 7BN, UK.
dominic@well.ox.ac.uk.
(7)The Ethox Centre, Nuffield Department of Population Health, University of
Oxford, Oxford, OX3 7LF, UK. Michael.parker@ethox.ox.ac.uk.
(8)Malaria Research and Training Center, DEAP/FMPOS, UMI3189, Université des
Sciences, des Techniques et des Technologies de Bamako, BP 1805, Bamako, Mali.
okd@icermali.org.

BACKGROUND: Obtaining informed consent for participation in genomic research in
low-income settings presents specific ethical issues requiring attention. These
include the challenges that arise when providing information about unfamiliar and
technical research methods, the implications of complicated infrastructure and
data sharing requirements, and the potential consequences of future research with
samples and data. This study investigated researchers' and participants' parents'
experiences of a consent process and understandings of a genome-wide association 
study of malaria involving children aged five and under in Mali. It aimed to
inform best practices in recruiting participants into genomic research.
METHODS: A qualitative rapid ethical assessment was undertaken. Fifty-five
semi-structured interviews were conducted with the parents of research
participants. An additional nine semi-structured interviews were conducted with
senior research scientists, research assistants and with a member of an ethics
committee. A focus group with five parents of research participants and direct
observations of four consent processes were also conducted. French and translated
English transcripts were descriptively and thematically coded using OpenCode
software.
RESULTS: Participants' parents in the MalariaGEN study had differing
understandings of the causes of malaria, the rationale for collecting blood
samples, the purposes of the study and the kinds of information the study would
generate. Genomic aspects of the research, including the gene/environment
interaction underlying susceptibility or resistance to severe malaria, proved
particularly challenging to explain and understand.
CONCLUSIONS: This study identifies a number of areas to be addressed in the
design of consent processes for genomic research, some of which require careful
ethical analysis. These include determining how much information should be
provided about differing aspects of the research and how best to promote
understandings of genomic research. We conclude that it is important to build
capacity in the design and conduct of effective and appropriate consent processes
for genomic research in low and middle-income settings. Additionally,
consideration should be given to the role of review committees and community
consultation activities in protecting the interests of participants in genomic
research.

DOI: 10.1186/s12910-015-0035-7 
PMCID: PMC4469103
PMID: 26077875  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

