
1. Parasit Vectors. 2015 Jun 24;8:342. doi: 10.1186/s13071-015-0959-2.

Paratransgenesis: a promising new strategy for mosquito vector control.

Wilke AB(1), Marrelli MT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Epidemiologia, Faculdade de Saúde Pública, Universidade de São
Paulo, Av. Dr. Arnaldo 715, São Paulo, SP, CEP-01246-904, Brazil.
andrewilke@usp.br.
(2)Departamento de Epidemiologia, Faculdade de Saúde Pública, Universidade de São
Paulo, Av. Dr. Arnaldo 715, São Paulo, SP, CEP-01246-904, Brazil.
mmarelli@usp.br.

The three main mosquito genera, Anopheles, Aedes and Culex, transmit respectively
malaria, dengue and lymphatic filariasis. Current mosquito control strategies
have proved unsuccessful, and there still is a substantial number of morbidity
and mortality from these diseases. Genetic control methods have now arisen as
promising alternative strategies, based on two approaches: the replacement of a
vector population by disease-refractory mosquitoes and the release of mosquitoes 
carrying a lethal gene to suppress target populations. However, substantial
hurdles and limitations need to be overcome if these methods are to be used
successfully, the most significant being that a transgenic mosquito strain is
required for every target species, making genetically modified mosquito
strategies inviable when there are multiple vector mosquitoes in the same area.
Genetically modified bacteria capable of colonizing a wide range of mosquito
species may be a solution to this problem and another option for the control of
these diseases. In the paratransgenic approach, symbiotic bacteria are
genetically modified and reintroduced in mosquitoes, where they express effector 
molecules. For this approach to be used in practice, however, requires a better
understanding of mosquito microbiota and that symbiotic bacteria and effector
molecules be identified. Paratransgenesis could prove very useful in mosquito
species that are inherently difficult to transform or in sibling species
complexes. In this approach, a genetic modified bacteria can act by: (a) causing 
pathogenic effects in the host; (b) interfering with the host's reproduction; (c)
reducing the vector's competence; and (d) interfering with oogenesis and
embryogenesis. It is a much more flexible and adaptable approach than the use of 
genetically modified mosquitoes because effector molecules and symbiotic bacteria
can be replaced if they do not achieve the desired result. Paratransgenesis may
therefore become an important integrated pest management tool for mosquito
control.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-015-0959-2 
PMCID: PMC4489152
PMID: 26104575  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

