
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2014 Aug;2(4):AID-0016-2014. doi:
10.1128/microbiolspec.AID-0016-2014.

Vector-Mediated In Vivo Antibody Expression.

Schnepp BC(1), Johnson PR(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Abramson Research Center,
Philadelphia, PA 19104.

This article focuses on a novel vaccine strategy known as vector-mediated
antibody gene transfer, with a particular focus on human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV). This strategy provides a solution to the problem of current vaccines that 
fail to generate neutralizing antibodies to prevent HIV-1 infection and AIDS.
Antibody gene transfer allows for predetermination of antibody affinity and
specificity prior to "immunization" and avoids the need for an active humoral
immune response against the HIV envelope protein. This approach uses recombinant 
adeno-associated viral (rAAV) vectors, which have been shown to transduce muscle 
with high efficiency and direct the long-term expression of a variety of
transgenes, to deliver the gene encoding a broadly neutralizing antibody into the
muscle. Following rAAV vector gene delivery, the broadly neutralizing antibodies 
are endogenously synthesized in myofibers and passively distributed to the
circulatory system. This is an improvement over classical passive immunization
strategies that administer antibody proteins to the host to provide protection
from infection. Vector-mediated gene transfer studies in mice and monkeys with
anti-HIV and simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV)-neutralizing antibodies
demonstrated long-lasting neutralizing activity in serum with complete protection
against intravenous challenge with virulent HIV and SIV. These results indicate
that existing potent anti-HIV antibodies can be rapidly moved into the clinic.
However, this methodology need not be confined to HIV. The general strategy of
vector-mediated antibody gene transfer can be applied to other difficult vaccine 
targets such as hepatitis C virus, malaria, respiratory syncytial virus, and
tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1128/microbiolspec.AID-0016-2014 
PMID: 26104192  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

