
1. BMC Genomics. 2015 Jul 11;16:519. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1690-2.

Drosophila anti-nematode and antibacterial immune regulators revealed by RNA-Seq.

Castillo JC(1)(2), Creasy T(3), Kumari P(4), Shetty A(5), Shokal U(6), Tallon
LJ(7), Eleftherianos I(8).

Author information: 
(1)Insect Infection and Immunity Lab, Department of Biological Sciences,
Institute for Biomedical Sciences, The George Washington University, Washington
DC, 20052, USA. juliocastillo25@gmail.com.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institutes of Health,
Rockville, MD, 20852, USA. juliocastillo25@gmail.com.
(3)Institute for Genome Sciences, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA.
toddcreasy@gmail.com.
(4)Institute for Genome Sciences, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA.
pkumari@som.umaryland.edu.
(5)Institute for Genome Sciences, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA.
ashetty@som.umaryland.edu.
(6)Insect Infection and Immunity Lab, Department of Biological Sciences,
Institute for Biomedical Sciences, The George Washington University, Washington
DC, 20052, USA. upasana@gwu.edu.
(7)Institute for Genome Sciences, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA.
ljtallon@som.umaryland.edu.
(8)Insect Infection and Immunity Lab, Department of Biological Sciences,
Institute for Biomedical Sciences, The George Washington University, Washington
DC, 20052, USA. ioannise@gwu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Drosophila melanogaster activates a variety of immune responses
against microbial infections. However, information on the Drosophila immune
response to entomopathogenic nematode infections is currently limited. The
nematode Heterorhabditis bacteriophora is an insect parasite that forms a
mutualistic relationship with the gram-negative bacteria Photorhabdus
luminescens. Following infection, the nematodes release the bacteria that quickly
multiply within the insect and produce several toxins that eventually kill the
host. Although we currently know that the insect immune system interacts with
Photorhabdus, information on interaction with the nematode vector is scarce.
RESULTS: Here we have used next generation RNA-sequencing to analyze the
transcriptional profile of wild-type adult flies infected by axenic
Heterorhabditis nematodes (lacking Photorhabdus bacteria), symbiotic
Heterorhabditis nematodes (carrying Photorhabdus bacteria), and Photorhabdus
bacteria alone. We have obtained approximately 54 million reads from the
different infection treatments. Bioinformatic analysis shows that infection with 
Photorhabdus alters the transcription of a large number of Drosophila genes
involved in translational repression as well in response to stress. However,
Heterorhabditis infection alters the transcription of several genes that
participate in lipidhomeostasis and metabolism, stress responses, DNA/protein
synthesis and neuronal functions. We have also identified genes in the fly with
potential roles in nematode recognition, anti-nematode activity and nociception.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings provide fundamental information on the molecular
events that take place in Drosophila upon infection with the two pathogens,
either separately or together. Such large-scale transcriptomic analyses set the
stage for future functional studies aimed at identifying the exact role of key
factors in the Drosophila immune response against nematode-bacteria complexes.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-015-1690-2 
PMCID: PMC4499211
PMID: 26162375  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

