
1. Parasit Vectors. 2015 Jul 11;8:365. doi: 10.1186/s13071-015-0969-0.

Identifying avian malaria vectors: sampling methods influence outcomes.

Carlson JS(1), Walther E(2), TroutFryxell R(3), Staley S(4), Tell LA(5), Sehgal
RN(6), Barker CM(7), Cornel AJ(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, University of California, Davis, CA, USA.
jennysaracarlson@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Biology, San Francisco State University, San Francisco, CA, USA.
mocker21@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology, The University of Tennessee,
Knoxville, TN, USA. RFryxell@utk.edu.
(4)Department of Entomology, University of California, Davis, CA, USA.
zagal92@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Medicine and Epidemiology, University of California, Davis, CA, 
USA. latell@ucdavis.edu.
(6)Department of Biology, San Francisco State University, San Francisco, CA, USA.
sehgal@sfsu.edu.
(7)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of
California, Davis, CA, USA. cmbarker@ucdavis.edu.
(8)Department of Entomology, University of California, Davis, CA, USA.
ajcornel@ucanr.edu.

BACKGROUND: The role of vectors in the transmission of avian malaria parasites is
currently understudied. Many studies that investigate parasite-vector
relationships use limited trapping techniques and/or identify potential competent
vectors in the field in such ways that cannot distinguish between an infected or 
infectious vector. Without the use of multiple trapping techniques that address
the specific biology of diverse mosquito species, and without looking at the
infection status of individual mosquitoes, it is not possible to make dependable 
conclusions on the role of mosquitoes in the transmission of avian malaria
parasites.
METHODS: We conducted two years of mosquito collections at a riparian preserve in
California where a wide diversity of species were collected with multiple trap
types. We hypothesized that competent mosquito species can influence the
distribution and diversity of avian malaria parasites by acting as a
compatibility filter for specific Plasmodium species. To determine the infection 
status of all individual mosquitoes for Plasmodium species/lineages,
amplification within the cytochrome b gene was carried out on over 3000
individual mosquito thoraxes, and for those that tested positive we then repeated
the same process for abdomens and salivary glands.
RESULTS: Our data show heterogeneity in the transmissibility of Plasmodium among 
ornithophillic mosquito species. More specifically, Culex stigmatosoma appears to
not be a vector of Plasmodium homopolare, a parasite that is prevalent in the
avian population, but is a vector of multiple other Plasmodium species/lineages.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that conclusions made on the role of vectors
from studies that do not use different mosquito trapping methods should be
re-evaluated with caution, as we documented the potential for trapping biases,
which may cause studies to miss important roles of specific mosquito species in
the transmission of avian malaria. Moreover, we document heterogeneity in the
transmission of Plasmodium spp. by mosquitoes can influence Plasmodium diversity 
and prevalence in specific locations to Plasmodium-vector incompatibilities.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-015-0969-0 
PMCID: PMC4702297
PMID: 26160384  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

