
1. Curr Genet. 2016 Feb;62(1):31-8. doi: 10.1007/s00294-015-0506-x. Epub 2015 Jul
21.

Alternative splicing mechanisms orchestrating post-transcriptional gene
expression: intron retention and the intron-rich genome of apicomplexan
parasites.

Lunghi M(1), Spano F(2), Magini A(1), Emiliani C(1), Carruthers VB(3), Di
Cristina M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Biology and Biotechnology, University of Perugia, via
del Giochetto, 06122, Perugia, Italy.
(2)Department of Infectious, Parasitic and Immunomediated Diseases, Istituto
Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Biology and Biotechnology, University of Perugia, via
del Giochetto, 06122, Perugia, Italy. manlio.dicristina@unipg.it.

Apicomplexan parasites including Toxoplasma gondii and Plasmodium species have
complex life cycles that include multiple hosts and differentiation through
several morphologically distinct stages requiring marked changes in gene
expression. This review highlights emerging evidence implicating regulation of
mRNA splicing as a mechanism to prime these parasites for rapid gene expression
upon differentiation. We summarize the most important insights in alternative
splicing including its role in regulating gene expression by decreasing mRNA
abundance via 'Regulated Unproductive Splicing and Translation'. As a related but
less well-understood mechanism, we discuss also our recent work suggesting a role
for intron retention for precluding translation of stage specific isoforms of T. 
gondii glycolytic enzymes. We additionally provide new evidence that intron
retention might be a widespread mechanism during parasite differentiation.
Supporting this notion, recent genome-wide analysis of Toxoplasma and Plasmodium 
suggests intron retention is more pervasive than heretofore thought. These
findings parallel recent emergence of intron retention being more prevalent in
mammals than previously believed, thereby adding to the established roles in
plants, fungi and unicellular eukaryotes. Deeper mechanistic studies of intron
retention will provide important insight into its role in regulating gene
expression in apicomplexan parasites and more general in eukaryotic organisms.

DOI: 10.1007/s00294-015-0506-x 
PMID: 26194054  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

