
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2015 Aug 5;9(8):e0003978. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003978. 
eCollection 2015.

Transcription Profiling of Malaria-Naïve and Semi-immune Colombian Volunteers in 
a Plasmodium vivax Sporozoite Challenge.

Rojas-Peña ML(1), Vallejo A(2), Herrera S(2), Gibson G(1), Arévalo-Herrera M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrative Genomics, School of Biology, Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America.
(2)Caucaseco Scientific Research Center (CSRC), Cali, Colombia.
(3)Caucaseco Scientific Research Center (CSRC), Cali, Colombia; School of Health,
Universidad del Valle, Cali, Colombia.

BACKGROUND: Continued exposure to malaria-causing parasites in endemic regions of
malaria induces significant levels of acquired immunity in adult individuals. A
better understanding of the transcriptional basis for this acquired immunological
response may provide insight into how the immune system can be boosted during
vaccination, and into why infected individuals differ in symptomology.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Peripheral blood gene expression profiles of 9
semi-immune volunteers from a Plasmodium vivax malaria prevalent region
(Buenaventura, Colombia) were compared to those of 7 naïve individuals from a
region with no reported transmission of malaria (Cali, Colombia) after a
controlled infection mosquito bite challenge with P. vivax. A Fluidigm nanoscale 
quantitative RT-PCR array was used to survey altered expression of 96 blood
informative transcripts at 7 timepoints after controlled infection, and RNASeq
was used to contrast pre-infection and early parasitemia timepoints. There was no
evidence for transcriptional changes prior to the appearance of blood stage
parasites at day 12 or 13, at which time there was a strong interferon response
and, unexpectedly, down-regulation of transcripts related to inflammation and
innate immunity. This differential expression was confirmed with RNASeq, which
also suggested perturbations of aspects of T cell function and erythropoiesis.
Despite differences in clinical symptoms between the semi-immune and malaria
naïve individuals, only subtle differences in their transcriptomes were observed,
although 175 genes showed significantly greater induction or repression in the
naïve volunteers from Cali.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Gene expression profiling of whole blood reveals the
type and duration of the immune response to P. vivax infection, and highlights a 
subset of genes that may mediate adaptive immunity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003978 
PMCID: PMC4526565
PMID: 26244760  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

