
1. AIDS. 2015 Jul 31;29(12):1549-56. doi: 10.1097/QAD.0000000000000731.

Disentangling the impact of within-host evolution and transmission dynamics on
the tempo of HIV-1 evolution.

Vrancken B(1), Baele G, Vandamme AM, van Laethem K, Suchard MA, Lemey P.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Microbiology and Immunology, Rega Institute, KU Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium bCentro de Malária e Outras Doenças Tropicais Instituto de Higiene e
Medicina Tropical and Unidade de Microbiologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa,
Lisboa, Portugal cDepartment of Biomathematics dDepartment of Human Genetics,
David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA eDepartment of Biostatistics, UCLA
Fielding School of Public Health, University of California, Los Angeles,
California, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine how HIV-1 risk groups impact transmitted diversity and
the tempo of viral evolution at a population scale.
METHODS: We investigated a set of previously described transmission chains
(n = 70) using a population genetic approach, and tested whether the expected
differences in proportions of multivariant transmissions are reflected by varying
proportions of transmitted diversity between men having sex with men (MSM) and
heterosexual (HET) subpopulations - the largest contributors to HIV spread. To
assess evolutionary rate differences among the different risk groups, we compiled
risk group datasets for subtypes A1, B and CRF01_AE, and directly compared the
absolute substitution rate and its synonymous and non-synonymous components.
RESULTS: There was sufficient demographic signal to inform the transmission model
in Bayesian evolutionary analysis by sampling trees using env data to compare the
transmission bottleneck size between the MSM and HET risk groups. We found no
indications for a different proportion of transmitted genetic diversity at the
population level between these groups. In the direct rate comparisons between the
risk groups, however, we consistently recovered a higher evolutionary rate in the
male-dominated risk group compared to the HET datasets.
CONCLUSION: We find that the risk group composition affects the viral
evolutionary rate and therefore potentially also the adaptation rate. In
particular, risk group-specific sex ratios, and the variation in within-host
evolutionary rates between men and women, impose evolutionary rate differences at
the epidemic level, but we cannot exclude a role of varying transmission rates.

DOI: 10.1097/QAD.0000000000000731 
PMCID: PMC5348249
PMID: 26244394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

