
1. Adv Biol Regul. 2015 Sep;59:65-81. doi: 10.1016/j.jbior.2015.06.003. Epub 2015
Jul 17.

Roles of EGFR and KRAS and their downstream signaling pathways in pancreatic
cancer and pancreatic cancer stem cells.

Fitzgerald TL(1), Lertpiriyapong K(2), Cocco L(3), Martelli AM(3), Libra M(4),
Candido S(4), Montalto G(5), Cervello M(6), Steelman L(7), Abrams SL(7), McCubrey
JA(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Brody School of Medicine at East Carolina University,
Greenville, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Comparative Medicine, Brody School of Medicine at East Carolina 
University, Greenville, NC, USA.
(3)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Neuromotorie, Università di Bologna,
Bologna, Italy.
(4)Department of Biomedical and Biotechnological Sciences, Laboratory of
Translational Oncology & Functional Genomics, Section of Pathology & Oncology,
Via Androne, Catania, Italy, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.
(5)Biomedical Department of Internal Medicine and Specialties, University of
Palermo, Palermo, Italy; Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Istituto di
Biomedicina e Immunologia Molecolare "Alberto Monroy", Palermo, Italy.
(6)Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Istituto di Biomedicina e Immunologia
Molecolare "Alberto Monroy", Palermo, Italy.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Brody School of Medicine at East
Carolina University, Greenville, NC, USA.
(8)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Brody School of Medicine at East
Carolina University, Greenville, NC, USA. Electronic address: mccubreyj@ecu.edu.

Pancreatic cancer is currently the fourth most common cancer, is increasing in
incidence and soon will be the second leading cause of cancer death in the USA.
This is a deadly malignancy with an incidence that approximates the mortality
with 44,000 new cases and 36,000 deaths each year. Surgery, although only
modestly successful, is the only curative option. However, due the locally
aggressive nature and early metastasis, surgery can be performed on less than 20%
of patients. Cytotoxic chemotherapy is palliative, has significant toxicity and
improves survival very little. Thus new treatment paradigms are needed
desperately. Due to the extremely high frequency of KRAS gene mutations (>90%)
detected in pancreatic cancer patients, the roles of the epidermal growth factor 
receptor (EGFR), Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK and PI3K/PTEN/Akt/mTORC1/GSK-3 pathways have
been investigated in pancreatic cancer for many years. Constitutively active Ras 
can activate both of these pathways and there is cross talk between Ras and EGFR 
which is believed to be important in driving metastasis. Mutant KRAS may also
drive the expression of GSK-3 through Raf/MEK/ERK-mediated effects on GSK-3
transcription. GSK-3 can then regulate the expression of NF-kappaB which is
important in modulating pancreatic cancer chemoresistance. While the receptors
and many downstream signaling molecules have been identified and characterized,
there is still much to learn about these pathways and how their deregulation can 
lead to cancer. Multiple inhibitors to EGFR, PI3K, mTOR, GSK-3, Raf, MEK and
hedgehog (HH) have been developed and are being evaluated in various cancers.
Current research often focuses on the role of these pathways in cancer stem cells
(CSC), with the goal to identify sites where therapeutic resistance may develop. 
Relatively novel fields of investigation such as microRNAs and drugs used for
other diseases e.g., diabetes, (metformin) and malaria (chloroquine) have
provided new information about therapeutic resistance and CSCs. This review will 
focus on recent advances in the field and how they affect pancreatic cancer
research and treatment.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbior.2015.06.003 
PMID: 26257206  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

