
1. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2015 Jul 27;9:3821-35. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S77860. eCollection
2015.

Effect of lactoferrin protein on red blood cells and macrophages: mechanism of
parasite-host interaction.

Anand N(1), Kanwar RK(2), Dubey ML(1), Vahishta RK(3), Sehgal R(1), Verma AK(4), 
Kanwar JR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Parasitology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical
Education and Research, Chandigarh, India.
(2)Nanomedicine Laboratory of Immunology and Molecular Biomedical Research,
School of Medicine, Molecular and Medical Research Strategic Research Centre,
Faculty of Health, Deakin University, Geelong, VIC, Australia.
(3)Department of Histopathology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research, Chandigarh.
(4)Nanobiotech Laboratory, Department of Zoology, Kirorimal College, University
of Delhi, Delhi, India.

Erratum in
    Drug Des Devel Ther. 2020 May 28;14:2123-2124.

BACKGROUND: Lactoferrin is a natural multifunctional protein known to have
antitumor, antimicrobial, and anti-inflammatory activity. Apart from its
antimicrobial effects, lactoferrin is known to boost the immune response by
enhancing antioxidants. Lactoferrin exists in various forms depending on its iron
saturation. The present study was done to observe the effect of lactoferrin,
isolated from bovine and buffalo colostrum, on red blood cells (RBCs) and
macrophages (human monocytic cell line-derived macrophages THP1 cells).
METHODS: Lactoferrin obtained from both species and in different iron saturation 
forms were used in the present study, and treatment of host cells were given with
different forms of lactoferrin at different concentrations. These treated host
cells were used for various studies, including morphometric analysis, viability
by MTT assay, survivin gene expression, production of reactive oxygen species,
phagocytic properties, invasion assay, and Toll-like receptor-4, Toll-like
receptor-9, and MDR1 expression, to investigate the interaction between
lactoferrin and host cells and the possible mechanism of action with regard to
parasitic infections.
RESULTS: The mechanism of interaction between host cells and lactoferrin have
shown various aspects of gene expression and cellular activity depending on the
degree of iron saturation of lactoferrin. A significant increase (P<0.05) in
production of reactive oxygen species, phagocytic activity, and Toll-like
receptor expression was observed in host cells incubated with iron-saturated
lactoferrin when compared with an untreated control group. However, there was no 
significant (P>0.05) change in percentage viability in the different groups of
host cells treated, and no downregulation of survivin gene expression was found
at 48 hours post-incubation. Upregulation of the Toll-like receptor and
downregulation of the P-gp gene confirmed the immunomodulatory potential of
lactoferrin protein.
CONCLUSION: The present study details the interaction between lactoferrin and
parasite host cells, ie, RBCs and macrophages, using various cellular processes
and expression studies. The study reveals the possible mechanism of action
against various intracellular pathogens such as Toxoplasma, Plasmodium,
Leishmania, Trypanosoma, and Mycobacterium. The presence of iron in lactoferrin
plays an important role in enhancing the various activities taking place inside
these cells. This work provides a lot of information about targeting lactoferrin 
against many parasitic infections which can rule out the exact pathways for
inhibition of diseases caused by intracellular microbes mainly targeting RBCs and
macrophages for their survival. Therefore, this initial study can serve as a
baseline for further evaluation of the mechanism of action of lactoferrin against
parasitic diseases, which is not fully understood to date.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S77860 
PMCID: PMC4524381
PMID: 26251568  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

