
1. BMC Syst Biol. 2015 Aug 28;9:49. doi: 10.1186/s12918-015-0194-7.

A tree-like Bayesian structure learning algorithm for small-sample datasets from 
complex biological model systems.

Yin W(1)(2), Garimalla S(3), Moreno A(4), Galinski MR(5), Styczynski MP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Biomedical Engineering of Education Ministry, Department of
Biomedical Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, P. R. China.
wwyin@mail.zju.edu.cn.
(2)School of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, Georgia Institute of
Technology, 311 Ferst Drive NW, Atlanta, GA, 30332-0100, USA.
wwyin@mail.zju.edu.cn.
(3)School of Biology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA.
swetha.garimalla@gatech.edu.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Emory Vaccine Center, Yerkes National Primate
Research Center, Emory University School of Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, 
GA, USA. camoren@emory.edu.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, Emory Vaccine Center, Yerkes National Primate
Research Center, Emory University School of Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, 
GA, USA. Mary.Galinski@emory.edu.
(6)School of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, Georgia Institute of
Technology, 311 Ferst Drive NW, Atlanta, GA, 30332-0100, USA.
Mark.Styczynski@chbe.gatech.edu.

BACKGROUND: There are increasing efforts to bring high-throughput systems biology
techniques to bear on complex animal model systems, often with a goal of learning
about underlying regulatory network structures (e.g., gene regulatory networks). 
However, complex animal model systems typically have significant limitations on
cohort sizes, number of samples, and the ability to perform follow-up and
validation experiments. These constraints are particularly problematic for many
current network learning approaches, which require large numbers of samples and
may predict many more regulatory relationships than actually exist.
RESULTS: Here, we test the idea that by leveraging the accuracy and efficiency of
classifiers, we can construct high-quality networks that capture important
interactions between variables in datasets with few samples. We start from a
previously-developed tree-like Bayesian classifier and generalize its network
learning approach to allow for arbitrary depth and complexity of tree-like
networks. Using four diverse sample networks, we demonstrate that this approach
performs consistently better at low sample sizes than the Sparse Candidate
Algorithm, a representative approach for comparison because it is known to
generate Bayesian networks with high positive predictive value. We develop and
demonstrate a resampling-based approach to enable the identification of a viable 
root for the learned tree-like network, important for cases where the root of a
network is not known a priori. We also develop and demonstrate an integrated
resampling-based approach to the reduction of variable space for the learning of 
the network. Finally, we demonstrate the utility of this approach via the
analysis of a transcriptional dataset of a malaria challenge in a non-human
primate model system, Macaca mulatta, suggesting the potential to capture
indicators of the earliest stages of cellular differentiation during
leukopoiesis.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate that by starting from effective and efficient
approaches for creating classifiers, we can identify interesting tree-like
network structures with significant ability to capture the relationships in the
training data. This approach represents a promising strategy for inferring
networks with high positive predictive value under the constraint of small
numbers of samples, meeting a need that will only continue to grow as more
high-throughput studies are applied to complex model systems.

DOI: 10.1186/s12918-015-0194-7 
PMCID: PMC4551520
PMID: 26310492  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

