
1. Biol Bull. 2015 Aug;229(1):38-46.

Number and regulation of protozoan aquaporins reflect environmental complexity.

Von Bülow J(1), Beitz E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry,
Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, Gutenbergstrasse 76, 24118 Kiel, Germany.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry,
Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, Gutenbergstrasse 76, 24118 Kiel, Germany 
ebeitz@pharmazie.uni-kiel.de.

Protozoa are a diverse group of unicellular eukaryotes. Evidence has accumulated 
that protozoan aquaporin water and solute channels (AQP) contribute to adaptation
in changing environments. Intracellular protozoan parasites live a well-sheltered
life. Plasmodium spp. express a single AQP, Toxoplasma gondii two, while
Trypanosoma cruzi and Leishamnia spp. encode up to five AQPs. Their AQPs are
thought to import metabolic precursors and simultaneously to dispose of waste and
to help parasites survive osmotic stress during transmission to and from the
insect vector or during kidney passages. Trypanosoma brucei is a protozoan
parasite that swims freely in the human blood. Expression and intracellular
localization of the three T. brucei AQPs depend on the stage of differentiation
during the life cycle, suggesting distinct roles in energy generation,
metabolism, and cell motility. Free-living amoebae are in direct contact with the
environment, encountering severe and sudden changes in the availability of
nutrition, and in the osmotic conditions due to rainfall or drought. Amoeba
proteus expresses a single AQP that is present in the contractile vacuole complex
required for osmoregulation, whereas Dictyostelium discoideum expresses four
AQPs, of which two are present in the single-celled amoeboidal stage and two more
in the later multicellular stages preceding spore formation. The number and
regulation of protozoan aquaporins may reflect environmental complexity. We
highlight the gated AqpB from D. discoideum as an example of how life in the wild
is challenged by a complex AQP structure-function relationship.

© 2015 Marine Biological Laboratory.

DOI: 10.1086/BBLv229n1p38 
PMID: 26338868  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

