
1. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2016 Feb;69:14-24. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2015.09.003. Epub
2015 Sep 10.

Transposition burst of mariner-like elements in the sequenced genome of Rhodnius 
prolixus.

Fernández-Medina RD(1), Granzotto A(2), Ribeiro JM(3), Carareto CM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Programa de Computação Científica, Av. Brasil, 4365,
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Electronic address: dfernandezmedina@gmail.com.
(2)UNESP - Univ. Estadual Paulista, Departamento de Biologia, São José do Rio
Preto, SP, Brazil. Electronic address: adrianagranzotto@yahoo.com.br.
(3)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, NIAID-NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.
Electronic address: JRIBEIRO@niaid.nih.gov.
(4)UNESP - Univ. Estadual Paulista, Departamento de Biologia, São José do Rio
Preto, SP, Brazil. Electronic address: carareto@ibilce.unesp.br.

Transposable elements (TEs) are widespread in insect's genomes. However, there
are wide differences in the proportion of the total DNA content occupied by these
repetitive sequences in different species. We have analyzed the TEs present in R.
prolixus (vector of the Chagas disease) and showed that 3.0% of this genome is
occupied by Class II TEs, belonging mainly to the Tc1-mariner superfamily (1.65%)
and MITEs (1.84%). Interestingly, most of this genomic content is due to the
expansion of two subfamilies belonging to: irritans himar, a well characterized
subfamily of mariners, and prolixus1, one of the two novel subfamilies here
described. The high amount of sequences in these subfamilies suggests that bursts
of transposition occurred during the life cycle of this family. In an attempt to 
characterize these elements, we performed an in silico analysis of the sequences 
corresponding to the DDD/E domain of the transposase gene. We performed an
evolutionary analysis including network and Bayesian coalescent-based methods in 
order to infer the dynamics of the amplification, as well as to estimate the time
of the bursts identified in these subfamilies. Given our data, we hypothesized
that the TE expansions occurred around the time of speciation of R. prolixus
around 1.4 mya. This suggestion lays on the "Transposon Model" of TE evolution,
in which the members of a TE population that are replicative active are present
at multiple loci in the genome, but their replicative potential varies, and of
the "Life Cycle Model" that states that when present-day TEs have been involved
in amplification bursts, they share an ancestral copy that dates back to this
initial amplification.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2015.09.003 
PMID: 26363296  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

