
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1325:257-86. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2815-6_21.

Generation of Transgenic Rodent Malaria Parasites Expressing Human Malaria
Parasite Proteins.

Salman AM(1)(2), Mogollon CM(1), Lin JW(1)(3), van Pul FJ(1), Janse CJ(1), Khan
SM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Leiden Malaria Research Group, Department of Parasitology, LUMC, Leiden, The
Netherlands.
(2)The Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(3)Division of Parasitology, MRC National Institute for Medical Research, London,
UK.
(4)Leiden Malaria Research Group, Department of Parasitology, LUMC, Leiden, The
Netherlands. S.M.Khan@lumc.nl.

We describe methods for the rapid generation of transgenic rodent Plasmodium
berghei (Pb) parasites that express human malaria parasite (HMP) proteins, using 
the recently developed GIMO-based transfection methodology. Three different
genetic modifications are described resulting in three types of transgenic
parasites. (1) Additional Gene (AG) mutants. In these mutants the HMP gene is
introduced as an "additional gene" into a silent/neutral locus of the Pb genome
under the control of either a constitutive or stage-specific Pb promoter. This
method uses the GIMO-transfection protocol and AG mutants are generated by
replacing the positive-negative selection marker (SM) hdhfr::yfcu cassette in a
neutral locus of a standard GIMO mother line with the HMP gene expression
cassette, resulting in SM free transgenic parasites. (2) Double-step Replacement 
(DsR) mutants. In these mutants the coding sequence (CDS) of the Pb gene is
replaced with the CDS of the HMP ortholog in a two-step GIMO-transfection
procedure. This process involves first the replacement of the Pb CDS with the
hdhfr::yfcu SM, followed by insertion of the HMP ortholog at the same locus
thereby replacing hdhfr::yfcu with the HMP CDS. These steps use the
GIMO-transfection protocol, which exploits both positive selection for Pb
orthologous gene-deletion and negative selection for HMP gene-insertion,
resulting in SM free transgenic parasites. (3) Double-step Insertion (DsI)
mutants. When a Pb gene is essential for blood stage development the DsR strategy
is not possible. In these mutants the HMP expression cassette is first introduced
into the neutral locus in a standard GIMO mother line as described for AG mutants
but under the control elements of the Pb orthologous gene; subsequently, the Pb
ortholog CDS is targeted for deletion through replacement of the Pb CDS with the 
hdhfr::yfcu SM, resulting in transgenic parasites with a new GIMO locus
permissive for additional gene-insertion modifications.The different types of
transgenic parasites can be exploited to examine interactions of drugs/inhibitors
or immune factors with HMP molecules in vivo. Mice either immunized with
HMP-vaccines or treated with specific drugs can be infected/challenged with these
transgenic mutants to evaluate drug or vaccine efficacy in vivo.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2815-6_21 
PMID: 26450395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

