
1. Vaccine. 2015 Dec 22;33(52):7452-61. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.09.096. Epub
2015 Nov 27.

Progress with Plasmodium falciparum sporozoite (PfSPZ)-based malaria vaccines.

Richie TL(1), Billingsley PF(2), Sim BK(2), James ER(2), Chakravarty S(2),
Epstein JE(3), Lyke KE(4), Mordmüller B(5), Alonso P(6), Duffy PE(7), Doumbo
OK(8), Sauerwein RW(9), Tanner M(10), Abdulla S(11), Kremsner PG(5), Seder
RA(12), Hoffman SL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Sanaria Inc., Rockville, MD, United States. Electronic address:
trichie@sanaria.com.
(2)Sanaria Inc., Rockville, MD, United States.
(3)Naval Medical Research Center, Silver Spring, MD, United States.
(4)Center for Malaria Research, Institute for Global Health, University of
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(5)Institute of Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(6)Barcelona Institute for Global Health (ISGlobal), Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Laboratory of Malaria Immunology and Vaccinology, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, NIH, Rockville, MD, United States.
(8)Malaria Research and Training Center, University of Bamako, Bamako, Mali.
(9)Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(10)Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland.
(11)Ifakara Health Institute, Bagamoyo, United Republic of Tanzania.
(12)Vaccine Research Center, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States.

Sanaria Inc. has developed methods to manufacture, purify and cryopreserve
aseptic Plasmodium falciparum (Pf) sporozoites (SPZ), and is using this platform 
technology to develop an injectable PfSPZ-based vaccine that provides high-grade,
durable protection against infection with Pf malaria. Several candidate vaccines 
are being developed and tested, including PfSPZ Vaccine, in which the PfSPZ are
attenuated by irradiation, PfSPZ-CVac, in which fully infectious PfSPZ are
attenuated in vivo by concomitant administration of an anti-malarial drug, and
PfSPZ-GA1, in which the PfSPZ are attenuated by gene knockout. Forty-three
research groups in 15 countries, organized as the International PfSPZ Consortium 
(I-PfSPZ-C), are collaborating to advance this program by providing intellectual,
clinical, and financial support. Fourteen clinical trials of these products have 
been completed in the USA, Europe and Africa, two are underway and at least 12
more are planned for 2015-2016 in the US (four trials), Germany (2 trials),
Tanzania, Kenya, Mali, Burkina Faso, Ghana and Equatorial Guinea. Sanaria
anticipates application to license a first generation product as early as late
2017, initially to protect adults, and a year later to protect all persons >6
months of age for at least six months. Improved vaccine candidates will be
advanced as needed until the following requirements have been met: long-term
protection against natural transmission, excellent safety and tolerability, and
operational feasibility for population-wide administration. Here we describe the 
three most developed whole PfSPZ vaccine candidates, associated clinical trials, 
initial plans for licensure and deployment, and long-term objectives for a final 
product suitable for mass administration to achieve regional malaria elimination 
and eventual global eradication.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.09.096 
PMCID: PMC5077156
PMID: 26469720  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: TLR, PFB, BKS, ERJ, SC and SLH are salaried, full
time employees of Sanaria Inc., the developer and sponsor of Sanaria PfSPZ
Vaccine, PfSPZ Challenge, and the PfSPZ-CVac vaccine approach.

