
1. Acta Trop. 2016 Jan;153:111-5. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2015.10.009. Epub 2015 
Oct 23.

Characterization of asymptomatic Plasmodium falciparum infection and its risk
factors in pregnant women from the Republic of Congo.

Francine N(1), Damien B(2), Anna F(2), Michael K(2), Christevy VJ(2), Felix
KK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Fondation Congolaise pour la Recherche Médicale, Brazzaville, The Republic of 
Congo; Faculty of Sciences and Techniques, University Marien Ngouabi,
Brazzaville, The Republic of Congo; Institute for Tropical Medicine, University
of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. Electronic address:
francine.ntoumi@uni-tuebingen.de.
(2)Fondation Congolaise pour la Recherche Médicale, Brazzaville, The Republic of 
Congo.
(3)Fondation Congolaise pour la Recherche Médicale, Brazzaville, The Republic of 
Congo; Faculty of Sciences and Techniques, University Marien Ngouabi,
Brazzaville, The Republic of Congo.

Malaria in pregnancy remains a serious public health problem in the Republic of
Congo despite the implementation of intermittent preventive treatment with
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (IPTp-SP) in 2006. The aim of this cross-sectional
study was to characterize Plasmodium falciparum infections and determine possible
risk factors in pregnant Congolese women attending an antenatal clinic in a
periurban area of southern Brazzaville. This study was conducted from March 2012 
to December 2013 in a site where several years ago, high malaria resistance to SP
was reported. Pregnant women were enrolled during antenatal visits and the number
of received IPTp-SP doses was recorded as well as individual sociodemographic
data. Peripheral blood was collected and P. falciparum infection was checked by
microscopy and by PCR targeting P. falciparum merozoite surface protein gene
(msp2). Haemoglobin concentration was measured and P. falciparum positive samples
were typed for msp2 allelic diversity. A total of 363 pregnant women were
recruited. The prevalence of asymptomatic P. falciparum infection was 7% and 19% 
by microscopy and by PCR, respectively. More than one half (51.5%) of the
pregnant women were anaemic. Multivariate analysis indicated that P. falciparum
infection was associated with anaemia. It was also observed that women who have
received IPTp-SP have significantly lower prevalence of infection. The
administration of IPTp-SP did not influence the multiplicity of infection (MOI). 
This first study investigating asymptomatic malaria infection on pregnant women
of the Republic of Congo shows that P. falciparum infections were clearly
associated with maternal anaemia, and use of IPTp-SP reduced the risk of carrying
asymptomatic infections.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2015.10.009 
PMID: 26477849  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

