
1. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Oct 16;11(10):e1005211. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005211.
eCollection 2015 Oct.

Fundamental Roles of the Golgi-Associated Toxoplasma Aspartyl Protease, ASP5, at 
the Host-Parasite Interface.

Hammoudi PM(1), Jacot D(1), Mueller C(2), Di Cristina M(3), Dogga SK(1), Marq
JB(1), Romano J(4), Tosetti N(1), Dubrot J(5), Emre Y(5), Lunghi M(3), Coppens
I(4), Yamamoto M(6), Sojka D(7), Pino P(1), Soldati-Favre D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, Centre Médical
Universitaire, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, Centre Médical
Universitaire, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland; Department of
Immunoparasitology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, 
Osaka, Japan.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Biology and Biotechnology, University of Perugia,
Perugia, Italy.
(4)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns Hopkins University 
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(5)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Centre Médical Universitaire,
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Immunoparasitology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,
Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, Centre Médical
Universitaire, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland; Institute of
Parasitology, Biology Centre of the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
České Budějovice, Czech Republic.

Toxoplasma gondii possesses sets of dense granule proteins (GRAs) that either
assemble at, or cross the parasitophorous vacuole membrane (PVM) and exhibit
motifs resembling the HT/PEXEL previously identified in a repertoire of exported 
Plasmodium proteins. Within Plasmodium spp., cleavage of the HT/PEXEL motif by
the endoplasmic reticulum-resident protease Plasmepsin V precedes trafficking to 
and export across the PVM of proteins involved in pathogenicity and host cell
remodelling. Here, we have functionally characterized the T. gondii aspartyl
protease 5 (ASP5), a Golgi-resident protease that is phylogenetically related to 
Plasmepsin V. We show that deletion of ASP5 causes a significant loss in parasite
fitness in vitro and an altered virulence in vivo. Furthermore, we reveal that
ASP5 is necessary for the cleavage of GRA16, GRA19 and GRA20 at the PEXEL-like
motif. In the absence of ASP5, the intravacuolar nanotubular network disappears
and several GRAs fail to localize to the PVM, while GRA16 and GRA24, both known
to be targeted to the host cell nucleus, are retained within the vacuolar space. 
Additionally, hypermigration of dendritic cells and bradyzoite cyst wall
formation are impaired, critically impacting on parasite dissemination and
persistence. Overall, the absence of ASP5 dramatically compromises the parasite's
ability to modulate host signalling pathways and immune responses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005211 
PMCID: PMC4608785
PMID: 26473595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

