
1. EBioMedicine. 2015 Jul 29;2(9):1186-92. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2015.07.033.
eCollection 2015 Sep.

Natural infection of Plasmodium brasilianum in humans: Man and monkey share
quartan malaria parasites in the Venezuelan Amazon.

Lalremruata A(1), Magris M(2), Vivas-Martínez S(3), Koehler M(1), Esen M(1),
Kempaiah P(4), Jeyaraj S(1), Perkins DJ(4), Mordmüller B(1), Metzger WG(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(2)Servicio Autónomo Centro Amazónico para la Investigación y Control de
Enfermedades Tropicales 'Simón Bolívar' (SACAICET), Puerto Ayacucho, Estado
Amazonas, Venezuela.
(3)Servicio Autónomo Centro Amazónico para la Investigación y Control de
Enfermedades Tropicales 'Simón Bolívar' (SACAICET), Puerto Ayacucho, Estado
Amazonas, Venezuela ; Cátedra de Salud Pública, Escuela de Medicina Luis Razetti,
Universidad Central de Venezuela, Caracas, Venezuela.
(4)Center for Global Health, Department of Internal Medicine, University of New
Mexico School of Medicine, Albuquerque, NM, USA.
(5)Institute of Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany ;
Servicio Autónomo Centro Amazónico para la Investigación y Control de
Enfermedades Tropicales 'Simón Bolívar' (SACAICET), Puerto Ayacucho, Estado
Amazonas, Venezuela.

BACKGROUND: The quartan malaria parasite Plasmodium malariae is the widest spread
and best adapted human malaria parasite. The simian Plasmodium brasilianum causes
quartan fever in New World monkeys and resembles P. malariae morphologically.
Since the genetics of the two parasites are nearly identical, differing only in a
range of mutations expected within a species, it has long been speculated that
the two are the same. However, no naturally acquired infection with parasites
termed as P. brasilianum has been found in humans until now.
METHODS: We investigated malaria cases from remote Yanomami indigenous
communities of the Venezuelan Amazon and analyzed the genes coding for the
circumsporozoite protein (CSP) and the small subunit of ribosomes (18S) by
species-specific PCR and capillary based-DNA sequencing.
FINDINGS: Based on 18S rRNA gene sequencing, we identified 12 patients harboring 
malaria parasites which were 100% identical with P. brasilianum isolated from the
monkey, Alouatta seniculus. Translated amino acid sequences of the CS protein
gene showed identical immunodominant repeat units between quartan malaria
parasites isolated from both humans and monkeys.
INTERPRETATION: This study reports, for the first time, naturally acquired
infections in humans with parasites termed as P. brasilianum. We conclude that
quartan malaria parasites are easily exchanged between humans and monkeys in
Latin America. We hypothesize a lack of host specificity in mammalian hosts and
consider quartan malaria to be a true anthropozoonosis. Since the name P.
brasilianum suggests a malaria species distinct from P. malariae, we propose that
P. brasilianum should have a nomenclatorial revision in case further research
confirms our findings. The expansive reservoir of mammalian hosts discriminates
quartan malaria from other Plasmodium spp. and requires particular research
efforts.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2015.07.033 
PMCID: PMC4588399
PMID: 26501116  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

