
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2017 Aug;136:52-57. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2015.06.011. Epub 2015
Nov 11.

Production of recombinant PvDBPII, receptor binding domain of Plasmodium vivax
Duffy binding protein, and evaluation of immunogenicity to identify an adjuvant
formulation for vaccine development.

Bhardwaj R(1), Shakri AR(1), Hans D(1), Gupta P(1), Fernandez-Becerra C(2), Del
Portillo HA(3), Pandey G(4), Chitnis CE(5).

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB), New
Delhi, India.
(2)Barcelona Centre for International Health (CRESIB), Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Barcelona Centre for International Health (CRESIB), Barcelona, Spain;
Institució Catalana de Recerca I Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Malaria Vaccine Development Program (MVDP), New Delhi, India.
(5)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB), New
Delhi, India. Electronic address: chetan.chitnis@pasteur.fr.

Plasmodium vivax is dependent on interaction with the Duffy antigen receptor for 
chemokines (DARC) for invasion of human erythrocytes. The P. vivax Duffy binding 
protein (PvDBP) mediates interaction of P. vivax merozoites with DARC. The DARC
receptor-binding domain lies in a conserved N-terminal cysteine-rich region of
PvDBP referred to as region II (PvDBPII). PvDBPII is an attractive vaccine
candidate since antibodies raised against PvDBPII block erythrocyte invasion by
P. vivax. Here, we describe methods to produce recombinant PvDBPII in its
correctly folded conformation. A synthetic gene optimized for expression of
PvDBPII in Escherichia coli and fed batch fermentation process based on
exponential feeding strategy was used to achieve high levels of expression of
recombinant PvDBPII. Recombinant PvDBPII was isolated from inclusion bodies,
refolded by rapid dilution and purified by ion exchange chromatography. Purified 
recombinant PvDBPII was characterized for identity, purity and functional
activity using standardized release assays. Recombinant PvDBPII formulated with
various human compatible adjuvants including glycosylpyranosyl lipid A-stable
emulsion (GLA-SE) and alhydrogel was used for immunogenicity studies in small
animals to downselect a suitable formulation for clinical development. Sera
collected from immunized animals were tested for recognition of PvDBPII and
inhibition of PvDBPII-DARC binding. GLA-SE formulations of PvDBPII yielded higher
ELISA and binding inhibition titres compared to PvDBPII formulated with
alhydrogel. These data support further development of a recombinant vaccine for
P. vivax based on PvDBPII formulated with GLA-SE.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2015.06.011 
PMID: 26578115  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

