
1. Malar J. 2015 Nov 18;14:464. doi: 10.1186/s12936-015-0981-z.

Insecticide resistance profile of Anopheles gambiae from a phase II field station
in Cové, southern Benin: implications for the evaluation of novel vector control 
products.

Ngufor C(1)(2)(3), N'Guessan R(4)(5)(6), Fagbohoun J(7), Subramaniam K(8), Odjo
A(9), Fongnikin A(10), Akogbeto M(11), Weetman D(12), Rowland M(13)(14).

Author information: 
(1)London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
corine.ngufor@lshtm.ac.uk.
(2)Centre de Recherches Entomologiques de Cotonou, Cotonou, Benin.
corine.ngufor@lshtm.ac.uk.
(3)Pan African Malaria Vector Research Consortium, London, UK.
corine.ngufor@lshtm.ac.uk.
(4)London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
raphaelnguessan@yahoo.fr.
(5)Centre de Recherches Entomologiques de Cotonou, Cotonou, Benin.
raphaelnguessan@yahoo.fr.
(6)Pan African Malaria Vector Research Consortium, London, UK.
raphaelnguessan@yahoo.fr.
(7)Centre de Recherches Entomologiques de Cotonou, Cotonou, Benin.
laurenjos2010@yahoo.fr.
(8)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, UK.
krishanthi.subramaniam@lstmed.ac.uk.
(9)Centre de Recherches Entomologiques de Cotonou, Cotonou, Benin.
abibatho@yahoo.fr.
(10)Centre de Recherches Entomologiques de Cotonou, Cotonou, Benin.
Fongnikin@live.fr.
(11)Centre de Recherches Entomologiques de Cotonou, Cotonou, Benin.
akogbetom@yahoo.fr.
(12)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, UK.
david.weetman@lstmed.ac.uk.
(13)London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
mark.rowland@lshtm.ac.uk.
(14)Pan African Malaria Vector Research Consortium, London, UK.
mark.rowland@lshtm.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Novel indoor residual spraying (IRS) and long-lasting insecticidal
net (LLIN) products aimed at improving the control of pyrethroid-resistant
malaria vectors have to be evaluated in Phase II semi-field experimental studies 
against highly pyrethroid-resistant mosquitoes. To better understand their
performance it is necessary to fully characterize the species composition,
resistance status and resistance mechanisms of the vector populations in the
experimental hut sites.
METHODS: Bioassays were performed to assess phenotypic insecticide resistance in 
the malaria vector population at a newly constructed experimental hut site in
Cové, a rice growing area in southern Benin, being used for WHOPES Phase II
evaluation of newly developed LLIN and IRS products. The efficacy of standard
WHOPES-approved pyrethroid LLIN and IRS products was also assessed in the
experimental huts. Diagnostic genotyping techniques and microarray studies were
performed to investigate the genetic basis of pyrethroid resistance in the Cové
Anopheles gambiae population.
RESULTS: The vector population at the Cové experimental hut site consisted of a
mixture of Anopheles coluzzii and An. gambiae s.s. with the latter occurring at
lower frequencies (23 %) and only in samples collected in the dry season. There
was a high prevalence of resistance to pyrethroids and DDT (>90 % bioassay
survival) with pyrethroid resistance intensity reaching 200-fold compared to the 
laboratory susceptible An. gambiae Kisumu strain. Standard WHOPES-approved
pyrethroid IRS and LLIN products were ineffective in the experimental huts
against this vector population (8-29 % mortality). The L1014F allele frequency
was 89 %. CYP6P3, a cytochrome P450 validated as an efficient metabolizer of
pyrethroids, was over-expressed.
CONCLUSION: Characterizing pyrethroid resistance at Phase II field sites is
crucial to the accurate interpretation of the performance of novel vector control
products. The strong levels of pyrethroid resistance at the Cové experimental hut
station make it a suitable site for Phase II experimental hut evaluations of
novel vector control products, which aim for improved efficacy against
pyrethroid-resistant malaria vectors to WHOPES standards. The resistance genes
identified can be used as markers for further studies investigating the
resistance management potential of novel mixture LLIN and IRS products tested at 
the site.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-015-0981-z 
PMCID: PMC4652434
PMID: 26581678  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

