
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2015 Dec 28;9(12):e0004252. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0004252. eCollection 2015 Dec.

Whole Genome Sequencing of Field Isolates Reveals Extensive Genetic Diversity in 
Plasmodium vivax from Colombia.

Winter DJ(1), Pacheco MA(1)(2), Vallejo AF(3), Schwartz RS(1), Arevalo-Herrera
M(3)(4), Herrera S(3), Cartwright RA(1)(5), Escalante AA(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Biodesign Institute, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, United
States of America.
(2)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine (igem), Temple University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(3)Caucaseco Scientific Research Center, Cali, Colombia.
(4)Faculty of Health, Universidad del Valle, Cali, Colombia.
(5)The School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, United 
States of America.

Plasmodium vivax is the most prevalent malarial species in South America and
exerts a substantial burden on the populations it affects. The control and
eventual elimination of P. vivax are global health priorities. Genomic research
contributes to this objective by improving our understanding of the biology of P.
vivax and through the development of new genetic markers that can be used to
monitor efforts to reduce malaria transmission. Here we analyze whole-genome data
from eight field samples from a region in Cordóba, Colombia where malaria is
endemic. We find considerable genetic diversity within this population, a result 
that contrasts with earlier studies suggesting that P. vivax had limited
diversity in the Americas. We also identify a selective sweep around a
substitution known to confer resistance to sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP). This 
is the first observation of a selective sweep for SP resistance in this species. 
These results indicate that P. vivax has been exposed to SP pressure even when
the drug is not in use as a first line treatment for patients afflicted by this
parasite. We identify multiple non-synonymous substitutions in three other genes 
known to be involved with drug resistance in Plasmodium species. Finally, we
found extensive microsatellite polymorphisms. Using this information we developed
18 polymorphic and easy to score microsatellite loci that can be used in
epidemiological investigations in South America.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004252 
PMCID: PMC4692395
PMID: 26709695  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

