
1. Biol Direct. 2015 Dec 23;10:74. doi: 10.1186/s13062-015-0101-6.

Evolutionary loss of peroxisomes--not limited to parasites.

Žárský V(1), Tachezy J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University in Prague, 
Viničná 7, 128 44, Prague, Czech Republic. zarsky1@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University in Prague, 
Viničná 7, 128 44, Prague, Czech Republic. tachezy@natur.cuni.cz.

BACKGROUND: Peroxisomes are ubiquitous eukaryotic organelles that
compartmentalize a variety of metabolic pathways that are primarily related to
the oxidative metabolism of lipids and the detoxification of reactive oxygen
species. The importance of peroxisomes is underscored by serious human diseases, 
which are caused by disorders in peroxisomal functions. Some eukaryotic lineages,
however, lost peroxisomes. These organisms are mainly anaerobic protists and some
parasitic lineages including Plasmodium and parasitic platyhelminths. Here we
performed a systematic in-silico analysis of peroxisomal markers among metazoans 
to assess presence of peroxisomes and peroxisomal enzymes.
RESULTS: Our analyses reveal an obvious loss of peroxisomes in all tested flukes,
tapeworms, and parasitic roundworms of the order Trichocephalida. Intriguingly,
peroxisomal markers are absent from the genome of the free-living tunicate
Oikopleura dioica, which inhabits oxygen-containing niches of sea waters. We
further map the presence and predicted subcellular localization of putative
peroxisomal enzymes, showing that in organisms without the peroxisomal markers
the set of these enzymes is highly reduced and none of them contains a predicted 
peroxisomal targeting signal.
CONCLUSIONS: We have shown that several lineages of metazoans independently lost 
peroxisomes and that the loss of peroxisomes was not exclusively associated with 
adaptation to anaerobic habitats and a parasitic lifestyle. Although the reason
for the loss of peroxisomes from O. dioica is unclear, organisms lacking
peroxisomes, including the free-living O. dioica, share certain typical
r-selected traits: high fecundity, limited ontogenesis and relatively low
complexity of the gene content. We hypothesize that peroxisomes are generally the
first compartment to be lost during evolutionary reductions of the eukaryotic
cell.

DOI: 10.1186/s13062-015-0101-6 
PMCID: PMC4690255
PMID: 26700421  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

