
1. Parasit Vectors. 2016 Jan 4;9:3. doi: 10.1186/s13071-015-1286-3.

Three sympatric clusters of the malaria vector Anopheles culicifacies E (Diptera:
Culicidae) detected in Sri Lanka.

Harischandra IN(1), Dassanayake RS(2), De Silva BG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Applied Sciences, University of Sri
Jayewardenepura, Gangodawila, Nugegoda, Sri Jayewardenepura, 10250, Sri Lanka.
ireshanh@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Colombo,
Cumarathunga Munidasa Mawatha, Colombo 04, 00300, Sri Lanka.
rsdassanayake@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Applied Sciences, University of Sri
Jayewardenepura, Gangodawila, Nugegoda, Sri Jayewardenepura, 10250, Sri Lanka.
nissankakolitha@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The disease re-emergence threat from the major malaria vector in Sri 
Lanka, Anopheles culicifacies, is currently increasing. To predict malaria vector
dynamics, knowledge of population genetics and gene flow is required, but this
information is unavailable for Sri Lanka. This study was carried out to determine
the population structure of An. culicifacies E in Sri Lanka.
METHODS: Eight microsatellite markers were used to examine An. culicifacies E
collected from six sites in Sri Lanka during 2010-2012. Standard population
genetic tests and analyses, genetic differentiation, Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, 
linkage disequilibrium, Bayesian cluster analysis, AMOVA, SAMOVA and
isolation-by-distance were conducted using five polymorphic loci.
RESULTS: Five microsatellite loci were highly polymorphic with high allelic
richness. Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium (HWE) was significantly rejected for four
loci with positive F(IS) values in the pooled population (p < 0.0100). Three loci
showed high deviations in all sites except Kataragama, which was in agreement
with HWE for all loci except one locus (p < 0.0016). Observed heterozygosity was 
less than the expected values for all sites except Kataragama, where reported
negative F(IS) values indicated a heterozygosity excess. Genetic differentiation 
was observed for all sampling site pairs and was not supported by the isolation
by distance model. Bayesian clustering analysis identified the presence of three 
sympatric clusters (gene pools) in the studied population. Significant genetic
differentiation was detected in cluster pairs with low gene flow and isolation by
distance was not detected between clusters. Furthermore, the results suggested
the presence of a barrier to gene flow that divided the populations into two
parts with the central hill region of Sri Lanka as the dividing line.
CONCLUSIONS: Three sympatric clusters were detected among An. culicifacies E
specimens isolated in Sri Lanka. There was no effect of geographic distance on
genetic differentiation and the central mountain ranges in Sri Lanka appeared to 
be a barrier to gene flow.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-015-1286-3 
PMCID: PMC4700606
PMID: 26728098  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

