
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016 Jan 25;10(1):e0004399. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0004399. eCollection 2016 Jan.

Epidemiology and Clinical Burden of Malaria in the War-Torn Area, Orakzai Agency 
in Pakistan.

Karim AM(1), Hussain I(2)(3), Malik SK(1), Lee JH(1), Cho IH(4), Kim YB(5), Lee
SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Leading Research Laboratory, Department of Biological Sciences,
Myongji University, Yongin, Gyeonggido, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Zoology, Kohat University of Science and Technology, Kohat,
Pakistan.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, Quaid-i-Azam University Islamabad, Islamabad,
Pakistan.
(4)University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(5)Department of Natural Science, North Shore Community College, Danvers,
Massachusetts, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Military conflict has been a major challenge in the detection and
control of emerging infectious diseases such as malaria. It poses issues
associated with enhancing emergence and transmission of infectious diseases by
destroying infrastructure and collapsing healthcare systems. The Orakzai agency
in Pakistan has witnessed a series of intense violence and destruction. Military 
conflicts and instability in Afghanistan have resulted in the migration of
refugees into the area and possible introduction of many infectious disease
epidemics. Due to the ongoing violence and Talibanization, it has been a
challenge to conduct an epidemiological study.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: All patients were sampled within the transmission
season. After a detailed clinical investigation of patients, data were recorded. 
Baseline venous blood samples were taken for microscopy and nested polymerase
chain reaction (nPCR) analysis. Plasmodium species were detected using nested PCR
(nPCR) and amplification of the small subunit ribosomal ribonucleic acid (ssrRNA)
genes using the primer pairs. We report a clinical assessment of the epidemic
situation of malaria caused by Plasmodium vivax (86.5%) and Plasmodium falciparum
(11.79%) infections with analysis of complications in patients such as
decompensated shock (41%), anemia (8.98%), hypoglycaemia (7.3%), multiple
convulsions (6.7%), hyperpyrexia (6.17%), jaundice (5%), and hyperparasitaemia
(4.49%).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This overlooked distribution of P. vivax should be
considered by malaria control strategy makers in the world and by the Government 
of Pakistan. In our study, children were the most susceptible population to
malaria infection while they were the least expected to use satisfactory
prevention strategies in such a war-torn deprived region. Local health
authorities should initiate malaria awareness programs in schools and
malaria-related education should be further promoted at the local level reaching 
out to both children and parents.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004399 
PMCID: PMC4725727
PMID: 26809063  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

