
1. BMJ Clin Evid. 2016 Jan 22;2016. pii: 2402.

Sickle cell disease.

Meremikwu MM(1), Okomo U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, College of Medical Sciences, University of Calabar,
Calabar, Nigeria.

INTRODUCTION: Sickle cell disease causes chronic haemolytic anaemia, dactylitis, 
and painful acute crises. It also increases the risk of stroke, organ damage,
bacterial infections, and complications of blood transfusion. In sub-Saharan
Africa, up to one third of adults are carriers of the defective sickle cell gene,
and 1% to 2% of babies are born with the disease.
METHODS AND OUTCOMES: We conducted a systematic overview, aiming to answer the
following clinical question: What are the effects of pharmaceutical interventions
to prevent sickle cell crisis and other acute complications in people with sickle
cell disease? We searched: Medline, Embase, The Cochrane Library, and other
important databases up to January 2015 (Clinical Evidence overviews are updated
periodically; please check our website for the most up-to-date version of this
overview).
RESULTS: At this update, searching of electronic databases retrieved 369 studies.
After deduplication and removal of conference abstracts, 136 records were
screened for inclusion in the overview. Appraisal of titles and abstracts led to 
the exclusion of 99 studies and the further review of 37 full publications. Of
the 37 full articles evaluated, three already included systematic reviews were
updated, two systematic reviews, two RCTs, and one subsequent RCT were added at
this update. We performed a GRADE evaluation for 12 PICO combinations.
CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic overview, we categorised the efficacy for five
interventions based on information about the effectiveness and safety of
antibiotic prophylaxis in children aged under 5 years, antibiotic prophylaxis in 
children aged 5 years or older, hydroxyurea, malaria chemoprophylaxis, and
pneumococcal vaccines.


PMCID: PMC4725622
PMID: 26808098  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

