
1. Iran J Parasitol. 2015 Oct-Dec;10(4):505-16.

DNA Sequence Polymorphism of the Lactate Dehydrogenase Genefrom Iranian
Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium falciparum Isolates.

Getacher Feleke D(1), Nateghpour M(2), Motevalli Haghi A(1), Hajjaran H(1),
Farivar L(1), Mohebali M(1), Raoofian R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Parasitology and Mycology, School of Public Health,
International Campus, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Medical Parasitology and Mycology, School of Public Health,
International Campus, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran; Center
for Research of Endemic Parasites of Iran, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran.
(3)Legal Medicine Research Center, Legal Medicine Organization, Tehran Iran.

BACKGROUND: Parasite lactate dehydrogenase (pLDH) is extensively employed as
malaria rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs). Moreover, it is a well-known drug target
candidate. However, the genetic diversity of this gene might influence
performance of RDT kits and its drug target candidacy. This study aimed to
determine polymorphism of pLDH gene from Iranian isolates of P. vivax and P.
falciparum.
METHODS: Genomic DNA was extracted from whole blood of microscopically confirmed 
P. vivax and P. falciparum infected patients. pLDH gene of P. falciparum and P.
vivax was amplified using conventional PCR from 43 symptomatic malaria patients
from Sistan and Baluchistan Province, Southeast Iran from 2012 to 2013.
RESULTS: Sequence analysis of 15 P. vivax LDH showed fourteen had 100% identity
with P. vivax Sal-1 and Belem strains. Two nucleotide substitutions were detected
with only one resulted in amino acid change. Analysis of P. falciparum LDH
sequences showed six of the seven sequences had 100% homology with P. falciparum 
3D7 and Mzr-1. Moreover, PfLDH displayed three nucleotide changes that resulted
in changing only one amino acid. PvLDH and PfLDH showed 75%-76% nucleotide and
90.4%-90.76% amino acid homology.
CONCLUSION: pLDH gene from Iranian P. falciparum and P. vivax isolates displayed 
98.8-100% homology with 1-3 nucleotide substitutions. This indicated this gene
was relatively conserved. Additional studies can be done weather this genetic
variation can influence the performance of pLDH based RDTs or not.


PMCID: PMC4724825
PMID: 26811715 

