
1. Malar J. 2016 Jan 29;15:51. doi: 10.1186/s12936-016-1097-9.

Comparative genome-wide analysis and evolutionary history of
haemoglobin-processing and haem detoxification enzymes in malarial parasites.

Ponsuwanna P(1), Kochakarn T(2)(3), Bunditvorapoom D(4)(5)(6), Kümpornsin K(7),
Otto TD(8), Ridenour C(9), Chotivanich K(10)(11), Wilairat P(12), White
NJ(13)(14), Miotto O(15)(16)(17), Chookajorn T(18).

Author information: 
(1)Genomic and Evolutionary Medicine Unit, Centre of Excellence in Malaria,
Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
patrath.pons@gmail.com.
(2)Genomic and Evolutionary Medicine Unit, Centre of Excellence in Malaria,
Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
faith1114@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand. faith1114@gmail.com.
(4)Genomic and Evolutionary Medicine Unit, Centre of Excellence in Malaria,
Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
duangkamon.bun@mahidol.edu.
(5)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine
Siriraj Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand. duangkamon.bun@mahidol.edu.
(6)Division of Molecular Genetics, Department of Research and Development,
Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
duangkamon.bun@mahidol.edu.
(7)Genomic and Evolutionary Medicine Unit, Centre of Excellence in Malaria,
Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
krittikorn.kum@student.mahidol.edu.
(8)Parasite Genomics, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome
Campus, Cambridge, UK. tdo@sanger.ac.uk.
(9)Genomic and Evolutionary Medicine Unit, Centre of Excellence in Malaria,
Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
chase.ridenour@gmail.com.
(10)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine,
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. nok@tropmedres.ac.
(11)Department of Clinical Tropical Medicine, Faculty of Tropical Medicine,
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. nok@tropmedres.ac.
(12)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok, 
Thailand. prapon.wil@mahidol.ac.th.
(13)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine,
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. nickwdt@tropmedres.ac.
(14)Centre for Tropical Medicine, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, UK. nickwdt@tropmedres.ac.
(15)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine,
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. olivo@tropmedres.ac.
(16)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK. olivo@tropmedres.ac.
(17)Medical Research Council (MRC) Centre for Genomics and Global Health,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. olivo@tropmedres.ac.
(18)Genomic and Evolutionary Medicine Unit, Centre of Excellence in Malaria,
Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
thanat.cho@mahidol.edu.

BACKGROUND: Malaria parasites have evolved a series of intricate mechanisms to
survive and propagate within host red blood cells. Intra-erythrocytic parasitism 
requires these organisms to digest haemoglobin and detoxify iron-bound haem.
These tasks are executed by haemoglobin-specific proteases and haem
biocrystallization factors that are components of a large multi-subunit complex. 
Since haemoglobin processing machineries are functionally and genetically linked 
to the modes of action and resistance mechanisms of several anti-malarial drugs, 
an understanding of their evolutionary history is important for drug development 
and drug resistance prevention.
METHODS: Maximum likelihood trees of genetic repertoires encoding haemoglobin
processing machineries within Plasmodium species, and with the representatives of
Apicomplexan species with various host tropisms, were created. Genetic variants
were mapped onto existing three-dimensional structures. Genome-wide single
nucleotide polymorphism data were used to analyse the selective pressure and the 
effect of these mutations at the structural level.
RESULTS: Recent expansions in the falcipain and plasmepsin repertoires are unique
to human malaria parasites especially in the Plasmodium falciparum and P.
reichenowi lineage. Expansion of haemoglobin-specific plasmepsins occurred after 
the separation event of Plasmodium species, but the other members of the
plasmepsin family were evolutionarily conserved with one copy for each sub-group 
in every Apicomplexan species. Haemoglobin-specific falcipains are separated from
invasion-related falcipain, and their expansions within one specific locus arose 
independently in both P. falciparum and P. vivax lineages. Gene conversion
between P. falciparum falcipain 2A and 2B was observed in artemisinin-resistant
strains. Comparison between the numbers of non-synonymous and synonymous
mutations suggests a strong selective pressure at falcipain and plasmepsin genes.
The locations of amino acid changes from non-synonymous mutations mapped onto
protein structures revealed clusters of amino acid residues in close proximity or
near the active sites of proteases.
CONCLUSION: A high degree of polymorphism at the haemoglobin processing genes
implicates an imposition of selective pressure. The identification in recent
years of functional redundancy of haemoglobin-specific proteases makes them less 
appealing as potential drug targets, but their expansions, especially in the
human malaria parasite lineages, unequivocally point toward their functional
significance during the independent and repetitive adaptation events in malaria
parasite evolutionary history.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-016-1097-9 
PMCID: PMC4731938
PMID: 26821618  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

