
1. Cilia. 2016 Feb 4;5:3. doi: 10.1186/s13630-016-0025-5. eCollection 2015.

Basal body structure and composition in the apicomplexans Toxoplasma and
Plasmodium.

Francia ME(1), Dubremetz JF(2), Morrissette NS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Cycle Regulation Laboratory, Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciencia, Oeiras,
Portugal.
(2)UMR 5235 CNRS, Université de Montpellier 2, Montpellier, France.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California
Irvine, Irvine, CA USA.

The phylum Apicomplexa encompasses numerous important human and animal
disease-causing parasites, including the Plasmodium species, and Toxoplasma
gondii, causative agents of malaria and toxoplasmosis, respectively.
Apicomplexans proliferate by asexual replication and can also undergo sexual
recombination. Most life cycle stages of the parasite lack flagella; these
structures only appear on male gametes. Although male gametes (microgametes)
assemble a typical 9+2 axoneme, the structure of the templating basal body is
poorly defined. Moreover, the relationship between asexual stage centrioles and
microgamete basal bodies remains unclear. While asexual stages of Plasmodium lack
defined centriole structures, the asexual stages of Toxoplasma and closely
related coccidian apicomplexans contain centrioles that consist of nine singlet
microtubules and a central tubule. There are relatively few ultra-structural
images of Toxoplasma microgametes, which only develop in cat intestinal
epithelium. Only a subset of these include sections through the basal body: to
date, none have unambiguously captured organization of the basal body structure. 
Moreover, it is unclear whether this basal body is derived from pre-existing
asexual stage centrioles or is synthesized de novo. Basal bodies in Plasmodium
microgametes are thought to be synthesized de novo, and their assembly remains
ill-defined. Apicomplexan genomes harbor genes encoding δ- and ε-tubulin
homologs, potentially enabling these parasites to assemble a typical triplet
basal body structure. Moreover, the UNIMOD components (SAS6, SAS4/CPAP, and
BLD10/CEP135) are conserved in these organisms. However, other widely conserved
basal body and flagellar biogenesis elements are missing from apicomplexan
genomes. These differences may indicate variations in flagellar biogenesis
pathways and in basal body arrangement within the phylum. As apicomplexan basal
bodies are distinct from their metazoan counterparts, it may be possible to
selectively target parasite structures in order to inhibit microgamete motility
which drives generation of genetic diversity in Toxoplasma and transmission for
Plasmodium.

DOI: 10.1186/s13630-016-0025-5 
PMCID: PMC4743101
PMID: 26855772 

