
1. Parasit Vectors. 2016 Feb 9;9:78. doi: 10.1186/s13071-016-1359-y.

Novel factors of Anopheles gambiae haemocyte immune response to Plasmodium
berghei infection.

Lombardo F(1)(2), Christophides GK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, UK.
fabrizio.lombardo@uniroma1.it.
(2)Current address: Department of Public Health and Infectious Diseases, Sapienza
University of Rome, Rome, Italy. fabrizio.lombardo@uniroma1.it.
(3)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, UK.
g.christophides@imperial.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Insect haemocytes mediate cellular immune responses (e.g.,
phagocytosis) and contribute to the synthesis of humoral immune factors. In
previous work, a genome-wide molecular characterization of Anopheles gambiae
circulating haemocytes was followed by functional gene characterization using
cell-based RNAi screens. Assays were carried out to investigate the role of
selected haemocyte-specific or enriched genes in phagocytosis of bacterial
bio-particles, expression of the antimicrobial peptide cecropin1, and basal and
induced expression of the mosquito complement factor LRIM1 (leucine-rich repeat
immune gene I).
FINDINGS: Here we studied the impact of a subset of genes (37 candidates) from
the haemocyte-specific dsRNA collection on the development of Plasmodium in the
mosquito by in vivo gene silencing. Our screening identifies 10 novel factors
with a role in the mosquito response to Plasmodium. Analysis of in vivo screening
phenotypes reveals a significant anti-correlation between the prevalence of
oocysts and melanised ookinetes.
CONCLUSIONS: Among novel immune genes are putative pattern recognition proteins
(leucine-rich repeat, fibrinogen-domain and R-type lectins), immune modulation
and signalling proteins (LPS-induced tumor necrosis factor alpha factor, LITAF
and CLIP proteases), and components of extracellular matrix such as laminin and
collagen. Additional identified proteins such as the storage protein hexamerin
and vesicular-type ATPase (V-ATPase) are associated for the first time with the
mosquito response against Plasmodium.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-016-1359-y 
PMCID: PMC4746906
PMID: 26858200  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

