
1. Int J Mass Spectrom. 2015 Nov 30;391:82-92.

Protein profiling of mefloquine resistant Plasmodium falciparum using mass
spectrometry-based proteomics.

Reamtong O(1), Srimuang K(1), Saralamba N(1), Sangvanich P(2), Day NP(3), White
NJ(3), Imwong M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Tropical Medicine and Genetics, Faculty of Tropical
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok 10400, Thailand.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok
10330, Thailand.
(3)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, 
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand; Centre for Tropical Medicine, Churchill
Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Malaria is a mosquito borne infectious disease caused by protozoa of genus
Plasmodium. There are five species of Plasmodium that are found to infect humans.
Plasmodium falciparum can cause severe malaria leading to higher morbidity and
mortality of malaria than the other four species. Antimalarial resistance is the 
major obstacle to control malaria. Mefloquine was used in combination with
Artesunate for uncomplicated P. falciparum in South East Asia and it has
developed and established mefloquine resistance in this region. Here,
gel-enhanced liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (GeLC-MS/MS)-based
proteomics and label-free quantification were used to explore the protein
profiles of mefloquine-sensitive and -induced resistant P. falciparum. A Thai P. 
falciparum isolate (S066) was used as a model in this research. Our data revealed
for the first time that 69 proteins exhibited at least 2-fold differences in
their expression levels between the two parasite lines. Of these, 36 were
up-regulated and 33 were down-regulated in the mefloquine-resistant line compared
with the mefloquine-sensitive line. These findings are consistent with those of
past studies, where the multidrug resistance protein Pgh1 showed an up-regulation
pattern consistent with that expected from its average 3-copy pfmdr1 gene number.
Pgh1 and eight other up-regulated proteins (i.e., histo-aspartyl protease
protein, exportin 1, eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 subunit 8,
peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase, serine rich protein homologue, exported
protein 1, ATP synthase beta chain and phospholipid scramblase 1) were further
validated for their expression levels using reverse transcriptase quantitative
real-time PCR. The data support the up-regulation status in the
mefloquine-resistant parasite line of all the candidate genes referred to above. 
Therefore, GeLC-MS/MS-based proteomics combined with label-free quantification is
a reliable approach for exploring mefloquine resistance biomarkers in P.
falciparum. Identification of these proteins leads to better understanding of
mefloquine resistant mechanisms in malaria parasites.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijms.2015.09.009 
PMCID: PMC4708064
PMID: 26869851 

