
1. mBio. 2016 Feb 16;7(1):e01300-15. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01300-15.

Activated Neutrophils Are Associated with Pediatric Cerebral Malaria Vasculopathy
in Malawian Children.

Feintuch CM(1), Saidi A(2), Seydel K(3), Chen G(4), Goldman-Yassen A(1),
Mita-Mendoza NK(1), Kim RS(5), Frenette PS(4), Taylor T(3), Daily JP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.
(2)Blantyre Malaria Project, University of Malawi College of Medicine, Blantyre, 
Malawi.
(3)Blantyre Malaria Project, University of Malawi College of Medicine, Blantyre, 
Malawi Department of Osteopathic Medical Specialties, College of Osteopathic
Medicine, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA.
(4)Ruth L. and David S. Gottesman Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative
Medicine Research and Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.
(5)Department of Epidemiology and Population Health, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.
(6)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of
Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA
johanna.daily@einstein.yu.edu.

Most patients with cerebral malaria (CM) sustain cerebral microvascular
sequestration of Plasmodium falciparum-infected red blood cells (iRBCs). Although
many young children are infected with P. falciparum, CM remains a rare outcome;
thus, we hypothesized that specific host conditions facilitate iRBC cerebral
sequestration. To identify these host factors, we compared the peripheral
whole-blood transcriptomes of Malawian children with iRBC cerebral sequestration,
identified as malarial-retinopathy-positive CM (Ret+CM), to the transcriptomes of
children with CM and no cerebral iRBC sequestration, defined as
malarial-retinopathy-negative CM (Ret-CM). Ret+CM was associated with
upregulation of 103 gene set pathways, including cytokine, blood coagulation, and
extracellular matrix (ECM) pathways (P < 0.01; false-discovery rate [FDR] of
<0.05). Neutrophil transcripts were the most highly upregulated individual
transcripts in Ret+CM patients. Activated neutrophils can modulate diverse host
processes, including the ECM, inflammation, and platelet biology to potentially
facilitate parasite sequestration. Therefore, we compared plasma neutrophil
proteins and neutrophil chemotaxis between Ret+CM and Ret-CM patients. Plasma
levels of human neutrophil elastase, myeloperoxidase, and proteinase 3, but not
lactoferrin or lipocalin, were elevated in Ret+CM patients, and neutrophil
chemotaxis was impaired, possibly related to increased plasma heme. Neutrophils
were rarely seen in CM brain microvasculature autopsy samples, and no neutrophil 
extracellular traps were found, suggesting that a putative neutrophil effect on
endothelial cell biology results from neutrophil soluble factors rather than
direct neutrophil cellular tissue effects. Meanwhile, children with Ret-CM had
lower levels of inflammation, higher levels of alpha interferon, and upregulation
of Toll-like receptor pathways and other host transcriptional pathways, which may
represent responses that do not favor cerebral iRBC sequestration.IMPORTANCE:
There were approximately 198 million cases of malaria worldwide in 2013, with an 
estimated 584,000 deaths occurring mostly in sub-Saharan African children. CM is 
a severe and rare form of Plasmodium falciparum infection and is associated with 
high rates of mortality and neurological morbidity, despite antimalarial
treatment. A greater understanding of the pathophysiology of CM would allow the
development of adjunctive therapies to improve clinical outcomes. A hallmark of
CM is cerebral microvasculature sequestration of P. falciparum-infected red blood
cells (iRBCs), which results in vasculopathy in some patients. Our data provide a
global analysis of the host pathways associated with CM and newly identify an
association of activated neutrophils with brain iRBC sequestration. Products of
activated neutrophils could alter endothelial cell receptors and coagulation to
facilitate iRBC adherence. Future studies can now examine the role of neutrophils
in CM pathogenesis to improve health outcomes.

Copyright © 2016 Feintuch et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01300-15 
PMCID: PMC4791846
PMID: 26884431  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

