
1. Asian Pac J Trop Med. 2016 Feb;9(2):158-63. doi: 10.1016/j.apjtm.2016.01.003.
Epub 2016 Jan 11.

Immunogenicity and immunizing protection effect of GAMA gene DNA vaccine on
Plasmodium berghei.

Du F(1), Wang S(1), Zhao C(2), Cao YM(3), Luo EJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogen Biology, Basic Medical College of China Medical
University, Shenyang City, Liaoning, China.
(2)Inspection Institute of Jilin Medical College, China.
(3)Department of Immunology, Basic Medical College of China Medical University,
Shenyang City, Liaoning, China.
(4)Department of Pathogen Biology, Basic Medical College of China Medical
University, Shenyang City, Liaoning, China. Electronic address: enjiecmu@126.com.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effect of immunogenicity and immunizing protection of
GAMA gene DNA vaccine, which was related with merozoite, ookinete and sporozoite 
invasion.
METHODS: Gene fragments were obtained using PCR technique and eukaryotic
expression vector (containing immunostimulatory sequence) was built. BALB/c mice 
were divided into PBS control group, empty vector control group and study group
and were immunized at week 0, 3 and 6 respectively. Blood was collected 2 weeks
after each immunization and serum was separated to detect the IgG, IgG1 and IgG2a
levels. Spleen of mice was obtained for preparation of splenic mononuclear cell
and the cytokine IL-4 and IFN-γ levels were detected. Indirect immunofluorescence
and western blot were employed to verify the specificity of antiserum. Sporozoite
and merozoite invasion were used respectively to detect the immune protective
effect 2 weeks after the third immunization. Ookinete conversion rate in vitro
and oocyst numbers of mosquito stomach were observed to evaluate the
transmission-blocking levels.
RESULTS: In GAMA DNA vaccine group: antiserum could be combined with recombinant 
protein specifically and green fluorescence signals of merozoite, ookinete and
sporozoite were observable, while specific fragments and fluorescence signals
were not observable in empty vector group. Compared with control group, specific 
IgG in DNA vaccine immunity group significantly increased (P < 0.01), and IgG1
and IgG2a all increased (P < 0.01). IL-4, IFN-γ content in study group
significantly increased, compared with control group (P < 0.01). GAMA DNA vaccine
immunity could not obviously block the erythrocyte-stage infection (caused by
sporozoite invasion); compared with control group, liver worm load was slightly
reduced (P < 0.05), and antiserum ookinete numbers (cultured in vitro) had no
significant difference with oocyst numbers of mosquito stomach in DNA vaccine
group.
CONCLUSIONS: GAMA has good antigenicity, which could stimulate the body to
produce specific immune responses; while DNA vaccine immunity could not play a
good protective effect, the effect of which is only limited to the slight
reduction of liver worm load, and has no obvious erythrocyte-stage protective
effect and transmission-blocking effect. Therefore, trying other immunization
strategies for further research on the value of GAMA (as multi-stage antigen
vaccine and multi-stage combined vaccine components of the life-cycle of
plasmodium) is necessary.

Copyright © 2016 Hainan Medical College. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apjtm.2016.01.003 
PMID: 26919947 

