
1. Parasit Vectors. 2016 Mar 10;9:140. doi: 10.1186/s13071-016-1427-3.

Paratransgenesis to control malaria vectors: a semi-field pilot study.

Mancini MV(1), Spaccapelo R(2), Damiani C(1), Accoti A(1), Tallarita M(2),
Petraglia E(1), Rossi P(1), Cappelli A(1), Capone A(1), Peruzzi G(2), Valzano
M(1), Picciolini M(2), Diabaté A(3), Facchinelli L(2), Ricci I(1), Favia G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Scuola di Bioscienze e Medicina Veterinaria, Università di Camerino, Camerino,
Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, Centro di Genomica Funzionale, University
of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(3)Institut de Recherche en Sciences de la Sante (IRSS), Direction Regionale de
l'Ouest (DRO), BP 390, Bobo Dioulasso, Burkina Faso.
(4)Scuola di Bioscienze e Medicina Veterinaria, Università di Camerino, Camerino,
Italy. guido.favia@unicam.it.

BACKGROUND: Malaria still remains a serious health burden in developing
countries, causing more than 1 million deaths annually. Given the lack of an
effective vaccine against its major etiological agent, Plasmodium falciparum, and
the growing resistance of this parasite to the currently available drugs
repertoire and of Anopheles mosquitoes to insecticides, the development of
innovative control measures is an imperative to reduce malaria transmission.
Paratransgenesis, the modification of symbiotic organisms to deliver
anti-pathogen effector molecules, represents a novel strategy against Plasmodium 
development in mosquito vectors, showing the potential to reduce parasite
development. However, the field application of laboratory-based evidence of
paratransgenesis imposes the use of more realistic confined semi-field
environments.
METHODS: Large cages were used to evaluate the ability of bacteria of the genus
Asaia expressing green fluorescent protein (Asaia (gfp)), to diffuse in Anopheles
stephensi and Anopheles gambiae target mosquito populations. Asaia (gfp) was
introduced in large cages through the release of paratransgenic males or by sugar
feeding stations. Recombinant bacteria transmission was directly detected by
fluorescent microscopy, and further assessed by molecular analysis.
RESULTS: Here we show the first known trial in semi-field condition on
paratransgenic anophelines. Modified bacteria were able to spread at high rate in
different populations of An. stephensi and An. gambiae, dominant malaria vectors,
exploring horizontal ways and successfully colonising mosquito midguts. Moreover,
in An. gambiae, vertical and trans-stadial diffusion mechanisms were
demonstrated.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate the considerable ability of modified Asaia
to colonise different populations of malaria vectors, including pecies where its 
association is not primary, in large environments. The data support the potential
to employ transgenic Asaia as a tool for malaria control, disclosing promising
perspective for its field application with suitable effector molecules.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-016-1427-3 
PMCID: PMC4787196
PMID: 26965746  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

