
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2016 Jun;54(6):1500-1511. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00235-16. Epub 2016 
Mar 23.

A Method for Amplicon Deep Sequencing of Drug Resistance Genes in Plasmodium
falciparum Clinical Isolates from India.

Rao PN(1), Uplekar S(1), Kayal S(2), Mallick PK(3), Bandyopadhyay N(3), Kale
S(3), Singh OP(3), Mohanty A(4), Mohanty S(5), Wassmer SC(6), Carlton JM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, Department of Biology, New York
University, New York, New York, USA.
(2)National Institute of Technology, Raurkela, Odisha, India.
(3)National Institute of Malaria Research, Indian Council of Medical Research,
Dwarka, New Delhi, India.
(4)Institute of Life Sciences, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India.
(5)Ispat General Hospital, Raurkela, Odisha, India.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Division of Parasitology, New York University
School of Medicine, New York, New York, USA.
(7)Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, Department of Biology, New York
University, New York, New York, USA jane.carlton@nyu.edu.

A major challenge to global malaria control and elimination is early detection
and containment of emerging drug resistance. Next-generation sequencing (NGS)
methods provide the resolution, scalability, and sensitivity required for
high-throughput surveillance of molecular markers of drug resistance. We have
developed an amplicon sequencing method on the Ion Torrent PGM platform for
targeted resequencing of a panel of six Plasmodium falciparum genes implicated in
resistance to first-line antimalarial therapy, including artemisinin combination 
therapy, chloroquine, and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine. The protocol was optimized
using 12 geographically diverse P. falciparum reference strains and successfully 
applied to multiplexed sequencing of 16 clinical isolates from India. The
sequencing results from the reference strains showed 100% concordance with
previously reported drug resistance-associated mutations. Single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in clinical isolates revealed a number of known
resistance-associated mutations and other nonsynonymous mutations that have not
been implicated in drug resistance. SNP positions containing multiple allelic
variants were used to identify three clinical samples containing mixed genotypes 
indicative of multiclonal infections. The amplicon sequencing protocol has been
designed for the benchtop Ion Torrent PGM platform and can be operated with
minimal bioinformatics infrastructure, making it ideal for use in countries that 
are endemic for the disease to facilitate routine large-scale surveillance of the
emergence of drug resistance and to ensure continued success of the malaria
treatment policy.

Copyright © 2016 Rao et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00235-16 
PMCID: PMC4879288
PMID: 27008882  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

