
1. Asian Pac J Trop Med. 2016 Apr;9(4):313-323. doi: 10.1016/j.apjtm.2016.03.013.
Epub 2016 Mar 10.

Microarray analysis of PBMC after Plasmodium falciparum infection: Molecular
insights into disease pathogenesis.

Hu WC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of International Health, Johns Hopkins University School of Public 
Health, Division of Clinical Chinese Medicine, National Research Institute of
Chinese Medicine, Beitou District, Taipei, 112, Taiwan. Electronic address:
Wanchung.Hu09@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: To find out host gene expression profiles after malarial infection.
METHODS: Further time-course microarray analysis of peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells focusing on malaria pathogenesis was performed.
RESULTS: Up-regulation of coagulation-related genes, heat shock proteins,
glycolytic enzymes, glucose transporters, and vacuolar H(+)-ATPases was found in 
acute febrile malaria. In early malaria, prior to detectable parasitemia, CD36
and ICAM1 were up-regulated. During acute malaria, there is correlation between
IL-1β and heat shock proteins. CD163, a hemoglobin scavenger receptor, was
up-regulated in acute malaria to potentially facilitate free hemoglobin up-take
by leukocytes. In acute malaria, high MafB gene expression was negatively
correlated with hemoglobin and platelet counts. Consistent with hemoglobin
down-regulation, peripheral red blood cell counts tended to increase during acute
malaria. Up-regulations of red blood cell and leukocyte binding mediators like
CD36, ICAM1, thrombospondin, and thrombomodulin may contribute to the
pathogenesis of cerebral malaria. Similarly, up-regulation of correlated
glycolytic enzymes, glucose transporter and H(+)-ATPases may contribute to the
hypoglycemia and metabolic acidosis frequently observed in serious malaria
patients. Overall gender effects on gene expression profiles between male and
female were not apparent, except for some hemoglobins were significantly
down-regulated in male versus female, which suggesting males are prone to
malaria-related anemia.
CONCLUSIONS: Leukocyte gene expression profiles can explain the pathogenesis of
malarial complication such as fever, metabolic acidosis, hypoglycemia, anemia,
and coagulopathy.

Copyright © 2016 Hainan Medical College. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apjtm.2016.03.013 
PMID: 27086147 

