
1. Parasit Vectors. 2016 Jun 24;9(1):357. doi: 10.1186/s13071-016-1633-z.

Differential expression profiles of the salivary proteins SP15 and SP44 from
Phlebotomus papatasi.

Hosseini-Vasoukolaei N(1)(2), Idali F(3), Khamesipour A(4), Yaghoobi-Ershadi
MR(1), Kamhawi S(5), Valenzuela JG(5), Edalatkhah H(6), Arandian MH(7), Mirhendi 
H(8), Emami S(9), Jafari R(7), Saeidi Z(1), Jeddi-Tehrani M(10), Akhavan AA(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Entomology and Vector Control, School of Public Health, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Medical Entomology and Vector Control, Health Sciences Research 
Center, Faculty of Health, Mazandaran University of Medical Sciences, Sari, Iran.
(3)Reproductive Immunology Research Center, Avicenna Research Institute, ACECR,
Tehran, Iran.
(4)Center for Research and Training in Skin Diseases and Leprosy, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Vector Molecular Biology Section, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institute of
Health, Rockville, MD, 20852, USA.
(6)Reproductive Biotechnology Research Center, Avicenna Research Institute,
ACECR, Tehran, Iran.
(7)Esfahan Health Research Station, National Institute of Health Research, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Esfahan, Iran.
(8)Department of Medical Mycology and Parasitology, School of Medicine, Isfahan
University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
(9)Monoclonal Antibody Research Center, Avicenna Research Institute, ACECR,
Tehran, Iran.
(10)Monoclonal Antibody Research Center, Avicenna Research Institute, ACECR,
Tehran, Iran. mahjed@avicenna.ac.ir.
(11)Department of Medical Entomology and Vector Control, School of Public Health,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. aaakhavan@tums.ac.ir.

BACKGROUND: Sand fly saliva has been shown to help parasite establishment and to 
induce immune responses in vertebrate hosts. In the current study, we
investigated the pattern of expression of two Phlebotomus papatasi salivary
transcripts in specific physiological and seasonal conditions at a hyperendemic
area of zoonotic cutaneous leishmaniasis (ZCL) in Iran.
METHODS: Sand flies were collected during 2012-2013, and grouped according to
physiological stages such as unfed, fed, semi-gravid, gravid, parous,
nulliparous, infected or non-infected with Leishmania major and also based on the
season in which they were collected. Quantitative Real-Time PCR was applied for
assessment of the expression of two relevant salivary transcripts, PpSP15 and
PpSP44, associated to protection from and exacerbation of ZCL, respectively.
RESULTS: The expression of PpSP15 and PpSP44 transcripts was significantly
up-regulated (1.74 and 1.4 folds, respectively) in blood fed compared to unfed
flies. Among four groups of fed, unfed, semi-gravid and gravid flies, the lowest 
levels of PpSP15 and PpSP44 expression were observed in gravid flies.
Additionally, the expression levels of both PpSP15 and PpSP44 transcripts in P.
papatasi collected during summer were significantly up-regulated (3.7 and 4.4
folds, respectively) compared to spring collections. In addition, the PpSP15
transcript exhibited a significant up-regulation (P < 0.05) in non-infected flies
compared to those infected with L. major.
CONCLUSIONS: This study contributes to our knowledge of the differential
expression of salivary genes among different groups within a P. papatasi
population under natural field conditions. Cutaneous and visceral leishmaniasis
are of public health importance in many parts of Iran and neighbouring countries 
where P. papatasi is the proven and dominant sand fly vector for ZCL, the most
prevalent and endemic form of the disease in Iran. Therefore, the current study
could be helpful in understanding the influence of salivary genes on Leishmania
transmission by phlebotomine sand flies. Our findings demonstrate the
differential expression of salivary transcripts under various physiological
conditions potentially influencing the sand fly capacity for parasite
transmission as well as the outcome of disease.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-016-1633-z 
PMCID: PMC4919860
PMID: 27342811  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

