
1. J Vector Borne Dis. 2016 Apr-Jun;53(2):168-78.

Monitoring the efficacy of antimalarial medicines in India via sentinel sites:
Outcomes and risk factors for treatment failure.

Mishra N(1), Srivastava B(1), Bharti RS(1), Rana R(1), Kaitholia K(1), Anvikar
AR(1), Das MK(2), Ghosh SK(3), Bhatt RM(4), Tyagi PK(5), Dev V(6), Phookan S(6), 
Wattal SL(7), Sonal GS(7), Dhariwal AC(7), Valecha N(1).

Author information: 
(1)ECR Division, National Institute of Malaria Research, New Delhi, India.
(2)National Institute of Malaria Research (Field Unit), Ranchi, Jharkhand, India.
(3)National Institute of Malaria Research (Field Unit), Bengaluru, Karnataka,
India.
(4)National Institute of Malaria Research (Field Unit), Raipur, Chhattisgarh,
India.
(5)National Institute of Malaria Research (Field Unit), Rourkela, Odisha, India.
(6)National Institute of Malaria Research (Field Unit), Guwahati, Assam, India.
(7)National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme, Delhi, India.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVES: To combat the problem of antimalarial drug resistance,
monitoring the changes in drug efficacy over time through periodic surveillance
is essential. Since 2009, systematic and continuous monitoring is being done
through nationwide sentinel site system. Potential early warning signs like
partner drug resistance markers were also monitored in the clinical samples from 
the study areas.
METHODS: A total of 1864 patients with acute uncomplicated malaria were enrolled 
in therapeutic efficacy studies of artesunate plus sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine
(AS+SP) for Plasmodium falciparum; those infected with P. vivax were given
chloroquine (CQ). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was used to distinguish
post-treatment reinfection from treatment failures. Isolates of P. falciparum
were also analysed for dihydropteroate synthase (dhps) and dihydrofolate
reductase (dhfr) gene mutations.
RESULTS: Overall, 1687 (91.7%) patients completed the follow-up. In most of the
falciparum patients the parasitaemia was cleared within 24 h of treatment, except
12 patients who remained parasite positive after 72 h. Presence of dhfr and dhps 
quintuple mutation was observed predominantly in treatment failure samples. A
daily dose of artesunate of < 3 mg/kg of body weight, age of <5 yr, and fever at 
enrolment were associated with an increased risk of treatment failure. The AS+SP 
in P. falciparum was effective in > 95% cases in all the sentinel sites except in
Northeastern region (NE). Chloroquine remained 100% efficacious in case of P.
vivax infections.
INTERPRETATION & CONCLUSION: Till 2012, India's national antimalarial drug
resistance monitoring system proved highly efficacious and safe towards
first-line antimalarials used in the country, except in Northeastern region where
a decline in efficacy of AS+SP has been observed. This led to change in
first-line treatment for P. falciparum to artemether-lumefantrine in Northeastern
region.


PMID: 27353588  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

