
1. Exp Parasitol. 2016 Oct;169:13-21. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2016.06.013. Epub 2016 
Jun 30.

A Plasmodium falciparum S33 proline aminopeptidase is associated with changes in 
erythrocyte deformability.

da Silva FL(1), Dixon MW(2), Stack CM(3), Teuscher F(4), Taran E(5), Jones MK(6),
Lovas E(6), Tilley L(2), Brown CL(7), Trenholme KR(8), Dalton JP(9), Gardiner
DL(10), Skinner-Adams TS(11).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Parasitology, McGill University, Canada; QIMR Berghofer Medical
Research Institute, Australia.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Institute, University 
of Melbourne, Australia; ARC Centre of Excellence for Coherent X-Ray Science,
Melbourne, Australia.
(3)School of Science and Health, University of Western Sydney, Australia.
(4)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Australia.
(5)Australian Institute for Bioengineering & Nanotechnology, University of
Queensland, Australia; The Australian National Fabrication Facility, Queensland
Node, Brisbane, Australia.
(6)School of Veterinary Sciences, University of Queensland, Australia.
(7)School of Natural Sciences, Griffith University, Brisbane, Queensland 4111,
Australia; Eskitis Institute for Drug Discovery, Griffith University, Queensland,
Australia.
(8)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Australia; School of Medicine,
University of Queensland, Australia.
(9)Institute of Parasitology, McGill University, Canada; School of Biological
Sciences, Queen's University Belfast, Northern Ireland, United Kingdom.
(10)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Australia; Eskitis Institute for
Drug Discovery, Griffith University, Queensland, Australia.
(11)School of Natural Sciences, Griffith University, Brisbane, Queensland 4111,
Australia; Eskitis Institute for Drug Discovery, Griffith University, Queensland,
Australia. Electronic address: t.skinner-adams@griffith.edu.au.

Infection with the apicomplexan parasite Plasmodium falciparum is a major cause
of morbidity and mortality worldwide. One of the striking features of this
parasite is its ability to remodel and decrease the deformability of host red
blood cells, a process that contributes to disease. To further understand the
virulence of Pf we investigated the biochemistry and function of a putative Pf
S33 proline aminopeptidase (PfPAP). Unlike other P. falciparum aminopeptidases,
PfPAP contains a predicted protein export element that is non-syntenic with other
human infecting Plasmodium species. Characterization of PfPAP demonstrated that
it is exported into the host red blood cell and that it is a prolyl
aminopeptidase with a preference for N-terminal proline substrates. In addition
genetic deletion of this exopeptidase was shown to lead to an increase in the
deformability of parasite-infected red cells and in reduced adherence to the
endothelial cell receptor CD36 under flow conditions. Our studies suggest that
PfPAP plays a role in the rigidification and adhesion of infected red blood cells
to endothelial surface receptors, a role that may make this protein a novel
target for anti-disease interventions strategies.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2016.06.013 
PMID: 27373432  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

