
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2016 Oct;44:367-375. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2016.07.040. Epub
2016 Jul 30.

Sequence diversity and positive selection at the Duffy-binding protein genes of
Plasmodium knowlesi and P. cynomolgi: Analysis of the complete coding sequences
of Thai isolates.

Putaporntip C(1), Kuamsab N(2), Jongwutiwes S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology of Malaria and Opportunistic Parasites Research Unit,
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, Thailand. Electronic address: p.chaturong@gmail.com.
(2)Molecular Biology of Malaria and Opportunistic Parasites Research Unit,
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, Thailand.

Plasmodium knowlesi and P. cynomolgi are simian malaria parasites capable of
causing symptomatic human infections. The interaction between the Duffy binding
protein alpha on P. knowlesi merozoite and the Duffy-antigen receptor for
chemokine (DARC) on human and macaque erythrocyte membrane is prerequisite for
establishment of blood stage infection whereas DARC is not required for
erythrocyte invasion by P. cynomolgi. To gain insights into the evolution of the 
PkDBP gene family comprising PkDBPα, PkDBPβ and PkDBPγ, and a member of the DBP
gene family of P. cynomolgi (PcyDBP1), the complete coding sequences of these
genes were analyzed from Thai field isolates and compared with the publicly
available DBP sequences of P. vivax (PvDBP). The complete coding sequences of
PkDBPα (n=11), PkDBPβ (n=11), PkDBPγ (n=10) and PcyDBP1 (n=11) were obtained from
direct sequencing of the PCR products. Nucleotide diversity of DBP is highly
variable across malaria species. PcyDBP1 displayed the greatest level of
nucleotide diversity while all PkDBP gene members exhibited comparable levels of 
diversity. Positive selection occurred in domains I, II and IV of PvDBP and in
domain V of PcyDBP1. Although deviation from neutrality was not detected in
domain II of PkDBPα, a signature of positive selection was identified in the
putative DARC binding site in this domain. The DBP gene families seem to have
arisen following the model of concerted evolution because paralogs rather than
orthologs are clustered in the phylogenetic tree. The presence of identical or
closely related repeats exclusive for the PkDBP gene family suggests that
duplication of gene members postdated their divergence from the ancestral PcyDBP 
and PvDBP lineages. Intragenic recombination was detected in all DBP genes of
these malaria species. Despite the limited number of isolates, P. knowlesi from
Thailand shared phylogenetically related domain II sequences of both PkDBPα and
PkDBPγ with those from Peninsular Malaysia, consistent with their geographic
proximity.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2016.07.040 
PMID: 27480919  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

