
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Aug 10;6:31291. doi: 10.1038/srep31291.

Transcriptomic evidence for modulation of host inflammatory responses during
febrile Plasmodium falciparum malaria.

Tran TM(1)(2), Jones MB(3), Ongoiba A(4), Bijker EM(5), Schats R(6), Venepally
P(3), Skinner J(1), Doumbo S(4), Quinten E(6), Visser LG(6), Whalen E(7),
Presnell S(7), O'Connell EM(8), Kayentao K(4), Doumbo OK(4), Chaussabel D(7)(9), 
Lorenzi H(10), Nutman TB(8), Ottenhoff TH(6), Haks MC(6), Traore B(4), Kirkness
EF(3), Sauerwein RW(5), Crompton PD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, USA.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(3)Genomic Medicine Group, J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
(4)Mali International Center of Excellence in Research, University of Sciences,
Technique and Technology of Bamako, Bamako, Mali.
(5)Department of Medical Microbiology, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Infectious Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
The Netherlands.
(7)Systems Immunology Division, Benaroya Research Institute, Seattle, WA, USA.
(8)Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(9)Sidra Medical and Research Center, Doha, Qatar.
(10)Infectious Diseases Group, J. Craig Venter Institute, Bethesda, Maryland,
USA.

Identifying molecular predictors and mechanisms of malaria disease is important
for understanding how Plasmodium falciparum malaria is controlled. Transcriptomic
studies in humans have so far been limited to retrospective analysis of blood
samples from clinical cases. In this prospective, proof-of-principle study, we
compared whole-blood RNA-seq profiles at pre-and post-infection time points from 
Malian adults who were either asymptomatic (n = 5) or febrile (n = 3) during
their first seasonal PCR-positive P. falciparum infection with those from
malaria-naïve Dutch adults after a single controlled human malaria infection
(n = 5). Our data show a graded activation of pathways downstream of
pro-inflammatory cytokines, with the highest activation in malaria-naïve Dutch
individuals and significantly reduced activation in malaria-experienced Malians. 
Newly febrile and asymptomatic infections in Malians were statistically
indistinguishable except for genes activated by pro-inflammatory cytokines. The
combined data provide a molecular basis for the development of a pyrogenic
threshold as individuals acquire immunity to clinical malaria.

DOI: 10.1038/srep31291 
PMCID: PMC4978957
PMID: 27506615  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

