
1. Parasit Vectors. 2016 Aug 8;9(1):437. doi: 10.1186/s13071-016-1702-3.

A new lizard malaria parasite Plasmodium intabazwe n. sp. (Apicomplexa:
Haemospororida: Plasmodiidae) in the Afromontane Pseudocordylus melanotus
(Sauria: Cordylidae) with a review of African saurian malaria parasites.

van As J(1), Cook CA(2), Netherlands EC(3)(4), Smit NJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology & Entomology, University of the Free State, QwaQwa
campus, Free State, South Africa.
(2)Unit for Environmental Sciences and Management, North-West University,
Potchefstroom, South Africa. apicomplexan@yahoo.co.za.
(3)Unit for Environmental Sciences and Management, North-West University,
Potchefstroom, South Africa.
(4)Laboratory of Aquatic Ecology, Evolution and Conservation, University of
Leuven, 3000, Leuven, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Saurian malaria parasites are diverse apicomplexan blood parasites
including the family Plasmodiidae Mesnil, 1903, and have been studied since the
early 1900s. Currently, at least 27 species of Plasmodium are recorded in African
lizards, and to date only two species, Plasmodium zonuriae (Pienaar, 1962) and
Plasmodium cordyli Telford, 1987, have been reported from the African endemic
family Cordylidae. This paper presents a description of a new malaria parasite in
a cordylid lizard and provides a phylogenetic hypothesis for saurian Plasmodium
species from South Africa. Furthermore, it provides a tabular review of the
Plasmodium species that to date have been formally described infecting species of
African lizards.
METHODS: Blood samples were collected from 77 specimens of Pseudocordylus
melanotus (A. Smith, 1838) from Platberg reserve in the Eastern Free State, and
two specimens of Cordylus vittifer (Reichenow, 1887) from the Roodewalshoek
conservancy in Mpumalanga (South Africa). Blood smears were Giemsa-stained,
screened for haematozoa, specifically saurian malaria parasites, parasite stages 
were photographed and measured. A small volume was also preserved for TEM
studies. Plasmodium and Haemoproteus primer sets, with a nested-polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) protocol, were employed to target a fragment of the cytochrome-b
(cyt-b) gene region. Resulting sequences of the saurian Plasmodium species'
isolates were compared with each other and to other known Plasmodium spp.
sequences in the GenBank database.
RESULTS: The presence of P. zonuriae in both specimens of the type lizard host C.
vittifer was confirmed using morphological characteristics, which subsequently
allowed for the species' molecular characterisation. Of the 77 P. melanotus, 44
were parasitised by a Plasmodium species, which when compared morphologically to 
other African saurian Plasmodium spp. and molecularly to P. zonuriae, supported
its description as a new species Plasmodium intabazwe n. sp.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first morphological and molecular account of Plasmodium 
species within the African endemic family Cordylidae from South Africa. The study
highlights the need for molecular analysis of other cordylid Plasmodium species
within Africa. Future studies should also include elucidating of the life-cycles 
of these species, thus promoting the use of both morphological and molecular
characteristics in species descriptions of saurian malaria parasites.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-016-1702-3 
PMCID: PMC4977684
PMID: 27502045  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

