
1. Malar J. 2016 Aug 17;15(1):416. doi: 10.1186/s12936-016-1459-3.

Phagocytosis-inducing antibodies to Plasmodium falciparum upon immunization with 
a recombinant PfEMP1 NTS-DBL1α domain.

Quintana Mdel P(1)(2), Angeletti D(1), Moll K(1), Chen Q(1)(3)(4), Wahlgren M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology (MTC), Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Escuela de Medicina y Ciencias de la Salud, Facultad de Ciencias Naturales y
Matemáticas, Universidad del Rosario, Bogotá, Colombia.
(3)Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, Jilin University, Changchun, People's Republic of 
China.
(4)Institute of Pathogen Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing,
People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology (MTC), Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. mats.wahlgren@ki.se.

BACKGROUND: Individuals living in endemic areas gradually acquire natural
immunity to clinical malaria, largely dependent on antibodies against parasite
antigens. There are many studies indicating that the variant antigen PfEMP1 at
the surface of the parasitized red blood cell (pRBC) is one of the major targets 
of the immune response. It is believed that antibodies against PfEMP1 confer
protection by blocking sequestration (rosetting and cytoadherence), inducing
antibody-dependent cellular-inhibitory effect and opsonizing pRBCs for
phagocytosis.
METHODS: A recombinant NTS-DBL1α domain from a rosette-mediating PfEMP1 was
expressed in Escherichia coli. The resulting protein was purified and used for
immunization to generate polyclonal (goat) and monoclonal (mouse) antibodies. The
antibodies' ability to opsonize and induce phagocytosis in vitro was tested and
contrasted with the presence of opsonizing antibodies naturally acquired during
Plasmodium falciparum infection.
RESULTS: All antibodies recognized the recombinant antigen and the surface of
live pRBCs, however, their capacity to opsonize the pRBCs for phagocytosis
varied. The monoclonal antibodies isotyped as IgG2b did not induce phagocytosis, 
while those isotyped as IgG2a were in general very effective, inducing
phagocytosis with similar levels as those naturally acquired during P. falciparum
infection. These monoclonal antibodies displayed different patterns, some of them
showing a concentration-dependent activity while others showed a prozone-like
effect. The goat polyclonal antibodies were not able to induce phagocytosis.
CONCLUSION: Immunization with an NTS-DBL1-α domain of PfEMP1 generates antibodies
that not only have a biological role in rosette disruption but also effectively
induce opsonization for phagocytosis of pRBCs with similar activity to naturally 
acquired antibodies from immune individuals living in a malaria endemic area.
Some of the antibodies with high opsonizing activity were not able to disrupt
rosettes, indicating that epitopes of the NTS-DBL1-α other than those involved in
rosetting are exposed on the pRBC surface and are able to induce functional
antibodies. The ability to induce phagocytosis largely depended on the antibody
isotype and on the ability to recognize the surface of the pRBC regardless of the
rosette-disrupting capacity.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-016-1459-3 
PMCID: PMC4987995
PMID: 27531359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

