
1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2016 Sep 5;4:89. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2016.00089. eCollection 
2016.

Fluorescence In situ Hybridization: Cell-Based Genetic Diagnostic and Research
Applications.

Cui C(1), Shu W(2), Li P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Cytogenetics, Department of Genetics, Yale School of
MedicineNew Haven, CT, USA; Department of Pathology, Institute of Hematology and 
Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical SciencesTianjin, China.
(2)Laboratory of Clinical Cytogenetics, Department of Genetics, Yale School of
MedicineNew Haven, CT, USA; Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Guangxi
Medical UniversityNanning, China.
(3)Laboratory of Clinical Cytogenetics, Department of Genetics, Yale School of
Medicine New Haven, CT, USA.

Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is a macromolecule recognition
technology based on the complementary nature of DNA or DNA/RNA double strands.
Selected DNA strands incorporated with fluorophore-coupled nucleotides can be
used as probes to hybridize onto the complementary sequences in tested cells and 
tissues and then visualized through a fluorescence microscope or an imaging
system. This technology was initially developed as a physical mapping tool to
delineate genes within chromosomes. Its high analytical resolution to a single
gene level and high sensitivity and specificity enabled an immediate application 
for genetic diagnosis of constitutional common aneuploidies,
microdeletion/microduplication syndromes, and subtelomeric rearrangements. FISH
tests using panels of gene-specific probes for somatic recurrent losses, gains,
and translocations have been routinely applied for hematologic and solid tumors
and are one of the fastest-growing areas in cancer diagnosis. FISH has also been 
used to detect infectious microbias and parasites like malaria in human blood
cells. Recent advances in FISH technology involve various methods for improving
probe labeling efficiency and the use of super resolution imaging systems for
direct visualization of intra-nuclear chromosomal organization and profiling of
RNA transcription in single cells. Cas9-mediated FISH (CASFISH) allowed in situ
labeling of repetitive sequences and single-copy sequences without the disruption
of nuclear genomic organization in fixed or living cells. Using oligopaint-FISH
and super-resolution imaging enabled in situ visualization of chromosome
haplotypes from differentially specified single-nucleotide polymorphism loci.
Single molecule RNA FISH (smRNA-FISH) using combinatorial labeling or sequential 
barcoding by multiple round of hybridization were applied to measure mRNA
expression of multiple genes within single cells. Research applications of these 
single molecule single cells DNA and RNA FISH techniques have visualized
intra-nuclear genomic structure and sub-cellular transcriptional dynamics of many
genes and revealed their functions in various biological processes.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2016.00089 
PMCID: PMC5011256
PMID: 27656642 

