
1. PLoS One. 2016 Sep 26;11(9):e0163791. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0163791.
eCollection 2016.

Expression of 6-Cys Gene Superfamily Defines Babesia bovis Sexual Stage
Development within Rhipicephalus microplus.

Alzan HF(1)(2), Lau AO(3), Knowles DP(1)(4), Herndon DR(4), Ueti MW(1)(4), Scoles
GA(1)(4), Kappmeyer LS(4), Suarez CE(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, United States of America.
(2)Parasitology and Animal Diseases Department, National Research Center, Dokki, 
Giza, Egypt.
(3)The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, 5601 Fishers Lane, 
MSC 9823, Bethesda, MD, United States of America.
(4)Animal Disease Research Unit, United States Department of
Agricultural-Agricultural Research Service, Pullman, WA, United States of
America.

Babesia bovis, an intra-erythrocytic tick-borne apicomplexan protozoan, is one of
the causative agents of bovine babesiosis. Its life cycle includes sexual
reproduction within cattle fever ticks, Rhipicephalus spp. Six B. bovis 6-Cys
gene superfamily members were previously identified (A, B, C, D, E, F) where
their orthologues in Plasmodium parasite have been shown to encode for proteins
required for the development of sexual stages. The current study identified four 
additional 6-Cys genes (G, H, I, J) in the B. bovis genome. These four genes are 
described in the context of the complete ten 6-Cys gene superfamily. The proteins
expressed by this gene family are predicted to be secreted or surface membrane
directed. Genetic analysis comparing the 6-Cys superfamily among five distinct B.
bovis strains shows limited sequence variation. Additionally, A, B, E, H, I and J
genes were transcribed in B. bovis infected tick midgut while genes A, B and E
were also transcribed in the subsequent B. bovis kinete stage. Transcription of
gene C was found exclusively in the kinete. In contrast, transcription of genes
D, F and G in either B. bovis infected midguts or kinetes was not detected. None 
of the 6-Cys transcripts were detected in B. bovis blood stages. Subsequent
protein analysis of 6-Cys A and B is concordant with their transcript profile.
The collective data indicate as in Plasmodium parasite, certain B. bovis 6-Cys
family members are uniquely expressed during sexual stages and therefore, they
are likely required for parasite reproduction. Within B. bovis specifically,
proteins encoded by 6-Cys genes A and B are markers for sexual stages and
candidate antigens for developing novel vaccines able to interfere with the
development of B. bovis within the tick vector.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0163791 
PMCID: PMC5036836
PMID: 27668751 

Conflict of interest statement: These authors have declared that no competing
interest exist.

