
1. Acta Trop. 2016 Dec;164:438-447. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2016.10.002. Epub
2016 Oct 5.

Design, construction and validation of a Plasmodium vivax microarray for the
transcriptome profiling of clinical isolates.

Boopathi PA(1), Subudhi AK(2), Middha S(3), Acharya J(4), Mugasimangalam RC(5),
Kochar SK(6), Kochar DK(7), Das A(8).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Parasitology and Systems Biology Lab, Department of Biological
Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS), Pilani, Rajasthan,
India. Electronic address: boopathiarunachalam@gmail.com.
(2)Molecular Parasitology and Systems Biology Lab, Department of Biological
Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS), Pilani, Rajasthan,
India. Electronic address: amit4help@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Medicine, S.P. Medical College, Bikaner, Rajasthan, India.
Electronic address: sheetumig21@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Medicine, S.P. Medical College, Bikaner, Rajasthan, India.
Electronic address: jyotiacharya2@gmail.com.
(5)Genotypic Technology Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore, India. Electronic address:
raja@genotypic.co.in.
(6)Department of Medicine, S.P. Medical College, Bikaner, Rajasthan, India.
Electronic address: drskkochar@rediffmail.com.
(7)Rajasthan University of Health Sciences, Jaipur, Rajasthan, India. Electronic 
address: drdkkochar@yahoo.com.
(8)Molecular Parasitology and Systems Biology Lab, Department of Biological
Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS), Pilani, Rajasthan,
India. Electronic address: ashisd28@gmail.com.

High density oligonucleotide microarrays have been used on Plasmodium vivax field
isolates to estimate whole genome expression. However, no microarray platform has
been experimentally optimized for studying the transcriptome of field isolates.
In the present study, we adopted both bioinformatics and experimental testing
approaches to select best optimized probes suitable for detecting parasite
transcripts from field samples and included them in designing a custom 15K P.
vivax microarray. This microarray has long oligonucleotide probes (60mer) that
were in-situ synthesized onto glass slides using Agilent SurePrint technology and
has been developed into an 8X15K format (8 identical arrays on a single slide).
Probes in this array were experimentally validated and represents 4180 P. vivax
genes in sense orientation, of which 1219 genes have also probes in antisense
orientation. Validation of the 15K array by using field samples (n=14) has shown 
99% of parasite transcript detection from any of the samples. Correlation
analysis between duplicate probes (n=85) present in the arrays showed perfect
correlation (r2=0.98) indicating the reproducibility. Multiple probes
representing the same gene exhibited similar kind of expression pattern across
the samples (positive correlation, r≥0.6). Comparison of hybridization data with 
the previous studies and quantitative real-time PCR experiments were performed to
highlight the microarray validation procedure. This array is unique in its
design, and results indicate that the array is sensitive and reproducible. Hence,
this microarray could be a valuable functional genomics tool to generate reliable
expression data from P. vivax field isolates.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2016.10.002 
PMID: 27720625  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

