
1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Sep 27;7:1520. eCollection 2016.

Functional Characteristics of the Gut Microbiome in C57BL/6 Mice Differentially
Susceptible to Plasmodium yoelii.

Stough JM(1), Dearth SP(2), Denny JE(3), LeCleir GR(1), Schmidt NW(3), Campagna
SR(2), Wilhelm SW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Tennessee Knoxville, TN, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Tennessee Knoxville, TN, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Louisville
Louisville, KY, USA.

C57BL/6 mice are widely used for in vivo studies of immune function and
metabolism in mammals. In a previous study, it was observed that when C57BL/6
mice purchased from different vendors were infected with Plasmodium yoelii, a
causative agent of murine malaria, they exhibited both differential immune
responses and significantly different parasite burdens: these patterns were
reproducible when gut contents were transplanted into gnotobiotic mice. To gain
insight into the mechanism of resistance, we removed whole ceca from mice
purchased from two vendors, Taconic Biosciences (low parasitemia) and Charles
River Laboratories (high parasitemia), to determine the combined host and
microflora metabolome and metatranscriptome. With the exception of two Charles
River samples, we observed ≥90% similarity in overall bacterial gene expression
within vendors and ≤80% similarity between vendors. In total 33 bacterial genes
were differentially expressed in Charles River mice (p-value < 0.05) relative to 
the mice purchased from Taconic. Included among these, fliC, ureABC, and six
members of the nuo gene family were overrepresented in microbiomes susceptible to
more severe malaria. Moreover, 38 mouse genes were differentially expressed in
these purported genetically identical mice. Differentially expressed genes
included basigin, a cell surface receptor required for P. falciparum invasion of 
red blood cells. Differences in metabolite pools were detected, though their
relevance to malaria infection, microbial community activity, or host response is
not yet understood. Our data have provided new targets that may connect gut
microbial activity to malaria resistance and susceptibility phenotypes in the
C57BL/6 model organism.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01520 
PMCID: PMC5037233
PMID: 27729904 

