
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2016 Dec 27;61(1). pii: e02556-15. doi:
10.1128/AAC.02556-15. Print 2017 Jan.

Plasmodium falciparum Genetic Diversity in Continental Equatorial Guinea before
and after Introduction of Artemisinin-Based Combination Therapy.

Guerra M(1), Neres R(1), Salgueiro P(1), Mendes C(1), Ndong-Mabale N(2), Berzosa 
P(3), de Sousa B(4), Arez AP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Global Health and Tropical Medicine (GHTM), Instituto de Higiene e Medicina
Tropical (IHMT), Universidade Nova de Lisboa (UNL), Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)Centro de Referencia para el Control de Endemias, Instituto de Salud Carlos
III, Bata, Equatorial Guinea.
(3)Centro Nacional de Medicina Tropical, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid,
Spain.
(4)Faculdade de Psicologia e de Ciências da Educação, Universidade de Coimbra,
Coimbra, Portugal.
(5)Global Health and Tropical Medicine (GHTM), Instituto de Higiene e Medicina
Tropical (IHMT), Universidade Nova de Lisboa (UNL), Lisbon, Portugal
aparez@ihmt.unl.pt.

Efforts to control malaria may affect malaria parasite genetic variability and
drug resistance, the latter of which is associated with genetic events that
promote mechanisms to escape drug action. The worldwide spread of drug resistance
has been a major obstacle to controlling Plasmodium falciparum malaria, and thus 
the study of the origin and spread of associated mutations may provide some
insights into the prevention of its emergence. This study reports an analysis of 
P. falciparum genetic diversity, focusing on antimalarial resistance-associated
molecular markers in two socioeconomically different villages in mainland
Equatorial Guinea. The present study took place 8 years after a previous one,
allowing the analysis of results before and after the introduction of an
artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT), i.e., artesunate plus amodiaquine.
Genetic diversity was assessed by analysis of the Pfmsp2 gene and neutral
microsatellite loci. Pfdhps and Pfdhfr alleles associated with
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) resistance and flanking microsatellite loci were
investigated, and the prevalences of drug resistance-associated point mutations
of the Pfcrt, Pfmdr1, Pfdhfr, and Pfdhps genes were estimated. Further, to
monitor the use of ACT, we provide the baseline prevalences of K13 propeller
mutations and Pfmdr1 copy numbers. After 8 years, noticeable differences occurred
in the distribution of genotypes conferring resistance to chloroquine and SP, and
the spread of mutated genotypes differed according to the setting. Regarding
artemisinin resistance, although mutations reported as being linked to
artemisinin resistance were not present at the time, several single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) were observed in the K13 gene, suggesting that closer
monitoring should be maintained to prevent the possible spread of artemisinin
resistance in Africa.

Copyright © 2016 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02556-15 
PMCID: PMC5192141
PMID: 27795385  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

