
1. Parasit Vectors. 2016 Nov 11;9(1):576.

Identification of interchangeable cross-species function of elongation factor-1
alpha promoters in Babesia bigemina and Babesia bovis.

Silva MG(1), Knowles DP(2)(3), Suarez CE(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA, USA. marta@vetmed.wsu.edu.
(2)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA, USA.
(3)Animal Disease Research Unit, Agricultural Research Service, USDA, WSU,
Pullman, WA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Tick-borne Babesia bigemina is responsible for acute and potentially 
lethal hemolytic disease in cattle. The development of genetic manipulation tools
necessary to the better understanding of parasite biology is currently limited by
the lack of a complete parasite genome and experimental tools such as
transfection. Effective promoters, required to regulate expression of transgenes,
such as the elongation factor-1 alpha (ef-1α), have been identified in other
apicomplexans such as Babesia bovis and Plasmodium falciparum.
METHODS: The B. bigemina ef-1a locus was defined by searching a partial genome
library of B. bigemina (Sanger Institute). Presence of an intron in the 5'
untranslated region was determined by 5' Rapid Amplification of cDNA Ends (RACE) 
analysis. Promoter activity was determined by measurement of luciferase
expression at several time points after electroporation, efficiency of
transfections and normalization of data was determined by quantitative PCR and by
the percentage of parasitized erythrocytes.
RESULTS: The ef-1α locus contains two identical head to head ef-1α genes
separated by a 1.425 kb intergenic (IG) region. Significant sequence divergence
in the regions upstream of the inverted repeats on each side of the B. bigemina
IG region suggest independent regulation mechanisms for controlling expression of
each of the two ef-1α genes. Plasmid constructs containing the 5' and 3' halves
of the IG regions controlling the expression of the luciferase gene containing a 
3' region of a B. bigemina rap-1a gene, were generated for the testing of
luciferase activity in transiently transfected parasites. Both halves of the
ef-1α IG region tested showed the ability to promote high level production of
luciferase. Moreover, both B. bigemina ef-1α promoters are also active in
transiently transfected B. bovis and conversely, a B. bovis ef-1α promoter is
active in transiently transfected B. bigemina.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively these data demonstrate the existence of two distinct
promoters with homologous and heterologous promoter function in B. bigemina and
B. bovis which is described for the first time in Babesia species. This study is 
of significance for development of interspecies stable transfection systems for
B. bigemina and for B. bovis.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-016-1859-9 
PMCID: PMC5106780
PMID: 27835993  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

