
1. Parasit Vectors. 2016 Nov 25;9(1):608.

Structural divergence of chromosomes between malaria vectors Anopheles lesteri
and Anopheles sinensis.

Liang J(1), Cheng B(1), Zhu G(2), Wei Y(1), Tang J(2), Cao J(2), Ma Y(3),
Sharakhova MV(4)(5), Xia A(6), Sharakhov IV(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of National Health and Family Planning Commission on Parasitic 
Disease Control and Prevention, Jiangsu Provincial Key Laboratory on Parasite and
Vector Control Technology, Jiangsu Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Wuxi, Jiangsu
Province, China.
(3)Department of Tropical Infectious Diseases, Faculty of Tropical Medicine and
Public Health, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, 200433, China.
(4)Department of Entomology, Fralin Life Science Institute, Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, VA, USA.
(5)Laboratory for Ecology, Genetics and Environmental Protection, Tomsk State
University, Tomsk, Russia.
(6)Department of Entomology, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China.
xiaai@njau.edu.cn.
(7)Department of Entomology, Fralin Life Science Institute, Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, VA, USA. igor@vt.edu.
(8)Laboratory for Ecology, Genetics and Environmental Protection, Tomsk State
University, Tomsk, Russia. igor@vt.edu.

BACKGROUND: Anopheles lesteri and Anopheles sinensis are two major malaria
vectors in China and Southeast Asia. They are dramatically different in terms of 
geographical distribution, host preference, resting habitats, and other traits
associated with ecological adaptation and malaria transmission. Both species
belong to the Anopheles hyrcanus group, but the extent of genetic differences
between them is not well understood. To provide an effective way to differentiate
between species and to find useful markers for population genetics studies, we
performed a comparative cytogenetic analysis of these two malaria vectors.
RESULTS: Presented here is a standard cytogenetic map for An. lesteri, and a
comparative analysis of chromosome structure and gene order between An. lesteri
and An. sinensis. Our results demonstrate that much of the gene order on
chromosomes X and 2 was reshuffled between the two species. However, the banding 
pattern and the gene order on chromosome 3 appeared to be conserved. We also
found two new polymorphic inversions, 2Lc and 3Rb, in An. lesteri, and we mapped 
the breakpoints of these two inversions on polytene chromosomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate the extent of structural divergence of
chromosomes between An. lesteri and An. sinensis, and provide a new taxonomic
cytogenetic tool to distinguish between these two species. Polymorphic inversions
of An. lesteri could serve as markers for studies of the population structure and
ecological adaptations of this major malaria vector.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-016-1855-0 
PMCID: PMC5124334
PMID: 27887641  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

