
1. Malar J. 2016 Nov 29;15(1):575.

Characterizing the impact of sustained sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine use upon the
Plasmodium falciparum population in Malawi.

Ravenhall M(1), Benavente ED(1), Mipando M(2), Jensen AT(3), Sutherland CJ(1),
Roper C(1), Sepúlveda N(1)(4), Kwiatkowski DP(5), Montgomery J(6)(7), Phiri
KS(8), Terlouw A(6)(7), Craig A(6), Campino S(9), Ocholla H(10)(11), Clark
TG(12)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(2)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, University of Malawi, Blantyre,
Malawi.
(3)Centre for Medical Parasitology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
(4)Centre for Statistics and Applications of University of Lisbon, Lisbon,
Portugal.
(5)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK.
(6)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Pembroke Place, Liverpool, UK.
(7)Malawi-Liverpool-Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Programme, College of
Medicine, University of Malawi, Blantyre, Malawi.
(8)School of Public Health and Family Medicine, College of Medicine, University
of Malawi, Blantyre, Malawi.
(9)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, UK. susana.campino@lshtm.ac.uk.
(10)Malawi-Liverpool-Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Programme, College of
Medicine, University of Malawi, Blantyre, Malawi. harold.ocholla@gmail.com.
(11)School of Public Health and Family Medicine, College of Medicine, University 
of Malawi, Blantyre, Malawi. harold.ocholla@gmail.com.
(12)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, UK. taane.clark@lshtm.ac.uk.
(13)Faculty of Epidemiology and Population Health, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, UK. taane.clark@lshtm.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Malawi experienced prolonged use of sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine (SP) as
the front-line anti-malarial drug, with early replacement of chloroquine and
delayed introduction of artemisinin-based combination therapy. Extended use of
SP, and its continued application in pregnancy is impacting the genomic variation
of the Plasmodium falciparum population.
METHODS: Whole genome sequence data of P. falciparum isolates covering 2 years of
transmission within Malawi, alongside global datasets, were used. More than
745,000 SNPs were identified, and differences in allele frequencies between
countries assessed, as well as genetic regions under positive selection
determined.
RESULTS: Positive selection signals were identified within dhps, dhfr and gch1,
all components of the parasite folate pathway associated with SP resistance.
Sitting predominantly on a dhfr triple mutation background, a novel copy number
increase of ~twofold was identified in the gch1 promoter. This copy number was
almost fixed (96.8% frequency) in Malawi samples, but found at less than 45%
frequency in other African populations, and distinct from a whole gene
duplication previously reported in Southeast Asian parasites.
CONCLUSIONS: SP resistance selection pressures have been retained in the Malawian
population, with known resistance dhfr mutations at fixation, complemented by a
novel gch1 promoter duplication. The effects of the duplication on the fitness
costs of SP variants and resistance need to be elucidated.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-016-1634-6 
PMCID: PMC5129638
PMID: 27899115  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

