
1. PLoS Pathog. 2016 Dec 29;12(12):e1006080. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006080.
eCollection 2016 Dec.

Plasmodium falciparum Nucleosomes Exhibit Reduced Stability and Lost Sequence
Dependent Nucleosome Positioning.

Silberhorn E(1), Schwartz U(1), Löffler P(2), Schmitz S(2), Symelka A(1), de
Koning-Ward T(3), Merkl R(2), Längst G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry III; Biochemistry Centre Regensburg (BCR), University of
Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(2)Biochemistry II; Biochemistry Centre Regensburg (BCR), University of
Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(3)School of Medicine, Deakin University, Waurn Ponds, Australia.

The packaging and organization of genomic DNA into chromatin represents an
additional regulatory layer of gene expression, with specific nucleosome
positions that restrict the accessibility of regulatory DNA elements. The
mechanisms that position nucleosomes in vivo are thought to depend on the
biophysical properties of the histones, sequence patterns, like phased
di-nucleotide repeats and the architecture of the histone octamer that folds DNA 
in 1.65 tight turns. Comparative studies of human and P. falciparum histones
reveal that the latter have a strongly reduced ability to recognize internal
sequence dependent nucleosome positioning signals. In contrast, the nucleosomes
are positioned by AT-repeat sequences flanking nucleosomes in vivo and in vitro. 
Further, the strong sequence variations in the plasmodium histones, compared to
other mammalian histones, do not present adaptations to its AT-rich genome. Human
and parasite histones bind with higher affinity to GC-rich DNA and with lower
affinity to AT-rich DNA. However, the plasmodium nucleosomes are overall less
stable, with increased temperature induced mobility, decreased salt stability of 
the histones H2A and H2B and considerable reduced binding affinity to GC-rich
DNA, as compared with the human nucleosomes. In addition, we show that plasmodium
histone octamers form the shortest known nucleosome repeat length (155bp) in
vitro and in vivo. Our data suggest that the biochemical properties of the
parasite histones are distinct from the typical characteristics of other
eukaryotic histones and these properties reflect the increased accessibility of
the P. falciparum genome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006080 
PMCID: PMC5198986
PMID: 28033404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

