
1. BMC Genomics. 2017 Jan 3;18(1):6. doi: 10.1186/s12864-016-3441-4.

The transcriptome of the mosquito Aedes fluviatilis (Diptera: Culicidae), and
transcriptional changes associated with its native Wolbachia infection.

Caragata EP(1), Pais FS(2), Baton LA(1), Silva JB(1), Sorgine MH(3), Moreira
LA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Grupo Mosquitos Vetores: Endossimbiontes e Interação Patógeno Vetor, Centro de
Pesquisas René Rachou - Fiocruz, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(2)Grupo de Informática de Biossistemas e Genômica, Centro de Pesquisas René
Rachou - Fiocruz, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(3)Instituto de Bioquímica Médica, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.
(4)Grupo Mosquitos Vetores: Endossimbiontes e Interação Patógeno Vetor, Centro de
Pesquisas René Rachou - Fiocruz, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
luciano@cpqrr.fiocruz.br.

BACKGROUND: Wolbachia is a bacterial endosymbiont that naturally infects a wide
range of insect species, and causes drastic changes to host biology. Stable
infections of Wolbachia in mosquitoes can inhibit infection with medically
important pathogens such as dengue virus and malaria-causing Plasmodium
parasites. However, some native Wolbachia strains can enhance infection with
certain pathogens, as is the case for the mosquito Aedes fluviatilis, where
infection with Plasmodium gallinaceum is enhanced by the native wFlu Wolbachia
strain. To better understand the biological interactions between mosquitoes and
native Wolbachia infections, and to investigate the process of pathogen
enhancement, we used RNA-Seq to generate the transcriptome of Ae. fluviatilis
with and without Wolbachia infection.
RESULTS: In total, we generated 22,280,160 Illumina paired-end reads from
Wolbachia-infected and uninfected mosquitoes, and used these to make a de novo
transcriptome assembly, resulting in 58,013 contigs with a median sequence length
of 443 bp and an N50 of 2454 bp. Contigs were annotated through local alignments 
using BlastX, and associated with both gene ontology and KEGG orthology terms.
Through baySeq, we identified 159 contigs that were significantly upregulated due
to Wolbachia infection, and 98 that were downregulated. Critically, we saw no
changes to Toll or IMD immune gene transcription, but did see evidence that wFlu 
infection altered the expression of several bacterial recognition genes, and
immune-related genes that could influence Plasmodium infection. wFlu infection
also had a widespread effect on a number of host physiological processes
including protein, carbohydrate and lipid metabolism, and oxidative stress. We
then compared our data set with transcriptomic data for other Wolbachia
infections in Aedes aegypti, and identified a core set of 15 gene groups
associated with Wolbachia infection in mosquitoes.
CONCLUSIONS: While the scale of transcriptional changes associated with wFlu
infection might be small, the scope is rather large, which confirms that native
Wolbachia infections maintain intricate molecular relationships with their
mosquito hosts even after lengthy periods of co-evolution. We have also
identified several potential means through which wFlu infection might influence
Plasmodium infection in Ae. fluviatilis, and these genes should form the basis of
future investigation into the enhancement of Plasmodium by Wolbachia.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-016-3441-4 
PMCID: PMC5210266
PMID: 28049478  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

