
1. Insect Mol Biol. 2017 Apr;26(2):140-151. doi: 10.1111/imb.12289. Epub 2017 Jan 9.

The Anopheles gambiae transcriptome - a turning point for malaria control.

Domingos A(1)(2), Pinheiro-Silva R(1), Couto J(1), do Rosário V(1), de la Fuente 
J(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical (IHMT), Lisboa, Portugal.
(2)Global Health and Tropical Medicine (GHMT), Instituto de Higiene e Medicina
Tropical (IHMT), Lisboa, Portugal.
(3)SaBio. Instituto de Investigación de Recursos Cinegéticos,
IREC-CSIC-UCLM-JCCM, Ciudad Real, Spain.
(4)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, Center for Veterinary Health Sciences, 
Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK, USA.

Mosquitoes are important vectors of several pathogens and thereby contribute to
the spread of diseases, with social, economic and public health impacts. Amongst 
the approximately 450 species of Anopheles, about 60 are recognized as vectors of
human malaria, the most important parasitic disease. In Africa, Anopheles gambiae
is the main malaria vector mosquito. Current malaria control strategies are
largely focused on drugs and vector control measures such as insecticides and
bed-nets. Improvement of current, and the development of new, mosquito-targeted
malaria control methods rely on a better understanding of mosquito vector
biology. An organism's transcriptome is a reflection of its physiological state
and transcriptomic analyses of different conditions that are relevant to mosquito
vector competence can therefore yield important information. Transcriptomic
analyses have contributed significant information on processes such as
blood-feeding parasite-vector interaction, insecticide resistance, and tissue-
and stage-specific gene regulation, thereby facilitating the path towards the
development of new malaria control methods. Here, we discuss the main
applications of transcriptomic analyses in An. gambiae that have led to a better 
understanding of mosquito vector competence.

© 2017 The Royal Entomological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/imb.12289 
PMID: 28067439  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

