
1. Adolesc Health Med Ther. 2016 Dec 23;8:11-29. doi: 10.2147/AHMT.S94170.
eCollection 2017.

Burkitt lymphoma in adolescents and young adults: management challenges.

Dozzo M(1), Carobolante F(1), Donisi PM(2), Scattolin A(1), Maino E(1), Sancetta 
R(1), Viero P(1), Bassan R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Complex Operative Unit of Hematology, Ospedale dell'Angelo.
(2)Simple Departmental Operative Unit of Anatomic Pathology, Ospedale Ss.
Giovanni e Paolo, Venice, Italy.

About one-half of all Burkitt lymphoma (BL) patients are younger than 40 years,
and one-third belong to the adolescent and young adult (AYA) subset, defined by
an age between 15 and 25-40 years, based on selection criteria used in different 
reports. BL is an aggressive B-cell neoplasm displaying highly characteristic
clinico-diagnostic features, the biologic hallmark of which is a translocation
involving immunoglobulin and c-MYC genes. It presents as sporadic, endemic, or
epidemic disease. Endemicity is pathogenetically linked to an imbalance of the
immune system which occurs in African children infected by malaria parasites and 
Epstein-Barr virus, while the epidemic form strictly follows the pattern of
infection by HIV. BL shows propensity to extranodal involvement of abdominal
organs, bone marrow, and central nervous system, and can cause severe metabolic
and renal impairment. Nevertheless, BL is highly responsive to specifically
designed short-intensive, rotational multiagent chemotherapy programs, empowered 
by the anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody rituximab. When carefully applied with
appropriate supportive measures, these modern programs achieve a cure rate of
approximately 90% in the average AYA patient, irrespective of clinical stage,
which is the best result achievable in any aggressive lymphoid malignancy to
date. The challenges ahead concern the following: optimization of management in
underdeveloped countries, with reduction of diagnostic and referral-for-care
intervals, and the applicability of currently curative regimens; the development 
of lower intensity but equally effective treatments for frail or
immunocompromised patients at risk of death by complications; the identification 
of very high-risk patients through positron-emission tomography and minimal
residual disease assays; and the assessment in these and the few
refractory/relapsed ones of new monoclonals (ofatumumab, blinatumomab, inotuzumab
ozogamicin) and new molecules targeting c-MYC and key proliferative steps of
B-cell malignancies.

DOI: 10.2147/AHMT.S94170 
PMCID: PMC5207020
PMID: 28096698 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.

