
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2017 Jan 24;14(2). pii: E111. doi:
10.3390/ijerph14020111.

Malpighian Tubules as Novel Targets for Mosquito Control.

Piermarini PM(1), Esquivel CJ(2), Denton JS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Ohio Agricultural Research and Development Center,
The Ohio State University, Wooster, OH 44691, USA. piermarini.1@osu.edu.
(2)Department of Entomology, Ohio Agricultural Research and Development Center,
The Ohio State University, Wooster, OH 44691, USA.
esquivelpalma.1@buckeyemail.osu.edu.
(3)Departments of Anesthesiology and Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. jerod.s.denton@Vanderbilt.Edu.

The Malpighian tubules and hindgut are the renal excretory tissues of mosquitoes;
they are essential to maintaining hemolymph water and solute homeostasis.
Moreover, they make important contributions to detoxifying metabolic wastes and
xenobiotics in the hemolymph. We have focused on elucidating the molecular
mechanisms of Malpighian tubule function in adult female mosquitoes and
developing chemical tools as prototypes for next-generation mosquitocides that
would act via a novel mechanism of action (i.e., renal failure). To date, we have
targeted inward rectifier potassium (Kir) channels expressed in the Malpighian
tubules of the yellow fever mosquito Aedes aegypti and malaria mosquito Anopheles
gambiae. Inhibition of these channels with small molecules inhibits
transepithelial K⁺ and fluid secretion in Malpighian tubules, leading to a
disruption of hemolymph K⁺ and fluid homeostasis in adult female mosquitoes. In
addition, we have used next-generation sequencing to characterize the
transcriptome of Malpighian tubules in the Asian tiger mosquito Aedes albopictus,
before and after blood meals, to reveal new molecular targets for potentially
disrupting Malpighian tubule function. Within 24 h after a blood meal, the
Malpighian tubules enhance the mRNA expression of genes encoding mechanisms
involved with the detoxification of metabolic wastes produced during blood
digestion (e.g., heme, NH₃, reactive oxygen species). The development of chemical
tools targeting these molecular mechanisms in Malpighian tubules may offer a
promising avenue for the development of mosquitocides that are highly-selective
against hematophagous females, which are the only life stage that transmits
pathogens.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph14020111 
PMCID: PMC5334665
PMID: 28125032  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

