
1. Vaccine. 2017 Feb 22;35(8):1140-1147. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.01.016. Epub
2017 Jan 25.

Novel adenovirus encoded virus-like particles displaying the placental malaria
associated VAR2CSA antigen.

Andersson AC(1), Resende M(2), Salanti A(3), Nielsen MA(4), Holst PJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Parasitology at Department of Immunology and Microbiology, 
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen and at
Department of Infectious Diseases, Copenhagen University Hospital
(Rigshospitalet), Denmark. Electronic address: anmaca.andersson@gmail.com.
(2)Centre for Medical Parasitology at Department of Immunology and Microbiology, 
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen and at
Department of Infectious Diseases, Copenhagen University Hospital
(Rigshospitalet), Denmark. Electronic address: mafaldaresende@gmail.com.
(3)Centre for Medical Parasitology at Department of Immunology and Microbiology, 
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen and at
Department of Infectious Diseases, Copenhagen University Hospital
(Rigshospitalet), Denmark. Electronic address: salanti@sund.ku.dk.
(4)Centre for Medical Parasitology at Department of Immunology and Microbiology, 
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen and at
Department of Infectious Diseases, Copenhagen University Hospital
(Rigshospitalet), Denmark. Electronic address: mortenn@sund.ku.dk.
(5)Centre for Medical Parasitology at Department of Immunology and Microbiology, 
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen and at
Department of Infectious Diseases, Copenhagen University Hospital
(Rigshospitalet), Denmark. Electronic address: pholst@sund.ku.dk.

The malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum presents antigens on the infected
erythrocyte surface that bind human receptors expressed on the vascular
endothelium. The VAR2CSA mediated binding to a distinct chondroitin sulphate A
(CSA) is a crucial step in the pathophysiology of placental malaria and the CSA
binding region of VAR2CSA has been identified as a promising vaccine target
against placental malaria. Here we designed adenovirus encoded virus-like
particles (VLP) by co-encoding Simian Immunodeficiency Virus (SIV) gag and
VAR2CSA. The VAR2CSA antigen was fused to the transmembrane (TM) and cytoplasmic 
tail (CT) domains of either the envelope protein of mouse mammary tumour virus
(MMTV) or the hemagglutinin (HA) of influenza A. For a non-VLP incorporation
control, a third design was made where VAR2CSA was expressed without TM-CT
domains. In the primary immunogenicity study in Balb/c mice, VAR2CSA fused to HA 
TM-CT was significantly superior in inducing ID1-ID2a specific antibodies after
the first immunization. A sequential study was performed to include a comparison 
to the soluble VAR2CSA protein vaccine, which has entered a phase I clinical
trial (NCT02647489). The results revealed the induction of higher antibody
responses and increased inhibition of parasite binding to CSA using either
VAR2CSA HA TM-CT or VAR2CSA MMTV TM-CT as priming vaccines for protein
double-boost immunizations, compared to protein prime-double boost regimen.
Analysis of pooled serum samples on peptide arrays revealed a unique targeting of
several epitopes in mice that had been primed with VAR2CSA HA TM-CT.
Consequently, modification of VLP anchors is an important point of optimization
in virus-encoded retroviral VLP-based vaccines, and adenovirus VLPs boosted by
recombinant proteins offer hope of increasing the levels of protective VAR2CSA
specific antibodies.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.01.016 
PMID: 28131394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

