
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Feb 24;7:43190. doi: 10.1038/srep43190.

Epitopes of anti-RIFIN antibodies and characterization of rif-expressing
Plasmodium falciparum parasites by RNA sequencing.

Ch'ng JH(1)(2), Sirel M(1), Zandian A(3), Del Pilar Quintana M(1), Chun Leung
Chan S(1), Moll K(1), Tellgren-Roth A(4), Nilsson I(4), Nilsson P(3), Qundos
U(3), Wahlgren M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology (MTC), Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, National University of Singapore,
Singapore.
(3)Affinity Proteomics, Science for Life Laboratory, School of Biotechnology,
Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Center for Biomembrane Research, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics,
Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.

Variable surface antigens of Plasmodium falciparum have been a major research
focus since they facilitate parasite sequestration and give rise to deadly
malaria complications. Coupled with its potential use as a vaccine candidate, the
recent suggestion that the repetitive interspersed families of polypeptides
(RIFINs) mediate blood group A rosetting and influence blood group distribution
has raised the research profile of these adhesins. Nevertheless, detailed
investigations into the functions of this highly diverse multigene family remain 
hampered by the limited number of validated reagents. In this study, we assess
the specificities of three promising polyclonal anti-RIFIN antibodies that were
IgG-purified from sera of immunized animals. Their epitope regions were mapped
using a 175,000-peptide microarray holding overlapping peptides of the P.
falciparum variable surface antigens. Through immunoblotting and
immunofluorescence imaging, we show that different antibodies give varying
results in different applications/assays. Finally, we authenticate the
antibody-based detection of RIFINs in two previously uncharacterized
non-rosetting parasite lines by identifying the dominant rif transcripts using
RNA sequencing.

DOI: 10.1038/srep43190 
PMCID: PMC5324397
PMID: 28233866  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

