
1. BMC Genomics. 2017 Feb 27;18(1):205. doi: 10.1186/s12864-017-3590-0.

Genome content analysis yields new insights into the relationship between the
human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum and its anopheline vectors.

Oppenheim SJ(1), Rosenfeld JA(2)(3), DeSalle R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Sackler Institute for Comparative Genomics, American Museum of Natural
History, New York, NY, 10024, USA. soppenheim@amnh.org.
(2)Sackler Institute for Comparative Genomics, American Museum of Natural
History, New York, NY, 10024, USA.
(3)Cancer Institute of New Jersey, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, USA.

BACKGROUND: The persistent and growing gap between the availability of sequenced 
genomes and the ability to assign functions to sequenced genes led us to explore 
ways to maximize the information content of automated annotation for studies of
anopheline mosquitos. Specifically, we use genome content analysis of a large
number of previously sequenced anopheline mosquitos to follow the loss and gain
of protein families over the evolutionary history of this group. The importance
of this endeavor lies in the potential for comparative genomic studies between
Anopheles and closely related non-vector species to reveal ancestral genome
content dynamics involved in vector competence. In addition, comparisons within
Anopheles could identify genome content changes responsible for variation in the 
vectorial capacity of this family of important parasite vectors.
RESULTS: The competence and capacity of P. falciparum vectors do not appear to be
phylogenetically constrained within the Anophelinae. Instead, using ancestral
reconstruction methods, we suggest that a previously unexamined component of
vector biology, anopheline nucleotide metabolism, may contribute to the unique
status of anophelines as P. falciparum vectors. While the fitness effects of
nucleotide co-option by P. falciparum parasites on their anopheline hosts are not
yet known, our results suggest that anopheline genome content may be responding
to selection pressure from P. falciparum. Whether this response is defensive, in 
an attempt to redress improper nucleotide balance resulting from P. falciparum
infection, or perhaps symbiotic, resulting from an as-yet-unknown mutualism
between anophelines and P. falciparum, is an open question that deserves further 
study.
CONCLUSIONS: Clearly, there is a wealth of functional information to be gained
from detailed manual genome annotation, yet the rapid increase in the number of
available sequences means that most researchers will not have the time or
resources to manually annotate all the sequence data they generate. We believe
that efforts to maximize the amount of information obtained from automated
annotation can help address the functional annotation deficit that most
evolutionary biologists now face, and here demonstrate the value of such an
approach.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-017-3590-0 
PMCID: PMC5327517
PMID: 28241792  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

