
1. Semin Cancer Biol. 2017 Oct;46:65-83. doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2017.02.009. Epub 
2017 Feb 28.

From ancient herb to modern drug: Artemisia annua and artemisinin for cancer
therapy.

Efferth T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Johannes Gutenberg University, Institute of Pharmacy and Biochemistry,
Department of Pharmaceutical Biology, Staudinger Weg 5, 55128 Mainz, Germany.
Electronic address: efferth@uni-mainz.de.

Artemisia annua L. is used throughout Asia and Africa as tea and press juice to
treat malaria and related symptomes (fever, chills). Its active ingredient,
artemisinin (ARS), has been developed as antimalarial drug and is used worldwide.
Interestingly, the bioactivity is not restricted to malaria treatment. We and
others found that ARS-type drugs also reveal anticancer in vitro and in vivo. In 
this review, we give a systematic overview of the literature published over the
past two decades until the end of 2016. Like other natural products, ARS acts in 
a multi-specific manner against tumors. The cellular response of ARS and its
derivatives (dihydroartemisinin, artesunate, artemether, arteether) towards
cancer cells include oxidative stress response by reactive oxygen species and
nitric oxide, DNA damage and repair (base excision repair, homologous
recombination, non-homologous end-joining), various cell death modes (apoptosis, 
autophagy, ferroptosis, necrosis, necroptosis, oncosis), inhibition of
angiogenesis and tumor-related signal transduction pathways (e.g. Wnt/β-catenin
pathway, AMPK pathway, metastatic pathways, and others) and signal transducers
(NF-κB, MYC/MAX, AP-1, CREBP, mTOR etc). ARS-type drugs are at the stairways to
the clinics. Several published case reports and pilot phase I/II trials indicate 
clinical anticancer activity of these compounds. Because of unexpected cases of
hepatotoxicity, combinations of ARS-type drugs with complementary and alternative
medicines are not recommended, until controlled clinical trials will prove the
safety of non-approved combination treatments.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2017.02.009 
PMID: 28254675  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

