
1. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2017 Jan;51(1):41-51.

[Production and molecular characterization of Plasmodium falciparum recombinant
circumsporozoite protein with 37 NANP and 4 NVDP epitopes].

[Article in Turkish]

Uyar Y(1), Akşit A, Karaca S, Ceylan ŞS, Yürük M.

Author information: 
(1)Turkish Red Crescent Blood Donation Center, Kayseri, Turkey.
dryunusuyar@yahoo.com.

Malaria is caused by the protozoan parasite Plasmodium, the leading cause of
death amongst the parasitic diseases. The disease is transmitted to human by the 
bites of female Anopheles mosquitoes. According to the World Health Organization 
(WHO) data, there were an estimated 214 million malaria cases and estimated
438.000 deaths occurred worldwide, in 2015. It is observed that 90% of all the
deaths due to malaria occur in Africa. 78% of these cases were children who are
under five years old. Intensive malaria interventions helped to reduce malaria
incidence by 37% between 2000 and 2015. Malaria is a curable disease if diagnosed
and treated promptly and correctly. Drug resistance has developed against almost 
all anti-malarial drugs and an effective vaccine against malaria has not been
developed yet. Vaccine studies initiated 40 years ago by sterile immunity against
falciparum malaria through immunization by exposure to 1000 irradiated
mosquitoes. Complex structures, complicated life cycles and various antigenic
structures of Plasmodium species make vaccination studies difficult.
Circumsporozoite protein (CSP), the most extensively studied protein is also
present in the content of the vaccine candidate RTS,S which is currently closest 
to get license. CSP was the first described Plasmodium antigen because of its
important role during initiation of the parasitic infection. CSP is the major
surface coat protein of Plasmodium parasite. CSP is a soluble protein and
recombinant form of the CSP can be produced in Escherichia coli. NANP repeat
region is a target site for host antibodies. Recently many DNA, RNA and protein
vaccine candidates are being developed against malaria. According to WHO, in the 
next 20 years period, malaria vaccine can be developed. In this study we aimed to
produce recombinant CSP (rCSP). Initially, P.falciparum CSP gene was amplified by
PCR. CSP gene was cloned in to the pJET cloning vector. The gene subcloned to the
pET100 protein expression vector. E.coli cells were used for protein expression. 
After this process, purification and endotoxin removal protocols were performed. 
As a result, 1182 bp CSP gene was obtained from P.falciparum genomic DNA.
Accuracy of cloning and DNA sequence of the CSP gene was determined with DNA
sequence analysis. The gene sequence was recorded to the GenBank with a
registration no KT315396. rCSP was expressed in E.coli cells. The existence of
rCSP was verifiedwith Western Blot method and was purified and removed from
endotoxins. rCSP aminoacid sequence and 3D shape was obtained.We believe that the
production of recombinant CSP will enable us to contribute to the further malaria
vaccine studies in our laboratory and country.

DOI: 10.5578/mb.46549 
PMID: 28283009  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

