
1. Microb Pathog. 2017 Jun;107:69-74. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2017.03.017. Epub 2017 
Mar 21.

Oxidative stress and genes regulation of cerebral malaria upon Zizyphus
spina-christi treatment in a murine model.

Mubaraki MA(1), Hafiz TA(2), Al-Quraishy S(3), Dkhil MA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Laboratory Sciences Department, College of Applied Medical Sciences, 
King Saud University, Saudi Arabia. Electronic address: mmubaraki@ksu.edu.sa.
(2)Clinical Laboratory Sciences Department, College of Applied Medical Sciences, 
King Saud University, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University, Saudi Arabia;
Department of Zoology and Entomology, Faculty of Science, Helwan University,
Egypt.

The development and spread of multidrug-resistant strains of malarial parasites
have led to an overwhelming increase in the resistance to current antimalarial
drugs. The urgent need for alternative antimalarial drugs has directed some of
the current studies toward folkloric medicine approaches. Interestingly, the
Zizyphus spina Cristi leaf extract (ZLE) has been found to exhibit antiplasmodial
activity. This study evaluated the protective effect of ZLE against Plasmodium
berghei-induced cerebral tissue injuries in mice. Male C57Bl/6 mice received an
injection of P. berghei-infected red blood cells. Mice were divided into three
groups (control, infected, and ZLE-treated), and were subjected to histological, 
biochemical, and molecular analyses. Murine malaria infections induced
significant weight loss; however, upon ZLE treatment, the weight of mice was
markedly restored. Additionally, infected mice showed brain histopathological
changes and induction of oxidative damage. Significantly, ZLE treatment restored 
the levels of oxidative markers and antioxidant enzyme to the normal ranges. The 
mRNA expression of several genes in the brain of mice including Cacnb4, Adam23,
Glrb, Vdac3, and Cabp1 was significantly upregulated during P. berghei infection.
In contrast, ZLE markedly reduced the mRNA expression of these genes. To
conclude, the results indicate that ZLE could play an important role in reducing 
the destructive effect of P. berghei-induced cerebral malaria owing to its
antiplasmodial and antioxidant activities.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2017.03.017 
PMID: 28336326  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

