
1. Microb Cell. 2016 Aug 30;3(10):511-521. doi: 10.15698/mic2016.10.534.

Phylogenetic profiles of all membrane transport proteins of the malaria parasite 
highlight new drug targets

Weiner J(1), Kooij TW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Berlin, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology & Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular
Informatics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University
Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

In order to combat the on-going malaria epidemic, discovery of new drug targets
remains vital. Proteins that are essential to survival and specific to malaria
parasites are key candidates. To survive within host cells, the parasites need to
acquire nutrients and dispose of waste products across multiple membranes.
Additionally, like all eukaryotes, they must redistribute ions and organic
molecules between their various internal membrane bound compartments. Membrane
transport proteins mediate all of these processes and are considered important
mediators of drug resistance as well as drug targets in their own right.
Recently, using advanced experimental genetic approaches and streamlined life
cycle profiling, we generated a large collection of Plasmodium berghei gene
deletion mutants and assigned essential gene functions, highlighting potential
targets for prophylactic, therapeutic, and transmission-blocking anti-malarial
drugs. Here, we present a comprehensive orthology assignment of all Plasmodium
falciparum putative membrane transport proteins and provide a detailed overview
of the associated essential gene functions obtained through experimental genetics
studies in human and murine model parasites. Furthermore, we discuss the
phylogeny of selected potential drug targets identified in our functional screen.
We extensively discuss the results in the context of the functional assignments
obtained using gene targeting available to date.

DOI: 10.15698/mic2016.10.534 
PMCID: PMC5348985
PMID: 28357319 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare no
existing conflicts of interest.

