
1. Front Microbiol. 2017 Mar 28;8:501. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00501. eCollection
2017.

Human and Epstein-Barr Virus miRNA Profiling as Predictive Biomarkers for Endemic
Burkitt Lymphoma.

Oduor CI(1), Movassagh M(2), Kaymaz Y(2), Chelimo K(3), Otieno J(4), Ong'echa
JM(5), Moormann AM(6), Bailey JA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Global Health Research, Kenya Medical Research InstituteKisumu,
Kenya; Department of Biomedical Sciences and Technology, Maseno UniversityMaseno,
Kenya.
(2)Program in Bioinformatics and Integrative Biology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School Worcester, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Technology, Maseno University Maseno,
Kenya.
(4)Jaramogi Oginga Odinga Teaching and Referral Hospital, Ministry of Medical
Services Kisumu, Kenya.
(5)Center for Global Health Research, Kenya Medical Research Institute Kisumu,
Kenya.
(6)Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School
Worcester, MA, USA.
(7)Program in Bioinformatics and Integrative Biology, University of Massachusetts
Medical SchoolWorcester, MA, USA; Division of Transfusion Medicine, Department of
Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical SchoolWorcester, MA, USA.

Endemic Burkitt lymphoma (eBL) is an aggressive B cell lymphoma and is associated
with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and Plasmodium falciparum malaria co-infections.
Central to BL oncogenesis is the over-expression of the MYC proto-oncogene which 
is caused by a translocation of an Ig enhancer in approximation to the myc gene. 
While whole genome/transcriptome sequencing methods have been used to define
driver mutations and transcriptional dysregulation, microRNA (miRNA)
dysregulation and differential expression has yet to be fully characterized. We
hypothesized that both human and EBV miRNAs contribute to eBL clinical
presentation, disease progression, and poor outcomes. Using sensitive and precise
deep sequencing, we identified miRNAs from 17 Kenyan eBL patient tumor samples
and delineated the complement of both host and EBV miRNAs. One human miRNA,
hsa-miR-10a-5p was found to be differentially expressed (DE), being
down-regulated in jaw tumors relative to abdominal and in non-survivors compared 
to survivors. We also examined EBV miRNAs, which made up 2.7% of the miRNA
composition in the eBL samples. However, we did not find any significant
associations regarding initial patient outcome or anatomical presentation. Gene
ontology analysis and pathway enrichment of previously validated targets of
miR-10a-5p suggest that it can promote tumor cell survival as well as aid in
evasion of apoptosis. To examine miR-10a-5p regulatory effect on gene expression 
in eBL, we performed a pairwise correlation coefficient analysis on the
expression levels of all its validated targets. We found a significant enrichment
of correlated target genes consistent with miR-10a-5p impacting expression. The
functions of genes and their correlation fit with multiple target genes impacting
tumor resilience. The observed downregulation of miR-10a and associated genes
suggests a role for miRNA in eBL patient outcomes and has potential as a
predictive biomarker that warrants further investigation.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00501 
PMCID: PMC5368269
PMID: 28400759 

