
1. J Infect Dis. 2017 Mar 15;215(6):938-945. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jix053.

Expression of the Plasmodium falciparum Clonally Variant clag3 Genes in Human
Infections.

Mira-Martínez S(1)(2), van Schuppen E(2), Amambua-Ngwa A(3), Bottieau E(1),
Affara M(3), Van Esbroeck M(1), Vlieghe E(1), Guetens P(1), Rovira-Graells N(2), 
Gómez-Pérez GP(2), Alonso PL(2), D'Alessandro U(1)(3)(4), Rosanas-Urgell A(1),
Cortés A(2)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium.
(2)Barcelona Institute for Global Health (ISGlobal), Barcelona Ctr. Int. Health
Res. (CRESIB), Hospital Clínic - Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Medical Research Council Unit, Fajara, The Gambia.
(4)London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, United Kingdom.
(5)ICREA, Barcelona, Spain.

Background: Many genes of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum show
clonally variant expression regulated at the epigenetic level. These genes
participate in fundamental host-parasite interactions and contribute to adaptive 
processes. However, little is known about their expression patterns during human 
infections. A peculiar case of clonally variant genes are the 2 nearly identical 
clag3 genes, clag3.1 and clag3.2, which mediate nutrient uptake and are linked to
resistance to some toxic compounds.
Methods: We developed a procedure to characterize the expression of clag3 genes
in naturally infected patients and in experimentally infected human volunteers.
Results: We provide the first description of clag3 expression during human
infections, which revealed mutually exclusive expression and identified the gene 
predominantly expressed. Adaptation to culture conditions or selection with a
toxic compound resulted in isolate-dependent changes in clag3 expression. We also
found that clag3 expression patterns were reset during transmission stages.
Conclusions: Different environment conditions select for parasites with different
clag3 expression patterns, implying functional differences between the proteins
encoded. The epigenetic memory is likely erased before parasites start infection 
of a new human host. Altogether, our findings support the idea that clonally
variant genes facilitate the adaptation of parasite populations to changing
conditions through bet-hedging strategies.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jix053 
PMCID: PMC5407054
PMID: 28419281  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

