
1. Parasit Vectors. 2017 Apr 26;10(1):203. doi: 10.1186/s13071-017-2133-5.

Molecular identification of Plasmodium spp. and blood meal sources of anophelines
in environmental reserves on São Luís Island, state of Maranhão, Brazil.

Figueiredo MAP(1), Di Santi SM(2), Manrique WG(3), Gonçalves LR(1), André MR(1), 
Machado RZ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Immunoparasitology Laboratory, School of Agrarian and Veterinary Sciences
(FCAV), Universidade Estadual Paulista (UNESP) Jaboticabal Campus, Jaboticabal,
SP, Brazil.
(2)Center for Malaria Studies, Superintendence of Control of Endemic Diseases,
State Secretariat of Health of São Paulo/Institute of Tropical Medicine of São
Paulo (IMT-SP), University of São Paulo (USP), São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(3)Veterinary Pathology Laboratory, Brazil University, Descalvado Campus,
Descalvado, SP, Brazil.
(4)Immunoparasitology Laboratory, School of Agrarian and Veterinary Sciences
(FCAV), Universidade Estadual Paulista (UNESP) Jaboticabal Campus, Jaboticabal,
SP, Brazil. zacarias@fcav.unesp.br.

BACKGROUND: Considering the diversity of feeding habits that females of some
species of anophelines present, it is important to understand which vertebrates
are part of blood food sources and how important is the role of each in the
ecoepidemiology of malaria. There are many vector species for Plasmodium spp. in 
the State of Maranhão, Brazil. In São Luís Island, Anopheles aquasalis is the
main vector for human malaria; this species is abundant in areas with primates
that are positive for Plasmodium. Anopheles aquasalis has natural exophilic and
zoophilic feeding behavior, but in cases of high density and absence of animals, 
presents quite varied behavior, and feeds on human blood. In this context, the
objective of the present study was to identify Plasmodium spp. and the blood meal
sources of anophelines in two environmental reserves on São Luís Island, state of
Maranhão, using molecular methods.
METHODS: Between June and July 2013, female anophelines were collected in the
Sítio Aguahy Private Reserve, in the municipality of São José de Ribamar, and in 
the Sítio Mangalho Reserve, located within the Maracanã Environmental Protection 
Area, in the municipality of São Luís. CDC-type light traps, Shannon traps and
protected human bait were used during three consecutive hours in peridomestic and
wooded areas. Pools of anophelines were formed using mosquitoes of the same
species that had been caught at the same site on the same date. A genus-specific 
amplification protocol based on the 18S rRNA gene was used for qPCR and cPCR.
RESULTS: A total of 416 anophelines were collected, of the following species: An.
aquasalis (399), An. mediopunctatus (3), An. shannoni (1), An. nuneztovari (sensu
lato) (1), An. goeldii (1), An. evansae (2) and An. (Nyssorhynchus) sp. (9),
comprising 54 pools. Two pools were positive for Plasmodium (2/54) based on the
18S rRNA gene. In the phylogenetic analysis using the maximum likelihood method, 
based on a 240 bp fragment of the 18S rRNA gene, it was found that the sequences 
of Plasmodium sp. amplified from pools of An. aquasalis (pool 2) and An.
nuneztovari (s.l.) (pool 10) were phylogenetically related to a clade of P.
falciparum isolates from India, and to a clade of Plasmodium sp. isolates from
psittacines in Brazil, respectively. Cat, dog and human DNA were identified in
the blood meals of the anophelines sampled.
CONCLUSION: The species An. aquasalis was the most abundant anopheline species in
São Luís Island. Plasmodium spp. DNA was detected, thus confirming the importance
of this species as the main vector on São Luís Island, Brazil. In addition, the
presence of An. nuneztovari (s.l.) with DNA positive for Plasmodium spp. confirms
its importance as a secondary vector.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-017-2133-5 
PMCID: PMC5405462
PMID: 28441969  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

