
1. Malar J. 2017 Apr 28;16(1):179. doi: 10.1186/s12936-017-1831-y.

Increase in the prevalence of mutations associated with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine
resistance in Plasmodium falciparum isolates collected from early to late
pregnancy in Nanoro, Burkina Faso.

Ruizendaal E(1), Tahita MC(2), Geskus RB(3)(4), Versteeg I(5), Scott S(6)(7),
d'Alessandro U(7)(8), Lompo P(2), Derra K(2), Traore-Coulibaly M(2), de Jong
MD(9), Schallig HDFH(9), Tinto H(2), Mens PF(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. esmee.ruizendaal@gmail.com.
(2)Institut de Recherche en Sciences de la Santé-Unité de Recherche Clinique de
Nanoro, (IRSS-URCN), Nanoro, Burkina Faso.
(3)Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Biostatistic and Bioinformatics, Academic
Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Oxford University Clinical Research Unit, Wellcome Trust Major Overseas
Programme, Ho Chi Minh City, Viet Nam.
(5)Koninklijk Instituut voor de Tropen, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(7)Disease Control and Elimination, Medical Research Council Unit, Fajara,
Gambia.
(8)Department of Disease Control, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases,
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(9)Department of Medical Microbiology, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Pregnant women are a high-risk group for Plasmodium falciparum
infections, which may result in maternal anaemia and low birth weight newborns,
among other adverse birth outcomes. Intermittent preventive treatment with
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine during pregnancy (IPTp-SP) is widely implemented to
prevent these negative effects of malaria. However, resistance against SP by P.
falciparum may decrease efficacy of IPTp-SP. Combinations of point mutations in
the dhps (codons A437, K540) and dhfr genes (codons N51, C59, S108) of P.
falciparum are associated with SP resistance. In this study the prevalence of SP 
resistance mutations was determined among P. falciparum found in pregnant women
and the general population (GP) from Nanoro, Burkina Faso and the association of 
IPTp-SP dosing and other variables with mutations was studied.
METHODS: Blood spots on filter papers were collected from pregnant women at their
first antenatal care visit (ANC booking) and at delivery, from an ongoing trial
and from the GP in a cross-sectional survey. The dhps and dhfr genes were
amplified by nested PCR and products were sequenced to identify mutations
conferring resistance (ANC booking, n = 400; delivery, n = 223; GP, n = 400).
Prevalence was estimated with generalized estimating equations and for
multivariate analyses mixed effects logistic regression was used.
RESULTS: The prevalence of the triple dhfr mutation was high, and significantly
higher in the GP and at delivery than at ANC booking, but it did not affect birth
weight. Furthermore, quintuple mutations (triple dhfr and double dhps mutations) 
were found for the first time in Burkina Faso. IPTp-SP did not significantly
affect the occurrence of any of the mutations, but high transmission season was
associated with increased mutation prevalence in delivery samples. It is unclear 
why the prevalence of mutations was higher in the GP than in pregnant women at
ANC booking.
CONCLUSION: The high number of mutants and the presence of quintuple mutants in
Burkina Faso confirm concerns about the efficacy of IPTp-SP in the near future.
Other drug combinations to tackle malaria in pregnancy should, therefore, be
explored. An increase in mutation prevalence due to IPTp-SP dosing could not be
confirmed.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-017-1831-y 
PMCID: PMC5410088
PMID: 28454537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

