
1. J Pak Med Assoc. 2017 May;67(5):677-681.

Amplification of Mitochondrial DNA for detection of Plasmodiumvivax in
Balochistan.

Shahwani MN(1), Nisar S(1), Aleem A(1), Panezai M(1), Afridi S(1), Malik SI(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Life Sciences and Informatics (FLS&I),
Balochistan University of Information Technology, Engineering and Management
Sciences (BUITEMS), Quetta, Balochistan, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Bioinformatics & Biological Sciences, Capital University of
Science & Technology, Expressway, Islamabad, Pakistan.

OBJECTIVE: To access a new step using PCR to amplify the targeted mtDNA sequence 
for detecting specifically Plasmodium vivax and its co-infections, false positive
and false negative results with Plasmodium falciparum.
METHODS: In this study we have standardized a new technical approach in which the
target mitochondrial DNA sequence (mtDNA) was amplified by using a PCR technique 
as a tool to detect Plasmodium spp. Species specific primers were designed to
hybridize with cytochrome c oxidase gene of P. vivax (cox I) and P. falciparum
(cox III). Two hundred blood samples were collected on the basis of clinical
symptoms which were initially examined through microscopic analysis after
preparing Giemsa stained thick and thin blood smears. Afterwards genomic DNA was 
extracted from all samples and was then subjected to PCR amplification by using
species specific primers and amplified segments were sequenced for confirmation
of results.
RESULTS: One-hundred and thirty-two blood samples were detected as positive for
malaria by PCR, out of which 64 were found to be positive by PCR and 53 by both
microscopy and PCR for P.vivax infection. Nine samples were found to be false
negative, one P.vivax mono infection was declared as co infection by PCR and 3
samples identified as having P.falciparum gametes were confirmed as P.vivax by
PCR amplification. Sensitivity and specificity were found to be 85% and 92%
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Results obtained through PCR method were comparatively better and
reliable than microscopy.


PMID: 28507350  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

