
1. Mol Cell Probes. 2017 Oct;35:20-26. doi: 10.1016/j.mcp.2017.06.001. Epub 2017 Jun
3.

Duffy blood group system: New genotyping method and distribution in a Brazilian
extra-Amazonian population.

Martins ML(1), da Silva AR(2), Santos HC(3), Alves MT(1), Schmidt LC(1),
Vertchenko SB(1), Dusse LMS(4), Silva Malta MCFD(5).

Author information: 
(1)Fundação Centro de Hematologia e Hemoterapia de Minas Gerais - Hemominas, MG, 
Brazil.
(2)Fundação Centro de Hematologia e Hemoterapia de Minas Gerais - Hemominas, MG, 
Brazil; Department of Clinical and Toxicological Analysis, Faculty of Pharmacy - 
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(3)Laboratório de Genética e Cardiologia Molecular, Instituto do Coração,
Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Department of Clinical and Toxicological Analysis, Faculty of Pharmacy -
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(5)Fundação Centro de Hematologia e Hemoterapia de Minas Gerais - Hemominas, MG, 
Brazil. Electronic address: maria.malta@hemominas.mg.gov.br.

Duffy blood group system is of interest in several fields of science including
transfusion medicine, immunology and malariology. Although some methods have been
developed for Duffy polymorphism genotyping, not all of them have been
sufficiently described and validated, and all present limitations. At the same
time, the frequency of Duffy alleles and antigens in some densely populated
regions of the world are still missing. In this study we present new tests for
genotyping the major alleles of the Duffy blood system and describe Duffy alleles
and antigens in blood donors and transfusion-dependent patients in Minas Gerais, 
Brazil. A simple and reproducible strategy was devised for Duffy genotyping based
on real-time PCR that included SNPs rs12075 and rs2814778. No significant
differences between the allele frequencies were observed comparing blood donors
and patients. Among the blood donors, the phenotype Fy(a-b+) was the most common 
and the Fy(a-b-) phenotype, associated with populations of African descent, was
remarkably less common among subjects who self-identified as black in comparison 
to other ethnoracial categories. However, the African ancestry estimated by
molecular markers was significantly higher in individuals with the allele
associated to the Duffy null phenotype. The genotyping method presented may be
useful to study Duffy genotypes accurately in different contexts and populations.
The results suggest a reduced risk of alloimmunization for Duffy antigens and
increased susceptibility for malaria in Minas Gerais, considering the high
frequency of Duffy-positive individuals.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcp.2017.06.001 
PMID: 28587995  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

