
1. Malar J. 2017 Jun 15;16(1):253. doi: 10.1186/s12936-017-1889-6.

G6PD deficiency alleles in a malaria-endemic region in the Western Brazilian
Amazon.

Dombrowski JG(1), Souza RM(1)(2), Curry J(3), Hinton L(3), Silva NRM(1), Grignard
L(4), Gonçalves LA(1), Gomes AR(4), Epiphanio S(5), Drakeley C(4), Huggett
J(6)(7), Clark TG(4)(8), Campino S(9), Marinho CRF(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of
São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Multidisciplinary Center, Federal University of Acre, Acre, Brazil.
(3)LGC Genomics, Hoddesdon, Hertfordshire, UK.
(4)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(5)Department of Clinical and Toxicological Analyses, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Molecular and Cell Biology, LGC, Teddington, Middlesex, UK.
(7)School of Biosciences & Medicine, Faculty of Health & Medical Sciences,
University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey, UK.
(8)Faculty of Epidemiology and Population Health, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(9)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, UK. Susana.Campino@lshtm.ac.uk.
(10)Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of
São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. marinho@usp.br.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium vivax parasites are the predominant cause of malaria
infections in the Brazilian Amazon. Infected individuals are treated with
primaquine, which can induce haemolytic anaemia in glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase (G6PD)-deficient individuals and may lead to severe and fatal
complications. This X-linked disorder is distributed globally and is caused by
allelic variants with a geographical distribution that closely reflects
populations exposed historically to endemic malaria. In Brazil, few studies have 
reported the frequency of G6PD deficiency (G6PDd) present in malaria-endemic
areas. This is particularly important, as G6PDd screening is not currently
performed before primaquine treatment. The aim of this study was to determine the
prevalence of G6PDd in the region of Alto do Juruá, in the Western Brazilian
Amazon, an area characterized by a high prevalence of P. vivax infection.
METHODS: Five-hundred and sixteen male volunteers were screened for G6PDd using
the fluorescence spot test (Beutler test) and CareStart™ G6PD Biosensor system.
Demographic and clinical-epidemiological data were acquired through an individual
interview. To assess the genetic basis of G6PDd, 24 SNPs were genotyped using the
Kompetitive Allele Specific PCR assay.
RESULTS: Twenty-three (4.5%) individuals were G6PDd. No association was found
between G6PDd and the number of malaria cases. An increased risk of reported
haemolysis symptoms and blood transfusions was evident among the G6PDd
individuals. Twenty-two individuals had the G6PDd A(-) variant and one the G6PD
A(+) variant. The Mediterranean variant was not present. Apart from one
polymorphism, almost all SNPs were monomorphic or with low frequencies (0-0.04%).
No differences were detected among ethnic groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The data indicates that ~1/23 males from the Alto do Juruá could be 
G6PD deficient and at risk of haemolytic anaemia if treated with primaquine. G6PD
A(-) is the most frequent deficiency allele in this population. These results
concur with reported G6PDd in other regions in Brazil. Routine G6PDd screening to
personalize primaquine administration should be considered, particularly as
complete treatment of patients with vivax malaria using chloroquine and
primaquine, is crucial for malaria elimination.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-017-1889-6 
PMCID: PMC5471696
PMID: 28619120  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

