
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2017 Jun 20;7:260. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00260.
eCollection 2017.

Genetic Characterization of Coenzyme A Biosynthesis Reveals Essential Distinctive
Functions during Malaria Parasite Development in Blood and Mosquito.

Hart RJ(1), Abraham A(1), Aly ASI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tropical Medicine, Tulane UniversityNew Orleans, LA, United
States.

Coenzyme A (CoA) is an essential universal cofactor for all prokaryotic and
eukaryotic cells. In nearly all non-photosynthetic cells, CoA biosynthesis
depends on the uptake and phosphorylation of vitamin B5 (pantothenic acid or
pantothenate). Recently, putative pantothenate transporter (PAT) and pantothenate
kinases (PanKs) were functionally characterized in P. yoelii. PAT and PanKs were 
shown to be dispensable for blood stage development, but they were essential for 
mosquito stages development. Yet, little is known about the cellular functions of
the other enzymes of the CoA biosynthesis pathway in malaria parasite life cycle 
stages. All enzymes of this pathway were targeted for deletion or
deletion/complementation analyses by knockout/knock-in plasmid constructs to
reveal their essential roles in P. yoelii life cycle stages. The intermediate
enzymes PPCS (Phosphopantothenylcysteine Synthase), PPCDC
(Phosphopantothenylcysteine Decarboxylase) were shown to be dispensable for
asexual and sexual blood stage development, but they were essential for oocyst
development and the production of sporozoites. However, the last two enzymes of
this pathway, PPAT (Phosphopantetheine Adenylyltransferase) and DPCK
(Dephospho-CoA Kinase), were essential for blood stage development. These results
indicate alternative first substrate requirement for the malaria parasite, other 
than the canonical pantothenate, for the synthesis of CoA in the blood but not
inside the mosquito midgut. Collectively, our data shows that CoA de novo
biosynthesis is essential for both blood and mosquito stages, and thus validates 
the enzymes of this pathway as potential antimalarial targets.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00260 
PMCID: PMC5476742
PMID: 28676844  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

