
1. PLoS Pathog. 2017 Jul 6;13(7):e1006453. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006453.
eCollection 2017 Jul.

The Plasmodium falciparum pseudoprotease SERA5 regulates the kinetics and
efficiency of malaria parasite egress from host erythrocytes.

Collins CR(1), Hackett F(1), Atid J(1), Tan MSY(1), Blackman MJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Biochemistry Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London, United
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Pathogen Molecular Biology, London School of Hygiene & Tropical 
Medicine, London, United Kingdom.

Egress of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum from its host red blood cell
is a rapid, highly regulated event that is essential for maintenance and
completion of the parasite life cycle. Egress is protease-dependent and is
temporally associated with extensive proteolytic modification of parasite
proteins, including a family of papain-like proteins called SERA that are
expressed in the parasite parasitophorous vacuole. Previous work has shown that
the most abundant SERA, SERA5, plays an important but non-enzymatic role in
asexual blood stages. SERA5 is extensively proteolytically processed by a
parasite serine protease called SUB1 as well as an unidentified cysteine protease
just prior to egress. However, neither the function of SERA5 nor the role of its 
processing is known. Here we show that conditional disruption of the SERA5 gene, 
or of both the SERA5 and related SERA4 genes simultaneously, results in a
dramatic egress and replication defect characterised by premature host cell
rupture and the failure of daughter merozoites to efficiently disseminate,
instead being transiently retained within residual bounding membranes. SERA5 is
not required for poration (permeabilization) or vesiculation of the host cell
membrane at egress, but the premature rupture phenotype requires the activity of 
a parasite or host cell cysteine protease. Complementation of SERA5 null
parasites by ectopic expression of wild-type SERA5 reversed the egress defect,
whereas expression of a SERA5 mutant refractory to processing failed to rescue
the phenotype. Our findings implicate SERA5 as an important regulator of the
kinetics and efficiency of egress and suggest that proteolytic modification is
required for SERA5 function. In addition, our study reveals that efficient egress
requires tight control of the timing of membrane rupture.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006453 
PMCID: PMC5500368
PMID: 28683142  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

