
1. Elife. 2017 Aug 18;6. pii: e29865. doi: 10.7554/eLife.29865.

Small molecule inhibition of apicomplexan FtsH1 disrupts plastid biogenesis in
human pathogens.

Amberg-Johnson K(1)(2), Hari SB(3), Ganesan SM(4), Lorenzi HA(5), Sauer RT(3),
Niles JC(4), Yeh E(1)(2)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Stanford Medical School, Stanford, United States.
(2)Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford Medical School, Stanford, United States.
(3)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
United States.
(4)Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, United States.
(5)Department of Infectious Disease, The J. Craig Venter Institute, Maryland,
United States.
(6)Department of Pathology, Stanford Medical School, Stanford, United States.

The malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum and related apicomplexan pathogens
contain an essential plastid organelle, the apicoplast, which is a key
anti-parasitic target. Derived from secondary endosymbiosis, the apicoplast
depends on novel, but largely cryptic, mechanisms for protein/lipid import and
organelle inheritance during parasite replication. These critical biogenesis
pathways present untapped opportunities to discover new parasite-specific drug
targets. We used an innovative screen to identify actinonin as having a novel
mechanism-of-action inhibiting apicoplast biogenesis. Resistant mutation,
chemical-genetic interaction, and biochemical inhibition demonstrate that the
unexpected target of actinonin in P. falciparum and Toxoplasma gondii is FtsH1, a
homolog of a bacterial membrane AAA+ metalloprotease. PfFtsH1 is the first novel 
factor required for apicoplast biogenesis identified in a phenotypic screen. Our 
findings demonstrate that FtsH1 is a novel and, importantly, druggable
antimalarial target. Development of FtsH1 inhibitors will have significant
advantages with improved drug kinetics and multistage efficacy against multiple
human parasites.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.29865 
PMCID: PMC5576918
PMID: 28826494  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

