
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2017 Aug 22;11(8):e0005805. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0005805. eCollection 2017 Aug.

Mitochondria and lipid raft-located FOF1-ATP synthase as major therapeutic
targets in the antileishmanial and anticancer activities of ether lipid
edelfosine.

Villa-Pulgarín JA(1), Gajate C(1)(2), Botet J(3), Jimenez A(3), Justies N(4),
Varela-M RE(1), Cuesta-Marbán Á(1), Müller I(5), Modolell M(4), Revuelta JL(3),
Mollinedo F(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer, Centro de Investigación 
del Cáncer, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC)-Universidad de
Salamanca, Campus Miguel de Unamuno, Salamanca, Spain.
(2)Laboratory of Cell Death and Cancer Therapy, Department of Cellular and
Molecular Medicine, Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Metabolic Engineering Group, Departamento de Microbiología y Genética,
Universidad de Salamanca, Edificio Departamental, Campus Miguel de Unamuno,
Salamanca, Spain.
(4)Department of Cellular Immunology, Max-Planck-Institut für Immunbiologie und
Epigenetik, Freiburg, Germany.
(5)Department of Medicine, Section of Immunology, St. Mary's Campus, Imperial
College London, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Leishmaniasis is the world's second deadliest parasitic disease after
malaria, and current treatment of the different forms of this disease is far from
satisfactory. Alkylphospholipid analogs (APLs) are a family of anticancer drugs
that show antileishmanial activity, including the first oral drug (miltefosine)
for leishmaniasis and drugs in preclinical/clinical oncology trials, but their
precise mechanism of action remains to be elucidated.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we show that the tumor cell
apoptosis-inducer edelfosine was the most effective APL, as compared to
miltefosine, perifosine and erucylphosphocholine, in killing Leishmania spp.
promastigotes and amastigotes as well as tumor cells, as assessed by DNA
breakdown determined by flow cytometry. In studies using animal models, we found 
that orally-administered edelfosine showed a potent in vivo antileishmanial
activity and diminished macrophage pro-inflammatory responses. Edelfosine was
also able to kill Leishmania axenic amastigotes. Edelfosine was taken up by host 
macrophages and killed intracellular Leishmania amastigotes in infected
macrophages. Edelfosine accumulated in tumor cell mitochondria and Leishmania
kinetoplast-mitochondrion, and led to mitochondrial transmembrane potential
disruption, and to the successive breakdown of parasite mitochondrial and nuclear
DNA. Ectopic expression of Bcl-XL inhibited edelfosine-induced cell death in both
Leishmania parasites and tumor cells. We found that the cytotoxic activity of
edelfosine against Leishmania parasites and tumor cells was associated with a
dramatic recruitment of FOF1-ATP synthase into lipid rafts following edelfosine
treatment in both parasites and cancer cells. Raft disruption and specific
FOF1-ATP synthase inhibition hindered edelfosine-induced cell death in both
Leishmania parasites and tumor cells. Genetic deletion of FOF1-ATP synthase led
to edelfosine drug resistance in Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The present study shows that the antileishmanial and
anticancer actions of edelfosine share some common signaling processes, with
mitochondria and raft-located FOF1-ATP synthase being critical in the killing
process, thus identifying novel druggable targets for the treatment of
leishmaniasis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0005805 
PMCID: PMC5568728
PMID: 28829771  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

