
1. Parasit Vectors. 2017 Aug 23;10(1):396. doi: 10.1186/s13071-017-2336-9.

Insecticide resistance status of three malaria vectors, Anopheles gambiae (s.l.),
An. funestus and An. mascarensis, from the south, central and east coasts of
Madagascar.

Rakotoson JD(1), Fornadel CM(2), Belemvire A(2), Norris LC(2), George K(2),
Caranci A(2), Lucas B(3), Dengela D(4).

Author information: 
(1)President's Malaria Initiative Africa Indoor Residual Spraying Project, Abt
Associates, Antananarivo, Madagascar.
(2)U.S. President's Malaria Initiative, United States Agency for International
Development, Bureau for Global Health, Office of Infectious Disease, 2100 Crystal
Drive, Arlington, VA, 22202, USA.
(3)President's Malaria Initiative Africa Indoor Residual Spraying Project, Abt
Associates, 4550 Montgomery Ave, Suite 800 North, Bethesda, MD, 20814, USA.
(4)President's Malaria Initiative Africa Indoor Residual Spraying Project, Abt
Associates, 4550 Montgomery Ave, Suite 800 North, Bethesda, MD, 20814, USA.
Dereje_Dengela@abtassoc.com.

BACKGROUND: Insecticide-based vector control, which comprises use of
insecticide-treated bed nets (ITNs) and indoor residual spraying (IRS), is the
key method to malaria control in Madagascar. However, its effectiveness is
threatened as vectors become resistant to insecticides. This study investigated
the resistance status of malaria vectors in Madagascar to various insecticides
recommended for use in ITNs and/or IRS.
METHODS: WHO tube and CDC bottle bioassays were performed on populations of
Anopheles gambiae (s.l.), An. funestus and An. mascarensis. Adult female An.
gambiae (s.l.) mosquitoes reared from field-collected larvae and pupae were
tested for their resistance to DDT, permethrin, deltamethrin, alpha-cypermethrin,
lambda-cyhalothrin, bendiocarb and pirimiphos-methyl. Resting An. funestus and
An. mascarensis female mosquitoes collected from unsprayed surfaces were tested
against permethrin, deltamethrin and pirimiphos-methyl. The effect on insecticide
resistance of pre-exposure to the synergists piperonyl-butoxide (PBO) and
S,S,S-tributyl phosphorotrithioate (DEF) also was assessed. Molecular analyses
were done to identify species and determine the presence of knock-down resistance
(kdr) and acetylcholinesterase resistance (ace-1 R ) gene mutations.
RESULTS: Anopheles funestus and An. mascarensis were fully susceptible to
permethrin, deltamethrin and pirimiphos-methyl. Anopheles gambiae (s.l.) was
fully susceptible to bendiocarb and pirimiphos-methyl. Among the 17 An. gambiae
(s.l.) populations tested for deltamethrin, no confirmed resistance was recorded,
but suspected resistance was observed in two sites. Anopheles gambiae (s.l.) was 
resistant to permethrin in four out of 18 sites (mortality 68-89%) and to
alpha-cypermethrin (89% mortality) and lambda-cyhalothrin (80% and 85%) in one of
17 sites, using one or both assay methods. Pre-exposure to PBO restored full
susceptibility to all pyrethroids tested except in one site where only partial
restoration to permethrin was observed. DEF fully suppressed resistance to
deltamethrin and alpha-cypermethrin, while it partially restored susceptibility
to permethrin in two of the three sites. Molecular analysis data suggest absence 
of kdr and ace-1 R gene mutations.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests involvement of detoxifying enzymes in the
phenotypic resistance of An. gambiae (s.l.) to pyrethroids. The absence of
resistance in An. funestus and An. mascarensis to pirimiphos-methyl and
pyrethroids and in An. gambiae (s.l.) to carbamates and organophosphates presents
greater opportunity for managing resistance in Madagascar.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-017-2336-9 
PMCID: PMC5569519
PMID: 28835269  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

