
1. Ann Neurol. 2017 Sep;82(3):429-443. doi: 10.1002/ana.25028.

Dysregulation of LIMK-1/cofilin-1 pathway: A possible basis for alteration of
neuronal morphology in experimental cerebral malaria.

Simhadri PK(1), Malwade R(1), Vanka R(2), Nakka VP(1), Kuppusamy G(2), Babu
PP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, School of life Sciences,
University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, Telangana.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutics, JSS College of Pharmacy, Udhagamandalam, Tamil
Nadu, India.

OBJECTIVE: Loss of cognition even after survival is the salient feature of
cerebral malaria (CM). Currently, the fate of neuronal morphology is not studied 
at the ultrastructural level in CM. Recent studies suggest that maintenance of
neuronal morphology and dendritic spine density (actin dynamics in particular)
are essential for proper cognitive function. LIMK-1/cofilin-1 signaling pathway
is known to be involved in the maintenance of actin dynamics through regulation
of cofilin-1, and in executing learning and memory functions.
METHODS: Using an experimental mouse model, we analyzed the behavioral parameters
of asymptomatic mice with CM by performing a rapid murine coma and behavior scale
experiment. We performed Golgi-Cox staining to assess neuronal morphology,
dendritic spine density, and arborization in brain cortex subjected to Plasmodium
berghei ANKA infection compared to asymptomatic, anemic, and control groups. We
studied the neural gene expression pattern of LIMK-1, cofilin-1, and β-actin in
all the experimental groups by semiquantitative and quantitative polymerase chain
reaction followed by immunoblotting and immunofluorescence.
RESULTS: We observed significant loss of dendritic spine density, abnormal spine 
morphology, reduced dendritic arborization, and extensive dendritic varicosities 
in the cortical neurons of CM-infected brain. Furthermore, these observations
correlated with diminished protein levels of LIMK-1, cofilin-1,
phospho-cofilin-1, and β-actin in the whole brain lysates as well as formation of
actin-cofilin rods in the brain sections of symptomatic mice with CM.
INTERPRETATION: Overall, our findings suggest that the altered neuronal
morphology and dysregulation of LIMK-1/cofilin-1 pathway could affect the
cognitive outcome after experimental CM. Therefore, this study could help to
establish newer therapeutic strategies addressing long-term cognitive impairment 
after CM. Ann Neurol 2017;82:429-443.

© 2017 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.25028 
PMID: 28843047  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

