
1. Genetics. 2017 Oct;207(2):729-740. doi: 10.1534/genetics.117.300221. Epub 2017
Aug 31.

Cross-Species Y Chromosome Function Between Malaria Vectors of the Anopheles
gambiae Species Complex.

Bernardini F(1), Galizi R(1), Wunderlich M(1), Taxiarchi C(1), Kranjc N(1), Kyrou
K(1), Hammond A(1), Nolan T(1), Lawniczak MNK(2), Papathanos PA(3), Crisanti
A(4), Windbichler N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, South Kensington Campus,
SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom.
(2)Malaria Programme, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, CB10 1SA
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(3)Section of Genomics and Genetics, Department of Experimental Medicine,
University of Perugia, 06132, Italy.
(4)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, South Kensington Campus,
SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom n.windbichler@imperial.ac.uk a.drcrisanti@imperial.ac.uk.

Y chromosome function, structure and evolution is poorly understood in many
species, including the Anopheles genus of mosquitoes-an emerging model system for
studying speciation that also represents the major vectors of malaria. While the 
Anopheline Y had previously been implicated in male mating behavior, recent data 
from the Anopheles gambiae complex suggests that, apart from the putative primary
sex-determiner, no other genes are conserved on the Y. Studying the functional
basis of the evolutionary divergence of the Y chromosome in the gambiae complex
is complicated by complete F1 male hybrid sterility. Here, we used an F1 × F0
crossing scheme to overcome a severe bottleneck of male hybrid incompatibilities 
that enabled us to experimentally purify a genetically labeled A. gambiae Y
chromosome in an A. arabiensis background. Whole genome sequencing (WGS)
confirmed that the A. gambiae Y retained its original sequence content in the A. 
arabiensis genomic background. In contrast to comparable experiments in
Drosophila, we find that the presence of a heterospecific Y chromosome has no
significant effect on the expression of A. arabiensis genes, and transcriptional 
differences can be explained almost exclusively as a direct consequence of
transcripts arising from sequence elements present on the A. gambiae Y chromosome
itself. We find that Y hybrids show no obvious fertility defects, and no
substantial reduction in male competitiveness. Our results demonstrate that,
despite their radically different structure, Y chromosomes of these two species
of the gambiae complex that diverged an estimated 1.85 MYA function
interchangeably, thus indicating that the Y chromosome does not harbor loci
contributing to hybrid incompatibility. Therefore, Y chromosome gene flow between
members of the gambiae complex is possible even at their current level of
divergence. Importantly, this also suggests that malaria control interventions
based on sex-distorting Y drive would be transferable, whether intentionally or
contingent, between the major malaria vector species.

Copyright © 2017 by the Genetics Society of America.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.117.300221 
PMCID: PMC5629335
PMID: 28860320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

