
1. J Infect Public Health. 2018 May - Jun;11(3):321-325. doi:
10.1016/j.jiph.2017.08.013. Epub 2017 Sep 15.

Comparative study of clinical presentation and hematological indices in
hospitalized sickle cell patients with severe Plasmodium falciparum malaria.

Purohit P(1), Mohanty PK(2), Patel S(3), Das P(4), Panigrahi J(5), Das K(6).

Author information: 
(1)Sickle Cell Clinic and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Veer Surendra Sai
Institute of Medical Sciences and Research (VIMSAR), Burla, Sambalpur, Odisha,
India. Electronic address: prasanta.biochem@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Medicine, Veer Surendra Sai Institute of Medical Sciences and
Research (VIMSAR), Burla, Sambalpur, Odisha, India. Electronic address:
drpradeepmohanty@rediffmail.com.
(3)Sickle Cell Clinic and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Veer Surendra Sai
Institute of Medical Sciences and Research (VIMSAR), Burla, Sambalpur, Odisha,
India. Electronic address: drsirispatel@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Infectious Disease, Asian Institute of Public Health,
Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India. Electronic address: pdas1234@gmail.com.
(5)School of Life Sciences, Sambalpur University, Jyoti Vihar, Burla, Odisha,
India (Present address: Department of Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences,
Central University of Rajasthan, Kishangarh, Dist-Ajmer, Rajasthan, India).
Electronic address: drjpanigrahi@gmail.com.
(6)Sickle Cell Clinic and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Veer Surendra Sai
Institute of Medical Sciences and Research (VIMSAR), Burla, Sambalpur, Odisha,
India. Electronic address: kishalaya2@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Sickle-cell-gene has a high frequency in malaria endemic regions. In 
India, though the prevalence of both sickle-cell-gene and malaria are high, no
study has been carried out. This study aims to find out the possible differences 
in hematological and clinical parameters in severe falciparum malaria with
respect to sickle cell genotypes.
METHODS: Five hundred fourteen adults with severe falciparum malaria hospitalized
in Department of Medicine, Veer Surendra Sai Institute of Medical Sciences and
Research, Burla, between August, 2010 to December, 2014 were included and
categorized on the basis of sickle cell genotypes. The hematological parameters
were compared by one-way-analysis-of-variance and incidence of sub-phenotypes of 
severe malaria was compared by χ2 test across the groups.
RESULTS: Patients with sickle cell anemia (HbSS) and severe falciparum malaria
had lower hemoglobin level compared to patients with normal β-globin genotype
(HbAA) and sickle cell trait (HbAS). Most of the hematological parameters were
homogeneous in patients with HbAA and HbAS and different from patients with HbSS.
Incidence of acute renal failure was low (χ2, 9.91; p, 0.002) and jaundice was
high (χ2, 5.20; p, 0.022) in patients with HbSS. No clinical difference was
observed in patients with HbAA and HbAS. The mortality was low (χ2, 4.33; p,
0.037) and high (χ2, 10.48; p, 0.001) in patients with HbAS and HbSS respectively
compared to patients with HbAA.
CONCLUSION: Though sickle-cell-gene protects against falciparum infections, the
hematological parameters and sub-phenotypes of severe malaria remain unchanged
when the infection progresses to a severe form in patients with HbAA and HbAS.
Presence of hemolytic anemia in patients with HbSS shows diverse hematological
and clinical phenotypes as compared to others. High mortality in patients with
HbSS emphasizes the need for a better preventive approach to save valuable lives.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jiph.2017.08.013 
PMID: 28927555  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

