
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2017 Oct 2;11(10):e0005991. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0005991. eCollection 2017 Oct.

Phylogenetic analysis of simian Plasmodium spp. infecting Anopheles balabacensis 
Baisas in Sabah, Malaysia.

Chua TH(1), Manin BO(1), Daim S(1), Vythilingam I(2), Drakeley C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology and Medical Diagnostics, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Universiti Malaysia Sabah, Kota Kinabalu, Sabah, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia.
(3)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Anopheles balabacensis of the Leucospyrus group has been confirmed as
the primary knowlesi malaria vector in Sabah, Malaysian Borneo for some time now.
Presently, knowlesi malaria is the only zoonotic simian malaria in Malaysia with 
a high prevalence recorded in the states of Sabah and Sarawak.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Anopheles spp. were sampled using human landing
catch (HLC) method at Paradason village in Kudat district of Sabah. The collected
Anopheles were identified morphologically and then subjected to total DNA
extraction and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to detect Plasmodium parasites in 
the mosquitoes. Identification of Plasmodium spp. was confirmed by sequencing the
SSU rRNA gene with species specific primers. MEGA4 software was then used to
analyse the SSU rRNA sequences and bulid the phylogenetic tree for inferring the 
relationship between simian malaria parasites in Sabah. PCR results showed that
only 1.61% (23/1,425) of the screened An. balabacensis were infected with one or 
two of the five simian Plasmodium spp. found in Sabah, viz. Plasmodium coatneyi, 
P. inui, P. fieldi, P. cynomolgi and P. knowlesi. Sequence analysis of SSU rRNA
of Plasmodium isolates showed high percentage of identity within the same
Plasmodium sp. group. The phylogenetic tree based on the consensus sequences of
P. knowlesi showed 99.7%-100.0% nucleotide identity among the isolates from An.
balabacensis, human patients and a long-tailed macaque from the same locality.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This is the first study showing high molecular identity
between the P. knowlesi isolates from An. balabacensis, human patients and a
long-tailed macaque in Sabah. The other common simian Plasmodium spp. found in
long-tailed macaques and also detected in An. balabacensis were P. coatneyi, P.
inui, P. fieldi and P. cynomolgi. The high percentage identity of nucleotide
sequences between the P. knowlesi isolates from the long-tailed macaque, An.
balabacensis and human patients suggests a close genetic relationship between the
parasites from these hosts.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0005991 
PMCID: PMC5638607
PMID: 28968395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

