
1. mBio. 2017 Oct 17;8(5). pii: e01656-17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01656-17.

Plasmodium falciparum Calcium-Dependent Protein Kinase 2 Is Critical for Male
Gametocyte Exflagellation but Not Essential for Asexual Proliferation.

Bansal A(1), Molina-Cruz A(2), Brzostowski J(3), Mu J(2), Miller LH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA
bansal.abhisheka@gmail.com lmiller@niaid.nih.gov.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(3)LIG Imaging Facility, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Drug development efforts have focused mostly on the asexual blood stages of the
malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum Except for primaquine, which has its own
limitations, there are no available drugs that target the transmission of the
parasite to mosquitoes. Therefore, there is a need to validate new parasite
proteins that can be targeted for blocking transmission. P. falciparum
calcium-dependent protein kinases (PfCDPKs) play critical roles at various stages
of the parasite life cycle and, importantly, are absent in the human host. These 
features mark them as attractive drug targets. In this study, using CRISPR/Cas9
we successfully knocked out PfCDPK2 from blood-stage parasites, which was
previously thought to be an indispensable protein. The growth rate of the PfCDPK2
knockout (KO) parasites was similar to that of wild-type parasites, confirming
that PfCDPK2 function is not essential for the asexual proliferation of the
parasite in vitro The mature male and female gametocytes of PfCDPK2 KO parasites 
become round after induction. However, they fail to infect female Anopheles
stephensi mosquitoes due to a defect(s) in male gametocyte exflagellation and
possibly in female gametes.IMPORTANCE Despite reductions in the number of deaths 
it causes, malaria continues to be a leading infectious disease of the developing
world. For effective control and elimination of malaria, multiple stages of the
parasite need to be targeted. One such stage includes the transmission of the
parasite to mosquitoes. Here, we demonstrate the successful knockout of PfCDPK2, 
which was previously thought to be indispensable for parasite growth in red blood
cells. The PfCDPK2 KO parasites are incapable of establishing an infection in
mosquitoes. Therefore, our study suggests that targeting PfCDPK2 may be a good
strategy to control malaria transmission in countries with high transmission.
Moreover, molecular understanding of the signaling pathway of PfCDPK2 may provide
additional targets for malaria control.

Copyright © 2017 Bansal et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01656-17 
PMCID: PMC5646254
PMID: 29042501  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

