
1. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2018 Jan;297(1):161-183. doi: 10.1007/s00404-017-4562-y.
Epub 2017 Oct 23.

Identification of differentially expressed genes regulated by molecular signature
in breast cancer-associated fibroblasts by bioinformatics analysis.

Vastrad B(1), Vastrad C(2), Tengli A(3), Iliger S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, SET's College of Pharmacy, Dharwad, Karnataka,
580002, India. basavarajmv@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Computer Science, Karnataka University, Dharwad, Karnataka,
580002, India.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, JSS College of Pharmacy, Jagadguru Sri
Shivarathreeshwara University Mysuru, Mysuru, Karnataka, 570015, India.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutics, SET's College of Pharmacy, Dharwad, Karnataka,
580002, India.

OBJECTIVE: Breast cancer is a severe risk to public health and has adequately
convoluted pathogenesis. Therefore, the description of key molecular markers and 
pathways is of much importance for clarifying the molecular mechanism of breast
cancer-associated fibroblasts initiation and progression. Breast
cancer-associated fibroblasts gene expression dataset was downloaded from Gene
Expression Omnibus database.
METHODS: A total of nine samples, including three normal fibroblasts, three
granulin-stimulated fibroblasts and three cancer-associated fibroblasts samples, 
were used to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between normal
fibroblasts, granulin-stimulated fibroblasts and cancer-associated fibroblasts
samples. The gene ontology (GO) and pathway enrichment analysis was performed,
and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network of the DEGs was constructed by
NetworkAnalyst software.
RESULTS: Totally, 190 DEGs were identified, including 66 up-regulated and 124
down-regulated genes. GO analysis results showed that up-regulated DEGs were
significantly enriched in biological processes (BP), including cell-cell
signalling and negative regulation of cell proliferation; molecular function
(MF), including insulin-like growth factor II binding and insulin-like growth
factor I binding; cellular component (CC), including insulin-like growth factor
binding protein complex and integral component of plasma membrane; the
down-regulated DEGs were significantly enriched in BP, including cell adhesion
and extracellular matrix organization; MF, including N-acetylgalactosamine
4-sulfate 6-O-sulfotransferase activity and calcium ion binding; CC, including
extracellular space and extracellular matrix. WIKIPATHWAYS analysis showed the
up-regulated DEGs were enriched in myometrial relaxation and contraction
pathways. WIKIPATHWAYS, REACTOME, PID_NCI and KEGG pathway analysis showed the
down-regulated DEGs were enriched endochondral ossification, TGF beta signalling 
pathway, integrin cell surface interactions, beta1 integrin cell surface
interactions, malaria and glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis-chondroitin
sulfate/dermatan sulphate. The top 5 up-regulated hub genes, CDKN2A, MME, PBX1,
IGFBP3, and TFAP2C and top 5 down-regulated hub genes VCAM1, KRT18, TGM2, ACTA2, 
and STAMBP were identified from the PPI network, and subnetworks revealed these
genes were involved in significant pathways, including myometrial relaxation and 
contraction pathways, integrin cell surface interactions, beta1 integrin cell
surface interaction. Besides, the target hsa-mirs for DEGs were identified.
hsa-mir-759, hsa-mir-4446-5p, hsa-mir-219a-1-3p and hsa-mir-26a-5p were important
miRNAs in this study.
CONCLUSIONS: We pinpoint important key genes and pathways closely related with
breast cancer-associated fibroblasts initiation and progression by a series of
bioinformatics analysis on DEGs. These screened genes and pathways provided for a
more detailed molecular mechanism underlying breast cancer-associated fibroblasts
occurrence and progression, holding promise for acting as molecular markers and
probable therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.1007/s00404-017-4562-y 
PMID: 29063236  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

