
1. Br J Haematol. 2018 Jan;180(1):118-133. doi: 10.1111/bjh.14976. Epub 2017 Nov 2.

Quantitative mass spectrometry of human reticulocytes reveal proteome-wide
modifications during maturation.

Chu TTT(1), Sinha A(1), Malleret B(2)(3), Suwanarusk R(3), Park JE(4), Naidu
R(1), Das R(1), Dutta B(4), Ong ST(5), Verma NK(5), Chan JK(6)(7), Nosten
F(8)(9), Rénia L(3), Sze SK(4), Russell B(2)(10), Chandramohanadas R(1)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Pillar of Engineering Product Development (EPD), Singapore University of
Technology & Design (SUTD), Singapore.
(2)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Singapore Immunology Network (SIgN), Agency for Science & Technology,
Singapore.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
(5)Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore.
(6)Department of Reproductive Medicine, KK Women's and Children's Hospital,
Singapore.
(7)Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore.
(8)Shoklo Malaria Research Unit, Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, 
Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Mae Sot, Thailand.
(9)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of
Medicine Research Building, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(10)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Otago University, Dunedin, New
Zealand.

Erythropoiesis is marked by progressive changes in morphological, biochemical and
mechanical properties of erythroid precursors to generate red blood cells (RBC). 
The earliest enucleated forms derived in this process, known as reticulocytes,
are multi-lobular and spherical. As reticulocytes mature, they undergo a series
of dynamic cytoskeletal re-arrangements and the expulsion of residual organelles,
resulting in highly deformable biconcave RBCs (normocytes). To understand the
significant, yet neglected proteome-wide changes associated with reticulocyte
maturation, we undertook a quantitative proteomics approach. Immature
reticulocytes (marked by the presence of surface transferrin receptor, CD71) and 
mature RBCs (devoid of CD71) were isolated from human cord blood using a magnetic
separation procedure. After sub-fractionation into triton-extracted membrane
proteins and luminal samples (isobaric tags for relative and absolute
quantitation), quantitative mass spectrometry was conducted to identify more than
1800 proteins with good confidence and coverage. While most structural proteins
(such as Spectrins, Ankyrin and Band 3) as well as surface glycoproteins were
conserved, proteins associated with microtubule structures, such as Talin-1/2 and
ß-Tubulin, were detected only in immature reticulocytes. Atomic force microscopy 
(AFM)-based imaging revealed an extended network of spectrin filaments in
reticulocytes (with an average length of 48 nm), which shortened during
reticulocyte maturation (average spectrin length of 41 nm in normocytes). The
extended nature of cytoskeletal network may partly account for increased
deformability and shape changes, as reticulocytes transform to normocytes.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/bjh.14976 
PMID: 29094334  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

