
1. Malar J. 2017 Nov 17;16(1):468. doi: 10.1186/s12936-017-2118-z.

Detection of Plasmodium falciparum male and female gametocytes and determination 
of parasite sex ratio in human endemic populations by novel, cheap and robust
RTqPCR assays.

Santolamazza F(1), Avellino P(1), Siciliano G(2), Yao FA(3), Lombardo F(1),
Ouédraogo JB(3)(4), Modiano D(1), Alano P(5), Mangano VD(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Sanità Pubblica e Malattie Infettive, Sapienza Università di
Roma, Roma, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Malattie Infettive, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Roma, Italy.
(3)Institut de Recherche en Sciences de la Santé, Bobo Dioulasso, Burkina Faso.
(4)Centre Muraz, Bobo Dioulasso, Burkina Faso.
(5)Dipartimento di Malattie Infettive, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Roma, Italy.
pietro.alano@iss.it.
(6)Dipartimento di Sanità Pubblica e Malattie Infettive, Sapienza Università di
Roma, Roma, Italy. valentina.mangano@uniroma1.it.
(7)Dipartimento di Ricerca Traslazionale e Nuove Tecnologie in Medicina e
Chirurgia, Università di Pisa, Pisa, Italy. valentina.mangano@uniroma1.it.

BACKGROUND: The presence of Plasmodium falciparum gametocytes in peripheral blood
is essential for human to mosquito parasite transmission. The detection of
submicroscopic infections with gametocytes and the estimation of the gametocyte
sex ratio are crucial to assess the human host potential ability to infect
mosquitoes and transmit malaria parasites.
AIM AND OBJECTIVES: The aim of this work was to develop sensitive and cheap Real 
Time qPCR assays for large-scale epidemiological surveys, based on detection and 
amplification of gametocyte sex specific transcripts selected from the
literature: the female-specific pfs25 and pf glycerol kinase (pfGK) and the
male-specific pfs230p and pf13 transcripts.
METHODS: RTqPCR assays were used to test the gametocyte- and sex-specific
expression of the target genes using asexual stages of the gametocyteless
parasite clone F12 and FACS purified male and female gametocytes of the
PfDynGFP/P47mCherry line. Assays were performed on 50 blood samples collected
during an epidemiological survey in the Soumousso village, Burkina Faso,
West-Africa, and amplification of the human housekeeping gene 18S rRNA was
employed to normalize RNA sample variability.
RESULTS: SYBR Green assays were developed that showed higher sensitivity compared
to Taqman assays at a reduced cost. RTqPCR results confirmed that expression of
pfs25 and pfs230p are female and male-specific, respectively, and introduced two 
novel markers, the female-specific pfGK and the male-specific pf13. A formula was
derived to calculate the ratio of male to female gametocytes based on the ratio
of male to female transcript copy number. Use of these assays in the field
samples showed, as expected, a higher sensitivity of RTqPCR compared to
microscopy. Importantly, similar values of gametocyte sex-ratio were obtained in 
the field samples based on the four different target combinations.
CONCLUSION: Novel, sensitive, cheap and robust molecular assays were developed
for the detection and quantification of female and male P. falciparum
gametocytes. In particular, the RTqPCR assays based on the female-specific pfs25 
and the newly described male gametocyte-specific pf13 transcripts, including
normalization by the human 18S, reliably assess presence and abundance of female 
and male gametocytes and enable to determine their sex-ratio in human subjects in
endemic areas.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-017-2118-z 
PMCID: PMC5693539
PMID: 29149898  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

