
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2018 Jan 25;62(2). pii: e01489-17. doi:
10.1128/AAC.01489-17. Print 2018 Feb.

Characterization of Plasmodium Atg3-Atg8 Interaction Inhibitors Identifies Novel 
Alternative Mechanisms of Action in Toxoplasma gondii.

Varberg JM(1), LaFavers KA(1), Arrizabalaga G(#)(1)(2), Sullivan WJ Jr(#)(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA wjsulliv@iupui.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Protozoan parasites, including the apicomplexan pathogens Plasmodium falciparum
(which causes malaria) and Toxoplasma gondii (which causes toxoplasmosis), infect
millions of people worldwide and represent major human disease burdens. Despite
their prevalence, therapeutic strategies to treat infections caused by these
parasites remain limited and are threatened by the emergence of drug resistance, 
highlighting the need for the identification of novel drug targets. Recently,
homologues of the core autophagy proteins, including Atg8 and Atg3, were
identified in many protozoan parasites. Importantly, components of the Atg8
conjugation system that facilitate the lipidation of Atg8 are required for both
canonical and parasite-specific functions and are essential for parasite
viability. Structural characterization of the P. falciparum Atg3-Atg8
(PfAtg3-Atg8) interaction has led to the identification of compounds that block
this interaction. Additionally, many of these compounds inhibit P. falciparum
growth in vitro, demonstrating the viability of this pathway as a drug target.
Given the essential role of the Atg8 lipidation pathway in Toxoplasma, we sought 
to determine whether three PfAtg3-Atg8 interaction inhibitors identified in the
Medicines for Malaria Venture Malaria Box exerted a similar inhibitory effect in 
Toxoplasma While all three inhibitors blocked Toxoplasma replication in vitro at 
submicromolar concentrations, they did not inhibit T. gondii Atg8 (TgAtg8)
lipidation. Rather, high concentrations of two of these compounds induced TgAtg8 
lipidation and fragmentation of the parasite mitochondrion, similar to the
effects seen following starvation and monensin-induced autophagy. Additionally,
we report that one of the PfAtg3-Atg8 interaction inhibitors induces Toxoplasma
egress and provide evidence that this is mediated by an increase in intracellular
calcium in response to drug treatment.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01489-17 
PMCID: PMC5786771
PMID: 29158278  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

