
1. Insect Mol Biol. 2018 Apr;27(2):177-187. doi: 10.1111/imb.12362. Epub 2017 Nov
22.

Identification and characterization of a histamine-binding lipocalin-like
molecule from the relapsing fever tick Ornithodoros turicata.

Neelakanta G(1)(2), Sultana H(1)(2), Sonenshine DE(1)(3), Andersen JF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA, USA.
(2)Center for Molecular Medicine, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA, USA.
(3)The Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, NIAID, National Institutes of
Health, Rockville, MA, USA.

Lipocalins are low molecular weight membrane transporters that are abundantly
expressed in the salivary glands and other tissues of ticks. In this study, we
identified a lipocalin-like molecule, designated as otlip, from the soft ticks
Ornithodoros turicata, the vector for the relapsing fever causing spirochete
Borrelia turicatae. We noted that the expression of otlip was developmentally
regulated, with adult ticks expressing significantly higher levels in comparison 
to the larvae or nymphal ticks. Expression of otlip was evident in both fed and
unfed O. turicata ticks, with significantly increased expression in the salivary 
glands in comparison to the midgut or ovary tissues. High conservation of the
biogenic amine-binding motif was evident in the deduced primary amino acid
sequence of Otlip. Protein modelling of Otlip revealed conservation of most of
the residues involved in binding histamine or serotonin ligand. In vitro assays
demonstrated binding of recombinant Otlip with histamine. Furthermore, prediction
of post-translational modifications revealed that Otlip contained phosphorylation
and myristoylation sites. Taken together, our study not only provides evidence
for the presence of a lipocalin-like molecule in O. turicata ticks but also
suggests a role for this molecule in the salivary glands of this medically
important vector.

© 2017 The Royal Entomological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/imb.12362 
PMID: 29164729  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

