
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2017 Nov 21;7:476. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00476.
eCollection 2017.

Analysis of the Salivary Gland Transcriptome of Unfed and Partially Fed Amblyomma
sculptum Ticks and Descriptive Proteome of the Saliva.

Esteves E(1), Maruyama SR(2), Kawahara R(3), Fujita A(4), Martins LA(3), Righi
AA(3), Costa FB(5), Palmisano G(3), Labruna MB(5), Sá-Nunes A(1), Ribeiro JMC(6),
Fogaça AC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Imunologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade de 
São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Genética e Evolução, Universidade Federal de São Carlos, São
Carlos, Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Parasitologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade 
de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Departamento de Ciência da Computação, Instituto de Matemática e Estatística, 
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Departamento de Medicina Veterinária Preventiva e Saúde Animal, Faculdade de
Medicina Veterinária e Zootecnia, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, MD, United States.

Ticks are obligate blood feeding ectoparasites that transmit a wide variety of
pathogenic microorganisms to their vertebrate hosts. Amblyomma sculptum is vector
of Rickettsia rickettsii, the causative agent of Rocky Mountain spotted fever
(RMSF), the most lethal rickettsiosis that affects humans. It is known that the
transmission of pathogens by ticks is mainly associated with the physiology of
the feeding process. Pathogens that are acquired with the blood meal must first
colonize the tick gut and later the salivary glands (SG) in order to be
transmitted during a subsequent blood feeding via saliva. Tick saliva contains a 
complex mixture of bioactive molecules with anticlotting, antiplatelet
aggregation, vasodilatory, anti-inflammatory, and immunomodulatory properties to 
counteract both the hemostasis and defense mechanisms of the host. Besides
facilitating tick feeding, the properties of saliva may also benefits survival
and establishment of pathogens in the host. In the current study, we compared the
sialotranscriptome of unfed A. sculptum ticks and those fed for 72 h on rabbits
using next generation RNA sequencing (RNA-seq). The total of reads obtained were 
assembled in 9,560 coding sequences (CDSs) distributed in different functional
classes. CDSs encoding secreted proteins, including lipocalins, mucins, protease 
inhibitors, glycine-rich proteins, metalloproteases, 8.9 kDa superfamily members,
and immunity-related proteins were mostly upregulated by blood feeding. Selected 
CDSs were analyzed by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction preceded
by reverse transcription (RT-qPCR), corroborating the transcriptional profile
obtained by RNA-seq. Finally, high-performance liquid chromatography coupled with
tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis revealed 124 proteins in saliva of
ticks fed for 96-120 h. The corresponding CDSs of 59 of these proteins were
upregulated in SG of fed ticks. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
report on the proteome of A. sculptum saliva. The functional characterization of 
the identified proteins might reveal potential targets to develop vaccines for
tick control and/or blocking of R. rickettsii transmission as well as
pharmacological bioproducts with antihemostatic, anti-inflammatory and
antibacterial activities.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00476 
PMCID: PMC5702332
PMID: 29209593  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

