
1. mBio. 2017 Dec 12;8(6). pii: e01986-17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01986-17.

Systematic CRISPR-Cas9-Mediated Modifications of Plasmodium yoelii ApiAP2 Genes
Reveal Functional Insights into Parasite Development.

Zhang C(1), Li Z(1), Cui H(1), Jiang Y(1), Yang Z(1), Wang X(1), Gao H(1), Liu
C(1), Zhang S(1), Su XZ(2), Yuan J(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Signaling Network, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian,
China.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA
xsu@niaid.nih.gov yuanjing@xmu.edu.cn.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Signaling Network, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian,
China xsu@niaid.nih.gov yuanjing@xmu.edu.cn.

Malaria parasites have a complex life cycle with multiple developmental stages in
mosquito and vertebrate hosts, and different developmental stages express unique 
sets of genes. Unexpectedly, many transcription factors (TFs) commonly found in
eukaryotic organisms are absent in malaria parasites; instead, a family of genes 
encoding proteins similar to the plant Apetala2 (ApiAP2) transcription factors is
expanded in the parasites. Several malaria ApiAP2 genes have been shown to play a
critical role in parasite development; however, the functions of the majority of 
the ApiAP2 genes remain to be elucidated. In particular, no study on the
Plasmodium yoelii ApiAP2 (PyApiAP2) gene family has been reported so far. This
study systematically investigated the functional roles of PyApiAP2 genes in
parasite development. Twenty-four of the 26 PyApiAP2 genes were selected for
disruption, and 12 were successfully knocked out using the clustered regularly
interspaced short palindromic repeat-CRISPR-associated protein 9 (CRISPR-Cas9)
method. The effects of gene knockout (KO) on parasite development in mouse and
mosquito stages were evaluated. Ten of 12 successfully disrupted genes, including
two genes that have not been functionally characterized in any Plasmodium species
previously, were shown to be critical for P. yoelii development of sexual and
mosquito stages. Additionally, seven of the genes were labeled for protein
expression analysis, revealing important information supporting their functions. 
This study represents the first systematic functional characterization of the
P. yoelii ApiAP2 gene family and discovers important insights on the roles of the
ApiAP2 genes in parasite development.IMPORTANCE Malaria is a parasitic disease
that infects hundreds of millions of people, leading to an estimated 0.35 million
deaths in 2015. A better understanding of the mechanism of gene expression
regulation during parasite development may provide important clues for disease
control and prevention. In this study, systematic gene disruption experiments
were performed to study the functional roles of members of the Plasmodium yoelii 
ApiAP2 (PyApiAP2) gene family in parasite development. Genes that are critical
for the development of male and female gametocytes, oocysts, and sporozoites were
characterized. The protein expression profiles for seven of the PyApiAP2 gene
products were also analyzed, revealing important information on their functions. 
This study provides expression and functional information for many PyApiAP2
genes, which can be explored for disease management.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01986-17 
PMCID: PMC5727417
PMID: 29233900  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

