
1. FEBS J. 2018 Mar;285(5):848-870. doi: 10.1111/febs.14370. Epub 2018 Jan 11.

A high parasite density environment induces transcriptional changes and cell
death in Plasmodium falciparum blood stages.

Chou ES(1), Abidi SZ(2), Teye M(3), Leliwa-Sytek A(3), Rask TS(3), Cobbold SA(1),
Tonkin-Hill GQ(4), Subramaniam KS(5), Sexton AE(6), Creek DJ(6), Daily JP(7),
Duffy MF(1), Day KP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bio21 Institute for Molecular Science and Biotechnology and School of
BioSciences, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC., Australia.
(2)Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Division of Medical Parasitology, New York
University School of Medicine, NY, USA.
(4)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC.,
Australia.
(5)Department of Parasitology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Pembroke
Place, Liverpool, UK.
(6)Drug Delivery Disposition and Dynamics, Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Monash University, Parkville, VIC., Australia.
(7)Department of Medicine, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.

Transient regulation of Plasmodium numbers below the density that induces fever
has been observed in chronic malaria infections in humans. This species
transcending control cannot be explained by immunity alone. Using an in vitro
system we have observed density dependent regulation of malaria population size
as a mechanism to possibly explain these in vivo observations. Specifically,
Plasmodium falciparum blood stages from a high but not low-density environment
exhibited unique phenotypic changes during the late trophozoite (LT) and schizont
stages of the intraerythrocytic cycle. These included in order of appearance:
failure of schizonts to mature and merozoites to replicate, apoptotic-like
morphological changes including shrinking, loss of mitochondrial membrane
potential, and blebbing with eventual release of aberrant parasites from infected
erythrocytes. This unique death phenotype was triggered in a stage-specific
manner by sensing of a high-density culture environment. Conditions of glucose
starvation, nutrient depletion, and high lactate could not induce the phenotype. 
A high-density culture environment induced rapid global changes in the parasite
transcriptome including differential expression of genes involved in cell
remodeling, clonal antigenic variation, metabolism, and cell death pathways
including an apoptosis-associated metacaspase gene. This transcriptional profile 
was also characterized by concomitant expression of asexual and sexual
stage-specific genes. The data show strong evidence to support our hypothesis
that density sensing exists in P. falciparum. They indicate that an
apoptotic-like mechanism may play a role in P. falciparum density regulation,
which, as in yeast, has features quite distinguishable from mammalian
apoptosis.DATABASE: Gene expression data are available in the GEO databases under
the accession number GSE91188.

© 2017 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.14370 
PMID: 29281179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

