
1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2018 Jan 4;14(1):e1005895. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005895.
eCollection 2018 Jan.

Functional interrogation of Plasmodium genus metabolism identifies species- and
stage-specific differences in nutrient essentiality and drug targeting.

Abdel-Haleem AM(1)(2), Hefzi H(3)(4), Mineta K(1), Gao X(1), Gojobori T(1),
Palsson BO(3)(4)(5), Lewis NE(4)(5), Jamshidi N(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Computational
Bioscience Research Centre (CBRC), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia.
(2)King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Biological and
Environmental Sciences and Engineering (BESE) division, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
CA, United States of America.
(4)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability at the University of
California, San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA, United States of America.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA,
United States of America.
(6)Institute of Engineering in Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, CA, United States of America.
(7)Department of Radiological Sciences, University of California, Los Angeles,
CA, United States of America.

Several antimalarial drugs exist, but differences between life cycle stages among
malaria species pose challenges for developing more effective therapies. To
understand the diversity among stages and species, we reconstructed genome-scale 
metabolic models (GeMMs) of metabolism for five life cycle stages and five
species of Plasmodium spanning the blood, transmission, and mosquito stages. The 
stage-specific models of Plasmodium falciparum uncovered stage-dependent changes 
in central carbon metabolism and predicted potential targets that could affect
several life cycle stages. The species-specific models further highlight
differences between experimental animal models and the human-infecting species.
Comparisons between human- and rodent-infecting species revealed differences in
thiamine (vitamin B1), choline, and pantothenate (vitamin B5) metabolism. Thus,
we show that genome-scale analysis of multiple stages and species of Plasmodium
can prioritize potential drug targets that could be both anti-malarials and
transmission blocking agents, in addition to guiding translation from non-human
experimental disease models.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005895 
PMCID: PMC5771636
PMID: 29300748  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

