
1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2018 Jan 9;14(1):e1005923. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005923.
eCollection 2018 Jan.

Modeling the genetic relatedness of Plasmodium falciparum parasites following
meiotic recombination and cotransmission.

Wong W(1), Wenger EA(2), Hartl DL(1)(3), Wirth DF(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T. H. Chan School of
Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(2)Institute for Disease Modeling, Bellevue, Washington, United States of
America.
(3)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(4)Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Unlike in most pathogens, multiple-strain (polygenomic) infections of P.
falciparum are frequently composed of genetic siblings. These genetic siblings
are the result of sexual reproduction and can coinfect the same host when
cotransmitted by the same mosquito. The degree with which coinfecting strains are
related varies among infections and populations. Because sexual recombination
occurs within the mosquito, the relatedness of cotransmitted strains could depend
on transmission dynamics, but little is actually known of the factors that
influence the relatedness of cotransmitted strains. Part of the uncertainty stems
from an incomplete understanding of how within-host and within-vector dynamics
affect cotransmission. Cotransmission is difficult to examine experimentally but 
can be explored using a computational model. We developed a malaria transmission 
model that simulates sexual reproduction in order to understand what determines
the relatedness of cotransmitted strains. This study highlights how the
relatedness of cotransmitted strains depends on both within-host and
within-vector dynamics including the complexity of infection. We also used our
transmission model to analyze the genetic relatedness of polygenomic infections
following a series of multiple transmission events and examined the effects of
superinfection. Understanding the factors that influence the relatedness of
cotransmitted strains could lead to a better understanding of the
population-genetic correlates of transmission and therefore be important for
public health.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005923 
PMCID: PMC5777656
PMID: 29315306  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

