
1. Parasit Vectors. 2018 Jan 15;11(1):34. doi: 10.1186/s13071-017-2610-x.

Genome-wide identification, characterization and classification of ionotropic
glutamate receptor genes (iGluRs) in the malaria vector Anopheles sinensis
(Diptera: Culicidae).

Wang TT(1), Si FL(1), He ZB(1), Chen B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Vector Insects; Institute of Entomology and
Molecular Biology, Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing, People's Republic of
China.
(2)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Vector Insects; Institute of Entomology and
Molecular Biology, Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing, People's Republic of
China. c_bin@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Ionotropic glutamate receptors (iGluRs) are conserved ligand-gated
ion channel receptors, and ionotropic receptors (IRs) were revealed as a new
family of iGluRs. Their subdivision was unsettled, and their characteristics are 
little known. Anopheles sinensis is a major malaria vector in eastern Asia, and
its genome was recently well sequenced and annotated.
METHODS: We identified iGluR genes in the An. sinensis genome, analyzed their
characteristics including gene structure, genome distribution, domains and
specific sites by bioinformatic methods, and deduced phylogenetic relationships
of all iGluRs in An. sinensis, Anopheles gambiae and Drosophila melanogaster.
Based on the characteristics and phylogenetics, we generated the classification
of iGluRs, and comparatively analyzed the intron number and selective pressure of
three iGluRs subdivisions, iGluR group, Antenna IR and Divergent IR subfamily.
RESULTS: A total of 56 iGluR genes were identified and named in the whole-genome 
of An. sinensis. These genes were located on 18 scaffolds, and 31 of them (29
being IRs) are distributed into 10 clusters that are suggested to form mainly
from recent gene duplication. These iGluRs can be divided into four groups: NMDA,
non-NMDA, Antenna IR and Divergent IR based on feature comparison and
phylogenetic analysis. IR8a and IR25a were suggested to be monophyletic, named as
Putative in the study, and moved from the Antenna subfamily in the IR family to
the non-NMDA group as a sister of traditional non-NMDA. The generated iGluRs of
genes (including NMDA and regenerated non-NMDA) are relatively conserved, and
have a more complicated gene structure, smaller ω values and some specific
functional sites. The iGluR genes in An. sinensis, An. gambiae and D.
melanogaster have amino-terminal domain (ATD), ligand binding domain (LBD) and
Lig_Chan domains, except for IR8a that only has the LBD and Lig_Chan domains.
However, the new concept IR family of genes (including regenerated Antenna IR,
and Divergent IR), especially for Divergent IR are more variable, have a simpler 
gene structure (intron loss phenomenon) and larger ω values, and lack specific
functional sites. These IR genes have no other domains except for Antenna IRs
that only have the Lig_Chan domain.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides a comprehensive information framework for iGluR 
genes in An. sinensis, and generated the classification of iGluRs by feature and 
bioinformatics analyses. The work lays the foundation for further functional
study of these genes.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-017-2610-x 
PMCID: PMC5769321
PMID: 29334982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

