
1. J Proteome Res. 2018 Mar 2;17(3):1258-1268. doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.7b00861.
Epub 2018 Feb 5.

Chromosome Gene Orientation Inversion Networks (GOINs) of Plasmodium Proteome.

Quevedo-Tumailli VF(1)(2), Ortega-Tenezaca B(1)(2)(3), González-Díaz H(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)RNASA-IMEDIR, Computer Science Faculty, University of A Coruña , 15071 A
Coruña, Spain.
(2)Universidad Estatal Amazónica UEA , Puyo, Pastaza, Ecuador.
(3)Universidad Regional Autónoma de los Andes UNIANDES-Puyo , Puyo, Pastaza,
Ecuador.
(4)Dept. of Organic Chemistry II, University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU ,
48940 Leioa, Biscay, Spain.
(5)IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science , 48011 Bilbao, Biscay, Spain.

The spatial distribution of genes in chromosomes seems not to be random. For
instance, only 10% of genes are transcribed from bidirectional promoters in
humans, and many more are organized into larger clusters. This raises intriguing 
questions previously asked by different authors. We would like to add a few more 
questions in this context, related to gene orientation inversions. Does gene
orientation (inversion) follow a random pattern? Is it relevant to biological
activity somehow? We define a new kind of network coined as the gene orientation 
inversion network (GOIN). GOIN's complex network encodes short- and long-range
patterns of inversion of the orientation of pairs of gene in the chromosome. We
selected Plasmodium falciparum as a case of study due to the high relevance of
this parasite to public health (causal agent of malaria). We constructed here for
the first time all of the GOINs for the genome of this parasite. These networks
have an average of 383 nodes (genes in one chromosome) and 1314 links (pairs of
gene with inverse orientation). We calculated node centralities and other
parameters of these networks. These numerical parameters were used to study
different properties of gene inversion patterns, for example, distribution, local
communities, similarity to Erdös-Rényi random networks, randomness, and so on. We
find clues that seem to indicate that gene orientation inversion does not follow 
a random pattern. We noted that some gene communities in the GOINs tend to group 
genes encoding for RIFIN-related proteins in the proteome of the parasite.
RIFIN-like proteins are a second family of clonally variant proteins expressed on
the surface of red cells infected with Plasmodium falciparum. Consequently, we
used these centralities as input of machine learning (ML) models to predict the
RIFIN-like activity of 5365 proteins in the proteome of Plasmodium sp. The best
linear ML model found discriminates RIFIN-like from other proteins with
sensitivity and specificity 70-80% in training and external validation series.
All of these results may point to a possible biological relevance of gene
orientation inversion not directly dependent on genetic sequence information.
This work opens the gate to the use of GOINs as a tool for the study of the
structure of chromosomes and the study of protein function in proteome research.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.7b00861 
PMID: 29336158  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

