
1. Parasit Vectors. 2018 Jan 15;11(1):36. doi: 10.1186/s13071-018-2615-0.

Cryptic diversity in an Atlantic Forest malaria vector from the mountains of
South-East Brazil.

de Rezende Dias G(1), Fujii TTS(2)(3), Fogel BF(2)(3), Lourenço-de-Oliveira
R(4)(5), Silva-do-Nascimento TF(4), Pitaluga AN(6)(5), Carvalho-Pinto CJ(7)(5),
Carvalho AB(8)(5), Peixoto AA(3)(5), Rona LDP(9)(10)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, IB, PPGBBE, Rio de Janeiro, RJ,
Brazil.
(2)Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Polo de Xerém, Duque de Caxias, RJ,
Brazil.
(3)Laboratório de Biologia Molecular de Insetos, IOC, FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro,
RJ, Brazil.
(4)Laboratório de Mosquitos Transmissores de Hematozoários, IOC, FIOCRUZ, Rio de 
Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(5)Instituto Nacional de Ciência e Tecnologia em Entomologia Molecular (INCT-EM, 
CNPq), Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(6)Laboratório de Biologia Molecular de Parasitas e Vetores, IOC, FIOCRUZ, Rio de
Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(7)Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, MIP, CCB, Florianópolis, SC, Brazil.
(8)Departamento de Genética, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de
Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(9)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, UK.
luisa.rona@imperial.ac.uk.
(10)Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, BEG, CCB, Florianópolis, SC, Brazil. 
luisa.rona@imperial.ac.uk.
(11)Instituto Nacional de Ciência e Tecnologia em Entomologia Molecular (INCT-EM,
CNPq), Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil. luisa.rona@imperial.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Anopheles (Kerteszia) cruzii is the primary vector of human and
simian malarias in Brazilian regions covered by the Atlantic Rainforest. Previous
studies found that An. cruzii presents high levels of behavioural, chromosomal
and molecular polymorphisms, which led to the hypothesis that it may be a complex
of cryptic species. Here, An. cruzii specimens were collected in five sites in
South-East Brazil located at different altitudes on the inner and coastal slopes 
of two mountain ranges covered by Atlantic Rainforest, known as Serra do Mar and 
Serra da Mantiqueria. Partial sequences for two genes (Clock and cpr) were
generated and compared with previously published sequences from Florianópolis
(southern Brazil). Genetic diversity was analysed with estimates of population
structure (F ST ) and haplotype phylogenetic trees in order to understand how
many species of the complex may occur in this biome and how populations across
the species distribution are related.
RESULTS: The sequences from specimens collected at sites located on the lower
coastal slopes of Serra do Mar (Guapimirim, Tinguá and Sana) clustered together
in the phylogenetic analysis, while the major haplotypes from sites located on
higher altitude and at the continental side of the same mountains (Bocaina)
clustered with those from Serra da Mantiqueira (Itatiaia), an inner mountain
range. These two An. cruzii lineages showed statistically significant genetic
differentiation and fixed characters, and have high F ST values typical of
between species comparisons. Finally, in Bocaina, where the two lineages occur in
sympatry, we found deviations from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium due to a deficit of
heterozygotes, indicating partial reproductive isolation. These results strongly 
suggest that at least two distinct lineages of An. cruzii (provisorily named
"Group 1" and "Group 2") occur in the mountains of South-East Brazil.
CONCLUSIONS: At least two genetically distinct An. cruzii lineages occur in the
Atlantic Forest covered mountains of South-East Brazil. The co-occurrence of
distinct lineages of An. cruzii (possibly incipient species) in those mountains
is an interesting biological phenomenon and may have important implications for
malaria prevalence, Plasmodium transmission dynamics and control.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-018-2615-0 
PMCID: PMC5769553
PMID: 29335015  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

