
1. HLA. 2018 Apr;91(4):255-270. doi: 10.1111/tan.13196. Epub 2018 Jan 25.

The role of HLA-G in parasitic diseases.

Sabbagh A(1), Sonon P(2), Sadissou I(2), Mendes-Junior CT(3), Garcia A(1)(4),
Donadi EA(2), Courtin D(1).

Author information: 
(1)UMR 216 MERIT, Institut de Recherche pour le Développement, Faculté de
Pharmacie de Paris, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France.
(2)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, University of
São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Química, Faculdade de Filosofia, Ciências e Letras de Ribeirão
Preto, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Centre d'Etude et de Recherche sur le Paludisme Associé à la Grossesse et à
l'Enfance (CERPAGE), Faculté des Sciences de la Santé, Cotonou, Bénin.

Little attention has been devoted to the role of HLA-G gene and molecule on
parasitic disorders, and the available studies have focused on malaria, African
and American trypanosomiasis, leishmaniosis, toxoplasmosis and echinococcosis.
After reporting a brief description regarding the role of the cells of innate and
adaptive immune system against parasites, we reviewed the major features of the
HLA-G gene and molecule and the role of HLA-G on the major cells of immune
system. Increased levels of soluble HLA-G (sHLA-G) have been observed in patients
presenting toxoplasmosis and in the active phase of echinococcosis. In addition, 
increased sHLA-G has also been associated with increased susceptibility to
malaria and increased susceptibility to develop human African trypanosomiasis
(HAT). In contrast, decreased membrane-bound HLA-G has been reported in placenta 
of patients infected with Plasmodium falciparum and in heart and colon of
patients presenting Chagas disease. The 3' untranslated region of the HLA-G gene 
has been the main focus of studies on malaria, HAT and Chagas disease, exhibiting
distinct patterns of associations. Considering that HLA-G is an immune checkpoint
molecule, inhibiting the activity of several cells of the immune system, the
excessive neoexpression and the increased sHLA-G levels together with the
decreased constitutive tissue expression of membrane-bound HLA-G may be
detrimental to the host infected with parasite agents.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tan.13196 
PMID: 29368453  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

