
1. PLoS One. 2018 Feb 9;13(2):e0192659. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0192659.
eCollection 2018.

KSHV oral shedding and plasma viremia result in significant changes in the
extracellular tumorigenic miRNA expression profile in individuals infected with
the malaria parasite.

Ikoma M(1), Gantt S(2), Casper C(3)(4), Ogata Y(5), Zhang Q(6), Basom R(6), Dyen 
MR(1), Rose TM(1)(7), Barcy S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Global Infectious Disease Research, Seattle Children's Research
Institute, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of British Columbia, BC Children's
Hospital, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(3)Infectious Disease Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, United States of
America.
(4)Departments of Medicine and Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington, United States of America.
(5)Proteomics, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington,
United States of America.
(6)Genomics, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, United 
States of America.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
United States of America.

Kaposi's sarcoma herpesvirus (KSHV) is the etiological agent of Kaposi's sarcoma 
(KS). Both KSHV and HIV infections are endemic in Uganda, where KS is among the
most common cancers in HIV-infected individuals. Recent studies examined the use 
of small RNAs as biomarkers of disease, including microRNAs (miRNAs), with viral 
and tumor-derived miRNAs being detected in exosomes from individuals with
KSHV-associated malignancies. In the current study, the host and viral
extracellular mature miRNA expression profiles were analyzed in blood of
KS-negative individuals in Uganda, comparing those with or without KSHV
detectable from the oropharynx. We observed increased levels of cellular
oncogenic miRNAs and decreased levels of tumor-suppressor miRNAs in plasma of
infected individuals exhibiting oral KSHV shedding. These changes in host
oncomiRs were exacerbated in people co-infected with HIV, and partially reversed 
after 2 years of anti-retroviral therapy. We also detected KSHV miRNAs in plasma 
of KSHV infected individuals and determined that their expression levels
correlated with KSHV plasma viremia. Deep sequencing revealed an expected profile
of small cellular RNAs in plasma, with miRNAs constituting the major RNA biotype.
In contrast, the composition of small RNAs in exosomes was highly atypical with
high levels of YRNA and low levels of miRNAs. Mass spectrometry analysis of the
exosomes revealed eleven different peptides derived from the malaria parasite,
Plasmodium falciparum, and small RNA sequencing confirmed widespread plasmodium
co-infections in the Ugandan cohorts. Proteome analysis indicated an exosomal
protein profile consistent with erythrocyte and keratinocyte origins for the
plasma exosomes. A strong correlation was observed between the abundance of
Plasmodium proteins and cellular markers of malaria. As Plasmodium falciparum is 
an endemic pathogen in Uganda, our study shows that co-infection with other
pathogens, such as KSHV, can severely impact the small RNA repertoire,
complicating the use of exosome miRNAs as biomarkers of disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0192659 
PMCID: PMC5806893
PMID: 29425228  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

