
1. J Hematol Oncol. 2018 Feb 20;11(1):23. doi: 10.1186/s13045-018-0561-0.

Artesunate shows potent anti-tumor activity in B-cell lymphoma.

Våtsveen TK(1)(2), Myhre MR(3), Steen CB(4)(5)(6), Wälchli S(4)(5)(3), Lingjærde 
OC(5)(6), Bai B(4)(5), Dillard P(3), Theodossiou TA(7), Holien T(8)(9), Sundan
A(8)(9), Inderberg EM(3), Smeland EB(4)(5), Myklebust JH(4)(5), Oksvold MP(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo
University Hospital-Radiumhospitalet, Ullernschausseen 70, Montebello, 0379,
Oslo, Norway. thea.kristin.vatsveen@rr-research.no.
(2)Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
thea.kristin.vatsveen@rr-research.no.
(3)Department of Cellular Therapy, Department of Oncology, Oslo University
Hospital-Radiumhospitalet, Oslo, Norway.
(4)Department of Cancer Immunology, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo
University Hospital-Radiumhospitalet, Ullernschausseen 70, Montebello, 0379,
Oslo, Norway.
(5)Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(6)Department of Computer Science, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(7)Department of Radiation Biology, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo
University Hospital-Radiumhospitalet, Oslo, Norway.
(8)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.
(9)Department of Hematology, St. Olav's Hospital HF, Trondheim, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Although chemo-immunotherapy has led to an improved overall survival 
for most B-cell lymphoma types, relapsed and refractory disease remains a
challenge. The malaria drug artesunate has previously been identified as a growth
suppressor in some cancer types and was tested as a new treatment option in
B-cell lymphoma.
METHODS: We included artesunate in a cancer sensitivity drug screen in B lymphoma
cell lines. The preclinical properties of artesunate was tested as single agent
in vitro in 18 B-cell lymphoma cell lines representing different histologies and 
in vivo in an aggressive B-cell lymphoma xenograft model, using NSG mice.
Artesunate-treated B lymphoma cell lines were analyzed by functional assays, gene
expression profiling, and protein expression to identify the mechanism of action.
RESULTS: Drug screening identified artesunate as a highly potent anti-lymphoma
drug. Artesunate induced potent growth suppression in most B lymphoma cells with 
an IC50 comparable to concentrations measured in serum from artesunate-treated
malaria patients, while leaving normal B-cells unaffected. Artesunate markedly
inhibited highly aggressive tumor growth in a xenograft model. Gene expression
analysis identified endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and the unfolded protein
response as the most affected pathways and artesunate-induced expression of the
ER stress markers ATF-4 and DDIT3 was specifically upregulated in malignant
B-cells, but not in normal B-cells. In addition, artesunate significantly
suppressed the overall cell metabolism, affecting both respiration and
glycolysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Artesunate demonstrated potent apoptosis-inducing effects across a
broad range of B-cell lymphoma cell lines in vitro, and a prominent anti-lymphoma
activity in vivo, suggesting it to be a relevant drug for treatment of B-cell
lymphoma.

DOI: 10.1186/s13045-018-0561-0 
PMCID: PMC5819282
PMID: 29458389  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

