
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2018 Feb 20;12(2):e0006185. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0006185. eCollection 2018 Feb.

Host plant forensics and olfactory-based detection in Afro-tropical mosquito
disease vectors.

Nyasembe VO(1)(2), Tchouassi DP(1), Pirk CWW(2), Sole CL(2), Torto B(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)International Centre of Insect Physiology and Ecology, Nairobi, Kenya.
(2)Department of Zoology and Entomology, University of Pretoria, Hatfield, South 
Africa.

The global spread of vector-borne diseases remains a worrying public health
threat, raising the need for development of new combat strategies for vector
control. Knowledge of vector ecology can be exploited in this regard, including
plant feeding; a critical resource that mosquitoes of both sexes rely on for
survival and other metabolic processes. However, the identity of plant species
mosquitoes feed on in nature remains largely unknown. By testing the hypothesis
about selectivity in plant feeding, we employed a DNA-based approach targeting
trnH-psbA and matK genes and identified host plants of field-collected
Afro-tropical mosquito vectors of dengue, Rift Valley fever and malaria being
among the most important mosquito-borne diseases in East Africa. These included
three plant species for Aedes aegypti (dengue), two for both Aedes mcintoshi and 
Aedes ochraceus (Rift Valley fever) and five for Anopheles gambiae (malaria).
Since plant feeding is mediated by olfactory cues, we further sought to identify 
specific odor signatures that may modulate host plant location. Using coupled gas
chromatography (GC)-electroantennographic detection, GC/mass spectrometry and
electroantennogram analyses, we identified a total of 21 antennally-active
components variably detected by Ae. aegypti, Ae. mcintoshi and An. gambiae from
their respective host plants. Whereas Ae. aegypti predominantly detected
benzenoids, Ae. mcintoshi detected mainly aldehydes while An. gambiae detected
sesquiterpenes and alkenes. Interestingly, the monoterpenes β-myrcene and
(E)-β-ocimene were consistently detected by all the mosquito species and present 
in all the identified host plants, suggesting that they may serve as signature
cues in plant location. This study highlights the utility of molecular approaches
in identifying specific vector-plant associations, which can be exploited in
maximizing control strategies such as such as attractive toxic sugar bait and
odor-bait technology.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0006185 
PMCID: PMC5834208
PMID: 29462150  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

