
1. Malar J. 2018 Feb 23;17(1):91. doi: 10.1186/s12936-018-2232-6.

Direct whole-genome sequencing of Plasmodium falciparum specimens from dried
erythrocyte spots.

Nag S(1)(2), Kofoed PE(3)(4), Ursing J(4)(5)(6), Lemvigh CK(7), Allesøe RL(7),
Rodrigues A(4), Svendsen CA(8), Jensen JD(8), Alifrangis M(9)(10), Lund O(7),
Aarestrup FM(8).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Parasitology at Department of Immunology and Microbiology, 
Faculty of Health and Medical Science, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark. jassd_nf@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Copenhagen University Hospital
(Rigshospitalet), Copenhagen, Denmark. jassd_nf@hotmail.com.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, Kolding Hospital, Kolding, Denmark.
(4)Bandim Health Project, Bissau, Guinea-Bissau.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Department of Infectious Diseases, Danderyds Hospital, Danderyd, Sweden.
(7)DTU Bioinformatics, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark.
(8)Division for Epidemiology and Microbial Genomics, National Food Institute,
Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark.
(9)Centre for Medical Parasitology at Department of Immunology and Microbiology, 
Faculty of Health and Medical Science, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
(10)Department of Infectious Diseases, Copenhagen University Hospital
(Rigshospitalet), Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium falciparum malaria remains a major health burden and
genomic research represents one of the necessary approaches for continued
progress towards malaria control and elimination. Sample acquisition for this
purpose is troublesome, with the majority of malaria-infected individuals living 
in rural areas, away from main infrastructure and the electrical grid. The aim of
this study was to describe a low-tech procedure to sample P. falciparum specimens
for direct whole genome sequencing (WGS), without use of electricity and
cold-chain.
METHODS: Venous blood samples were collected from malaria patients in Bandim,
Guinea-Bissau and leukocyte-depleted using Plasmodipur filters, the enriched
parasite sample was spotted on Whatman paper and dried. The samples were stored
at ambient temperatures and subsequently used for DNA-extraction. Ratios of
parasite:human content of the extracted DNA was assessed by qPCR, and five
samples with varying parasitaemia, were sequenced. Sequencing data were used to
analyse the sample content, as well as sample coverage and depth as compared to
the 3d7 reference genome.
RESULTS: qPCR revealed that 73% of the 199 samples were applicable for WGS, as
defined by a minimum ratio of parasite:human DNA of 2:1. WGS revealed an even
distribution of sequence data across the 3d7 reference genome, regardless of
parasitaemia. The acquired read depths varied from 16 to 99×, and coverage varied
from 87.5 to 98.9% of the 3d7 reference genome. SNP-analysis of six genes, for
which amplicon sequencing has been performed previously, confirmed the
reliability of the WGS-data.
CONCLUSION: This study describes a simple filter paper based protocol for
sampling P. falciparum from malaria patients for subsequent direct WGS, enabling 
acquisition of samples in remote settings with no access to electricity.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-018-2232-6 
PMCID: PMC5824530
PMID: 29471822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

