
1. Microb Pathog. 2018 Apr;117:299-303. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2018.02.048. Epub
2018 Feb 26.

Vitamin D receptor regulates intestinal inflammatory response in mice infected
with blood stage malaria.

Mubaraki MA(1), Dkhil MA(2), Hafiz TA(1), Khalil MF(3), Al-Shaebi EM(4), Delic
D(5), Elshaikh K(6), Al-Quraishy S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Laboratory Sciences Department, College of Applied Medical Sciences, 
King Saud University, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University, Saudi Arabia;
Department of Zoology and Entomology, Faculty of Science, Helwan University,
Egypt. Electronic address: mohameddkhil@yahoo.com.
(3)Department of Zoology and Entomology, Faculty of Science, Helwan University,
Egypt; Department of Basic Sciences, Deanship of Preparatory Year and Supporting 
Studies, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, 1982, Dammam, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Boehringer-Ingelheim Pharma, Biberach, Germany.
(6)Department of Zoology and Entomology, Faculty of Science, Helwan University,
Egypt; Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Taibah University, Saudi
Arabia.

Malaria is a harmful disease affecting both tropical and subtropical countries
and causing sometimes fatal complications. The effects of malaria-related
complications on the intestine have been relatively neglected, and the reasons
for the intestinal damage caused by malaria infection are not yet clear. The
present study aims to evaluate the influence of intestinal vitamin D receptor on 
host-pathogen interactions during malaria induced in mice by Plasmodium chabaudi.
To induce the infection, animals were infected with 106P. chabaudi-parasitized
erythrocytes. Mice were sacrificed on day 8 post-infection. The infected mice
experienced a significant body weight loss and parasitaemia affecting about 46%
of RBCs. Infection caused marked pathological changes in the intestinal tissue
indicated by shortening of the intestine and villi. Moreover, the phagocytic
activity of macrophages increased significantly (P < 0.01) in the infected villi 
compared to the non-infected ones. Infection by the parasite also induced marked 
upregulation of nuclear factor-kappa B, inducible nitric oxide synthase, Vitamin 
D Receptor, interleukin-1β, tumour necrosis factor alpha and interferon
gamma-mRNA. It can be implied from this that vitamin D receptor has a role in
regulating malarial infection.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2018.02.048 
PMID: 29496525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

