
1. Drug Metab Dispos. 2018 May;46(5):503-513. doi: 10.1124/dmd.117.079905. Epub 2018
Mar 7.

Physiological Regulation of Drug Metabolism and Transport: Pregnancy, Microbiome,
Inflammation, Infection, and Fasting.

Morgan ET(1), Dempsey JL(2), Mimche SM(2), Lamb TJ(2), Kulkarni S(2), Cui JY(1), 
Jeong H(1), Slitt AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta,
Georgia (E.T.M., S.M.M.); Department of Pathology, University of Utah, Salt Lake 
City, Utah (T.J.L.); Department of Pharmacy Practice and Department of
Biopharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of Illinois, Chicago,
Illinois (H.J., J.L.D.); Department of Environmental and Occupational Health
Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington (J.L.D., J.Y.C.); and
Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Rhode Island,
Kingston, Rhode Island (A.L.S., S.K.) etmorga@emory.edu yjeong@uic.edu
juliacui@uw.edu angela_slitt@uri.edu.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta,
Georgia (E.T.M., S.M.M.); Department of Pathology, University of Utah, Salt Lake 
City, Utah (T.J.L.); Department of Pharmacy Practice and Department of
Biopharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of Illinois, Chicago,
Illinois (H.J., J.L.D.); Department of Environmental and Occupational Health
Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington (J.L.D., J.Y.C.); and
Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Rhode Island,
Kingston, Rhode Island (A.L.S., S.K.).

This article is a report on a symposium entitled "Physiological Regulation of
Drug Metabolism and Transport" sponsored by the American Society for Pharmacology
and Experimental Therapeutics and held at the Experimental Biology 2017 meeting
in Chicago, IL. The contributions of physiologic and pathophysiological
regulation of drug-metabolizing enzymes and transporters to interindividual
variability in drug metabolism are increasingly recognized but in many cases are 
not well understood. The presentations herein discuss the phenomenology,
consequences, and mechanism of such regulation. CYP2D6 transgenic mice were used 
to provide insights into the mechanism of regulation of this enzyme in pregnancy,
via hepatocyte nuclear factor 4α, small heterodimer partner, and retinoids.
Regulation of intestinal and hepatic drug-processing enzymes by the intestinal
microbiota via tryptophan and its metabolites was investigated. The potential
impact of parasitic infections on human drug metabolism and clearance was
assessed in mice infected with Schistosoma mansoni or Plasmodium chabaudi
chabaudi AS, both of which produced widespread and profound effects on murine
hepatic drug-metabolizing enzymes. Finally, the induction of Abcc drug efflux
transporters by fasting was investigated. This was demonstrated to occur via a
cAMP, protein kinase A/nuclear factor-E2-related factor 2/Sirtuin 1 pathway via
antioxidant response elements on the Abcc genes.

Copyright © 2018 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1124/dmd.117.079905 
PMCID: PMC5885931
PMID: 29514828  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

