
1. Exp Parasitol. 2018 May;188:26-35. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2018.03.001. Epub 2018 
Mar 8.

Genetic diversity analysis of PvCSP and its application in tracking of Plasmodium
vivax.

Zhang LL(1), Yao LN(2), Chen HL(3), Lu QY(4), Ruan W(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Communicable Diseases of Control and Prevention, Zhejiang
Provincial Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, Hangzhou, China. Electronic
address: llzhang@cdc.zj.cn.
(2)Department of Communicable Diseases of Control and Prevention, Zhejiang
Provincial Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, Hangzhou, China. Electronic
address: lnyao@cdc.zj.cn.
(3)Department of Communicable Diseases of Control and Prevention, Zhejiang
Provincial Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, Hangzhou, China. Electronic
address: hlchen@cdc.zj.cn.
(4)Department of Communicable Diseases of Control and Prevention, Zhejiang
Provincial Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, Hangzhou, China. Electronic
address: qiaoyilu@cdc.zj.cn.
(5)Department of Communicable Diseases of Control and Prevention, Zhejiang
Provincial Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, Hangzhou, China; Wenzhou
City Health and Family Planning, Wenzhou 325000, China. Electronic address:
wruan@cdc.zj.cn.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium vivax remains a potential cause of morbidity and mortality
for people living where it is endemic. Understanding the regional genetic
diversity of P. vivax is valuable for studying population dynamics and tracing
the origins of parasites. The Plasmodium vivax circumsporozoite gene (PvCSP) is
highly polymorphic and has been used previously as a marker in P. vivax
population studies. The aim of this study is to investigate the genetic diversity
of the PvCSP, to provide more genetic polymorphism data for further studies on
P. vivax population structure, and tracking of the origin of clinical cases.
METHODS: Nested PCR and DNA sequencing of the PvCSP were performed to obtain
nucleotide sequences of P. vivax isolates collected from Zhejiang province,
China, between 2006 and 2014. To investigate the genetic diversity of PvCSP, the 
nucleotide sequences and amino acid sequences of the PvCSP were analyzed using
DNAstar, Mega software and the phylogenetic tree constructed. The relatedness
between the polymorphism and infection source were also analyzed using the SPSS
software.
RESULTS: The 66 P. vivax isolates collected from Zhejiang province were either
indigenous cases or cases imported from different regions of the world. All 66
P. vivax isolates belonged to the VK210 variant. Fourteen different Peptide
Repeat Motifs (PRMs) were detected in the Central Repeat Region (CRR) of PvCSP,
among which, two PRMs of GDRADGQPA and GDRAAGQPA were widely distributed in all
isolates. Several polymorphic characteristics of the VK210 variant were observed,
including the insertion sequence of 12 peptides, the frequency of the GGNA
repeat, the frequency of the PRMs repeat in CRR, and the frequency of the PRM of 
GNGAGGQAA repeat, which were indicative for tracking the parasite.
CONCLUSION: This study presents abundant genetic diversity in the PvCSP marker
among P. vivax strains around the world. The genetic data are valuable to expand 
the polymorphism information on P. vivax, which could be helpful for further
study on population dynamics and tracking the origin of P. vivax.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2018.03.001 
PMID: 29526573  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

