
1. PLoS Pathog. 2018 Mar 14;14(3):e1006930. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006930.
eCollection 2018 Mar.

Oxidative stress and protein damage responses mediate artemisinin resistance in
malaria parasites.

Rocamora F(1), Zhu L(1), Liong KY(1), Dondorp A(2), Miotto O(3), Mok S(4),
Bozdech Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
(2)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, 
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Medical Research Council (MRC) Centre for Genomics and Global Health,
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(4)Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York, United States of
America.

Due to their remarkable parasitocidal activity, artemisinins represent the key
components of first-line therapies against Plasmodium falciparum malaria.
However, the decline in efficacy of artemisinin-based drugs jeopardizes global
efforts to control and ultimately eradicate the disease. To better understand the
resistance phenotype, artemisinin-resistant parasite lines were derived from two 
clones of the 3D7 strain of P. falciparum using a selection regimen that mimics
how parasites interact with the drug within patients. This long term in vitro
selection induced profound stage-specific resistance to artemisinin and its
relative compounds. Chemosensitivity and transcriptional profiling of
artemisinin-resistant parasites indicate that enhanced adaptive responses against
oxidative stress and protein damage are associated with decreased artemisinin
susceptibility. This corroborates our previous findings implicating these
cellular functions in artemisinin resistance in natural infections. Genomic
characterization of the two derived parasite lines revealed a spectrum of
sequence and copy number polymorphisms that could play a role in regulating
artemisinin response, but did not include mutations in pfk13, the main marker of 
artemisinin resistance in Southeast Asia. Taken together, here we present a
functional in vitro model of artemisinin resistance that is underlined by a new
set of genetic polymorphisms as potential genetic markers.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006930 
PMCID: PMC5868857
PMID: 29538461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

