
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2018 May;98(5):1374-1381. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0857. Epub
2018 Mar 15.

Development of Visually Improved Loop Mediated Isothermal Amplification for the
Diagnosis of Plasmodium vivax Malaria in a Tertiary Hospital in Chandigarh, North
India.

Kaur H(1), Sehgal R(1), Bansal D(2), Sultan AA(2), Bhalla A(3), Singhi SC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Parasitology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical
Education and Research, Chandigarh, India.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Cornell Medicine-Qatar,
Cornell University, Qatar Foundation-Education City, Doha, Qatar.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education
and Research, Chandigarh, India.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and
Research, Chandigarh, India.

More than 80% of the global burden of the Plasmodium vivax is contributed by
mainly three countries (India, Indonesia, and Pakistan). Reports from last
decades have highlighted the occurrence of severe P. vivax malaria which was
earlier considered to be benign. The recent trends of increasing P.
vivax-associated morbidity and mortality emphasizes the need for early and
accurate diagnosis of P. vivax malaria for the timely management of patients.
Microscopy is considered a gold standard but needs experienced laboratory
technologists. Over the last few years, Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is being 
used as a highly sensitive and specific test but it requires expensive equipment 
which limits its use in the field. Therefore, in the present study, utility of
visually improved loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) for the detection
of P. vivax was evaluated targeting 18SrRNA gene in 145 microscopically confirmed
P. vivax and 20 P. vivax negative patients. Sensitivity and specificity of LAMP
was assessed with respect to microscopy and multiplex nested PCR (nPCR). Results 
of the LAMP assay was also correlated with rapid diagnostic test, multiplex nPCR 
and real-time PCR results. Overall, sensitivity and specificity of P.
vivax-specific LAMP compared with microscopy were found to be 100% and 85%,
respectively. Furthermore, detection limit for LAMP was found to be 0.8 copies/μL
and it was also able to detect three complicated cases of P. vivax which were
missed by microscopy. This study showed a LAMP assay to be a rapid and very
sensitive method for the early diagnosis of both complicated and uncomplicated P.
vivax malaria.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0857 
PMCID: PMC5953384
PMID: 29557335  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

