
1. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis. 2018 May;18(5):252-257. doi: 10.1089/vbz.2017.2219.
Epub 2018 Mar 20.

Molecular Characterization and Phylogenetic Analysis of Anaplasma spp. and
Ehrlichia spp. Isolated from Various Ticks in Southeastern and Northwestern
Regions of Iran.

Jafar Bekloo A(1)(2), Ramzgouyan MR(2)(3), Shirian S(4)(5), Faghihi F(6), Bakhshi
H(7), Naseri F(8), Sedaghat M(9), Telmadarraiy Z(9).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Human Rights, Shahid Beheshti Universality , Tehran, Iran .
(2)2 Department of Research and Development, Chabahar Gulf Marine Company ,
Chabahar, Iran .
(3)3 Department of Tissue Engineering and Applied Cell Sciences, School of
Advanced Technologies in Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences ,
Tehran, Iran .
(4)4 Department of Pathology, School of Veterinary Medicine, Shahrekord
University , Shahrekord, Iran .
(5)5 Department of Cytopathology, Dr. Daneshbod Path Lab , Shiraz Molecular
Pathology Research Center, Shiraz, Iran .
(6)6 Department of Biotechnology, Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Iran
University of Medical Sciences , Tehran, Iran .
(7)7 Department of Parasitology, Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG),
Pasteur Institute of Iran (PII) , Biotechnology Research Center (BRC), Tehran,
Iran .
(8)8 Veterenary Office of Chabahar , Chabahar, Iran .
(9)9 Department of Medical Entomology and Vector Control, School of Public
Health, Tehran University of Medical Sciences , Tehran, Iran .

INTRODUCTION: Anaplasma/Ehrlichia species are tick-transmitted pathogens that
cause infections in humans and numerous domestic and wild animal species. There
is no information available on the molecular characteristics and phylogenetic
position of Anaplasma/Ehrlichia spp. isolated from tick species from different
geographic locations in Iran. The aim of this study was to determine the
prevalence, molecular characteristics, and phylogenetic relationship of both
Anaplasma spp. and Ehrlichia spp. in tick species isolated from different
domestic animals from two different geographical locations of Iran.
METHODS: A total of 930 ticks were collected from 93 cattle, 250 sheep, and 587
goats inhabiting the study areas. The collected ticks were then investigated for 
the presence of Anaplasma/Ehrlichia spp. using nested PCR based on the 16S rRNA
gene, followed by sequencing. Sequence analysis was done based on the data
published in the GenBank on Anaplasma/Ehrlichia spp. isolates using bioinformatic
tools such as the standard nucleotide BLAST.
RESULTS: Genome of Anaplasma or Ehrlichia spp. was detected in 14 ticks collected
in Heris, including 5 Dermacentor marginatus, 1 Haemaphysalis erinacei, 3
Hyalomma anatolicum, and 4 Rhipicephalus sanguineus, also in 29 ticks collected
in Chabahar, including 14 R. sanguineus, 8 D. marginatus, 3 Hyalomma Anatolicum, 
and 4 Hyalomma dromedarii. Partial analysis of the 16S rRNA gene sequence of
positive samples collected from goats and sheep showed that they were infected
with Anaplasma/Ehrlichia spp. that were 94-98% identical to ovine Anaplasma and
91-96% identical to Neoehrlichia and Ehrlichia spp.
CONCLUSION: The various ticks identified in this study suggest the possible
emergence of tick-borne diseases in animals and humans in these regions. R.
sanguineus and D. marginatus seem to be predominant vectors responsible for
anaplasmosis in these regions. Partial sequence analysis of the 16S rRNA gene
showed that A. ovis is genetically polymorphic in these regions. Furthermore, an 
association between the genetic heterogeneity of this microorganism and the
geographical regions of Anaplasma strains was found. This study also showed that 
those ticks that were collected from the same geographical origin were infected
with closely related strains of Anaplasma.

DOI: 10.1089/vbz.2017.2219 
PMID: 29584589  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

