
1. Mol Immunol. 2018 May;97:82-93. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2018.03.019. Epub 2018 Mar 
28.

Role of IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α cytokines and TNF-α promoter variability in
Plasmodium vivax infection during pregnancy in endemic population of Jharkhand,
India.

Singh KP(1), Shakeel S(2), Naskar N(3), Bharti A(4), Kaul A(5), Anwar S(6),
Kumari S(2), Kumar A(2), Singh JK(7), Kumari N(8), Gupta BK(2), Manna P(9), Roy
V(9), Lata S(10), Singh OP(5), Sinha MP(11), Sharma AK(12), Sohail M(13).

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratory, University Department of Zoology, Vinoba Bhave
University, Hazaribag, Jharkhand, India; Department of Biochemistry, Rajendra
Memorial Research Institute of Medical Sciences, Patna, India.
(2)Research Laboratory, University Department of Zoology, Vinoba Bhave
University, Hazaribag, Jharkhand, India.
(3)Female OPD, Kasturba Medical College, Karnataka, India.
(4)Research Laboratory, University Department of Zoology, Vinoba Bhave
University, Hazaribag, Jharkhand, India; Department of Biotechnology, VIT
University, Vellore, India.
(5)Division of Parasitology, National Institute of Malaria Research, New Delhi,
India.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, Rajendra Memorial Research Institute of Medical
Sciences, Patna, India.
(7)Department of Biotechnology, T. N. B. College, Bhagalpur, India.
(8)Department of Biochemistry, Patna Medical College and Hospital, Patna, India.
(9)Faculty of Life Science, MATS University, Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India.
(10)Female OPD, Sadar Hospital, Hazaribag, Jharkhand, India.
(11)University Departments of Zoology, Ranchi University, Ranchi, Jharkhand,
India.
(12)Research Laboratory, University Department of Zoology, Vinoba Bhave
University, Hazaribag, Jharkhand, India. Electronic address:
ajaysharma@vbu.ac.in.
(13)Research Laboratory, University Department of Zoology, Vinoba Bhave
University, Hazaribag, Jharkhand, India. Electronic address: soh.khan@vbu.ac.in.

BACKGROUND: The combinatorial effects of Plasmodium infection, perturbation of
inflammatory responses and the dichotomic role of TNF promoter polymorphism has
potential clinical and physiological relevance during pregnancy.
OBJECTIVE AND METHODS: This coordinated orchestration instigated us to
investigate the circulating level of inflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, TNF-α and
IL-6) employing ELISA in a stratified group of samples and the plausible genetic 
association of TNF-α -308 G/A using PCR-RFLP/sequencing during Plasmodium vivax
infection in pregnancy.
RESULTS: We observed significantly elevated concentrations of IL-1β were
observed, followed by IL-6 and TNF-α in women with malaria (WWM) and in malaria
in pregnancy (MIP). Further, elevated IL-1β, followed by TNF-α and IL-6 were
detected in the non-infected pregnancy group. The differential dynamics of
inflammatory cytokine concentration during each trimester of pregnancy with and
without P. vivax infection were detected. For the first time, a high level of
IL-6 was observed in the first trimester of MIP and high IL-1β in healthy
pregnancies. In the second trimester, however, we observed a high level of IL-1β 
in the MIP group compared to a sustained high level of IL-1β in the healthy
pregnancy group. In the third trimester, high IL-1β was sustained in the MIP
group and healthy pregnancies acquired a high TNF-α level. The genotypic
distribution for the TNF-α promoter -308 G/A position was observed to be
nonsignificant and mildly associated during MIP (OR = 1.4) and in WWM (OR = 1.2).
Moreover, based on genotypic distribution, we observed a well-correlated and
significantly elevated TNF-α concentration in the mutant homozygote genotype (AA;
p = 0.001) followed by heterozygotes (GA; p = 0.0001) and ancestral genotypes
(GG; p = 0.0001) in both MIP and WWM subjects.
CONCLUSION: The observation of elevated IL-1β and IL-6 in MIP and TNF-α in WWM
may be regarded as a prognostic inflammatory marker of infection and pregnancy.
Most particularly, the TNF-α concentration and its polymorphic variability in the
promoter region may indicate genetic susceptibility and mildly influence the risk
for P. vivax infection during pregnancy and in women with malaria.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2018.03.019 
PMID: 29602073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

