
1. Malar J. 2018 Apr 4;17(1):154. doi: 10.1186/s12936-018-2259-8.

The use of driving endonuclease genes to suppress mosquito vectors of malaria in 
temporally variable environments.

Lambert B(1)(2), North A(3), Burt A(4), Godfray HCJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1
3PS, UK. ben.c.lambert@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, School of Public Health,
Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, St. Mary's Campus, Norfolk Place,
London, W2 1PG, UK. ben.c.lambert@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1
3PS, UK.
(4)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, Silwood Park, Ascot,
Berks, SL5 7PY, UK.

BACKGROUND: The use of gene drive systems to manipulate populations of malaria
vectors is currently being investigated as a method of malaria control. One
potential system uses driving endonuclease genes (DEGs) to spread genes that
impose a genetic load. Previously, models have shown that the introduction of
DEG-bearing mosquitoes could suppress or even extinguish vector populations in
spatially-heterogeneous environments which were constant over time. In this
study, a stochastic spatially-explicit model of mosquito ecology is combined with
a rainfall model which enables the generation of a variety of daily precipitation
patterns. The model is then used to investigate how releases of a DEG that cause 
a bias in population sex ratios towards males are affected by seasonal or random 
rainfall patterns. The parameters of the rainfall model are then fitted using
data from Bamako, Mali, and Mbita, Kenya, to evaluate release strategies in
similar climatic conditions.
RESULTS: In landscapes with abundant resources and large mosquito populations the
spread of a DEG is reliable, irrespective of variability in rainfall. This study 
thus focuses mainly on landscapes with low density mosquito populations where the
spread of a DEG may be sensitive to variation in rainfall. It is found that an
introduced DEG will spread into its target population more reliably in wet
conditions, yet an established DEG will have more impact in dry conditions. In
strongly seasonal environments, it is thus preferable to release DEGs at the
onset of a wet season to maximize their spread before the following dry season.
If the variability in rainfall has a substantial random component, there is a net
increase in the probability that a DEG release will lead to population
extinction, due to the increased impact of a DEG which manages to establish in
these conditions. For Bamako, where annual rainfall patterns are characterized by
a long dry season, it is optimal to release a DEG at the start of the wet season,
where the population is growing fastest. By contrast release timing is of lower
importance for the less seasonal Mbita.
CONCLUSION: This analysis suggests that DEG based methods of malaria vector
control can be effective in a wide range of climates. In environments with
substantial temporal variation in rainfall, careful timing of releases which
accounts for the temporal variation in population density can substantially
improve the probability of mosquito suppression or extinction.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-018-2259-8 
PMCID: PMC5885365
PMID: 29618367  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

