
1. mSphere. 2018 Apr 11;3(2). pii: e00130-18. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00130-18. Print
2018 Apr 25.

Single-Cell Analysis Reveals Distinct Gene Expression and Heterogeneity in Male
and Female Plasmodium falciparum Gametocytes.

Walzer KA(1)(2), Kubicki DM(1)(2), Tang X(3), Chi JT(4)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University, Durham,
North Carolina, USA.
(2)Center for Genomic and Computational Biology, Duke University, Durham, North
Carolina, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Michigan Technological University,
Houghton, Michigan, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University, Durham,
North Carolina, USA jentsan.chi@duke.edu.

Sexual reproduction is an obligate step in the Plasmodium falciparum life cycle, 
with mature gametocytes being the only form of the parasite capable of
human-to-mosquito transmission. Development of male and female gametocytes takes 
9 to 12 days, and although more than 300 genes are thought to be specific to
gametocytes, only a few have been postulated to be male or female specific.
Because these genes are often expressed during late gametocyte stages and for
some, male- or female-specific transcript expression is debated, the separation
of male and female populations is technically challenging. To overcome these
challenges, we have developed an unbiased single-cell approach to determine which
transcripts are expressed in male versus female gametocytes. Using microfluidic
technology, we isolated single mid- to late-stage gametocytes to compare the
expression of 91 genes, including 87 gametocyte-specific genes, in 90 cells. Such
analysis identified distinct gene clusters whose expression was associated with
male, female, or all gametocytes. In addition, a small number of male gametocytes
clustered separately from female gametocytes based on sex-specific expression
independent of stage. Many female-enriched genes also exhibited stage-specific
expression. RNA fluorescent in situ hybridization of male and female markers
validated the mutually exclusive expression pattern of male and female
transcripts in gametocytes. These analyses uncovered novel male and female
markers that are expressed as early as stage III gametocytogenesis, providing
further insight into Plasmodium sex-specific differentiation previously masked in
population analyses. Our single-cell approach reveals the most robust markers for
sex-specific differentiation in Plasmodium gametocytes. Such single-cell
expression assays can be generalized to all eukaryotic pathogens.IMPORTANCE Most 
human deaths that result from malaria are caused by the eukaryotic parasite
Plasmodium falciparum The only form of this parasite that is transmitted to the
mosquito is the sexual form, called the gametocyte. The production of mature
gametocytes can take up to 2 weeks and results in phenotypically distinct males
and females, although what causes this gender-specific differentiation remains
largely unknown. Here, we demonstrate the first use of microfluidic technology to
capture single gametocytes and determine their temporal sex-specific gene
expression in an unbiased manner. We were able to determine male or female
identity of single cells based on the upregulation of gender-specific genes as
early as mid-stage gametocytes. This analysis has revealed strong markers for
male and female gametocyte differentiation that were previously concealed in
population analyses. Similar single-cell analyses in eukaryotic pathogens using
this method may uncover rare cell types and heterogeneity previously masked in
population studies.

Copyright © 2018 Walzer et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00130-18 
PMCID: PMC5909122
PMID: 29643077  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

