
1. BMC Biotechnol. 2018 Apr 11;18(1):22. doi: 10.1186/s12896-018-0428-z.

Antiplasmodial and trypanocidal activity of violacein and deoxyviolacein produced
from synthetic operons.

Bilsland E(1)(2)(3), Tavella TA(4), Krogh R(5), Stokes JE(6), Roberts A(7),
Ajioka J(8), Spring DR(6), Andricopulo AD(5), Costa FTM(4), Oliver SG(7).

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Systems Biology Centre and Department of Biochemistry, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. bilsland@unicamp.br.
(2)Department of Structural and Functional Biology, Institute of Biology,
UNICAMP, Campinas, SP, Brazil. bilsland@unicamp.br.
(3)Laboratory of Tropical Diseases - Prof. Dr. Luiz Jacintho da Silva -
Department of Genetics, Evolution, Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil. bilsland@unicamp.br.
(4)Laboratory of Tropical Diseases - Prof. Dr. Luiz Jacintho da Silva -
Department of Genetics, Evolution, Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil.
(5)Laboratory of Medicinal and Computational Chemistry, University of São Paulo, 
São Carlos, SP, Brazil.
(6)Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(7)Cambridge Systems Biology Centre and Department of Biochemistry, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(8)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

BACKGROUND: Violacein is a deep violet compound that is produced by a number of
bacterial species. It is synthesized from tryptophan by a pathway that involves
the sequential action of 5 different enzymes (encoded by genes vioA to vioE).
Violacein has antibacterial, antiparasitic, and antiviral activities, and also
has the potential of inducing apoptosis in certain cancer cells.
RESULTS: Here, we describe the construction of a series of plasmids harboring the
complete or partial violacein biosynthesis operon and their use to enable
production of violacein and deoxyviolacein in E.coli. We performed in vitro
assays to determine the biological activity of these compounds against
Plasmodium, Trypanosoma, and mammalian cells. We found that, while deoxyviolacein
has a lower activity against parasites than violacein, its toxicity to mammalian 
cells is insignificant compared to that of violacein.
CONCLUSIONS: We constructed E. coli strains capable of producing biologically
active violacein and related compounds, and propose that deoxyviolacein might be 
a useful starting compound for the development of antiparasite drugs.

DOI: 10.1186/s12896-018-0428-z 
PMCID: PMC5896143
PMID: 29642881  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

