
1. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2018 May;96:36-50. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2018.03.008. Epub
2018 Apr 12.

Odorant-binding protein-based identification of natural spatial repellents for
the African malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae.

Kröber T(1), Koussis K(2), Bourquin M(3), Tsitoura P(4), Konstantopoulou M(5),
Awolola TS(6), Dani FR(7), Qiao H(8), Pelosi P(9), Iatrou K(10), Guerin PM(11).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology, Faculty of Science, University of Neuchâtel, rue
Emile-Argand 11, 2000 Neuchâtel, Switzerland. Electronic address:
thomas.kroeber@unine.ch.
(2)Insect Molecular Genetics and Biotechnology Group, National Centre for
Scientific Research "Demokritos", 153 10 Aghia Paraskevi, Athens, Greece.
Electronic address: Konstantinos.Kousis@Crick.ac.uk.
(3)Institute of Biology, Faculty of Science, University of Neuchâtel, rue
Emile-Argand 11, 2000 Neuchâtel, Switzerland. Electronic address:
martine.bourquin@unine.ch.
(4)Insect Molecular Genetics and Biotechnology Group, National Centre for
Scientific Research "Demokritos", 153 10 Aghia Paraskevi, Athens, Greece.
Electronic address: ptsitour@bio.demokritos.gr.
(5)Laboratory of Chemical Ecology and Natural Products, Institute of Biosciences 
& Applications, National Centre for Scientific Research "Demokritos", 153 10
Aghia Paraskevi, Athens, Greece. Electronic address: mkonstan@bio.demokritos.gr.
(6)Nigerian Institute of Medical Research, Lagos, Nigeria. Electronic address:
awololas@hotmail.com.
(7)Department of Biology, University of Florence, Florence, Italy. Electronic
address: francescaromana.dani@unifi.it.
(8)Department of Agriculture, Food and Environment, University of Pisa, Pisa,
Italy. Electronic address: qhlonline@hotmail.com.
(9)Department of Agriculture, Food and Environment, University of Pisa, Pisa,
Italy. Electronic address: ppelosi.obp@libero.it.
(10)Insect Molecular Genetics and Biotechnology Group, National Centre for
Scientific Research "Demokritos", 153 10 Aghia Paraskevi, Athens, Greece.
Electronic address: iatrou@bio.demokritos.gr.
(11)Institute of Biology, Faculty of Science, University of Neuchâtel, rue
Emile-Argand 11, 2000 Neuchâtel, Switzerland. Electronic address:
patrick.guerin@unine.ch.

There is increasing interest in the development of effective mosquito repellents 
of natural origin to reduce transmission of diseases such as malaria and yellow
fever. To achieve this we have employed an in vitro competition assay involving
odorant-binding proteins (OBPs) of the malaria mosquito, Anopheles gambiae, with 
a predominantly female expression bias to identify plant essential oils (EOs)
containing bioactive compounds that target mosquito olfactory function. EOs and
their fractions capable of binding to such OBPs displayed repellence against
female mosquitoes in a laboratory repellent assay. Repellent EOs were subjected
to gas chromatographic analysis linked to antennogram (EAG) recordings from
female A. gambiae to identify the biologically active constituents. Among these
compounds cumin alcohol, carvacrol, ethyl cinnamate and butyl cinnamate proved as
effective as DEET at an equivalent dose in the repellent assay, and combinations 
of carvacrol with either butyl cinnamate or cumin alcohol proved to be
significantly more effective than DEET in the assay. When tested as spatial
repellents in experimental shelters housing sleeping humans in northern Nigeria a
binary mixture of carvacrol plus cumin alcohol caused mosquitoes to leave
shelters in significantly higher numbers to those induced by DEET in female
Anopheles spp. and in numbers equivalent to that of DEET in Culex spp.
mosquitoes. These findings indicate an approach for the identification of
biologically active molecules of natural origin serving as repellents for
mosquitoes.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2018.03.008 
PMID: 29656020  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

