
1. Parasit Vectors. 2018 Apr 13;11(1):242. doi: 10.1186/s13071-018-2807-7.

Effects of antibiotic treatment on the fecundity of Rhipicephalus
haemaphysaloides ticks.

Li LH(1)(2), Zhang Y(2), Zhu D(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Publish Health and Management, Weifang Medical University, Weifang, 
261053, People's Republic of China.
(2)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, WHO Collaborating Centre for Malaria, Schistosomiasis and
Filariasis, Key Laboratory of Parasite & Vector Biology, Ministry of Health,
Shanghai, 200025, People's Republic of China.
(3)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, WHO Collaborating Centre for Malaria, Schistosomiasis and
Filariasis, Key Laboratory of Parasite & Vector Biology, Ministry of Health,
Shanghai, 200025, People's Republic of China. zhudan818@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Endosymbiotic bacteria inhabit a variety of arthropods including
ticks and may have multiple effects on the host's survival, reproduction or
pathogen acquisition and transmission. Rhipicephalus haemaphysaloides is one of
the most widely distributed tick species in China. The symbiotic bacteria
composition and their impacts to R. haemaphysaloides ticks have not been studied.
The present study investigated the composition of microbial community in R.
haemaphysaloides ticks and then assessed the effects of endosymbionts on the
host's fecundity by antibiotic treatment experiments.
METHODS: The microbial population of female and male R. haemaphysaloides ticks
was analyzed using Illumina Miseq sequencing of 16S rRNA gene. Thirty engorged
female ticks were then randomly divided into five groups and injected with
ampicillin, ciprofloxacin, kanamycin, tetracycline, or phosphate-buffered
solution (PBS), respectively. Effects of antibiotic treatments on maternal
oviposition, egg hatching and density of endosymbionts were evaluated.
RESULTS: Illumina Miseq sequencing showed that Coxiella and Rickettsia were the
predominant bacterial genera inhabiting R. haemaphysaloides ticks. Antibiotic
treatment experiments found that kanamycin reduced the density of Coxiella-like
endosymbiont (Coxiella-LE hereafter) in eggs, ciprofloxacin reduced the density
of Rickettsia-like endosymbiont (Rickettsia-LE), and tetracycline had effect on
both endosymbionts, while ampicillin affected neither. Meanwhile hatching rates
of eggs were observed to decrease greatly in the kanamycin or
tetracycline-treated group but maintained in the ampicillin or
ciprofloxacin-treated group. Furthermore, the reduced hatching rates were found
to be associated with density of Coxiella-LE in eggs.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings indicate that Coxiella-LE is essential for the
reproduction of R. haemaphysaloides ticks, and that kanamycin can be used to
study the role of Coxiella-LE on ticks.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-018-2807-7 
PMCID: PMC5899350
PMID: 29653599  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

