
1. Sci Rep. 2018 Apr 18;8(1):6176. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-24296-0.

Chromobacterium spp. mediate their anti-Plasmodium activity through secretion of 
the histone deacetylase inhibitor romidepsin.

Saraiva RG(1), Huitt-Roehl CR(2), Tripathi A(1), Cheng YQ(3), Bosch J(4)(5),
Townsend CA(2), Dimopoulos G(6).

Author information: 
(1)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology,
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)UNT System College of Pharmacy, University of North Texas Health Science
Center, Fort Worth, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bloomberg School of Public
Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(5)InterRayBio, LLC, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(6)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology,
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. 
gdimopo1@jhu.edu.

The Chromobacterium sp. Panama bacterium has in vivo and in vitro anti-Plasmodium
properties. To assess the nature of the Chromobacterium-produced anti-Plasmodium 
factors, chemical partition was conducted by bioassay-guided fractionation where 
different fractions were assayed for activity against asexual stages of P.
falciparum. The isolated compounds were further partitioned by reversed-phase
FPLC followed by size-exclusion chromatography; high resolution UPLC and ESI/MS
data were then collected and revealed that the most active fraction contained a
cyclic depsipeptide, which was identified as romidepsin. A pure sample of this
FDA-approved HDAC inhibitor allowed us to independently verify this finding, and 
establish that romidepsin also has potent effect against mosquito stages of the
parasite's life cycle. Genomic comparisons between C. sp. Panama and multiple
species within the Chromobacterium genus further demonstrated a correlation
between presence of the gene cluster responsible for romidepsin production and
effective antiplasmodial activity. A romidepsin-null Chromobacterium spp. mutant 
loses its anti-Plasmodium properties by losing the ability to inhibit P.
falciparum HDAC activity, and romidepsin is active against resistant parasites to
commonly deployed antimalarials. This independent mode of action substantiates
exploring a chromobacteria-based approach for malaria transmission-blocking.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-24296-0 
PMCID: PMC5906607
PMID: 29670144  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

