
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2018 Jun;98(6):1566-1570. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0473. Epub
2018 Apr 19.

Coinfection with Enteric Pathogens in East African Children with Acute
Gastroenteritis-Associations and Interpretations.

Andersson M(1), Kabayiza JC(2), Elfving K(1), Nilsson S(3), Msellem MI(4),
Mårtensson A(5), Björkman A(6), Bergström T(1), Lindh M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg,
Sweden.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Rwanda, Kigali, Rwanda.
(3)Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Zanzibar Malaria Elimination Programme (ZAMEP), Ministry of Health, Zanzibar, 
Tanzania.
(5)Department of Women's and Children's Health, International Maternal and Child 
Health (IMCH), Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(6)Malaria Research, Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

Enteric coinfections among children in low-income countries are very common, but 
it is not well known if specific pathogen combinations are associated or have
clinical importance. In this analysis, feces samples from children in Rwanda and 
Zanzibar less than 5 years of age, with (N = 994) or without (N = 324) acute
diarrhea, were analyzed by real-time polymerase chain reaction targeting a wide
range of pathogens. Associations were investigated by comparing co-detection and 
mono-detection frequencies for all pairwise pathogen combinations. More than one 
pathogen was detected in 840 samples (65%). A negative association (coinfections 
being less common than expected from probability) was observed for rotavirus in
combination with Shigella, Campylobacter, or norovirus genogroup II, but only in 
patients, which is statistically expected for agents that independently cause
diarrhea. A positive correlation was observed, in both patients and controls,
between Ct (threshold cycle) values for certain virulence factor genes in
enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC) (eae and bfpA) and toxin genes in
enterotoxigenic E. coli (eltB and estA), allowing estimation of how often these
genes were present in the same bacteria. A significant positive association in
patients only was observed for Shigella and EPEC-eae, suggesting that this
coinfection might interact in a manner that enhances symptoms. Although
interaction between pathogens that affect symptoms is rare, this work emphasizes 
the importance and difference in interpretation of coinfections depending on
whether they are positively or negatively associated.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0473 
PMCID: PMC6086148
PMID: 29692296  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

