
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2018 Jul 27;62(8). pii: e00056-18. doi:
10.1128/AAC.00056-18. Print 2018 Aug.

Model System Identifies Kinetic Driver of Hsp90 Inhibitor Activity against
African Trypanosomes and Plasmodium falciparum.

Meyer KJ(1), Caton E(1), Shapiro TA(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Departments of Medicine and of Pharmacology
and Molecular Sciences, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Departments of Medicine and of Pharmacology
and Molecular Sciences, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA tshapiro@jhmi.edu.
(3)The Johns Hopkins Malaria Research Institute, The Johns Hopkins University
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Hsp90 inhibitors, well studied in the laboratory and clinic for antitumor
indications, have promising activity against protozoan pathogens, including
Trypanosoma brucei which causes African sleeping sickness, and the malaria
parasite, Plasmodium falciparum To progress these experimental drugs toward
clinical use, we adapted an in vitro dynamic hollow-fiber system and deployed
artificial pharmacokinetics to discover the driver of their activity: either
concentration or time. The activities of compounds from three major classes of
Hsp90 inhibitors in development were evaluated against trypanosomes. In all
circumstances, the activities of the tested Hsp90 inhibitors were concentration
driven. By optimally deploying the drug to match its kinetic driver, the efficacy
of a given dose was improved up to 5-fold, and maximal efficacy was achieved with
a significantly lower drug exposure. The superiority of concentration-driven
regimens was evident in vitro over several logs of drug exposure and was
predictive of efficacy in a mouse model of African trypanosomiasis. In studies
with P. falciparum, antimalarial activity was similarly concentration driven.
This experimental strategy offers an expedient and versatile translational tool
to assess the impact of pharmacokinetics on antiprotozoal activity. Knowing
kinetic governance early in drug development provides an additional metric for
judging lead compounds and allows the incisive design of animal efficacy studies.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00056-18 
PMCID: PMC6105818
PMID: 29866861  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

