
1. Sci Transl Med. 2018 Jun 27;10(447). pii: eaar3619. doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.aar3619.

Integrated pathogen load and dual transcriptome analysis of systemic
host-pathogen interactions in severe malaria.

Lee HJ(1), Georgiadou A(2), Walther M(3), Nwakanma D(3), Stewart LB(4), Levin
M(2), Otto TD(5), Conway DJ(4), Coin LJ(1), Cunnington AJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland 4072, Australia.
(2)Section of Paediatrics, Imperial College, London W2 1PG, UK.
(3)Medical Research Council Unit The Gambia at London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, P.O. Box 273, Fajara, The Gambia.
(4)Department of Pathogen Molecular Biology, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London WC1E 7HT, UK.
(5)Wellcome Trust Sanger Centre, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK.
(6)Section of Paediatrics, Imperial College, London W2 1PG, UK.
a.cunnington@imperial.ac.uk.

The pathogenesis of infectious diseases depends on the interaction of host and
pathogen. In Plasmodium falciparum malaria, host and parasite processes can be
assessed by dual RNA sequencing of blood from infected patients. We performed
dual transcriptome analyses on samples from 46 malaria-infected Gambian children 
to reveal mechanisms driving the systemic pathophysiology of severe malaria.
Integrating these transcriptomic data with estimates of parasite load and
detailed clinical information allowed consideration of potentially confounding
effects due to differing leukocyte proportions in blood, parasite developmental
stage, and whole-body pathogen load. We report hundreds of human and parasite
genes differentially expressed between severe and uncomplicated malaria, with
distinct profiles associated with coma, hyperlactatemia, and thrombocytopenia.
High expression of neutrophil granule-related genes was consistently associated
with all severe malaria phenotypes. We observed severity-associated variation in 
the expression of parasite genes, which determine cytoadhesion to vascular
endothelium, rigidity of infected erythrocytes, and parasite growth rate. Up to
99% of human differential gene expression in severe malaria was driven by
differences in parasite load, whereas parasite gene expression showed little
association with parasite load. Coexpression analyses revealed interactions
between human and P. falciparum, with prominent co-regulation of translation
genes in severe malaria between host and parasite. Multivariate analyses
suggested that increased expression of granulopoiesis and interferon-γ-related
genes, together with inadequate suppression of type 1 interferon signaling, best 
explained severity of infection. These findings provide a framework for
understanding the contributions of host and parasite to the pathogenesis of
severe malaria and identifying new treatments.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aar3619 
PMCID: PMC6326353
PMID: 29950443  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

