
1. Prog Neurobiol. 2019 Jan;172:40-70. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2018.06.008. Epub
2018 Jul 29.

The sinister face of heme oxygenase-1 in brain aging and disease.

Schipper HM(1), Song W(2), Tavitian A(3), Cressatti M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada; Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada. Electronic address: hyman.schipper@mcgill.ca.
(2)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada.
(3)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada; Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Under stressful conditions, cellular heme catabolism to carbon monoxide, iron and
biliverdin is mediated by the 32 kDa enzyme, heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1). A wide
range of pro-oxidant and inflammatory stimuli act on diverse consensus sequences 
within the Hmox1 promoter to rapidly induce the gene. There is ample evidence
attesting to the beneficial effects of HO-1 upregulation in brain. By converting 
pro-oxidant heme to the antioxidants, biliverdin and bilirubin, HO-1/biliverdin
reductase may help restore a more favorable tissue redox microenvironment.
Contrariwise, in some cell types and under certain circumstances, heme-derived
carbon monoxide and iron may amplify intracellular oxidative stress and
exacerbate the disease process. This inimical side of neural HO-1 has often been 
ignored in biomedical literature promulgating interventions aimed at boosting
central HO-1 expression for the management of diverse CNS conditions and is the
focus of the current review. A comprehensive model of astroglial stress is
presented wherein sustained Hmox1 induction promotes oxidative mitochondrial
membrane damage, iron sequestration and mitophagy (macroautophagy). The HO-1
mediated gliopathy renders nearby neuronal constituents vulnerable to oxidative
injury and recapitulates 'core' neuropathological features of many aging-related 
neurodegenerative and some neurodevelopmental brain disorders. A balanced
literature should acknowledge that, in a host of chronic human CNS afflictions,
the glial HO-1 response may serve as a robust transducer of noxious stimuli, an
important driver of relevant neuropathology and a potentially disease-modifying
therapeutic target.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2018.06.008 
PMID: 30009872  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

