
1. J Med Entomol. 2019 Jan 8;56(1):72-85. doi: 10.1093/jme/tjy127.

Identification, Molecular Characterization, and In Silico Structural Analysis of 
Carboxypeptidase B2 of Anopheles stephensi.

Khamsehnejad MI(1), Djadid ND(1), Raz A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran (PII), Pasteur Avenue, Tehran, Iran.

Malaria is a vector-borne infectious disease that is considered a priority of the
World Health Organization due to its enormous impacts on global health.
Plasmodium spp. (Haemosporida: Plasmodiidae), Anopheles spp. (Diptera:
Culicidae), and a suitable host are the key elements for malaria transmission. To
disrupt the parasitic life cycle of malaria or prevent its transmission, these
three key elements should be targeted by effective control strategies.
Development of vaccines that interrupt malaria transmission is one of the
solutions that has been recommended to the countries that aim to eliminate
malaria. With respect to the important role of Anopheles stephensi in malaria
transmission and involvement of Anopheles carboxypeptidase B1 in sexual parasite 
development, we characterized the second member of cpb gene family (cpbAs2) of
An. Stephensi to provide some basic information and evaluate significance of
cpbAs2's role in complementing sexual plasmodium development role of cpbAs1. The 
cpbAs2 mRNA sequence was characterized by 3' and 5' RACE and the structural
features of its coded protein were studied by in silico modeling. The coding
sequence and gene structure of cpbAs2 were determined empirically and compared
with the in silico predictions from the An. stephensi genome sequencing project. 
Furthermore, homology modeling revealed that its structure is very similar to the
structurally important domains of procarboxypeptidase B2 in humans. This study
provides basic molecular and structural information about another member of the
cpb gene family of An. stephensi. The reported results are informative and
necessary for evaluation of the role of this gene in sexual parasite development 
by future studies.

DOI: 10.1093/jme/tjy127 
PMID: 30124910  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

