
1. Zhongguo Ji Sheng Chong Xue Yu Ji Sheng Chong Bing Za Zhi. 2017 Feb;35(1):13-7.

[Polymorphisms of tryptophan-rich antigen gene of Plasmodium ovale subspecies
from imported malaria cases in Henan Province].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou RM, Li SH, Zhang YL, Qian D, Yang CY, Liu Y, Zhao YL, Zhang HW, Xu BL.

Objective: To analyze the genetic sequence of tryptophan-rich antigen (PoTRA)
gene of Plasmodium ovale subspecies from imported malaria cases in Henan Province
in 2015.
Methods: Blood samples were collected from 22 imported ovale malaria cases in
Henan Province in 2015. After DNA extraction, PoTRA was amplified by nested PCR, 
and was inserted into the pMD18-T vector. The plasmid was extracted and
sequenced, and the results were blasted in GenBank to determine the subspecies of
P. ovale. The sizes and species of the PoTRA gene were analyzed. The amino-acid
sequence of PoTRA was also aligned to analyze the difference in amino acid
sequence. The phylogenetic tree was constructed to analyze the genetic
relationship among the samples by neighbor-joining.
Results: Of the 22 imported cases, eight (36.4%) were infected with P. ovale
wallikeri, which had two sizes, the predominant 245 and 299 bp. The other 14
cases (63.6%) were infected with P. ovale curtisi, which had three sizes, the
predominant 299, 317 and 335 bp. Amino-acid sequence alignment revealed that the 
two types of P. ovale wallikeri differed in two amino-acid units, MANPINMANPIN
and AITPIN, while the three types of P. ovale curtisi differed in amino-acid
units TITPIS and TINPIN. The phylogenetic tree showed that the 22 samples
belonged to two subpopulations of P. ovale curtisi and P. ovale wallikeri,
wherein the P. ovale curtisi was further divided into two sub-branches, and
samples with sizes of 317 and 335 bp were in the same sub-branch with a closer
genetic relationship.
Conclusion: Two subspecies, P. ovale curtisi and P. ovale wallikeri, are
identified from the imported ovale malaria cases in Henan Province in 2015. The
P. ovale curtisi has three genetic types and P. ovale wallikeri has two genetic
types of PoTRA gene, revealing genetic polymorphisms of PoTRA.


PMID: 30133225  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

