
1. Zhongguo Ji Sheng Chong Xue Yu Ji Sheng Chong Bing Za Zhi. 2017 Feb;35(1):36-41.

[The effect of leptin transgenic Plasmodium yoelii on mouse body weight].

[Article in Chinese]

Li K, Zheng H, Zhu F, Fu Y, Xu WY.

Objective: To investigate the effect of leptin transgenic Plasmodium yoelii on
mouse body weight.
Methods: To construct the leptin gene-containing CRISPR/Cas9 recombinant plasmid 
which had the 5′UTR and 3′UTR of MIF(macrophage migration inhibitory factor) of
Plasmodium yoelli 17XNL strain at two ends, the exogenous mouse leptin gene was
inserted downstream of MIF coding region through homologous recombination,
resulting in the PYC-MIF-Leptin recombinant plasmid. The recombinant plasmid was 
then electroporated into P. y 17XNL mature schizonts, and the transgenic
schizonts were used to infect a Kunming mouse via tail vein injection. The
trangenic P. y clone was screened by pyrimethamine selection and identified by
PCR. The trangenic or wild-type P. y was used to infect a C57BL/6 mouse
respectively. Blood sample was collected through eye ball and tail vein, and
immunofluorescence and RT-PCR were performed to determine the expression of
leptin protein in the parasites. Finally, PBS (200 μl) containing trangenic or
wild-type P. y (1 × 104) was injected through the tail vein into C57BL/6 mice(n =
5 respectively). The negative control received a same volume of PBS. The changes 
of parasitemia and body weight were recorded every two days.
Results: The leptin-expressing recombinant plasmid PYC-MIF-Leptin was constructed
successfully. Results of DNA sequencing of transgenic parasites confirmed the
integration of leptin gene at the downstream of MIF gene and successful
transcription. Immunofluorescence results indicated successful expression of
mouse leptin protein. The weight loss was significant in mice infected with
transgenic parasites on day 17(17.26 ± 1.40)g, decreased by 10.7%, but not in the
other two groups. Both transgenic and wild-type parasites began to decline when
parasitemia reached about 10%, but the transgenic parasites proliferated more
rapidly. Both disappeared at 23 days.
Conclusion: Infection with leptin transgenic parasites decreases the body weight 
of the infected mice.


PMID: 30133236  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

