
1. Evol Appl. 2018 Mar 25;11(8):1245-1256. doi: 10.1111/eva.12619. eCollection 2018 
Sep.

Adaptive deletion in resistance gene duplications in the malaria vector Anopheles
gambiae.

Assogba BS(1)(2)(3)(4), Alout H(1), Koffi A(5), Penetier C(6), Djogbénou
LS(3)(4), Makoundou P(1), Weill M(1), Labbé P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut des Sciences de l'Evolution de Montpellier (UMR 5554,
CNRS-UM-IRD-EPHE) Université de Montpellier Montpellier France.
(2)Disease Control and Elimination Department Medical Research Council, Unit The 
Gambia Banjul The Gambia.
(3)Institut Régional de Santé Publique Université d'Abomey Calavi Cotonou Benin.
(4)Faculté des Sciences et Techniques Laboratoire de Biologie et de Typage
Moléculaire en Microbiologie Université d'Abomey Calavi Cotonou Bénin.
(5)Institut Pierre Richet (IPR)/Institut National de Santé Publique (INSP) Bouaké
Côte d'Ivoire.
(6)Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD) UMR MIVEGEC Montpellier
France.

While gene copy-number variations play major roles in long-term evolution, their 
early dynamics remains largely unknown. However, examples of their role in
short-term adaptation are accumulating: identical repetitions of a locus
(homogeneous duplications) can provide a quantitative advantage, while the
association of differing alleles (heterogeneous duplications) allows carrying two
functions simultaneously. Such duplications often result from rearrangements of
sometimes relatively large chromosome fragments, and even when adaptive, they can
be associated with deleterious side effects that should, however, be reduced by
subsequent evolution. Here, we took advantage of the unique model provided by the
malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae s.l. to investigate the early evolution of
several duplications, heterogeneous and homogeneous, segregating in natural
populations from West Africa. These duplications encompass ~200 kb and 11 genes, 
including the adaptive insecticide resistance ace-1 locus. Through the survey of 
several populations from three countries over 3-4 years, we showed that an
internal deletion of all coamplified genes except ace-1 is currently spreading in
West Africa and introgressing from An. gambiae s.s. to An. coluzzii. Both
observations provide evidences of its selection, most likely due to reducing the 
gene-dosage disturbances caused by the excessive copies of the nonadaptive genes.
Our study thus provides a unique example of the early adaptive trajectory of
duplications and underlines the role of the environmental conditions (insecticide
treatment practices and species ecology). It also emphasizes the striking
diversity of adaptive responses in these mosquitoes and reveals a worrisome
process of resistance/cost trade-off evolution that could impact the control of
malaria vectors in Africa.

DOI: 10.1111/eva.12619 
PMCID: PMC6099818
PMID: 30151037 

