
1. Front Microbiol. 2018 Aug 22;9:1780. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.01780. eCollection
2018.

HU-Lacking Mutants of Salmonella enterica Enteritidis Are Highly Attenuated and
Can Induce Protection in Murine Model of Infection.

Milanez GP(1), Werle CH(1), Amorim MR(1), Ribeiro RA(1), Tibo LHS(1),
Roque-Barreira MC(2), Oliveira AF(2), Brocchi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Evolution, Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of
Biology, University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil.
(2)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Faculdade de Medicina de
Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

Salmonella enterica infection is a major public health concern worldwide,
particularly when associated with other medical conditions. The serovars
Typhimurium and Enteritidis are frequently associated with an invasive illness
that primarily affects immunocompromised adults and children with HIV, malaria,
or malnutrition. These serovars can also cause infections in a variety of animal 
hosts, and they are the most common isolates in poultry materials. Here, we
described S. Enteritidis mutants, where hupA and hupB genes were deleted, and
evaluated their potential use as live-attenuated vaccine candidates. In vitro,
the mutants behaved like S. Typhimurium described previously, but there were some
particularities in macrophage invasion and survival experiments. The virulence
and immunogenicity of the mutant lacking both hupA and hupB (PT4ΔhupAB) were
evaluated in a BALB/c mice model. This mutant was highly attenuated and could,
therefore, be administrated at doses higher than 109 CFU/treatment, which was
sufficient to protect all treated mice challenged with the wild-type parental
strain with a single dose. Additionally, the PT4ΔhupAB strain induced production 
of specific IgG and IgA antibodies against Salmonella and TH1-related cytokines
(IFN-γ and TNF-α), indicating that this strain can induce systemic and mucosal
protection in the murine model. Additional studies are needed to better
understand the mechanisms that lead to attenuation of the double-mutant PT4ΔhupAB
and to elucidate the immune response induced by immunization using this strain.
However, our data allow us to state that hupAB mutants could be potential
candidates to be explore as live-attenuated vaccines.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.01780 
PMCID: PMC6113365
PMID: 30186241 

