
1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2019 May;25(5):580-585. doi: 10.1016/j.cmi.2018.09.009.
Epub 2018 Sep 27.

Genetic diversity and deletion of Plasmodium falciparum histidine-rich protein 2 
and 3: a threat to diagnosis of P. falciparum malaria.

Gendrot M(1), Fawaz R(2), Dormoi J(1), Madamet M(3), Pradines B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Unité Parasitologie et entomologie, Département de biologie des agents
transmissibles, Institut de recherche biomédicale des armées, Marseille, France; 
Aix Marseille Univ, IRD, AP-HM, SSA, VITROME, IHU Méditerranée Infection,
Marseille, France.
(2)Ecole de santé des armées, Bron, France.
(3)Unité Parasitologie et entomologie, Département de biologie des agents
transmissibles, Institut de recherche biomédicale des armées, Marseille, France; 
Aix Marseille Univ, IRD, AP-HM, SSA, VITROME, IHU Méditerranée Infection,
Marseille, France; Centre national de référence du paludisme, Institut
hospitalo-universitaire (IHU) Méditerranée Infection, Marseille, France.
(4)Unité Parasitologie et entomologie, Département de biologie des agents
transmissibles, Institut de recherche biomédicale des armées, Marseille, France; 
Aix Marseille Univ, IRD, AP-HM, SSA, VITROME, IHU Méditerranée Infection,
Marseille, France; Centre national de référence du paludisme, Institut
hospitalo-universitaire (IHU) Méditerranée Infection, Marseille, France.
Electronic address: bruno.pradines@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: PfHRP2-based rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs), based on the recognition 
of the Plasmodium falciparum histidine-rich protein 2, are currently the most
used tests in malaria detection. Most of the antibodies used in RDTs also detect 
PfHRP3. However, false-negative results were reported. Significant variation in
the pfhrp2 gene could lead to the expression of a modified protein that would no 
longer be recognized by the antibodies used in PfHRP2-based RDTs. Additionally,
parasites lacking the PfHRP2 do not express the protein and are, therefore, not
identifiable.
AIMS: This review aims to assess the pfhrp2 and pfhrp3 genetic variation or the
prevalence of gene deletion in areas where malaria is endemic and describe its
implications on RDT use.
SOURCES: Publications of interest were identified using PubMed, Google Scholar
and Google.
CONTENT: More than 18 types of amino acid repeats were identified from the PfHRP2
sequences. Sequencing analysis revealed high-level genetic variation in the
pfhrp2 and pfhrp3 genes (>90% of variation in Madagascar, Nigeria or Senegal)
both within and between countries. However, genetic variation of PfHRP2 and
PfHRP3 does not seem to be a major cause of false-negative results. The countries
that showed the highest proportions of pfhrp2-negative parasites were Peru
(20%-100%) and Guyana (41%) in South America, Ghana (36%) and Rwanda (23%) in
Africa. High prevalence of pfhrp2 deletion causes a high rate of false-negatives 
results.
IMPLICATIONS: Presence of parasites lacking the pfhrp2 gene may pose a major
threat to malaria control programmes because P. falciparum-infected individuals
are not diagnosed and properly treated.

Copyright © 2018 European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious
Diseases. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmi.2018.09.009 
PMID: 30267926  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

