
1. Mol Ecol. 2019 Feb;28(3):568-583. doi: 10.1111/mec.14891. Epub 2018 Nov 22.

Parallel evolution of gene classes, but not genes: Evidence from Hawai'ian
honeycreeper populations exposed to avian malaria.

Cassin-Sackett L(1)(2), Callicrate TE(1)(3), Fleischer RC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Conservation Genomics, Smithsonian Conservation Biology Institute, 
National Zoological Park, Washington, District of Columbia.
(2)Department of Integrative Biology, University of South Florida, Tampa,
Florida.
(3)Species Conservation Toolkit Initiative, Department of Conservation Science,
Chicago Zoological Society, Brookfield, Illinois.

Adaptation in nature is ubiquitous, yet characterizing its genomic basis is
difficult because population demographics cause correlations with nonadaptive
loci. Introduction events provide opportunities to observe adaptation over known 
spatial and temporal scales, facilitating the identification of genes involved in
adaptation. The pathogen causing avian malaria, Plasmodium relictum, was
introduced to Hawai'i in the 1930s and elicited extinctions and precipitous
population declines in native honeycreepers. After a sharp initial population
decline, the Hawai'i 'amakihi (Chlorodrepanis virens) has evolved tolerance to
the parasite at low elevations where P. relictum exists, and can sustain
infection without major fitness consequences. High-elevation, unexposed
populations of 'amakihi display little to no tolerance. To explore the genomic
basis of adaptation to P. relictum in low-elevation 'amakihi, we genotyped 125
'amakihi from the island of Hawai'i via hybridization capture to 40,000
oligonucleotide baits containing SNPs and used the reference 'amakihi genome to
identify genes potentially under selection from malaria. We tested for outlier
loci between low- and high-elevation population pairs and identified loci with
signatures of selection within low-elevation populations. In some cases, genes
commonly involved in the immune response (e.g., major histocompatibility complex)
were associated with malaria presence in the population. We also detected several
novel candidate loci that may be implicated in surviving malaria infection (e.g.,
beta-defensin, glycoproteins and interleukin-related genes). Our results suggest 
that rapid adaptation to pathogens may occur through changes in different immune 
genes, but in the same classes of genes, across populations.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.14891 
PMID: 30298567  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

