
1. Malar J. 2018 Oct 25;17(1):385. doi: 10.1186/s12936-018-2535-7.

Influence of midgut microbiota in Anopheles stephensi on Plasmodium berghei
infections.

Kalappa DM(1)(2), Subramani PA(1), Basavanna SK(1), Ghosh SK(3)(4), Sundaramurthy
V(5), Uragayala S(1), Tiwari S(1), Anvikar AR(6), Valecha N(6).

Author information: 
(1)ICMR-National Institute of Malaria Research (Field Unit), Nirmal Bhawan-ICMR
Campus, Poojanahalli, Kannamangala Post, Devanahalli Taluk, Bengaluru, Karnataka,
562110, India.
(2)Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka, 576104, India.
(3)ICMR-National Institute of Malaria Research (Field Unit), Nirmal Bhawan-ICMR
Campus, Poojanahalli, Kannamangala Post, Devanahalli Taluk, Bengaluru, Karnataka,
562110, India. ghoshnimr@gmail.com.
(4)Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka, 576104, India.
ghoshnimr@gmail.com.
(5)National Centre for Biological Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental
Research, GKVK Campus, Bellary Road, Bengaluru, 560065, India.
(6)ICMR-National Institute of Malaria Research, Sector 8, Dwarka, New Delhi,
110077, India.

BACKGROUND: The native gut microbiota of Anopheles mosquitoes is known to play a 
key role in the physiological function of its host. Interestingly, this
microbiota can also influence the development of Plasmodium in its host
mosquitoes. In recent years, much interest has been shown in the employment of
gut symbionts derived from vectors in the control of vector-borne disease
transmission. In this study, the midgut microbial diversity has been
characterized among laboratory-reared adult Anopheles stephensi mosquitoes, from 
the colony created by rearing progeny of wild-caught mosquitoes (obtained from
three different locations in southern India) for multiple generations, using 16S 
ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene sequencing approach. Further, the influence of native
midgut microbiota of mosquitoes on the development of rodent malaria parasite
Plasmodium berghei in its host has been studied.
METHODS: The microbial diversity associated with the midgut of An. stephensi
mosquitoes was studied by sequencing V3 region of 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene. 
The influence of native midgut microbiota of An. stephensi mosquitoes on the
susceptibility of the mosquitoes to rodent malaria parasite P. berghei was
studied by comparing the intensity and prevalence of P. berghei infection among
the antibiotic treated and untreated cohorts of mosquitoes.
RESULTS: The analysis of bacterial diversity from the midguts of An. stephensi
showed Proteobacteria as the most dominant population among the three
laboratory-reared strains of An. stephensi studied. Major genera identified among
these mosquito strains were Acinetobacter, Pseudomonas, Prevotella,
Corynebacterium, Veillonella, and Bacillus. The mosquito infectivity studies
carried out to determine the implication of total midgut microbiota on P. berghei
infection showed that mosquitoes whose native microbiota cleared with antibiotics
had increased susceptibility to P. berghei infection compared to the antibiotic
untreated mosquitoes with its natural native microbiota.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of microbial symbiont to reduce the competence of vectors
involved in disease transmission has gained much importance in recent years as an
emerging alternative approach towards disease control. In this context, the
present study was aimed to identify the midgut microbiota composition of An.
stephensi, and its effect on the development of P. berghei. Interestingly, the
analysis of midgut microbiota from An. stephensi revealed the presence of genus
Veillonella in Anopheles species for the first time. Importantly, the study also 
revealed the negative influence of total midgut microbiota on the development of 
P. berghei in three laboratory strains of An. stephensi, emphasizing the
importance of understanding the gut microbiota in malaria vectors, and its
relationship with parasite development in designing strategies to control malaria
transmission.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-018-2535-7 
PMCID: PMC6203276
PMID: 30359252  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

