
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2018 Dec;99(6):1489-1498. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.18-0263. Epub
2018 Oct 18.

16S Metagenomic Comparison of Plasmodium falciparum-Infected and Noninfected
Anopheles gambiae and Anopheles funestus Microbiota from Senegal.

Bassene H(1)(2), Niang EHA(3)(4)(2), Fenollar F(1), Dipankar B(3), Doucouré
S(1)(2), Ali E(5), Michelle C(3), Raoult D(3), Sokhna C(1)(2), Mediannikov O(3).

Author information: 
(1)Aix Marseille Université, IRD, Assistance Publique-Hopitaux Marseille, Service
de Santé des Armées, Vecteurs-Infections Tropicales et Méditerranéennes
(VITROME), Marseille, France.
(2)Vecteurs-Infections Tropicales et Méditerranéennes (VITROME), Campus
International Université Cheikh Anta Diop-Institut de Recherche pour le
Développement, Dakar, Sénégal.
(3)Aix Marseille Université, IRD, AP-HM, Microbes, Evolution, Phylogeny and
Infection (MEPHI), Marseille, France.
(4)Laboratoire d'Ecologie Vectorielle et Parasitaire (LEVP), Faculté des Sciences
et Techniques, Université Cheikh Anta Diop (UCAD) de Dakar, Dakar, Sénégal.
(5)Laboratoire d'Études et de Recherche en Statistique et Développement
(LERSTAD), Université Gaston Berger de Saint Louis, St. Louis, Sénégal.

In the context of the pre-elimination of malaria, biological control may provide 
an alternative or additional tool to current malaria control strategies. During
their various stages of development, mosquitoes undergo subsequent changes in
their associated microbiota, depending on their environment and nutritional
status. Although Anopheles gambiae s.l. and Anopheles funestus are the two major 
malaria vectors in Senegal, the composition of their microbiota is not yet well
known. In this study, we explored the microbiota of mosquitoes naturally infected
or not by Plasmodium falciparum (Pf) using the 16S ribosomal RNA gene-based
bacterial metagenomic approach. In both vector species, the microbiota was more
diverse in Pf-infected samples than in the noninfected ones, although the total
number of reads appeared to be higher in noninfected mosquitoes. Overall, the
microbiota was different between the two vector species. Noteworthy, the
bacterial microbiota was significantly different between Pf-positive and
Pf-negative groups whatever the species, but was similar between individuals of
the same infection status within a species. Overall, the phylum of Proteobacteria
was the most predominant in both species, with bacteria of the genus Burkholderia
outweighing the others in noninfected vectors. The presence of some specific
bacterial species such as Asaia bogorensis, Enterobacter cloacae, Burkholderia
fungorum, and Burkholderia cepacia was also observed in Pf-free samples only.
These preliminary observations pave the way for further characterization of the
mosquito microbiota to select promising bacterial candidates for potential use in
an innovative approach to controlling malaria and overcoming the challenges to
achieving a malaria-free world.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.18-0263 
PMCID: PMC6283497
PMID: 30350766  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

