
1. Int J Dermatol. 2019 Aug;58(8):880-891. doi: 10.1111/ijd.14252. Epub 2018 Oct 26.

Itching, chloroquine, and malaria: a review of recent molecular and neuroscience 
advances and their contribution to mechanistic understanding and therapeutics of 
chronic non-histaminergic pruritus.

Ajayi AAL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

Chloroquine (CQ) is an antimalarial drug that elicits severe pruritus in black
Africans with malaria fever. This acute itching (2-7 days duration) exhibits age 
dependency and a racial and genetic predilection. CQ itch is non-histaminergic,
which makes it both a good model and a tool to probe the mechanisms of chronic
itch. This review focuses on recently discovered mechanisms, neuroscience,
mediators, and receptors that are implicated in molecular studies of CQ pruritus.
CQ pruritus mechanisms are also compared to that of itching following other
systemic diseases, such as chronic kidney disease, chronic liver disease, skin
disorders, and burns. There are striking similarities between CQ itching pathways
and other chronic itch secondary to systemic disease with or without skin
lesions, which have not been previously highlighted. Prominent among these are
the shared roles of skin, neural and spinal μ opiate receptors, kappa opiate
receptor, nitric oxide, serotonin via 5HT1B/D receptors, cytokines, especially
interleukins, and tumor necrosis factor. There is elaborate "cross talk" among
the diverse mediators and receptors involved in CQ-induced pruritus. CQ also
binds to the mas-related G protein coupled receptors MrgprA3/MrgprX1 present in a
small proportion (4-5%) of dorsal root ganglion neurons and skin. The mrgprA3 CQ 
receptors are coupled to PLC-β3 and a chloride channel to initiate skin itch
action potentials in C nerve fibers. Mrgpra3/X1 couples to TRPA1 for calcium
influx into neuronal cells at noncutaneous sites. Central CQ itch occurs via
gastrin-related peptide (GRP) and its receptor (GRPR) in the dorsal spinothalamic
tracts, as well as glutamic mediated GRP projection to parabrachial nucleus. The 
possibility of chronic itch therapy based on personalized medicine, genetics, and
transcriptomics or the use of itch "polypill/polycream" are discussed.

© 2018 The International Society of Dermatology.

DOI: 10.1111/ijd.14252 
PMID: 30362504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

