
1. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jan 1;36(1):177-199. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msy202.

Detection of Shared Balancing Selection in the Absence of Trans-Species
Polymorphism.

Cheng X(1)(2), DeGiorgio M(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences, Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, PA.
(2)Department of Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA.
(3)Department of Statistics, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA.
(4)Institute for CyberScience, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
PA.

Trans-species polymorphism has been widely used as a key sign of long-term
balancing selection across multiple species. However, such sites are often rare
in the genome and could result from mutational processes or technical artifacts. 
Few methods are yet available to specifically detect footprints of trans-species 
balancing selection without using trans-species polymorphic sites. In this study,
we develop summary- and model-based approaches that are each specifically
tailored to uncover regions of long-term balancing selection shared by a set of
species by using genomic patterns of intraspecific polymorphism and interspecific
fixed differences. We demonstrate that our trans-species statistics have
substantially higher power than single-species approaches to detect footprints of
trans-species balancing selection, and are robust to those that do not affect all
tested species. We further apply our model-based methods to human and chimpanzee 
whole-genome sequencing data. In addition to the previously established major
histocompatibility complex and malaria resistance-associated FREM3/GYPE regions, 
we also find outstanding genomic regions involved in barrier integrity and innate
immunity, such as the GRIK1/CLDN17 intergenic region, and the SLC35F1 and ABCA13 
genes. Our findings not only echo the significance of pathogen defense but also
reveal novel candidates in maintaining balanced polymorphisms across human and
chimpanzee lineages. Finally, we show that these trans-species statistics can be 
applied to and work well for an arbitrary number of species, and integrate them
into open-source software packages for ease of use by the scientific community.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msy202 
PMCID: PMC6530816
PMID: 30380122  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

