
1. Eur J Pharm Biopharm. 2019 Jan;134:153-165. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpb.2018.10.020. Epub
2018 Oct 29.

Inhalable poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) microparticles encapsulating
all-trans-Retinoic acid (ATRA) as a host-directed, adjunctive treatment for
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection.

O'Connor G(1), Krishnan N(2), Fagan-Murphy A(3), Cassidy J(4), O'Leary S(5),
Robertson BD(6), Keane J(7), O'Sullivan MP(8), Cryan SA(9).

Author information: 
(1)Drug Delivery and Advanced Materials Team, School of Pharmacy, Royal College
of Surgeons in Ireland, and Tissue Engineering Research Group, Royal College of
Surgeons in Ireland, Ardilaun House, 121 St Stephens Green, Dublin 2, Ireland;
Trinity Centre for Bioengineering, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland;
Ireland and Centre for Research in Medical Devices (CURAM), NUI Galway, Ireland; 
Department of Clinical Medicine, Trinity Translation Medicine Institute, St.
James's Hospital, Trinity College Dublin, The University of Dublin, Dublin 8,
Ireland. Electronic address: gemmaoconnor@rcsi.ie.
(2)MRC Centre for Molecular Bacteriology and Infection, Department of Medicine,
Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK. Electronic address:
nitya.krishnan@imperial.ac.uk.
(3)Drug Delivery and Advanced Materials Team, School of Pharmacy, Royal College
of Surgeons in Ireland, and Tissue Engineering Research Group, Royal College of
Surgeons in Ireland, Ardilaun House, 121 St Stephens Green, Dublin 2, Ireland;
Trinity Centre for Bioengineering, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland;
Ireland and Centre for Research in Medical Devices (CURAM), NUI Galway, Ireland. 
Electronic address: aidanfmurphy@rcsi.ie.
(4)Pathobiology Section, UCD School of Veterinary Medicine, University College
Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland. Electronic address: joseph.cassidy@ucd.ie.
(5)Department of Clinical Medicine, Trinity Translation Medicine Institute, St.
James's Hospital, Trinity College Dublin, The University of Dublin, Dublin 8,
Ireland. Electronic address: OLEARYSE@tcd.ie.
(6)MRC Centre for Molecular Bacteriology and Infection, Department of Medicine,
Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK. Electronic address:
b.robertson@imperial.ac.uk.
(7)Department of Clinical Medicine, Trinity Translation Medicine Institute, St.
James's Hospital, Trinity College Dublin, The University of Dublin, Dublin 8,
Ireland. Electronic address: JKeane@STJAMES.IE.
(8)Department of Clinical Medicine, Trinity Translation Medicine Institute, St.
James's Hospital, Trinity College Dublin, The University of Dublin, Dublin 8,
Ireland. Electronic address: Mary.OSullivan@tcd.ie.
(9)Drug Delivery and Advanced Materials Team, School of Pharmacy, Royal College
of Surgeons in Ireland, and Tissue Engineering Research Group, Royal College of
Surgeons in Ireland, Ardilaun House, 121 St Stephens Green, Dublin 2, Ireland;
Trinity Centre for Bioengineering, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland;
Ireland and Centre for Research in Medical Devices (CURAM), NUI Galway, Ireland. 
Electronic address: SCryan@rcsi.ie.

Ending the tuberculosis (TB) epidemic by 2030 was recently listed in the United
Nations (UN) Sustainable Development Goals alongside HIV/AIDS and malaria as it
continues to be a major cause of death worldwide. With a significant proportion
of TB cases caused by resistant strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb),
there is an urgent need to develop new and innovative approaches to treatment.
Since 1989, researchers have been assessing the anti-bacterial effects of the
active metabolite of vitamin A, all trans-Retinoic acid (ATRA) solution, in Mtb
models. More recently the antibacterial effect of ATRA has been shown to regulate
the immune response to infection via critical gene expression, monocyte
activation and the induction of autophagy leading to its application as a
host-directed therapy (HDT). Inhalation is an attractive route for targeted
treatment of TB, and therefore we have developed ATRA-loaded microparticles
(ATRA-MP) within the inhalable size range (2.07 ± 0.5 µm) offering targeted
delivery of the encapsulated cargo (70.5 ± 2.3%) to the site of action within the
alveolar macrophage, which was confirmed by confocal microscopy. Efficient
cellular delivery of ATRA was followed by a reduction in Mtb growth (H37Ra) in
THP-1 derived macrophages evaluated by both the BACT/ALERT® system and
enumeration of colony forming units (CFU). The antibacterial effect of ATRA-MP
treatment was further assessed in BALB/c mice infected with the virulent strain
of Mtb (H37Rv). ATRA-MP treatments significantly decreased the bacterial burden
in the lungs alongside a reduction in pulmonary pathology following just three
doses administered intratracheally. The immunomodulatory effects of targeted ATRA
treatment in the lungs indicate a distinct yet effective mechanism of action
amongst the formulations. This is the first study to-date of a controlled release
ATRA treatment for TB suitable for inhalation that offers improved targeting of a
HDT, retains antibacterial efficacy and improves pulmonary pathology compared to 
ATRA solution.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejpb.2018.10.020 
PMID: 30385419  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

