
1. Proteomes. 2018 Nov 12;6(4). pii: E47. doi: 10.3390/proteomes6040047.

Paraquat-Mediated Oxidative Stress in Anopheles gambiae Mosquitoes Is Regulated
by An Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) Stress Response.

Tarimo BB(1)(2)(3), Law HCH(4), Tao D(5), Pastrana-Mena R(6), Kanzok SM(7), Buza 
JJ(8), Dinglasan RR(9)(10)(11).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Bioengineering, Nelson Mandela-African Institution 
of Science and Technology, Tengeru, Arusha 23302, Tanzania. btarimo@ihi.or.tz.
(2)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology & the
Malaria Research Institute, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. btarimo@ihi.or.tz.
(3)Department of Health and Biomedical Sciences, Nelson Mandela-African
Institution of Science and Technology, Tengeru, Arusha 23302, Tanzania.
btarimo@ihi.or.tz.
(4)Emerging Pathogens Institute, Department of Infectious Diseases & Immunology, 
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611,
USA. henrylawch@connect.hku.hk.
(5)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology & the
Malaria Research Institute, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. dingyin.tao@nih.gov.
(6)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology & the
Malaria Research Institute, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. rebecca.pastrana.mena@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Biology, Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, IL 60660, USA.
skanzok@luc.edu.
(8)Department of Health and Biomedical Sciences, Nelson Mandela-African
Institution of Science and Technology, Tengeru, Arusha 23302, Tanzania.
joram.buza@nm-aist.ac.tz.
(9)School of Life Science and Bioengineering, Nelson Mandela-African Institution 
of Science and Technology, Tengeru, Arusha 23302, Tanzania.
rdinglasan@epi.ufl.edu.
(10)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology & the
Malaria Research Institute, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. rdinglasan@epi.ufl.edu.
(11)Emerging Pathogens Institute, Department of Infectious Diseases & Immunology,
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611,
USA. rdinglasan@epi.ufl.edu.

Paraquat is a potent superoxide (O₂-)-inducing agent that is capable of inducing 
an oxidative imbalance in the mosquito midgut. This oxidative imbalance can
super-stress the malaria parasite, leading to arrested development in the
mosquito midgut and reduced transmission. While several studies have explored the
effect of paraquat on malaria parasites, a fundamental understanding of the
mosquito response to this compound remains unknown. Here, we quantified the
mosquito midgut proteomic response to a paraquat-laced sugar meal, and found that
An. gambiae midguts were enriched in proteins that are indicative of cells under 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. We also carried out qRT-PCR analyses for nine 
prominent thioredoxin (Trx) and glutathione (GSH)-dependent genes in mosquito
midguts post P. falciparum blood meal ingestion to evaluate the concordance
between transcripts and proteins under different oxidative stress conditions. Our
data revealed an absence of significant upregulation in the Trx and GSH-dependent
genes following infected blood meal ingestion. These data suggest that the
intrinsic tolerance of the mosquito midgut to paraquat-mediated oxidative stress 
is through an ER stress response. These data indicate that mosquitoes have at
least two divergent pathways of managing the oxidative stress that is induced by 
exogenous compounds, and outline the potential application of paraquat-like drugs
to act selectively against malaria parasite development in mosquito midguts,
thereby blocking mosquito-to-human transmission.

DOI: 10.3390/proteomes6040047 
PMCID: PMC6313908
PMID: 30424486 

