
1. Biol Open. 2019 Jan 3;8(1). pii: bio037762. doi: 10.1242/bio.037762.

Integral gene drives for population replacement.

Nash A(1), Urdaneta GM(1), Beaghton AK(1), Hoermann A(1), Papathanos PA(2)(3),
Christophides GK(4), Windbichler N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, Sir Alexander Fleming
Building, South Kensington Campus, London SW7 2AZ, UK.
(2)Centre of Functional Genomics, Department of Experimental Medicine, University
of Perugia, Perugia 06123, Italy.
(3)Department of Entomology, Robert H. Smith Faculty of Agriculture, Food and
Environment, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot 7610001, Israel.
(4)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, Sir Alexander Fleming
Building, South Kensington Campus, London SW7 2AZ, UK
g.christophides@imperial.ac.uk n.windbichler@imperial.ac.uk.

A first generation of CRISPR-based gene drives has now been tested in the
laboratory in a number of organisms, including malaria vector mosquitoes.
Challenges for their use in the area-wide genetic control of vector-borne disease
have been identified, including the development of target site resistance, their 
long-term efficacy in the field, their molecular complexity, and practical and
legal limitations for field testing of both gene drive and coupled anti-pathogen 
traits. We have evaluated theoretically the concept of integral gene drive (IGD) 
as an alternative paradigm for population replacement. IGDs incorporate a minimal
set of molecular components, including drive and anti-pathogen effector elements 
directly embedded within endogenous genes - an arrangement that in theory allows 
targeting functionally conserved coding sequences without disrupting their
function. Autonomous and non-autonomous IGD strains could be generated,
optimized, regulated and imported independently. We performed quantitative
modeling comparing IGDs with classical replacement drives and show that selection
for the function of the hijacked host gene can significantly reduce the
establishment of resistant alleles in the population, while drive occurring at
multiple genomic loci prolongs the duration of transmission blockage in the face 
of pre-existing target site variation. IGD thus has potential as a more durable
and flexible population replacement strategy.

© 2019. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/bio.037762 
PMCID: PMC6361204
PMID: 30498016 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no
competing or financial interests.

