
1. Front Immunol. 2018 Nov 20;9:2619. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02619. eCollection
2018.

DAMP-Inducing Adjuvant and PAMP Adjuvants Parallelly Enhance Protective Type-2
and Type-1 Immune Responses to Influenza Split Vaccination.

Hayashi T(1)(2), Momota M(2)(3), Kuroda E(2)(3), Kusakabe T(2)(3), Kobari S(2),
Makisaka K(1), Ohno Y(1)(4), Suzuki Y(1), Nakagawa F(1), Lee MSJ(5), Coban C(5), 
Onodera R(6), Higashi T(1), Motoyama K(1), Ishii KJ(2)(3), Arima H(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Pharmaceutics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Adjuvant Innovation, Center for Vaccine and Adjuvant Research,
National Institute of Biomedical Innovation, Health and Nutrition, Osaka, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Vaccine Science, Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka
University, Osaka, Japan.
(4)Program for Leading Graduate Schools "Health Life Science: Interdisciplinary
and Global Oriented Program", Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.
(5)Laboratory of Malaria Immunology, Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka
University, Osaka, Japan.
(6)Building Regional Innovation Ecosystems, School of Pharmacy, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto, Japan.

Recently, it was reported that 2-hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin (HP-β-CyD), a
common pharmaceutical additive, can act as a vaccine adjuvant to enhance
protective type-2 immunogenicity to co-administered seasonal influenza split
vaccine by inducing host-derived damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs).
However, like most other DAMP-inducing adjuvants such as aluminum hydroxide
(Alum), HP-β-CyD may not be sufficient for the induction of protective type-1
(cellular) immune responses, thereby leaving room for improvement. Here, we
demonstrate that a combination of HP-β-CyD with a humanized TLR9 agonist, K3
CpG-ODN, a potent pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP), enhanced the
protective efficacy of the co-administered influenza split vaccine by inducing
antigen-specific type-2 and type-1 immune responses, respectively. Moreover,
substantial antigen-specific IgE induction by HP-β-CyD, which can cause an
allergic response to immunized antigen was completely suppressed by the addition 
of K3 CpG-ODN. Furthermore, HP-β-CyD- and K3 CpG-ODN-adjuvanted influenza split
vaccination protected the mice against lethal challenge with high doses of
heterologous influenza virus, which could not be protected against by single
adjuvant vaccines. Further experiments using gene deficient mice revealed the
unique immunological mechanism of action in vivo, where type-2 and type-1 immune 
responses enhanced by the combined adjuvants were dependent on TBK1 and TLR9,
respectively, indicating their parallel signaling pathways. Finally, the analysis
of immune responses in the draining lymph node suggested that HP-β-CyD promotes
the uptake of K3 CpG-ODN by plasmacytoid dendritic cells and B cells, which may
contributes to the activation of these cells and enhanced production of IgG2c.
Taken together, the results above may offer potential clinical applications for
the combination of DAMP-inducing adjuvant and PAMP adjuvant to improve vaccine
immunogenicity and efficacy by enhancing both type-2 and type-1 immune responses 
in a parallel manner.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02619 
PMCID: PMC6255964
PMID: 30515151  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

