
1. PeerJ. 2018 Dec 14;6:e6141. doi: 10.7717/peerj.6141. eCollection 2018.

The Plasmodium knowlesi Pk41 surface protein diversity, natural selection, sub
population and geographical clustering: a 6-cysteine protein family member.

Ahmed MA(1), Chu KB(2), Quan FS(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Zoology, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedical Science, Graduate School, Kyung Hee University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Biomedical Science Institute, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Introduction: The zoonotic malaria parasite Plasmodium knowlesi has currently
become the most dominant form of infection in humans in Malaysia and is an
emerging infectious disease in most Southeast Asian countries. The P41 is a
merozoite surface protein belonging to the 6-cysteine family and is a
well-characterized vaccine candidate in P. vivax and P. falciparum; however, no
study has been done in the orthologous gene of P. knowlesi. This study
investigates the level of polymorphism, haplotypes and natural selection of pk41 
genes in clinical isolates from Malaysia.
Method: Thirty-five full-length pk41 sequences from clinical isolates of Malaysia
along with four laboratory lines (along with H-strain) were downloaded from
public databases. For comparative analysis between species, orthologous P41 genes
from P. falciparum, P. vivax, P. coatneyi and P. cynomolgi were also downloaded. 
Genetic diversity, polymorphism, haplotype and natural selection were determined 
using DnaSP 5.10 software. Phylogenetic relationships between Pk41 genes were
determined using MEGA 5.0 software.
Results: Analysis of 39 full-length pk41 sequences along with the H-strain
identified 36 SNPs (20 non-synonymous and 16 synonymous substitutions) resulting 
in 31 haplotypes. Nucleotide diversity across the full-length gene was low and
was similar to its ortholog in P. vivax; pv41. Domain-wise amino acid analysis of
the two s48/45 domains indicated low level of polymorphisms for both the domains,
and the glutamic acid rich region had extensive size variations. In the central
domain, upstream to the glutamate rich region, a unique two to six (K-E)n repeat 
region was identified within the clinical isolates. Overall, the pk41 genes were 
indicative of negative/purifying selection due to functional constraints.
Domain-wise analysis of the s48/45 domains also indicated purifying selection.
However, analysis of Tajima's D across the genes identified non-synonymous SNPs
in the s48/45 domain II with high positive values indicating possible epitope
binding regions. All the 6-cysteine residues within the s48/45 domains were
conserved within the clinical isolates indicating functional conservation of
these regions. Phylogenetic analysis of full-length pk41 genes indicated
geographical clustering and identified three subpopulations of P. knowlesi; one
originating in the laboratory lines and two originating from Sarawak, Malaysian
Borneo.
Conclusion: This is the first study to report on the polymorphism and natural
selection of pk41 genes from clinical isolates of Malaysia. The results reveal
that there is low level of polymorphism in both s48/45 domains, indicating that
this antigen could be a potential vaccine target. However, genetic and molecular 
immunology studies involving higher number of samples from various parts of
Malaysia would be necessary to validate this antigen's candidacy as a vaccine
target for P. knowlesi.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.6141 
PMCID: PMC6296336
PMID: 30581686 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

