
1. Redox Biol. 2019 Feb;21:101072. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2018.101072. Epub 2018 Dec
10.

The impact of xanthine oxidase (XO) on hemolytic diseases.

Schmidt HM(1), Kelley EE(2), Straub AC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Pittsburgh Heart, Lung, Blood and Vascular Medicine Institute, United States; 
Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, United States.
(2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, West Virginia University, School of
Medicine, Morgantown, WV, United States. Electronic address:
eric.kelley@hsc.wvu.edu.
(3)Pittsburgh Heart, Lung, Blood and Vascular Medicine Institute, United States; 
Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, United States. Electronic address: astraub@pitt.edu.

Hemolytic diseases are associated with elevated levels of circulating free heme
that can mediate endothelial dysfunction directly via redox reactions with
biomolecules or indirectly by upregulating enzymatic sources of reactive species.
A key enzymatic source of these reactive species is the purine catabolizing
enzyme, xanthine oxidase (XO) as the oxidation of hypoxanthine to xanthine and
subsequent oxidation of xanthine to uric acid generates superoxide (O2•-) and
hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). While XO has been studied for over 120 years, much
remains unknown regarding specific mechanistic roles for this enzyme in
pathologic processes. This gap in knowledge stems from several interrelated
issues including: 1) lethality of global XO deletion and the absence of
tissue-specific XO knockout models have coalesced to relegate proof-of-principle 
experimentation to pharmacology; 2) XO is mobile and thus when upregulated
locally can be secreted into the circulation and impact distal vascular beds by
high-affinity association to the glycocalyx on the endothelium; and 3)
endothelial-bound XO is significantly resistant (> 50%) to inhibition by
allopurinol, the principle compound used for XO inhibition in the clinic as well 
as the laboratory. While it is known that circulating XO is elevated in hemolytic
diseases including sickle cell, malaria and sepsis, little is understood
regarding its role in these pathologies. As such, the aim of this review is to
define our current understanding regarding the effect of hemolysis (free heme) on
circulating XO levels as well as the subsequent impact of XO-derived oxidants in 
hemolytic disease processes.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.redox.2018.101072 
PMCID: PMC6305892
PMID: 30580157  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

