
1. CRISPR J. 2018 Feb 1;1(1):88-98. doi: 10.1089/crispr.2017.0012.

Redkmer: An Assembly-Free Pipeline for the Identification of Abundant and
Specific X-Chromosome Target Sequences for X-Shredding by CRISPR Endonucleases.

Papathanos PA(1), Windbichler N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of Genomics and Genetics,
University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, Sir Alexander Fleming
Building, South Kensington Campus, London, United Kingdom.

CRISPR-based synthetic sex ratio distorters, which operate by shredding the
X-chromosome during male meiosis, are promising tools for the area-wide control
of harmful insect pest or disease vector species. X-shredders have been proposed 
as tools to suppress insect populations by biasing the sex ratio of the wild
population toward males, thus reducing its natural reproductive potential.
However, to build synthetic X-shredders based on CRISPR, the selection of gRNA
targets, in the form of high-copy sequence repeats on the X chromosome of a given
species, is difficult, since such repeats are not accurately resolved in genome
assemblies and cannot be assigned to chromosomes with confidence. We have
therefore developed the redkmer computational pipeline, designed to identify
short and highly abundant sequence elements occurring uniquely on the X
chromosome. Redkmer was designed to use as input minimally processed whole genome
sequence data from males and females. We tested redkmer with short- and long-read
whole genome sequence data of Anopheles gambiae, the major vector of human
malaria, in which the X-shredding paradigm was originally developed. Redkmer
established long reads as chromosomal proxies with excellent correlation to the
genome assembly and used them to rank X-candidate kmers for their level of
X-specificity and abundance. Among these, a high-confidence set of 25-mers was
identified, many belonging to previously known X-chromosome repeats of Anopheles 
gambiae, including the ribosomal gene array and the selfish elements harbored
within it. Data from a control strain, in which these repeats are shared with the
Y chromosome, confirmed the elimination of these kmers during filtering. Finally,
we show that redkmer output can be linked directly to gRNA selection and
off-target prediction. In addition, the output of redkmer, including the
prediction of chromosomal origin of single-molecule long reads and chromosome
specific kmers, could also be used for the characterization of other biologically
relevant sex chromosome sequences, a task that is frequently hampered by the
repetitiveness of sex chromosome sequence content.

DOI: 10.1089/crispr.2017.0012 
PMCID: PMC6319322
PMID: 30627701 

Conflict of interest statement: No competing financial interests exist.

