
1. BMC Genomics. 2019 Jan 16;20(1):47. doi: 10.1186/s12864-018-5418-y.

Multiple genetic loci define Ca++ utilization by bloodstream malaria parasites.

Apolis L(1)(2), Olivas J(1), Srinivasan P(1)(3), Kushwaha AK(1), Desai SA(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, USA.
(2)Florida State University College of Medicine, Tallahassee, Florida, USA.
(3)Department Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns Hopkins Malaria
Research Institute, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)The Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, USA.
sdesai@niaid.nih.gov.

BACKGROUND: Bloodstream malaria parasites require Ca++ for their development, but
the sites and mechanisms of Ca++ utilization are not well understood. We
hypothesized that there may be differences in Ca++ uptake or utilization by
genetically distinct lines of P. falciparum. These differences, if identified,
may provide insights into molecular mechanisms.
RESULTS: Dose response studies with the Ca++ chelator EGTA (ethylene
glycol-bis(β-aminoethyl ether)-N,N,N',N'-tetraacetic acid) revealed stable
differences in Ca++ requirement for six geographically divergent parasite lines
used in previous genetic crosses, with the largest difference seen between the
parents of the HB3 x Dd2 cross. Genetic mapping of Ca++ requirement yielded
complex inheritance in 34 progeny clones with a single significant locus on
chromosome 7 and possible contributions from other loci. Although encoded by a
gene in the significant locus and a proposed Ca++ target, PfCRT (P. falciparum
chloroquine resistance transporter), the primary determinant of clinical
resistance to the antimalarial drug chloroquine, does not appear to contribute to
this quantitative trait. Stage-specific application of extracellular EGTA also
excluded determinants associated with merozoite egress and erythrocyte
reinvasion.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified differences in Ca++ utilization amongst P.
falciparum lines. These differences are under genetic regulation, segregating as 
a complex trait in genetic cross progeny. Ca++ uptake and utilization throughout 
the bloodstream asexual cycle of malaria parasites represents an unexplored
target for therapeutic intervention.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-018-5418-y 
PMCID: PMC6335690
PMID: 30651090  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

