
1. PLoS One. 2019 Jan 23;14(1):e0210252. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0210252.
eCollection 2019.

Cytomegalovirus vectors expressing Plasmodium knowlesi antigens induce immune
responses that delay parasitemia upon sporozoite challenge.

Hansen SG(1)(2), Womack J(1), Scholz I(1), Renner A(3), Edgel KA(3), Xu G(1),
Ford JC(1), Grey M(1), St Laurent B(4), Turner JM(2), Planer S(2), Legasse AW(2),
Richie TL(3), Aguiar JC(3), Axthelm MK(1)(2), Villasante ED(3), Weiss W(3),
Edlefsen PT(5), Picker LJ(1)(2), Früh K(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Oregon Health & Science University, Vaccine & Gene Therapy Institute,
Beaverton, OR, United States of America.
(2)Oregon Health & Science University, Oregon National Primate Research Center,
Beaverton, OR, United States of America.
(3)US Military Malaria Vaccine Program, Naval Medical Research Center, Silver
Spring, MD, United States of America.
(4)National Institutes of Health, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research,
Malaria Pathogenesis and Human Immunity Unit, Rockville, MD, United States of
America.
(5)Statistical Center for HIV/AIDS Research and Prevention, Vaccine and
Infectious Disease Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA,
United States of America.

The development of a sterilizing vaccine against malaria remains one of the
highest priorities for global health research. While sporozoite vaccines
targeting the pre-erythrocytic stage show great promise, it has not been possible
to maintain efficacy long-term, likely due to an inability of these vaccines to
maintain effector memory T cell responses in the liver. Vaccines based on human
cytomegalovirus (HCMV) might overcome this limitation since vectors based on
rhesus CMV (RhCMV), the homologous virus in rhesus macaques (RM), elicit and
indefinitely maintain high frequency, non-exhausted effector memory T cells in
extralymphoid tissues, including the liver. Moreover, RhCMV strain 68-1 elicits
CD8+ T cells broadly recognizing unconventional epitopes exclusively restricted
by MHC-II and MHC-E. To evaluate the potential of these unique immune responses
to protect against malaria, we expressed four Plasmodium knowlesi (Pk) antigens
(CSP, AMA1, SSP2/TRAP, MSP1c) in RhCMV 68-1 or in Rh189-deleted 68-1, which
additionally elicits canonical MHC-Ia-restricted CD8+ T cells. Upon inoculation
of RM with either of these Pk Ag expressing RhCMV vaccines, we obtained T cell
responses to each of the four Pk antigens. Upon challenge with Pk sporozoites we 
observed a delayed appearance of blood stage parasites in vaccinated RM
consistent with a 75-80% reduction of parasite release from the liver. Moreover, 
the Rh189-deleted RhCMV/Pk vectors elicited sterile protection in one RM. Once in
the blood, parasite growth was not affected. In contrast to T cell responses
induced by Pk infection, RhCMV vectors maintained sustained T cell responses to
all four malaria antigens in the liver post-challenge. The delayed appearance of 
blood stage parasites is thus likely due to a T cell-mediated inhibition of liver
stage parasite development. As such, this vaccine approach can be used to
efficiently test new T cell antigens, improve current vaccines targeting the
liver stage and complement vaccines targeting erythrocytic antigens.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0210252 
PMCID: PMC6343944
PMID: 30673723  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: OHSU and Drs. Picker, Hansen, and Früh have a
significant financial interest in VIR Biotechnology Inc., a company that may have
a commercial interest in the results of this research and technology. The
potential individual and institutional conflicts of interest have been reviewed
and managed by OHSU. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on
sharing data and materials.

