
1. Malar J. 2019 Jan 25;18(1):26. doi: 10.1186/s12936-019-2659-4.

A fast and cost-effective microsampling protocol incorporating reduced animal
usage for time-series transcriptomics in rodent malaria parasites.

Ramaprasad A(1)(2), Subudhi AK(3), Culleton R(4), Pain A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Pathogen Genomics Laboratory, Biological and Environmental Sciences and
Engineering (BESE) Division, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
(KAUST), Thuwal, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. abhinay.ramaprasad@kaust.edu.sa.
(2)Malaria Unit, Department of Pathology, Institute of Tropical Medicine
(NEKKEN), Nagasaki University, 1-12-4 Sakamoto, Nagasaki, 852-8523, Japan.
abhinay.ramaprasad@kaust.edu.sa.
(3)Pathogen Genomics Laboratory, Biological and Environmental Sciences and
Engineering (BESE) Division, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
(KAUST), Thuwal, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(4)Malaria Unit, Department of Pathology, Institute of Tropical Medicine
(NEKKEN), Nagasaki University, 1-12-4 Sakamoto, Nagasaki, 852-8523, Japan.
(5)Pathogen Genomics Laboratory, Biological and Environmental Sciences and
Engineering (BESE) Division, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
(KAUST), Thuwal, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. arnab.pain@kaust.edu.sa.

BACKGROUND: The transcriptional regulation that occurs in malaria parasites
during the erythrocytic stages of infection can be studied in vivo with rodent
malaria parasites propagated in mice. Time-series transcriptome profiling
commonly involves the euthanasia of groups of mice at specific time points
followed by the extraction of parasite RNA from whole blood samples. Current
methodologies for parasite RNA extraction involve several steps and when multiple
time points are profiled, these protocols are laborious, time-consuming, and
require the euthanization of large cohorts of mice.
RESULTS: A simplified protocol has been designed for parasite RNA extraction from
blood volumes as low as 20 μL (microsamples), serially bled from mice via tail
snips and directly lysed with TRIzol reagent. Gene expression data derived from
microsampling using RNA-seq were closely matched to those derived from larger
volumes of leucocyte-depleted and saponin-treated blood obtained from euthanized 
mice with high reproducibility between biological replicates. Transcriptome
profiling of microsamples taken at different time points during the
intra-erythrocytic developmental cycle of the rodent malaria parasite Plasmodium 
vinckei revealed the transcriptional cascade commonly observed in malaria
parasites.
CONCLUSIONS: Microsampling is a quick, robust and cost-efficient approach to
sample collection for in vivo time-series transcriptomic studies in rodent
malaria parasites.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-019-2659-4 
PMCID: PMC6347755
PMID: 30683099  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

