
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2019 Jan 14;8:454. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2018.00454.
eCollection 2018.

Parasite-Related Genetic and Epigenetic Aspects and Host Factors Influencing
Plasmodium falciparum Invasion of Erythrocytes.

Ararat-Sarria M(1)(2), Patarroyo MA(3)(4), Curtidor H(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Receptor-Ligand Department, Fundación Instituto de Inmunología de Colombia,
Bogotá, Colombia.
(2)PhD Programme in Biomedical and Biological Sciences, Universidad del Rosario, 
Bogotá, Colombia.
(3)Molecular Biology and Immunology Department, Fundación Instituto de
Immunología de Colombia (FIDIC), Bogotá, Colombia.
(4)School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universidad del Rosario, Bogotá,
Colombia.

Malaria, a disease caused by Plasmodium parasites, is widespread throughout
tropical and sub-tropical regions worldwide; it mostly affects children and
pregnant woman. Eradication has stalled despite effective prevention measures and
medication being available for this disease; this has mainly been due to the
parasite's resistance to medical treatment and the mosquito vector's resistance
to insecticides. Tackling such resistance involves using renewed approaches and
techniques for accruing a deep understanding of the parasite's biology, and
developing new drugs and vaccines. Studying the parasite's invasion of
erythrocytes should shed light on its ability to switch between invasion
phenotypes related to the expression of gene sets encoding proteins acting as
ligands during target cell invasion, thereby conferring mechanisms for evading a 
particular host's immune response and adapting to changes in target cell surface 
receptors. This review considers some factors influencing the expression of such 
phenotypes, such as Plasmodium's genetic, transcriptional and epigenetic
characteristics, and explores some host-related aspects which could affect
parasite phenotypes, aiming at integrating knowledge regarding this topic and the
possible relationship between the parasite's biology and host factors playing a
role in erythrocyte invasion.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2018.00454 
PMCID: PMC6339890
PMID: 30693273  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

