
1. PeerJ. 2019 Feb 5;7:e6361. doi: 10.7717/peerj.6361. eCollection 2019.

Blood parasites infecting the Hoatzin (Opisthocomus hoazin), a unique neotropical
folivorous bird.

Pacheco MA(1), García-Amado MA(2), Manzano J(3), Matta NE(3), Escalante AA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology/Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine (iGEM),
Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, United States of America.
(2)Laboratorio de Fisiología Gastrointestinal, Centro de Biofísica y Bioquímica, 
Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Científicas (IVIC), Caracas, Miranda,
Venezuela.
(3)Departamento de Biología, Grupo de Investigación Caracterización genética e
Inmunología, Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Sede Bogotá-Facultad de Ciencias, 
Bogota, Colombia.

The Hoatzin (Opisthocomus hoazin) is the only extant member of the order
Opisthocomiformes. This unique South American bird lives in the riparian lowland 
vegetation characteristic of the Amazon and Orinoco basins. Hoatzins nest in
communal social units close to water bodies; they are strictly folivores being
the only bird with pregastric fermentation in the crop. Because of the complex
logistics involved in capturing this bird, there is a knowledge gap on its
parasites. This study documents two distant lineages of haemosporidian parasites 
(Plasmodium spp.) in a juvenile and two adults sampled in the Cojedes state,
Venezuela. Although negative by microscopy, the parasite identification was
possible by using molecular methods. We estimated the phylogenetic relationships 
on the parasite cytochrome b (cytb, 480 bp) gene and the mitochondrial DNA. We
found one of the parasites lineages in two individuals (nestling and adult), and 
the corresponding fragment of cytb was identical to a one found in Wood Stork
(Mycteria americana) from Brazil. The other lineage, found in an adult, has an
identity of 469 out of 478 bp (98%) with Plasmodium sp. GAL-2012 (isolate
THAMB08) from Brazil. Although a morphological description of these parasites was
not possible, this is the first molecular study focusing on Hoatzin
haemosporidian parasites and the first documentation of Plasmodium infections in 
the Hoatzin from Venezuela. Furthermore, we reported microfilaria in two adults
as well as hematological parameters for six individuals. Information on
hematological parameters could contribute to establishing the necessary baseline 
to detect underlying conditions, such as infections, in this bird species.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.6361 
PMCID: PMC6368046
PMID: 30740273 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing
interests.

