
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2019 Apr 25;63(5). pii: e00052-19. doi:
10.1128/AAC.00052-19. Print 2019 May.

Identification of Antimalarial Compounds That Require CLAG3 for Their Uptake by
Plasmodium falciparum-Infected Erythrocytes.

Mira-Martínez S(#)(1)(2), Pickford AK(#)(2), Rovira-Graells N(#)(2), Guetens
P(1), Tintó-Font E(2), Cortés A(#)(3)(4), Rosanas-Urgell A(#)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium.
(2)ISGlobal, Hospital Clínic-Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia,
Spain.
(3)ISGlobal, Hospital Clínic-Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia,
Spain alfred.cortes@isglobal.org arosanas@itg.be.
(4)ICREA, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(5)Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium alfred.cortes@isglobal.org
arosanas@itg.be.
(#)Contributed equally

During the intraerythrocytic asexual cycle malaria parasites acquire nutrients
and other solutes through a broad selectivity channel localized at the membrane
of the infected erythrocyte termed the plasmodial surface anion channel (PSAC).
The protein product of the Plasmodium falciparum clonally variant clag3.1 and
clag3.2 genes determines PSAC activity. Switches in the expression of clag3
genes, which are regulated by epigenetic mechanisms, are associated with changes 
in PSAC-dependent permeability that can result in resistance to compounds toxic
for the parasite, such as blasticidin S. Here, we investigated whether other
antimalarial drugs require CLAG3 to reach their intracellular target and
consequently are prone to parasite resistance by epigenetic mechanisms. We found 
that the bis-thiazolium salts T3 (also known as albitiazolium) and T16 require
the product of clag3 genes to enter infected erythrocytes. P. falciparum
populations can develop resistance to these compounds via the selection of
parasites with dramatically reduced expression of both genes. However, other
compounds previously demonstrated or predicted to enter infected erythrocytes
through transport pathways absent from noninfected erythrocytes, such as
fosmidomycin, doxycycline, azithromycin, lumefantrine, or pentamidine, do not
require expression of clag3 genes for their antimalarial activity. This suggests 
that they use alternative CLAG3-independent routes to access parasites. Our
results demonstrate that P. falciparum can develop resistance to diverse
antimalarial compounds by epigenetic changes in the expression of clag3 genes.
This is of concern for drug development efforts because drug resistance by
epigenetic mechanisms can arise quickly, even during the course of a single
infection.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00052-19 
PMCID: PMC6496086
PMID: 30782998  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

