
1. Ticks Tick Borne Dis. 2019 Jun;10(4):787-797. doi: 10.1016/j.ttbdis.2019.03.013. 
Epub 2019 Mar 20.

Tick Gené's organ engagement in lipid metabolism revealed by a combined
transcriptomic and proteomic approach.

Xavier MA(1), Tirloni L(2), Pinto AFM(3), Diedrich JK(4), Yates JR 3rd(4),
Gonzales S(5), Farber M(5), da Silva Vaz I Junior(6), Termignoni C(7).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biotecnologia, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto
Alegre, RS, Brazil; Departamento de Bioquímica, Universidade Federal do Rio
Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(2)Vector Biology Section, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease, Rockville, MD, United States.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
CA, United States; Clayton Foundation Peptide Biology Lab, Salk Institute for
Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA, United States.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
CA, United States.
(5)Instituto de Biotecnología, Instituto Nacional de Tecnología Agropecuaria,
Hurlingham, BA, Argentina.
(6)Centro de Biotecnologia, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto
Alegre, RS, Brazil; Faculdade de Veterinária, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande 
do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(7)Centro de Biotecnologia, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto
Alegre, RS, Brazil; Departamento de Bioquímica, Universidade Federal do Rio
Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. Electronic address:
trmgn@cbiot.ufrgs.br.

Lipids play key roles in arthropod metabolism. In ticks, these biomolecules are
transported from fat body to other organs, such as ovary and Gené's organ. Gené's
organ, an apparatus found exclusively in female ticks, secretes a protective wax 
coat onto the egg surface, increasing egg viability in the environment due to
waterproof, cohesive, and antimicrobial properties. In this work, a combined
transcriptomic and proteomic approach shows that Gené's organ not solely secrets 
compounds taken up from the hemolymph, but is actively engaged in synthesis,
modification, and oxidation of lipids. Gené's organ was analyzed at two distinct 
stages: 1) when ticks detach from host by the end of hematophagous phase, and 2) 
during egg-laying. Data show that Gené's organ undergoes a maturation process
before the onset of oviposition, in preparation for its role during egg-laying.
Because it deals with a wax-secreting organ, the study focused on lipid
metabolism, examining a full machinery to synthesize, modify, and oxidize fatty
acids. Proteins involved in sterol modification, transport, and degradation were 
also addressed. In addition to highlighting Gené's organ importance in tick
reproductive physiology, the results reveal proteins and pathways crucial to egg 
wax secretion, and consequently, egg development in the environment. Tools
targeting these molecules and pathways would impair egg viability in the
environment, and therefore have the potential to be developed into novel tick
control methods.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ttbdis.2019.03.013 
PMID: 30904537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

