
1. PLoS One. 2019 Apr 9;14(4):e0211756. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0211756.
eCollection 2019.

DNA aptamers for the recognition of HMGB1 from Plasmodium falciparum.

Joseph DF(1), Nakamoto JA(1), Garcia Ruiz OA(1), Peñaranda K(1)(2),
Sanchez-Castro AE(1), Castillo PS(1), Milón P(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Applied Biophysics and Biochemistry, Centre for Research and
Innovation, Health Sciences Faculty, Universidad Peruana de Ciencias Aplicadas
(UPC), Lima, Perú.
(2)Research and Innovation Division, BDM, Lima, Perú.

Rapid Diagnostic Tests (RDTs) for malaria are restricted to a few biomarkers and 
antibody-mediated detection. However, the expression of commonly used biomarkers 
varies geographically and the sensibility of immunodetection can be affected by
batch-to-batch differences or limited thermal stability. In this study we aimed
to overcome these limitations by identifying a potential biomarker and by
developing molecular sensors based on aptamer technology. Using gene expression
databases, ribosome profiling analysis, and structural modeling, we find that the
High Mobility Group Box 1 protein (HMGB1) of Plasmodium falciparum is highly
expressed, structurally stable, and present along all blood-stages of P.
falciparum infection. To develop biosensors, we used in vitro evolution
techniques to produce DNA aptamers for the recombinantly expressed HMG-box, the
conserved domain of HMGB1. An evolutionary approach for evaluating the dynamics
of aptamer populations suggested three predominant aptamer motifs.
Representatives of the aptamer families were tested for binding parameters to the
HMG-box domain using microscale thermophoresis and rapid kinetics. Dissociation
constants of the aptamers varied over two orders of magnitude between nano- and
micromolar ranges while the aptamer-HMG-box interaction occurred in a few
seconds. The specificity of aptamer binding to the HMG-box of P. falciparum
compared to its human homolog depended on pH conditions. Altogether, our study
proposes HMGB1 as a candidate biomarker and a set of sensing aptamers that can be
further developed into rapid diagnostic tests for P. falciparum detection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0211756 
PMCID: PMC6456224
PMID: 30964875  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: BDM is a Startup of the Laboratory of Applied
Biophysics and Biochemistry (UPC) where PM owns shares. BDM is funded by the
Peruvian government (136-2016-Fondecyt) and is committed to develop diagnostic
methods for neglected diseases. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE
policies on sharing data and materials.

