
1. Trop Med Health. 2019 Apr 11;47:23. doi: 10.1186/s41182-019-0151-z. eCollection
2019.

Genetic structure of Anopheles gambiae s.s populations following the use of
insecticides on several consecutive years in southern Benin.

Fassinou AJYH(1)(2), Koukpo CZ(1)(2), Ossè RA(1)(3), Agossa FR(1), Assogba BS(4),
Sidick A(1), Sèwadé WT(1), Akogbéto MC(1)(5), Sèzonlin M(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Cotonou Entomological Research Center (CREC), Cotonou, Benin.
(2)Graduate School of Life Sciences and Earth, FAST - UAC, Abomey-Calavi, Benin.
(3)National University of Agriculture (UNA), Porto-Novo, Benin.
(4)5Medical Research Council Unit the Gambia at the London School of Hygiene &
Tropical, Serrekunda, Gambia.
(5)Laboratory of Evolution, Biodiversity of Arthropods and Sanitation, FAST -
UAC, Abomey-Calavi, Benin.

Background: Several studies have reported the strong resistance of Anopheles
gambiae s.l. complex species to pyrethroids. The voltage-dependent sodium channel
(Vgsc) gene is the main target of pyrethroids and DDT. In Benin, the frequency of
the resistant allele (L1014F) of this gene varies along the north-south transect.
Monitoring the evolution of resistance is necessary to better appreciate the
genetic structure of vector populations in localities subject to the intensive
use of chemicals associated with other control initiatives. The purpose of this
study was to map the distribution of pyrethroid insecticide resistance alleles of
the Kdr gene in malaria vectors in different regions and ecological facies in
order to identify the evolutionary forces that might be the basis of anopheline
population dynamics.
Methods: The characterization of Anopheles gambiae s.l. populations and
resistance mechanisms were performed using adult mosquitoes obtained from larvae 
collected in the four agroecological zones in southern Benin. Genomic DNA
extraction was performed on whole mosquitoes.The extracted genomic DNA from them 
were used for the molecular identification of species in Anopheles gambiae s.l.
complex and the identification of genotypes related to pyrethroid resistance as
the Kdr gene amino acid position 1014 in sodium channel. Molecular speciation and
genotyping of Kdr resistant alleles (1014) were done using PCR.Genepop software
version 4.2 was used to calculate allelic and genotypic frequencies in each
agroecological zone. The p value of the allelic frequency was determined using
the binomial test function in R version 3.3.3. The Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium was
checked for each population with Genetics software version 1.3.8.1. The observed 
heterozygosity and the expected heterozygosity as well as the fixation index and 
genetic differentiation index within and between populations were calculated
using Genepop software version 4.2.
Results: During the study period, Anopheles coluzzii was the major species in all
agroecological zones while Anopheles gambiae was scarcely represented. Regardless
of the species, resistant homozygote individuals (L1014F/L1014F) were dominant in
all agroecological zones, showing a strong selection of the resistant allele
(L1014F). All populations showed a deficit of heterozygosity. No genetic
differentiation was observed between the different populations of the two
species. For Anopheles coluzzii, there was a small differentiation among the
populations of the central cotton and bar-lands zones. The genetic
differentiation was modest among the population of the fisheries zone
(Fst = 0.1295). The genetic differentiation was very high in the population of
Anopheles gambiae of the bar-lands zone (Fst = 0.2408).
Conclusion: This study revealed that the use of insecticides in Benin for years
has altered the genetic structure of Anopheles gambiae s.s. populations in all
agroecological zones of southern Benin. It would be desirable to orientate vector
control efforts towards the use of insecticides other than pyrethroids and DDT or
combinations of insecticides with different modes of action.

DOI: 10.1186/s41182-019-0151-z 
PMCID: PMC6458727
PMID: 31007534 

Conflict of interest statement: Not applicableNot applicable.The authors declare 
that they have no competing interests.Springer Nature remains neutral with regard
to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

