
1. mBio. 2019 Apr 30;10(2). pii: e00217-19. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00217-19.

Meta-analysis of Plasmodium falciparum var Signatures Contributing to Severe
Malaria in African Children and Indian Adults.

Duffy F(#)(1), Bernabeu M(#)(1), Babar PH(2)(3), Kessler A(4), Wang CW(5)(6), Vaz
M(2), Chery L(3), Mandala WL(7)(8)(9), Rogerson SJ(10), Taylor TE(11)(12), Seydel
KB(11)(12), Lavstsen T(5)(6), Gomes E(2), Kim K(4), Lusingu J(5)(6)(13), Rathod
PK(3), Aitchison JD(14)(15), Smith JD(14)(16).

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(2)Goa Medical College & Hospital, Bambolim, Goa, India.
(3)Departments of Chemistry and Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington, USA.
(4)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.
(5)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of Immunology and Microbiology,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(6)Department of Infectious Diseases, Copenhagen University Hospital
(Rigshospitalet), Copenhagen, Denmark.
(7)Malawi-Liverpool Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Programme, Blantyre, Malawi.
(8)College of Medicine, Biomedical Department, University of Malawi, Blantyre,
Malawi.
(9)Academy of Medical Sciences, Malawi University of Science and Technology,
Thyolo, Malawi.
(10)Department of Medicine at the Doherty Institute, The University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia.
(11)Blantyre Malaria Project, University of Malawi College of Medicine, Blantyre,
Malawi.
(12)College of Osteopathic Medicine, Michigan State University, East Lansing,
Michigan, USA.
(13)Tanga Medical Research Centre, National Institute for Medical Research,
Tanga, Tanzania.
(14)Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, USA
john.aitchison@seattlechildrens.org joe.smith@seattlechildrens.org.
(15)Institute of Systems Biology, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(16)Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
USA.
(#)Contributed equally

The clinical presentation of severe Plasmodium falciparum malaria differs between
children and adults, but the mechanistic basis for this remains unclear.
Contributing factors to disease severity include total parasite biomass and the
diverse cytoadhesive properties mediated by the polymorphic var gene parasite
ligand family displayed on infected erythrocytes. To explore these factors, we
performed a multicohort analysis of the contribution of var expression and
parasite biomass to severe malaria in two previously published pediatric cohorts 
in Tanzania and Malawi and an adult cohort in India. Machine learning analysis
revealed independent and complementary roles for var adhesion types and parasite 
biomass in adult and pediatric severe malaria and showed that similar var
profiles, including upregulation of group A and DC8 var, predict severe malaria
in adults and children. Among adults, patients with multiorgan complications
presented infections with significantly higher parasite biomass without
significant differences in var adhesion types. Conversely, pediatric patients
with specific complications showed distinct var signatures. Cerebral malaria
patients showed broadly increased expression of var genes, in particular group A 
and DC8 var, while children with severe malaria anemia were classified based on
high transcription of DC8 var only. This study represents the first large
multisite meta-analysis of var expression, and it demonstrates the presence of
common var profiles in severe malaria patients of different ages across distant
geographical sites, as well as syndrome-specific disease signatures. The complex 
associations between parasite biomass, var adhesion type, and clinical
presentation revealed here represent the most comprehensive picture so far of the
relationship between cytoadhesion, parasite load, and clinical
syndrome.IMPORTANCE P. falciparum malaria can cause multiple disease
complications that differ by patient age. Previous studies have attempted to
address the roles of parasite adhesion and biomass in disease severity; however, 
these studies have been limited to single geographical sites, and there is
limited understanding of how parasite adhesion and biomass interact to influence 
disease manifestations. In this meta-analysis, we compared parasite disease
determinants in African children and Indian adults. This study demonstrates that 
parasite biomass and specific subsets of var genes are independently associated
with detrimental outcomes in both childhood and adult malaria. We also explored
how parasite var adhesion types and biomass play different roles in the
development of specific severe malaria pathologies, including childhood cerebral 
malaria and multiorgan complications in adults. This work represents the largest 
study to date of the role of both var adhesion types and biomass in severe
malaria.

Copyright © 2019 Duffy et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00217-19 
PMCID: PMC6495371
PMID: 31040236  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

