
1. Iran J Parasitol. 2019 Jan-Mar;14(1):143-150.

Efficacy of Artemisinin Base Combination Therapy and Genetic Diversity of
Plasmodium falciparum from Uncomplicated Malaria Falciparum Patient in District
of Pesawaran, Province of Lampung, Indonesia.

Suwandi JF(1), Asmara W(2), Kusnanto H(3), Syafruddin D(4)(5), Supargiyono S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Lampung, Bandar Lampung, Indonesia.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Gadjah Mada
University, Jogjakarta, Indonesia.
(3)Department of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, Public Health and Nursing,
Gadjah Mada University, Jogjakarta, Indonesia.
(4)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Hasanuddin University,
Makasar, Indonesia.
(5)Eijkman Institute for Molecular Biology, Jakarta, Indonesia.
(6)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Public Health and Nursing,
Gadjah Mada University, Jogjakarta, Indonesia.

Background: Malaria is an infectious disease caused by Plasmodium sp., that still
prevalence in some part of Indonesia. District of Pesawaran is one of malaria
endemic area in the Province of Lampung. The purpose of this study was to
evaluate the efficacy of the ACT treatment in the District of Pesawaran Province 
of Lampung, Indonesia from Dec 2012 to Jul 2013 and the genetic variation of the 
Plasmodium falciparum also studied.
Methods: This study was observational analytic study of falciparum malaria
patients treated with ACT and primaquine (DHP-PQ and AAQ-PQ) at Hanura Primary
Health Centre (Puskesmas). DNA isolation was done with QIAmp DNA Mini Kit.
Amplification of PfMDR1, MSP1, and MSP2 genes was done with appropriate forward
and reverse primer and procedures optimized first. PCR Product of PfMDR1 gene was
prepared for sequencing. Data analysis was done with MEGA 6 software.
Results: The results of this research are DHP-PQ effectiveness was still wellness
among falciparum malaria patients in District of Pesawaran, Province of Lampung, 
Indonesia. There is Single-nucleotide mutation of N86Y of PfMDR1 gene. The
dominant alleles found are MAD20 and 3D7 alleles with Multiplicity of Infection
(MOI) are low.
Conclusion: Therapy of DHP-PQ as an antimalarial falciparum in Pesawaran
District, Lampung, Indonesia is still good. The genetic variation found was the
SNP on the N86Y PfMDR1 gene, with dominant allele MAD20 and 3D7.


PMCID: PMC6511592
PMID: 31123479 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that
there is no conflict of interests.

