
1. J Parasitol. 2019 Jun;105(3):414-422.

Within-Lineage Divergence of Avian Haemosporidians: A Case Study to Reveal the
Origin of a Widespread Haemoproteus Parasite.

Huang X(1), Rapševičius P(1), Chapa-Vargas L(2), Hellgren O(1), Bensch S(1).

Author information: 
(1)1   Molecular Ecology and Evolution Lab, Department of Biology, Lund
University, Sölvegatan 37, SE-22362, Sweden.
(2)2   Instituto Potosino de Investigación Científica y Tecnológica A.C. Camino a
la Presa San José 2055, Lomas 4ª Sección, San Luis Potosí, SLP. C.P. 78216,
Mexico.

Avian haemosporidian parasites are particularly diverse and widespread. To date, 
more than 3,000 distinct cytochrome b lineages have been recorded, of which some 
present extremely wide geographical distributions, even including multiple
continents. Whether these isolates represent one or several cryptic species
remains unknown. Here we carried out a case study of SISKIN1, a common
haemosporidian parasite lineage belonging to the morphologically described
species Haemoproteus tartakovskyi. To shed light on its evolutionary origin, we
investigated the divergence between SISKIN1 isolates obtained from siskins and
redpolls in Europe (Russia and Sweden) and house finches in North America
(Mexico). First, we used sequence capture of a small data set (2 Russian isolates
and 1 Mexican isolate) to investigate the genetic structure based on the
full-length mitochondrial genome and ∼1,000 genes. The mitochondrial genomes of
Russian isolates were identical with each other but differed from the Mexican one
at 6 positions. The nuclear divergence between Russian and Mexican isolates was
on average 2.8%, close to what has been observed between 2 species of malaria
parasites that respectively infect humans (Plasmodium falciparum) and gorillas
(Plasmodium praefalciparum). Second, we used the expanded data set (15 samples in
total) to investigate the genetic structure in 3 genes known to be involved in
host invasion. The European isolates were identical across all sequenced genes,
whereas the Mexican isolates were highly diverse. The lack of shared alleles
between European and Mexican populations suggests that they might have diverged
in isolation without gene flow. From the MalAvi database we examined the lineages
most similar to the SISKIN1 barcode fragment (part of the cyt b gene) and found
that most of them had been recorded in North and South America. This suggests
that the lineage SISKIN1 originated in North America and subsequently spread to
Europe. Our analyses support that the cyt b gene barcoding region is a useful
marker for identification of avian haemosporidian lineages that can classify them
into clusters of closely related parasites, but to further investigate species
limits and evolutionary history, molecular data from multiple faster-evolving
genes are required.


PMID: 31145032  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

