
1. J Vis Exp. 2019 May 30;(147). doi: 10.3791/55688.

Phenotypic Analysis of Rodent Malaria Parasite Asexual and Sexual Blood Stages
and Mosquito Stages.

Aly ASI(1), Deveci G(2), Yilmaz I(2), Abraham A(3), Golshan A(3), Hart RJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Beykoz Institute of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Bezmialem Vakif
University, Istanbul, Turkey; School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine,
Department of Tropical Medicine, Tulane University; ahmed.aly@bezmialem.edu.tr.
(2)Beykoz Institute of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Bezmialem Vakif
University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, Department of Tropical
Medicine, Tulane University.

Recent advances in genetics and systems biology technologies have promoted our
understanding of the biology of malaria parasites on the molecular level.
However, effective malaria parasite targets for vaccine and chemotherapy
development are still limited. This is largely due to the unavailability of
relevant and practical in vivo infection models for human Plasmodium species,
most notably for P. falciparum and P. vivax. Therefore, rodent malaria species
have been extensively used as practical alternative in vivo models for malaria
vaccine, drug targeting, immune response, and functional characterization studies
of conserved Plasmodiumspp. genes. Indeed, rodent malaria models have proven to
be invaluable, especially for exploring mosquito transmission and liver stage
biology, and were indispensable for immunological studies. However, there are
discrepancies in the methods used to evaluate the phenotypes of transgenic and
wild-type asexual and sexual blood-stage parasites. Examples of these
discrepancies are the choice of an intravenous vs. intraperitoneal infection of
rodents with blood-stage parasites and the evaluation of male gamete
exflagellation. Herein, we detail standardized experimental methods to evaluate
the phenotypes of asexual and sexual blood stages in transgenic parasites
expressing reporter-gene or wild-type rodent malaria parasite species. We also
detail the methods to evaluate the phenotypes of malaria parasite mosquito stages
(gametes, ookinetes, oocysts, and sporozoites) inside Anopheles mosquito vectors.
These methods are detailed and simplified here for the lethal and non-lethal
strains of P. berghei and P. yoelii but can also be applied with some adjustments
to P. chabaudi and P. vinckei rodent malaria species.

DOI: 10.3791/55688 
PMID: 31205293  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

