
1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2019 Dec;25(12):1510-1516. doi: 10.1016/j.cmi.2019.06.009.
Epub 2019 Jun 18.

Digital PCR: a new technology for diagnosis of parasitic infections.

Pomari E(1), Piubelli C(2), Perandin F(2), Bisoffi Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious -Tropical Diseases and Microbiology, IRCCS Sacro
Cuore Don Calabria Hospital, Negrar, Verona, Italy. Electronic address:
elena.pomari@sacrocuore.it.
(2)Department of Infectious -Tropical Diseases and Microbiology, IRCCS Sacro
Cuore Don Calabria Hospital, Negrar, Verona, Italy.
(3)Department of Infectious -Tropical Diseases and Microbiology, IRCCS Sacro
Cuore Don Calabria Hospital, Negrar, Verona, Italy; Department of Diagnostics and
Public Health, University of Verona, Verona, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Parasitic infections are responsible for a significant burden of
disease worldwide as a result of international travel and immigration. More
accurate diagnostic tools are necessary in support to parasite control and
elimination programmes in endemic regions as well as for rapid case detection in 
non-endemic areas. Digital PCR (dPCR) is a powerful technology with recent
applications in parasitology.
AIMS: This review provides for the first time an overview of dPCR as a novel
technology applied to detection of parasitic infections, and highlights the most 
relevant potential benefits of this assay.
SOURCES: Peer-reviewed literature pertinent to this review based on PubMed,
Cochrane and Embase databases as well as laboratory experience of authors.
CONTENT: Among the 86 studies retrieved, 17 used the dPCR applied to parasites
belonging to protozoa (8), helminths (8) and arthropods (1) of clinical human
interest. dPCR was adopted in four studies, respectively, for Plasmodium and
Schistosoma japonicum. dPCR led to clear advantages over quantitative real-time
PCR in P. falciparum and spp., and in S. japonicum showing higher sensitivity;
and in Cryptosporidium with higher stability to inhibitors from stool. For all
parasites, dPCR allows absolute quantitation without the need of a standard
curve. Various dPCR platforms were used. A few critical factors need
consideration: DNA load, choice of platform and reaction optimization.
IMPLICATIONS: Owing to its sensitivity and quantitative characteristics, dPCR is 
a potential candidate to become an appealing new method among the molecular
technologies for parasite detection and quantitative analysis in the future. In
general, it has more applications than genomic DNA detection only, such as
quantitation in mixed infections, gene expression and mutation analysis. dPCR
should be considered in malaria screening and diagnosis as a complement to
routine assays and in schistosomiasis elimination programmes. Standardized
strategies and further studies are needed for the integration of dPCR in routine 
clinical laboratory.

Copyright © 2019 European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious
Diseases. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmi.2019.06.009 
PMID: 31226445  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

