
1. mBio. 2019 Jul 9;10(4). pii: e01460-19. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01460-19.

Deletion of Plasmodium falciparum Protein RON3 Affects the Functional
Translocation of Exported Proteins and Glucose Uptake.

Low LM(#)(1), Azasi Y(#)(1), Sherling ES(#)(1)(2), Garten M(3), Zimmerberg J(3), 
Tsuboi T(4), Brzostowski J(5), Mu J(1), Blackman MJ(2)(6), Miller LH(7).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, NIH, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
(2)Malaria Biochemistry Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London, United
Kingdom.
(3)Section on Integrative Biophysics, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute
of Child Health and Human Development, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(4)Division of Malaria Research, Proteo-Science Center, Ehime University,
Matsuyama, Ehime, Japan.
(5)LIG Imaging Facility, NIAID, NIH, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
(6)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene &
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(7)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, NIH, Rockville, Maryland, USA lmiller@niaid.nih.gov.
(#)Contributed equally

The survival of Plasmodium spp. within the host red blood cell (RBC) depends on
the function of a membrane protein complex, termed the Plasmodium translocon of
exported proteins (PTEX), that exports certain parasite proteins, collectively
referred to as the exportome, across the parasitophorous vacuolar membrane (PVM) 
that encases the parasite in the host RBC cytoplasm. The core of PTEX consists of
three proteins: EXP2, PTEX150, and the HSP101 ATPase; of these three proteins,
only EXP2 is a membrane protein. Studying the PTEX-dependent transport of members
of the exportome, we discovered that exported proteins, such as ring-infected
erythrocyte surface antigen (RESA), failed to be transported in parasites in
which the parasite rhoptry protein RON3 was conditionally disrupted.
RON3-deficient parasites also failed to develop beyond the ring stage, and
glucose uptake was significantly decreased. These findings provide evidence that 
RON3 influences two translocation functions, namely, transport of the parasite
exportome through PTEX and the transport of glucose from the RBC cytoplasm to the
parasitophorous vacuolar (PV) space where it can enter the parasite via the
hexose transporter (HT) in the parasite plasma membrane.IMPORTANCE The malarial
parasite within the erythrocyte is surrounded by two membranes. Plasmodium
translocon of exported proteins (PTEX) in the parasite vacuolar membrane
critically transports proteins from the parasite to the erythrocytic cytosol and 
membrane to create protein infrastructure important for virulence. The components
of PTEX are stored within the dense granule, which is secreted from the parasite 
during invasion. We now describe a protein, RON3, from another invasion
organelle, the rhoptry, that is also secreted during invasion. We find that RON3 
is required for the protein transport function of the PTEX and for glucose
transport from the RBC cytoplasm to the parasite, a function thought to be
mediated by PTEX component EXP2.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01460-19 
PMCID: PMC6747712
PMID: 31289187  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

