
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2019 Aug 23;63(9). pii: e00590-19. doi:
10.1128/AAC.00590-19. Print 2019 Sep.

Improving Methods for Analyzing Antimalarial Drug Efficacy Trials: Molecular
Correction Based on Length-Polymorphic Markers msp-1, msp-2, and glurp.

Jones S(1), Kay K(2), Hodel EM(3), Chy S(4), Mbituyumuremyi A(5), Uwimana A(5),
Menard D(6), Felger I(7), Hastings I(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tropical Disease Biology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine,
Liverpool, United Kingdom sam.jones@lstmed.ac.uk.
(2)Metrum Research Group, Tariffville, Connecticut, USA.
(3)Molecular & Clinical Pharmacology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United 
Kingdom.
(4)Institut Pasteur in Cambodia, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
(5)Rwanda Biomedical Center, Gasabo, Kigali, Rwanda.
(6)Malaria Genetics and Resistance Group, Biology of Host-Parasite Interactions
Unit, Department of Parasites and Insect Vectors, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.
(7)Department of Medical Parasitology and Infection Biology, Molecular
Diagnostics Unit, Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland.
(8)Department of Tropical Disease Biology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine,
Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(9)Centre for Drugs and Diagnostic Research, Liverpool School of Tropical
Medicine, Liverpool, United Kingdom.

Drug efficacy trials monitor the continued efficacy of front-line drugs against
falciparum malaria. Overestimating efficacy results in a country retaining a
failing drug as first-line treatment with associated increases in morbidity and
mortality, while underestimating drug effectiveness leads to removal of an
effective treatment with substantial practical and economic implications. Trials 
are challenging: they require long durations of follow-up to detect drug
failures, and patients are frequently reinfected during that period. Molecular
correction based on parasite genotypes distinguishes reinfections from drug
failures to ensure the accuracy of failure rate estimates. Several molecular
correction "algorithms" have been proposed, but which is most accurate and/or
robust remains unknown. We used pharmacological modeling to simulate parasite
dynamics and genetic signals that occur in patients enrolled in malaria drug
clinical trials. We compared estimates of treatment failure obtained from a
selection of proposed molecular correction algorithms against the known "true"
failure rate in the model. Our findings are as follows. (i) Molecular correction 
is essential to avoid substantial overestimates of drug failure rates. (ii) The
current WHO-recommended algorithm consistently underestimates the true failure
rate. (iii) Newly proposed algorithms produce more accurate failure rate
estimates; the most accurate algorithm depends on the choice of drug, trial
follow-up length, and transmission intensity. (iv) Long durations of patient
follow-up may be counterproductive; large numbers of new infections accumulate
and may be misclassified, overestimating drug failure rate. (v) Our model was
highly consistent with existing in vivo data. The current WHO-recommended method 
for molecular correction and analysis of clinical trials should be reevaluated
and updated.

Copyright © 2019 Jones et al.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00590-19 
PMCID: PMC6709465
PMID: 31307982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

