
1. BMC Med Ethics. 2019 Jul 27;20(1):54. doi: 10.1186/s12910-019-0389-3.

Informed consent and community engagement in open field research: lessons for
gene drive science.

Singh JA(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for the AIDS Programme of Research in South Africa (CAPRISA), Nelson R.
Mandela School of Medicine, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa.
Singhj9@ukzn.ac.za.
(2)Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
Singhj9@ukzn.ac.za.

BACKGROUND: The development of the CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing system has generated 
new possibilities for the use of gene drive constructs to reduce or suppress
mosquito populations to levels that do not support disease transmission. Despite 
this prospect, social resistance to genetically modified organisms remains high. 
Gene drive open field research thus raises important questions regarding what is 
owed to those who may not consent to such research, or those could be affected by
the proposed research, but whose consent is not solicited. The precise
circumstances under which informed consent must be obtained, and from whom,
requires careful consideration. Furthermore, appropriate engagement processes
should be central to any introduction of genetically modified mosquitos in
proposed target settings.
DISCUSSION: In this work, international guidance documents on informed consent
and engagement are reviewed and applied to the genetically modified mosquito
research context. Five analogous research endeavours that involve area-wide /
open field experiments are reviewed. The approach of each in respect to the
solicitation of individual informed consent and community engagement are
highlighted.
CONCLUSIONS: While the solicitation of individual informed consent in host
settings of gene drive field trials may not be possible or feasible in some
instances, local community and stakeholder engagement will be key to building
trust towards the proposed conduct of such research. In this regard, the
approaches taken by investigators and sponsors of political science field
research and weather modification field research should be avoided. Rather,
proponents of gene drive field research should look to the Eliminate Dengue field
trials, cluster randomised trials, and pragmatic clinical trials for guidance
regarding how the solicitation of individual informed consent of host communities
ought to be managed, and how these communities ought to be engaged.

DOI: 10.1186/s12910-019-0389-3 
PMCID: PMC6660705
PMID: 31351474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

