
1. PLoS One. 2019 Aug 8;14(8):e0220871. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0220871.
eCollection 2019.

Proteomic analysis of Plasmodium falciparum response to isocryptolepine
derivative.

Rujimongkon K(1), Mungthin M(2), Tummatorn J(3)(4), Ampawong S(5), Adisakwattana 
P(6), Boonyuen U(1), Reamtong O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Tropical Medicine and Genetics, Faculty of Tropical
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Phramongkutklao College of Medicine, Bangkok,
Thailand.
(3)Program on Chemical Biology, Chulabhorn Graduate Institute, Center of
Excellence on Environmental Health and Toxicology, Ministry of Education,
Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Laboratory of Medicinal Chemistry, Chulabhorn Research Institute, Bangkok,
Thailand.
(5)Department of Tropical Pathology, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(6)Department of Helminthology, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University,
Bangkok, Thailand.

Drug-resistant strains of malaria parasites have emerged for most of antimalarial
medications. A new chemotherapeutic compound is needed for malarial therapy.
Antimalarial activity against both drug-sensitive and drug-resistant P.
falciparum has been reported for an isocryptolepine derivative,
8-bromo-2-fluoro-5-methyl-5H-indolo[3,2-c]quinoline (ICL-M), which also showed
less toxicity to human cells. ICL-M has indoloquinoline as a core structure and
its mode of action remains unclear. Here, we explored the mechanisms of ICL-M in 
P. falciparum by assessing the stage-specific activity, time-dependent effect, a 
proteomic analysis and morphology. Since human topo II activity inhibition has
been reported as a function of isocryptolepine derivatives, malarial topo II
activity inhibition of ICL-M was also examined in this study. The ICL-M exhibited
antimalarial activity against both the ring and trophozoite stages of P.
falciparum. Our proteomics analysis revealed that a total of 112 P. falciparum
proteins were differentially expressed after ICL-M exposure; among these, 58 and 
54 proteins were upregulated and downregulated, respectively. Proteins localized 
in the food vacuole, nucleus, and cytoplasm showed quantitative alterations after
ICL-M treatment. A bioinformatic analysis revealed that pathways associated with 
ribosomes, proteasomes, metabolic pathways, amino acid biosynthesis, oxidative
phosphorylation, and carbon metabolism were significantly different in P.
falciparum treated with ICL-M. Moreover, a loss of ribosomes was clearly observed
by transmission electron microscopy in the ICL-M-treated P. falciparum. This
finding is in agreement with the proteomics data, which revealed downregulated
levels of ribosomal proteins following ICL-M treatment. Our results provide
important information about the mechanisms by which ICL-M affects the malaria
parasite, which may facilitate the drug development of isocryptolepine
derivatives.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0220871 
PMCID: PMC6687117
PMID: 31393938  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

