
1. Front Immunol. 2019 Jul 30;10:1771. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.01771. eCollection
2019.

Genetics of Malaria Inflammatory Responses: A Pathogenesis Perspective.

Penha-Gonçalves C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal.

Despite significant progress in combating malaria in recent years the burden of
severe disease and death due to Plasmodium infections remains a global public
health concern. Only a fraction of infected people develops severe clinical
syndromes motivating a longstanding search for genetic determinants of malaria
severity. Strong genetic effects have been repeatedly ascribed to mutations and
allelic variants of proteins expressed in red blood cells but the role of
inflammatory response genes in disease pathogenesis has been difficult to
discern. We revisited genetic evidence provided by inflammatory response genes
that have been repeatedly associated to malaria, namely TNF, NOS2, IFNAR1, HMOX1,
TLRs, CD36, and CD40LG. This highlighted specific genetic variants having
opposing roles in the development of distinct malaria clinical outcomes and
unveiled diverse levels of genetic heterogeneity that shaped the complex
association landscape of inflammatory response genes with malaria. However,
scrutinizing genetic effects of individual variants corroborates a pathogenesis
model where pro-inflammatory genetic variants acting in early infection stages
contribute to resolve infection but at later stages confer increased
vulnerability to severe organ dysfunction driven by tissue inflammation. Human
genetics studies are an invaluable tool to find genes and molecular pathways
involved in the inflammatory response to malaria but their precise roles in
disease pathogenesis are still unexploited. Genome editing in malaria
experimental models and novel genotyping-by-sequencing techniques are promising
approaches to delineate the relevance of inflammatory response gene variants in
the natural history of infection thereby will offer new rational angles on
adjuvant therapeutics for prevention and clinical management of severe malaria.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.01771 
PMCID: PMC6682681
PMID: 31417551  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

