
1. Malar J. 2019 Aug 15;18(1):275. doi: 10.1186/s12936-019-2903-y.

Molecular detection of drug resistant malaria in Southern Thailand.

Noisang C(1)(2), Prosser C(1)(2), Meyer W(1)(2)(3), Chemoh W(4), Ellis J(5),
Sawangjaroen N(6), Lee R(7).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Mycology Research Laboratory, Centre for Infectious Diseases and
Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine and Health, Westmead Clinical School, Marie
Bashir Institute for Infectious Diseases and Biosecurity, University of Sydney,
Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(2)Westmead Institute for Medical Research, Westmead, NSW, Australia.
(3)Westmead Hospital (Research and Education Network), Westmead, NSW, Australia.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Princess of Naradhiwas
University, Narathiwat, Thailand.
(5)School of Life Sciences, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, NSW,
Australia.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Prince of Songkla University, 
Hat Yai, Songkhla, Thailand.
(7)Centre for Infectious Diseases and Microbiology Laboratory Services, ICPMR,
Westmead Hospital, Westmead, NSW, Australia. rogan.lee@health.nsw.gov.au.

BACKGROUND: Drug resistance within the major malaria parasites Plasmodium vivax
and Plasmodium falciparum threatens malaria control and elimination in Southeast 
Asia. Plasmodium vivax first-line treatment drug is chloroquine together with
primaquine, and the first-line treatment for P. falciparum malaria is artemisinin
in combination with a partner drug. Plasmodium vivax and P. falciparum parasites 
resistant to their respective first-line therapies are now found within Southeast
Asia. The resistance perimeters may include high transmission regions of Southern
Thailand which are underrepresented in surveillance efforts.
METHODS: This study investigated blood samples from malaria centres in Southern
Thailand. Genetic loci associated with drug resistance were amplified and
sequenced. Drug resistance associated genes Pvmdr1, Pvcrt-o, Pvdhfr, and Pvdhps
were characterized for 145 cases of P. vivax malaria, as well as the artemisinin 
resistance-associated Pfkelch13 gene from 91 cases of P. falciparum malaria.
RESULTS: Plasmodium vivax samples from Southern Thai provinces showed numerous
chloroquine and antifolate resistance-associated mutations, including SNP and
Pvcrt-o K10-insertion combinations suggestive of chloroquine resistant P. vivax
phenotypes. A high proportion of the C580Y coding mutation (conferring
artemisinin resistance) was detected in P. falciparum samples originating from
Ranong and Yala (where the mutation was previously unreported).
CONCLUSIONS: The results demonstrate a risk of chloroquine and antifolate
resistant P. vivax phenotypes in Southern Thailand, and artemisinin resistant P. 
falciparum observed as far south as the Thai-Malaysian border region. Ongoing
surveillance of antimalarial drug resistance markers is called for in Southern
Thailand to inform case management.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-019-2903-y 
PMCID: PMC6694568
PMID: 31416468  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

