
1. Malar J. 2019 Aug 19;18(1):276. doi: 10.1186/s12936-019-2910-z.

Prevalence of Plasmodium parasites in non-human primates and mosquitoes in areas 
with different degrees of fragmentation in Colombia.

Rondón S(1), León C(2), Link A(3)(4), González C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones en Microbiología y Parasitología Tropical, CIMPAT,
Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad de los Andes, Cra. 1 N° 18ª-12, 
Bogotá, Colombia. sy.rondon941@uniandes.edu.co.
(2)Centro de Investigaciones en Microbiología y Parasitología Tropical, CIMPAT,
Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad de los Andes, Cra. 1 N° 18ª-12, 
Bogotá, Colombia.
(3)Laboratorio de Ecología de Bosques Tropicales y Primatología, Departamento de 
Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad de Los Andes, Cra. 1 N° 18ª-12, Bogotá,
Colombia.
(4)Fundación Proyecto Primates, Cra. 11a N° 91-55, Apartamento 202, Bogotá,
Colombia.

BACKGROUND: Parasites from the genus Plasmodium, the aetiological agent of
malaria in humans, can also infect non-human primates (NHP), increasing the
potential risk of zoonotic transmission with its associated global public health 
concerns. In Colombia, there are no recent studies on Plasmodium spp. infecting
free-ranging NHP. Thus, this study aimed to determine the diversity of Plasmodium
species circulating in fragmented forests in central Colombia, both in Anopheles 
mosquitoes and in the four sympatric NHP in the region (Ateles hybridus, Cebus
versicolor, Alouatta seniculus and Aotus griseimembra), in order to evaluate the 
risk of infection to humans associated with the presence of sylvatic hosts and
vectors infected with Plasmodium spp.
METHODS: Overall, there were collected 166 fecal samples and 25 blood samples
from NHP, and 442 individuals of Anopheles spp. DNA extraction, nested PCR using 
mitochondrial (cox3 gene) and ribosomal (18S rDNA) primers, electrophoresis and
sequencing were conducted in order to identify Plasmodium spp. from the samples.
RESULTS: Plasmodium falciparum was detected in two fecal samples of Alouatta
seniculus, while Plasmodium vivax/simium infected Ateles hybridus, Cebus
versicolor and Alouatta seniculus. Co-infections with P. vivax/simium and
Plasmodium malariae/brasilianum were found in three individuals. The highest
prevalence from blood samples was found for Plasmodium malariae/brasilianum in
two Alouatta seniculus while Plasmodium vivax/simium was most prevalent in fecal 
samples, infecting four individuals of Alouatta seniculus. Seven Anopheles
species were identified in the study site: Anopheles (Anopheles) punctimacula,
Anopheles (An.) malefactor, Anopheles (Nyssorhynchus) oswaldoi, Anopheles (Nys.) 
triannulatus, Anopheles (An.) neomaculipalpus, Anopheles (Nys.) braziliensis and 
Anopheles (Nys.) nuneztovari. Infection with P. vivax/simium was found in An.
nuneztovari, An. neomaculipalpus, and An. triannulatus. Furthermore, An. oswaldoi
and An. triannulatus were found infected with P. malariae/brasilianum. The effect
of fragmentation and distance to the nearest town measured in five forests with
different degrees of fragmentation was not statistically significant on the
prevalence of Plasmodium in NHP, but forest fragmentation did have an effect on
the Minimum Infection Rate (MIR) in Anopheles mosquitoes.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of Plasmodium spp. in NHP and Anopheles spp. in
fragmented forests in Colombia has important epidemiological implications in the 
human-NHP interface and the associated risk of malaria transmission.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-019-2910-z 
PMCID: PMC6700793
PMID: 31426810  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

