
1. BMC Genomics. 2019 Aug 20;20(1):664. doi: 10.1186/s12864-019-6034-1.

De novo profiling of RNA viruses in Anopheles malaria vector mosquitoes from
forest ecological zones in Senegal and Cambodia.

Belda E(1)(2)(3), Nanfack-Minkeu F(1)(2)(4), Eiglmeier K(1)(2), Carissimo G(5),
Holm I(1)(2), Diallo M(6), Diallo D(6), Vantaux A(7), Kim S(7), Sharakhov IV(8), 
Vernick KD(9)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Insect Vector Genetics and Genomics, Department of Parasites and
Insect Vectors, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(2)CNRS Unit of Evolutionary Genomics, Modeling, and Health (UMR2000), Institut
Pasteur, Paris, France.
(3)Integromics Unit, Institute of Cardiometabolism and Nutrition, Assistance
Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France.
(4)Sorbonne Université, Graduate School of Life Sciences ED515, UPMC - Université
Pierre et Marie Curie - Paris 6, 4 Place Jussieu, 75252, Paris, France.
(5)Laboratory of Microbial Immunity, Singapore Immunology Network, Agency for
Science, Technology and Research (A(∗)STAR), Singapore, Singapore.
(6)Institut Pasteur de Dakar, Dakar, Senegal.
(7)Institut Pasteur of Cambodia, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
(8)Department of Entomology, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University,
Blacksburg, VA, USA.
(9)Unit of Insect Vector Genetics and Genomics, Department of Parasites and
Insect Vectors, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. kvernick@pasteur.fr.
(10)CNRS Unit of Evolutionary Genomics, Modeling, and Health (UMR2000), Institut 
Pasteur, Paris, France. kvernick@pasteur.fr.

Erratum in
    BMC Genomics. 2019 Sep 5;20(1):698.

BACKGROUND: Mosquitoes are colonized by a large but mostly uncharacterized
natural virome of RNA viruses, and the composition and distribution of the
natural RNA virome may influence the biology and immunity of Anopheles malaria
vector populations.
RESULTS: Anopheles mosquitoes were sampled in malaria endemic forest village
sites in Senegal and Cambodia, including Anopheles funestus, Anopheles gambiae
group sp., and Anopheles coustani in Senegal, and Anopheles hyrcanus group sp.,
Anopheles maculatus group sp., and Anopheles dirus in Cambodia. The most frequent
mosquito species sampled at both study sites are human malaria vectors. Small and
long RNA sequences were depleted of mosquito host sequences, de novo assembled
and clustered to yield non-redundant contigs longer than 500 nucleotides.
Analysis of the assemblies by sequence similarity to known virus families yielded
115 novel virus sequences, and evidence supports a functional status for at least
86 of the novel viral contigs. Important monophyletic virus clades in the
Bunyavirales and Mononegavirales orders were found in these Anopheles from Africa
and Asia. The remaining non-host RNA assemblies that were unclassified by
sequence similarity to known viruses were clustered by small RNA profiles, and 39
high-quality independent contigs strongly matched a pattern of classic RNAi
processing of viral replication intermediates, suggesting they are entirely
undescribed viruses. One thousand five hundred sixty-six additional high-quality 
unclassified contigs matched a pattern consistent with Piwi-interacting RNAs
(piRNAs), suggesting that strand-biased piRNAs are generated from the natural
virome in Anopheles. To functionally query piRNA effect, we analyzed piRNA
expression in Anopheles coluzzii after infection with O'nyong nyong virus (family
Togaviridae), and identified two piRNAs that appear to display specifically
altered abundance upon arbovirus infection.
CONCLUSIONS: Anopheles vectors of human malaria in Africa and Asia are
ubiquitously colonized by RNA viruses, some of which are monophyletic but clearly
diverged from other arthropod viruses. The interplay between small RNA pathways, 
immunity, and the virome may represent part of the homeostatic mechanism
maintaining virome members in a commensal or nonpathogenic state, and could
potentially influence vector competence.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-019-6034-1 
PMCID: PMC6702732
PMID: 31429704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

