
1. PLoS Pathog. 2019 Sep 19;15(9):e1007974. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007974.
eCollection 2019 Sep.

Humoral immunity prevents clinical malaria during Plasmodium relapses without
eliminating gametocytes.

Joyner CJ(1)(2), Brito CFA(1)(3), Saney CL(1)(2), Joice Cordy R(1)(4), Smith
ML(1)(5), Lapp SA(1), Cabrera-Mora M(1)(2), Kyu S(2), Lackman N(1)(6), Nural
MV(1)(6), DeBarry JD(1)(6); MaHPIC Consortium, Kissinger JC(1)(6)(7)(8),
Styczynski MP(1)(5), Lee FE(1)(2)(9), Lamb TJ(1)(10), Galinski MR(1)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Host-Pathogen Interaction Center, Emory Vaccine Center, Yerkes
National Primate Research Center, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United States of
America.
(2)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care, & Sleep Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United States of America.
(3)Laboratory of Malaria, Centro de Pesquisas René Rachou-Fiocruz, Belo
Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(4)Department of Biology, Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, 
United States of America.
(5)School of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta, GA, United States of America.
(6)Institute of Bioinformatics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, United States 
of America.
(7)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, United States of
America.
(8)Center for Tropical and Emerging Global Diseases, University of Georgia,
Athens, GA, United States of America.
(9)Lowance Center for Human Immunology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United
States of America.
(10)Division of Microbiology and Immunology, Department of Pathology, University 
of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States of America.
(11)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Emory University
School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, United States of America.

Plasmodium relapses are attributed to the activation of dormant liver-stage
parasites and are responsible for a significant number of recurring malaria
blood-stage infections. While characteristic of human infections caused by P.
vivax and P. ovale, their relative contribution to malaria disease burden and
transmission remains poorly understood. This is largely because it is difficult
to identify 'bona fide' relapse infections due to ongoing transmission in most
endemic areas. Here, we use the P. cynomolgi-rhesus macaque model of relapsing
malaria to demonstrate that clinical immunity can form after a single
sporozoite-initiated blood-stage infection and prevent illness during relapses
and homologous reinfections. By integrating data from whole blood RNA-sequencing,
flow cytometry, P. cynomolgi-specific ELISAs, and opsonic phagocytosis assays, we
demonstrate that this immunity is associated with a rapid recall response by
memory B cells that expand and produce anti-parasite IgG1 that can mediate
parasite clearance of relapsing parasites. The reduction in parasitemia during
relapses was mirrored by a reduction in the total number of circulating
gametocytes, but importantly, the cumulative proportion of gametocytes increased 
during relapses. Overall, this study reveals that P. cynomolgi relapse infections
can be clinically silent in macaques due to rapid memory B cell responses that
help to clear asexual-stage parasites but still carry gametocytes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007974 
PMCID: PMC6752766
PMID: 31536608  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

