
1. Insects. 2019 Sep 20;10(10). pii: E307. doi: 10.3390/insects10100307.

Inhibitors of Eicosanoid Biosynthesis Reveal that Multiple Lipid Signaling
Pathways Influence Malaria Parasite Survival in Anopheles gambiae.

Kwon H(1), Smith RC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.
hskwon@iastate.edu.
(2)Department of Entomology, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.
smithr@iastate.edu.

Eicosanoids are bioactive signaling lipids derived from the oxidation of fatty
acids that act as important regulators of immune homeostasis and inflammation. As
a result, effective anti-inflammatory drugs have been widely used to reduce pain 
and inflammation which target key eicosanoid biosynthesis enzymes. Conserved from
vertebrates to insects, the use of these eicosanoid pathway inhibitors offer
opportunities to evaluate the roles of eicosanoids in less-characterized insect
systems. In this study, we examine the potential roles of eicosanoids on malaria 
parasite survival in the mosquito Anopheles gambiae. Using Plasmodium oocyst
numbers to evaluate parasite infection, general or specific inhibitors of
eicosanoid biosynthesis pathways were evaluated. Following the administration of 
dexamethasone and indomethacin, respective inhibitors of phospholipid A2 (PLA2)
and cyclooxygenase (COX), oocyst numbers were unaffected. However, inhibition of 
lipoxygenase (LOX) activity through the use of esculetin significantly increased 
oocyst survival. In contrast,
12-[[(tricyclo[3.3.1.13,7]dec-1-ylamino)carbonyl]amino]-dodecanoic acid (AUDA),
an inhibitor of epoxide hydroxylase (EH), decreased oocyst numbers. These
experiments were further validated through RNAi experiments to silence candidate 
genes homologous to EH in An. gambiae to confirm their contributions to
Plasmodium development. Similar to the results of AUDA treatment, the silencing
of EH significantly reduced oocyst numbers. These results imply that specific
eicosanoids in An. gambiae can have either agonist or antagonistic roles on
malaria parasite survival in the mosquito host.

DOI: 10.3390/insects10100307 
PMCID: PMC6835628
PMID: 31547026 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to
publish the results.

