
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2019 Sep 10;9:316. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2019.00316.
eCollection 2019.

Expression and Localization Profiles of Rhoptry Proteins in Plasmodium berghei
Sporozoites.

Tokunaga N(1), Nozaki M(1), Tachibana M(1), Baba M(1), Matsuoka K(1), Tsuboi
T(2), Torii M(1), Ishino T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Parasitology, Proteo-Science Center, Ehime University,
Toon, Japan.
(2)Division of Malaria Research, Proteo-Science Center, Ehime University,
Matsuyama, Japan.

In the Plasmodium lifecycle two infectious stages of parasites, merozoites, and
sporozoites, efficiently infect mammalian host cells, erythrocytes, and
hepatocytes, respectively. The apical structure of merozoites and sporozoites
contains rhoptry and microneme secretory organelles, which are conserved with
other infective forms of apicomplexan parasites. During merozoite invasion of
erythrocytes, some rhoptry proteins are secreted to form a tight junction between
the parasite and target cell, while others are discharged to maintain subsequent 
infection inside the parasitophorous vacuole. It has been questioned whether the 
invasion mechanisms mediated by rhoptry proteins are also involved in sporozoite 
invasion of two distinct target cells, mosquito salivary glands and mammalian
hepatocytes. Recently we demonstrated that rhoptry neck protein 2 (RON2), which
is crucial for tight junction formation in merozoites, is also important for
sporozoite invasion of both target cells. With the aim of comprehensively
describing the mechanisms of sporozoite invasion, the expression and localization
profiles of rhoptry proteins were investigated in Plasmodium berghei sporozoites.
Of 12 genes representing merozoite rhoptry molecules, nine are transcribed in
oocyst-derived sporozoites at a similar or higher level compared to those in
blood-stage schizonts. Immuno-electron microscopy demonstrates that eight
proteins, namely RON2, RON4, RON5, ASP/RON1, RALP1, RON3, RAP1, and RAMA,
localize to rhoptries in sporozoites. It is noteworthy that most rhoptry neck
proteins in merozoites are localized throughout rhoptries in sporozoites. This
study demonstrates that most rhoptry proteins, except components of the
high-molecular mass rhoptry protein complex, are commonly expressed in merozoites
and sporozoites in Plasmodium spp., which suggests that components of the
invasion mechanisms are basically conserved between infective forms independently
of their target cells. Combined with sporozoite-stage specific gene silencing
strategies, the contribution of rhoptry proteins in invasion mechanisms can be
described.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2019.00316 
PMCID: PMC6746830
PMID: 31552198  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

