
1. Trop Parasitol. 2019 Jul-Dec;9(2):108-114. doi: 10.4103/tp.TP_11_19. Epub 2019
Sep 18.

Genetic diversity of Indian Plasmodium vivax isolates based on the analysis of
PvMSP3β polymorphic marker.

Anantabotla VM(1), Antony HA(1), Joseph NM(1), Parija SC(2), Rajkumari N(1), Kini
JR(3), Manipura R(4), Nag VL(5), Gadepalli RS(5), Chayani N(6), Patro S(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical
Education and Research, Puducherry, India.
(2)Vice-Chancellor, Sri Balaji Vidyapeeth Deemed University, Puducherry, India.
(3)Department of Pathology, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal Academy of Higher
Education, Mangalore, Karnataka, India.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal Academy of
Higher Education, Mangalore, Karnataka, India.
(5)Department of Microbiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Jodhpur, 
Rajasthan, India.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Srirama Chandra Bhanja Medical College and
Hospital, Cuttack, Odisha, India.
(7)District Public Health Lab, District Headquarter Hospital, Puri, Odisha,
India.

Background: Malaria is one of the major communicable diseases in India and
worldwide. PvMSP3β is a highly polymorphic gene due to its large insertions and
deletions in the central alanine-rich region, which, in turn, makes it a valuable
marker for population genetic analysis. Very few studies are available from India
about the genetic diversity of Plasmodium vivax based on PvMSP3β gene, and hence,
this study was designed to understand the molecular diversity of the P. vivax
malaria parasite. The accumulating epidemiological data provide insights into the
circulating genetic variants of P. vivax in India, and ultimately benefits the
vaccine development.
Materials and Methods: A total of 268 samples confirmed to be positive by
microscopy, rapid diagnostic test, and quantitative buffy coat test were
collected from four different regions of India (Puducherry, Mangaluru, Jodhpur,
and Cuttack) in the present study. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based
diagnosis was carried out to confirm the P. vivax monoinfection, and only the
mono-infected samples were subjected to PvMSP3β gene amplification and further
restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) to determine suballeles.
Results: Based on the size of the amplified fragment, the PvMSP3β gene was
apportioned into two major types, namely Type A genotype (1.6-2 Kb) was
predominantly present in 148 isolates and Type B (1-1.5 Kb) was observed in 110
isolates. The percentage of mixed infections by PCR was 3.73%. All the PCR
products were subjected to RFLP to categorize into suballeles and we detected 39 
suballeles (A1-A39) in Type A, and 23 suballeles (B1-B23) in Type B genotype. A
high degree of diversity was observed among the isolates collected from Mangaluru
region when compared to isolates collected from other regions.
Conclusion: The present study showed a high degree of genetic diversity of
PvMSP3β gene among the isolates collected from various parts of India. High
polymorphism in PvMSP3β gene makes it a promising marker for epidemiological and 
vaccine development studies.

Copyright: © 2019 Tropical Parasitology.

DOI: 10.4103/tp.TP_11_19 
PMCID: PMC6767795
PMID: 31579665 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.

