
1. Microb Pathog. 2019 Dec;137:103782. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2019.103782. Epub 2019
Oct 7.

Detection of malaria with light microscopy and Nested polymerase chain reaction
(Nested PCR) methods in peripheral blood expansions and investigation of the
genetic diversity of Plasmodium species by 18S rRNA gene in Southeast of Iran.

Taghdiri A(1), Nejad Almani PG(2), Sharifi I(3), Mohammadi MA(4), Salari S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Parasitology and Mycology, Kerman University of Medical 
Sciences, Kerman, Iran.
(2)Leishmaniasis Research Center, Kerman University of Medical Sciences, Kerman, 
Iran; Students Research Committee, Kerman University of Medical Sciences, Kerman,
Iran. Electronic address: p_almani@kmu.ac.ir.
(3)Leishmaniasis Research Center, Kerman University of Medical Sciences, Kerman, 
Iran.
(4)Research Center for Hydatid Disease in Iran, Kerman University of Medical
Sciences, Kerman, Iran.
(5)Department of Medical Parasitology and Mycology, Kerman University of Medical 
Sciences, Kerman, Iran; Students Research Committee, Kerman University of Medical
Sciences, Kerman, Iran. Electronic address: sa_salari@kmu.ac.ir.

BACKGROUND: Malaria is a public health concern that leads to about a million
deaths worldwide every year. Malaria is caused by the genus Plasmodium, which
includes P. falciparum, P. vivax, P. malariae, and P. ovale. Molecular phylogeny 
is essential to better recognition the evolution of the genus Plasmodium genus
and detection of the relative degree of Plasmodium species in humans. The aim of 
this study was to detect malaria with Light Microscopy (LM) and Nested polymerase
chain reaction (Nested PCR) methods in peripheral blood expansions and to
investigate the genetic diversity of Plasmodium species by 18S rRNA gene in the
southeast of Iran.
METHODS: A total of 97 blood smears were collected from patients suspected to
malaria in a 6-year period in the southeast of Iran including Hormozgan, Kerman, 
and Sistan and Baluchestan provinces. Diagnosis of Plasmodium species on blood
smears was performed using LM and Nested PCR methods. In addition, 16
Plasmodium-positive samples were chosen for the determination of genetic
diversity.
RESULTS: Overall, 97 of 97 (100%) studied cases were positive by LM while 94 of
97 (96.8%) of them were detected as malaria by Nested PCR. Except for seven
cases, Nested PCR confirmed the LM results. These samples involved two P. vivax
and five P. falciparum in the LM method. Meanwhile, the Nested PCR was detected
in all of the cases as a mixed infection with P. vivax and P. falciparum. The
results of the phylogenetic analysis revealed two main clades and five different 
subclades. About 87.5% of the isolates were located in clade I and contained P.
vivax. In addition, 12.5% of the studied isolates involved P. falciparum that was
in clade II.
CONCLUSION: According to our results, Nested PCR method had higher sensitivity
than LM and is suggested as a good approach for malaria detection. Consideration 
the wide diversity of tested isolates and the importance of vaccine development, 
which is affected by this diversity, further studies are needed in this regard.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2019.103782 
PMID: 31600540  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

