
1. PLoS Pathog. 2019 Nov 7;15(11):e1008063. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008063.
eCollection 2019 Nov.

The male mosquito contribution towards malaria transmission: Mating influences
the Anopheles female midgut transcriptome and increases female susceptibility to 
human malaria parasites.

Dahalan FA(1), Churcher TS(2), Windbichler N(1), Lawniczak MKN(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Imperial College London, South Kensington, United Kingdom.
(2)MRC Centre for Outbreak Analysis and Modelling, Department of Infectious
Disease Epidemiology, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, United Kingdom.

Mating causes dramatic changes in female physiology, behaviour, and immunity in
many insects, inducing oogenesis, oviposition, and refractoriness to further
mating. Females from the Anopheles gambiae species complex typically mate only
once in their lifetime during which they receive sperm and seminal fluid proteins
as well as a mating plug that contains the steroid hormone 20-hydroxyecdysone.
This hormone, which is also induced by blood-feeding, plays a major role in
activating vitellogenesis for egg production. Here we show that female Anopheles 
coluzzii susceptibility to Plasmodium falciparum infection is significantly
higher in mated females compared to virgins. We also find that mating status has 
a major impact on the midgut transcriptome, detectable only under sugar-fed
conditions: once females have blood-fed, the transcriptional changes that are
induced by mating are likely masked by the widespread effects of blood-feeding on
gene expression. To determine whether increased susceptibility to parasites could
be driven by the additional 20E that mated females receive from males, we
mimicked mating by injecting virgin females with 20E, finding that these females 
are significantly more susceptible to human malaria parasites than virgin females
injected with the control 20E carrier. Further RNAseq was carried out to examine 
whether the genes that change upon 20E injection in the midgut are similar to
those that change upon mating. We find that 79 midgut-expressed genes are
regulated in common by both mating and 20E, and 96% (n = 76) of these are
regulated in the same direction (up vs down in 20E/mated). Together, these
findings show that male Anopheles mosquitoes induce changes in the female midgut 
that can affect female susceptibility to P. falciparum. This implies that in
nature, males might contribute to malaria transmission in previously
unappreciated ways, and that vector control strategies that target males may have
additional benefits towards reducing transmission.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008063 
PMCID: PMC6837289
PMID: 31697788  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

