
1. Front Microbiol. 2019 Oct 23;10:2373. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02373. eCollection 
2019.

Assessing the Diversity and Distribution of Apicomplexans in Host and Free-Living
Environments Using High-Throughput Amplicon Data and a Phylogenetically Informed 
Reference Framework.

Del Campo J(1)(2), Heger TJ(1)(3), Rodríguez-Martínez R(4), Worden AZ(5),
Richards TA(4), Massana R(6), Keeling PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(2)Department of Marine Biology and Ecology, Rosenstiel School of Marine and
Atmospheric Science, University of Miami, Miami, FL, United States.
(3)Soil Science Group, CHANGINS, University of Applied Sciences and Arts Western 
Switzerland, Nyon, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Biosciences, Living Systems Institute, College of Life and
Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom.
(5)GEOMAR - Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(6)Department of Marine Biology and Oceanography, Institut de Ciències del Mar
(CSIC), Barcelona, Spain.

Apicomplexans are a group of microbial eukaryotes that contain some of the most
well-studied parasites, including the causing agents of toxoplasmosis and
malaria, and emergent diseases like cryptosporidiosis or babesiosis. Decades of
research have illuminated the pathogenic mechanisms, molecular biology, and
genomics of model apicomplexans, but we know little about their diversity and
distribution in natural environments. In this study we analyze the distribution
of apicomplexans across a range of both host-associated and free-living
environments. Using publicly available small subunit (SSU) rRNA gene databases,
high-throughput environmental sequencing (HTES) surveys, and our own generated
HTES data, we developed an apicomplexan reference database, which includes the
largest apicomplexan SSU rRNA tree available to date and encompasses
comprehensive sampling of this group and their closest relatives. This tree
allowed us to identify and correct incongruences in the molecular identification 
of apicomplexan sequences. Analyzing the diversity and distribution of
apicomplexans in HTES studies with this curated reference database also showed a 
widespread, and quantitatively important, presence of apicomplexans across a
variety of free-living environments. These data allow us to describe a remarkable
molecular diversity of this group compared with our current knowledge, especially
when compared with that identified from described apicomplexan species. This is
most striking in marine environments, where potentially the most diverse
apicomplexans apparently exist, but have not yet been formally recognized. The
new database will be useful for microbial ecology and epidemiological studies,
and provide valuable reference for medical and veterinary diagnosis especially in
cases of emerging, zoonotic, and cryptic infections.

Copyright © 2019 del Campo, Heger, Rodríguez-Martínez, Worden, Richards, Massana 
and Keeling.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02373 
PMCID: PMC6819320
PMID: 31708883 

