
1. PLoS One. 2019 Nov 21;14(11):e0224743. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0224743.
eCollection 2019.

Diversity pattern of Plasmodium knowlesi merozoite surface protein 4 (MSP4) in
natural population of Malaysia.

Ahmed MA(1), Saif A(2), Quan FS(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Zoology, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, College of Applied Medical
Sciences, Najran University, Najran, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Medical Research Center for Bioreaction to Reactive Oxygen Species and
Biomedical Science Institute, School of Medicine, Graduate school, Kyung Hee
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Human infections due to the monkey malaria parasite Plasmodium knowlesi are
increasingly being reported from Malaysia. The parasite causes high parasitaemia,
severe and fatal malaria in humans thus there is a need for urgent measures for
its control. The MSP4 is a potential vaccine candidate, which is well studied in 
Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax; however, no study has been conducted 
in the orthologous gene of P. knowlesi. In this study, we investigated the level 
of polymorphisms, haplotypes, natural selection and population structure of
full-length pkmsp4 in 32 clinical samples from Malaysian Borneo along with 4
lab-adapted strains. We found low levels of polymorphism across the gene with
exon I showing higher diversity than the exon II. The C- terminal epidermal
growth factor (EGF) domains and GPI-anchored region within exon II were mostly
conserved with only 2 non-synonymous substitutions. Although 21 amino acid
haplotypes were found, the frequency of mutation at the majority of the
polymorphic positions was low. We found evidence of negative selection at the
exon II of the gene indicating existence of functional constraints. Phylogenetic 
haplotype network analysis identified shared haplotypes and indicated
geographical clustering of samples originating from Peninsular Malaysia and
Malaysian Borneo. High population differentiation values were observed within
parasite populations originating from Malaysian Borneo (Kapit, Sarikei and
Betong) and laboratory-adapted strains obtained from Peninsular Malaysia and
Philippines indicating distinct population structure. This is the first study to 
genetically characterize the full-length msp4 gene from clinical isolates of P.
knowlesi from Malaysia and thus would be very useful for future rational vaccine 
studies. Further studies with higher number of samples and functional
characterization of the protein will be necessary.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0224743 
PMCID: PMC6872184
PMID: 31751362  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

