
1. Ecol Evol. 2019 Oct 2;9(22):12482-12502. doi: 10.1002/ece3.5700. eCollection 2019
Nov.

Adaptive landscape genetics and malaria across divergent island bird populations.

Armstrong C(1), Davies RG(1), González-Quevedo C(1)(2), Dunne M(1), Spurgin
LG(1), Richardson DS(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences University of East Anglia Norwich UK.
(2)Grupo Ecología y Evolución de Vertebrados Instituto de Biología Facultad de
Ciencias Exactas y Naturales Universidad de Antioquia Medellín Colombia.

Environmental conditions play a major role in shaping the spatial distributions
of pathogens, which in turn can drive local adaptation and divergence in host
genetic diversity. Haemosporidians, such as Plasmodium (malaria), are a strong
selective force, impacting survival and fitness of hosts, with geographic
distributions largely determined by habitat suitability for their insect vectors.
Here, we have tested whether patterns of fine-scale local adaptation to malaria
are replicated across discrete, ecologically differing island populations of
Berthelot's pipits Anthus berthelotii. We sequenced TLR4, an innate immunity gene
that is potentially under positive selection in Berthelot's pipits, and two SNPs 
previously identified as being associated with malaria infection in a genome-wide
association study (GWAS) in Berthelot's pipits in the Canary Islands. We
determined the environmental predictors of malaria infection, using these to
estimate variation in malaria risk on Porto Santo, and found some congruence with
previously identified environmental risk factors on Tenerife. We also found a
negative association between malaria infection and a TLR4 variant in Tenerife. In
contrast, one of the GWAS SNPs showed an association with malaria risk in Porto
Santo, but in the opposite direction to that found in the Canary Islands GWAS.
Together, these findings suggest that disease-driven local adaptation may be an
important factor in shaping variation among island populations.

© 2019 The Authors. Ecology and Evolution published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/ece3.5700 
PMCID: PMC6875583
PMID: 31788192 

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.

