
1. PLoS One. 2019 Dec 2;14(12):e0225833. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0225833.
eCollection 2019.

Composition and structure of the culturable gut bacterial communities in
Anopheles albimanus from Colombia.

Galeano-Castañeda Y(1), Urrea-Aguirre P(1), Piedrahita S(1), Bascuñán P(1),
Correa MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Microbiología Molecular, Escuela de Microbiología, Universidad de
Antioquia, Medellín, Colombia.

The understanding of factors affecting the gut bacterial communities in malaria
vectors is essential for the design of vector control interventions, such as
those based on a paratransgenic approach. One of the requirements of this method 
is the availability of bacteria from the mosquito susceptible to culture. Thus,
the aim of this study was to evaluate the composition and structure of the
culturable gut bacterial communities in field mosquitoes Anopheles albimanus from
Colombia, in addition to generate a bacterial collection to further analyze
microbial functional activity. Gut bacteria were isolated from An. albimanus
larvae and adult mosquitoes collected in localities of the Atlantic and Pacific
Coasts. The bacterial isolates were grouped in 28 morphospecies that corresponded
to three phyla, three classes, nine families and 14 genera. The larvae guts from 
San Antero (Atlantic Coast) and Buenaventura (Pacific Coast) shared the genera
Bacillus and Lysinibacillus and in adults, Bacillus and Bacillus cereus Group
were registered in both localities. Gut bacterial richness was higher in adults
from the Pacific with respect to the Atlantic Coast, while larval richness was
similar in samples of both coasts. The Shannon index indicated uniformity in
morphospecies abundances in both localities. Finally, the characterization of
morphospecies from the gut of Anopheles albimanus mosquitoes from Colombia by
culture-dependent methods complemented with 16S rRNA gene sequencing allowed the 
definition, at a finer resolution, of the composition and structure of these
microbial communities. In addition, the obtained bacterial culture collection
will allow further evaluation of the microorganisms for their potential as
biocontrol agents.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0225833 
PMCID: PMC6886788
PMID: 31790474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declare that no competing
interests exist.

