
1. Pathogens. 2019 Dec 24;9(1). pii: E21. doi: 10.3390/pathogens9010021.

Human Microglia Respond to Malaria-Induced Extracellular Vesicles.

Mbagwu SI(1)(2), Lannes N(1), Walch M(1), Filgueira L(1), Mantel PY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Anatomy Unit, Department of Oncology, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of 
Science and Medicine, University of Fribourg, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Basic Medical Sciences, Nnamdi Azikiwe
University, Nnewi Campus, Nnewi 435101, Nigeria.

Microglia are the chief immune cells of the brain and have been reported to be
activated in severe malaria. Their activation may drive towards neuroinflammation
in cerebral malaria. Malaria-infected red blood cell derived-extracellular
vesicles (MiREVs) are produced during the blood stage of malaria infection. They 
mediate intercellular communication and immune regulation, among other functions.
During cerebral malaria, the breakdown of the blood-brain barrier can promote the
migration of substances such as MiREVs from the periphery into the brain,
targeting cells such as microglia. Microglia and extracellular vesicle
interactions in different pathological conditions have been reported to induce
neuroinflammation. Unlike in astrocytes, microglia-extracellular vesicle
interaction has not yet been described in malaria infection. Therefore, in this
study, we aimed to investigate the uptake of MiREVs by human microglia cells and 
their cytokine response. Human blood monocyte-derived microglia (MoMi) were
generated from buffy coats of anonymous healthy donors using Ficoll-Paque density
gradient centrifugation. The MiREVs were isolated from the Plasmodium falciparum 
cultures. They were purified by ultracentrifugation and labeled with PKH67 green 
fluorescent dye. The internalization of MiREVs by MoMi was observed after 4 h of 
co-incubation on coverslips placed in a 24-well plate at 37 °C using confocal
microscopy. Cytokine-gene expression was investigated using rt-qPCR, following
the stimulation of the MoMi cells with supernatants from the parasite cultures at
2, 4, and 24 h, respectively. MiREVs were internalized by the microglia and
accumulated in the perinuclear region. MiREVs-treated cells increased gene
expression of the inflammatory cytokine TNFα and reduced gene expression of the
immune suppressive IL-10. Overall, the results indicate that MiREVs may act on
microglia, which would contribute to enhanced inflammation in cerebral malaria.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens9010021 
PMCID: PMC7168629
PMID: 31878288 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no potential conflicts of interest with
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

