
1. mBio. 2020 Jan 7;11(1). pii: e02995-19. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02995-19.

Plasmodium yoelii Erythrocyte-Binding-like Protein Modulates Host Cell Membrane
Structure, Immunity, and Disease Severity.

Peng YC(#)(1), Qi Y(#)(1)(2), Zhang C(1), Yao X(1), Wu J(1), Pattaradilokrat
S(1)(3), Xia L(1)(4), Tumas KC(1), He X(1), Ishizaki T(5)(6), Qi CF(7), Holder
AA(8), Myers TG(9), Long CA(1), Kaneko O(5)(6), Li J(10), Su XZ(11).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Functional Genomics Section, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector
Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Pathogenic Biology and Immunology, Guangdong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Sino-French Hoffmann Institute,
Second Affiliated Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, 
Thailand.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central 
South University, Changsha, Hunan, China.
(5)Department of Protozoology, Institute of Tropical Medicine (NEKKEN), Nagasaki 
University, Nagasaki, Japan.
(6)Leading Program, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki University, 
Nagasaki, Japan.
(7)Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(8)Malaria Parasitology Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London, United
Kingdom.
(9)Genomic Technologies Section, Research Technologies Branch, National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA.
(10)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Signaling Network, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian,
China.
(11)Malaria Functional Genomics Section, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector
Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA xsu@niaid.nih.gov.
(#)Contributed equally

Erythrocyte-binding-like (EBL) proteins are known to play an important role in
malaria parasite invasion of red blood cells (RBCs); however, any roles of EBL
proteins in regulating host immune responses remain unknown. Here, we show that
Plasmodium yoelii EBL (PyEBL) can shape disease severity by modulating the
surface structure of infected RBCs (iRBCs) and host immune responses. We
identified an amino acid substitution (a change of C to Y at position 741
[C741Y]) in the protein trafficking domain of PyEBL between isogenic P. yoellii
nigeriensis strain N67 and N67C parasites that produce different disease
phenotypes in C57BL/6 mice. Exchanges of the C741Y alleles altered parasite
growth and host survival accordingly. The C741Y substitution also changed protein
processing and trafficking in merozoites and in the cytoplasm of iRBCs, reduced
PyEBL binding to band 3, increased phosphatidylserine (PS) surface exposure, and 
elevated the osmotic fragility of iRBCs, but it did not affect invasion of RBCs
in vitro The modified iRBC surface triggered PS-CD36-mediated phagocytosis of
iRBCs, host type I interferon (IFN-I) signaling, and T cell differentiation,
leading to improved host survival. This study reveals a previously unknown role
of PyEBL in regulating host-pathogen interaction and innate immune responses,
which may be explored for developing disease control strategies.IMPORTANCE
Malaria is a deadly parasitic disease that continues to afflict hundreds of
millions of people every year. Infections with malaria parasites can be
asymptomatic, with mild symptoms, or fatal, depending on a delicate balance of
host immune responses. Malaria parasites enter host red blood cells (RBCs)
through interactions between parasite ligands and host receptors, such as
erythrocyte-binding-like (EBL) proteins and host Duffy antigen receptor for
chemokines (DARC). Plasmodium yoelii EBL (PyEBL) is known to play a role in
parasite invasion of RBCs. Here, we show that PyEBL also affects disease severity
through modulation of host immune responses, particularly type I interferon
(IFN-I) signaling. This discovery assigns a new function to PyEBL and provides a 
mechanism for developing disease control strategies.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02995-19 
PMCID: PMC6946805
PMID: 31911494  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

