
1. mSphere. 2020 Jan 8;5(1). pii: e00818-19. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00818-19.

Puupehenone, a Marine-Sponge-Derived Sesquiterpene Quinone, Potentiates the
Antifungal Drug Caspofungin by Disrupting Hsp90 Activity and the Cell Wall
Integrity Pathway.

Tripathi SK(1), Feng Q(1), Liu L(2), Levin DE(2), Roy KK(3), Doerksen RJ(3),
Baerson SR(4), Shi X(5), Pan X(5), Xu WH(1), Li XC(1)(6), Clark AM(1)(6), Agarwal
AK(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Natural Products Research, School of Pharmacy, University 
of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Boston University Henry M. Goldman
School of Dental Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Division of Medicinal Chemistry, Department of BioMolecular Sciences, School
of Pharmacy, University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi, USA.
(4)Natural Products Utilization Research Unit, U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Agricultural Research Service, Oxford, Mississippi, USA.
(5)Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(6)Division of Pharmacognosy, Department of BioMolecular Sciences, School of
Pharmacy, University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi, USA.
(7)National Center for Natural Products Research, School of Pharmacy, University 
of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi, USA aagarwal@olemiss.edu.
(8)Division of Pharmacology, Department of BioMolecular Sciences, School of
Pharmacy, University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi, USA.

The cell wall-targeting echinocandin antifungals, although potent and well
tolerated, are inadequate in treating fungal infections due to their narrow
spectrum of activity and their propensity to induce pathogen resistance. A
promising strategy to overcome these drawbacks is to combine echinocandins with a
molecule that improves their activity and also disrupts drug adaptation pathways.
In this study, we show that puupehenone (PUUP), a marine-sponge-derived
sesquiterpene quinone, potentiates the echinocandin drug caspofungin (CAS) in
CAS-resistant fungal pathogens. We have conducted RNA sequencing (RNA-seq)
analysis, followed by genetic and molecular studies, to elucidate PUUP's
CAS-potentiating mechanism. We found that the combination of CAS and PUUP blocked
the induction of CAS-responding genes required for the adaptation to cell wall
stress through the cell wall integrity (CWI) pathway. Further analysis showed
that PUUP inhibited the activation of Slt2 (Mpk1), the terminal mitogen-activated
protein (MAP) kinase in this pathway. We also found that PUUP induced heat shock 
response genes and inhibited the activity of heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90).
Molecular docking studies predicted that PUUP occupies a binding site on Hsp90
required for the interaction between Hsp90 and its cochaperone Cdc37. Thus, we
show that PUUP potentiates CAS activity by a previously undescribed mechanism
which involves a disruption of Hsp90 activity and the CWI pathway. Given the
requirement of the Hsp90-Cdc37 complex in Slt2 activation, we suggest that
inhibitors of this complex would disrupt the CWI pathway and synergize with
echinocandins. Therefore, the identification of PUUP's CAS-potentiating mechanism
has important implications in the development of new antifungal combination
therapies.IMPORTANCE Fungal infections cause more fatalities worldwide each year 
than malaria or tuberculosis. Currently available antifungal drugs have various
limitations, including host toxicity, narrow spectrum of activity, and pathogen
resistance. Combining these drugs with small molecules that can overcome these
limitations is a useful strategy for extending their clinical use. We have
investigated the molecular mechanism by which a marine-derived compound
potentiates the activity of the antifungal echinocandin caspofungin. Our findings
revealed a mechanism, different from previously reported caspofungin
potentiators, in which potentiation is achieved by the disruption of Hsp90
activity and signaling through the cell wall integrity pathway, processes that
play important roles in the adaptation to caspofungin in fungal pathogens. Given 
the importance of stress adaptation in the development of echinocandin
resistance, this work will serve as a starting point in the development of new
combination therapies that will likely be more effective and less prone to
pathogen resistance.

Copyright © 2020 Tripathi et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00818-19 
PMCID: PMC6952202
PMID: 31915228  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

