
1. Parasit Vectors. 2020 Jan 13;13(1):18. doi: 10.1186/s13071-019-3868-y.

Gene copy number and function of the APL1 immune factor changed during Anopheles 
evolution.

Mitri C(1)(2), Bischoff E(1)(2), Eiglmeier K(1)(2), Holm I(1)(2), Dieme
C(1)(2)(3), Brito-Fravallo E(1)(2), Raz A(4), Zakeri S(4), Nejad MIK(4), Djadid
ND(4), Vernick KD(5)(6), Riehle MM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Insect Vector Genetics and Genomics, Department of Parasites and
Insect Vectors, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(2)CNRS Unit of Evolutionary Genomics, Modeling and Health (UMR2000), Institut
Pasteur, Paris, France.
(3)Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of Health, Slingerlands, NY, USA.
(4)Malaria and Vector Research Group, Biotechnology Research Center, Institut
Pasteur of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Unit of Insect Vector Genetics and Genomics, Department of Parasites and
Insect Vectors, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. kenneth.vernick@pasteur.fr.
(6)CNRS Unit of Evolutionary Genomics, Modeling and Health (UMR2000), Institut
Pasteur, Paris, France. kenneth.vernick@pasteur.fr.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical College of Wisconsin,
Milwaukee, WI, USA. mriehle@mcw.edu.

BACKGROUND: The recent reference genome assembly and annotation of the Asian
malaria vector Anopheles stephensi detected only one gene encoding the
leucine-rich repeat immune factor APL1, while in the Anopheles gambiae and
sibling Anopheles coluzzii, APL1 factors are encoded by a family of three
paralogs. The phylogeny and biological function of the unique APL1 gene in An.
stephensi have not yet been specifically examined.
METHODS: The APL1 locus was manually annotated to confirm the computationally
predicted single APL1 gene in An. stephensi. APL1 evolution within Anopheles was 
explored by phylogenomic analysis. The single or paralogous APL1 genes were
silenced in An. stephensi and An. coluzzii, respectively, followed by mosquito
survival analysis, experimental infection with Plasmodium and expression
analysis.
RESULTS: APL1 is present as a single ancestral gene in most Anopheles including
An. stephensi but has expanded to three paralogs in an African lineage that
includes only the Anopheles gambiae species complex and Anopheles christyi.
Silencing of the unique APL1 copy in An. stephensi results in significant
mosquito mortality. Elevated mortality of APL1-depleted An. stephensi is rescued 
by antibiotic treatment, suggesting that pathology due to bacteria is the cause
of mortality, and indicating that the unique APL1 gene is essential for host
survival. Successful Plasmodium development in An. stephensi depends upon APL1
activity for protection from high host mortality due to bacteria. In contrast,
silencing of all three APL1 paralogs in An. coluzzii does not result in elevated 
mortality, either with or without Plasmodium infection. Expression of the single 
An. stephensi APL1 gene is regulated by both the Imd and Toll immune pathways,
while the two signaling pathways regulate different APL1 paralogs in the expanded
APL1 locus.
CONCLUSIONS: APL1 underwent loss and gain of functions concomitant with expansion
from a single ancestral gene to three paralogs in one lineage of African
Anopheles. We infer that activity of the unique APL1 gene promotes longevity in
An. stephensi by conferring protection from or tolerance to an effect of
bacterial pathology. The evolution of an expanded APL1 gene family could be a
factor contributing to the exceptional levels of malaria transmission mediated by
human-feeding members of the An. gambiae species complex in Africa.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-019-3868-y 
PMCID: PMC6958605
PMID: 31931885  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

