
1. Front Immunol. 2020 Jan 14;10:3025. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.03025. eCollection
2019.

DNA Methylation in Anopheles albimanus Modulates the Midgut Immune Response
Against Plasmodium berghei.

Claudio-Piedras F(1), Recio-Tótoro B(1), Condé R(1), Hernández-Tablas JM(1),
Hurtado-Sil G(1), Lanz-Mendoza H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Sobre Enfermedades Infecciosas, Instituto Nacional
de Salud Pública, Cuernavaca, Mexico.

Epigenetic mechanisms such as DNA methylation and histone post-translational
modifications are fundamental for the phenotypic plasticity of insects during
their interaction with the environment. In response to environmental cues, the
methylation pattern in DNA is dynamically remodeled to achieve an epigenetic
control of gene expression. DNA methylation is the focus of study in insects for 
its evolutionarily conserved character; however, there is scant knowledge about
the epigenetic regulation in vector mosquitoes, especially during their infection
by parasites. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the participation of
DNA methylation in the immune response of Anopheles albimanus to a Plasmodium
infection. For this, we first investigated the presence of a fully functional DNA
methylation system in A. albimanus by assessing its potential role in larval
development. Subsequently, we evaluated the transcriptional response to
Plasmodium berghei of two mosquito phenotypes with different degrees of
susceptibility to the parasite, in a scenario where their global DNA methylation 
had been pharmacologically inhibited. Our study revealed that A. albimanus has a 
functional DNA methylation system that is essential to larval viability, and that
is also responsive to feeding and parasite challenges. The pharmacological
erasure of the methylome with azacytidine or decitabine abolished the divergent
responses of both mosquito phenotypes, leading to a transcriptionally similar
response upon parasite challenge. This response was more specific, and the
infection load in both phenotypes was lowered. Our findings suggest that DNA
methylation may constitute a key factor in vector competence, and a promising
target for preventing malaria transmission.

Copyright © 2020 Claudio-Piedras, Recio-Tótoro, Condé, Hernández-Tablas,
Hurtado-Sil and Lanz-Mendoza.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.03025 
PMCID: PMC6970940
PMID: 31993053 

