
1. Parasit Vectors. 2020 Jan 29;13(1):42. doi: 10.1186/s13071-020-3889-6.

Molecular characterization of RNase III protein of Asaia sp. for developing a
robust RNAi-based paratransgensis tool to affect the sexual life-cycle of
Plasmodium or Anopheles fitness.

Asgari M(1), Ilbeigikhamsehnejad M(1), Rismani E(2), Dinparast Djadid N(3), Raz
A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Molecular Medicine Department, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran. navidmvrg@gmail.com.
(4)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran. raz.biotech@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: According to scientific recommendations, paratransgenesis is one of
the solutions for improving the effectiveness of the Global Malaria Eradication
Programme. In paratransgenesis, symbiont microorganisms are used for distorting
or blocking the parasite life-cycle, affecting the fitness and longevity of
vectors or reducing the vectorial competence. It has been revealed recently that 
bacteria could be used as potent tools for double stranded RNA production and
delivery to insects. Moreover, findings showed that RNase III mutant bacteria are
more competent for this aim. Asaia spp. have been introduced as potent
paratransgenesis candidates for combating malaria and, based on their specific
features for this goal, could be considered as effective dsRNA production and
delivery tools to Anopheles spp. Therefore, we decided to characterize the rnc
gene and its related protein to provide the basic required information for
creating an RNase III mutant Asaia bacterium.
METHODS: Asaia bacteria were isolated from field-collected Anopheles stephensi
mosquitoes. The rnc gene and its surrounding sequences were characterized by
rapid amplification of genomic ends. RNase III recombinant protein was expressed 
in E. coli BL21 and biological activity of the purified recombinant protein was
assayed. Furthermore, Asaia RNaseIII amino acid sequence was analyzed by in
silico approaches such as homology modeling and docking to determine its
structural properties.
RESULTS: In this study, the structure of rnc gene and its related operon from
Asaia sp. was determined. In addition, by performing superimposition and docking 
with specific substrate, the structural features of Asaia RNaseIII protein such
as critical residues which are involved and essential for proper folding of
active site, binding of magnesium ions and double stranded RNA molecule to
protein and cleaving of dsRNA molecules, were determined.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, the basic and essential data for creating an RNase
III mutant Asaia sp. strain, which is the first step of developing an efficient
RNAi-based paratransgenesis tool, were acquired. Asaia sp. have been found in
different medically-important vectors and these data are potentially very helpful
for researchers studying paratransgenesis and vector-borne diseases and are
interested in applying the RNAi technology in the field.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-020-3889-6 
PMCID: PMC6990573
PMID: 31996254 

