
1. Transfus Apher Sci. 2020 Jun;59(3):102733. doi: 10.1016/j.transci.2020.102733.
Epub 2020 Jan 27.

"Dual-gene" malaria-resistance: Therapeutically-rational exchange (T-REX) of
group-O sickle trait and group-O C-traittrait red blood cells can be evaluated in
Benin and Nigeria.

Jajosky RP(1), Jajosky AN(2), Jajosky PG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Emory University, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Atlanta,
GA, USA; Biconcavity Inc., Retired USPHS Officer at Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention,1106 Spring Mill Dr. SW, Lilburn, GA 30047, USA. Electronic
address: rjajosk@emory.edu.
(2)Case Western Reserve University, University Hospitals Cleveland Medical
Center, Department of Pathology, 11100 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.
Electronic address: ajajosky@gmail.com.
(3)Biconcavity Inc., Retired USPHS Officer at Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention,1106 Spring Mill Dr. SW, Lilburn, GA 30047, USA. Electronic address:
jajosky@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Using indicators of disease severity, clinicians can predict which
Plasmodium falciparum (Pf) malaria patients being treated with artesunate or
quinine are likely to die despite these drugs. Effective "rescue adjuncts" are
needed when drugs alone are inadequate. "Therapeutically-rational exchange"
(T-REX) of special malaria-resistant red blood cells (RBCs) has been proposed to 
optimize adjunctive exchange transfusion.
METHODS: Studies were reviewed that (1) quantified how group-O status and
"sickle-trait" (HbAS) and "C-trait" (HbAC) hemoglobins affect Pf mortality, risk 
of thrombosis, or birth outcomes for women with pregnancy associated malaria
(PAM), (2) reported prevalences of "dual-gene" malaria-resistant RBCs, or (3)
reflected the level of exchange-transfusion and malaria-related expertise in
Benin and Nigeria.
RESULTS: Data show that the malaria- and thrombosis-resistance of RBCs depend on 
specific genes and the patient's clinical status and medical history. In
malaria-endemic Benin and Nigeria, prevalences of "dual-gene" malaria-resistant
group-O HbAS and group-O HbAC RBCs are substantial, and both malaria- and
exchange-related expertise are outstanding.
CONCLUSIONS: T-REX of "dual-gene" malaria-resistant RBCs is feasible in Benin and
Nigeria and warrants evaluation as a rescue adjunct for 3 subsets of Pf-malaria
patients. For therapeutic use, group-O HbAS RBCs are likely to be more effective 
than non-O HbAS RBCs for Pf-infected patients who (1) have a history of
thrombosis or (2) are taking birth-control hormones while group-O HbAC RBCs may
substantially improve birth outcomes for women with PAM. Studies suggest it is
prudent to assume - until proven otherwise - that T-REX of "dual-gene"
malaria-resistant RBCs can improve ("personalize") rescue of these patient
subsets.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.transci.2020.102733 
PMID: 32019737 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Dr. Ryan
Jajosky is the CEO and part-owner of Biconcavity Inc. Dr. Philip Jajosky is CMO
and part-owner of Biconcavity Inc. Biconcavity Inc. is a biotechnology research
and development company exploring drug-linked-erythrocytes. Biconcavity does not 
have any interest in malaria. Visit www.biconcavity.com for more information. Dr.
Audrey Jajosky does not have any disclosures.

