
1. Elife. 2020 Feb 17;9. pii: e54129. doi: 10.7554/eLife.54129.

A single-parasite transcriptional atlas of Toxoplasma Gondii reveals novel
control of antigen expression.

Xue Y(1), Theisen TC(2), Rastogi S(2), Ferrel A(2), Quake SR(1)(3)(4), Boothroyd 
JC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, United States.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, United States.
(3)Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, United States.
(4)Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, United States.

Toxoplasma gondii, a protozoan parasite, undergoes a complex and poorly
understood developmental process that is critical for establishing a chronic
infection in its intermediate hosts. Here, we applied single-cell RNA-sequencing 
(scRNA-seq) on >5,400 Toxoplasma in both tachyzoite and bradyzoite stages using
three widely studied strains to construct a comprehensive atlas of cell-cycle and
asexual development, revealing hidden states and transcriptional factors
associated with each developmental stage. Analysis of SAG1-related sequence (SRS)
antigenic repertoire reveals a highly heterogeneous, sporadic expression pattern 
unexplained by measurement noise, cell cycle, or asexual development.
Furthermore, we identified AP2IX-1 as a transcription factor that controls the
switching from the ubiquitous SAG1 to rare surface antigens not previously
observed in tachyzoites. In addition, comparative analysis between Toxoplasma and
Plasmodium scRNA-seq results reveals concerted expression of gene sets, despite
fundamental differences in cell division. Lastly, we built an interactive
data-browser for visualization of our atlas resource.

plain-language-summary: Toxoplasma gondii is a single-celled parasite that can
infect most warm-blooded animals, but only reproduces sexually in domestic and
wild cats. Distantly related to the malaria agent, it currently infects over a
quarter of the world’s human population. Although it is benign in most cases, the
condition can still be dangerous for foetuses and people whose immune system is
compromised. In the human body, Toxoplasma cells infiltrate muscle and nerve
cells; there it undergoes a complex transformation that helps the parasites to
stop dividing quickly and instead hide from the immune system in a dormant state.
It is still unclear how this transition unfolds, and in particular which genes
are switched on and off at any given time. To understand this transformation,
scientists often measure which genes are active across a group of parasites.
However, this approach gives only an ‘average’ picture and does not allow each
parasite to be profiled, missing out on the diversity that may exist between
individuals. One area of particular interest, for example, is a set of genes
called SAG1-related sequences. They code for the ‘molecular overcoat’ of the
parasite, an array of proteins that sit on the surface of Toxoplasma cells. More 
than 120 SAG1-related genes exist in the genome of each Toxoplasma parasite,
creating a whole wardrobe of proteins that potentially hide the parasites from
the immune system. Here, Xue et al. harnessed a technique called single-cell RNA 
sequencing, which allowed them to screen which genes were active in 5,400
individual Toxoplasma parasites from different strains. The analysis included
both the rapidly dividing form of the parasite (present in the initial stage of
an infection), and the slowly dividing form found in people who carry Toxoplasma 
without any symptoms. The resulting ‘atlas’ contains previously hidden
information about the genes used at each stage of parasite development: this
included unexpected similarities between Toxoplasma and the malaria agent, as
well as subtle differences between two of the Toxoplasma strains. The atlas also 
sheds light on how individual parasites turns on SAG1-related sequences. It
reveals a surprising diversity in the composition of the protein coats sported by
Toxoplasma cells at the same developmental stage, a strategy that may help to
thwart the immune system. One individual parasite in particular had an unusual
combination of coat and other proteins found in both the fast and slow-dividing
human forms. This parasite had been grown in human cells, yet a closer analysis
revealed that it had activated several genes (including ones encoding the protein
coat) that are normally only ‘on’ in the parasites going through sexual
reproduction in domestic and wild cats. This new data atlas helps to understand
how Toxoplasma are transmitted to and grow within humans, which could aid the
development of treatments. Ultimately, a better knowledge of these parasites
could also bring new information about the agent that causes malaria.
© 2020, Xue et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.54129 
PMCID: PMC7180058
PMID: 32065584 

Conflict of interest statement: YX, TT, SR, AF, SQ, JB No competing interests
declared

