
1. PLoS Pathog. 2020 Feb 18;16(2):e1008363. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008363.
eCollection 2020 Feb.

Complex nutrient channel phenotypes despite Mendelian inheritance in a Plasmodium
falciparum genetic cross.

Gupta A(1), Bokhari AAB(1), Pillai AD(1), Crater AK(1), Gezelle J(1), Saggu G(1),
Nasamu AS(2), Ganesan SM(2), Niles JC(3), Desai SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, United
States of America.
(2)Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(3)Division of Comparative Medicine, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Malaria parasites activate a broad-selectivity ion channel on their host
erythrocyte membrane to obtain essential nutrients from the bloodstream. This
conserved channel, known as the plasmodial surface anion channel (PSAC), has been
linked to parasite clag3 genes in P. falciparum, but epigenetic switching between
the two copies of this gene hinders clear understanding of how the encoded
protein determines PSAC activity. Here, we used linkage analysis in a P.
falciparum cross where one parent carries a single clag3 gene to overcome the
effects of switching and confirm a primary role of the clag3 product with high
confidence. Despite Mendelian inheritance, CLAG3 conditional knockdown revealed
remarkably preserved nutrient and solute uptake. Even more surprisingly,
transport remained sensitive to a CLAG3 isoform-specific inhibitor despite
quantitative knockdown, indicating that low doses of the CLAG3 transgene are
sufficient to confer block. We then produced a complete CLAG3 knockout line and
found it exhibits an incomplete loss of transport activity, in contrast to rhoph2
and rhoph3, two PSAC-associated genes that cannot be disrupted because nutrient
uptake is abolished in their absence. Although the CLAG3 knockout did not incur a
fitness cost under standard nutrient-rich culture conditions, this parasite could
not be propagated in a modified medium that more closely resembles human plasma. 
These studies implicate oligomerization of CLAG paralogs encoded by various
chromosomes in channel formation. They also reveal that CLAG3 is dispensable
under standard in vitro conditions but required for propagation under
physiological conditions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008363 
PMCID: PMC7048409
PMID: 32069335  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

