
1. mBio. 2020 Jun 2;11(3). pii: e01110-20. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01110-20.

Rrp6 Regulates Heterochromatic Gene Silencing via ncRNA RUF6 Decay in Malaria
Parasites.

Fan Y(#)(1), Shen S(#)(2), Wei G(#)(1), Tang J(#)(3), Zhao Y(1), Wang F(1), He
X(1), Guo G(2), Shang X(1), Yu X(3), Ma Z(4), He X(3), Liu M(2), Zhu Q(2), Le
Z(1), Wei G(4), Cao J(3)(5)(6), Jiang C(7)(8), Zhang Q(9).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Translational Medicine, Key Laboratory of Arrhythmias of
the Ministry of Education of China, East Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Institute of Translational Research, Tongji Hospital, the School of Life
Sciences and Technology, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Signaling and Disease
Research, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(3)National Health Commission Key Laboratory of Parasitic Disease Control and
Prevention, Jiangsu Provincial Key Laboratory on Parasite and Vector Control
Technology, Jiangsu Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Wuxi, China.
(4)CAS Key Laboratory of Computational Biology, CAS-MPG Partner Institute for
Computational Biology, Shanghai Institute of Nutrition and Health, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(5)Center for Global Health, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, China.
(6)Public Health Research Center, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, China.
(7)Institute of Translational Research, Tongji Hospital, the School of Life
Sciences and Technology, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Signaling and Disease
Research, Tongji University, Shanghai, China czjiang@tongji.edu.cn
qfzhang@tongji.edu.cn.
(8)The Research Center of Stem Cells and Ageing, Tsingtao Advanced Research
Institute, Tongji University, Tsingtao, China.
(9)Research Center for Translational Medicine, Key Laboratory of Arrhythmias of
the Ministry of Education of China, East Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, China czjiang@tongji.edu.cn qfzhang@tongji.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

The heterochromatin environment plays a central role in silencing genes
associated with the malaria parasite's development, survival in the host, and
transmission to the mosquito vector. However, the underlying mechanism regulating
the dynamic chromatin structure is not understood yet. Here, we have uncovered
that Plasmodium falciparum Rrp6, an orthologue of eukaryotic RNA
exosome-associated RNase, controls the silencing of heterochromatic genes. PfRrp6
knockdown disrupted the singular expression of the GC-rich ncRNA RUF6 family, a
known critical regulator of virulence gene expression, through the stabilization 
of the nascent transcripts. Mechanistic investigation showed that the
accumulation of the multiple RUF6 ncRNAs triggered local chromatin remodeling in 
situ, which activated their adjacent var genes. Strikingly, chromatin isolation
by RNA purification analysis (ChIRP-seq) revealed that a remarkable RUF6 ncRNA
had interacted with distal heterochromatin regions directly and stimulated a
global derepression effect on heterochromatic genes, including all variant gene
families and the sexual commitment-associated regulator ap2-g gene. Collectively,
Rrp6 appears to conduct the epigenetic surveillance of heterochromatic gene
expression through controlling RUF6 levels, thereby securing antigenic variation 
and sexual commitment of malaria parasites during the infection of the
host.IMPORTANCE Malaria remains a major public health and economic burden. The
heterochromatin environment controls the silencing of genes associated with the
fate of malaria parasites. Previous studies have demonstrated that a group of
GC-rich ncRNAs (RUF6) is associated with the mutually exclusive expression of var
genes, but the underlying mechanisms remain elusive. Here, through a series of
genetic manipulation and genome-wide multiomics analysis, we have identified the 
plasmodial orthologue of RNA exosome-associated Rrp6 as an upstream regulator of 
RUF6 expression and revealed that the dysregulation of RUF6 upon Rrp6 knockdown
triggered local chromatin alteration, thereby activating most heterochromatic
genes via direct interaction of RUF6 and distal gene loci. This finding not only 
uncovered the in-depth mechanism of RUF6-mediated regulation of heterochromatic
genes but also identified Rrp6 as a novel regulator of gene expression in human
malaria parasites, which provides a new target for developing intervention
strategies against malaria.

Copyright © 2020 Fan et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01110-20 
PMCID: PMC7267889
PMID: 32487761 

