
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 May 21;11:965. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00965. eCollection
2020.

Bacterial Microbiome in Wild-Caught Anopheles Mosquitoes in Western Thailand.

Tainchum K(1)(2), Dupont C(3)(4), Chareonviriyaphap T(2), Jumas-Bilak E(3)(4),
Bangs MJ(2)(5), Manguin S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Agricultural Innovation and Management Division, Faculty of Natural Resources,
Prince of Songkla University, Songkhla, Thailand.
(2)Center for Advanced Studies for Agriculture and Food, KU Institute for
Advanced Studies, Kasetsart University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)HydroSciences Montpellier, Institut de Recherche pour le Développement, CNRS, 
Université Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(4)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Laboratoire d'Hygiène Hospitalière,
Montpellier, France.
(5)Public Health & Malaria Control, PT Freeport Indonesia/International SOS,
Kuala Kencana, Indonesia.

Among the complex microbial community living in the mosquito midgut, some
bacteria (e.g., Enterobacter spp.) can deliver effector molecules with
anti-Plasmodium effects suppressing the development of malaria parasites
(Plasmodium falciparum) before the öokinete can penetrate the mosquito midgut
epithelium. Despite knowledge of this phenomenon, only a few studies have defined
the diversity of microbiota in wild-caught adult Anopheles species. The objective
of this study was to analyze and compare the bacterial microbiota in different
Anopheles species, including representatives of the primary malaria vectors in
western Thailand. Wild female Anopheles species were sampled from malaria-endemic
areas in Tak and Mae Hong Son provinces near the Thai-Myanmar border.
Midgut/abdominal bacterial diversity was assessed by examining the 16S rRNA gene,
V3 hypervariable region, using PCR-Temporal Temperature Gel Electrophoresis
(PCR-TTGE) profiling and sequence analysis. A total of 24 bacterial genera were
identified from eight Anopheles species. Five bacterial genera were newly
reported in Anopheles mosquitoes (Ferrimonas, Megasphaera, Pectobacterium,
Shimwellia, and Trabulsiella). Five genera, including Megasphaera, were detected 
exclusively in a single-malaria (Plasmodium vivax) infected Anopheles minimus and
not observed in other non-infected mosquitoes. The use of PCR-TTGE provides the
first characterization of the midgut bacterial microbiome present in wild adult
Anopheles in Thailand. Evidence that microbiota might impact pathogen development
(suppression) in Anopheles and thereby reduce the risk of pathogen transmission
deserves more studies to describe the presence and better understand the
biological role of bacteria in natural mosquito populations.

Copyright © 2020 Tainchum, Dupont, Chareonviriyaphap, Jumas-Bilak, Bangs and
Manguin.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00965 
PMCID: PMC7253650
PMID: 32508784 

