
1. J Vis Exp. 2020 May 24;(159). doi: 10.3791/61375.

Embryo Microinjection Techniques for Efficient Site-Specific Mutagenesis in Culex
quinquefasciatus.

Bui M(1), Li M(1), Raban RR(1), Liu N(2), Akbari OS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of California, San
Diego.
(2)Department of Entomology and Plant Patholog, Auburn University.
(3)Section of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of California, San
Diego; Tata Institute for Genetics and Society, University of California, San
Diego; oakbari@ucsd.edu.

Culex quinquefasciatus is a vector of a diverse range of vector-borne diseases
such as avian malaria, West Nile virus (WNV), Japanese encephalitis, Eastern
equine encephalitis, lymphatic filariasis, and Saint Louis encephalitis. Notably,
avian malaria has played a major role in the extinction of numerous endemic
island bird species, while WNV has become an important vector-borne disease in
the United States. To gain further insight into C. quinquefasciatus biology and
expand their genetic control toolbox, we need to develop more efficient and
affordable methods for genome engineering in this species. However, some
biological traits unique to Culex mosquitoes, particularly their egg rafts, have 
made it difficult to perform microinjection procedures required for genome
engineering. To address these challenges, we have developed an optimized embryo
microinjection protocol that focuses on mitigating the technical obstacles
associated with the unique characteristics of Culex mosquitoes. These procedures 
demonstrate optimized methods for egg collection, egg raft separation and other
handling procedures essential for successful microinjection in C.
quinquefasciatus. When coupled with the CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing technology,
these procedures allow us to achieve site-specific, efficient and heritable
germline mutations, which are required to perform advanced genome engineering and
develop genetic control technologies in this important, but currently
understudied, disease vector.

DOI: 10.3791/61375 
PMID: 32510506  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

