
1. Elife. 2020 Jun 15;9. pii: e58019. doi: 10.7554/eLife.58019.

Isolation and transcriptomic analysis of Anopheles gambiae oenocytes enables the 
delineation of hydrocarbon biosynthesis.

Grigoraki L(1), Grau-Bové X(1), Carrington Yates H(1), Lycett GJ(1), Ranson H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Vector Biology Department, Liverpool,
United Kingdom.

The surface of insects is coated in cuticular hydrocarbons (CHCs); variations in 
the composition of this layer affect a range of traits including adaptation to
arid environments and defence against pathogens and toxins. In the African
malaria vector, Anopheles gambiae quantitative and qualitative variance in CHC
composition have been associated with speciation, ecological habitat and
insecticide resistance. Understanding how these modifications arise will inform
us of how mosquitoes are responding to climate change and vector control
interventions. CHCs are synthesised in sub-epidermal cells called oenocytes that 
are very difficult to isolate from surrounding tissues. Here we utilise a
transgenic line with fluorescent oenocytes to purify these cells for the first
time. Comparative transcriptomics revealed the enrichment of biological processes
related to long chain fatty acyl-CoA biosynthesis and elongation of mono-,
poly-unsaturated and saturated fatty acids and enabled us to delineate, and
partially validate, the hydrocarbon biosynthetic pathway in An. gambiae.

plain-language-summary: The bodies of insects are encased in an exoskeleton or
cuticle that is key for their survival. The cuticle helps protect insects against
damage, prevents water loss and can defend against pesticides. A better
understanding of the role of the cuticle for survival in mosquitoes and other
insects could lead to new ways to prevent the spread of diseases such as malaria.
The cuticle is coated with various molecules from a group of chemicals called
hydrocarbons. This coating is made by specialized cells called oenocytes and
helps to protect insects. Hydrocarbons can also influence communications between 
certain insects by acting as recognition signals. In mosquitoes, oenocytes make
several hydrocarbons using a set of processes that are not well understood, and
the types of hydrocarbons they make can vary between individuals of the same
species. It is unclear how this mixture of hydrocarbons is generated and how
differences in the mixture can determine how mosquitoes adapt to their
surroundings. Grigoraki et al. studied the genes that were active in isolated
oenocytes from the mosquito Anopheles gambiae, which carries the parasite that
causes malaria. The study revealed a set of genes which are highly active in
oenocytes and control the production of fatty acids, a group of molecules used to
make hydrocarbons. Other genes involved in creating hydrocarbons were also found.
Grigoraki et al. further investigated a specific gene called FAS1899 and showed
that loss of this gene reduces overall hydrocarbon production by 25%.
Additionally, genes for transporting and recycling molecules and for producing
fats were also shown to be active, which may indicate that oenocytes have a
variety of unexplored roles besides making hydrocarbons. Grigoraki et al.
identify the genes involved in producing the hydrocarbon coating of mosquitoes
and demonstrate their significance. Further work is needed to understand the
precise roles of each of these genes and how they are regulated to adapt the
hydrocarbon coating to different situations. This can help explain how the
hydrocarbon coating changes in mosquitoes, for example in response to the use of 
insecticides or climate change. This information is important to adapt and
develop new tools to improve mosquito control.
© 2020, Grigoraki et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.58019 
PMCID: PMC7351493
PMID: 32538778 

Conflict of interest statement: LG, XG, HC, GL, HR No competing interests
declared

