
1. J Infect Dis. 2020 Jun 18. pii: jiaa177. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiaa177. [Epub ahead
of print]

Morphological and Transcriptional Changes in Human Bone Marrow During Natural
Plasmodium vivax Malaria Infections.

Brito MAM(1)(2), Baro B(1)(3), Raiol TC(4), Ayllon-Hermida A(3), Safe IP(1),
Deroost K(1), Figueiredo EFG(1)(2), Costa AG(1)(2), Armengol MDP(5), Sumoy L(5), 
Almeida ACG(1)(2), Hounkpe BW(6), De Paula EV(6)(7), Fernandez-Becerra C(3)(5),
Monteiro WM(1)(2), Del Portillo HA(3)(5)(8), Lacerda MVG(1)(2)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Fundação de Medicina Tropical Dr Heitor Vieira Dourado, Manaus, Amazonas,
Brazil.
(2)Universidade do Estado do Amazonas, Manaus, Amazonas, Brazil.
(3)ISGlobal, Hospital Clínic-Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Fiocruz Brasilia, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Brasilia, Brazil.
(5)Institut d'Investigació en Ciències de la Salut Germans Trias i Pujol,
Badalona, Spain.
(6)University of Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil.
(7)Hematology and Hemotherapy Foundation from Amazonas State, Manaus, Amazonas,
Brazil.
(8)Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats, Barcelona, Spain.
(9)Instituto Leônidas & Maria Deane, Fiocruz, Manaus, Amazonas, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: The presence of Plasmodium vivax malaria parasites in the human bone 
marrow (BM) is still controversial. However, recent data from a clinical case and
experimental infections in splenectomized nonhuman primates unequivocally
demonstrated the presence of parasites in this tissue.
METHODS: In the current study, we analyzed BM aspirates of 7 patients during the 
acute attack and 42 days after drug treatment. RNA extracted from CD71+ cell
suspensions was used for sequencing and transcriptomic analysis.
RESULTS: We demonstrated the presence of parasites in all patients during acute
infections. To provide further insights, we purified CD71+ BM cells and
demonstrated dyserythropoiesis and inefficient erythropoiesis in all patients. In
addition, RNA sequencing from 3 patients showed that genes related to erythroid
maturation were down-regulated during acute infections, whereas immune response
genes were up-regulated.
CONCLUSIONS: This study thus shows that during P. vivax infections, parasites are
always present in the BM and that such infections induced dyserythropoiesis and
ineffective erythropoiesis. Moreover, infections induce transcriptional changes
associated with such altered erythropoietic response, thus highlighting the
importance of this hidden niche during natural infections.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiaa177 
PMID: 32556188 

