
1. J Exp Biol. 2020 Aug 13;223(Pt 15). pii: jeb225821. doi: 10.1242/jeb.225821.

Nitric oxide produced by periostial hemocytes modulates the bacterial
infection-induced reduction of the mosquito heart rate.

Estévez-Lao TY(1), Sigle LT(1), Gomez SN(1), Hillyer JF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235,
USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235,
USA julian.hillyer@vanderbilt.edu.

The circulatory and immune systems of mosquitoes are functionally integrated. An 
infection induces the migration of hemocytes to the dorsal vessel, and
specifically, to the regions surrounding the ostia of the heart. These periostial
hemocytes phagocytose pathogens in the areas of the hemocoel that experience the 
highest hemolymph flow. Here, we investigated whether a bacterial infection
affects cardiac rhythmicity in the African malaria mosquito, Anopheles gambiae We
discovered that infection with Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus and
Staphylococcus epidermidis, but not Micrococcus luteus, reduces the mosquito
heart rate and alters the proportional directionality of heart contractions.
Infection does not alter the expression of genes encoding crustacean cardioactive
peptide (CCAP), FMRFamide, corazonin, neuropeptide F or short neuropeptide F,
indicating that they do not drive the cardiac phenotype. Infection upregulates
the transcription of two superoxide dismutase (SOD) genes, catalase and a
glutathione peroxidase, but dramatically induces upregulation of nitric oxide
synthase (NOS) in both the heart and hemocytes. Within the heart, nitric oxide
synthase is produced by periostial hemocytes, and chemically inhibiting the
production of nitric oxide using l-NAME reverses the infection-induced cardiac
phenotype. Finally, infection induces the upregulation of two lysozyme genes in
the heart and other tissues, and treating mosquitoes with lysozyme reduces the
heart rate in a manner reminiscent of the infection phenotype. These data
demonstrate an exciting new facet of the integration between the immune and
circulatory systems of insects, whereby a hemocyte-produced factor with immune
activity, namely nitric oxide, modulates heart physiology.

© 2020. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jeb.225821 
PMID: 32561636 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no
competing or financial interests.

