
1. BMC Genomics. 2020 Jun 29;21(1):446. doi: 10.1186/s12864-020-06849-8.

Structural variation of the malaria-associated human glycophorin A-B-E region.

Louzada S(1)(2)(3), Algady W(4), Weyell E(4), Zuccherato LW(5), Brajer P(4),
Almalki F(4), Scliar MO(6), Naslavsky MS(6), Yamamoto GL(6), Duarte YAO(7),
Passos-Bueno MR(6), Zatz M(6), Yang F(1), Hollox EJ(8).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, UK.
(2)Present address: Laboratory of Cytogenomics and Animal Genomics (CAG),
Department of Genetics and Biotechnology, University of Trás-os-Montes and Alto
Douro (UTAD), Vila Real, Portugal.
(3)Present address: BioISI - Biosystems & Integrative Sciences Institute, Faculty
of Sciences, University of Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(4)Department of Genetics and Genome Biology, University of Leicester, Leicester,
UK.
(5)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Universidade Federal de Minas
Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(6)Human Genome and Stem Cell Research Center, Department of Genetics and
Evolutionary Biology, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade de São Paulo, São
Paulo, Brazil.
(7)School of Nursing, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(8)Department of Genetics and Genome Biology, University of Leicester, Leicester,
UK. ejh33@le.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Approximately 5% of the human genome shows common structural
variation, which is enriched for genes involved in the immune response and
cell-cell interactions. A well-established region of extensive structural
variation is the glycophorin gene cluster, comprising three tandemly-repeated
regions about 120 kb in length and carrying the highly homologous genes GYPA,
GYPB and GYPE. Glycophorin A (encoded by GYPA) and glycophorin B (encoded by
GYPB) are glycoproteins present at high levels on the surface of erythrocytes,
and they have been suggested to act as decoy receptors for viral pathogens. They 
are receptors for the invasion of the protist parasite Plasmodium falciparum, a
causative agent of malaria. A particular complex structural variant, called DUP4,
creates a GYPB-GYPA fusion gene known to confer resistance to malaria. Many other
structural variants exist across the glycophorin gene cluster, and they remain
poorly characterised.
RESULTS: Here, we analyse sequences from 3234 diploid genomes from across the
world for structural variation at the glycophorin locus, confirming 15 variants
in the 1000 Genomes project cohort, discovering 9 new variants, and
characterising a selection of these variants using fibre-FISH and breakpoint
mapping at the sequence level. We identify variants predicted to create novel
fusion genes and a common inversion duplication variant at appreciable
frequencies in West Africans. We show that almost all variants can be explained
by non-allelic homologous recombination and by comparing the structural variant
breakpoints with recombination hotspot maps, confirm the importance of a
particular meiotic recombination hotspot on structural variant formation in this 
region.
CONCLUSIONS: We identify and validate large structural variants in the human
glycophorin A-B-E gene cluster which may be associated with different clinical
aspects of malaria.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-020-06849-8 
PMCID: PMC7325229
PMID: 32600246 

