
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2020 Jul 2;14(7):e0008385. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0008385.
eCollection 2020 Jul.

Anopheles sundaicus  complex and the presence of Anopheles epiroticus in
Indonesia.

Syafruddin D(1)(2), Lestari YE(1), Permana DH(1), Asih PBS(1), St Laurent B(3),
Zubaidah S(1), Rozi IE(1), Kosasih S(1), Shinta(4), Sukowati S(4), Hakim L(5),
Haryanto E(5), Mangunwardoyo W(6), Bangs MJ(7)(8), Lobo NF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Eijkman Institute for Molecular Biology, Jakarta, Indonesia.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Hasanuddin University,
Makassar, Indonesia.
(3)Eck Institute for Global Health, University of Notre Dame, IN, United States
of America.
(4)Health Ecology Research & Development Centre, National Institute of Health,
Research and Development, Ministry of Health, Jakarta, Indonesia.
(5)Division of Vector Borne Disease, Ministry of Health, Jakarta, Indonesia.
(6)Department of Biology, Faculty of Mathematics and Science, Universitas
Indonesia, Depok, Indonesia.
(7)PT Freeport Indonesia, International SOS, Freeport Medical Services, Kuala
Kencana, Papua, Indonesia.
(8)Department of Entomology, Faculty of Agriculture, Kasetsart University,
Bangkok, Thailand.

Anopheles sundaicus s.l. is an important malaria vector primarily found in
coastal landscapes of western and central Indonesia. The species complex has a
wide geographical distribution in South and Southeast Asia and exhibits
ecological and behavioural variability over its range. Studies on understanding
the distribution of different members in the complex and their bionomics related 
to malaria transmission might be important guiding more effective vector
intervention strategies. Female An. sundaicus s.l. were collected from seven
provinces, 12 locations in Indonesia representing Sumatra: North Sumatra,
Bangka-Belitung, South Lampung, and Bengkulu; in Java: West Java; and the Lesser 
Sunda Islands: West Nusa Tenggara and East Nusa Tenggara provinces. Sequencing of
ribosomal DNA ITS2 gene fragments and two mitochondrial DNA gene markers, COI and
cytb, enabled molecular identification of morphologically indistinguishable
members of the complex. Findings allowed inference on the distribution of the An.
sundaicus s.l. present in Indonesia and further illustrate the phylogenetic
relationships of An. epiroticus within the complex. A total of 370 An. sundaicus 
s.l specimens were analysed for the ITS2 fragment. The ITS2 sequence alignment
revealed two consistent species-specific point mutations, a T>C transition at
base 479 and a G>T transversion at base 538 that differentiated five haplotypes: 
TG, CG, TT, CT, and TY. The TG haplotype matched published An.
epiroticus-indicative sequences from Thailand, Vietnam and peninsular Malaysia.
The previously described insertion event (base 603) was observed in all
identified specimens. Analysis of the COI and cytb genes revealed no consistent
nucleotide variations that could definitively distinguish An. epiroticus from
other members in the Sundaicus Complex. The findings indicate and support the
existence of An. epiroticus in North Sumatra and Bangka-Belitung archipelago.
Further studies are recommended to determine the full distributional extent of
the Sundaicus complex in Indonesia and investigate the role of these species in
malaria transmission.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0008385 
PMCID: PMC7363104
PMID: 32614914  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

