
1. Chin Med. 2020 Jul 1;15:67. doi: 10.1186/s13020-020-00344-8. eCollection 2020.

Transcriptome analyses revealed the ultraviolet B irradiation and phytohormone
gibberellins coordinately promoted the accumulation of artemisinin in Artemisia
annua L.

Ma T(#)(1), Gao H(#)(2), Zhang D(1), Shi Y(1), Zhang T(3), Shen X(1), Wu L(1),
Xiang L(1), Chen S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Beijing for Identification and Safety Evaluation of Chinese 
Medicine, Institute of Chinese Materia Medica, China Academy of Chinese Medical
Sciences, Beijing, 100700 China.
(2)School of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Life Science, Wuhan University
of Technology, Wuhan, 430070 China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, 430070 China.
(#)Contributed equally

Background: Artemisinin-based combination therapy has become the preferred
approach for treating malaria and has successfully reduced malaria-related
mortality. Currently, the main source of artemisinin is Artemisia annua L., and
thus, it is of strategic importance to enhance artemisinin contents in A. annua
plants. Phytohormones and illumination are known to be important external
environmental factor that can have notable effects on the production of secondary
metabolite. The activities of different hormones can be influenced to varying
degrees by light, and thus light and hormones may jointly regulate various
processes in plants. Here, we performed transcriptome and metabolome analyses
revealed that ultraviolet B irradiation and phytohormone gibberellins
coordinately promoted the accumulation of artemisinin in Artemisia annua.
Methods: Artemisinin analysis was performed by ultra-high performance liquid
chromatography-tandem quadrupole mass spectrometry (UPLC-ESI-QqQ-MS/MS). RNA
sequencing, GO and KEGG enrichment analysis were applied to analyzing the
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) under ultraviolet B irradiation and
gibberellins treatments. Weighted gene co-expression network (WGCNA) analyzed the
genes in artemisinin‑related modules and identified candidate hub genes in these 
modules.
Results: In this study, we found that cross-talk between UV-B and GA induced
processes leading to modifications in artemisinin accumulation. A total of 14,762
genes differentially expressed (DEGs) among different treatments were identified 
by transcriptome analysis. UV-B and GA treatments enhanced the accumulation of
artemisinin by up-regulating the expression of the key artemisinin biosynthesis
genes ADS and CYP71AV1. According to the high degree value and high expression
level, a total of 84 co-expressed transcription factors were identified. Among
them, MYB and NAC TFs mainly involved in regulating the biosynthesis of
artemisinin. Weighted gene co-expression network analysis revealed that GA + UV
in blue modules was positively correlated with artemisinin synthesis, suggesting 
that the candidate hub genes in these modules should be up-regulated to enhance
artemisinin synthesis in response to GA + UV treatment.
Conclusion: Our study demonstrated the co-regulation of artemisinin biosynthetic 
pathway genes under ultraviolet B irradiation and phytohormone gibberellins
treatment. The co-expression was analysis revealed that the selected MYB and NAC 
TFs might have regulated the artemisinin biosynthesis gene expression with ADS
and CYP71AV1 genes. Weighted gene co-expression network analysis revealed that
GA + UV treatment in blue modules was positively correlated with artemisinin
synthesis. We established the network to distinguish candidate hub genes in blue 
modules might be up-regulated to enhance artemisinin synthesis in response to
GA + UV treatment.

© The Author(s) 2020.

DOI: 10.1186/s13020-020-00344-8 
PMCID: PMC7329506
PMID: 32625243 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare that they 
have no competing interests.

