
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2020 Aug 3;14(8):e0008506. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0008506.
eCollection 2020 Aug.

Population genomics identifies a distinct Plasmodium vivax population on the
China-Myanmar border of Southeast Asia.

Brashear AM(1)(2), Fan Q(3), Hu Y(4), Li Y(4), Zhao Y(4), Wang Z(5), Cao Y(4),
Miao J(1), Barry A(6), Cui L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, 
United States of America.
(2)Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania, United States of
America.
(3)Dalian Institute of Technology, Dalian, Liaoning Province, China.
(4)Department of Immunology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, China Medical
University, Shenyang, Liaoning, China.
(5)MHC Key Laboratory of Systems Biology of Pathogens, Institute of Pathogen
Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Beijing Union Medical College,
Beijing, China.
(6)Infection Systems Epidemiology, School of Medicine, Faculty of Health, Deakin 
University, Geelong, VIC, Australia.

Plasmodium vivax has become the predominant malaria parasite and a major
challenge for malaria elimination in the Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS). Yet, our
knowledge about the evolution of P. vivax populations in the GMS is fragmental.
We performed whole genome sequencing on 23 P. vivax samples from the
China-Myanmar border (CMB) and used 21 high-coverage samples to compare to over
200 samples from the rest of the GMS. Using genome-wide single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), we analyzed population differentiation, genetic structure, 
migration and potential selection using an array of methods. The CMB parasites
displayed a higher proportion of monoclonal infections, and 52% shared over 90%
of their genomes in identity-by-descent segments with at least one other sample
from the CMB, suggesting preferential expansion of certain parasite strains in
this region, likely resulting from the P. vivax outbreaks occurring during this
study period. Principal component, admixture, fixation index and phylogenetic
analyses all identified that parasites from the CMB were genetically distinct
from parasites from eastern parts of the GMS (Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam, and
Thailand), whereas the eastern GMS parasite populations were largely
undifferentiated. Such a genetic differentiation pattern of the P. vivax
populations from the GMS parasite was largely explainable through geographic
distance. Using the genome-wide SNPs, we narrowed down to a set of 36 SNPs for
differentiating parasites from different areas of the GMS. Genome-wide scans to
determine selection in the genome with two statistical methods identified genes
potentially under drug selection, including genes associated with antifolate
resistance and genes linked to chloroquine resistance in Plasmodium falciparum.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0008506 
PMCID: PMC7425983
PMID: 32745103  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

