
1. BMC Biol. 2020 Aug 11;18(1):98. doi: 10.1186/s12915-020-00834-z.

Modelling the suppression of a malaria vector using a CRISPR-Cas9 gene drive to
reduce female fertility.

North AR(1), Burt A(2), Godfray HCJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
Ace.north@zoo.ox.ac.uk.
(2)Imperial College, London, UK.
(3)Oxford Martin School, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

BACKGROUND: Gene drives based on CRISPR-Cas9 technology are increasingly being
considered as tools for reducing the capacity of mosquito populations to transmit
malaria, and one of the most promising options is driving endonuclease genes that
reduce the fertility of female mosquitoes. In particular, there is much interest 
in constructs that target the conserved mosquito doublesex (dsx) gene such that
the emergence of functional drive-resistant alleles is unlikely. Proof of
principle that these constructs can lead to substantial population suppression
has been obtained in population cages, and they are being evaluated for use in
sub-Saharan Africa. Here, we use simulation modelling to understand the factors
affecting the spread of this type of gene drive over a one million-square
kilometre area of West Africa containing substantial environmental and social
heterogeneity.
RESULTS: We found that a driving endonuclease gene targeting female fertility
could lead to substantial reductions in malaria vector populations on a regional 
scale. The exact level of suppression is influenced by additional fitness costs
of the transgene such as the somatic expression of Cas9, and its deposition in
sperm or eggs leading to damage to the zygote. In the absence of these costs, or 
of emergent drive-resistant alleles that restore female fertility, population
suppression across the study area is predicted to stabilise at ~ 95% 4 years
after releases commence. Small additional fitness costs do not greatly affect
levels of suppression, though if the fertility of females whose offspring
transmit the construct drops by more than ~ 40%, then population suppression is
much less efficient. We show the suppression potential of a drive allele with
high fitness costs can be enhanced by engineering it also to express male bias in
the progeny of transgenic males. Irrespective of the strength of the drive
allele, the spatial model predicts somewhat less suppression than equivalent
non-spatial models, in particular in highly seasonal regions where dry season
stochasticity reduces drive efficiency. We explored the robustness of these
results to uncertainties in mosquito ecology, in particular their method of
surviving the dry season and their dispersal rates.
CONCLUSIONS: The modelling presented here indicates that considerable suppression
of vector populations can be achieved within a few years of using a female
sterility gene drive, though the impact is likely to be heterogeneous in space
and time.

DOI: 10.1186/s12915-020-00834-z 
PMCID: PMC7422583
PMID: 32782000 

