
1. Parasit Vectors. 2020 Aug 20;13(1):427. doi: 10.1186/s13071-020-04302-z.

Determinants of Plasmodium falciparum multiplicity of infection and genetic
diversity in Burkina Faso.

Sondo P(1), Derra K(2), Rouamba T(2), Nakanabo Diallo S(3), Taconet P(4),
Kazienga A(2), Ilboudo H(2), Tahita MC(2), Valéa I(2), Sorgho H(2), Lefèvre
T(4)(5)(6), Tinto H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche en Sciences de la Santé/Clinical Research Unit of Nanoro
(IRSS-URCN), Nanoro, Burkina Faso. paulsondo@yahoo.fr.
(2)Institut de Recherche en Sciences de la Santé/Clinical Research Unit of Nanoro
(IRSS-URCN), Nanoro, Burkina Faso.
(3)Institut National de Santé Publique/Centre Muraz de Bobo-Dioulasso,
Bobo-Dioulasso, Burkina Faso.
(4)Centre de Recherche en Écologie et Évolution de la Santé (CREES), Montpellier,
France.
(5)Laboratoire Mixte International sur les Vecteurs (LAMIVECT), Bobo-Dioulasso,
Burkina Faso.
(6)Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD), Centre National pour la
Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Maladies Infectieuses et Vecteurs: Ecologie,
Génétique, Evolution et Contrôle (MIVEGEC), Université de Montpellier,
Montpellier, France.

BACKGROUND: Investigating malaria transmission dynamics is essential to inform
policy decision making. Whether multiplicity of infection (MOI) dynamic from
individual infections could be a reliable malaria metric in high transmission
settings with marked variation in seasons of malaria transmission has been poorly
assessed. This study aimed at investigating factors driving Plasmodium falciparum
MOI and genetic diversity in a hyperendemic area of Burkina Faso.
METHODS: Blood samples collected from a pharmacovigilance trial were used for
polymerase chain reaction genotyping of the merozoite surface proteins 1 and 2.
MOI was defined as the number of distinct parasite genotypes co-existing within a
particular infection. Monthly rainfall data were obtained from satellite data of 
the Global Precipitation Measurement Database while monthly malaria incidence
aggregated data were extracted from District Health Information Software 2
medical data of the Center-West health regional direction.
RESULTS: In the study area, infected people harboured an average of 2.732 (±
0.056) different parasite genotypes. A significant correlation between the
monthly MOI and the monthly malaria incidence was observed, suggesting that MOI
could be a good predictor of transmission intensity. A strong effect of season on
MOI was observed, with infected patients harbouring higher number of parasite
genotypes during the rainy season as compared to the dry season. There was a
negative relationship between MOI and host age. In addition, MOI decreased with
increasing parasite densities, suggesting that there was a within-host
competition among co-infecting genetically distinct P. falciparum variants. Each 
allelic family of the msp1 and msp2 genes was present all year round with no
significant monthly fluctuation.
CONCLUSIONS: In high malaria endemic settings with marked variation in seasons of
malaria transmission, MOI represents an appropriate malaria metric which provides
useful information about the longitudinal changes in malaria transmission in a
given area. Besides transmission season, patient age and parasite density are
important factors to consider for better understanding of variations in MOI. All 
allelic families of msp1 and msp2 genes were found in both dry and rainy season. 
The approach offers the opportunity of translating genotyping data into relevant 
epidemiological information for malaria control.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-020-04302-z 
PMCID: PMC7441709
PMID: 32819420 

