
1. BMC Genomics. 2020 Sep 4;21(1):608. doi: 10.1186/s12864-020-07025-8.

Leishmania infection induces a limited differential gene expression in the sand
fly midgut.

Coutinho-Abreu IV(1), Serafim TD(2), Meneses C(2), Kamhawi S(2), Oliveira F(3),
Valenzuela JG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Vector Molecular Biology Section, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Rockville, MD, USA. iliano.vieiracoutinhoabreugomes2@nih.gov.
(2)Vector Molecular Biology Section, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Rockville, MD, USA.
(3)Vector Molecular Biology Section, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Rockville, MD, USA. loliveira@niaid.nih.gov.
(4)Vector Molecular Biology Section, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Rockville, MD, USA. jvalenzuela@niaid.nih.gov.

BACKGROUND: Sand flies are the vectors of Leishmania parasites. To develop in the
sand fly midgut, Leishmania multiplies and undergoes various stage
differentiations giving rise to the infective form, the metacyclic promastigotes.
To determine the changes in sand fly midgut gene expression caused by the
presence of Leishmania, we performed RNA-Seq of uninfected and Leishmania
infantum-infected Lutzomyia longipalpis midguts from seven different libraries
corresponding to time points which cover the various Leishmania developmental
stages.
RESULTS: The combined transcriptomes resulted in the de novo assembly of 13,841
sand fly midgut transcripts. Importantly, only 113 sand fly transcripts, about
1%, were differentially expressed in the presence of Leishmania parasites.
Further, we observed distinct differentially expressed sand fly midgut
transcripts corresponding to the presence of each of the various Leishmania
stages suggesting that each parasite stage influences midgut gene expression in a
specific manner. Two main patterns of sand fly gene expression modulation were
noted. At early time points (days 1-4), more transcripts were down-regulated by
Leishmania infection at large fold changes (> 32 fold). Among the down-regulated 
genes, the transcription factor Forkhead/HNF-3 and hormone degradation enzymes
were differentially regulated on day 2 and appear to be the upstream regulators
of nutrient transport, digestive enzymes, and peritrophic matrix proteins.
Conversely, at later time points (days 6 onwards), most of the differentially
expressed transcripts were up-regulated by Leishmania infection with small fold
changes (< 32 fold). The molecular functions of these genes have been associated 
with the metabolism of lipids and detoxification of xenobiotics.
CONCLUSION: Overall, our data suggest that the presence of Leishmania produces a 
limited change in the midgut transcript expression profile in sand flies.
Further, Leishmania modulates sand fly gene expression early on in the
developmental cycle in order to overcome the barriers imposed by the midgut, yet 
it behaves like a commensal at later time points where a massive number of
parasites in the anterior midgut results only in modest changes in midgut gene
expression.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-020-07025-8 
PMCID: PMC7487717
PMID: 32887545 

