
1. Genome Res. 2020 Oct;30(10):1533-1546. doi: 10.1101/gr.262790.120. Epub 2020 Sep 
28.

Genome variation and population structure among 1142 mosquitoes of the African
malaria vector species Anopheles gambiae and Anopheles coluzzii.

Anopheles gambiae 1000 Genomes Consortium.

Collaborators: Clarkson CS, Miles A, Harding NJ, Lucas ER, Battey CJ,
Amaya-Romero JE, Kern AD, Fontaine MC, Donnelly MJ, Lawniczak MKN, Kwiatkowski DP
(chair), Donnelly MJ (chair), Ayala D, Besansky NJ, Burt A, Caputo B, Torre AD,
Fontaine MC, Godfray HCJ, Hahn MW, Kern AD, Kwiatkowski DP, Lawniczak MKN, Midega
J, O'Loughlin S, Pinto J, Riehle MM, Sharakhov I, Schrider DR, Vernick KD,
Weetman D, Wilding CS, White BJ, Troco AAD, Pinto J, Cano BJ, Diabaté BFA,
O'Loughlin S, Burt A, Costantini CC, Rohatgi KR, Besansky NJ, Constant CDE,
Weetman D, Elissa GN, Pinto J, Nwakanma GDC, Jawara M, Essandoh GJ, Weetman D,
Coulibaly GB, Riehle MM, Vernick KD, Pinto GJ, Dinis J, Midega KJ, Mbogo C, Bejon
P, Goff MGL, Robert V, Wilding UCS, Weetman D, Mawejje HD, Donnelly MJ, Weetman
LCD, Wilding CS, Donnelly MJ, Stalker J, Rockett KA, Drury E, Mead D, Jeffreys
AE, Hubbart C, Rowlands K, Isaacs AT, Jyothi D, Malangone C, Kamali M, Simpson V,
Henrichs C, Kwiatkowski DP.

Mosquito control remains a central pillar of efforts to reduce malaria burden in 
sub-Saharan Africa. However, insecticide resistance is entrenched in malaria
vector populations, and countries with a high malaria burden face a daunting
challenge to sustain malaria control with a limited set of surveillance and
intervention tools. Here we report on the second phase of a project to build an
open resource of high-quality data on genome variation among natural populations 
of the major African malaria vector species Anopheles gambiae and Anopheles
coluzzii We analyzed whole genomes of 1142 individual mosquitoes sampled from the
wild in 13 African countries, as well as a further 234 individuals comprising
parents and progeny of 11 laboratory crosses. The data resource includes
high-confidence single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) calls at 57 million variable
sites, genome-wide copy number variation (CNV) calls, and haplotypes phased at
biallelic SNPs. We use these data to analyze genetic population structure and
characterize genetic diversity within and between populations. We illustrate the 
utility of these data by investigating species differences in isolation by
distance, genetic variation within proposed gene drive target sequences, and
patterns of resistance to pyrethroid insecticides. This data resource provides a 
foundation for developing new operational systems for molecular surveillance and 
for accelerating research and development of new vector control tools. It also
provides a unique resource for the study of population genomics and evolutionary 
biology in eukaryotic species with high levels of genetic diversity under strong 
anthropogenic evolutionary pressures.

© 2020 The Anopheles gambiae 1000 Genomes Consortium; Published by Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory Press.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.262790.120 
PMID: 32989001 

