
1. Parasit Vectors. 2020 Oct 7;13(1):507. doi: 10.1186/s13071-020-04382-x.

Assessing the acoustic behaviour of Anopheles gambiae (s.l.) dsxF mutants:
implications for vector control.

Su MP(1)(2)(3), Georgiades M(1)(2), Bagi J(1)(2), Kyrou K(4), Crisanti A(4),
Albert JT(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Ear Institute, University College London, 332 Grays Inn Road, London, WC1X
8EE, UK.
(2)The Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, London, NW1 1AT, UK.
(3)Division of Biological Science, Nagoya University, Nagoya, 464-8602, Japan.
(4)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(5)Ear Institute, University College London, 332 Grays Inn Road, London, WC1X
8EE, UK. joerg.albert@ucl.ac.uk.
(6)The Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, London, NW1 1AT, UK.
joerg.albert@ucl.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Release of gene-drive mutants to suppress Anopheles mosquito
reproduction is a promising method of malaria control. However, many scientific, 
regulatory and ethical questions remain before transgenic mosquitoes can be
utilised in the field. At a behavioural level, gene-drive carrying mutants should
be at least as sexually attractive as the wildtype populations they compete
against, with a key element of Anopheles copulation being acoustic courtship. We 
analysed sound emissions and acoustic preference in a doublesex mutant previously
used to collapse Anopheles gambiae (s.l.) cages.
METHODS: Anopheles rely on flight tones produced by the beating of their wings
for acoustic mating communication. We assessed the impact of disrupting a
female-specific isoform of the doublesex gene (dsxF) on the wing beat frequency
(WBF; measured as flight tone) of males (XY) and females (XX) in homozygous dsxF-
mutants (dsxF-/-), heterozygous dsxF- carriers (dsxF+/-) and G3 dsxF+ controls
(dsxF+/+). To exclude non-genetic influences, we controlled for temperature and
wing length. We used a phonotaxis assay to test the acoustic preferences of
mutant and control mosquitoes.
RESULTS: A previous study showed an altered phenotype only for dsxF-/- females,
who appear intersex, suggesting that the female-specific dsxF allele is
haplosufficient. We identified significant, dose-dependent increases in the WBF
of both dsxF-/- and dsxF+/- females compared to dsxF+/+ females. All female WBFs 
remained significantly lower than male equivalents, though. Males showed stronger
phonotactic responses to the WBFs of control dsxF+/+ females than to those of
dsxF+/- and dsxF-/- females. We found no evidence of phonotaxis in any female
genotype. No male genotypes displayed any deviations from controls.
CONCLUSIONS: A prerequisite for anopheline copulation is the phonotactic
attraction of males towards female flight tones within mating swarms. Reductions 
in mutant acoustic attractiveness diminish their mating efficiency and thus the
efficacy of population control efforts. Caged population assessments may not
successfully reproduce natural mating scenarios. We propose to amend existing
testing protocols to better reflect competition between mutants and target
populations. Our findings confirm that dsxF disruption has no effect on males;
for some phenotypic traits, such as female WBFs, the effects of dsxF appear
dose-dependent rather than haplosufficient.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-020-04382-x 
PMCID: PMC7539510
PMID: 33028410 

