
1. Parasit Vectors. 2020 Oct 15;13(1):516. doi: 10.1186/s13071-020-04403-9.

Anopheles gambiae (s.l.) is found where few are looking: assessing mosquito
diversity and density outside inhabited areas using diverse sampling methods.

Epopa PS(1), Millogo AA(2), Collins CM(3), North AR(4), Benedict MQ(5), Tripet
F(6), OʼLoughlin S(7), Dabiré RK(8), Ouédraogo GA(9), Diabaté A(8).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche en Sciences de la Santé/Centre Muraz, Bobo-Dioulasso,
Burkina Faso. epopastef@yahoo.fr.
(2)Institut des Sciences des Sociétés, Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso.
(3)Centre for Environmental Policy, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(4)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(5)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Atlanta, USA.
(6)Centre for Applied Entomology and Parasitology, School of Life Sciences, Keele
University, Staffordshire, UK.
(7)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(8)Institut de Recherche en Sciences de la Santé/Centre Muraz, Bobo-Dioulasso,
Burkina Faso.
(9)Laboratoire de Recherche et d'Enseignement en Santé et Biotechnologies
Animales, Université Nazi Boni (UNB), Bobo-Dioulasso, Burkina Faso.

BACKGROUND: One of the promising current approaches to curb malaria lies in
genetic vector control, the implementation of which will require an improved
understanding of the movement of genetic constructs among mosquito populations.
To predict potential gene flow from one area to another, it is important to begin
to understand mosquito dynamics outside of the commonly-sampled village areas,
and thus how genes may move between villages. This study assessed the presence
and relative abundance of mosquitoes in a 6-km corridor between two villages in
western Burkina Faso.
METHODS: The area surrounding the villages was mapped and the road between them
was used as the basis of a transect along which to sample. Five collection points
were placed along this transect. To investigate both larval and adult mosquito
presence, multiple sampling approaches were used surrounding each point:
searching for larval sites in an area of 500 m radius, swarm sampling, human
landing catches (HLC), CDC light traps and backpack aspiration catches of
potential resting sites. Sampling took place twice: in September and October
2015.
RESULTS: Adult mosquitoes from six species of Anopheles and three other genera
were found along the whole transect. Anopheles gambiae (s.l.) was the most
abundant followed by Anopheles nili and Anopheles coustani. Larvae of Anopheles
spp. were found in small pools of surface water along the whole transect, though 
their presence increased with human proximity. HLC and aspiration were the most
efficient methods of collecting adult mosquitoes along the whole transect,
indicating that there are both host-seeking and resting mosquitoes well away from
core village areas. In contrast, swarms of male mosquitoes, thought to be the
principle mating locations of Anopheles spp. mosquitoes in West Africa, were only
found close to the core village areas.
CONCLUSIONS: This preliminary study indicates that Anopheles spp. mosquitoes are 
both present and breeding in low human-density areas along transit axes and
provides both a relative evaluation of methods for use in these areas and
evidence that gene flow between Sahelian population centres is likely. More
robust and structured studies are nevertheless needed to come with stronger
conclusions.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-020-04403-9 
PMID: 33059722 

