
1. Analyst. 2020 Oct 20. doi: 10.1039/d0an01306d. [Epub ahead of print]

Development of a fluorescent distance-based paper device using loop-mediated
isothermal amplification to detect Escherichia coli in urine.

Saengsawang N(1), Ruang-Areerate T(2), Kesakomol P(3), Thita T(4), Mungthin M(2),
Dungchai W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Analytical Chemistry, Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, King
Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi, Thailand. wijitar.dun@kmutt.ac.th.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Phramongkutklao College of Medicine, Thailand.
youangtr@yahoo.com.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Phramongkutklao College of Medicine, Thailand.
(4)Drug Research Unit for Malaria, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol
University, Thailand.

The highly sensitive and selective determination of Escherichia coli (E. coli) in
urine was achieved using a SYBR™ safe loop-mediated isothermal amplification
(LAMP) method with a distance-based paper device. New primers set specific to
multi-copy the 16s rRNA gene of E. coli were designed and used in this study. The
detection sensitivity of these primers was higher than in related work and they
could be incorporated with a low-cost paper-based device to quantify E. coli in
urine at a concentration lower than 101 CFU mL-1. Regarding standard artificial
urine, a linear range of a 10-fold dilution of E. coli concentration (105-100 CFU
mL-1) with an R-square value (R2) = 0.9823 was observed directly using a
fluorescent migratory distance of the 4 μL reaction mixture in the detection zone
under blue light without the need for postreaction staining process. Based on the
device, E. coli infection could be significantly categorized into 3 groups; none,
light, and heavy levels, which is beneficial for UTI diagnosis. Hence, this
paper-based device is suitable for use with the SYBR™ Safe-LAMP assay to
semi-quantify E. coli, especially in resource-limited settings due to advantages 
of low cost, simple fabrication and operation, and no requirement for
sophisticated instruments, as well as its disposability and portability.

DOI: 10.1039/d0an01306d 
PMID: 33078771 

