
1. J Cell Sci. 1995 Apr;108 ( Pt 4):1587-96.

MHC class I molecules are an essential cell surface component involved in
Theileria parva sporozoite binding to bovine lymphocytes.

Shaw MK(1), Tilney LG, Musoke AJ, Teale AJ.

Author information: 
(1)ILRAD, Nairobi, Kenya.

The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules are ubiquitous cell 
surface molecules involved in the cell-mediated immune response. We show here,
using a number of different, independent approaches, that these proteins are an
essential component of the host cell surface receptor involved in Theileria parva
sporozoite invasion. Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) reactive with common
determinants on MHC class I molecules and with beta-2 microglobulin inhibited
sporozoite entry by specifically preventing the initial binding event. However,
in experiments using lymphocytes from heterozygous cattle in which at least four 
MHC class I gene products are expressed, mAbs which reacted with only one of
these products did not inhibit entry. Using a series of bovine deletion mutant
cell lines from which one or both MHC class I haplotypes had been lost,
sporozoite binding and entry clearly correlated with the level of class I surface
expression. While the level of sporozoite entry into cells in which one of the
MHC class I haplotypes was lost was only slightly lower than into the parent
cells, in a double deletion cell line having less than 5% of the class I
expression of the parent cells the level of infection was only 4.3% of that into 
the parent cells. Furthermore, sporozoite entry into cells from a spontaneously
arising mutant cell line exhibiting low levels of class I expression was
correspondingly low. Treatment of lymphocytes with IL-2 produced a significant
increase in host cell susceptibility and sporozoite entry and this increase
correlated with either an increase in the number of target molecules per host
cell, or in the binding of bovine MHC class I molecules to the mAbs. In
particular, a significant increase in the level of reactivity with mAb W6/32 was 
observed. Lastly, we show that parasite entry can be competitively inhibited with
an isolated sporozoite surface protein, p67. However, p67 binds weakly to
lymphocyte surface molecules and initial attempts to use p67 to isolate the
relevant host cell molecule(s) have not been successful.


PMID: 7615677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

