
1. J Biol Chem. 1999 May 14;274(20):14218-23.

Plasmepsin II, an acidic hemoglobinase from the Plasmodium falciparum food
vacuole, is active at neutral pH on the host erythrocyte membrane skeleton.

Le Bonniec S(1), Deregnaucourt C, Redeker V, Banerjee R, Grellier P, Goldberg DE,
Schrével J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Parasitaire, Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, EP 
1790 CNRS, 61 rue Buffon, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France.

Plasmepsin II, an aspartic protease from the human intraerythrocytic parasite
Plasmodium falciparum, is involved in degradation of the host cell hemoglobin
within the acidic food vacuole of the parasite. Previous characterization of
enzymatic activities from Plasmodium soluble extracts, responsible for in vitro
hydrolysis of erythrocyte spectrin, had shown that the hydrolysis process
occurred at pH 5.0 and involved aspartic protease(s) cleaving mainly within the
SH3 motif of the spectrin alpha-subunit. Therefore, we used a recombinant
construct of the erythroid SH3 motif as substrate to investigate the involvement 
of plasmepsins in spectrin hydrolysis. Using specific anti-plasmepsin II
antibodies in Western blotting experiments, plasmepsin II was detected in
chromatographic fractions enriched in the parasite SH3 hydrolase activity.
Involvement of plasmepsin II in hydrolysis was demonstrated by mass spectrometry 
identification of cleavage sites in the SH3 motif, upon hydrolysis by Plasmodium 
extract enzymatic activity, and by recombinant plasmepsin II. Furthermore,
recombinant plasmepsin II digested native spectrin at pH 6.8, either purified or 
situated in erythrocyte ghosts. Additional degradation of actin and protein 4.1
from ghosts was observed. Specific antibodies were used in confocal imaging of
schizont-infected erythrocytes to localize plasmepsin II in mature stages of the 
parasite development cycle; antibodies clearly labeled the periphery of the
parasites. Taken together, these results strongly suggest that, in addition to
hemoglobin degradation, plasmepsin II might be involved in cytoskeleton cleavage 
of infected erythrocytes.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.20.14218 
PMID: 10318841  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

