
1. Am J Hum Biol. 2001 Nov-Dec;13(6):753-60.

ACP1 and human adaptability: association with past malarial morbidity in the
Sardinian population.

Bottini E(1), Palmarino R, Lucarelli P, Lista F, Bottini N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Preventive and Social Pediatrics, Department of Biopathology and
Imaging Diagnostics, University of Rome, Tor Vergata, School of Medicine, Rome,
Italy. bottini@med.uniroma2.it

Acid Phosphatase locus 1 (ACP1) is a polymorphic enzyme controlled by a locus on 
chromosome 2 with three common codominant alleles: *A, *B, and *C. ACP1 shows two
major isoforms, F and S. The ratio of their concentration differs markedly among 
genotypes. Two functions have been proposed for the enzyme: flavin-mononucleotide
phosphatase and tyrosine phosphatase activity. An association between ACP1
polymorphism and past malarial morbidity in Sardinia and the Po Valley has been
described. Genetic polymorphisms could contribute to natural resistance or
susceptibility to the disease. On the other hand, malaria pressure may select for
genes that increase susceptibility to common diseases of modern civilization.
Thus, the association between ACP1 and malaria in Sardinia in the light of recent
understanding of the function of ACP1 and the molecular basis of malaria
pathophysiology, especially aspects of the structure of band 3 protein (B3P) and 
the role of cytokines have been revisited. There is a significant negative
correlation between ACP1 S isoform concentration, directly related to the ACP1*C 
allele, and past malarial morbidity in Sardinia. Populations subjected in the
past to a heavy malarial burden show, at present, a lower concentration of the S 
isoform compared to a nearby malaria-free population, suggesting that genotypes
with high S isoform concentration have been subjected to negative selection in a 
malarial environment. Correlation analysis and analysis of the joint G-6-PD/ACP1 
distribution suggest that the relationship between past endemic malaria and the S
isoform has not been mediated by glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G-6-PD)
deficiency, thus pointing to a direct effect of malaria on ACP1.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajhb.1121 
PMID: 11748814  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

