
1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2004 May;99(1-2):87-98.

Quantitative analysis of pro-inflammatory cytokine mRNA expression in Theileria
annulata-infected cell lines derived from resistant and susceptible cattle.

McGuire K(1), Manuja A, Russell GC, Springbett A, Craigmile SC, Nichani AK,
Malhotra DV, Glass EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genomics and Bioinformatics, Roslin Institute, Roslin,
Midlothian, Edinburgh EH25 9PS, UK. kirsty.mcguirebbsrc.ac.uk

The pathogenic mechanisms involved in tropical theileriosis, caused by the
tick-borne protozoan parasite Theileria annulata, are unclear. Pathology is
associated with the schizont stage of the parasite, which resides within bovine
macrophages. Breed-specific differences in pathology have been observed in
cattle, several Bos indicus breeds are relatively resistant to tropical
theileriosis whilst Bos taurus cattle are highly susceptible. Infected cells
express pro-inflammatory cytokines and it has been hypothesized that these
cytokines play a major role in the pathology of the disease. Therefore, using
quantitative RT-PCR we investigated the expression of the key candidates,
interleukin 1 beta (IL-1beta), IL-6 and tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha),
in T. annulata low passage infected cell lines derived ex vivo from experimental 
infection of resistant and susceptible cattle. mRNA for each cytokine was
detected in all cell lines investigated at levels higher than those observed in
resting monocytes. However, the analyses did not identify any breed-specific
differences. Therefore, these results are not consistent with the hypothesis that
differential regulation of infected cell derived pro-inflammatory cytokines
(IL-1beta, IL-6 and TNF-alpha) accounts for the breed-related differences in
resistance and susceptibility to T. annulata infection. Other, currently unknown 
mechanisms may be of greater importance.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2004.01.003 
PMID: 15113657  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

