
1. Parasitol Int. 2006 Jun;55(2):107-12. Epub 2006 Jan 4.

Down-regulation of tight junction mRNAs in human endothelial cells co-cultured
with Plasmodium falciparum-infected erythrocytes.

Susomboon P(1), Maneerat Y, Dekumyoy P, Kalambaheti T, Iwagami M, Komaki-Yasuda
K, Kawazu S, Tangpukdee N, Looareesuwan S, Kano S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Tropical Medicine, Faculty of Tropical Medicine,
Mahidol University, 420/6 Ratchavithi Road, Bangkok 10400, Thailand.

To understand the mechanism of sequestration in the microvasculature of patients 
with falciparum malaria, we examined the patterns of expression of mRNAs for
adhesion molecules (ICAM-1, VCAM-1, and E-selectin) and tight junction molecules 
(occludin, vinculin, and ZO-1) in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs)
co-cultured with Plasmodium falciparum-parasitized red blood cells (PRBCs) in
vitro. The PRBCs were collected from patients with uncomplicated, severe, or
cerebral malaria (CM). Patterns of mRNA expression in HUVECs co-cultured with
PRBCs were examined by real-time quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR). Levels of mRNAs for all the three adhesion molecules
increased with increased culture time within 3 h, regardless of the source of the
PRBCs. In contrast, the patterns of mRNA expression for the tight junction
molecules varied between the different co-cultures. When HUVECs were cultured
with PRBCs from uncomplicated malaria patients, levels of mRNAs for tight
junction molecules increased according to the culture time. HUVECs co-cultured
with PRBCs from severe malaria patients showed no change in the mRNAs levels
during 3 h of observation. When HUVECs were cultured with PRBCs from CM patients,
levels of mRNAs for tight junction proteins decreased according to the culture
time. Although the mechanisms underlying these phenomena are not clear, our
results suggest that PRBCs can alter expression of tight junction proteins in
endothelial cells at the site of sequestration and thereby influence disease
severity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2005.11.054 
PMID: 16388977  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

