
1. FASEB J. 2006 Jun;20(8):1224-6. Epub 2006 Apr 7.

Apoptosis in liver during malaria: role of oxidative stress and implication of
mitochondrial pathway.

Guha M(1), Kumar S, Choubey V, Maity P, Bandyopadhyay U.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Drug Target Discovery and Development, Central Drug Research
Institute, Chatter Manzil Palace, Mahatma Gandhi Marg, Lucknow-226001, Uttar
Pradesh, India.

Hepatic dysfunction is a common clinical complication in malaria, although its
pathogenesis remains largely unknown. Using a variety of in vivo and ex vivo
approaches, we have shown for the first time that malarial infection induces
hepatic apoptosis through augmentation of oxidative stress. Apoptosis in
hepatocyte has been confirmed by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase
(TdT)-mediated dUTP-biotin-nick-end labeling assay (TUNEL) and caspase-3
activation. Gene expression analysis using RT-PCR indicates the significant
down-regulation of Bcl-2 and up-regulation of Bax expression in liver of malaria 
infected mice suggesting the involvement of mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis.
The levels of Fas expression and caspase-8 activity in infected liver were same
as that of uninfected control mice indicating death receptor (Fas) pathway did
not contribute to liver apoptosis during malarial infection. Moreover, evidence
has been presented by confocal microscopy to show the translocation of Bax from
cytosol to mitochondria in apoptotic hepatocyte, resulting in opening of
permeability transition pores, which in turn decreases mitochondrial membrane
potential and induces cytochrome c release into cytosol. Malarial infection
induces the generation of hydroxyl radical (*OH) in liver, which may be
responsible for the induction of oxidative stress and apoptosis as administration
of *OH specific antioxidant as well as spin trap, alpha-phenyl-tert-butyl-nitrone
in malaria-infected mice significantly inhibits the development of oxidative
stress as well as induction of apoptosis. Thus, results suggest the implication
of oxidative stress induced-mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis in the
pathophysiology of hepatic dysfunction in malaria.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.05-5338fje 
PMID: 16603602  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

