
1. Br J Pharmacol. 2006 Sep;149(1):14-22. Epub 2006 Jul 24.

Atorvastatin inhibits inflammatory hypernociception.

Santodomingo-Garzón T(1), Cunha TM, Verri WA Jr, Valério DA, Parada CA, Poole S, 
Ferreira SH, Cunha FQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, University 
of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Atorvastatin is an inhibitor of the enzyme
3-hydroxyl-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase used to prevent coronary heart
disease. We have studied the analgesic effect of atorvastatin in inflammatory
models in which a sequential release of mediators (bradykinin, (BK), tumour
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) and the
chemokine, KC/CXCL) links the stimulus with release of directly acting
hypernociceptive mediators such as prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)).
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: The effects of orally administered atorvastatin on
inflammatory mechanical hypernociception in mouse paws were evaluated with an
electronic pressure-meter. Cytokines and PGE(2) were measured by ELISA and RIA.
KEY RESULTS: Treatment with atorvastatin for 3 days dose-dependently reduced
hypernociception induced by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or that following antigen
challenge in sensitized animals. Atorvastatin pre-treatment reduced
hypernociception induced by bradykinin and cytokines (TNF-alpha, IL-1beta and
KC), and the release of IL-1beta and PGE(2) in paw skin, induced by
lipopolysaccharide. The antinociceptive effect of atorvastatin on LPS-induced
hypernociception was prevented by mevalonate co-treatment without affecting serum
cholesterol levels. Hypernociception induced by PGE(2) was inhibited by
atorvastatin, suggesting intracellular antinociceptive mechanisms for
atorvastatin. The antinociceptive effect of atorvastatin upon LPS- or
PGE(2)-induced hypernociception was prevented by non-selective inhibitors of
nitric oxide synthase (NOS) but not by selective inhibition of inducible NOS or
in mice lacking this enzyme.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Antinociceptive effects of atorvastatin depend on
inhibition of cytokines and prostanoid production and on stimulation of NO
production by constitutive NOS. Our study suggests that statins may constitute a 
novel class of analgesic drugs.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0706836 
PMCID: PMC1629407
PMID: 16865092  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

