
1. PLoS One. 2007 Feb 21;2(2):e228.

Dissection of the role of PfEMP1 and ICAM-1 in the sensing of
Plasmodium-falciparum-infected erythrocytes by natural killer cells.

Baratin M(1), Roetynck S, Pouvelle B, Lemmers C, Viebig NK, Johansson S, Bierling
P, Scherf A, Gysin J, Vivier E, Ugolini S.

Author information: 
(1)Aix-Marseille Université, Faculté des Sciences de Luminy, Centre d'Immunologie
de Marseille-Luminy (CIML), Marseille, France.

BACKGROUND: Host innate immunity contributes to malaria clinical outcome by
providing protective inflammatory cytokines such as interferon-gamma, and by
shaping the adaptive immune response. Plasmodium falciparum (Pf) is the etiologic
agent of the most severe forms of human malaria. Natural Killer (NK) cells are
lymphocytes of the innate immune system that are the first effectors to produce
interferon-gamma in response to Pf. However, the molecular bases of Pf-NK cell
recognition events are unknown. Our study focuses on the role of Pf erythrocyte
membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1), a major Pf virulence factor. PfEMP1 is expressed on 
parasitized-erythrocytes and participates to vascular obstruction through the
binding to several host receptors. PfEMP1 is also a pivotal target for host
antibody response to Pf infection.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Using genetically-engineered parasite mutant
strains, a human genetic deficiency, and blocking antibodies, we identified two
receptor-ligand pairs involved in two uncoupled events occurring during the
sensing of Pf infection by NK cells. First, PfEMP1 interaction with one of its
host receptor, chondroitin sulfate A, mediates the cytoadhesion of Pf-infected
erythrocytes to human NK cell lines, but is not required for primary NK cell
activation. Second, intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), another host
receptor for PfEMP1, is mandatory for NK cell interferon-gamma response. In this 
case, ICAM-1 acts via its engagement with its host ligand, LFA-1, and not with
PfEMP1, consistent with the obligatory cross-talk of NK cells with macrophages
for their production of interferon-gamma.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: PfEMP1-independent but ICAM-1/LFA-1-dependent events
occurring during NK cell activation by Pf highlight the fundamental role of
cellular cooperation during innate immune response to malaria.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0000228 
PMCID: PMC1794133
PMID: 17311092  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

