
1. J Immunol. 2007 Mar 15;178(6):3954-61.

Disruption of CD36 impairs cytokine response to Plasmodium falciparum
glycosylphosphatidylinositol and confers susceptibility to severe and fatal
malaria in vivo.

Patel SN(1), Lu Z, Ayi K, Serghides L, Gowda DC, Kain KC.

Author information: 
(1)McLaughlin-Rotman Centre, University Health Network-Toronto General Hospital, 
McLaughlin Centre for Molecular Medicine, University of Toronto, 200 Elizabeth
Street, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

CD36 is a scavenger receptor that has been implicated in malaria pathogenesis as 
well as innate defense against blood-stage infection. Inflammatory responses to
Plasmodium falciparum GPI (pfGPI) anchors are believed to play an important role 
in innate immune response to malaria. We investigated the role of CD36 in
pfGPI-induced MAPK activation and proinflammatory cytokine secretion.
Furthermore, we explored the role of this receptor in an experimental model of
acute malaria in vivo. We demonstrate that ERK1/2, JNK, p38, and c-Jun became
phosphorylated in pfGPI-stimulated macrophages. In contrast, pfGPI-induced
phosphorylation of JNK, ERK1/2, and c-Jun was reduced in Cd36(-/-) macrophages
and Cd36(-/-) macrophages secreted significantly less TNF-alpha in response to
pfGPI than their wild-type counterparts. In addition, we demonstrate a role for
CD36 in innate immune response to malaria in vivo. Compared with wild-type mice, 
Cd36(-/-) mice experienced more severe and fatal malaria when challenged with
Plasmodium chabaudi chabaudi AS. Cd36(-/-) mice displayed a combined defect in
cytokine induction and parasite clearance with a dysregulated cytokine response
to infection, earlier peak parasitemias, higher parasite densities, and higher
mortality rates than wild-type mice. These results provide direct evidence that
pfGPI induces TNF-alpha secretion in a CD36-dependent manner and support a role
for CD36 in modulating host cytokine response and innate control of acute
blood-stage malaria infection in vivo.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.178.6.3954 
PMID: 17339496  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

