
1. Apoptosis. 2008 Jul;13(7):857-66. doi: 10.1007/s10495-008-0217-6.

Glycosylphosphatidylinositol-induced cardiac myocyte death might contribute to
the fatal outcome of Plasmodium falciparum malaria.

Wennicke K(1), Debierre-Grockiego F, Wichmann D, Brattig NW, Pankuweit S, Maisch 
B, Schwarz RT, Ruppert V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine - Cardiology, Philipps-University of Marburg, 
University Hospital, Baldingerstrasse 1, 35043 Marburg/Lahn, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) purified from Plasmodium
falciparum has been shown to play an important role as a toxin in the pathology
of malaria. Previous studies demonstrated cardiac involvement in patients
suffering from severe malaria due to P. falciparum. Therefore, we tested the
hypothesis that GPI induces apoptosis in cardiomyocytes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: By using TUNEL and caspase activity assays, we provided
evidence for apoptosis induction in cardiomyocytes by P. falciparum GPI after 48 
h of incubation. A similar result was obtained in heart cells of mice 48 h after 
in vivo injection of GPI. Gene expression analyses in GPI-treated cardiomyocytes 
showed an up-regulation of apoptotic genes (apaf-1, bax) and of a myocardial
damage marker bnp (brain natriuretic peptide), while a down-regulation was
observed for the anti-apoptotic gene bcl-2 and for the heat shock protein hsp70. 
In spite of inflammatory cytokine gene up-regulation by GPI, co-culture with
peripheral mononuclear cells (PMNCs) did not change the results obtained with
cardiomyocytes alone, indicating a direct effect of GPI on cardiac myocytes.
Co-culture with non-myocytic cardiac cells (NMCCs) resulted in up-regulation of
Hsp70 and Bcl-2 genes in GPI-treated cardiomyocytes but without repercussion on
the apoptosis level. A malaria-infected patient, presenting fulminant heart
failure showed typical signs of cardiac myocyte apoptosis demonstrating the
clinical relevance of toxin induced heart damage for the lethality of malaria.
Our studies performed in vitro and in mice suggest that the GPI could be
responsible for cardiomyocyte apoptosis that occurred in this patient.
CONCLUSION: Plasmodium falciparum GPI-induced apoptosis might participate in the 
lethality of malaria.

DOI: 10.1007/s10495-008-0217-6 
PMID: 18470700  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

