
1. PLoS Pathog. 2008 Nov;4(11):e1000201. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000201. Epub
2008 Nov 7.

Kinome-wide RNAi screen implicates at least 5 host hepatocyte kinases in
Plasmodium sporozoite infection.

Prudêncio M(1), Rodrigues CD, Hannus M, Martin C, Real E, Gonçalves LA, Carret C,
Dorkin R, Röhl I, Jahn-Hoffmann K, Luty AJ, Sauerwein R, Echeverri CJ, Mota MM.

Author information: 
(1)Unidade de Malária, Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Universidade de Lisboa,
Lisboa, Portugal.

Plasmodium sporozoites, the causative agent of malaria, are injected into their
vertebrate host through the bite of an infected Anopheles mosquito, homing to the
liver where they invade hepatocytes to proliferate and develop into merozoites
that, upon reaching the bloodstream, give rise to the clinical phase of
infection. To investigate how host cell signal transduction pathways affect
hepatocyte infection, we used RNAi to systematically test the entire kinome and
associated genes in human Huh7 hepatoma cells for their potential roles during
infection by P. berghei sporozoites. The three-phase screen covered 727 genes,
which were tested with a total of 2,307 individual siRNAs using an automated
microscopy assay to quantify infection rates and qRT-PCR to assess silencing
levels. Five protein kinases thereby emerged as top hits, all of which caused
significant reductions in infection when silenced by RNAi. Follow-up validation
experiments on one of these hits, PKCsigma (PKCzeta), confirmed the physiological
relevance of our findings by reproducing the inhibitory effect on P. berghei
infection in adult mice treated systemically with liposome-formulated
PKCsigma-targeting siRNAs. Additional cell-based analyses using a
pseudo-substrate inhibitor of PKCsigma added further RNAi-independent support,
indicating a role for host PKCsigma on the invasion of hepatocytes by
sporozoites. This study represents the first comprehensive, functional
genomics-driven identification of novel host factors involved in Plasmodium
sporozoite infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000201 
PMCID: PMC2574010
PMID: 18989463  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

