
1. PLoS One. 2009;4(3):e4956. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004956. Epub 2009 Mar 24.

Detecting linkage between a trait and a marker in a random mating population
without pedigree record.

Mano S(1), Endo TA, Oka A, Ozawa A, Gojobori T, Inoko H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Natural Sciences, Nagoya City University, Nagoya, Japan.
mano@nsc.nagoya-cu.ac.jp

Modern linkage-based approaches employing extended pedigrees are becoming
powerful tools for localizing complex quantitative trait loci. For these linkage 
mapping methods, it is necessary to reconstruct extended pedigrees which include 
living individuals, using extensive pedigree records. Unfortunately, such records
are not always easy to obtain and application of the linkage-based approaches has
been restricted. Within a finite population under random mating, latent
inbreeding rather than non-random inbreeding by consanguineous marriages is
expected to occur and is attributable to coalescence in a finite population.
Interestingly, it has been revealed that significant random inbreeding exists
even in general human populations. Random inbreeding should be used to detect the
hidden coancestry between individuals for a particular chromosomal position and
it could also have application in linkage mapping methods. Here we present a
novel method, named finite population based linkage mapping (FPL) method, to
detect linkage between a quantitative trait and a marker via random inbreeding in
a finite population without pedigree records. We show how to estimate coancestry 
for a chromosomal position between individuals by using multipoint Bayesian
estimation. Subsequently, we describe the FPL method for detecting linkage via
interval mapping method using a nonparametric test. We show that the FPL method
does work via simulated data. For a random sample from a finite population, the
FPL method is more powerful than a standard pedigree-based linkage mapping method
with using genotypes of all parents of the sample. In addition, the FPL method
was demonstrated by actual microsatellite genotype data of 750 Japanese
individuals that are unrelated according to pedigree records to map a known
Psoriasis susceptible locus. For samples without pedigree records, it was
suggested that the FPL method require limited number of individuals, therefore
would be better than other methods using thousands of individuals.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004956 
PMCID: PMC2655708
PMID: 19308260  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

