
1. Int J Parasitol. 2009 Aug;39(10):1099-108. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2009.02.020.
Epub 2009 Mar 19.

The protozoan parasite Theileria annulata alters the differentiation state of the
infected macrophage and suppresses musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene (MAF)
transcription factors.

Jensen K(1), Makins GD, Kaliszewska A, Hulme MJ, Paxton E, Glass EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics & Genomics, The Roslin Institute and Royal (Dick) School 
of Veterinary Studies, University of Edinburgh, Roslin Biocentre, Midlothian EH25
9PS, UK. Kirsty.Jensen@roslin.ed.ac.uk

The tick-borne protozoan parasite Theileria annulata causes a debilitating
disease of cattle called Tropical Theileriosis. The parasite predominantly
invades bovine macrophages (m phi) and induces host cell transformation by a
mechanism that has not been fully elucidated. Infection is associated with loss
of characteristic m phi functions and phenotypic markers, indicative of host cell
de-differentiation. We have investigated the effect of T. annulata infection on
the expression of the m phi differentiation marker c-maf. The up-regulation of
c-maf mRNA levels observed during bovine monocyte differentiation to m phi was
suppressed by T. annulata infection. Furthermore, mRNA levels for c-maf and the
closely related transcription factor mafB were significantly lower in established
T. annulata-infected cell-lines than in bovine monocyte-derived m phi. Treatment 
of T. annulata-infected cells with the theileriacidal drug buparvaquone induced
up-regulation of c-maf and mafB, which correlated with altered expression of
down-stream target genes, e.g. up-regulation of integrin B7 and down-regulation
of IL12A. Furthermore, T. annulata infection is associated with the suppression
of the transcription factors, Pu.1 and RUNX1, and colony stimulating factor 1
receptor (CSF1R) which are also involved in the regulation of monocyte/m phi
differentiation. We believe these results provide the first direct evidence that 
T. annulata modulates the host m phi differentiation state, which may diminish
the defence capabilities of the infected cell and/or promote cell proliferation. 
Musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene (MAF) transcription factors play an
important role in cell proliferation, differentiation and survival; therefore,
regulation of these genes may be a major mechanism employed by T. annulata to
survive within the infected m phi.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2009.02.020 
PMCID: PMC2723921
PMID: 19303416  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

