
1. Infect Immun. 1991 Dec;59(12):4540-6.

Effects of gamma interferon, tumor necrosis factor alpha, and interleukin-2 on
infection and proliferation of Theileria parva-infected bovine lymphoblasts and
production of interferon by parasitized cells.

DeMartini JC(1), Baldwin CL.

Author information: 
(1)International Laboratory for Research on Animal Diseases, Nairobi, Kenya.

Theileria parva is a protozoan parasite that infects bovine B cells and alpha
beta and gamma delta T cells and transforms them into continually proliferating
cells. CD4+ T. parva-antigen-specific immune T cells have been shown to produce
cytokines in response to stimulation with parasitized cells, and T.
parva-infected lymphocytes produce and consume T-cell growth factors and
interleukin-2 (IL-2). To ascertain the role of T-cell cytokines on T. parva
infections, we evaluated recombinant gamma interferon (rIFN-gamma), rIL-2, and
tumor necrosis factor alpha (rTNF-alpha) for their effects on establishment,
proliferation, and survival of parasitized cells. The results indicate that
neither rIFN-gamma nor rTNF-alpha had an enhancing or inhibitory effect on the
growth of established T. parva-infected T-cell clones, whereas bovine rIL-2
increased the proliferation of infected B-cell and alpha beta T-cell clones but
not that of gamma delta T-cell clones. To evaluate the effects of the cytokines
on establishment of parasitized cell lines, peripheral blood mononuclear cells
were cultured in their presence immediately following infection with T. parva
sporozoites. Neither rIFN-gamma nor rIL-2 altered the proportion of cells
initially developing schizonts, but both enhanced establishment of infected cell 
lines by about twofold. In contrast, rTNF-alpha resulted in about a 33% decrease 
in the proportion of schizont-infected cells. Inhibitory effects on establishment
of parasitized cell lines by rTNF-alpha were no longer apparent by 12 days
following infection. Tests conducted during this study indicated that T.
parva-infected lymphocytes also spontaneously produce IFN that is neutralized by 
acidic pH treatment. In conclusion, we speculate that none of these T-cell
cytokines are likely to have a profound inhibitory effect in vivo on T. parva
infections. Instead, IFN-gamma and IL-2 may facilitate the establishment of
infection by T. parva.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.59.12.4540-4546.1991 
PMCID: PMC259075
PMID: 1937812  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

