
1. Am J Clin Nutr. 2010 Jan;91(1):200-7. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.2009.28260. Epub 2009 Nov
18.

alpha-Tocopherol transfer protein inhibition is effective in the prevention of
cerebral malaria in mice.

Herbas MS(1), Okazaki M, Terao E, Xuan X, Arai H, Suzuki H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit for Functional Genomics, National Research Center for Protozoan 
Diseases, Obihiro University of Agriculture, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Nutritional status likely plays an important role in determining the 
outcome of protozoan infections. Despite the evidence of Plasmodium sensitivity
to oxidative stress, the potential role of vitamin E, a free radical scavenger,
on the outcome of cerebral malaria (CM) has yet to be elucidated.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the influence of vitamin E on Plasmodium parasite
development and murine CM outcome, alpha-tocopherol transfer protein (alpha-TTP),
a regulator of vitamin E in the host circulation, was abrogated.
DESIGN: alpha-TTP knockout mice were infected with Plasmodium berghei ANKA, and
survival rate, parasitemia, brain histologic alterations, and brain barrier
permeability were assessed. In addition, mRNA expression of the cytokines and
adhesion molecules involved in this neurologic pathology were monitored.
RESULTS: alpha-TTP knockout mice infected with P. berghei ANKA did not exhibit
any clinical or pathologic signs of CM, and a histologic analysis of the brain
tissues in these animals showed no alteration of blood-brain barrier integrity
compared with that in control mice. Interestingly, protection of the blood-brain 
barrier in these infected alpha-TTP knockout mice was lost when dietary
supplementation with vitamin E was added to their diet. Moreover, interleukins
and adhesion molecule transcripts in the brain of control mice were significantly
up-regulated compared with those in the alpha-TTP knockout mice.
CONCLUSION: It appears that a deficiency of alpha-tocopherol in the circulation
prevents CM and suggests that alpha-TTP is a putative target for the early
prevention of CM.

DOI: 10.3945/ajcn.2009.28260 
PMID: 19923370  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

