
1. Malar J. 2010 Jun 9;9:155. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-9-155.

Cerebral malaria: insights from host-parasite protein-protein interactions.

Rao A(1), Kumar MK, Joseph T, Bulusu G.

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences Division, TCS Innovation Labs Hyderabad, Tata Consultancy
Services Ltd, 1, Software Units Layout, Madhapur, Hyderabad-500081, India.
adityar.rao@tcs.com

BACKGROUND: Cerebral malaria is a form of human malaria wherein Plasmodium
falciparum-infected red blood cells adhere to the blood capillaries in the brain,
potentially leading to coma and death. Interactions between parasite and host
proteins are important in understanding the pathogenesis of this deadly form of
malaria. It is, therefore, necessary to study available protein-protein
interactions to identify lesser known interactions that could throw light on key 
events of cerebral malaria.
METHODS: Sequestration, haemostasis dysfunction, systemic inflammation and
neuronal damage are key processes of cerebral malaria. Key events were identified
from literature as being crucial to these processes. An integrated interactome
was created using available experimental and predicted datasets as well as from
literature. Interactions from this interactome were filtered based on Gene
Ontology and tissue-specific annotations, and further analysed for relevance to
the key events.
RESULTS: PfEMP1 presentation, platelet activation and astrocyte dysfunction were 
identified as the key events influencing the disease. 48896 host-parasite along
with other host-parasite, host-host and parasite-parasite protein-protein
interactions obtained from a disease-specific corpus were combined to form an
integrated interactome. Filtering of the interactome resulted in five
host-parasite PPI, six parasite-parasite and two host-host PPI. The analysis of
these interactions revealed the potential significance of apolipoproteins and
temperature/Hsp expression on efficient PfEMP1 presentation; role of MSP-1 in
platelet activation; effect of parasite proteins in TGF-beta regulation and the
role of albumin in astrocyte dysfunction.
CONCLUSIONS: This work links key host-parasite, parasite-parasite and host-host
protein-protein interactions to key processes of cerebral malaria and generates
hypotheses for disease pathogenesis based on a filtered interaction dataset.
These hypotheses provide novel and significant insights to cerebral malaria.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-9-155 
PMCID: PMC2891816
PMID: 20529383  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

