
1. J Immunol. 2011 Jan 15;186(2):1091-6. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002256. Epub 2010
Dec 13.

An intact canonical NF-κB pathway is required for inflammatory gene expression in
response to hypoxia.

Fitzpatrick SF(1), Tambuwala MM, Bruning U, Schaible B, Scholz CC, Byrne A,
O'Connor A, Gallagher WM, Lenihan CR, Garvey JF, Howell K, Fallon PG, Cummins EP,
Taylor CT.

Author information: 
(1)UCD Conway Institute, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland.

Hypoxia is a feature of the microenvironment in a number of chronic inflammatory 
conditions due to increased metabolic activity and disrupted perfusion at the
inflamed site. Hypoxia contributes to inflammation through the regulation of gene
expression via key oxygen-sensitive transcriptional regulators including the
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) and NF-κB. Recent studies have revealed a high
degree of interdependence between HIF and NF-κB signaling; however, the relative 
contribution of each to hypoxia-induced inflammatory gene expression remains
unclear. In this study, we use transgenic mice expressing luciferase under the
control of NF-κB to demonstrate that hypoxia activates NF-κB in the heart and
lungs of mice in vivo. Using small interfering RNA targeted to the p65 subunit of
NF-κB, we confirm a unidirectional dependence of hypoxic HIF-1α accumulation upon
an intact canonical NF-κB pathway in cultured cells. Cyclooxygenase-2 and other
key proinflammatory genes are transcriptionally induced by hypoxia in a manner
that is both HIF-1 and NF-κB dependent, and in mouse embryonic fibroblasts
lacking an intact canonical NF-κB pathway, there is a loss of hypoxia-induced
inflammatory gene expression. Finally, under conditions of hypoxia, HIF-1α and
the p65 subunit of NF-κB directly bind to the cyclooxygenase-2 promoter. These
results implicate an essential role for NF-κB signaling in inflammatory gene
expression in response to hypoxia both through the regulation of HIF-1 and
through direct effects upon target gene expression.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002256 
PMID: 21149600  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

