
1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2011 Aug;10(8):M110.006411. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M110.006411.
Epub 2011 May 10.

Quantitative time-course profiling of parasite and host cell proteins in the
human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

Foth BJ(1), Zhang N, Chaal BK, Sze SK, Preiser PR, Bozdech Z.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang
Drive, Singapore 637551.

Studies of the Plasmodium falciparum transcriptome have shown that the tightly
controlled progression of the parasite through the intra-erythrocytic
developmental cycle (IDC) is accompanied by a continuous gene expression cascade 
in which most expressed genes exhibit a single transcriptional peak. Because the 
biochemical and cellular functions of most genes are mediated by the encoded
proteins, understanding the relationship between mRNA and protein levels is
crucial for inferring biological activity from transcriptional gene expression
data. Although studies on other organisms show that <50% of protein abundance
variation may be attributable to corresponding mRNA levels, the situation in
Plasmodium is further complicated by the dynamic nature of the cyclic gene
expression cascade. In this study, we simultaneously determined mRNA and protein 
abundance profiles for P. falciparum parasites during the IDC at 2-hour
resolution based on oligonucleotide microarrays and two-dimensional differential 
gel electrophoresis protein gels. We find that most proteins are represented by
more than one isoform, presumably because of post-translational modifications.
Like transcripts, most proteins exhibit cyclic abundance profiles with one peak
during the IDC, whereas the presence of functionally related proteins is highly
correlated. In contrast, the abundance of most parasite proteins peaks
significantly later (median 11 h) than the corresponding transcripts and often
decreases slowly in the second half of the IDC. Computational modeling indicates 
that the considerable and varied incongruence between transcript and protein
abundance may largely be caused by the dynamics of translation and protein
degradation. Furthermore, we present cyclic abundance profiles also for
parasite-associated human proteins and confirm the presence of five human
proteins with a potential role in antioxidant defense within the parasites.
Together, our data provide fundamental insights into transcript-protein
relationships in P. falciparum that are important for the correct interpretation 
of transcriptional data and that may facilitate the improvement and development
of malaria diagnostics and drug therapy.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M110.006411 
PMCID: PMC3149090
PMID: 21558492  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

