
1. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2011 Aug 15;4(6):566-74. Epub 2011 Jul 23.

Quantitation of brain edema and localisation of aquaporin 4 expression in
relation to susceptibility to experimental cerebral malaria.

Ampawong S(1), Combes V, Hunt NH, Radford J, Chan-Ling T, Pongponratn E, Grau GE.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Immunology Unit, Dept. of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and Bosch
Institute, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.

The pathogenic mechanisms underlying the occurrence of cerebral malaria (CM) are 
still incompletely understood but, clearly, cerebral complications may result
from concomitant microvessel obstruction and inflammation. The extent to which
brain edema contributes to pathology has not been investigated. Using the model
of P. berghei ANKA infection, we compared brain microvessel morphology of
CM-susceptible and CM-resistant mice. By quantitative planimetry, we provide
evidence that CM is characterized by enlarged perivascular spaces (PVS). We show 
a dramatic aquaporin 4 (AQP4) upregulation, selectively at the level of
astrocytic foot processes, in both CM and non-CM disease, but significantly more 
pronounced in mice with malarial-induced neurological syndrome. This suggests
that a threshold of AQP4 expression is needed to lead to neurovascular pathology,
a view that is supported by significantly higher levels in mice with clinically
overt CM. Numbers of intravascular leukocytes significantly correlated with both 
PVS enlargement and AQP4 overexpression. Thus, brain edema could be a
contributing factor in CM pathogenesis and AQP4, specifically in its astrocytic
location, a key molecule in this mechanism. Since experimental CM is associated
with substantial brain edema, it models paediatric CM better than the adult
syndrome and it is tempting to evaluate AQP4 in the former context. If AQP4
changes are confirmed in human CM, it may represent a novel target for
therapeutic intervention.


PMCID: PMC3160608
PMID: 21904632  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

