
1. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(10):e1002982. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002982. Epub 2012
Oct 25.

Neuroimmunological blood brain barrier opening in experimental cerebral malaria.

Nacer A(1), Movila A, Baer K, Mikolajczak SA, Kappe SH, Frevert U.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Parasitology, Department of Microbiology, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, New York, United States of America.

Plasmodium falciparum malaria is responsible for nearly one million annual deaths
worldwide. Because of the difficulty in monitoring the pathogenesis of cerebral
malaria in humans, we conducted a study in various mouse models to better
understand disease progression in experimental cerebral malaria (ECM). We
compared the effect on the integrity of the blood brain barrier (BBB) and the
histopathology of the brain of P. berghei ANKA, a known ECM model, P. berghei
NK65, generally thought not to induce ECM, P. yoelii 17XL, originally reported to
induce human cerebral malaria-like histopathology, and P. yoelii YM. As expected,
P. berghei ANKA infection caused neurological signs, cerebral hemorrhages, and
BBB dysfunction in CBA/CaJ and Swiss Webster mice, while Balb/c and A/J mice were
resistant. Surprisingly, PbNK induced ECM in CBA/CaJ mice, while all other mice
were resistant. P. yoelii 17XL and P. yoelii YM caused lethal hyperparasitemia in
all mouse strains; histopathological alterations, BBB dysfunction, or
neurological signs were not observed. Intravital imaging revealed that infected
erythrocytes containing mature parasites passed slowly through capillaries making
intimate contact with the endothelium, but did not arrest. Except for relatively 
rare microhemorrhages, mice with ECM presented no obvious histopathological
alterations that would explain the widespread disruption of the BBB. Intravital
imaging did reveal, however, that postcapillary venules, but not capillaries or
arterioles, from mice with ECM, but not hyperparasitemia, exhibit platelet
marginalization, extravascular fibrin deposition, CD14 expression, and extensive 
vascular leakage. Blockage of LFA-1 mediated cellular interactions prevented
leukocyte adhesion, vascular leakage, neurological signs, and death from ECM. The
endothelial barrier-stabilizing mediators imatinib and FTY720 inhibited vascular 
leakage and neurological signs and prolonged survival to ECM. Thus, it appears
that neurological signs and coma in ECM are due to regulated opening of
paracellular-junctional and transcellular-vesicular fluid transport pathways at
the neuroimmunological BBB.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002982 
PMCID: PMC3486917
PMID: 23133375  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

