
1. Am J Vet Res. 2013 Jun;74(6):901-9. doi: 10.2460/ajvr.74.6.901.

Systemic immune responses in Cytauxzoon felis-infected domestic cats.

Frontera-Acevedo K(1), Balsone NM, Dugan MA, Makemson CR, Sellers LB, Brown HM,
Peterson DS, Creevy KE, Garner BC, Sakamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize systemic immune responses in Cytauxzoon felis-infected
cats.
SAMPLE: Blood and lung samples obtained from 27 cats.
PROCEDURES: Cats were allocated into 4 groups: cats that died of cytauxzoonosis, 
acutely ill C felis-infected cats, healthy survivors of C felis infection, and
healthy uninfected cats. Serum concentrations of tumor necrosis factor-α and
interleukin-1 β were measured and serum proteins characterized. Blood smears were
stained immunocytochemically and used to assess immunoglobulin deposition.
Immunohistochemical expression of CD18 and tumor necrosis factor-α were compared 
in lung tissues obtained from cats that died and healthy uninfected cats. A
real-time reverse-transcription PCR assay for CD18 expression was performed on
selected blood samples from all groups.
RESULTS: Concentrations of both cytokines were greater and serum albumin
concentrations were significantly lower in cats that died of cytauxzoonosis,
compared with results for all other groups. Erythrocytes from acutely ill cats
and survivors of C felis infection had staining for plasmalemmal IgM, whereas
erythrocytes from the other groups did not. Increased staining of C
felis-infected monocytes and interstitial neutrophils for CD18 was detected. The 
real-time reverse-transcription PCR assay confirmed a relative increase in CD18
expression in cats that died of cytauxzoonosis and acutely ill cats, compared
with expression in other groups. Immunostaining for TNF-α in lung samples
confirmed a local proinflammatory response.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Results indicated immunopathologic responses 
were greater in cats that died of C felis infection than in cats that survived C 
felis infection.

DOI: 10.2460/ajvr.74.6.901 
PMID: 23718659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

