
1. J Vet Intern Med. 2013 Sep-Oct;27(5):1172-8. doi: 10.1111/jvim.12146. Epub 2013
Jul 22.

Markers of coagulation activation, endothelial stimulation, and inflammation in
dogs with babesiosis.

Barić Rafaj R(1), Kuleš J, Selanec J, Vrkić N, Zovko V, Zupančič M, Trampuš
Bakija A, Matijatko V, Crnogaj M, Mrljak V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Zagreb, Croatia.

BACKGROUND: Babesia infections in dogs can result in a wide range of clinical and
laboratory presentations, including coagulopathy. Expression of intercellular
adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) and von Willebrand factor (vWF) in dogs with
babesiosis is unknown.
OBJECTIVES: Whether inflammation in babesiosis triggers activation of ICAM-1 and 
the coagulation system.
ANIMALS: Twelve and 10 dogs with naturally occurring babesiosis before and after 
antiparasitic treatment, respectively, were compared with 10 healthy dogs.
METHODS: In this prospective study, diagnosis was made by blood smear examination
and confirmed by PCR. C-reactive protein (CRP), soluble intercellular adhesion
molecule 1 (sICAM-1), and von Willebrand factor (vWF) levels were measured by a
canine ELISA kit, fibrinogen (FIB) and factor VIII activity levels were measured 
by coagulometric methods, and blood cell counts (WBC, RBC, PLT) were determined
with an automatic analyzer.
RESULTS: Compared to healthy dogs, the CRP, sICAM-1, and FIB concentrations were 
significantly increased before therapy and remained high for 3 days after therapy
in dogs with babesiosis. vWF activity was significantly decreased in dogs with
babesiosis before treatment. FVIII activity did not differ between dogs with
babesiosis and healthy dogs. WBC; RBC and PLT were significantly lower before
treatment and normalized by 3 days after treatment.
CONCLUSION AND CLINICAL IMPORTANCE: A proinflammatory condition in babesiosis
appears to influence endothelial dysfunction and hemostatic activity. Although
clearly beneficial for the parasite, sequestered blood cells can obstruct blood
flow in small vessels, promote an inflammatory state, and could increase the
severity of babesiosis.

Copyright © 2013 by the American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/jvim.12146 
PMID: 23875771  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

