
1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Mar 6;10(3):e1003980. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003980.
eCollection 2014 Mar.

PPARγ agonists improve survival and neurocognitive outcomes in experimental
cerebral malaria and induce neuroprotective pathways in human malaria.

Serghides L(1), McDonald CR(2), Lu Z(2), Friedel M(3), Cui C(4), Ho KT(5), Mount 
HT(6), Sled JG(7), Kain KC(8).

Author information: 
(1)Toronto General Research Institute, University Health Network, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada; SA Rotman Laboratories, Sandra Rotman Centre for Global Health, 
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Women's College Research
Institute, Women's College Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)SA Rotman Laboratories, Sandra Rotman Centre for Global Health, University
Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Tropical Disease Unit, Division of
Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.
(3)Mouse Imaging Centre, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Tropical Disease Unit, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of
Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada;
Department of Psychiatry, Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.
(7)Mouse Imaging Centre, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada;
Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(8)Toronto General Research Institute, University Health Network, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada; SA Rotman Laboratories, Sandra Rotman Centre for Global Health, 
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Tropical Disease Unit,
Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Cerebral malaria (CM) is associated with a high mortality rate, and long-term
neurocognitive impairment in approximately one third of survivors. Adjunctive
therapies that modify the pathophysiological processes involved in CM may improve
outcome over anti-malarial therapy alone. PPARγ agonists have been reported to
have immunomodulatory effects in a variety of disease models. Here we report that
adjunctive therapy with PPARγ agonists improved survival and long-term
neurocognitive outcomes in the Plasmodium berghei ANKA experimental model of CM. 
Compared to anti-malarial therapy alone, PPARγ adjunctive therapy administered to
mice at the onset of CM signs, was associated with reduced endothelial
activation, and enhanced expression of the anti-oxidant enzymes SOD-1 and
catalase and the neurotrophic factors brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)
and nerve growth factor (NGF) in the brains of infected mice. Two months
following infection, mice that were treated with anti-malarials alone
demonstrated cognitive dysfunction, while mice that received PPARγ adjunctive
therapy were completely protected from neurocognitive impairment and from
PbA-infection induced brain atrophy. In humans with P. falciparum malaria, PPARγ 
therapy was associated with reduced endothelial activation and with induction of 
neuroprotective pathways, such as BDNF. These findings provide insight into
mechanisms conferring improved survival and preventing neurocognitive injury in
CM, and support the evaluation of PPARγ agonists in human CM.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003980 
PMCID: PMC3946361
PMID: 24603727  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

