
1. Neuroscience. 2015 Jan 22;284:920-933. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.10.062.
Epub 2014 Nov 13.

Evidence for the contribution of adult neurogenesis and hippocampal cell death in
experimental cerebral malaria cognitive outcome.

de Miranda AS(1), Brant F(2), Campos AC(2), Vieira LB(3), Rocha NP(4), Cisalpino 
D(5), Binda NS(6), Rodrigues DH(7), Ransohoff RM(8), Machado FS(2), Rachid MA(9),
Teixeira AL(10).

Author information: 
(1)Postgraduate Program in Health Sciences: Infectious Diseases and Tropical
Medicine, School of Medicine, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte,
MG, Brazil; Immunopharmacology Group, Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, 
Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo
Horizonte, MG, Brazil; Neuroscience Branch, Interdisciplinary Laboratory of
Medical Investigation, School of Medicine, Federal University of Minas Gerais,
Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil; Neuroinflammation Research Center, Department of
Neuroscience, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.
Electronic address: mirandas.aline@gmail.com.
(2)Postgraduate Program in Health Sciences: Infectious Diseases and Tropical
Medicine, School of Medicine, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte,
MG, Brazil; Immunopharmacology Group, Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, 
Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo
Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal
University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(4)Immunopharmacology Group, Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, Institute
of Biological Sciences, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG,
Brazil; Neuroscience Branch, Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Medical
Investigation, School of Medicine, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo
Horizonte, MG, Brazil; Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Biological
Sciences, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal
University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(6)National Institute of Science and Technology in Molecular Medicine, School of 
Medicine, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(7)Immunopharmacology Group, Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, Institute
of Biological Sciences, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG,
Brazil; Neuroscience Branch, Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Medical
Investigation, School of Medicine, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo
Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(8)Neuroinflammation Research Center, Department of Neuroscience, Lerner Research
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(9)Department of Pathology, Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal University 
of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(10)Postgraduate Program in Health Sciences: Infectious Diseases and Tropical
Medicine, School of Medicine, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte,
MG, Brazil; Immunopharmacology Group, Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, 
Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo
Horizonte, MG, Brazil; Neuroscience Branch, Interdisciplinary Laboratory of
Medical Investigation, School of Medicine, Federal University of Minas Gerais,
Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil. Electronic address: altexr@gmail.com.

Cognitive dysfunction is a major sign of cerebral malaria (CM). However, the
underlying mechanisms of CM cognitive outcome remain poorly understood. A body of
evidence suggests that adult neurogenesis may play a role in learning and memory 
processes. It has also been reported that these phenomena can be regulated by the
immune system. We hypothesized that memory dysfunction in CM results from
hippocampal neurogenesis impairment mediated by the deregulated immune response
during the acute phase of CM. C57Bl/6 mice were infected with Plasmodium berghei 
ANKA (PbA) strain, using a standardized inoculation of 10(6) parasitized
erythrocytes. Long-term working memory was evaluated using the novel object
recognition test. The mRNA expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor
(BDNF), tropomyosin-receptor-kinase (TRK-B) and nerve growth factor (NGF) in the 
frontal cortex and hippocampus was estimated by real-time polymerase chain
reaction (PCR). The protein levels of cytokine interleukin-2 (IL-2), IL-4, IL-6, 
IL-10, interferon-γ (IFN-γ), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), and CCL11 and
neurotrophins BDNF and NGF were determined using a cytometric bead array (CBA)
kit or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Cell viability in the hippocampus was
analyzed by Confocal Microscopy. Neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus was determined
through quantification of doublecortin (DCX) positive cells. PbA-infected mice
presented working memory impairment on day 5 post-infection. At this same time
point, CM mice exhibited a decrease in DCX-positive cells in the dentate gyrus in
parallel with increased cell death and elevated inflammatory cytokines (IL-6,
TNF-α, IFN-γ and CCL11) in the hippocampus and frontal cortex. A significant
reduction of BDNF mRNA expression was also found. IL-6 and TNF-α correlated
negatively with BDNF and NGF levels in the hippocampus of CM mice. In summary, we
provide further evidence that neuroinflammation following PbA-infection
influences neurotrophin expression, impairs adult hippocampal neurogenesis and
increases hippocampal cell death in association with memory impairment following 
CM course. The current study identified potential mediators of memory impairment 
in CM.

Copyright © 2014 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.10.062 
PMID: 25451296  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

