
1. J Infect. 2015 Nov;71(5):587-96. doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2015.08.005. Epub 2015 Aug
21.

Is asymptomatic malaria really asymptomatic? Hematological, vascular and
inflammatory effects of asymptomatic malaria parasitemia.

de Mast Q(1), Brouwers J(2), Syafruddin D(3), Bousema T(4), Baidjoe AY(5), de
Groot PG(2), van der Ven AJ(6), Fijnheer R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands; Department of Clinical Chemistry and Haematology, University
Medical Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
Quirijn.demast@radboudumc.nl.
(2)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Haematology, University Medical Centre,
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Eijkman Institute for Molecular Biology, Jakarta, Indonesia; Department of
Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Hasanuddin University, Makassar, Indonesia.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Department of Immunology and Infection, London School 
of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Medical Microbiology, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.

Asymptomatic malaria infections are highly prevalent in malaria endemic regions
and most of these infections remain undiagnosed and untreated. Whereas
conventional malaria symptoms are by definition absent, little is known on the
more subtle health consequences of these infections. The aim of our study was to 
analyze the hematologic, vascular and inflammatory effects of patent and
subpatent asymptomatic malaria parasitemia in children and adults on the
Indonesian island Sumba. Both children and adults with parasitemia had increased 
high-sensitive C-reactive protein levels compared to aparasitemic individuals. In
addition, children, but not adults with parasitemia also had lower platelet
counts and Hb levels and higher levels of von Willebrand factor and platelet
factor-4, markers of endothelial and platelet activation, respectively. These
findings suggest that asymptomatic malaria infections have subtle health
consequences, especially in children, and should be regarded as potentially
harmful.

Copyright © 2015 The British Infection Association. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinf.2015.08.005 
PMID: 26304688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

