
1. Acta Trop. 2016 Sep;161:55-61. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2016.05.014. Epub 2016 
May 27.

An experimental ovine Theileriosis: The effect of Theileria lestoquardi infection
on cardiovascular system in sheep.

Yaghfoori S(1), Razmi GR(2), Mohri M(3), Razavizadeh AR(4), Movassaghi AR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ferdowsi
University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran. Electronic address:
Saeed.yaghfoori@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ferdowsi
University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran. Electronic address: razmi@um.ac.ir.
(3)Department of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ferdowsi
University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran. Electronic address:
mohri@ferdowsi.um.ac.ir.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ferdowsi
University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran. Electronic address: razavizadeh@um.ac.ir.
(5)Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ferdowsi
University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran. Electronic address: armov@um.ac.ir.

The malignant ovine theileriosis is caused by Theileria lestoquardi, which is
highly pathogenic in sheep. Theileriosis involves different organs in ruminants, 
but the effect of the disease on the cardiovascular system is unclear. To
understand the pathogenesis of T. lestoquardi on the cardiovascular system,
Baluchi breed sheep were infected with the mentioned parasite by releasing unfed 
adults of Hyalomma anatolicum anatolicum, which were infected with T.
lestoquardi. The infected sheep were clinically examined on days 0, 2, 5, 7, 10, 
12, 14, 17, and 21, and the blood samples were collected for biochemical
parameters measurement. At termination of the experiment, the infected sheep were
euthanized and pathological examinations of heart tissue were conducted. During
experimental infection of sheep with T. lestoquardi, activities of cardiac
troponin I (cTnI), lactate dehydrogenase, and aspartate aminotransferase, were
significantly increased (P˂0.05), while a conspicuous decrease (P˂0.05) was
observed in creatine phosphokinase activities. Alterations made in biochemical
factors almost coincided with the presence of piroplasm in the blood and schizont
in lymph nodes. Maximum and minimum of parasitemia in the sheep stood between
3.3% and 0.28%, respectively. In addition, electrocardiography revealed sinus
tachycardia, sinus arrhythmia, sino-atrial block and ST-elevation, atrial
premature beat, and alteration in QRS and in T waves' amplitude. Heart
histopathological examination showed hyperemia, infiltration of mononuclear
inflammatory cells into interstitial tissue, endocarditis, and focal necrosis of 
cardiac muscle cells. In addition, in one of the sheep, definite occurrence of
infarction was observed. The results indicate that T. lestoquardi infection has
devastating pathological impacts on the cardiovascular system of sheep.
Furthermore, measurement of the cTnI amount is a useful biochemical factor for
diagnosis and for better understanding of the severity and progression of the
disease and its effects on cardiac tissue.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2016.05.014 
PMID: 27242073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

