
1. PLoS Pathog. 2016 Aug 24;12(8):e1005831. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005831.
eCollection 2016 Aug.

Placental Sequestration of Plasmodium falciparum Malaria Parasites Is Mediated by
the Interaction Between VAR2CSA and Chondroitin Sulfate A on Syndecan-1.

Ayres Pereira M(1), Mandel Clausen T(1)(2), Pehrson C(1), Mao Y(3)(4), Resende
M(1), Daugaard M(2), Riis Kristensen A(5), Spliid C(1), Mathiesen L(6), E Knudsen
L(6), Damm P(7), G Theander T(1), R Hansson S(8), A Nielsen M(1), Salanti A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of Immunology and Microbiology,
University of Copenhagen and Copenhagen University Hospital, Denmark.
(2)Vancouver Prostate Centre, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America.
(4)Copenhagen Center for Glycomics and Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency,
Vancouver, Canada.
(6)Section of Environmental Health, Department of Public Health, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(7)Department of Obstetrics, Rigshospitalet, Faculty of Health and Medical
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(8)Division of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund
University Hospital, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

During placental malaria, Plasmodium falciparum infected erythrocytes sequester
in the placenta, causing health problems for both the mother and fetus. The
specific adherence is mediated by the VAR2CSA protein, which binds to placental
chondroitin sulfate (CS) on chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs) in the
placental syncytium. However, the identity of the CSPG core protein and the
cellular impact of the interaction have remain elusive. In this study we
identified the specific CSPG core protein to which the CS is attached, and
characterized its exact placental location. VAR2CSA pull-down experiments using
placental extracts from whole placenta or syncytiotrophoblast microvillous cell
membranes showed three distinct CSPGs available for VAR2CSA adherence. Further
examination of these three CSPGs by immunofluorescence and proximity ligation
assays showed that syndecan-1 is the main receptor for VAR2CSA mediated placental
adherence. We further show that the commonly used placental choriocarcinoma cell 
line, BeWo, express a different set of proteoglycans than those present on
placental syncytiotrophoblast and may not be the most biologically relevant model
to study placental malaria. Syncytial fusion of the BeWo cells, triggered by
forskolin treatment, caused an increased expression of placental CS-modified
syndecan-1. In line with this, we show that rVAR2 binding to placental CS impairs
syndecan-1-related Src signaling in forskolin treated BeWo cells, but not in
untreated cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005831 
PMCID: PMC4996535
PMID: 27556547  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

