
1. J Immunol. 1996 Mar 1;156(5):1897-1907.

Glycosylphosphatidylinositol toxin of Plasmodium induces nitric oxide synthase
expression in macrophages and vascular endothelial cells by a protein tyrosine
kinase-dependent and protein kinase C-dependent signaling pathway.

Tachado SD(1), Gerold P, McConville MJ, Baldwin T, Quilici D, Schwarz RT,
Schofield L.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Unit, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Victoria, Australia.

In this study, we demonstrate that glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) is a major 
toxin of Plasmodium falciparum origin responsible for nitric oxide (NO)
production in host cells. Purified malarial GPI is sufficient to induce NO
release in a time- and dose-dependent manner in macrophages and vascular
endothelial cells, and regulates inducible NO synthase expression in macrophages.
GPI-induced NO production was blocked by the NO synthase-specific inhibitor
L-N-monomethylarginine. GPI also synergizes with IFN-gamma in regulating NO
production. The structurally related molecules dipalmitoylphosphatidylinositol
and iM4 glycoinositolphospholipid from Leishmania mexicana had no such activity, 
and the latter antagonized IFN-gamma-induced NO output. GPI activates macrophages
by initiating an early onset tyrosine kinase-mediated signaling process, similar 
to that induced by total parasite extracts. The tyrosine kinase antagonists
tyrphostin and genistein inhibited the release of NO by parasite extracts and by 
GPI, alone or in combination with IFN-gamma, demonstrating the involvement of one
or more tyrosine kinases in the signaling cascade. GPI-induced NO release was
also blocked by the protein kinase C inhibitor calphostin C, demonstrating a role
for protein kinase C in GPI-mediated cell signaling, and by pyrrolidine
dithiocarbamate, indicating the involvement of the NF-kappa B/c-rel family of
transcription factors in cell activation. A neutralizing mAb to malarial GPI
inhibited NO production induced by GPI and total malarial parasite extracts in
human vascular endothelial cells and murine macrophages, indicating that GPI is a
necessary agent of parasite origin in parasite-induced NO output. Thus, in
contrast to dipalmitoylphosphatidylinositol and glycoinositolphospholipids of
Leishmania, malarial GPI initiates a protein tyrosine kinase- and protein kinase 
C-mediated signal transduction pathway, regulating inducible NO synthase
expression with the participation of NF-kappa B/c-rel, which leads to macrophage 
and vascular endothelial cell activation and downstream production of NO. These
events may play a role in the etiology of severe malaria.


PMID: 8596042  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

