
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Apr 15;94(8):4022-7.

Signal transduction in macrophages by glycosylphosphatidylinositols of
Plasmodium, Trypanosoma, and Leishmania: activation of protein tyrosine kinases
and protein kinase C by inositolglycan and diacylglycerol moieties.

Tachado SD(1), Gerold P, Schwarz R, Novakovic S, McConville M, Schofield L.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Victoria, Australia.

The perturbation of various glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored surface
proteins imparts profound regulatory signals to macrophages, lymphocytes and
other cell types. The specific contribution of the GPI moieties to these events
however is unclear. This study demonstrates that purified GPIs of Plasmodium
falciparum, Trypanosoma brucei, and Leishmania mexicana origin are sufficient to 
initiate signal transduction when added alone to host cells as chemically defined
agonists. GPIs (10 nM-1 microM) induce rapid activation of the protein tyrosine
kinase (PTK) p59(hck) in macrophages. The minimal structural requirement for PTK 
activation is the evolutionarily conserved core glycan sequence Man alpha1-2Man
alpha1-6Man alpha1-4GlcN1-6myo-inositol. GPI-associated diacylglycerols
independently activate the calcium-independent epsilon isoform of protein kinase 
C. Both signals collaborate in regulating the downstream NF-kappa B/rel-dependent
gene expression of interleukin 1alpha, tumor necrosis factor (TNF) alpha, and
inducible NO synthase. The alkylacyl-glycerol-containing iM4 GIPL of L. mexicana,
however, is unable to activate protein kinase C and inhibits TNF expression in
response to other agonists, establishing signaling specificity among structurally
distinct GPIs. GPI alone appears sufficient to mimic the activities of malaria
parasite extracts in the signaling pathway leading to TNF expression. A mAb to
GPI blocks TNF induction by parasite extracts indicating that GPI is a necessary 
agent in this response. As protozoal GPIs are closely related to their mammalian 
counterparts, the data indicate that GPIs do indeed constitute a novel outside-in
signaling system, acting as both agonists and second messenger substrates, and
imparting at least two separate signals through the structurally distinct glycan 
and fatty acid domains. These activities may underlie aspects of pathology and
immune regulation in protozoal infections.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.94.8.4022 
PMCID: PMC20561
PMID: 9108098  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

