
1. Malar J. 2010 Dec 3;9:351. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-9-351.

Dynamic subcellular localization of isoforms of the folate pathway enzyme serine 
hydroxymethyltransferase (SHMT) through the erythrocytic cycle of Plasmodium
falciparum.

Read M(1), Müller IB, Mitchell SL, Sims PF, Hyde JE.

Author information: 
(1)Manchester Interdisciplinary Biocentre, Faculty of Life Sciences, University
of Manchester, 131 Princess Street, Manchester M1 7DN, UK.

BACKGROUND: The folate pathway enzyme serine hydroxymethyltransferase (SHMT)
converts serine to glycine and 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate and is essential
for the acquisition of one-carbon units for subsequent transfer reactions.
5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate is used by thymidylate synthase to convert dUMP to
dTMP for DNA synthesis. In Plasmodium falciparum an enzymatically functional SHMT
(PfSHMTc) and a related, apparently inactive isoform (PfSHMTm) are found, encoded
by different genes. Here, patterns of localization of the two isoforms during the
parasite erythrocytic cycle are investigated.
METHODS: Polyclonal antibodies were raised to PfSHMTc and PfSHMTm, and, together 
with specific markers for the mitochondrion and apicoplast, were employed in
quantitative confocal fluorescence microscopy of blood-stage parasites.
RESULTS: As well as the expected cytoplasmic occupancy of PfSHMTc during all
stages, localization into the mitochondrion and apicoplast occurred in a
stage-specific manner. Although early trophozoites lacked visible organellar
PfSHMTc, a significant percentage of parasites showed such fluorescence during
the mid-to-late trophozoite and schizont stages. In the case of the
mitochondrion, the majority of parasites in these stages at any given time showed
no marked PfSHMTc fluorescence, suggesting that its occupancy of this organelle
is of limited duration. PfSHMTm showed a distinctly more pronounced mitochondrial
location through most of the erythrocytic cycle and GFP-tagging of its N-terminal
region confirmed the predicted presence of a mitochondrial signal sequence.
Within the apicoplast, a majority of mitotic schizonts showed a marked
concentration of PfSHMTc, whose localization in this organelle was less
restricted than for the mitochondrion and persisted from the late trophozoite to 
the post-mitotic stages. PfSHMTm showed a broadly similar distribution across the
cycle, but with a distinctive punctate accumulation towards the ends of
elongating apicoplasts. In very late post-mitotic schizonts, both PfSHMTc and
PfSHMTm were concentrated in the central region of the parasite that becomes the 
residual body on erythrocyte lysis and merozoite release.
CONCLUSIONS: Both PfSHMTc and PfSHMTm show dynamic, stage-dependent localization 
among the different compartments of the parasite and sequence analysis suggests
they may also reversibly associate with each other, a factor that may be critical
to folate cofactor function, given the apparent lack of enzymic activity of
PfSHMTm.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-9-351 
PMCID: PMC3014972
PMID: 21129192  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

