
1. BMC Genomics. 2010 Dec 1;11 Suppl 3:S13. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-S3-S13.

Core genome components and lineage specific expansions in malaria parasites
plasmodium.

Cai H(1), Gu J, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Texas at San Antonio, TX 78249, USA.
hong.cai@utsa.edu

BACKGROUND: The increasing resistance of Plasmodium, the malaria parasites, to
multiple commonly used drugs has underscored the urgent need to develop effective
antimalarial drugs and vaccines. The new direction of genomics-driven target
discovery has become possible with the completion of parasite genome sequencing, 
which can lead us to a better understanding of how the parasites develop the
genetic variability that is associated with their response to environmental
challenges and other adaptive phenotypes.
RESULTS: We present the results of a comprehensive analysis of the genomes of six
Plasmodium species, including two species that infect humans, one that infects
monkeys, and three that infect rodents. The core genome shared by all six species
is composed of 3,351 genes, which make up about 22%-65% of the genome repertoire.
These components play important roles in fundamental functions as well as in
parasite-specific activities. We further investigated the distribution and
features of genes that have been expanded in specific Plasmodium lineage(s).
Abundant duplicate genes are present in the six species, with 5%-9% of the whole 
genomes composed lineage specific radiations. The majority of these gene families
are hypothetical proteins with unknown functions; a few may have predicted roles 
such as antigenic variation.
CONCLUSIONS: The core genome components in the malaria parasites have functions
ranging from fundamental biological processes to roles in the complex networks
that sustain the parasite-specific lifestyles appropriate to different hosts.
They represent the minimum requirement to maintain a successful life cycle that
spans vertebrate hosts and mosquito vectors. Lineage specific expansions (LSEs)
have given rise to abundant gene families in Plasmodium. Although the functions
of most families remain unknown, these LSEs could reveal components in parasite
networks that, by their enhanced genetic variability, can contribute to
pathogenesis, virulence, responses to environmental challenges, or interesting
phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-S3-S13 
PMCID: PMC2999343
PMID: 21143780  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

