
1. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 15;5(12):e15424. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015424.

Engineering the chloroplast targeted malarial vaccine antigens in Chlamydomonas
starch granules.

Dauvillée D(1), Delhaye S, Gruyer S, Slomianny C, Moretz SE, d'Hulst C, Long CA, 
Ball SG, Tomavo S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, CNRS UMR 8576, UGSF, Université 
des Sciences et Technologies de Lille, Villeneuve d'Ascq, France.

BACKGROUND: Malaria, an Anopheles-borne parasitic disease, remains a major global
health problem causing illness and death that disproportionately affects
developing countries. Despite the incidence of malaria, which remains one of the 
most severe infections of human populations, there is no licensed vaccine against
this life-threatening disease. In this context, we decided to explore the
expression of Plasmodium vaccine antigens fused to the granule bound starch
synthase (GBSS), the major protein associated to the starch matrix in all
starch-accumulating plants and algae such as Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We describe the development of genetically engineered
starch granules containing plasmodial vaccine candidate antigens produced in the 
unicellular green algae Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. We show that the C-terminal
domains of proteins from the rodent Plasmodium species, Plasmodium berghei Apical
Major Antigen AMA1, or Major Surface Protein MSP1 fused to the algal granule
bound starch synthase (GBSS) are efficiently expressed and bound to the
polysaccharide matrix. Mice were either immunized intraperitoneally with the
engineered starch particles and Freund adjuvant, or fed with the engineered
particles co-delivered with the mucosal adjuvant, and challenged
intraperitoneally with a lethal inoculum of P. Berghei. Both experimental
strategies led to a significantly reduced parasitemia with an extension of life
span including complete cure for intraperitoneal delivery as assessed by negative
blood thin smears. In the case of the starch bound P. falciparum GBSS-MSP1 fusion
protein, the immune sera or purified immunoglobulin G of mice immunized with the 
corresponding starch strongly inhibited in vitro the intra-erythrocytic asexual
development of the most human deadly plasmodial species.
CONCLUSION: This novel system paves the way for the production of clinically
relevant plasmodial antigens as algal starch-based particles designated herein as
amylosomes, demonstrating that efficient production of edible vaccines can be
genetically produced in Chlamydomonas.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015424 
PMCID: PMC3002285
PMID: 21179538  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

