
1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2010 Dec 14;11 Suppl 11:S13. doi:
10.1186/1471-2105-11-S11-S13.

Revealing parasite influence in metabolic pathways in Apicomplexa infected
patients.

Xu T(1), Ping J, Yu Y, Yu F, Yu Y, Hao P, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)College of life science and biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, 200240, China. xutaoseu@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: As an obligate intracellular parasite, Apicomplexa interacts with the
host in the special living environment, competing for energy and nutrients from
the host cells by manipulating the host metabolism. Previous studies of
host-parasite interaction mainly focused on using cellular and biochemical
methods to investigate molecular functions in metabolic pathways of parasite
infected hosts. Computational approaches taking advantage of high-throughput
biological data and topology of metabolic pathways have a great potential in
revealing the details and mechanism of parasites-to-host interactions. A new
analytical method was designed in this work to study host-parasite interactions
in human cells infected with Plasmodium falciparum and Cryptosporidium parvum.
RESULTS: We introduced a new method that analyzes the host metabolic pathways in 
divided parts: host specific subpathways and host-parasite common subpathways.
Upon analysis on gene expression data from cells infected by Plasmodium
falciparum or Cryptosporidium parvum, we found: (i) six host-parasite common
subpathways and four host specific subpathways were significantly altered in
plasmodium infected human cells; (ii) plasmodium utilized fatty acid biosynthesis
and elongation, and Pantothenate and CoA biosynthesis to obtain nutrients from
host environment; (iii) in Cryptosporidium parvum infected cells, most of the
host-parasite common enzymes were down-regulated, whereas the host specific
enzymes up-regulated; (iv) the down-regulation of common subpathways in host
cells might be caused by competition for the substrates and up-regulation of host
specific subpathways may be stimulated by parasite infection.
CONCLUSION: Results demonstrated a significantly coordinated expression pattern
between the two groups of subpathways. The method helped expose the impact of
parasite infection on host cell metabolism, which was previously concealed in the
pathway enrichment analysis. Our approach revealed detailed subpathways and
metabolic information are important to the symbiosis in two kinds of the
apicomplex parasites, and highlighted its significance in research and
understanding of parasite-host interactions.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-11-S11-S13 
PMCID: PMC3024860
PMID: 21172048  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

