
1. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 25;6(1):e14587. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014587.

Site-specific integration and expression of an anti-malarial gene in transgenic
Anopheles gambiae significantly reduces Plasmodium infections.

Meredith JM(1), Basu S, Nimmo DD, Larget-Thiery I, Warr EL, Underhill A, McArthur
CC, Carter V, Hurd H, Bourgouin C, Eggleston P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Entomology and Parasitology, Keele University, Keele,
United Kingdom.

Diseases transmitted by mosquitoes have a devastating impact on global health and
this is worsening due to difficulties with existing control measures and climate 
change. Genetically modified mosquitoes that are refractory to disease
transmission are seen as having great potential in the delivery of novel control 
strategies. Historically the genetic modification of insects has relied upon
transposable elements which have many limitations despite their successful use.
To circumvent these limitations the Streptomyces phage phiC31 integrase system
has been successfully adapted for site-specific transgene integration in insects.
Here, we present the first site-specific transformation of Anopheles gambiae, the
principal vector of human malaria. Mosquitoes were initially engineered to
incorporate the phiC31 targeting site at a defined genomic location. A second
phase of genetic modification then achieved site-specific integration of Vida3, a
synthetic anti-malarial gene. Expression of Vida3, specifically in the midgut of 
bloodfed females, offered consistent and significant protection against
Plasmodium yoelii nigeriensis, reducing average parasite intensity by 85%.
Similar protection was observed against Plasmodium falciparum in some
experiments, although protection was inconsistent. In the fight against malaria, 
it is imperative to establish a broad repertoire of both anti-malarial effector
genes and tissue-specific promoters for their expression, enabling those offering
maximum effect with minimum fitness cost to be identified. In the future, this
technology will allow effective comparisons and informed choices to be made,
potentially leading to complete transmission blockade.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014587 
PMCID: PMC3026776
PMID: 21283619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

