
1. Malar J. 2011 Feb 8;10:29. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-29.

Malaria infection by sporozoite challenge induces high functional antibody titres
against blood stage antigens after a DNA prime, poxvirus boost vaccination
strategy in Rhesus macaques.

Hamid MM(1), Remarque EJ, El Hassan IM, Hussain AA, Narum DL, Thomas AW, Kocken
CH, Weiss WR, Faber BW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Biomedical Primate Research Centre, Rijswijk, The 
Netherlands. faber@bprc.nl

BACKGROUND: A DNA prime, poxvirus (COPAK) boost vaccination regime with four
antigens, i.e. a combination of two Plasmodium knowlesi sporozoite (csp/ssp2) and
two blood stage (ama1/msp142) genes, leads to self-limited parasitaemia in 60% of
rhesus monkeys and survival from an otherwise lethal infection with P. knowlesi. 
In the present study, the role of the blood stage antigens in protection was
studied in depth, focusing on antibody formation against the blood stage antigens
and the functionality thereof.
METHODS: Rhesus macaques were immunized with the four-component vaccine and
subsequently challenged i.v. with 100 P. knowlesi sporozoites. During
immunization and challenge, antibody titres against the two blood stage antigens 
were determined, as well as the in vitro growth inhibition capacity of those
antibodies. Antigen reversal experiments were performed to determine the relative
contribution of antibodies against each of the two blood stage antigens to the
inhibition.
RESULTS: After vaccination, PkAMA1 and PkMSP1₁₉ antibody titres in vaccinated
animals were low, which was reflected in low levels of inhibition by these
antibodies as determined by in vitro inhibition assays. Interestingly, after
sporozoite challenge antibody titres against blood stage antigens were boosted
over 30-fold in both protected and not protected animals. The in vitro inhibition
levels increased to high levels (median inhibitions of 59% and 56% at 6 mg/mL
total IgG, respectively). As growth inhibition levels were not significantly
different between protected and not protected animals, the ability to control
infection appeared cannot be explained by GIA levels. Judged by in vitro antigen 
reversal growth inhibition assays, over 85% of the inhibitory activity of these
antibodies was directed against PkAMA1.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report that demonstrates that a DNA prime/poxvirus
boost vaccination regimen induces low levels of malaria parasite growth
inhibitory antibodies, which are boosted to high levels upon challenge. No
association could, however, be established between the levels of inhibitory
capacity in vitro and protection, either after vaccination or after challenge.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-29 
PMCID: PMC3046915
PMID: 21303498  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

