
1. BMC Genomics. 2011 Feb 18;12:119. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-119.

RSpred, a set of Hidden Markov Models to detect and classify the RIFIN and STEVOR
proteins of Plasmodium falciparum.

Joannin N(1), Kallberg Y, Wahlgren M, Persson B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Cell and Tumor biology (MTC), Karolinska
Institutet, SE-17177 Stockholm, Sweden. njoannin@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Many parasites use multicopy protein families to avoid their host's
immune system through a strategy called antigenic variation. RIFIN and STEVOR
proteins are variable surface antigens uniquely found in the malaria parasites
Plasmodium falciparum and P. reichenowi. Although these two protein families are 
different, they have more similarity to each other than to any other proteins
described to date. As a result, they have been grouped together in one Pfam
domain. However, a recent study has described the sub-division of the RIFIN
protein family into several functionally distinct groups. These sub-groups
require phylogenetic analysis to sort out, which is not practical for large-scale
projects, such as the sequencing of patient isolates and meta-genomic analysis.
RESULTS: We have manually curated the rif and stevor gene repertoires of two
Plasmodium falciparum genomes, isolates DD2 and HB3. We have identified 25% of
mis-annotated and ~30 missing rif and stevor genes. Using these data sets, as
well as sequences from the well curated reference genome (isolate 3D7) and field 
isolate data from Uniprot, we have developed a tool named RSpred. The tool, based
on a set of hidden Markov models and an evaluation program, automatically
identifies STEVOR and RIFIN sequences as well as the sub-groups: A-RIFIN,
B-RIFIN, B1-RIFIN and B2-RIFIN. In addition to these groups, we distinguish a
small subset of STEVOR proteins that we named STEVOR-like, as they either differ 
remarkably from typical STEVOR proteins or are too fragmented to reach a high
enough score. When compared to Pfam and TIGRFAMs, RSpred proves to be a more
robust and more sensitive method. We have applied RSpred to the proteomes of
several P. falciparum strains, P. reichenowi, P. vivax, P. knowlesi and the
rodent malaria species. All groups were found in the P. falciparum strains, and
also in the P. reichenowi parasite, whereas none were predicted in the other
species.
CONCLUSIONS: We have generated a tool for the sorting of RIFIN and STEVOR
proteins, large antigenic variant protein groups, into homogeneous sub-families. 
Assigning functions to such protein families requires their subdivision into
meaningful groups such as we have shown for the RIFIN protein family. RSpred
removes the need for complicated and time consuming phylogenetic analysis
methods. It will benefit both research groups sequencing whole genomes as well as
others working with field isolates. RSpred is freely accessible via
http://www.ifm.liu.se/bioinfo/.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-119 
PMCID: PMC3050820
PMID: 21332983  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

