
1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Feb 10;7(2):e1001279. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001279.

Genetic mapping identifies novel highly protective antigens for an apicomplexan
parasite.

Blake DP(1), Billington KJ, Copestake SL, Oakes RD, Quail MA, Wan KL, Shirley MW,
Smith AL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Health, Compton, Berkshire, United Kingdom.
dblake@rvc.ac.uk

Apicomplexan parasites are responsible for a myriad of diseases in humans and
livestock; yet despite intensive effort, development of effective sub-unit
vaccines remains a long-term goal. Antigenic complexity and our inability to
identify protective antigens from the pool that induce response are serious
challenges in the development of new vaccines. Using a combination of parasite
genetics and selective barriers with population-based genetic fingerprinting, we 
have identified that immunity against the most important apicomplexan parasite of
livestock (Eimeria spp.) was targeted against a few discrete regions of the
genome. Herein we report the identification of six genomic regions and, within
two of those loci, the identification of true protective antigens that confer
immunity as sub-unit vaccines. The first of these is an Eimeria maxima homologue 
of apical membrane antigen-1 (AMA-1) and the second is a previously
uncharacterised gene that we have termed 'immune mapped protein-1' (IMP-1).
Significantly, homologues of the AMA-1 antigen are protective with a range of
apicomplexan parasites including Plasmodium spp., which suggest that there may be
some characteristic(s) of protective antigens shared across this diverse group of
parasites. Interestingly, homologues of the IMP-1 antigen, which is protective
against E. maxima infection, can be identified in Toxoplasma gondii and Neospora 
caninum. Overall, this study documents the discovery of novel protective antigens
using a population-based genetic mapping approach allied with a protection-based 
screen of candidate genes. The identification of AMA-1 and IMP-1 represents a
substantial step towards development of an effective anti-eimerian sub-unit
vaccine and raises the possibility of identification of novel antigens for other 
apicomplexan parasites. Moreover, validation of the parasite genetics approach to
identify effective antigens supports its adoption in other parasite systems where
legitimate protective antigen identification is difficult.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001279 
PMCID: PMC3037358
PMID: 21347348  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

