
1. PLoS Biol. 2011 Mar;9(3):e1000600. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000600. Epub 2011
Mar 8.

Exceptional diversity, maintenance of polymorphism, and recent directional
selection on the APL1 malaria resistance genes of Anopheles gambiae.

Rottschaefer SM(1), Riehle MM, Coulibaly B, Sacko M, Niaré O, Morlais I, Traoré
SF, Vernick KD, Lazzaro BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, United States 
of America.

The three-gene APL1 locus encodes essential components of the mosquito immune
defense against malaria parasites. APL1 was originally identified because it lies
within a mapped QTL conferring the vector mosquito Anopheles gambiae natural
resistance to the human malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum, and APL1 genes
have subsequently been shown to be involved in defense against several species of
Plasmodium. Here, we examine molecular population genetic variation at the APL1
gene cluster in spatially and temporally diverse West African collections of A.
gambiae. The locus is extremely polymorphic, showing evidence of adaptive
evolutionary maintenance of genetic variation. We hypothesize that this
variability aids in defense against genetically diverse pathogens, including
Plasmodium. Variation at APL1 is highly structured across geographic and temporal
subpopulations. In particular, diversity is exceptionally high during the rainy
season, when malaria transmission rates are at their peak. Much less allelic
diversity is observed during the dry season when mosquito population sizes and
malaria transmission rates are low. APL1 diversity is weakly stratified by the
polymorphic 2La chromosomal inversion but is very strongly subdivided between the
M and S "molecular forms." We find evidence that a recent selective sweep has
occurred at the APL1 locus in M form mosquitoes only. The independently reported 
observation of a similar M-form restricted sweep at the Tep1 locus, whose product
physically interacts with APL1C, suggests that epistatic selection may act on
these two loci causing them to sweep coordinately.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000600 
PMCID: PMC3050937
PMID: 21408087  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

