
1. Malar J. 2011 Mar 31;10:71. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-71.

Plasmodium Cysteine Repeat Modular Proteins 3 and 4 are essential for malaria
parasite transmission from the mosquito to the host.

Douradinha B(1), Augustijn KD, Moore SG, Ramesar J, Mota MM, Waters AP, Janse CJ,
Thompson J.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Unit, Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina de
Lisboa, Av. Prof. Egas Moniz, 1649-028 Lisbon, Portugal.

BACKGROUND: The Plasmodium Cysteine Repeat Modular Proteins (PCRMP) are a family 
of four conserved proteins of malaria parasites, that contain a number of motifs 
implicated in host-parasite interactions. Analysis of mutants of the rodent
parasite Plasmodium berghei lacking expression of PCRMP1 or 2 showed that these
proteins are essential for targeting of P. berghei sporozoites to the mosquito
salivary gland and, hence, for transmission from the mosquito to the mouse.
METHODS: In this work, the role of the remaining PCRMP family members, PCRMP3 and
4, has been investigated throughout the Plasmodium life cycle by generation and
analysis of P. berghei gene deletion mutants, Δpcrmp3 and Δpcrmp4. The role of
PCRMP members during the transmission and hepatic stages of the Plasmodium
lifecycle has been evaluated by light- and electron microscopy and by analysis of
liver stage development in HEPG2 cells in vitro and by infecting mice with mutant
sporozoites. In addition, mice were immunized with live Δpcrmp3 and Δpcrmp4
sporozoites to evaluate their immunization potential as a genetically-attenuated 
parasite-based vaccine.
RESULTS: Disruption of pcrmp3 and pcrmp4 in P. berghei revealed that they are
also essential for transmission of the parasite through the mosquito vector,
although acting in a distinct way to pbcrmp1 and 2. Mutants lacking expression of
PCRMP3 or PCRMP4 show normal blood stage development and oocyst formation in the 
mosquito and develop into morphologically normal sporozoites, but these have a
defect in egress from oocysts and do not enter the salivary glands. Sporozoites
extracted from oocysts perform gliding motility and invade and infect hepatocytes
but do not undergo further development and proliferation. Furthermore, the study 
shows that immunization with Δcrmp3 and Δcrmp4 sporozoites does not confer
protective immunity upon subsequent challenge.
CONCLUSIONS: PCRMP3 and 4 play multiple roles during the Plasmodium life cycle;
they are essential for the establishment of sporozoite infection in the mosquito 
salivary gland, and subsequently for development in hepatocytes. However,
although Δpcrmp3 and Δpcrmp4 parasites are completely growth-impaired in the
liver, immunization with live sporozoites does not induce the protective immune
responses that have been shown for other genetically-attenuated parasites.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-71 
PMCID: PMC3083381
PMID: 21453484  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

