
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2011 Jun;55(6):2576-84. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01409-10.
Epub 2011 Apr 4.

Artesunate tolerance in transgenic Plasmodium falciparum parasites overexpressing
a tryptophan-rich protein.

Deplaine G(1), Lavazec C, Bischoff E, Natalang O, Perrot S, Guillotte-Blisnick M,
Coppée JY, Pradines B, Mercereau-Puijalon O, David PH.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Unité d'Immunologie Moléculaire des Parasites, Département
de Parasitologie Mycologie, CNRS, URA2581, F-75015 Paris, France.

Due to their rapid, potent action on young and mature intraerythrocytic stages,
artemisinin derivatives are central to drug combination therapies for Plasmodium 
falciparum malaria. However, the evidence for emerging parasite
resistance/tolerance to artemisinins in southeast Asia is of great concern. A
better understanding of artemisinin-related drug activity and resistance
mechanisms is urgently needed. A recent transcriptome study of parasites exposed 
to artesunate led us to identify a series of genes with modified levels of
expression in the presence of the drug. The gene presenting the largest mRNA
level increase, Pf10_0026 (PArt), encoding a hypothetical protein of unknown
function, was chosen for further study. Immunodetection with PArt-specific sera
showed that artesunate induced a dose-dependent increase of the protein level.
Bioinformatic analysis showed that PArt belongs to a Plasmodium-specific gene
family characterized by the presence of a tryptophan-rich domain with a novel
hidden Markov model (HMM) profile. Gene disruption could not be achieved,
suggesting an essential function. Transgenic parasites overexpressing PArt
protein were generated and exhibited tolerance to a spike exposure to high doses 
of artesunate, with increased survival and reduced growth retardation compared to
that of wild-type-treated controls. These data indicate the involvement of PArt
in parasite defense mechanisms against artesunate. This is the first report of
genetically manipulated parasites displaying a stable and reproducible decreased 
susceptibility to artesunate, providing new possibilities to investigate the
parasite response to artemisinins.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01409-10 
PMCID: PMC3101408
PMID: 21464256  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

