
1. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 4;6(4):e18400. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018400.

Parasite killing in malaria non-vector mosquito Anopheles culicifacies species B:
implication of nitric oxide synthase upregulation.

Vijay S(1), Rawat M, Adak T, Dixit R, Nanda N, Srivastava H, Sharma JK, Prasad
GB, Sharma A.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Biochemistry and Structural Biology Laboratory, National Institute of 
Malaria Research (ICMR), Dwarka, New Delhi, India.

BACKGROUND: Anopheles culicifacies, the main vector of human malaria in rural
India, is a complex of five sibling species. Despite being phylogenetically
related, a naturally selected subgroup species B of this sibling species complex 
is found to be a poor vector of malaria. We have attempted to understand the
differences between vector and non-vector Anopheles culicifacies mosquitoes in
terms of transcriptionally activated nitric oxide synthase (AcNOS) physiologies
to elucidate the mechanism of refractoriness. Identification of the differences
between genes and gene products that may impart refractory phenotype can
facilitate development of novel malaria transmission blocking strategies.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We conducted a study on phylogenetically related 
susceptible (species A) and refractory (species B) sibling species of An.
culicifacies mosquitoes to characterize biochemical and molecular differences in 
AcNOS gene and gene elements and their ability to inhibit oocyst growth. We
demonstrate that in species B, AcNOS specific activity and nitrite/nitrates in
mid-guts and haemolymph were higher as compared to species A after invasion of
the mid-gut by P. vivax at the beginning and during the course of blood feeding. 
Semiquantitative RT-PCR and real time PCR data of AcNOS concluded that this gene 
is more abundantly expressed in midgut of species B than in species A and is
transcriptionally upregulated post blood meals. Dietary feeding of L-NAME along
with blood meals significantly inhibited midgut AcNOS activity leading to an
increase in oocyst production in An. culicifacies species B.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We hypothesize that upregulation of mosquito innate
cytotoxicity due to NOS in refractory strain to Plasmodium vivax infection may
contribute to natural refractoriness in An. culicifacies mosquito population.
This innate capacity of refractory mosquitoes could represent the ancestral
function of the mosquito immune system against the parasite and could be utilized
to understand the molecular basis of refractoriness in planning effective vector 
control strategies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018400 
PMCID: PMC3070730
PMID: 21483693  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

