
1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Apr;7(4):e1002015. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002015. Epub 2011
Apr 7.

Plasmodium knowlesi: reservoir hosts and tracking the emergence in humans and
macaques.

Lee KS(1), Divis PC, Zakaria SK, Matusop A, Julin RA, Conway DJ, Cox-Singh J,
Singh B.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Research Centre, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University
Malaysia Sarawak, Kuching, Sarawak, Malaysia.

Plasmodium knowlesi, a malaria parasite originally thought to be restricted to
macaques in Southeast Asia, has recently been recognized as a significant cause
of human malaria. Unlike the benign and morphologically similar P. malariae,
these parasites can lead to fatal infections. Malaria parasites, including P.
knowlesi, have not yet been detected in macaques of the Kapit Division of
Malaysian Borneo, where the majority of human knowlesi malaria cases have been
reported. In order to extend our understanding of the epidemiology and
evolutionary history of P. knowlesi, we examined 108 wild macaques for malaria
parasites and sequenced the circumsporozoite protein (csp) gene and mitochondrial
(mt) DNA of P. knowlesi isolates derived from macaques and humans. We detected
five species of Plasmodium (P. knowlesi, P. inui, P. cynomolgi, P. fieldi and P. 
coatneyi) in the long-tailed and pig-tailed macaques, and an extremely high
prevalence of P. inui and P. knowlesi. Macaques had a higher number of P.
knowlesi genotypes per infection than humans, and some diverse alleles of the P. 
knowlesi csp gene and certain mtDNA haplotypes were shared between both hosts.
Analyses of DNA sequence data indicate that there are no mtDNA lineages
associated exclusively with either host. Furthermore, our analyses of the mtDNA
data reveal that P. knowlesi is derived from an ancestral parasite population
that existed prior to human settlement in Southeast Asia, and underwent
significant population expansion approximately 30,000-40,000 years ago. Our
results indicate that human infections with P. knowlesi are not newly emergent in
Southeast Asia and that knowlesi malaria is primarily a zoonosis with wild
macaques as the reservoir hosts. However, ongoing ecological changes resulting
from deforestation, with an associated increase in the human population, could
enable this pathogenic species of Plasmodium to switch to humans as the preferred
host.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002015 
PMCID: PMC3072369
PMID: 21490952  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

