
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2011 Aug;78(2):225-34. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2011.04.012. Epub
2011 Apr 29.

Overexpression, purification and assessment of cyclosporin binding of a family of
cyclophilins and cyclophilin-like proteins of the human malarial parasite
Plasmodium falciparum.

Marín-Menéndez A(1), Bell A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Genetics and Microbiology, Moyne
Institute of Preventive Medicine, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland.

Malaria represents a global health, economic and social burden of enormous
magnitude. Chemotherapy is at the moment a largely effective weapon against the
disease, but the appearance of drug-resistant parasites is reducing the
effectiveness of most drugs. Finding new drug-target candidates is one approach
to the development of new drugs. The family of cyclophilins may represent a group
of potential targets. They are involved in protein folding and regulation due to 
their peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase and/or chaperone activities. They also 
mediate the action of the immunosuppressive drug cyclosporin A, which
additionally has strong antimalarial activity. In the genome database of the most
lethal human malarial parasite Plasmodium falciparum, 11 genes apparently
encoding cyclophilin or cyclophilin-like proteins were found, but most of these
have not yet been characterized. Previously a pET vector conferring a C-terminal 
His₆ tag was used for recombinant expression and purification of one member of
the P. falciparum cyclophilin family in Escherichia coli. The approach here was
to use an identical method to produce all of the other members of this family and
thereby allow the most consistent functional comparisons. We were successful in
generating all but three of the family, plus a single amino-acid mutant, in the
same recombinant form as either full-length proteins or isolated cyclophilin-like
domains. The recombinant proteins were assessed by thermal melt assay for correct
folding and cyclosporin A binding.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2011.04.012 
PMID: 21549842  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

