
1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2011;712:30-48. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-8414-2_3.

Falcipains and other cysteine proteases of malaria parasites.

Rosenthal PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, San Francisco General Hospital, University of
California, San Francisco, California, USA. prosenthal@medsfgh.ucsf.edu

A number of cysteine proteases of malaria parasites have been described and many 
more are suggested by analysis of the Plasmodium falciparum genome sequence. The 
best characterized of these proteases are the falcipains, a family of four
papain-family enzymes. Falcipain-2 and falcipain-3 act in concert with other
proteases to hydrolyze host erythrocyte hemoglobin in the parasite food vacuole. 
Disruption of the falcipain-2 gene led to a transient block in hemoglobin
hydrolysis and parasites with increased sensitivity to protease inhibitors.
Disruption of the falcipain-3 gene was not possible, strongly suggesting that
this protease is essential for erythrocytic parasites. Disruption of the
falcipain-1 gene did not alter development in erythrocytes, but led to decreased 
production of oocysts in mosquitoes. other papain-family proteases predicted by
the genome sequence include dipeptidyl peptidases, a calpain homolog and
serine-repeat antigens (SERAs). Dipeptidyl aminopeptidase 1 appears to be
essential and localized to the food vacuole, suggesting a role in hemoglobin
hydrolysis. Dipeptidyl aminopeptidase 3 appears to play a role in the rupture of 
erythrocytes by mature parasites. the P. falciparum calpain homolog gene could
not be disrupted, suggesting that the protein is essential and a role in the
parasite cell cycle has been suggested. Nine P. falciparum SERAs have cysteine
protease motifs, but in some the active site cys is replaced by a Ser. Gene
disruption studies suggested that SERA-5 and SERA-6 are essential. activation of 
SERA-5 by a serine protease seems to be required for merozoite egress from the
erythrocyte. New drugs for malaria are greatly needed and cysteine proteases
represent potential drug targets. cysteine protease inhibitors have demonstrated 
potent antimalarial effects and the optimization and testing of falcipain
inhibitor antimalarials is underway.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4419-8414-2_3 
PMID: 21660657  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

