
1. Int J Parasitol. 2011 Aug 15;41(10):1019-27. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2011.03.014.
Epub 2011 Jun 1.

Hippoboscid-transmitted Haemoproteus parasites (Haemosporida) infect Galapagos
Pelecaniform birds: evidence from molecular and morphological studies, with a
description of Haemoproteus iwa.

Levin II(1), Valkiūnas G, Santiago-Alarcon D, Cruz LL, Iezhova TA, O'Brien SL,
Hailer F, Dearborn D, Schreiber EA, Fleischer RC, Ricklefs RE, Parker PG.

Author information: 
(1)University of Missouri-St. Louis, Department of Biology and Whitney R. Harris 
World Ecology Center, 1 University Blvd., St. Louis, MO 63121, USA.
Iris.Levin@umsl.edu

Haemosporidian parasites are widely distributed and common parasites of birds,
and the application of molecular techniques has revealed remarkable diversity
among their lineages. Four haemosporidian genera infect avian hosts (Plasmodium, 
Haemoproteus, Leucocytozoon and Fallisia), and Haemoproteus is split into two
sub-genera based on morphological evidence and phylogenetic support for two
divergent sister clades. One clade (Haemoproteus (Parahaemoproteus)) contains
parasites developing in birds belonging to several different orders, except
pigeons and doves (Columbiformes), while the other (Haemoproteus (Haemoproteus)) 
has previously been shown to only infect dove hosts. Here we provide molecular
and morphological identification of Haemoproteus parasites from several seabird
species that are closely related to those found in dove hosts. We also document a
deeply divergent clade with two haemosporidian lineages recovered primarily from 
frigatebirds (Fregatidae, Pelecaniformes) that is sister to the
hippoboscid-(Hippoboscidae) transmitted dove parasites. One of the lineages in
this new clade of parasites belongs to Haemoproteus iwa and is distributed in two
species of frigatebird (Fregata) hosts from Hawaii, the Galapagos Islands, the
eastern Pacific and throughout the Caribbean Basin. Haemosporidian parasites are 
often considered rare in seabirds due in part to the lack or low activity of some
dipteran vectors (e.g., mosquitos, biting midges) in marine and coastal
environments; however, we show that H. iwa is prevalent and is very likely
vectored among frigatebirds by hippoboscid flies which are abundant on
frigatebirds and other seabirds. This study supports the existence of two sister 
clades of avian Haemoproteus in accord with the subgeneric classification of
avian hemoproteids. Description of H. iwa from Galapagos Fregata minor is given
based on morphology of blood stages and segments of the mitochondrial cytochrome 
b gene, which can be used for identification. This study shows that hippoboscid
flies warrant more attention as vectors of avian Haemoproteus spp., particularly 
in marine and coastal environments.

Copyright © 2011 Australian Society for Parasitology Inc. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2011.03.014 
PMID: 21683082  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

