
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2011 Oct;11(7):1608-15. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2011.05.021.
Epub 2011 Jun 25.

Cytokine gene haplotypes with a potential effect on susceptibility to malaria in 
sympatric ethnic groups in Mali.

Israelsson E(1), Maiga B, Kearsley S, Dolo A, Homann MV, Doumbo OK,
Troye-Blomberg M, Tornvall P, Berzins K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Wenner-Gren Institute, Stockholm University,
Stockholm, Sweden. Elisabeth.israelsson@wgi.su.se

Cytokines are important players in the immune responses, and an unbalance in pro-
and anti-inflammatory cytokine responses may affect parasitemia and pathology in 
a Plasmodium falciparum infection. Polymorphisms in cytokine genes may affect not
only the levels of the protein, but many down-stream functions, such as
production of C-reactive protein and immunoglobulin isotype switching.
Susceptibility to malaria has been shown to differ between individuals with
different genetic backgrounds, as indicated by studies in Fulani and non-Fulani
ethnic groups. The aim of this study was to investigate possible interethnic
differences in totally twelve single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the genes
encoding the cytokines IL-1β, IL-6, IL-10 and TNF. These SNPs are present in the 
promoter region of the genes, and have previously been associated with cytokine
expression and with disease outcome in malaria. The results from the present
study suggest that the Fulani ethnic group has a more pro-inflammatory response, 
due to high frequencies of high-producing alleles of IL1β and low-producing
alleles of IL10. IL-6 could potentially also contribute to the relatively lower
susceptibility to malaria in the Fulani ethnic group, whereas the TNF
polymorphisms analysed in this study rather seem to associate with the severity
of the infection and not the susceptibility for the infection itself. We
therefore suggest that the polymorphisms analysed in this study all show a
potential to influence the relatively lower susceptibility to malaria seen in the
Fulani ethnic group as compared to the other sympatric ethnic groups.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2011.05.021 
PMID: 21708291  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

