
1. Malar J. 2011 Jul 14;10:193. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-193.

Plasmodium falciparum glutamate dehydrogenase a is dispensable and not a drug
target during erythrocytic development.

Storm J(1), Perner J, Aparicio I, Patzewitz EM, Olszewski K, Llinas M, Engel PC, 
Müller S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infection, Immunity & Inflammation, Wellcome Trust Centre for
Molecular Parasitology, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, Sir
Graeme Davies Building, University of Glasgow, 120 University Place, Glasgow G12 
8TA, UK.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium falciparum contains three genes encoding potential
glutamate dehydrogenases. The protein encoded by gdha has previously been
biochemically and structurally characterized. It was suggested that it is
important for the supply of reducing equivalents during intra-erythrocytic
development of Plasmodium and, therefore, a suitable drug target.
METHODS: The gene encoding the NADP(H)-dependent GDHa has been disrupted by
reverse genetics in P. falciparum and the effect on the antioxidant and metabolic
capacities of the resulting mutant parasites was investigated.
RESULTS: No growth defect under low and elevated oxygen tension, no up- or
down-regulation of a number of antioxidant and NADP(H)-generating proteins or
mRNAs and no increased levels of GSH were detected in the D10Δgdha parasite
lines. Further, the fate of the carbon skeleton of [13C] labelled glutamine was
assessed by metabolomic studies, revealing no differences in the labelling of
α-ketoglutarate and other TCA pathway intermediates between wild type and mutant 
parasites.
CONCLUSIONS: First, the data support the conclusion that D10Δgdha parasites are
not experiencing enhanced oxidative stress and that GDHa function may not be the 
provision of NADP(H) for reductive reactions. Second, the results imply that the 
cytosolic, NADP(H)-dependent GDHa protein is not involved in the oxidative
deamination of glutamate but that the protein may play a role in ammonia
assimilation as has been described for other NADP(H)-dependent GDH from plants
and fungi. The lack of an obvious phenotype in the absence of GDHa may point to a
regulatory role of the protein providing glutamate (as nitrogen storage molecule)
in situations where the parasites experience a limiting supply of carbon sources 
and, therefore, under in vitro conditions the enzyme is unlikely to be of
significant importance. The data imply that the protein is not a suitable target 
for future drug development against intra-erythrocytic parasite development.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-193 
PMCID: PMC3163627
PMID: 21756354  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

