
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23430. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023430. Epub 2011 Aug 15.

Plasmodium falciparum: differential selection of drug resistance alleles in
contiguous urban and peri-urban areas of Brazzaville, Republic of Congo.

Tsumori Y(1), Ndounga M, Sunahara T, Hayashida N, Inoue M, Nakazawa S, Casimiro
P, Isozumi R, Uemura H, Tanabe K, Kaneko O, Culleton R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Protozoology, Institute of Tropical Medicine (NEKKEN), and the
Global COE Program, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan.

The African continent is currently experiencing rapid population growth, with
rising urbanization increasing the percentage of the population living in large
towns and cities. We studied the impact of the degree of urbanization on the
population genetics of Plasmodium falciparum in urban and peri-urban areas in and
around the city of Brazzaville, Republic of Congo. This field setting, which
incorporates local health centers situated in areas of varying urbanization, is
of interest as it allows the characterization of malaria parasites from areas
where the human, parasite, and mosquito populations are shared, but where
differences in the degree of urbanization (leading to dramatic differences in
transmission intensity) cause the pattern of malaria transmission to differ
greatly. We have investigated how these differences in transmission intensity
affect parasite genetic diversity, including the amount of genetic polymorphism
in each area, the degree of linkage disequilibrium within the populations, and
the prevalence and frequency of drug resistance markers. To determine parasite
population structure, heterozygosity and linkage disequilibrium, we typed eight
microsatellite markers and performed haplotype analysis of the msp1 gene by PCR. 
Mutations known to be associated with resistance to the antimalarial drugs
chloroquine and pyrimethamine were determined by sequencing the relevant portions
of the crt and dhfr genes, respectively. We found that parasite genetic diversity
was comparable between the two sites, with high levels of polymorphism being
maintained in both areas despite dramatic differences in transmission intensity. 
Crucially, we found that the frequencies of genetic markers of drug resistance
against pyrimethamine and chloroquine differed significantly between the sites,
indicative of differing selection pressures in the two areas.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023430 
PMCID: PMC3156131
PMID: 21858115  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

