
1. Malar J. 2011 Sep 19;10:272. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-272.

Characterization and tissue-specific expression patterns of the Plasmodium
chabaudi cir multigene family.

Ebbinghaus P(1), Krücken J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Parasitology and Tropical Veterinary Medicine, Freie Universität
Berlin, Königsweg 67, 14163 Berlin, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Variant antigens expressed on the surface of parasitized red blood
cells (pRBCs) are important virulence factors of malaria parasites. Whereas
Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane proteins 1 (PfEMP1) are responsible
for sequestration of mature parasites, little is known about putative ligands
mediating cytoadherence to host receptors in other Plasmodium species. Candidates
include members of the pir superfamily found in the human parasite Plasmodium
vivax (vir), in the simian pathogen Plasmodium knowlesi (kir) and in the rodent
malarias Plasmodium yoelii (yir), Plasmodium berghei (bir) and Plasmodium
chabaudi (cir). The aim of this study was to reveal a potential involvement of
cir genes in P. chabaudi sequestration.
METHODS: Subfamilies of cir genes were identified by bioinformatic analyses of
annotated sequence data in the Plasmodium Genome Database. In order to examine
tissue-specific differences in the expression of cir mRNAs, RT-PCR with
subfamily-specific primers was used. In total, 432 cDNA clones derived from six
different tissues were sequenced to characterize the transcribed cir gene
repertoire. To confirm differences in transcription profiles of cir genes,
restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analyses were performed to
compare different host tissues and to identify changes during the course of P.
chabaudi infections in immunocompetent mice.
RESULTS: The phylogenetic analysis of annotated P. chabaudi putative CIR proteins
identified two major subfamilies. Comparison of transcribed cir genes from six
different tissues revealed significant differences in the frequency clones
belonging to individual cir gene subgroups were obtained from different tissues. 
Further hints of difference in the transcription of cir genes in individual
tissues were obtained by RFLP. Whereas only minimal changes in the transcription 
pattern of cir genes could be detected during the developmental cycle of the
parasites, switching to expression of other cir genes during the course of an
infection was observed around or after peak parasitemia.
CONCLUSIONS: The tissue-specific expression of cir mRNAs found in this study
indicates correlation between expression of CIR antigens and distribution of
parasites in inner organs. Together with comparable results for other members of 
the pir superfamily this suggests a role of cir and other pir genes in antigenic 
variation and sequestration of malaria parasites.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-272 
PMCID: PMC3189184
PMID: 21929749  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

