
1. BMC Genomics. 2011 Sep 22;12:457. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-457.

The landscape of inherited and de novo copy number variants in a Plasmodium
falciparum genetic cross.

Samarakoon U(1), Gonzales JM, Patel JJ, Tan A, Checkley L, Ferdig MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Eck Institute for Global Health, University
of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA.

BACKGROUND: Copy number is a major source of genome variation with important
evolutionary implications. Consequently, it is essential to determine copy number
variant (CNV) behavior, distributions and frequencies across genomes to
understand their origins in both evolutionary and generational time frames. We
use comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) microarray and the resolution
provided by a segregating population of cloned progeny lines of the malaria
parasite, Plasmodium falciparum, to identify and analyze the inheritance of 170
genome-wide CNVs.
RESULTS: We describe CNVs in progeny clones derived from both Mendelian (i.e.
inherited) and non-Mendelian mechanisms. Forty-five CNVs were present in the
parent lines and segregated in the progeny population. Furthermore, extensive
variation that did not conform to strict Mendelian inheritance patterns was
observed. 124 CNVs were called in one or more progeny but in neither parent: we
observed CNVs in more than one progeny clone that were not identified in either
parent, located more frequently in the telomeric-subtelomeric regions of
chromosomes and singleton de novo CNVs distributed evenly throughout the genome. 
Linkage analysis of CNVs revealed dynamic copy number fluctuations and suggested 
mechanisms that could have generated them. Five of 12 previously identified
expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) hotspots coincide with CNVs,
demonstrating the potential for broad influence of CNV on the transcriptional
program and phenotypic variation.
CONCLUSIONS: CNVs are a significant source of segregating and de novo genome
variation involving hundreds of genes. Examination of progeny genome segments
provides a framework to assess the extent and possible origins of CNVs. This
segregating genetic system reveals the breadth, distribution and dynamics of CNVs
in a surprisingly plastic parasite genome, providing a new perspective on the
sources of diversity in parasite populations.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-457 
PMCID: PMC3191341
PMID: 21936954  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

