
1. Malar J. 2011 Oct 7;10:291. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-291.

Transgenic Plasmodium parasites stably expressing Plasmodium vivax dihydrofolate 
reductase-thymidylate synthase as in vitro and in vivo models for antifolate
screening.

Somsak V(1), Uthaipibull C, Prommana P, Srichairatanakool S, Yuthavong Y,
Kamchonwongpaisan S.

Author information: 
(1)Protein-Ligand Engineering and Molecular Biology Laboratory, National Center
for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), National Science and
Technology Development Agency, Thailand Science Park, Pathumthani 12120,
Thailand.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium vivax is the most prevalent cause of human malaria in
tropical regions outside the African continent. The lack of a routine continuous 
in vitro culture of this parasite makes it difficult to develop specific drugs
for this disease. To facilitate the development of anti-P. vivax drugs, bacterial
and yeast surrogate models expressing the validated P. vivax target dihydrofolate
reductase-thymidylate synthase (DHFR-TS) have been generated; however, they can
only be used as primary screening models because of significant differences in
enzyme expression level and in vivo drug metabolism between the surrogate models 
and P. vivax parasites.
METHODS: Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium berghei parasites were transfected 
with DNA constructs bearing P. vivax dhfr-ts pyrimethamine sensitive (wild-type) 
and pyrimethamine resistant (mutant) alleles. Double crossover homologous
recombination was used to replace the endogenous dhfr-ts of P. falciparum and P. 
berghei parasites with P. vivax homologous genes. The integration of Pvdhfr-ts
genes via allelic replacement was verified by Southern analysis and the
transgenic parasites lines validated as models by standard drug screening assays.
RESULTS: Transgenic P. falciparum and P. berghei lines stably expressing
PvDHFR-TS replacing the endogenous parasite DHFR-TS were obtained. Anti-malarial 
drug screening assays showed that transgenic parasites expressing wild-type
PvDHFR-TS were pyrimethamine-sensitive, whereas transgenic parasites expressing
mutant PvDHFR-TS were pyrimethamine-resistant. The growth and sensitivity to
other types of anti-malarial drugs in the transgenic parasites were otherwise
indistinguishable from the parental parasites.
CONCLUSION: With the permanent integration of Pvdhfr-ts gene in the genome, the
transgenic Plasmodium lines expressing PvDHFR-TS are genetically stable and will 
be useful for screening anti-P. vivax compounds targeting PvDHFR-TS. A similar
approach could be used to generate transgenic models specific for other targets
of interest, thus facilitating the development of anti-P. vivax drugs in general.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-291 
PMCID: PMC3198988
PMID: 21981896  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

