
1. Malar J. 2011 Oct 11;10:295. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-295.

In vitro anti-plasmodial activity of Dicoma anomala subsp. gerrardii
(Asteraceae): identification of its main active constituent, structure-activity
relationship studies and gene expression profiling.

Becker JV(1), van der Merwe MM, van Brummelen AC, Pillay P, Crampton BG, Mmutlane
EM, Parkinson C, van Heerden FR, Crouch NR, Smith PJ, Mancama DT, Maharaj VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biosciences, CSIR, PO Box 395, Pretoria, 0001, South Africa.

BACKGROUND: Anti-malarial drug resistance threatens to undermine efforts to
eliminate this deadly disease. The resulting omnipresent requirement for drugs
with novel modes of action prompted a national consortium initiative to discover 
new anti-plasmodial agents from South African medicinal plants. One of the plants
selected for investigation was Dicoma anomala subsp. gerrardii, based on its
ethnomedicinal profile.
METHODS: Standard phytochemical analysis techniques, including solvent-solvent
extraction, thin-layer- and column chromatography, were used to isolate the main 
active constituent of Dicoma anomala subsp. gerrardii. The crystallized pure
compound was identified using nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, mass
spectrometry and X-ray crystallography. The compound was tested in vitro on
Plasmodium falciparum cultures using the parasite lactate dehydrogenase (pLDH)
assay and was found to have anti-malarial activity. To determine the functional
groups responsible for the activity, a small collection of synthetic analogues
was generated - the aim being to vary features proposed as likely to be related
to the anti-malarial activity and to quantify the effect of the modifications in 
vitro using the pLDH assay. The effects of the pure compound on the P. falciparum
transcriptome were subsequently investigated by treating ring-stage parasites
(alongside untreated controls), followed by oligonucleotide microarray- and data 
analysis.
RESULTS: The main active constituent was identified as dehydrobrachylaenolide, a 
eudesmanolide-type sesquiterpene lactone. The compound demonstrated an in vitro
IC50 of 1.865 μM against a chloroquine-sensitive strain (D10) of P. falciparum.
Synthetic analogues of the compound confirmed an absolute requirement that the
α-methylene lactone be present in the eudesmanolide before significant
anti-malarial activity was observed. This feature is absent in the artemisinins
and suggests a different mode of action. Microarray data analysis identified 572 
unique genes that were differentially expressed as a result of the treatment and 
gene ontology analysis identified various biological processes and molecular
functions that were significantly affected. Comparison of the
dehydrobrachylaenolide treatment transcriptional dataset with a published
artesunate (also a sesquiterpene lactone) dataset revealed little overlap. These 
results strengthen the notion that the isolated compound and the artemisinins
have differentiated modes of action.
CONCLUSIONS: The novel mode of action of dehydrobrachylaenolide, detected during 
these studies, will play an ongoing role in advancing anti-plasmodial drug
discovery efforts.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-295 
PMCID: PMC3200184
PMID: 21985233  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

