
1. Malar J. 2011 Oct 31;10:329. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-329.

Sexual recombination is a signature of a persisting malaria epidemic in Peru.

Sutton PL(1), Torres LP, Branch OH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, Department of Biology, New York
University, New York, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to consider the impact that multi-clone,
complex infections have on a parasite population structure in a low transmission 
setting. In general, complexity of infection (minimum number of clones within an 
infection) and the overall population level diversity is expected to be minimal
in low transmission settings. Additionally, the parasite population structure is 
predicted to be clonal, rather than sexual due to infrequent parasite inoculation
and lack of recombination between genetically distinct clones. However, in this
low transmission of the Peruvian Amazon, complex infections are becoming more
frequent, in spite of decreasing infection prevalence. In this study, it was
hypothesized that sexual recombination between distinct clonal lineages of
Plasmodium falciparum parasites were altering the subpopulation structure and
effectively maintaining the population-level diversity.
METHODS: Fourteen microsatellite markers were chosen to describe the genetic
diversity in 313 naturally occurring P. falciparum infections from Peruvian
Amazon. The population and subpopulation structure was characterized by
measuring: clusteredness, expected heterozygosity (He), allelic richness, private
allelic richness, and linkage disequilibrium. Next, microsatellite haplotypes and
alleles were correlated with P. falciparum merozoite surface protein 1 Block 2
(Pfmsp1-B2) to examine the presence of recombinant microsatellite haplotypes.
RESULTS: The parasite population structure consists of six genetically diverse
subpopulations of clones, called "clusters". Clusters 1, 3, 4, and 6 have unique 
haplotypes that exceed 70% of the total number of clones within each cluster,
while Clusters 2 and 5 have a lower proportion of unique haplotypes, but still
exceed 46%. By measuring the He, allelic richness, and private allelic richness
within each of the six subpopulations, relatively low levels of genetic diversity
within each subpopulation (except Cluster 4) are observed. This indicated that
the number of alleles, and not the combination of alleles, are limited. Next, the
standard index of association (IAS) was measured, which revealed a significant
decay in linkage disequilibrium (LD) associated with Cluster 6, which is
indicative of independent assortment of alleles. This decay in LD is a signature 
of this subpopulation approaching linkage equilibrium by undergoing sexual
recombination. To trace possible recombination events, the two most frequent
microsatellite haplotypes observed over time (defined by either a K1 or Mad20)
were selected as the progenitors and then potential recombinants were identified 
in within the natural population.
CONCLUSIONS: Contrary to conventional low transmission models, this study
provides evidence of a parasite population structure that is superficially
defined by a clonal backbone. Sexual recombination does occur and even arguably
is responsible for maintaining the substructure of this population.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-329 
PMCID: PMC3231964
PMID: 22039962  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

