
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e24784. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024784. Epub 2011 Oct 17.

Amplification of P. falciparum Cytoadherence through induction of a pro-adhesive 
state in host endothelium.

Wu Y(1), Szestak T, Stins M, Craig AG.

Author information: 
(1)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, United Kingdom.

This study examined the ability of P.falciparum-infected erythrocytes (IE) to
induce a pro-adhesive environment in the host endothelium during malaria
infection, prior to the systemic cytokine activation seen in the later phase of
disease. Previous work had shown increases in receptor levels but had not
measured to actual impact on IE binding. Using a co-culture system with a range
of endothelial cells (EC) and IE with different cytoadherent properties, we have 
characterised the specific expression of adhesion receptors and subsequent IE
binding by FACS and adhesion assays. We have also examined the specific
signalling pathways induced during co-culture that are potentially involved in
the induction of receptor expression. The results confirmed that ICAM-1 is
up-regulated, albeit at much lower levels than seen with TNF activation, in
response to co-culture with infected erythrocytes in all three tissue endothelial
cell types tested but that up-regulation of VCAM-1 is tissue-dependent. This
small increase in the levels of EC receptors correlated with large changes in IE 
adhesion ability. Co-culture with either RBC or IE increased the potential of
subsequent adhesion indicating priming/modulation effects on EC which make them
more susceptible to adhesion and thereby the recruitment of IE. Trypsin surface
digestion of IE and the use of a Pfsbp1-knockout (ko) parasite line abrogated the
up-regulation of ICAM-1 and reduced IE binding to EC suggesting that PfEMP-1 and 
other molecules exported to the IE surface via the PfSBP1 pathway are major
mediators of this phenotype. This was also supported by the higher induction of
EC adhesion receptors by adherent IE compared to isogenic, non-adherent lines.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024784 
PMCID: PMC3197193
PMID: 22043276  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

