
1. Malar J. 2011 Nov 3;10:336. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-336.

Vivax malaria in Mauritania includes infection of a Duffy-negative individual.

Wurtz N(1), Mint Lekweiry K, Bogreau H, Pradines B, Rogier C, Ould Mohamed Salem 
Boukhary A, Hafid JE, Ould Ahmedou Salem MS, Trape JF, Basco LK, Briolant S.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherche en Biologie et Epidémiologie Parasitaires, Institut de
Recherche Biomédicale des Armées, Parc du Pharo, Marseille Cedex, France.
nathalie_wurtz@yahoo.fr

BACKGROUND: Duffy blood group polymorphisms are important in areas where
Plasmodium vivax is present because this surface antigen is thought to act as a
key receptor for this parasite. In the present study, Duffy blood group
genotyping was performed in febrile uninfected and P. vivax-infected patients
living in the city of Nouakchott, Mauritania.
METHODS: Plasmodium vivax was identified by real-time PCR. The Duffy blood group 
genotypes were determined by standard PCR followed by sequencing of the promoter 
region and exon 2 of the Duffy gene in 277 febrile individuals. Fisher's exact
test was performed in order to assess the significance of variables.
RESULTS: In the Moorish population, a high frequency of the FYBES/FYBES genotype 
was observed in uninfected individuals (27.8%), whereas no P. vivax-infected
patient had this genotype. This was followed by a high level of FYA/FYB, FYB/FYB,
FYB/FYBES and FYA/FYBES genotype frequencies, both in the P. vivax-infected and
uninfected patients. In other ethnic groups (Poular, Soninke, Wolof), only the
FYBES/FYBES genotype was found in uninfected patients, whereas the FYA/FYBES
genotype was observed in two P. vivax-infected patients. In addition, one patient
belonging to the Wolof ethnic group presented the FYBES/FYBES genotype and was
infected by P. vivax.
CONCLUSIONS: This study presents the Duffy blood group polymorphisms in
Nouakchott City and demonstrates that in Mauritania, P. vivax is able to infect
Duffy-negative patients. Further studies are necessary to identify the process
that enables this Duffy-independent P. vivax invasion of human red blood cells.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-336 
PMCID: PMC3228859
PMID: 22050867  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

