
1. BMC Genomics. 2011 Nov 29;12:586. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-586.

Identification and analysis of the RNA degrading complexes and machinery of
Giardia lamblia using an in silico approach.

Williams CW(1), Elmendorf HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Georgetown University, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

BACKGROUND: RNA degradation is critical to the survival of all cells. With
increasing evidence for pervasive transcription in cells, RNA degradation has
gained recognition as a means of regulating gene expression. Yet, RNA degradation
machinery has been studied extensively in only a few eukaryotic organisms,
including Saccharomyces cerevisiae and humans. Giardia lamblia is a parasitic
protist with unusual genomic traits: it is binucleated and tetraploid, has a very
compact genome, displays a theme of genomic minimalism with cellular machinery
commonly comprised of a reduced number of protein components, and has a
remarkably large population of long, stable, noncoding, antisense RNAs.
RESULTS: Here we use in silico approaches to investigate the major RNA
degradation machinery in Giardia lamblia and compare it to a broad array of other
parasitic protists. We have found key constituents of the deadenylation and
decapping machinery and of the 5'-3' RNA degradation pathway. We have similarly
found that all of the major 3'-5' RNA degradation pathways are present in
Giardia, including both exosome-dependent and exosome-independent machinery.
However, we observe significant loss of RNA degradation machinery genes that will
result in important differences in the protein composition, and potentially
functionality, of the various RNA degradation pathways. This is most apparent in 
the exosome, the central mediator of 3'-5' degradation, which apparently contains
an altered core configuration in both Giardia and Plasmodium, with only four,
instead of the canonical six, distinct subunits. Additionally the exosome in
Giardia is missing both the Rrp6, Nab3, and Nrd1 proteins, known to be key
regulators of noncoding transcript stability in other cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that although the full complement of the
major RNA degradation mechanisms were present - and likely functional - early in 
eukaryotic evolution, the composition and function of the complexes is more
variable than previously appreciated. We suggest that the missing components of
the exosome complex provide an explanation for the stable abundance of sterile
RNA species in Giardia.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-586 
PMCID: PMC3282835
PMID: 22126454  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

