
1. Infect Immun. 2012 Apr;80(4):1491-501. doi: 10.1128/IAI.05980-11. Epub 2012 Jan
17.

A hybrid multistage protein vaccine induces protective immunity against murine
malaria.

Singh B(1), Cabrera-Mora M, Jiang J, Moreno A.

Author information: 
(1)Emory Vaccine Center, Yerkes National Primate Research Center, Emory
University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

We have previously reported the design and expression of chimeric recombinant
proteins as an effective platform to deliver malaria vaccines. The erythrocytic
and exoerythrocytic protein chimeras described included autologous T helper
epitopes genetically linked to defined B cell epitopes. Proof-of-principle
studies using vaccine constructs based on the Plasmodium yoelii circumsporozoite 
protein (CSP) and P. yoelii merozoite surface protein-1 (MSP-1) showed
encouraging results when tested individually in this mouse malaria model. To
evaluate the potential synergistic or additive effect of combining these chimeric
antigens, we constructed a synthetic gene encoding a hybrid protein that combined
both polypeptides in a single immunogen. The multistage vaccine was expressed in 
soluble form in Escherichia coli at high yield. Here we report that the
multistage protein induced robust immune responses to individual components, with
no evidence of vaccine interference. Passive immunization using purified IgG from
rabbits immunized with the hybrid protein conferred more robust protection
against the experimental challenge with P. yoelii sporozoites than passive
immunization with purified IgG from rabbits immunized with the individual
proteins. High antibody titers and high frequencies of CD4(+)- and
CD8(+)-specific cytokine-secreting T cells were elicited by vaccination. T cells 
were multifunctional and able to simultaneously produce interleukin-2 (IL-2),
gamma interferon (IFN-γ), and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α). The mechanism 
of vaccine-induced protection involved neutralizing antibodies and effector
CD4(+) T cells and resulted in the control of hyperparasitemia and protection
against malarial anemia. These data support our strategy of using an array of
autologous T helper epitopes to maximize the response to multistage malaria
vaccines.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.05980-11 
PMCID: PMC3318412
PMID: 22252877  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

