
1. J Parasitol. 2012 Jun;98(3):657-65. doi: 10.1645/GE-3006.1. Epub 2012 Jan 30.

A new morphologically distinct avian malaria parasite that fails detection by
established polymerase chain reaction-based protocols for amplification of the
cytochrome B gene.

Zehtindjiev P(1), Križanauskienė A, Bensch S, Palinauskas V, Asghar M, Dimitrov
D, Scebba S, Valkiūnas G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Research, Bulgarian Academy of
Sciences, 2 Gagarin Street, 1113 Sofia, Bulgaria.

Plasmodium polymorphum n. sp. (Haemosporida, Plasmodiidae) was found in the
skylark, Alauda arvensis (Passeriformes: Alaudidae), during autumnal migration in
southern Italy. This organism is illustrated and described based on the
morphology of its blood stages. The most distinctive feature of this malaria
parasite is the clear preference of its blood stages (trophozoites, meronts, and 
gametocytes) for immature red blood cells, including erythroblasts. Based on
preference of erythrocytic meronts for immature red blood cells, P. polymorphum
is most similar to species of the subgenus Huffia . This parasite can be readily 
distinguished from all other bird malaria parasites, including Plasmodium (
Huffia ) spp., due to preferential development and maturation of its gametocytes 
in immature red blood cells, a unique character for avian Plasmodium spp. In
addition, the margins of nuclei in blood stages of P. polymorphum are markedly
smooth and distinct; this is also a distinct diagnostic feature of this parasite.
Plasmodium polymorphum has been recorded only in the skylark; it is probably a
rare parasite, whose host range and geographical distribution remain unclear.
Microscopic examination detected a light infection of Plasmodium relictum
(lineage GRW11, parasitemia of <0.01%) in the same sample with P. polymorphum ;
the latter parasite clearly predominated (3.5% parasitemia). However, experienced
researchers were unable to detect sequences of mitochondrial cytochrome b gene
(cyt b ) of P. polymorphum from the microscopically positive sample by using
published and newly designed primers for DNA amplification of avian Plasmodium
spp. The light parasitemia of P. relictum was easily detectable using several
polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based assays, but P. polymorphum was undetectable
in all applied assays. Quantitative PCR also showed the presence of light
parasitemia (0.06%) of the lineage GRW11 in this sample. This supports the
conclusion that the morphologically distinct parasite observed along with P.
relictum and predominant in the sample is genetically dissimilar from the lineage
GRW11 based on cyt b sequence. In samples with co-infections, general PCR
protocols tend to favor the amplification of the parasite with the higher
parasitemia or the amplification with the best matching sequence to the primers. 
Because the parasitemia of P. polymorphum was >50-fold higher than that of P.
relictum and several different primers were tested, we suggest that the failure
to amplify P. polymorphum is a more complex problem than why co-infections are
commonly overlooked in PCR-based studies. We suggest possible explanations of
these results and call for additional research on evolution of mitochondrial
genome of hemosporidian parasites.

DOI: 10.1645/GE-3006.1 
PMID: 22288487  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

