
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31098. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031098. Epub 2012 Feb 20.

Bloodmeal analysis reveals avian Plasmodium infections and broad host preferences
of Culicoides (Diptera: Ceratopogonidae) vectors.

Santiago-Alarcon D(1), Havelka P, Schaefer HM, Segelbacher G.

Author information: 
(1)Biología y Conservación de Vertebrados, Instituto de Ecología A.C., Xalapa,
Veracruz, México. diego.santiago@inecol.edu.mx

Changing environmental conditions and human encroachment on natural habitats
bring human populations closer to novel sources of parasites, which might then
develop into new emerging diseases. Diseases transmitted by host generalist
vectors are of special interest due to their capacity to move pathogens into
novel hosts. We hypothesize that humans using forests for recreation are exposed 
to a broad range of parasites from wild animals and their vectors. A corollary of
this is that new vector-host, parasite-host, and vector-parasite associations
could eventually develop. Thus, we expect to observe atypical vector-host
associations. Using molecular bloodmeal analysis via amplification of the mtDNA
COI gene we identified the vertebrate hosts of Culicoides (Diptera:
Ceratopogonidae) species in a sub-urban forest of Southwestern Germany.
Bloodmeals were also checked for haemosporidian infections by amplifying a
fragment of the mtDNA cyt b gene. We identified a total of 20 Culicoides species,
thirteen of which fed on humans. From 105 screened bloodmeals we obtained high
quality sequences for 77 samples, 73 (94.8%) originated from humans, two from
livestock (Bos taurus and Equus caballus), and two from wild birds (Sylvia
atricapilla and Turdus merula). We found that four Culicoides species previously 
assumed to feed exclusively on either birds (C. kibunensis) or domestic mammals
(C. chiopterus, C. deltus, C. scoticus) fed also on humans. A total of six
Culicoides abdomens were infected with avian haemosporidian parasites (Plasmodium
or Haemoproteus), four of those abdomens contained blood derived from humans. Our
results suggest that parasites of wild animals may be transferred to humans
through infectious bites of Culicoides vectors. Further, we show that Culicoides 
vectors believed to be a specialist on specific vertebrate groups can have
plastic feeding preferences, and that Culicoides are susceptible to infection by 
Plasmodium parasites, though vector viability must still be experimentally
demonstrated.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031098 
PMCID: PMC3282704
PMID: 22363557  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

