
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e32524. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032524. Epub 2012 Feb 29.

Roles of the amino terminal region and repeat region of the Plasmodium berghei
circumsporozoite protein in parasite infectivity.

Aldrich C(1), Magini A, Emiliani C, Dottorini T, Bistoni F, Crisanti A,
Spaccapelo R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Perugia, Perugia Italy.

The circumsporozoite protein (CSP) plays a key role in malaria sporozoite
infection of both mosquito salivary glands and the vertebrate host. The conserved
Regions I and II have been well studied but little is known about the immunogenic
central repeat region and the N-terminal region of the protein. Rodent malaria
Plasmodium berghei parasites, in which the endogenous CS gene has been replaced
with the avian Plasmodium gallinaceum CS (PgCS) sequence, develop normally in the
A. stephensi mosquito midgut but the sporozoites are not infectious. We therefore
generated P. berghei transgenic parasites carrying the PgCS gene, in which the
repeat region was replaced with the homologous region of P. berghei CS (PbCS). A 
further line, in which both the N-terminal region and repeat region were replaced
with the homologous regions of PbCS, was also generated. Introduction of the PbCS
repeat region alone, into the PgCS gene, did not rescue sporozoite
species-specific infectivity. However, the introduction of both the PbCS repeat
region and the N-terminal region into the PgCS gene completely rescued
infectivity, in both the mosquito vector and the mammalian host.
Immunofluorescence experiments and western blot analysis revealed correct
localization and proteolytic processing of CSP in the chimeric parasites. The
results demonstrate, in vivo, that the repeat region of P. berghei CSP, alone, is
unable to mediate sporozoite infectivity in either the mosquito or the mammalian 
host, but suggest an important role for the N-terminal region in sporozoite host 
cell invasion.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032524 
PMCID: PMC3290588
PMID: 22393411  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

