
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e32643. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032643. Epub 2012 Mar 5.

Wolbachia infection decreased the resistance of Drosophila to lead.

Wang L(1), Zhou C, He Z, Wang ZG, Wang JL, Wang YF.

Author information: 
(1)Hubei Key Laboratory of Genetic Regulation and Integrative Biology, College of
Life Science, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: The heavy metal lead has been shown to be associated with a genotoxic
risk. Drosophila melanogaster is a model organism commonly utilized in genetic
toxicology testing. The endosymbionts--Wolbachia are now very common in both wild
populations and laboratory stocks of Drosophila. Wolbachia may induce resistance 
to pathogenic viruses, filarial nematodes and Plasmodium in fruit fly and
mosquito hosts. However the effect of Wolbachia infection on the resistance of
their hosts to heavy metal is unknown.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Manipulating the lead content in the diet of
Drosophila melanogaster, we found that lead consumption had no different effects 
on developmental time between Wolbachia-infected (Dmel wMel) and -uninfected
(Dmel T) flies. While in Pb-contaminated medium, significantly reduced amount of 
pupae and adults of Dmel wMel were emerged, and Dmel wMel adults had
significantly shorter longevity than that of Dmel T flies. Lead infusion in diet 
resulted in significantly decreased superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity in Dmel T
flies (P<0.05), but not in Dmel wMel flies. Correspondingly, lead cultures
induced a 10.8 fold increase in malonaldehyde (MDA) contents in Dmel T larvae
(P<0.05). While in Dmel wMel larvae, it resulted in only a 1.3 fold increase. By 
quantitative RT-PCR, we showed that lead infused medium caused significantly
increased expression level of relish and CecA2 genes in Dmel T flies (P<0.01).
Lead cultures did not change dramatically the expression of these genes in Dmel
wMel flies.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These results suggest that Wolbachia infection
decreased the resistance of Drosophila to lead likely by limiting the production 
of peroxides resulted from lead, thus being unable to activate the immunological 
pathway in the host to prevent them from lead damage. This represents a novel
Wolbachia-host interaction and provides information that researchers working on
Drosophila toxicology should take in consideration the presence of Wolbachia in
the stocks they are analyzing.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032643 
PMCID: PMC3293831
PMID: 22403688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

