
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e34168. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034168. Epub 2012 Mar 26.

Erasing the epigenetic memory and beginning to switch--the onset of antigenic
switching of var genes in Plasmodium falciparum.

Fastman Y(1), Noble R, Recker M, Dzikowski R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Molecular Genetics, The Kuvin Center for the
Study of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, IMRIC, The Hebrew University-Hadassah 
Medical School, Jerusalem, Israel.

Antigenic variation in Plasmodium falciparum is regulated by transcriptional
switches among members of the var gene family, each expressed in a mutually
exclusive manner and encoding a different variant of the surface antigens
collectively named PfEMP1. Antigenic switching starts when the first merozoites
egress from the liver and begin their asexual proliferation within red blood
cells. By erasing the epigenetic memory we created parasites with no var
background, similar to merozoites that egress from the liver where no var gene is
expressed. Creating a null-var background enabled us to investigate the onset of 
antigenic switches at the early phase of infection. At the onset of switching,
var transcription pattern is heterogeneous with numerous genes transcribed at low
levels including upsA vars, a subtype that was implicated in severe malaria,
which are rarely activated in growing cultures. Analysis of subsequent in vitro
switches shows that the probability of a gene to turn on or off is not associated
with its chromosomal position or promoter type per se but on intrinsic properties
of each gene. We concluded that var switching is determined by gene specific
associated switch rates rather than general promoter type or locus associated
switch rates. In addition, we show that fine tuned reduction in var transcription
increases their switch rate, indicating that transcriptional perturbation can
alter antigenic switching.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034168 
PMCID: PMC3312910
PMID: 22461905  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

