
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33326. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033326. Epub 2012 Mar 30.

Centromere plasmid: a new genetic tool for the study of Plasmodium falciparum.

Iwanaga S(1), Kato T, Kaneko I, Yuda M.

Author information: 
(1)Mie University, School of Medicine, Tsu, Japan. iwanaga@doc.medic.mie-u.ac.jp

The introduction of transgenes into Plasmodium falciparum, a highly virulent
human malaria parasite, has been conducted either by single crossover
recombination or by using episomal plasmids. However, these techniques remain
insufficient because of the low transfection efficiency and the low frequency of 
recombination. To improve the genetic manipulation of P. falciparum, we developed
the centromere plasmid as a new genetic tool. First, we attempted to clone all of
the predicted centromeres from P. falciparum into E. coli cells but failed
because of the high A/T contents of these sequences. To overcome this difficulty,
we identified the common sequence features of the centromere of Plasmodium spp.
and designed a small centromere that retained those features. The centromere
plasmid constructed with the small centromere sequence, pFCEN, segregated into
daughter parasites with approximately 99% efficiency, resulting in the stable
maintenance of this plasmid in P. falciparum even in the absence of drug
selection. This result demonstrated that the small centromere sequence harboured 
in pFCEN could function as an actual centromere in P. falciparum. In addition,
transgenic parasites were more rapidly generated when using pFCEN than when using
the control plasmid, which did not contain the centromere sequence. Furthermore, 
in contrast to the control plasmid, pFCEN did not form concatemers and, thus, was
maintained as a single copy over multiple cell divisions. These unique properties
of the pFCEN plasmid will solve the current technical limitations of the genetic 
manipulation of P. falciparum, and thus, this plasmid will become a standard
genetic tool for the study of this parasite.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033326 
PMCID: PMC3316556
PMID: 22479383  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

