
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34990. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034990. Epub 2012 Apr 20.

The origin of malarial parasites in orangutans.

Pacheco MA(1), Reid MJ, Schillaci MA, Lowenberger CA, Galdikas BM, Jones-Engel L,
Escalante AA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Evolutionary Medicine and Informatics, the Biodesign Institute,
Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Recent findings of Plasmodium in African apes have changed our
perspectives on the evolution of malarial parasites in hominids. However,
phylogenetic analyses of primate malarias are still missing information from
Southeast Asian apes. In this study, we report molecular data for a malaria
parasite lineage found in orangutans.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We screened twenty-four blood samples from Pongo 
pygmaeus (Kalimantan, Indonesia) for Plasmodium parasites by PCR. For all the
malaria positive orangutan samples, parasite mitochondrial genomes (mtDNA) and
two antigens: merozoite surface protein 1 42 kDa (MSP-1(42)) and circumsporozoite
protein gene (CSP) were amplified, cloned, and sequenced. Fifteen orangutans
tested positive and yielded 5 distinct mitochondrial haplotypes not previously
found. The haplotypes detected exhibited low genetic divergence among them,
indicating that they belong to one species. We report phylogenetic analyses using
mitochondrial genomes, MSP-1(42) and CSP. We found that the orangutan malaria
parasite lineage was part of a monophyletic group that includes all the known
non-human primate malaria parasites found in Southeast Asia; specifically, it
shares a recent common ancestor with P. inui (a macaque parasite) and P. hylobati
(a gibbon parasite) suggesting that this lineage originated as a result of a host
switch. The genetic diversity of MSP-1(42) in orangutans seems to be under
negative selection. This result is similar to previous findings in non-human
primate malarias closely related to P. vivax. As has been previously observed in 
the other Plasmodium species found in non-human primates, the CSP shows high
polymorphism in the number of repeats. However, it has clearly distinctive motifs
from those previously found in other malarial parasites.
CONCLUSION: The evidence available from Asian apes indicates that these parasites
originated independently from those found in Africa, likely as the result of host
switches from other non-human primates.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034990 
PMCID: PMC3335055
PMID: 22536346  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

