
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2012 Sep;185(1):36-47. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2012.06.005. Epub 2012 Jun 18.

Two long non-coding RNAs generated from subtelomeric regions accumulate in a
novel perinuclear compartment in Plasmodium falciparum.

Sierra-Miranda M(1), Delgadillo DM, Mancio-Silva L, Vargas M, Villegas-Sepulveda 
N, Martínez-Calvillo S, Scherf A, Hernandez-Rivas R.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biomedicina Molecular, Centro de Investigación y de Estudios
Avanzados del Instituto Politécnico Nacional (IPN), México, DF, Mexico.

Chromosome ends have been implicated in the default silencing of clonally variant
gene families in the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. These
chromosome regions are organized into heterochromatin, as defined by the presence
of a repressive histone H3 lysine 9 trimethylated marker and heterochromatin
protein 1. Here, we show that the non-coding subtelomeric region adjacent to
virulence genes forms facultative heterochromatin in a cell cycle-dependent
manner. We demonstrate that telomere-associated repeat elements (TAREs) and
telomeres are transcribed as long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) during schizogony.
Northern blot assays revealed two classes of lncRNAs: a ~4-kb transcript composed
of telomere sequences and a TARE-3 element, and a >6-kb transcript composed of
21-bp repeats from TARE-6. These lncRNAs are transcribed by RNA polymerase II as 
single-stranded molecules. RNA-FISH analysis showed that these lncRNAs form
several nuclear foci during the schizont stage, whereas in the ring stage, they
are located in a single perinuclear compartment that does not co-localize with
any known nuclear subcompartment. Furthermore, the TARE-6 lncRNA is predicted to 
form a stable and repetitive hairpin structure that is able to bind histones.
Consequently, the characterization of the molecular interactions of these lncRNAs
with nuclear proteins may reveal novel modes of gene regulation and nuclear
function in P. falciparum.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2012.06.005 
PMID: 22721695  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

