
1. Proteome Sci. 2012 Jun 21;10 Suppl 1:S10. doi: 10.1186/1477-5956-10-S1-S10.

Computational synchronization of microarray data with application to Plasmodium
falciparum.

Zhao W(1), Dauwels J, Niles JC, Cao J.

Author information: 
(1)Singapore-MIT Alliance for Research and Technology, Centre for Life Sciences, 
28 Medical Drive, Singapore 117456. jdauwels@ntu.edu.sg.

BACKGROUND: Microarrays are widely used to investigate the blood stage of
Plasmodium falciparum infection. Starting with synchronized cells, gene
expression levels are continually measured over the 48-hour intra-erythrocytic
cycle (IDC). However, the cell population gradually loses synchrony during the
experiment. As a result, the microarray measurements are blurred. In this paper, 
we propose a generalized deconvolution approach to reconstruct the intrinsic
expression pattern, and apply it to P. falciparum IDC microarray data.
METHODS: We develop a statistical model for the decay of synchrony among cells,
and reconstruct the expression pattern through statistical inference. The
proposed method can handle microarray measurements with noise and missing data.
The original gene expression patterns become more apparent in the reconstructed
profiles, making it easier to analyze and interpret the data. We hypothesize that
reconstructed gene expression patterns represent better temporally resolved
expression profiles that can be probabilistically modeled to match changes in
expression level to IDC transitions. In particular, we identify transcriptionally
regulated protein kinases putatively involved in regulating the P. falciparum
IDC.
RESULTS: By analyzing publicly available microarray data sets for the P.
falciparum IDC, protein kinases are ranked in terms of their likelihood to be
involved in regulating transitions between the ring, trophozoite and schizont
developmental stages of the P. falciparum IDC. In our theoretical framework, a
few protein kinases have high probability rankings, and could potentially be
involved in regulating these developmental transitions.
CONCLUSIONS: This study proposes a new methodology for extracting intrinsic
expression patterns from microarray data. By applying this method to P.
falciparum microarray data, several protein kinases are predicted to play a
significant role in the P. falciparum IDC. Earlier experiments have indeed
confirmed that several of these kinases are involved in this process. Overall,
these results indicate that further functional analysis of these additional
putative protein kinases may reveal new insights into how the P. falciparum IDC
is regulated.

DOI: 10.1186/1477-5956-10-S1-S10 
PMCID: PMC3380736
PMID: 22759568 

