
1. Infect Immun. 2012 Aug;80(8):2963-70. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00072-12. Epub 2012 Jul 2.

Enhanced basophil reactivities during severe malaria and their relationship with 
the Plasmodium falciparum histamine-releasing factor translationally controlled
tumor protein.

Pelleau S(1), Diop S, Dia Badiane M, Vitte J, Beguin P, Nato F, Diop BM, Bongrand
P, Parzy D, Jambou R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire du Paludisme, Institut Pasteur de Dakar, Dakar, Sénégal.

Recent studies suggest shared pathogenic pathways during malaria and allergy.
Indeed, IgE, histamine, and the parasite-derived Plasmodium falciparum
histamine-releasing factor translationally controlled tumor protein (PfTCTP) can 
be found at high levels in serum from patients experiencing malaria, but their
relationship with basophil activation remains unknown. We recruited P.
falciparum-infected patients in Senegal with mild malaria (MM; n = 19) or severe 
malaria (SM; n = 9) symptoms and healthy controls (HC; n = 38). Levels of serum
IgE, PfTCTP, and IgG antibodies against PfTCTP were determined by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays (ELISA). Basophil reactivities to IgE-dependent and
-independent stimulations were measured ex vivo using fresh blood by looking at
the expression level of the basophil activation marker CD203c with flow
cytometry. Unstimulated basophils from MM had significantly lower levels of
CD203c expression compared to those from HC and SM. After normalization on this
baseline level, basophils from SM showed an enhanced reactivity to calcimycin
(A23187) and hemozoin. Although SM reached higher median levels of activation
after anti-IgE stimulation, great interindividual differences did not allow the
results to reach statistical significance. When primed with recombinant TCTP
before anti-IgE, qualitative differences in terms of a better ability to control 
excessive activation could be described for SM. IgE levels were very high in
malaria patients, but concentrations in MM and SM were similar and were not
associated with basophil responses, which demonstrates that the presence of IgE
alone cannot explain the various basophil reactivities. Indeed, PfTCTP could be
detected in 32% of patients, with higher concentrations for SM. These
PfTCTP-positive patients displayed significantly higher basophil reactivities to 
any stimulus. Moreover, the absence of anti-PfTCTP IgG was associated with higher
responses in SM but not MM. Our results show an association between basophil
reactivity and malaria severity and suggest a pathogenic role for plasmodial
PfTCTP in the induction of this allergy-like mechanism.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00072-12 
PMCID: PMC3434570
PMID: 22753372  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

