
1. J Clin Invest. 2012 Sep;122(9):3227-38. doi: 10.1172/JCI62182. Epub 2012 Aug 1.

Targets of antibodies against Plasmodium falciparum-infected erythrocytes in
malaria immunity.

Chan JA(1), Howell KB, Reiling L, Ataide R, Mackintosh CL, Fowkes FJ, Petter M,
Chesson JM, Langer C, Warimwe GM, Duffy MF, Rogerson SJ, Bull PC, Cowman AF,
Marsh K, Beeson JG.

Author information: 
(1)Macfarlane Burnet Institute for Medical Research and Public Health, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia.

Plasmodium falciparum is the major cause of malaria globally and is transmitted
by mosquitoes. During parasitic development, P. falciparum-infected erythrocytes 
(P. falciparum-IEs) express multiple polymorphic proteins known as variant
surface antigens (VSAs), including the P. falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein
1 (PfEMP1). VSA-specific antibodies are associated with protection from
symptomatic and severe malaria. However, the importance of the different VSA
targets of immunity to malaria remains unclear, which has impeded an
understanding of malaria immunity and vaccine development. In this study, we
developed assays using transgenic P. falciparum with modified PfEMP1 expression
to quantify serum antibodies to VSAs among individuals exposed to malaria. We
found that the majority of the human antibody response to the IE targets PfEMP1. 
Furthermore, our longitudinal studies showed that individuals with
PfEMP1-specific antibodies had a significantly reduced risk of developing
symptomatic malaria, whereas antibodies to other surface antigens were not
associated with protective immunity. Using assays that measure antibody-mediated 
phagocytosis of IEs, an important mechanism in parasite clearance, we identified 
PfEMP1 as the major target of these functional antibodies. Taken together, these 
data demonstrate that PfEMP1 is a key target of humoral immunity. These findings 
advance our understanding of the targets and mediators of human immunity to
malaria and have major implications for malaria vaccine development.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI62182 
PMCID: PMC3428085
PMID: 22850879  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

