
1. J Vis Exp. 2012 Aug 15;(66):e4166. doi: 10.3791/4166.

An in vitro co-infection model to study Plasmodium falciparum-HIV-1 interactions 
in human primary monocyte-derived immune cells.

Andreani G(1), Gagnon D, Lodge R, Tremblay MJ, Richard D.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Research Center, CHUL (CHUQ), Quebec City, Quebec, Canada.

Plasmodium falciparum, the causative agent of the deadliest form of malaria, and 
human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) are among the most important health
problems worldwide, being responsible for a total of 4 million deaths annually.
Due to their extensive overlap in developing regions, especially Sub-Saharan
Africa, co-infections with malaria and HIV-1 are common, but the interplay
between the two diseases is poorly understood. Epidemiological reports have
suggested that malarial infection transiently enhances HIV-1 replication and
increases HIV-1 viral load in co-infected individuals. Because this viremia stays
high for several weeks after treatment with antimalarials, this phenomenon could 
have an impact on disease progression and transmission. The cellular
immunological mechanisms behind these observations have been studied only
scarcely. The few in vitro studies investigating the impact of malaria on HIV-1
have demonstrated that exposure to soluble malarial antigens can increase HIV-1
infection and reactivation in immune cells. However, these studies used whole
cell extracts of P. falciparum schizont stage parasites and peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC), making it hard to decipher which malarial component(s) 
was responsible for the observed effects and what the target host cells were.
Recent work has demonstrated that exposure of immature monocyte-derived dendritic
cells to the malarial pigment hemozoin increased their ability to transfer HIV-1 
to CD4+ T cells, but that it decreased HIV-1 infection of macrophages(8). To shed
light on this complex process, a systematic analysis of the interactions between 
the malaria parasite and HIV-1 in different relevant human primary cell
populations is critically needed. Several techniques for investigating the impact
of HIV-1 on the phagocytosis of micro-organisms and the effect of such pathogens 
on HIV-1 replication have been described. We here present a method to investigate
the effects of P. falciparum-infected erythrocytes on the replication of HIV-1 in
human primary monocyte-derived macrophages. The impact of parasite exposure on
HIV-1 transcriptional/translational events is monitored by using single cycle
pseudotyped viruses in which a luciferase reporter gene has replaced the Env gene
while the effect on the quantity of virus released by the infected macrophages is
determined by measuring the HIV-1 capsid protein p24 by ELISA in cell
supernatants.

DOI: 10.3791/4166 
PMCID: PMC3487290
PMID: 22929299  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

