
1. Genet Vaccines Ther. 2012 Aug 31;10(1):8. doi: 10.1186/1479-0556-10-8.

Targeting wild-type Erythrocyte receptors for Plasmodium falciparum and vivax
Merozoites by Zinc Finger Nucleases In- silico: Towards a Genetic Vaccine against
Malaria.

Kajumbula H(1), Byarugaba W, Wayengera M.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Medical Microbiology, School of Biomedical Science, College of Health 
Sciences, Makerere University, P O Box 7072, Kampala, Uganda. wmisaki@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Malaria causes immense human morbidity and mortality globally. The
plasmodium species vivax and falciparum cause over 75 % clinical malaria cases.
Until now, gene-based strategies against malaria have only been applied to
plasmodium species and their mosquito-vector. Merozoites of these two respective 
plasmodium species target and invade red blood cells (RBCs) by using the duffy
antigen receptor for chemokines (DARC), and Sialic Acid (SLC4A1) residues of the 
O-linked glycans of Glycophorin A. RBCs of naturally selected duffy-negative
blacks are resistant to P.vivax tropism. We hypothesized that artificial
aberration of the host-pathway by target mutagenesis of either RBC -receptors,
may abolish or reduce susceptibility of the host to malaria. As a first step
towards the experimental actualization of these concepts, we aimed to identify
zinc finger arrays (ZFAs) for constructing ZFNs that target genes of either
wild-type host-RBC- receptors.
METHODS: In-Silico Gene & Genome Informatics
RESULTS: Using the genomic contextual nucleotide-sequences of homo-sapiens darc
and glycophorin-a, and the ZFN-consortia software- CoDA-ZiFiT-ZFA and
CoDA-ZiFiT-ZFN: we identified 163 and over 1,000 single zinc finger arrays
(sZFAs) that bind sequences within the genes for the two respective
RBC-receptors. Second, 2 and 18 paired zinc finger arrays (pZFAs) that are
precursors for zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs) capable of cleaving the genes for
darc and glycophorin-a were respectively assembled. Third, a mega-BLAST
evaluation of the genome-wide cleavage specificity of this set of ZFNs was done, 
revealing alternate homologous nucleotide targets in the human genome other than 
darc or glycophorin A.
CONCLUSIONS: ZFNs engineered with these ZFA-precursors--with further optimization
to enhance their specificity to only darc and glycophorin-a, could be used in
constructing an experimental gene-based-malaria vaccine. Alternatively,
meganucleases and transcription activator-like (TAL) nucleases that target
conserved stretches of darc and glycophorin-a DNA may serve the purpose of
abrogating invasion of RBCs by falciparam and vivax plasmodia species.

DOI: 10.1186/1479-0556-10-8 
PMCID: PMC3500210
PMID: 22938508 

