
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e42496. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042496. Epub 2012 Aug 29.

Estimating the numbers of malaria infections in blood samples using
high-resolution genotyping data.

Ross A(1), Koepfli C, Li X, Schoepflin S, Siba P, Mueller I, Felger I, Smith T.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland.
amanda.ross@unibas.ch

People living in endemic areas often habour several malaria infections at once.
High-resolution genotyping can distinguish between infections by detecting the
presence of different alleles at a polymorphic locus. However the number of
infections may not be accurately counted since parasites from multiple infections
may carry the same allele. We use simulation to determine the circumstances under
which the number of observed genotypes are likely to be substantially less than
the number of infections present and investigate the performance of two methods
for estimating the numbers of infections from high-resolution genotyping data.
The simulations suggest that the problem is not substantial in most datasets: the
disparity between the mean numbers of infections and of observed genotypes was
small when there was 20 or more alleles, 20 or more blood samples, a mean number 
of infections of 6 or less and where the frequency of the most common allele was 
no greater than 20%. The issue of multiple infections carrying the same allele is
unlikely to be a major component of the errors in PCR-based genotyping.
Simulations also showed that, with heterogeneity in allele frequencies, the
observed frequencies are not a good approximation of the true allele frequencies.
The first method that we proposed to estimate the numbers of infections assumes
that they are a good approximation and hence did poorly in the presence of
heterogeneity. In contrast, the second method by Li et al estimates both the
numbers of infections and the true allele frequencies simultaneously and produced
accurate estimates of the mean number of infections.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042496 
PMCID: PMC3430681
PMID: 22952595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

