
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e45797. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045797. Epub 2012 Oct 1.

Focused Screening and Treatment (FSAT): a PCR-based strategy to detect malaria
parasite carriers and contain drug resistant P. falciparum, Pailin, Cambodia.

Hoyer S(1), Nguon S, Kim S, Habib N, Khim N, Sum S, Christophel EM, Bjorge S,
Thomson A, Kheng S, Chea N, Yok S, Top S, Ros S, Sophal U, Thompson MM, Mellor S,
Ariey F, Witkowski B, Yeang C, Yeung S, Duong S, Newman RD, Menard D.

Author information: 
(1)World Health Organization, Global Malaria Programme, Geneva, Switzerland.
hoyers@who.int

Recent studies have shown that Plasmodium falciparum malaria parasites in Pailin 
province, along the border between Thailand and Cambodia, have become resistant
to artemisinin derivatives. To better define the epidemiology of P. falciparum
populations and to assess the risk of the possible spread of these parasites
outside Pailin, a new epidemiological tool named "Focused Screening and
Treatment" (FSAT), based on active molecular detection of asymptomatic parasite
carriers was introduced in 2010. Cross-sectional malariometric surveys using PCR 
were carried out in 20 out of 109 villages in Pailin province. Individuals
detected as P. falciparum carriers were treated with atovaquone-proguanil
combination plus a single dose of primaquine if the patient was non-G6PD
deficient. Interviews were conducted to elicit history of cross-border travel
that might contribute to the spread of artemisinin-resistant parasites. After
directly observed treatment, patients were followed up and re-examined on day 7
and day 28. Among 6931 individuals screened, prevalence of P. falciparum carriers
was less than 1%, of whom 96% were asymptomatic. Only 1.6% of the individuals had
a travel history or plans to go outside Cambodia, with none of those tested being
positive for P. falciparum. Retrospective analysis, using 2010 routine
surveillance data, showed significant differences in the prevalence of
asymptomatic carriers discovered by FSAT between villages classified as "high
risk" and "low risk" based on malaria incidence data. All positive individuals
treated and followed-up until day 28 were cured. No mutant-type allele related to
atovaquone resistance was found. FSAT is a potentially useful tool to detect,
treat and track clusters of asymptomatic carriers of P. falciparum along with
providing valuable epidemiological information regarding cross-border movements
of potential malaria parasite carriers and parasite gene flow.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045797 
PMCID: PMC3462177
PMID: 23049687  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

