
1. J Vis Exp. 2012 Oct 7;(68). pii: 4073. doi: 10.3791/4073.

Analysis of single-cell gene transcription by RNA fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH).

Ronander E(1), Bengtsson DC, Joergensen L, Jensen AT, Arnot DE.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of International Health,
Immunology & Microbiology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen.
elenar@sund.ku.dk

Adhesion of Plasmodium falciparum infected erythrocytes (IE) to human endothelial
receptors during malaria infections is mediated by expression of PfEMP1 protein
variants encoded by the var genes. The haploid P. falciparum genome harbors
approximately 60 different var genes of which only one has been believed to be
transcribed per cell at a time during the blood stage of the infection. How such 
mutually exclusive regulation of var gene transcription is achieved is unclear,
as is the identification of individual var genes or sub-groups of var genes
associated with different receptors and the consequence of differential binding
on the clinical outcome of P. falciparum infections. Recently, the mutually
exclusive transcription paradigm has been called into doubt by transcription
assays based on individual P. falciparum transcript identification in single
infected erythrocytic cells using RNA fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH)
analysis of var gene transcription by the parasite in individual nuclei of P.
falciparum IE(1). Here, we present a detailed protocol for carrying out the
RNA-FISH methodology for analysis of var gene transcription in single-nuclei of
P. falciparum infected human erythrocytes. The method is based on the use of
digoxigenin- and biotin- labeled antisense RNA probes using the TSA Plus
Fluorescence Palette System(2) (Perkin Elmer), microscopic analyses and freshly
selected P. falciparum IE. The in situ hybridization method can be used to
monitor transcription and regulation of a variety of genes expressed during the
different stages of the P. falciparum life cycle and is adaptable to other
malaria parasite species and other organisms and cell types.

DOI: 10.3791/4073 
PMCID: PMC3912591
PMID: 23070076  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

