
1. Malar J. 2012 Nov 15;11:375. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-375.

Improving N-terminal protein annotation of Plasmodium species based on signal
peptide prediction of orthologous proteins.

Neto Ade M(1), Alvarenga DA, Rezende AM, Resende SS, Ribeiro Rde S, Fontes CJ,
Carvalho LH, de Brito CF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria, Rene Rachou Research Institute, Fiocruz Minas, Belo
Horizonte, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Signal peptide is one of the most important motifs involved in
protein trafficking and it ultimately influences protein function. Considering
the expected functional conservation among orthologs it was hypothesized that
divergence in signal peptides within orthologous groups is mainly due to
N-terminal protein sequence misannotation. Thus, discrepancies in signal peptide 
prediction of orthologous proteins were used to identify misannotated proteins in
five Plasmodium species.
METHODS: Signal peptide (SignalP) and orthology (OrthoMCL) were combined in an
innovative strategy to identify orthologous groups showing discrepancies in
signal peptide prediction among their protein members (Mixed groups). In a
comparative analysis, multiple alignments for each of these groups and gene
models were visually inspected in search of misannotated proteins and, whenever
possible, alternative gene models were proposed. Thresholds for signal peptide
prediction parameters were also modified to reduce their impact as a possible
source of discrepancy among orthologs. Validation of new gene models was based on
RT-PCR (few examples) or on experimental evidence already published (ApiLoc).
RESULTS: The rate of misannotated proteins was significantly higher in Mixed
groups than in Positive or Negative groups, corroborating the proposed
hypothesis. A total of 478 proteins were reannotated and change of signal peptide
prediction from negative to positive was the most common. Reannotations triggered
the conversion of almost 50% of all Mixed groups, which were further reduced by
optimization of signal peptide prediction parameters.
CONCLUSIONS: The methodological novelty proposed here combining orthology and
signal peptide prediction proved to be an effective strategy for the
identification of proteins showing wrongly N-terminal annotated sequences, and it
might have an important impact in the available data for genome-wide searching of
potential vaccine and drug targets and proteins involved in host/parasite
interactions, as demonstrated for five Plasmodium species.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-375 
PMCID: PMC3529677
PMID: 23153225  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

