
1. Genome Biol. 2012 Nov 26;13(11):R108. doi: 10.1186/gb-2012-13-11-r108.

Organellar proteomics reveals hundreds of novel nuclear proteins in the malaria
parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

Oehring SC, Woodcroft BJ, Moes S, Wetzel J, Dietz O, Pulfer A, Dekiwadia C,
Maeser P, Flueck C, Witmer K, Brancucci NM, Niederwieser I, Jenoe P, Ralph SA,
Voss TS.

BACKGROUND: The post-genomic era of malaria research provided unprecedented
insights into the biology of Plasmodium parasites. Due to the large evolutionary 
distance to model eukaryotes, however, we lack a profound understanding of many
processes in Plasmodium biology. One example is the cell nucleus, which controls 
the parasite genome in a development- and cell cycle-specific manner through
mostly unknown mechanisms. To study this important organelle in detail, we
conducted an integrative analysis of the P. falciparum nuclear proteome.
RESULTS: We combined high accuracy mass spectrometry and bioinformatic approaches
to present for the first time an experimentally determined core nuclear proteome 
for P. falciparum. Besides a large number of factors implicated in known nuclear 
processes, one-third of all detected proteins carry no functional annotation,
including many phylum- or genus-specific factors. Importantly, extensive
experimental validation using 30 transgenic cell lines confirmed the high
specificity of this inventory, and revealed distinct nuclear localization
patterns of hitherto uncharacterized proteins. Further, our detailed analysis
identified novel protein domains potentially implicated in gene transcription
pathways, and sheds important new light on nuclear compartments and processes
including regulatory complexes, the nucleolus, nuclear pores, and nuclear import 
pathways.
CONCLUSION: Our study provides comprehensive new insight into the biology of the 
Plasmodium nucleus and will serve as an important platform for dissecting general
and parasite-specific nuclear processes in malaria parasites. Moreover, as the
first nuclear proteome characterized in any protist organism, it will provide an 
important resource for studying evolutionary aspects of nuclear biology.

DOI: 10.1186/gb-2012-13-11-r108 
PMCID: PMC4053738
PMID: 23181666  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

