
1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2013 Feb;12(2):426-48. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M112.021238. Epub
2012 Nov 28.

Proteomic and genetic analyses demonstrate that Plasmodium berghei blood stages
export a large and diverse repertoire of proteins.

Pasini EM(1), Braks JA, Fonager J, Klop O, Aime E, Spaccapelo R, Otto TD,
Berriman M, Hiss JA, Thomas AW, Mann M, Janse CJ, Kocken CH, Franke-Fayard B.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Primate Research Centre, 2288 GJ Rijswijk, The Netherlands.

Malaria parasites actively remodel the infected red blood cell (irbc) by
exporting proteins into the host cell cytoplasm. The human parasite Plasmodium
falciparum exports particularly large numbers of proteins, including proteins
that establish a vesicular network allowing the trafficking of proteins onto the 
surface of irbcs that are responsible for tissue sequestration. Like P.
falciparum, the rodent parasite P. berghei ANKA sequesters via irbc interactions 
with the host receptor CD36. We have applied proteomic, genomic, and
reverse-genetic approaches to identify P. berghei proteins potentially involved
in the transport of proteins to the irbc surface. A comparative proteomics
analysis of P. berghei non-sequestering and sequestering parasites was used to
determine changes in the irbc membrane associated with sequestration. Subsequent 
tagging experiments identified 13 proteins (Plasmodium export element
(PEXEL)-positive as well as PEXEL-negative) that are exported into the irbc
cytoplasm and have distinct localization patterns: a dispersed and/or patchy
distribution, a punctate vesicle-like pattern in the cytoplasm, or a distinct
location at the irbc membrane. Members of the PEXEL-negative BIR and
PEXEL-positive Pb-fam-3 show a dispersed localization in the irbc cytoplasm, but 
not at the irbc surface. Two of the identified exported proteins are transported 
to the irbc membrane and were named erythrocyte membrane associated proteins.
EMAP1 is a member of the PEXEL-negative Pb-fam-1 family, and EMAP2 is a
PEXEL-positive protein encoded by a single copy gene; neither protein plays a
direct role in sequestration. Our observations clearly indicate that P. berghei
traffics a diverse range of proteins to different cellular locations via
mechanisms that are analogous to those employed by P. falciparum. This
information can be exploited to generate transgenic humanized rodent P. berghei
parasites expressing chimeric P. berghei/P. falciparum proteins on the surface of
rodent irbc, thereby opening new avenues for in vivo screening adjunct therapies 
that block sequestration.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M112.021238 
PMCID: PMC3567864
PMID: 23197789  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

