
1. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2013 Sep 1;19(7):683-95. doi: 10.1089/ars.2012.4625. Epub 
2012 Dec 20.

Glutathione transport: a new role for PfCRT in chloroquine resistance.

Patzewitz EM(1), Salcedo-Sora JE, Wong EH, Sethia S, Stocks PA, Maughan SC,
Murray JA, Krishna S, Bray PG, Ward SA, Müller S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, College of Medical,
Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.

AIMS: Chloroquine (CQ) kills Plasmodium falciparum by binding heme, preventing
its detoxification to hemozoin in the digestive vacuole (DV) of the parasite. CQ 
resistance (CQR) is associated with mutations in the DV membrane protein P.
falciparum chloroquine resistance transporter (PfCRT), mediating the leakage of
CQ from the DV. However, additional factors are thought to contribute to the
resistance phenotype. This study tested the hypothesis that there is a link
between glutathione (GSH) and CQR.
RESULTS: Using isogenic parasite lines carrying wild-type or mutant pfcrt, we
reveal lower levels of GSH in the mutant lines and enhanced sensitivity to the
GSH synthesis inhibitor l-buthionine sulfoximine, without any alteration in
cytosolic de novo GSH synthesis. Incubation with N-acetylcysteine resulted in
increased GSH levels in all parasites, but only reduced susceptibility to CQ in
PfCRT mutant-expressing lines. In support of a heme destruction mechanism
involving GSH in CQR parasites, we also found lower hemozoin levels and reduced
CQ binding in the CQR PfCRT-mutant lines. We further demonstrate via expression
in Xenopus laevis oocytes that the mutant alleles of Pfcrt in CQR parasites
selectively transport GSH.
INNOVATION: We propose a mechanism whereby mutant pfcrt allows enhanced transport
of GSH into the parasite's DV. The elevated levels of GSH in the DV reduce the
level of free heme available for CQ binding, which mediates the lower
susceptibility to CQ in the PfCRT mutant parasites.
CONCLUSION: PfCRT has a dual role in CQR, facilitating both efflux of harmful CQ 
from the DV and influx of beneficial GSH into the DV.

DOI: 10.1089/ars.2012.4625 
PMCID: PMC3739961
PMID: 23256874  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

