
1. BMC Genomics. 2013 Jan 16;14:8. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-8.

A new computational approach redefines the subtelomeric vir superfamily of
Plasmodium vivax.

Lopez FJ(1), Bernabeu M, Fernandez-Becerra C, del Portillo HA.

Author information: 
(1)Barcelona Centre for International Health Research, CRESIB, Hospital
Clínic-Universitat de Barcelona, Roselló 153, 1a planta CEK Building, 08036
Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Subtelomeric multigene families of malaria parasites encode virulent 
determinants. The published genome sequence of Plasmodium vivax revealed the
largest subtelomeric multigene family of human malaria parasites, the vir
super-family, presently composed of 346 vir genes subdivided into 12 different
subfamilies based on sequence homologies detected by BLAST.
RESULTS: A novel computational approach was used to redefine vir genes. First, a 
protein-weighted graph was built based on BLAST alignments. This graph was
processed to ensure that edge weights are not exclusively based on the BLAST
score between the two corresponding proteins, but strongly dependant on their
graph neighbours and their associations. Then the Markov Clustering Algorithm was
applied to the protein graph. Next, the Homology Block concept was used to
further validate this clustering approach. Finally, proteome-wide analysis was
carried out to predict new VIR members. Results showed that (i) three previous
subfamilies cannot longer be classified as vir genes; (ii) most previously
unclustered vir genes were clustered into vir subfamilies; (iii) 39 hypothetical 
proteins were predicted as VIR proteins; (iv) many of these findings are
supported by a number of structural and functional evidences, sub-cellular
localization studies, gene expression analysis and chromosome localization (v)
this approach can be used to study other multigene families in malaria.
CONCLUSIONS: This methodology, resource and new classification of vir genes will 
contribute to a new structural framing of this multigene family and other
multigene families of malaria parasites, facilitating the design of experiments
to understand their role in pathology, which in turn may help furthering vaccine 
development.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-8 
PMCID: PMC3566924
PMID: 23324551  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

