
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55475. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055475. Epub 2013 Feb 6.

Relationship between knockdown resistance, metabolic detoxification and
organismal resistance to pyrethroids in Anopheles sinensis.

Zhong D(1), Chang X, Zhou G, He Z, Fu F, Yan Z, Zhu G, Xu T, Bonizzoni M, Wang
MH, Cui L, Zheng B, Chen B, Yan G.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Public Health, College of Health Sciences, University of California
Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA.

Anopheles sinensis is the most important vector of malaria in Southeast Asia,
including China. Currently, the most effective measure to prevent malaria
transmission relies on vector control through the use of insecticides, primarily 
pyrethroids. Extensive use of insecticides poses strong selection pressure on
mosquito populations for resistance. Resistance to insecticides can arise due to 
mutations in the insecticide target site (target site resistance), which in the
case of pyrethroids is the para-type sodium channel gene, and/or the catabolism
of the insecticide by detoxification enzymes before it reaches its target
(metabolic detoxification resistance). In this study, we examined deltamethrin
resistance in An. sinensis from China and investigated the relative importance of
target site versus metabolic detoxification mechanisms in resistance. A high
frequency (>85%) of nonsynonymous mutations in the para gene was found in
populations from central China, but not in populations from southern China.
Metabolic detoxification as measured by the activity of monooxygenases and
glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) was detected in populations from both central
and southern China. Monooxygenase activity levels were significantly higher in
the resistant than the susceptible mosquitoes, independently of their geographic 
origin. Stepwise multiple regression analyses in mosquito populations from
central China found that both knockdown resistance (kdr) mutations and
monooxygenase activity were significantly associated with deltamethrin
resistance, with monooxygenase activity playing a stronger role. These results
demonstrate the importance of metabolic detoxification in pyrethroid resistance
in An. sinensis, and suggest that different mechanisms of resistance could evolve
in geographically different populations.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055475 
PMCID: PMC3566193
PMID: 23405157  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

