
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55539. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055539. Epub 2013 Feb 7.

Transcription sites are developmentally regulated during the asexual cycle of
Plasmodium falciparum.

Moraes CB(1), Dorval T, Contreras-Dominguez M, Dossin Fde M, Hansen MA, Genovesio
A, Freitas-Junior LH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neglected Diseases Drug Discovery (CND3), Institut Pasteur Korea,
Gyeonggi-do, South Korea.

Increasing evidence shows that the spatial organization of transcription is an
important epigenetic factor in eukaryotic gene regulation. The malaria parasite
Plasmodium falciparum shows a remarkably complex pattern of gene expression
during the erythrocytic cycle, paradoxically contrasting with the relatively low 
number of putative transcription factors encoded by its genome. The spatial
organization of nuclear subcompartments has been correlated with the regulation
of virulence genes. Here, we investigate the nuclear architecture of
transcription during the asexual cycle of malaria parasites. As in mammals,
transcription is organized into discrete nucleoplasmic sites in P. falciparum,
but in a strikingly lower number of foci. An automated analysis of 3D images
shows that the number and intensity of transcription sites vary significantly
between rings and trophozoites, although the nuclear volume remains constant.
Transcription sites are spatially reorganized during the asexual cycle, with a
higher proportion of foci located in the outermost nuclear region in rings,
whereas in trophozoites, foci are evenly distributed throughout the nucleoplasm. 
As in higher eukaryotes, transcription sites are predominantly found in areas of 
low chromatin density. Immunofluorescence analysis shows that transcription sites
form an exclusive nuclear compartment, different from the compartments defined by
the silenced or active chromatin markers. In conclusion, these data suggest that 
transcription is spatially contained in discrete foci that are developmentally
regulated during the asexual cycle of malaria parasites and located in areas of
low chromatin density.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055539 
PMCID: PMC3567098
PMID: 23408998  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

