
1. Parasit Vectors. 2013 Feb 22;6:47. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-6-47.

Phylogeography of the neotropical Anopheles triannulatus complex (Diptera:
Culicidae) supports deep structure and complex patterns.

Moreno M(1), Bickersmith S, Harlow W, Hildebrandt J, McKeon SN,
Silva-do-Nascimento TF, Loaiza JR, Ruiz F, Lourenço-de-Oliveira R, Sallum MA,
Bergo ES, Fritz GN, Wilkerson RC, Linton YM, Juri MJ, Rangel Y, Póvoa MM,
Gutiérrez-Builes LA, Correa MM, Conn JE.

Author information: 
(1)New York State Department of Health, Wadsworth Center, Griffin Laboratory,
Albany, NY, USA. mmorenoleirana@ucsd.edu

BACKGROUND: The molecular phylogenetic relationships and population structure of 
the species of the Anopheles triannulatus complex: Anopheles triannulatus s.s.,
Anopheles halophylus and the putative species Anopheles triannulatus C were
investigated.
METHODS: The mitochondrial COI gene, the nuclear white gene and rDNA ITS2 of
samples that include the known geographic distribution of these taxa were
analyzed. Phylogenetic analyses were performed using Bayesian inference, Maximum 
parsimony and Maximum likelihood approaches.
RESULTS: Each data set analyzed septely yielded a different topology but none
provided evidence for the seption of An. halophylus and An. triannulatus C,
consistent with the hypothesis that the two are undergoing incipient speciation. 
The phylogenetic analyses of the white gene found three main clades, whereas the 
statistical parsimony network detected only a single metapopulation of Anopheles 
triannulatus s.l. Seven COI lineages were detected by phylogenetic and network
analysis. In contrast, the network, but not the phylogenetic analyses, strongly
supported three ITS2 groups. Combined data analyses provided the best resolution 
of the trees, with two major clades, Amazonian (clade I) and
trans-Andean + Amazon Delta (clade II). Clade I consists of multiple subclades:
An. halophylus + An. triannulatus C; trans-Andean Venezuela; central
Amazonia + central Bolivia; Atlantic coastal lowland; and Amazon delta. Clade II 
includes three subclades: Panama; cis-Andean Colombia; and cis-Venezuela. The
Amazon delta specimens are in both clades, likely indicating local sympatry.
Spatial and molecular variance analyses detected nine groups, corroborating some 
of subclades obtained in the combined data analysis.
CONCLUSION: Combination of the three molecular markers provided the best
resolution for differentiation within An. triannulatus s.s. and An. halophylus
and C. The latest two species seem to be very closely related and the analyses
performed were not conclusive regarding species differentiation. Further studies 
including new molecular markers would be desirable to solve this species status
question. Besides, results of the study indicate a trans-Andean origin for An.
triannulatus s.l. The potential implications for malaria epidemiology remain to
be investigated.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-6-47 
PMCID: PMC3606328
PMID: 23433428  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

