
1. Cell Microbiol. 2013 Sep;15(9):1585-604. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12137. Epub 2013 Apr 5.

A key role for lipoic acid synthesis during Plasmodium liver stage development.

Falkard B(1), Kumar TR, Hecht LS, Matthews KA, Henrich PP, Gulati S, Lewis RE,
Manary MJ, Winzeler EA, Sinnis P, Prigge ST, Heussler V, Deschermeier C, Fidock
D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, NY, USA.

The successful navigation of malaria parasites through their life cycle, which
alternates between vertebrate hosts and mosquito vectors, requires a complex
interplay of metabolite synthesis and salvage pathways. Using the rodent parasite
Plasmodium berghei, we have explored the synthesis and scavenging pathways for
lipoic acid, a short-chain fatty acid derivative that regulates the activity of
α-ketoacid dehydrogenases including pyruvate dehydrogenase. In Plasmodium, lipoic
acid is either synthesized de novo in the apicoplast or is scavenged from the
host into the mitochondrion. Our data show that sporozoites lacking the
apicoplast lipoic acid protein ligase LipB are markedly attenuated in their
infectivity for mice, and in vitro studies document a very late liver stage
arrest shortly before the final phase of intra-hepaticparasite maturation.
LipB-deficient asexual blood stage parasites show unimpaired rates of growth in
normal in vitro or in vivo conditions. However, these parasites showed reduced
growth in lipid-restricted conditions induced by treatment with the lipoic acid
analogue 8-bromo-octanoate or with the lipid-reducing agent clofibrate. This
finding has implications for understanding Plasmodium pathogenesis in
malnourished children that bear the brunt of malarial disease. This study also
highlights the potential of exploiting lipid metabolism pathways for the design
of genetically attenuated sporozoite vaccines.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12137 
PMCID: PMC3740003
PMID: 23490300  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

