
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59746. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059746. Epub 2013 Mar 26.

Surveillance on the status of immune cells after Echinnococcus granulosus
protoscoleces infection in Balb/c mice.

Pan W(1), Zhou HJ, Shen YJ, Wang Y, Xu YX, Hu Y, Jiang YY, Yuan ZY, Ugwu CE, Cao 
JP.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Minstry of Health,
World Health Organization Collaborating Centre for Malaria, Schistosomiasis and
Filariasis, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Cystic echinococcosis is a global parasitic disease caused by
infection with Echinococcus granulosus larvae with potentially life-threatening
complications in humans. To date, the status of the immune cells believed to be
associated with the pathogenicity of E. granulosus infection has not been
demonstrated clearly.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, we developed a multiplex flow
cytometry assay to investigate the systemic immune status of innate and adaptive 
immunity at 30, 180, 360 days post-infection (dpi) in mice infected with E.
granulousus. At 30 dpi, an increase in the number of CD11b(+) and CD11c(+)
antigen-presenting cells (APCs) was observed. This was accompanied by the slight 
down-regulated expression of the co-stimulatory molecule MHC-II, indicating the
impairment of APCs in early infection through the release of secretory-excretory 
products. In all infected groups, we observed a significant increase in innate
immune cells, including APCs and GR-1(+) cells, and a dramatic increase in the
myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) expressing CD11b(+)/GR-1(+). Moreover,
the upregulation of the activated markers CD69, CD44, CD40L, and the
downregulation of CD62L were observed in the CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells following 
infection. Regulatory T cells expressing CD4(+)/CD25(+)/FoxP3 (+) increased
significantly over the course of infection.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that the microenvironment in the peripheral
immune system after E. granulosus infection changes in subtle but detectably
ways, especially during the persistent period of infection. We found that T cells
were activated following infection, but observed that the significant increase of
immunosuppressive cells such as MDSC and Treg cells could inhibit T cell response
to E. granulosus antigens. We suggest these cells may play a neglected but key
role in the downregulation of the immune response in long-term parasitic
infection. Understanding the basic functions and temporal interactions of these
immunosuppressive cells will pave the way for new strategies of parasite vaccine 
design.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059746 
PMCID: PMC3608569
PMID: 23555767  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

