
1. Database (Oxford). 2013 Apr 12;2013:bat021. doi: 10.1093/database/bat021. Print
2013.

A database for curating the associations between killer cell immunoglobulin-like 
receptors and diseases in worldwide populations.

Takeshita LY(1), Gonzalez-Galarza FF, dos Santos EJ, Maia MH, Rahman MM, Zain SM,
Middleton D, Jones AR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Integrative Biology, Functional and Comparative Genomics,
University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 7ZB, UK. L.Takeshita@liverpool.ac.uk

The killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIR) play a fundamental role in
the innate immune system, through their interactions with human leucocyte antigen
(HLA) molecules, leading to the modulation of activity in natural killer (NK)
cells, mainly related to killing pathogen-infected cells. KIR genes are hugely
polymorphic both in the number of genes an individual carries and in the number
of alleles identified. We have previously developed the Allele Frequency Net
Database (AFND, http://www.allelefrequencies.net), which captures worldwide
frequencies of alleles, genes and haplotypes for several immune genes, including 
KIR genes, in healthy populations, covering >4 million individuals. Here, we
report the creation of a new database within AFND, named KIR and Diseases
Database (KDDB), capturing a large quantity of data derived from publications in 
which KIR genes, alleles, genotypes and/or haplotypes have been associated with
infectious diseases (e.g. hepatitis C, HIV, malaria), autoimmune disorders (e.g. 
type I diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis), cancer and pregnancy-related
complications. KDDB has been created through an extensive manual curation effort,
extracting data on more than a thousand KIR-disease records, comprising >50 000
individuals. KDDB thus provides a new community resource for understanding not
only how KIR genes are associated with disease, but also, by working in tandem
with the large data sets already present in AFND, where particular genes,
genotypes or haplotypes are present in worldwide populations or different ethnic 
groups. We anticipate that KDDB will be an important resource for researchers
working in immunogenetics. Database URL:
http://www.allelefrequencies.net/diseases/.

DOI: 10.1093/database/bat021 
PMCID: PMC3625957
PMID: 23584834  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

