
1. Parasit Vectors. 2013 Apr 18;6:109. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-6-109.

Molecular and epidemiological characterization of Plasmodium vivax recurrent
infections in southern Mexico.

Gonzalez-Ceron L(1), Mu J, Santillán F, Joy D, Sandoval MA, Camas G, Su X, Choy
EV, Torreblanca R.

Author information: 
(1)CRISP, National Institute for Public Health, Tapachula, Chiapas 30700, Mexico.
lgonzal@insp.mx

BACKGROUND: In southern Mexico, malaria transmission is low, seasonal, and
persistent. Because many patients are affected by two or more malaria episodes
caused by Plasmodium vivax, we carried out a study to determine the timing,
frequency, and genetic identity of recurrent malaria episodes in the region
between 1998 and 2008.
METHODS: Symptomatic patients with more than one P. vivax infection were followed
up, and blood samples were collected from primary and recurrent infections. DNA
extracted from infected blood samples was analyzed for restriction fragment
length polymorphism (RFLP) in genes encoding csp and msp3α, as well as size
variation in seven microsatellites.
RESULTS: One hundred and forty six parasite samples were collected from 70
patients; of these, 65 patients had one recurrent infection, four had two, and
one had three recurrent infections. The majority of recurrent infections occurred
within one year of the primary infection, some of which were genetically
homologous to the primary infection. As the genetic diversity in the background
population was high, the probability of homologous re-infection was low and the
homologous recurrences likely reflected relapses. These homologous recurrent
infections generally had short (< 6 months) or long (6-12 months) intervals
between the primary (PI) and recurrent (RI) infections; whereas infections
containing heterologous genotypes had relatively longer intervals. The
epidemiological data indicate that heterologous recurrences could be either
relapse or re-infections.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic and temporal analysis of P. vivax recurrence patterns in
southern Mexico indicated that relapses play an important role in initiating
malaria transmission each season. The manifestation of these infections during
the active transmission season allowed the propagation of diverse hypnozoite
genotypes. Both short- and long-interval relapses have contributed to parasite
persistence and must be considered as targets of treatment for malaria
elimination programs in the region to be successful.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-6-109 
PMCID: PMC3637411
PMID: 23597046  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

