
1. Traffic. 2013 Aug;14(8):895-911. doi: 10.1111/tra.12081. Epub 2013 May 29.

Global analysis of apicomplexan protein S-acyl transferases reveals an enzyme
essential for invasion.

Frénal K(1), Tay CL, Mueller C, Bushell ES, Jia Y, Graindorge A, Billker O,
Rayner JC, Soldati-Favre D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, CMU, University of Geneva, 
Rue Michel-Servet 1, CH-1211, Geneva 4, Switzerland.

The advent of techniques to study palmitoylation on a whole proteome scale has
revealed that it is an important reversible modification that plays a role in
regulating multiple biological processes. Palmitoylation can control the affinity
of a protein for lipid membranes, which allows it to impact protein trafficking, 
stability, folding, signalling and interactions. The publication of the palmitome
of the schizont stage of Plasmodium falciparum implicated a role for
palmitoylation in host cell invasion, protein export and organelle biogenesis.
However, nothing is known so far about the repertoire of protein S-acyl
transferases (PATs) that catalyse this modification in Apicomplexa. We undertook 
a comprehensive analysis of the repertoire of Asp-His-His-Cys cysteine-rich
domain (DHHC-CRD) PAT family in Toxoplasma gondii and Plasmodium berghei by
assessing their localization and essentiality. Unlike functional redundancies
reported in other eukaryotes, some apicomplexan-specific DHHCs are essential for 
parasite growth, and several are targeted to organelles unique to this phylum. Of
particular interest is DHHC7, which localizes to rhoptry organelles in all
parasites tested, including the major human pathogen P. falciparum. TgDHHC7
interferes with the localization of the rhoptry palmitoylated protein TgARO and
affects the apical positioning of the rhoptry organelles. This PAT has a major
impact on T. gondii host cell invasion, but not on the parasite's ability to
egress.

© 2013 The Authors. Traffic published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tra.12081 
PMCID: PMC3813974
PMID: 23638681  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

