
1. J Parasitol. 2013 Dec;99(6):1133-6. doi: 10.1645/13-211.1. Epub 2013 May 3.

Evaluation of a restriction fragment length enzyme assay for differentiation of
Haemoproteus and Plasmodium across a standard region of the mitochondrial genome.

Kistler WM(1), Hernandez SM, Gibbs SE, Ballard JR, Arnold SL, Johnson T, Yabsley 
MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Daniel B. Warnell School of Forestry and Natural Resources, University of
Georgia, Athens, Georgia 30602;

Avian hemosporidian parasites are a genetically diverse group of parasites with a
near cosmopolitan distribution. Over the past 2 decades, several PCR protocols
have been designed to detect these parasites. The majority of these protocols
amplify part of or the entire mitochondrial cytochrome b gene. However, many of
these protocols co-amplify 2 genera (Haemoproteus and Plasmodium), making it
impossible to determine which genus is amplified without post-PCR analysis. A
uniform database (MalAvi), containing sequences amplified with the primers HAEMF 
and HAEMR2, has been developed to increase comparability across studies. We
analyzed sequences from the MalAvi database and new sequences and found that
digestion with EcoRV could be used to distinguish Haemoproteus from the majority 
of Plasmodium sequences. In addition, we tested 220 wild birds from Costa Rica
and the United States for avian hemosporidians and assessed the ability of EcoRV 
to distinguish these 2 genera. Thirty-six positive samples were sequenced to
confirm the restriction profiles, and we also analyzed 63 new hemosporidian
sequences from ongoing studies in the United States for the restriction site.
Among these new samples, all of the 85 Haemoproteus (subgenus Parahaemoproteus)
and 14 Plasmodium were distinguishable. Overall, 887 of 898 (98.8%) sequences
from our studies and the MalAvi database were assigned to the correct genus. Of
these samples, all Haemoproteus samples were correctly identified and all but 11 
Plasmodium samples were correctly identified by the EcoRV assay. Overall, this
restriction enzyme protocol is able to quickly and efficiently classify these 2
genera of avian malarial parasites and would be useful for researchers interested
in identifying parasites to genus-level, studies focused on sequence analysis of 
only a single genus, or for detecting co-infections that would need cloning prior
to sequence analysis.

DOI: 10.1645/13-211.1 
PMID: 23641900  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

