
1. BMC Evol Biol. 2013 Jun 18;13:124. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-13-124.

Overlapping genes of Aedes aegypti: evolutionary implications from comparison
with orthologs of Anopheles gambiae and other insects.

Behura SK(1), Severson DW.

Author information: 
(1)Eck Institute for Global Health, Department of Biological Sciences, University
of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA.

BACKGROUND: Although gene overlapping is a common feature of prokaryote and
mitochondria genomes, such genes have also been identified in many eukaryotes.
The overlapping genes in eukaryotes are extensively rearranged even between
closely related species. In this study, we investigated retention and
rearrangement of positionally overlapping genes between the mosquitoes Aedes
aegypti (dengue virus vector) and Anopheles gambiae (malaria vector). The
overlapping gene pairs of A. aegypti were further compared with orthologs of
other selected insects to conduct several hypothesis driven investigations
relating to the evolution and rearrangement of overlapping genes.
RESULTS: The results show that as much as ~10% of the predicted genes of A.
aegypti and A. gambiae are localized in positional overlapping manner.
Furthermore, the study shows that differential abundance of introns and simple
sequence repeats have significant association with positional rearrangement of
overlapping genes between the two species. Gene expression analysis further
suggests that antisense transcripts generated from the oppositely oriented
overlapping genes are differentially regulated and may have important regulatory 
functions in these mosquitoes. Our data further shows that synonymous and
non-synonymous mutations have differential but non-significant effect on
overlapping localization of orthologous genes in other insect genomes.
CONCLUSION: Gene overlapping in insects may be a species-specific evolutionary
process as evident from non-dependency of gene overlapping with species
phylogeny. Based on the results, our study suggests that overlapping genes may
have played an important role in genome evolution of insects.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2148-13-124 
PMCID: PMC3689595
PMID: 23777277  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

