
1. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 5;8(7):e69412. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069412. Print 2013.

The co-expression pattern of odorant binding proteins and olfactory receptors
identify distinct trichoid sensilla on the antenna of the malaria mosquito
Anopheles gambiae.

Schultze A(1), Pregitzer P, Walter MF, Woods DF, Marinotti O, Breer H, Krieger J.

Author information: 
(1)University of Hohenheim, Institute of Physiology, Stuttgart, Germany.

The initial steps of odorant recognition in the insect olfactory system involve
odorant binding proteins (OBPs) and odorant receptors (ORs). While large families
of OBPs have been identified in the malaria vector A. gambiae, little is known
about their expression pattern in the numerous sensory hairs of the female
antenna. We applied whole mount fluorescence in Situ hybridization (WM-FISH) and 
fluorescence immunohistochemistry (WM-FIHC) to investigate the sensilla
co-expression of eight A. gambiae OBPs (AgOBPs), most notably AgOBP1 and AgOBP4, 
which all have abundant transcripts in female antenna. WM-FISH analysis of female
antennae using AgOBP-specific probes revealed marked differences in the number of
cells expressing each various AgOBPs. Testing combinations of AgOBP probes in
two-color WM-FISH resulted in distinct cellular labeling patterns, indicating a
combinatorial expression of AgOBPs and revealing distinct AgOBP requirements for 
various functional sensilla types. WM-FIHC with antisera to AgOBP1 and AgOBP4
confirmed expression of the respective proteins by support cells and demonstrated
a location of OBPs within sensilla trichodea. Based on the finding that AgOBP1
and AgOBP4 as well as the receptor type AgOR2 are involved in the recognition of 
indole, experiments were performed to explore if the AgOBP-types and AgOR2 are
co-expressed in distinct olfactory sensilla. Applying two-color WM-FISH with
AgOBP-specific probes and probes specific for AgOR2 revealed a close association 
of support cells bearing transcripts for AgOBP1 and AgOBP4 and neurons with a
transcript for the receptor AgOR2. Moreover, combined WM-FISH/-FIHC approaches
using an AgOR2-specific riboprobe and AgOBP-specific antisera revealed the
expression of the "ligand-matched" AgOBP1, AgOBP4 and AgOR2 to single trichoid
hairs. This result substantiates the notion that a specific response to indole is
mediated by an interplay of the proteins.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069412 
PMCID: PMC3702612
PMID: 23861970  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

