
1. J Vis Exp. 2013 Jul 12;(77):e50598. doi: 10.3791/50598.

Genetic manipulation in Δku80 strains for functional genomic analysis of
Toxoplasma gondii.

Rommereim LM(1), Hortua Triana MA, Falla A, Sanders KL, Guevara RB, Bzik DJ, Fox 
BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth, USA.

Targeted genetic manipulation using homologous recombination is the method of
choice for functional genomic analysis to obtain a detailed view of gene function
and phenotype(s). The development of mutant strains with targeted gene deletions,
targeted mutations, complemented gene function, and/or tagged genes provides
powerful strategies to address gene function, particularly if these genetic
manipulations can be efficiently targeted to the gene locus of interest using
integration mediated by double cross over homologous recombination. Due to very
high rates of nonhomologous recombination, functional genomic analysis of
Toxoplasma gondii has been previously limited by the absence of efficient methods
for targeting gene deletions and gene replacements to specific genetic loci.
Recently, we abolished the major pathway of nonhomologous recombination in type I
and type II strains of T. gondii by deleting the gene encoding the KU80
protein(1,2). The Δku80 strains behave normally during tachyzoite (acute) and
bradyzoite (chronic) stages in vitro and in vivo and exhibit essentially a 100%
frequency of homologous recombination. The Δku80 strains make functional genomic 
studies feasible on the single gene as well as on the genome scale(1-4). Here, we
report methods for using type I and type II Δku80Δhxgprt strains to advance gene 
targeting approaches in T. gondii. We outline efficient methods for generating
gene deletions, gene replacements, and tagged genes by targeted insertion or
deletion of the hypoxanthine-xanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HXGPRT) 
selectable marker. The described gene targeting protocol can be used in a variety
of ways in Δku80 strains to advance functional analysis of the parasite genome
and to develop single strains that carry multiple targeted genetic manipulations.
The application of this genetic method and subsequent phenotypic assays will
reveal fundamental and unique aspects of the biology of T. gondii and related
significant human pathogens that cause malaria (Plasmodium sp.) and
cryptosporidiosis (Cryptosporidium).

DOI: 10.3791/50598 
PMCID: PMC3735270
PMID: 23892917  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

