
1. Malar J. 2013 Aug 21;12:288. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-288.

Merozoite surface protein-3 alpha as a genetic marker for epidemiologic studies
in Plasmodium vivax: a cautionary note.

Rice BL(1), Acosta MM, Pacheco MA, Escalante AA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Evolutionary Medicine and Informatics, The Biodesign Institute,
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium vivax is the most widespread of the human malaria
parasites in terms of geography, and is thought to present unique challenges to
local efforts aimed at control and elimination. Parasite molecular markers can
provide much needed data on P. vivax populations, but few such markers have been 
critically evaluated. One marker that has seen extensive use is the gene encoding
merozoite surface protein 3-alpha (MSP-3α), a blood-stage antigen known to be
highly variable among P. vivax isolates. Here, a sample of complete msp-3α gene
sequences is analysed in order to assess its utility as a molecular marker for
epidemiologic investigations.
METHODS: Amplification, cloning and sequencing of additional P. vivax isolates
from different geographic locations, including a set of Venezuelan field isolates
(n = 10), yielded a sample of 48 complete msp-3α coding sequences.
Characterization of standard population genetic measures of diversity,
phylogenetic analysis, and tests for recombination were performed. This allowed
comparisons to patterns inferred from the in silico simulation of a polymerase
chain reaction restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) protocol used 
widely.
RESULTS: The larger sample of MSP-3α diversity revealed incongruence between the 
observed levels of nucleotide polymorphism, which were high in all populations,
and the pattern of PCR-RFLP haplotype diversity. Indeed, PCR-RFLP haplotypes were
not informative of a population's genetic diversity and identical haplotypes
could be produced from analogous bands in the commonly used protocol. Evidence of
frequent and variable insertion-deletion mutations and recurrent recombination
between MSP-3α haplotypes complicated the inference of genetic diversity patterns
and reduced the phylogenetic signal.
CONCLUSIONS: The genetic diversity of P. vivax msp-3α involves intragenic
recombination events. Whereas the high genetic diversity of msp-3α makes it a
promising marker for some epidemiological applications, the ability of msp-3α
PCR-RFLP analysis to accurately track parasites is limited. Local studies of the 
circulating alleles are needed before implementing PCR-RFLP approaches.
Furthermore, evidence from the global sample analysed here suggests such msp-3α
PCR-RFLP methods are not suitable for broad geographic studies or tracking
parasite populations for an extended period of time.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-288 
PMCID: PMC3765194
PMID: 23964962  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

