
1. J Mol Recognit. 2013 Oct;26(10):496-500. doi: 10.1002/jmr.2292.

Development of a multifunctional tool for drug screening against plasmodial
protein-protein interactions via surface plasmon resonance.

Boucher LE(1), Bosch J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Johns Hopkins Malaria
Research Institute, Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Baltimore, MD, USA.

We have developed an expression system capable of producing large quantities of
low cost, specific peptides that are either His12 -tagged, biotinylated, or
unlabeled. The flexibility of this peptide system is suitable for interaction
studies via surface plasmon resonance (SPR), co-crystallization, and
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Gene blocks containing peptide sequences of
interest in addition to a 15 amino acid AviTag™, were cloned into a vector
expressing an N-terminal maltose binding protein. The constructs were expressed
and purified, and the molecular weights of the recombinant proteins were
estimated by analytical size exclusion chromatography. Successful in situ
biotinylation of the AviTag was confirmed by anti-biotin western blot and was
used for coupling to the surface plasmon resonance chip. We were able to
validate, as a proof of concept study, the specific protein-protein interaction
of Plasmodium falciparum aldolase (PfAldolase) with three different cytoplasmic
adhesin tail peptides from the family of thrombospondin-related anonymous
proteins (TRAPs), and to determine their affinities. This method of peptide
production enables high yield production of peptides in a two-day, cost effective
manner. This tool will allow us to screen for protein-protein interaction
inhibitors directed toward the liver stage and blood stage complexes of the
glideosome in Plasmodium species. Adaptation of this tool will allow researchers 
to pursue their own studies of protein-protein interactions.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/jmr.2292 
PMCID: PMC4277895
PMID: 23996492  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

