
1. Zhongguo Xue Xi Chong Bing Fang Zhi Za Zhi. 2013 Jun;25(3):263-7.

[Deltamethrin resistance, metabolic detoxification enzyme and kdr mutation in
Anopheles sinensis in region along Huaihe River in Anhui Province].

[Article in Chinese]

Chang XL(1), Xue YQ, Zhang AD, Zhu GD, Fang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Bengbu Medical College, Anhui Key
Laboratory of Infection and Immunity, Bengbu 233030, China.

OBJECTIVE: To understand the deltamethrin resistance level, GTS and P450
metabolic detoxification enzyme activities, and mutations in the para-type sodium
channel gene that confers knockdown resistance (kdr) in Anopheles sinensis
mosquitoes from malaria endemic areas along the Huaihe River in Anhui Province,
China.
METHODS: An. sinensis adult mosquitoes were collected in Lilou, Mohekou and Tuohu
townships of Bengbu City, Anhui Province from August to September, 2011. The
insecticide resistance bioassays were performed on adult mosquitoes by using the 
standard WHO susceptibility test with diagnostic concentrations of deltamethrin
0.05%, and the mosquito resistance status was classified based on the WHO
resistance classification criteria. The metabolic detoxification enzyme
activities were measured in randomly selected mosquitoes, and the IIS6 region of 
the para-type sodium channel gene was amplified by PCR and sequenced to detect
mutations at the codon 1014.
RESULTS: The knockdown rates within 60 min exposure to deltamethrin test paper
were 4.1%, 7.0% and 8.2%, and the mortality rates were 8.2%, 12.0% and 12.8% for 
mosquitoes collected from Lilou, Mohekou and Tuohu townships, respectively. These
three populations were classified as highly resistant populations based on the
WHO resistance classification criteria. The GST and P450 enzyme activities of the
three populations were significantly higher than those of the susceptible
laboratory population (P < 0.001). L1014C and L1014F mutations were detected, and
the wild type homozygote kdr genotype was not found. These three populations
exhibited a small but insignificant difference in kdr allele frequencies. No
mutation was found in the laboratory susceptible mosquitos.
CONCLUSION: The An. sinensis mosquito populations from the regions along the
Huaihe River in Anhui Province are strongly resistant to pyrethroid insecticides,
and exhibit significantly higher metabolic detoxification enzyme activities than 
the laboratory susceptible population. The high frequency of kdr mutation is
identified in the mosquito populations from the region along the Huaihe River in 
Anhui Province, China.


PMID: 24024445  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

