
1. Lett Appl Microbiol. 2014 Jan;58(1):42-52. doi: 10.1111/lam.12154. Epub 2013 Sep 
30.

Diversity and biological activities of the bacterial community associated with
the marine sponge Phorbas tenacior (Porifera, Demospongiae).

Dupont S(1), Carré-Mlouka A, Descarrega F, Ereskovsky A, Longeon A, Mouray E,
Florent I, Bourguet-Kondracki ML.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Molécules de Communication et Adaptation des Micro-organismes, UMR
7245 CNRS, Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France.

The diversity of the cultivable microbiota of the marine sponge Phorbas tenacior 
frequently found in the Mediterranean Sea was investigated, and its potential as 
a source of antimicrobial, antioxidant and antiplasmodial compounds was
evaluated. The cultivable bacterial community was studied by isolation,
cultivation and 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Twenty-three bacterial strains were
isolated and identified in the Proteobacteria (α or γ classes) and Actinobacteria
phyla. Furthermore, three different bacterial morphotypes localized
extracellularly within the sponge tissues were revealed by microscopic
observations. Bacterial strains were assigned to seven different genera, namely
Vibrio, Photobacterium, Shewanella, Pseudomonas, Ruegeria, Pseudovibrio and
Citricoccus. The strains affiliated to the same genus were differentiated
according to their genetic dissimilarities using random amplified polymorphic DNA
(RAPD) analyses. Eleven bacterial strains were selected for evaluation of their
bioactivities. Three isolates Pseudovibrio P1Ma4, Vibrio P1MaNal1 and Citricoccus
P1S7 revealed antimicrobial activity; Citricoccus P1S7 and Vibrio P1MaNal1
isolates also exhibited antiplasmodial activity, while two Vibrio isolates P1Ma8 
and P1Ma5 displayed antioxidant activity. These data confirmed the importance of 
Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria associated with marine sponges as a reservoir
of bioactive compounds.SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: This study presents 
the first report on the diversity of the cultivable bacteria associated with the 
marine sponge Phorbas tenacior, frequently found in the Mediterranean Sea.
Evaluation of the antiplasmodial, antimicrobial and antioxidant activities of the
isolates has been investigated and allowed to select bacterial strains,
confirming the importance of Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria as sources of
bioactive compounds.

© 2013 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/lam.12154 
PMID: 24033393  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

