
1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 25;8(9):e75321. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075321. eCollection
2013.

Dynamics of the major histocompatibility complex class I processing and
presentation pathway in the course of malaria parasite development in human
hepatocytes: implications for vaccine development.

Ma J(1), Trop S, Baer S, Rakhmanaliev E, Arany Z, Dumoulin P, Zhang H, Romano J, 
Coppens I, Levitsky V, Levitskaya J.

Author information: 
(1)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology,
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland,
United States of America.

Control of parasite replication exerted by MHC class I restricted CD8+ T-cells in
the liver is critical for vaccination-induced protection against malaria. While
many intracellular pathogens subvert the MHC class I presentation machinery, its 
functionality in the course of malaria replication in hepatocytes has not been
characterized. Using experimental systems based on specific identification,
isolation and analysis of human hepatocytes infected with P. berghei ANKA GFP or 
P. falciparum 3D7 GFP sporozoites we demonstrated that molecular components of
the MHC class I pathway exhibit largely unaltered expression in malaria-infected 
hepatocytes until very late stages of parasite development. Furthermore, infected
cells showed no obvious defects in their capacity to upregulate expression of
different molecular components of the MHC class I machinery in response to
pro-inflammatory lymphokines or trigger direct activation of allo-specific or
peptide-specific human CD8+ T-cells. We further demonstrate that ectopic
expression of circumsporozoite protein does not alter expression of critical
genes of the MHC class I pathway and its response to pro-inflammatory cytokines. 
In addition, we identified supra-cellular structures, which arose at late stages 
of parasite replication, possessed the characteristic morphology of merosomes and
exhibited nearly complete loss of surface MHC class I expression. These data have
multiple implications for our understanding of natural T-cell immunity against
malaria and may promote development of novel, efficient anti-malaria vaccines
overcoming immune escape of the parasite in the liver.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075321 
PMCID: PMC3783408
PMID: 24086507  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

