
1. Mol Biosyst. 2013 Dec;9(12):3091-100. doi: 10.1039/c3mb70342h. Epub 2013 Oct 2.

Artemisinin rewires the protein interaction network in cancer cells: network
analysis, pathway identification, and target prediction.

Huang C(1), Ba Q, Yue Q, Li J, Li J, Chu R, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Food Safety Research, Institute for Nutritional Sciences,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yueyang Road, Shanghai 200031,
China. huiwang@sibs.ac.cn.

Artemisinin and related compounds (artemisinins), as a frontline treatment for
malaria, have been used to save millions of lives. Their potential application in
cancer treatment is promising. Nevertheless, the precise mechanisms of action of 
artemisinins are still controversial. In particular, the system-level influence
of artemisinins on protein interactions and regulatory networks remains unknown, 
limiting progress in development of this class of compounds as anticancer drugs. 
In the present study, we investigated the mechanism of action of artemisinins in 
cancer therapy through an analysis based on biological networks. According to
experimental evidence from more than 400 literature studies, 558 key proteins
were derived and the artemisinins-rewired protein interaction network was
constructed. Topological properties were analyzed to show that the protein
network was a scale-free biological system. And the modularity analysis and
pathway identification were performed. Five key pathways including PI3K-Akt, T
cell receptor, Toll-like receptor, TGF-beta and insulin signaling pathways were
involved in artemisinins-mediated anticancer effects; their identification was
confirmed by microarray data. Based on these results, predictions were made about
the targets of artemisinins in various pathways. These results provide a deeper
understanding of the molecular mechanisms of action of artemisinins and will
contribute to the development and application of this class of compounds in
cancer treatment.

DOI: 10.1039/c3mb70342h 
PMID: 24085322  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

