
1. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 8;8(10):e76924. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076924. eCollection
2013.

Epistatic Interactions between apolipoprotein E and hemoglobin S Genes in
regulation of malaria parasitemia.

Rougeron V(1), Woods CM, Tiedje KE, Bodeau-Livinec F, Migot-Nabias F, Deloron P, 
Luty AJ, Fowkes FJ, Day KP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Division of Medical Parasitology, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, New York, United States of America.

Apolipoprotein E is a monomeric protein secreted by the liver and responsible for
the transport of plasma cholesterol and triglycerides. The APOE gene encodes 3
isoforms Ɛ4, Ɛ3 and Ɛ2 with APOE Ɛ4 associated with higher plasma cholesterol
levels and increased pathogenesis in several infectious diseases (HIV, HSV).
Given that cholesterol is an important nutrient for malaria parasites, we
examined whether APOE Ɛ4 was a risk factor for Plasmodium infection, in terms of 
prevalence or parasite density. A cross sectional survey was performed in 508
children aged 1 to 12 years in Gabon during the wet season. Children were
screened for Plasmodium spp. infection, APOE and hemoglobin S (HbS)
polymorphisms. Median parasite densities were significantly higher in APOE Ɛ4
children for Plasmodium spp. densities compared to non-APOE Ɛ4 children. When
stratified for HbS polymorphisms, median Plasmodium spp. densities were
significantly higher in HbAA children if they had an APOE Ɛ4 allele compared to
those without an APOE Ɛ4 allele. When considering non-APOE Ɛ4 children, there was
no quantitative reduction of Plasmodium spp. parasite densities for HbAS compared
to HbAA phenotypes. No influence of APOE Ɛ4 on successful Plasmodium liver cell
invasion was detected by multiplicity of infection. These results show that the
APOE Ɛ4 allele is associated with higher median malaria parasite densities in
children likely due to the importance of cholesterol availability to parasite
growth and replication. Results suggest an epistatic interaction between APOE and
HbS genes such that sickle cell trait only had an effect on parasite density in
APOE Ɛ4 children. This suggests a linked pathway of regulation of parasite
density involving expression of these genes. These findings have significance for
understanding host determinants of regulation of malaria parasite density, the
design of clinical trials as well as studies of co-infection with Plasmodium and 
other pathogens.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076924 
PMCID: PMC3792892
PMID: 24116184  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

