
1. Malar J. 2013 Oct 26;12:373. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-373.

An integrated strategy for efficient vector construction and multi-gene
expression in Plasmodium falciparum.

Wagner JC, Goldfless SJ, Ganesan SM, Lee MC, Fidock DA, Niles JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. jcniles@mit.edu.

BACKGROUND: The construction of plasmid vectors for transgene expression in the
malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum, presents major technical hurdles.
Traditional molecular cloning by restriction and ligation often yields deletions 
and re-arrangements when assembling low-complexity (A + T)-rich parasite DNA.
Furthermore, the use of large 5'- and 3'- untranslated regions of DNA sequence
(UTRs) to drive transgene transcription limits the number of expression cassettes
that can be incorporated into plasmid vectors.
METHODS: To address these challenges, two high fidelity cloning strategies,
namely yeast homologous recombination and the Gibson assembly method, were
evaluated for constructing P. falciparum vectors. Additionally, some general
rules for reliably using the viral 2A-like peptide to express multiple proteins
from a single expression cassette while preserving their proper trafficking to
various subcellular compartments were assessed.
RESULTS: Yeast homologous recombination and Gibson assembly were found to be
effective strategies for successfully constructing P. falciparum plasmid vectors.
Using these cloning methods, a validated family of expression vectors that
provide a flexible starting point for user-specific applications was created.
These vectors are also compatible with traditional cloning by restriction and
ligation, and contain useful combinations of commonly used features for enhancing
plasmid segregation and site-specific integration in P. falciparum. Additionally,
application of a 2A-like peptide for the synthesis of multiple proteins from a
single expression cassette, and some rules for combinatorially directing proteins
to discrete subcellular compartments were established.
CONCLUSIONS: A set of freely available, sequence-verified and functionally
validated parts that offer greater flexibility for constructing P. falciparum
vectors having expanded expression capacity is provided.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-373 
PMCID: PMC3842810
PMID: 24160265  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

