
1. Int J Parasitol. 2014 Feb;44(2):121-31. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2013.09.004. Epub
2013 Nov 1.

Emerging roles for protein S-palmitoylation in Toxoplasma biology.

Frénal K(1), Kemp LE(2), Soldati-Favre D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, University of Geneva, 1 rue
Michel-Servet, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. Electronic address:
karine.frenal@unige.ch.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, University of Geneva, 1 rue
Michel-Servet, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

Post-translational modifications are refined, rapidly responsive and powerful
ways to modulate protein function. Among post-translational modifications,
acylation is now emerging as a widespread modification exploited by eukaryotes,
bacteria and viruses to control biological processes. Protein palmitoylation
involves the attachment of palmitic acid, also known as hexadecanoic acid, to
cysteine residues of integral and peripheral membrane proteins and increases
their affinity for membranes. Importantly, similar to phosphorylation,
palmitoylation is reversible and is becoming recognised as instrumental for the
regulation of protein function by modulating protein interactions, stability,
folding, trafficking and signalling. Palmitoylation appears to play a central
role in the biology of the Apicomplexa, regulating critical processes such as
host cell invasion which is vital for parasite survival and dissemination. The
recent identification of over 400 palmitoylated proteins in Plasmodium falciparum
erythrocytic stages illustrates the broad spread and impact of this modification 
on parasite biology. The main enzymes responsible for protein palmitoylation are 
multi-membrane protein S-acyl transferases harbouring a catalytic Asp-His-His-Cys
(DHHC) motif. A global functional analysis of the repertoire of protein S-acyl
transferases in Toxoplasma gondii and Plasmodium berghei has recently been
performed. The essential nature of some of these enzymes illustrates the key
roles played by this post-translational modification in the corresponding
substrates implicated in fundamental processes such as parasite motility and
organelle biogenesis. Toward a better understanding of the depalmitoylation
event, a protein with palmitoyl protein thioesterase activity has been identified
in T. gondii. TgPPT1/TgASH1 is the main target of specific acyl protein
thioesterase inhibitors but is dispensable for parasite survival, suggesting the 
implication of other genes in depalmitoylation. Palmitoylation/depalmitoylation
cycles are now emerging as potential novel regulatory networks and T. gondii
represents a superb model organism in which to explore their significance.

Copyright © 2013 Australian Society for Parasitology Inc. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2013.09.004 
PMID: 24184909  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

