
1. Malar J. 2013 Nov 2;12:388. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-388.

Further evidence for an anti-inflammatory role of artesunate in experimental
cerebral malaria.

Miranda AS(1), Brant F, Rocha NP, Cisalpino D, Rodrigues DH, Souza DG, Machado
FS, Rachid MA, Teixeira AL Jr, Campos AC.

Author information: 
(1)Programme in Health Sciences: Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine,
School of Medicine, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG,
Brazil. mirandas.aline@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Cerebral malaria (CM) is a clinical syndrome resulting from
Plasmodium falciparum infection. A wide range of clinical manifestations follow
the disease including cognitive dysfunction, seizures and coma. CM pathogenesis
remains incompletely understood and without treatment this condition is
invariably fatal. Artesunate has been accepted as the most effective drug for
treating severe malaria. Besides its antiparasitic activity, an anti-inflammatory
property has also been reported. In the current study, the immunomodulatory role 
of artesunate was investigated using a Plasmodium berghei ANKA model of CM,
trough evaluation of behavioural changes and cytokines expression in hippocampus 
and in frontal cortex.
METHODS: C57Bl/6 mice were infected with P. berghei by intraperitoneal route,
using a standardized inoculation of 106 parasitized erythrocytes. Memory function
was evaluated using the step-down inhibitory avoidance test. The mRNA expression 
of IFN-γ, IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF in the frontal cortex and hippocampus of control
and infected mice on day 5 post-infection were estimated by quantitative real
time PCR. Plasmodium berghei -infected mice also received intraperitoneally a
single dose of artesunate (32 mg/kg) on day 4 post-infection, and 24 hours after 
treatment behavioural and immunological analysis were performed. The protein
levels of cytokines IL-2, IL-6, IL-10, IL-17, IFN-γ, TNF in the serum, frontal
cortex and hippocampus of controls and P. berghei -infected mice treated or not
treated with artesunate were determined using a cytometric bead array (CBA) kit. 
The survival and neurological symptoms of CM were also registered.
RESULTS: CM mice presented a significant impairment of aversive memory compared
to controls on day 5 post-infection. A higher mRNA expression of pro-inflammatory
cytokines was found in the hippocampus and frontal cortex of infected mice. A
single dose of artesunate was also able to decrease the expression of
inflammatory cytokines in the hippocampus and frontal cortex of P.
berghei-infected mice. In parallel, a significant improvement in neurological
symptoms and survival were observed in artesunate treated mice.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, the current study provided further evidence that CM
affects key brain areas related to cognition process. In addition, different
patterns of cytokine expression during the course of CM could be modulated by a
single administration of the anti-malarial artesunate.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-388 
PMCID: PMC3827003
PMID: 24180288  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

