
1. Paediatr Respir Rev. 2014 Mar;15(1):4-12. doi: 10.1016/j.prrv.2013.11.003. Epub
2013 Nov 15.

Differences in the clinical and genotypic presentation of sickle cell disease
around the world.

Saraf SL(1), Molokie RE(2), Nouraie M(3), Sable CA(4), Luchtman-Jones L(5),
Ensing GJ(6), Campbell AD(7), Rana SR(8), Niu XM(3), Machado RF(9), Gladwin
MT(10), Gordeuk VR(11).

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Sickle Cell Center, Section of Hematology-Oncology, University
of Illinois Hospital and Health Sciences System, Chicago, IL. Electronic address:
ssaraf@uic.edu.
(2)Comprehensive Sickle Cell Center, Section of Hematology-Oncology, University
of Illinois Hospital and Health Sciences System, Chicago, IL; Jesse Brown VA
Medical Center, Chicago IL.
(3)Center for Sickle Cell Disease, Department of Medicine, Howard University,
Washington DC.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Cardiology, Children's National Medical
Center, Washington DC.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Hematology, Children's National Medical
Center, Washington DC.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Cardiology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Hematology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI.
(8)Center for Sickle Cell Disease, Department of Pediatrics, Howard University,
Washington DC.
(9)Department of Medicine, Section of Pulmonary & Critical Care, University of
Illinois Hospital and Health Sciences System, Chicago, IL.
(10)Vascular Medicine Institute and the Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and
Critical Care Medicine, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburg, PA.
(11)Comprehensive Sickle Cell Center, Section of Hematology-Oncology, University 
of Illinois Hospital and Health Sciences System, Chicago, IL.

Sickle cell disease (SCD), caused by a mutation in the β-globin gene HBB, is
widely distributed in malaria endemic regions. Cardiopulmonary complications are 
major causes of morbidity and mortality. Hemoglobin SS (Hb SS) represents a large
proportion of SCD in the Americas, United Kingdom, and certain regions of Africa 
while higher proportions of hemoglobin SC are observed in Burkina Faso and
hemoglobin Sβ-thalassemia in Greece and India. Coinheritance of α-thalassemia and
persistence of hemoglobin F production are observed in highest frequency in
certain regions of India and the Middle East. As confirmed in the PUSH and
Walk-PHaSST studies, Hb SS, absence of co-inheriting alpha-thalassemia, and low
hemoglobin F levels tend to be associated with more hemolysis, lower hemoglobin
oxygen saturations, greater proportions of elevated tricuspid regurgitant jet
velocity and brain natriuretic peptide, and increased left ventricular mass
index. Identification of additional genetic modifiers will improve prediction of 
cardiopulmonary complications in SCD.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prrv.2013.11.003 
PMCID: PMC3944316
PMID: 24361300  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

