
1. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 31;8(12):e82962. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082962.
eCollection 2013.

Anticancer properties of distinct antimalarial drug classes.

Hooft van Huijsduijnen R(1), Guy RK(2), Chibale K(3), Haynes RK(4), Peitz I(5),
Kelter G(5), Phillips MA(6), Vennerstrom JL(7), Yuthavong Y(8), Wells TN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medicines for Malaria Venture (MMV), Geneva, Switzerland.
(2)St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, United States of
America.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular
Medicine, University of Cape Town, Rondebosch, South Africa.
(4)Centre of Excellence for Pharmaceutical Sciences, North-West University,
Potchefstroom, South Africa.
(5)Oncotest GmbH, Freiburg, Germany.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, United States of America.
(7)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
Nebraska, United States of America.
(8)BIOTEC, National Science and Technology Development Agency, Thailand Science
Park, Pathumthani, Thailand.

We have tested five distinct classes of established and experimental antimalarial
drugs for their anticancer potential, using a panel of 91 human cancer lines.
Three classes of drugs: artemisinins, synthetic peroxides and DHFR (dihydrofolate
reductase) inhibitors effected potent inhibition of proliferation with IC50s in
the nM- low µM range, whereas a DHODH (dihydroorotate dehydrogenase) and a
putative kinase inhibitor displayed no activity. Furthermore, significant
synergies were identified with erlotinib, imatinib, cisplatin, dasatinib and
vincristine. Cluster analysis of the antimalarials based on their differential
inhibition of the various cancer lines clearly segregated the synthetic peroxides
OZ277 and OZ439 from the artemisinin cluster that included artesunate,
dihydroartemisinin and artemisone, and from the DHFR inhibitors pyrimethamine and
P218 (a parasite DHFR inhibitor), emphasizing their shared mode of action. In
order to further understand the basis of the selectivity of these compounds
against different cancers, microarray-based gene expression data for 85 of the
used cell lines were generated. For each compound, distinct sets of genes were
identified whose expression significantly correlated with compound sensitivity.
Several of the antimalarials tested in this study have well-established and
excellent safety profiles with a plasma exposure, when conservatively used in
malaria, that is well above the IC50s that we identified in this study. Given
their unique mode of action and potential for unique synergies with established
anticancer drugs, our results provide a strong basis to further explore the
potential application of these compounds in cancer in pre-clinical or and
clinical settings.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082962 
PMCID: PMC3877007
PMID: 24391728  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

