
1. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 7;9(1):e84865. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084865. eCollection 
2014.

Phenylalanine metabolism regulates reproduction and parasite melanization in the 
malaria mosquito.

Fuchs S(1), Behrends V(2), Bundy JG(2), Crisanti A(1), Nolan T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, London, United
Kingdom.

The blood meal of the female malaria mosquito is a pre-requisite to egg
production and also represents the transmission route for the malaria parasite.
The proper and rapid assimilation of proteins and nutrients in the blood meal
creates a significant metabolic challenge for the mosquito. To better understand 
this process we generated a global profile of metabolite changes in response to
blood meal of Anopheles gambiae, using Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry
(GC-MS). To disrupt a key pathway of amino acid metabolism we silenced the gene
phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) involved in the conversion of the amino acid
phenylalanine into tyrosine. We observed increased levels of phenylalanine and
the potentially toxic metabolites phenylpyruvate and phenyllactate as well as a
reduction in the amount of tyrosine available for melanin synthesis. This in turn
resulted in a significant impairment of the melanotic encapsulation response
against the rodent malaria parasite Plasmodium berghei. Furthermore silencing of 
PAH resulted in a significant impairment of mosquito fertility associated with
reduction of laid eggs, retarded vitellogenesis and impaired melanisation of the 
chorion. Carbidopa, an inhibitor of the downstream enzyme DOPA decarboxylase that
coverts DOPA into dopamine, produced similar effects on egg melanization and
hatching rate suggesting that egg chorion maturation is mainly regulated via
dopamine. This study sheds new light on the role of amino acid metabolism in
regulating reproduction and immunity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084865 
PMCID: PMC3883676
PMID: 24409310  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

