
1. Vaccine. 2014 Apr 7;32(17):1998-2006. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.01.005. Epub
2014 Jan 15.

Nanoparticle formulation enhanced protective immunity provoked by
PYGPI8p-transamidase related protein (PyTAM) DNA vaccine in Plasmodium yoelii
malaria model.

Cherif MS(1), Shuaibu MN(2), Kodama Y(3), Kurosaki T(3), Helegbe GK(4), Kikuchi
M(4), Ichinose A(5), Yanagi T(6), Sasaki H(7), Yui K(8), Tien NH(9), Karbwang
J(9), Hirayama K(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunogenetics, Institute of Tropical Medicine (NEKKEN),
Nagasaki University, Japan; Global COE Program, Institute of Tropical Medicine
(NEKKEN), Nagasaki University, Japan; Institut National de Santé Publique,
Université de Conakry, Guinea.
(2)Department of Immunogenetics, Institute of Tropical Medicine (NEKKEN),
Nagasaki University, Japan; Global COE Program, Institute of Tropical Medicine
(NEKKEN), Nagasaki University, Japan.
(3)Department of Hospital Pharmacy, Nagasaki University, Japan.
(4)Department of Immunogenetics, Institute of Tropical Medicine (NEKKEN),
Nagasaki University, Japan.
(5)Electron Microscopy Central Laboratory, Institute of Tropical Medicine
(NEKKEN), Nagasaki University, Japan.
(6)Animal Research Center for Tropical Medicine, Nagasaki, Japan.
(7)Department of Hospital Pharmacy, Nagasaki University, Japan; Global COE
Program, Institute of Tropical Medicine (NEKKEN), Nagasaki University, Japan.
(8)Division of Immunology, Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology,
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki University, Japan.
(9)Department of Product Development, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Nagasaki
University, Nagasaki, Japan.
(10)Department of Immunogenetics, Institute of Tropical Medicine (NEKKEN),
Nagasaki University, Japan; Global COE Program, Institute of Tropical Medicine
(NEKKEN), Nagasaki University, Japan. Electronic address:
hiraken@nagasaki-u.ac.jp.

We have previously reported the new formulation of polyethylimine (PEI) with
gamma polyglutamic acid (γ-PGA) nanoparticle (NP) to have provided Plasmodium
yoelii merozoite surface protein-1 (PyMSP-1) plasmid DNA vaccine with enhanced
protective cellular and humoral immunity in the lethal mouse malaria model.
PyGPI8p-transamidase-related protein (PyTAM) was selected as a possible candidate
vaccine antigen by using DNA vaccination screening from 29 GPI anchor and signal 
sequence motif positive genes picked up using web-based bioinformatics tools;
though the observed protection was not complete. Here, we observed augmented
protective effect of PyTAM DNA vaccine by using PEI and γ-PGA complex as delivery
system. NP-coated PyTAM plasmid DNA immunized mice showed a significant survival 
rate from lethal P. yoelii challenge infection compared with naked PyTAM plasmid 
or with NP-coated empty plasmid DNA group. Antigen-specific IgG1 and IgG2b
subclass antibody levels, proportion of CD4 and CD8T cells producing IFN-γ in the
splenocytes and IL-4, IFN-γ, IL-12 and TNF-α levels in the sera and in the
supernatants from ex vivo splenocytes culture were all enhanced by the NP-coated 
PyTAM DNA vaccine. These data indicates that NP augments PyTAM protective immune 
response, and this enhancement was associated with increased DC activation and
concomitant IL-12 production.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.01.005 
PMID: 24440206  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

