
1. PLoS Genet. 2014 Jan;10(1):e1004008. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004008. Epub 2014
Jan 16.

Evolution of chloroplast transcript processing in Plasmodium and its chromerid
algal relatives.

Dorrell RG(1), Drew J(1), Nisbet RE(2), Howe CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom
; School of Pharmacy and Medical Sciences, University of South Australia,
Adelaide, Australia.

It is well understood that apicomplexan parasites, such as the malaria pathogen
Plasmodium, are descended from free-living algae, and maintain a vestigial
chloroplast that has secondarily lost all genes of photosynthetic function.
Recently, two fully photosynthetic relatives of parasitic apicomplexans have been
identified, the 'chromerid' algae Chromera velia and Vitrella brassicaformis,
which retain photosynthesis genes within their chloroplasts. Elucidating the
processes governing gene expression in chromerid chloroplasts might provide
valuable insights into the origins of parasitism in the apicomplexans. We have
characterised chloroplast transcript processing pathways in C. velia, V.
brassicaformis and P. falciparum with a focus on the addition of an unusual, 3'
poly(U) tail. We demonstrate that poly(U) tails in chromerids are preferentially 
added to transcripts that encode proteins that are directly involved in
photosynthetic electron transfer, over transcripts for proteins that are not
involved in photosynthesis. To our knowledge, this represents the first
chloroplast transcript processing pathway to be associated with a particular
functional category of genes. In contrast, Plasmodium chloroplast transcripts are
not polyuridylylated. We additionally present evidence that poly(U) tail addition
in chromerids is involved in the alternative processing of polycistronic
precursors covering multiple photosynthesis genes, and appears to be associated
with high levels of transcript abundance. We propose that changes to the
chloroplast transcript processing machinery were an important step in the loss of
photosynthesis in ancestors of parasitic apicomplexans.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004008 
PMCID: PMC3894158
PMID: 24453981  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

