
1. Malar J. 2014 Jan 29;13:35. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-35.

Genetic structure of Plasmodium vivax using the merozoite surface protein 1
icb5-6 fragment reveals new hybrid haplotypes in southern Mexico.

Cerritos R, González-Cerón L(1), Nettel JA, Wegier A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Regional de Investigación en Salud Pública, Instituto Nacional de Salud
Pública, Tapachula, Chiapas, México. lgonzal@insp.mx.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium vivax is a protozoan parasite with an extensive worldwide 
distribution, being highly prevalent in Asia as well as in Mesoamerica and South 
America. In southern Mexico, P. vivax transmission has been endemic and recent
studies suggest that these parasites have unique biological and genetic features.
The msp1 gene has shown high rate of nucleotide substitutions, deletions,
insertions, and its mosaic structure reveals frequent events of recombination,
maybe between highly divergent parasite isolates.
METHODS: The nucleotide sequence variation in the polymorphic icb5-6 fragment of 
the msp1 gene of Mexican and worldwide isolates was analysed. To understand how
genotype diversity arises, disperses and persists in Mexico, the genetic
structure and genealogical relationships of local isolates were examined. To
identify new sequence hybrids and their evolutionary relationships with other P. 
vivax isolates circulating worldwide two haplotype networks were constructed
questioning that two portions of the icb5-6 have different evolutionary history.
RESULTS: Twelve new msp1 icb5-6 haplotypes of P. vivax from Mexico were
identified. These nucleotide sequences show mosaic structure comprising three
partially conserved and two variable subfragments and resulted into five
different sequence types. The variable subfragment sV1 has undergone
recombination events and resulted in hybrid sequences and the haplotype network
allocated the Mexican haplotypes to three lineages, corresponding to the Sal I
and Belem types, and other more divergent group. In contrast, the network from
icb5-6 fragment but not sV1 revealed that the Mexican haplotypes belong to two
separate lineages, none of which are closely related to Sal I or Belem sequences.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the new hybrid haplotypes from southern
Mexico were the result of at least three different recombination events. These
rearrangements likely resulted from the recombination between haplotypes of
highly divergent lineages that are frequently distributed in South America and
Asia and diversified rapidly.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-35 
PMCID: PMC3923247
PMID: 24472213  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

