
1. Parasit Vectors. 2014 Jan 28;7:54. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-7-54.

Anopheles sinensis mosquito insecticide resistance: comparison of three mosquito 
sample collection and preparation methods and mosquito age in resistance
measurements.

Xu T, Zhong D, Tang L, Chang X, Fu F, Yan G, Zheng B(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, and WHO Collaborating Center for Malaria, Schistosomiasis and
Filariasis, Ministry of Public Health, Shanghai, China. cdcipdzhengbin@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Insecticide resistance monitoring in malaria mosquitoes is essential 
for guiding the rational use of insecticides in vector control programs.
Resistance bioassay is the first step for insecticide monitoring and it lays an
important foundation for molecular examination of resistance mechanisms. In the
literature, various mosquito sample collection and preparation methods have been 
used, but how mosquito sample collection and preparation methods affect
insecticide susceptibility bioassay results is largely unknown. The objectives of
this study were to determine whether mosquito sample collection and preparation
methods affected bioassay results, which may cause incorrect classification of
mosquito resistance status.
METHODS: The study was conducted in Anopheles sinensis mosquitoes in two study
sites in central China. Three mosquito sample collection and preparation methods 
were compared for insecticide susceptibility, kdr frequencies and metabolic
enzyme activities: 1) adult mosquitoes collected from the field; 2) F1 adults
from field collected, blood-fed mosquitoes; and 3) adult mosquitoes reared from
field collected larvae.
RESULTS: Mosquito sample collection and preparation methods significantly
affected mortality rates in the standard WHO tube resistance bioassay. Mortality 
rate of field-collected female adults was 10-15% higher than in mosquitoes reared
from field-collected larvae and F1 adults from field collected blood-fed females.
This pattern was consistent in mosquitoes from the two study sites. High kdr
mutation frequency (85-95%) with L1014F allele as the predominant mutation was
found in our study populations. Field-collected female adults consistently
exhibited the highest monooxygenase and GST activities. The higher mortality rate
observed in the field-collected female mosquitoes may have been caused by a
mixture of mosquitoes of different ages, as older mosquitoes were more
susceptible to deltamethrin than younger mosquitoes.
CONCLUSIONS: Female adults reared from field-collected larvae in resistance
bioassays are recommended to minimize the effect of confounding factors such as
mosquito age and blood feeding status so that more reliable and reproducible
mortality may be obtained.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-7-54 
PMCID: PMC3917893
PMID: 24472598  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

