
1. Genome Biol Evol. 2014 Mar;6(3):666-84. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evu043.

Chromera velia, endosymbioses and the rhodoplex hypothesis--plastid evolution in 
cryptophytes, alveolates, stramenopiles, and haptophytes (CASH lineages).

Petersen J(1), Ludewig AK, Michael V, Bunk B, Jarek M, Baurain D, Brinkmann H.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz-Institut DSMZ-Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen
GmbH, Braunschweig, Germany.

The discovery of Chromera velia, a free-living photosynthetic relative of
apicomplexan pathogens, has provided an unexpected opportunity to study the algal
ancestry of malaria parasites. In this work, we compared the molecular footprints
of a eukaryote-to-eukaryote endosymbiosis in C. velia to their equivalents in
peridinin-containing dinoflagellates (PCD) to reevaluate recent claims in favor
of a common ancestry of their plastids. To this end, we established the draft
genome and a set of full-length cDNA sequences from C. velia via next-generation 
sequencing. We documented the presence of a single coxI gene in the mitochondrial
genome, which thus represents the genetically most reduced aerobic organelle
identified so far, but focused our analyses on five "lucky genes" of the Calvin
cycle. These were selected because of their known support for a common origin of 
complex plastids from cryptophytes, alveolates (represented by PCDs),
stramenopiles, and haptophytes (CASH) via a single secondary endosymbiosis with a
red alga. As expected, our broadly sampled phylogenies of the nuclear-encoded
Calvin cycle markers support a rhodophycean origin for the complex plastid of
Chromera. However, they also suggest an independent origin of apicomplexan and
dinophycean (PCD) plastids via two eukaryote-to-eukaryote endosymbioses. Although
at odds with the current view of a common photosynthetic ancestry for alveolates,
this conclusion is nonetheless in line with the deviant plastome architecture in 
dinoflagellates and the morphological paradox of four versus three plastid
membranes in the respective lineages. Further support for independent
endosymbioses is provided by analysis of five additional markers, four of them
involved in the plastid protein import machinery. Finally, we introduce the
"rhodoplex hypothesis" as a convenient way to designate evolutionary scenarios
where CASH plastids are ultimately the product of a single secondary
endosymbiosis with a red alga but were subsequently horizontally spread via
higher-order eukaryote-to-eukaryote endosymbioses.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evu043 
PMCID: PMC3971594
PMID: 24572015  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

