
1. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 28;9(2):e90522. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090522. eCollection
2014.

Diversifying selection on the thrombospondin-related adhesive protein (TRAP) gene
of Plasmodium falciparum in Thailand.

Ohashi J(1), Suzuki Y(1), Naka I(1), Hananantachai H(2), Patarapotikul J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Genetic Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Tropical Medicine,
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Sporozoites of Plasmodium falciparum are transmitted to human hosts by Anopheles 
mosquitoes. Thrombospondin-related adhesive protein (TRAP) is expressed in
sporozoites and plays a crucial role in sporozoite gliding and invasion of human 
hepatocytes. A previous study showed that the TRAP gene has been subjected to
balancing selection in the Gambian P. falciparum population. To further study the
molecular evolution of the TRAP gene in Plasmodium falciparum, we investigated
TRAP polymorphisms in P. falciparum isolates from Suan Phueng District in
Ratchaburi Province, Thailand. The analysis of the entire TRAP coding sequences
in 32 isolates identified a total of 39 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs),
which comprised 37 nonsynonymous and two synonymous SNPs. McDonald-Kreitman test 
showed that the ratio of the number of nonsynonymous to synonymous polymorphic
sites within P. falciparum was significantly higher than that of the number of
nonsynonymous to synonymous fixed sites between P. falciparum and P. reichenowi. 
Furthermore, the rate of nonsynonymous substitution was significantly higher than
that of synonymous substitution within Thai P. falciparum. These results indicate
that the TRAP gene has been subject to diversifying selection in the Thai P.
falciparum population as well as the Gambian P. falciparum population. Comparison
of our P. falciparum isolates with those from another region of Thailand (Tak
province, Thailand) revealed that TRAP was highly differentiated between
geographically close regions. This rapid diversification seems to reflect strong 
recent positive selection on TRAP. Our results suggest that the TRAP molecule is 
a major target of the human immune response to pre-erythrocytic stages of P.
falciparum.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090522 
PMCID: PMC3938765
PMID: 24587387  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

