
1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 7;9(6):e90859. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090859. eCollection 
2014.

Circular RNA is expressed across the eukaryotic tree of life.

Wang PL(1), Bao Y(2), Yee MC(2), Barrett SP(3), Hogan GJ(3), Olsen MN(4), Dinneny
JR(2), Brown PO(4), Salzman J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
California, United States of America; Stanford Cancer Institute, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Plant Biology, Carnegie Institution for Science, Stanford,
California, United States of America; Temasek Lifesciences Laboratory, National
University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore; Department of Biological Sciences,
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
California, United States of America.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
California, United States of America; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(4):e95116.

An unexpectedly large fraction of genes in metazoans (human, mouse, zebrafish,
worm, fruit fly) express high levels of circularized RNAs containing canonical
exons. Here we report that circular RNA isoforms are found in diverse species
whose most recent common ancestor existed more than one billion years ago: fungi 
(Schizosaccharomyces pombe and Saccharomyces cerevisiae), a plant (Arabidopsis
thaliana), and protists (Plasmodium falciparum and Dictyostelium discoideum). For
all species studied to date, including those in this report, only a small
fraction of the theoretically possible circular RNA isoforms from a given gene
are actually observed. Unlike metazoans, Arabidopsis, D. discoideum, P.
falciparum, S. cerevisiae, and S. pombe have very short introns (∼ 100
nucleotides or shorter), yet they still produce circular RNAs. A minority of
genes in S. pombe and P. falciparum have documented examples of canonical
alternative splicing, making it unlikely that all circular RNAs are by-products
of alternative splicing or 'piggyback' on signals used in alternative RNA
processing. In S. pombe, the relative abundance of circular to linear transcript 
isoforms changed in a gene-specific pattern during nitrogen starvation. Circular 
RNA may be an ancient, conserved feature of eukaryotic gene expression programs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090859 
PMCID: PMC3946582
PMID: 24609083  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

