
1. Malar J. 2014 Mar 12;13:93. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-93.

Towards a comprehensive Plasmodium falciparum merozoite cell surface and secreted
recombinant protein library.

Zenonos ZA, Rayner JC, Wright GJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Surface Signalling Laboratory, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge
CB10 1SA, UK. gw2@sanger.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium falciparum is the aetiological agent for malaria, a deadly
infectious disease for which no vaccine has yet been licensed. The proteins
displayed on the merozoite cell surface have long been considered attractive
vaccine targets because of their direct exposure to host antibodies; however,
progress in understanding the functional role of these targets has been hindered 
by technical challenges associated with expressing these proteins in a
functionally active recombinant form. To address this, a method that enables the 
systematic expression of functional extracellular Plasmodium proteins was
previously developed, and used to create a library of 42 merozoite proteins.
METHODS: To compile a more comprehensive library of recombinant proteins
representing the repertoire of P. falciparum merozoite extracellular proteins for
systematic vaccine and functional studies, genome-wide expression profiling was
used to identify additional candidates. Candidate proteins were recombinantly
produced and their integrity and expression levels were tested by Western
blotting and ELISA.
RESULTS: Twenty-five additional genes that were upregulated during late
schizogony, and predicted to encode secreted and cell surface proteins, were
identified and expressed as soluble recombinant proteins. A band consistent with 
the entire ectodomain was observed by immunoblotting for the majority of the
proteins and their expression levels were quantified. By using sera from
malaria-exposed immune adults, the immunoreactivity of 20 recombinant proteins
was assessed, and most of the merozoite ligands were found to carry heat-labile
epitopes. To facilitate systematic comparative studies across the entire library,
multiple Plasmodium proteins were simultaneously purified using a custom-made
platform.
CONCLUSIONS: A library of recombinant P. falciparum secreted and cell surface
proteins was expanded by 20 additional proteins, which were shown to express at
usable levels and contain conformational epitopes. This resource of extracellular
P. falciparum merozoite proteins, which now contains 62 full-length ectodomains, 
will be a valuable tool in elucidating the function of these proteins during the 
blood stages of infection, and facilitate the comparative assessment of blood
stage vaccine candidates.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-93 
PMCID: PMC3995786
PMID: 24620899  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

