
1. Mol Ecol. 2014 May;23(9):2242-59. doi: 10.1111/mec.12733. Epub 2014 Apr 11.

Gene expression divergence between malaria vector sibling species Anopheles
gambiae and An. coluzzii from rural and urban Yaoundé Cameroon.

Cassone BJ(1), Kamdem C, Cheng C, Tan JC, Hahn MW, Costantini C, Besansky NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Eck Institute for Global Health & Department of Biological Sciences,
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, 46556-0369, USA.

Divergent selection based on aquatic larval ecology is a likely factor in the
recent isolation of two broadly sympatric and morphologically identical African
mosquito species, the malaria vectors Anopheles gambiae and An. coluzzii.
Population-based genome scans have revealed numerous candidate regions of recent 
positive selection, but have provided few clues as to the genetic mechanisms
underlying behavioural and physiological divergence between the two species,
phenotypes which themselves remain obscure. To uncover possible genetic
mechanisms, we compared global transcriptional profiles of natural and
experimental populations using gene-based microarrays. Larvae were sampled as
second and fourth instars from natural populations in and around the city of
Yaoundé, capital of Cameroon, where the two species segregate along a gradient of
urbanization. Functional enrichment analysis of differentially expressed genes
revealed that An. coluzzii--the species that breeds in more stable, biotically
complex and potentially polluted urban water bodies--overexpresses genes
implicated in detoxification and immunity relative to An. gambiae, which breeds
in more ephemeral and relatively depauperate pools and puddles in suburbs and
rural areas. Moreover, our data suggest that such overexpression by An. coluzzii 
is not a transient result of induction by xenobiotics in the larval habitat, but 
an inherent and presumably adaptive response to repeatedly encountered
environmental stressors. Finally, we find no significant overlap between the
differentially expressed loci and previously identified genomic regions of recent
positive selection, suggesting that transcriptome divergence is regulated by
trans-acting factors rather than cis-acting elements.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.12733 
PMCID: PMC4034741
PMID: 24673723  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

