
1. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 8;9(4):e92946. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092946. eCollection 
2014.

Deep profiling of the novel intermediate-size noncoding RNAs in intraerythrocytic
Plasmodium falciparum.

Wei C(1), Xiao T(2), Zhang P(2), Wang Z(1), Chen X(2), Zhang L(1), Yao M(1), Chen
R(2), Wang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and School of Basic Medicine,
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(2)Laboratory of Bioinformatics and Noncoding RNA, Institute of Biophysics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Intermediate-size noncoding RNAs (is-ncRNAs) have been shown to play important
regulatory roles in the development of several eukaryotic organisms. However,
they have not been thoroughly explored in Plasmodium falciparum, which is the
most virulent malaria parasite infecting human being. By using Illumina/Solexa
paired-end sequencing of an is-ncRNA-specific library, we performed a systematic 
identification of novel is-ncRNAs in intraerythrocytic P. falciparum, strain 3D7.
A total of 1,198 novel is-ncRNA candidates, including antisense, intergenic, and 
intronic is-ncRNAs, were identified. Bioinformatics analyses showed that the
intergenic is-ncRNAs were the least conserved among different Plasmodium species,
and antisense is-ncRNAs were more conserved than their sense counterparts.
Twenty-two novel snoRNAs were identified, and eight potential novel classes of P.
falciparum is-ncRNAs were revealed by clustering analysis. The expression of
randomly selected novel is-ncRNAs was confirmed by RT-PCR and northern blotting
assays. An obvious different expressional profile of the novel is-ncRNA between
the early and late intraerythrocytic developmental stages of the parasite was
observed. The expression levels of the antisense RNAs correlated with those of
their cis-encoded sense RNA counterparts, suggesting that these is-ncRNAs are
involved in the regulation of gene expression of the parasite. In conclusion, we 
accomplished a deep profiling analysis of novel is-ncRNAs in P. falciparum,
analysed the conservation and structural features of these novel is-ncRNAs, and
revealed their differential expression patterns during the development of the
parasite. These findings provide important information for further functional
characterisation of novel is-ncRNAs during the development of P. falciparum.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092946 
PMCID: PMC3979661
PMID: 24713982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

