
1. Parasit Vectors. 2014 Apr 10;7:176. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-7-176.

Cuticular differences associated with aridity acclimation in African malaria
vectors carrying alternative arrangements of inversion 2La.

Reidenbach KR, Cheng C, Liu F, Liu C, Besansky NJ(1), Syed Z.

Author information: 
(1)Eck Institute for Global Health & Department of Biological Sciences,
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA. nbesansk@nd.edu.

BACKGROUND: Principal malaria vectors in Africa, An. gambiae and An. coluzzii,
share an inversion polymorphism on the left arm of chromosome 2 (2La/2L+a) that
is distributed non-randomly in the environment. Genomic sequencing studies
support the role of strong natural selection in maintaining steep clines in 2La
inversion frequency along environmental gradients of aridity, and physiological
studies have directly implicated 2La in heat and desiccation tolerance, but the
precise genetic basis and the underlying behavioral and physiological mechanisms 
remain unknown. As the insect cuticle is the primary barrier to water loss,
differences in cuticle thickness and/or epicuticular waterproofing associated
with alternative 2La arrangements might help explain differences in desiccation
resistance.
METHODS: To test that hypothesis, two subcolonies of both An. gambiae and An.
coluzzii were established that were fixed for alternative 2La arrangements (2La
or 2L+a) on an otherwise homosequential and shared genetic background. Adult
mosquitoes reared under controlled environmental conditions (benign or arid) for 
eight days post-eclosion were collected and analyzed. Measurements of cuticle
thickness were made based on scanning electron microscopy, and cuticular
hydrocarbon (CHC) composition was evaluated by gas chromatography-mass
spectrometry.
RESULTS: After removing the allometric effects of body weight, differences in
mean cuticle thickness were found between alternative 2La karyotypes, but not
between alternative environments. Moreover, the thicker cuticle of the An.
coluzzii 2La karyotype was contrary to the known higher rate of water loss of
this karyotype relative to 2L+a. On the other hand, quantitative differences in
individual CHCs and overall CHC profiles between alternative karyotypes and
environmental conditions were consistent with expectation based on previous
physiological studies.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that alternative arrangements of the 2La
inversion are associated with differences in cuticle thickness and CHC
composition, but that only CHC composition appears to be relevant for desiccation
resistance. Differences in the CHC composition were consistent with previous
findings of a lower rate of water loss for the 2L+a karyotype at eight days
post-eclosion, suggesting that CHC composition is an important strategy for
maintaining water balance in this genetic background, but not for 2La. Despite a 
higher rate of water loss at eight days, higher body water content of the 2La
karyotype confers a level of desiccation resistance equivalent to that of the
2L+a karyotype.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-7-176 
PMCID: PMC3991895
PMID: 24721548  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

