
1. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 18;9(4):e95291. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095291. eCollection
2014.

Genetic analysis of the Gdh and Bg genes of animal-derived Giardia duodenalis
isolates in Northeastern China and evaluation of zoonotic transmission potential.

Liu A(1), Yang F(1), Shen Y(2), Zhang W(1), Wang R(3), Zhao W(1), Zhang L(3),
Ling H(1), Cao J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang,
China.
(2)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of
Health, WHO Collaborating Centre for Malaria, Schistosomiasis and Filariasis,
Shanghai, China.
(3)College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Henan Agricultural
University Zhengzhou, Henan, China.

BACKGROUND: Giardia duodenalis is a common intestinal parasite that infects
humans and many other mammals, mainly distributing in some areas with poor
sanitation. The proportion of the human giardiasis burden attributable to G.
duodenalis of animal origin differs in different geographical areas. In Mainland 
China, genetic data of the gdh and bg genes of G. duodenalis from animals are
only limited in dogs and cats. The aim of the study was to provide information on
the genetic characterizations of animal-derived G. duodenalis isolates (from
rabbits, sheep and cattle) at both loci in Heilongjiang Province, Northeastern
China, and to assess the potential for zoonotic transmission.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: 61 G. duodenalis isolates from animal feces
(dairy and beef cattle, sheep and rabbits) in Heilongjiang Province were
characterized at the gdh and bg loci in the present study. The gdh and bg gene
sequences of sheep-derived G. duodenalis assemblage AI, and the gdh sequences of 
rabbit-derived G. duodenalis assemblage B had 100% similarity with those from
humans, respectively. Novel subtypes of G. duodenalis were identified, with one
and seven subtypes for assemblages A and E at the gdh locus, and two and three
subtypes for assemblages B and E at the bg locus, respectively. Three pairs of
the same bg sequences of assemblage E were observed in sheep and cattle.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This is the first description of genetic
characterizations of the gdh and bg genes of G. duodenalis from rabbits, sheep
and cattle in Mainland China. Homology analysis of assemblages AI and B implied
the possibility of zoonotic transmission. The novel subtypes of assemblages of G.
duodenalis may represent the endemic genetic characteristics of G. duodenalis in 
Heilongjiang Province, China.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095291 
PMCID: PMC3991589
PMID: 24748379  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

