
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014 Apr 17;8(4):e2796. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002796.
eCollection 2014 Apr.

Differing patterns of selection and geospatial genetic diversity within two
leading Plasmodium vivax candidate vaccine antigens.

Parobek CM(1), Bailey JA(2), Hathaway NJ(3), Socheat D(4), Rogers WO(5), Juliano 
JJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina,
United States of America; Curriculum in Genetics and Molecular Biology,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of
America.
(2)Program in Bioinformatics and Integrative Biology, University of
Massachusetts, Worcester, Massachusetts, United States of America; Division of
Transfusion Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical
School, Worcester, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(3)Program in Bioinformatics and Integrative Biology, University of
Massachusetts, Worcester, Massachusetts, United States of America; School of
Medicine, University of Massachusetts, Worcester, Massachusetts, United States of
America.
(4)National Malaria Center, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
(5)United States Navy, Naval Medical Research Unit #2, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases, University of North Carolina School of
Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of America.

Although Plasmodium vivax is a leading cause of malaria around the world, only a 
handful of vivax antigens are being studied for vaccine development. Here, we
investigated genetic signatures of selection and geospatial genetic diversity of 
two leading vivax vaccine antigens--Plasmodium vivax merozoite surface protein 1 
(pvmsp-1) and Plasmodium vivax circumsporozoite protein (pvcsp). Using scalable
next-generation sequencing, we deep-sequenced amplicons of the 42 kDa region of
pvmsp-1 (n = 44) and the complete gene of pvcsp (n = 47) from Cambodian isolates.
These sequences were then compared with global parasite populations obtained from
GenBank. Using a combination of statistical and phylogenetic methods to assess
for selection and population structure, we found strong evidence of balancing
selection in the 42 kDa region of pvmsp-1, which varied significantly over the
length of the gene, consistent with immune-mediated selection. In pvcsp, the
highly variable central repeat region also showed patterns consistent with immune
selection, which were lacking outside the repeat. The patterns of selection seen 
in both genes differed from their P. falciparum orthologs. In addition, we found 
that, similar to merozoite antigens from P. falciparum malaria, genetic diversity
of pvmsp-1 sequences showed no geographic clustering, while the non-merozoite
antigen, pvcsp, showed strong geographic clustering. These findings suggest that 
while immune selection may act on both vivax vaccine candidate antigens, the
geographic distribution of genetic variability differs greatly between these two 
genes. The selective forces driving this diversification could lead to antigen
escape and vaccine failure. Better understanding the geographic distribution of
genetic variability in vaccine candidate antigens will be key to designing and
implementing efficacious vaccines.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002796 
PMCID: PMC3990511
PMID: 24743266  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

