
1. PLoS Genet. 2014 Apr 24;10(4):e1003874. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003874.
eCollection 2014 Apr.

A novel highly divergent protein family identified from a viviparous insect by
RNA-seq analysis: a potential target for tsetse fly-specific abortifacients.

Benoit JB(1), Attardo GM(1), Michalkova V(2), Krause TB(1), Bohova J(3), Zhang
Q(4), Baumann AA(5), Mireji PO(6), Takáč P(3), Denlinger DL(4), Ribeiro JM(7),
Aksoy S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology of Microbial Diseases, Yale School of Public Health, 
New Haven, Connecticut, United States of America.
(2)Division of Epidemiology of Microbial Diseases, Yale School of Public Health, 
New Haven, Connecticut, United States of America; Section of Molecular and
Applied Zoology, Institute of Zoology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava,
Slovakia.
(3)Section of Molecular and Applied Zoology, Institute of Zoology, Slovak Academy
of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia.
(4)Departments of Entomology and Evolution, Ecology and Organismal Biology, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.
(5)Janelia Farm Research Campus, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Ashburn,
Virginia, United States of America.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Egerton University, Njoro,
Kenya.
(7)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

In tsetse flies, nutrients for intrauterine larval development are synthesized by
the modified accessory gland (milk gland) and provided in mother's milk during
lactation. Interference with at least two milk proteins has been shown to extend 
larval development and reduce fecundity. The goal of this study was to perform a 
comprehensive characterization of tsetse milk proteins using lactation-specific
transcriptome/milk proteome analyses and to define functional role(s) for the
milk proteins during lactation. Differential analysis of RNA-seq data from
lactating and dry (non-lactating) females revealed enrichment of transcripts
coding for protein synthesis machinery, lipid metabolism and secretory proteins
during lactation. Among the genes induced during lactation were those encoding
the previously identified milk proteins (milk gland proteins 1-3, transferrin and
acid sphingomyelinase 1) and seven new genes (mgp4-10). The genes encoding
mgp2-10 are organized on a 40 kb syntenic block in the tsetse genome, have
similar exon-intron arrangements, and share regions of amino acid sequence
similarity. Expression of mgp2-10 is female-specific and high during milk
secretion. While knockdown of a single mgp failed to reduce fecundity,
simultaneous knockdown of multiple variants reduced milk protein levels and
lowered fecundity. The genomic localization, gene structure similarities, and
functional redundancy of MGP2-10 suggest that they constitute a novel highly
divergent protein family. Our data indicates that MGP2-10 function both as the
primary amino acid resource for the developing larva and in the maintenance of
milk homeostasis, similar to the function of the mammalian casein family of milk 
proteins. This study underscores the dynamic nature of the lactation cycle and
identifies a novel family of lactation-specific proteins, unique to Glossina sp.,
that are essential to larval development. The specificity of MGP2-10 to tsetse
and their critical role during lactation suggests that these proteins may be an
excellent target for tsetse-specific population control approaches.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003874 
PMCID: PMC3998918
PMID: 24763277  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

