
1. Genome Biol Evol. 2014 May 6;6(5):1158-65. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evu094.

Comparative genomic analysis of malaria mosquito vector-associated novel pathogen
Elizabethkingia anophelis.

Teo J(1), Tan SY(2), Liu Y(3), Tay M(2), Ding Y(3), Li Y(4), Kjelleberg S(5),
Givskov M(6), Lin RT(1), Yang L(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Microbiology Unit, National University
Hospital, Singapore.
(2)Singapore Centre on Environmental Life Sciences Engineering (SCELSE), Nanyang 
Technological University, SingaporeSchool of Biological Sciences, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore.
(3)Singapore Centre on Environmental Life Sciences Engineering (SCELSE), Nanyang 
Technological University, Singapore.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
(5)Singapore Centre on Environmental Life Sciences Engineering (SCELSE), Nanyang 
Technological University, SingaporeCentre for Marine Bio-Innovation and School of
Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney,
Australia.
(6)Singapore Centre on Environmental Life Sciences Engineering (SCELSE), Nanyang 
Technological University, SingaporeCosterton Biofilm Center, Department of
International Health, Immunology and Microbiology, Panum Institute, University of
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(7)Singapore Centre on Environmental Life Sciences Engineering (SCELSE), Nanyang 
Technological University, SingaporeSchool of Biological Sciences, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore yangliang@ntu.edu.sg.

Acquisition of Elizabethkingia infections in intensive care units (ICUs) has
risen in the past decade. Treatment of Elizabethkingia infections is challenging 
due to the lack of effective therapeutic regimens, leading to a high mortality
rate. Elizabethkingia infections have long been attributed to Elizabethkingia
meningoseptica. Recently, we used whole-genome sequencing to reveal that E.
anophelis is the pathogenic agent for an Elizabethkingia outbreak at two ICUs. We
performed comparative genomic analysis of seven hospital-isolated E. anophelis
strains with five available Elizabethkingia spp. genomes deposited in the
National Center for Biotechnology Information Database. A pan-genomic approach
was applied to identify the core- and pan-genome for the Elizabethkingia genus.
We showed that unlike the hospital-isolated pathogen E. meningoseptica ATCC 12535
strain, the hospital-isolated E. anophelis strains have genome content and
organization similar to the E. anophelis Ag1 and R26 strains isolated from the
midgut microbiota of the malaria mosquito vector Anopheles gambiae. Both the
core- and accessory genomes of Elizabethkingia spp. possess genes conferring
antibiotic resistance and virulence. Our study highlights that E. anophelis is an
emerging bacterial pathogen for hospital environments.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evu094 
PMCID: PMC4041001
PMID: 24803570  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

