
1. Curr Gene Ther. 2014;14(3):161-9.

Plasmids encoding protein aggregation domains act as molecular adjuvants for DNA 
vaccines.

Capitani M, Saade F, Havas KM, Angeletti M, Concetti F, Agas D, Sabbieti MG,
Concetti A, Venanzi FM, Petrovsky N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Flinders Medical Centre, Adelaide,
Australia 5042. nikolai.petrovsky@flinders.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: DNA vaccines provide high tolerability and safety but commonly suffer
from suboptimal immunogenicity. We previously reported that a plasmid vector
(pATRex), encoding the DNA sequence for the von Willebrand I/A domain of the
tumor endothelial marker-8 (TEM8) when given in combination with plasmid-encoded 
tumor antigens acted as a powerful molecular adjuvant enhancing immunity against 
breast and melanoma tumors.
AIMS: In the present study we addressed two unsolved issues; would the adjuvant
action of pATRex extend to a DNA vaccine against infectious disease and, if so,
what is the mechanistic basis for pATRex adjuvant action?
RESULTS: Here we show in a murine malaria vaccine model that co-administration of
pATRex potentiates antibody production elicited by an intramuscular injection of 
plasmid encoding Plasmodium yoelii merozoite surface protein 4/5 (PyMSP4/5).
pATRex enhanced the B-cell response and induced increased IgG1 production
consistent with TH2 polarization of the DNA vaccine response. To explore the
mechanism of adjuvant action, cells were transfected in vitro with pATRex and
this resulted in formation of insoluble intracellular aggregates and apoptotic
cell death. Using a structural modeling approach we identified a short peptide
sequence (α3-β4) within ATRex responsible for protein aggregation and confirmed
that transfection of cells with plasmid encoding this self-assembling peptide
similarly triggered intracellular aggregates, caspase activation and cell death.
CONCLUSION: Plasmids encoding aggregation-promoting domains induce formation of
insoluble intracellular aggregates that trigger caspase activation and apoptotic 
cell death leading to activation of the innate immune system thereby acting as
genetic adjuvants.

DOI: 10.2174/1566523214666140509114838 
PMID: 24828254  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

