
1. PLoS Genet. 2014 May 15;10(5):e1004382. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004382.
eCollection 2014 May.

A HECT ubiquitin-protein ligase as a novel candidate gene for altered quinine and
quinidine responses in Plasmodium falciparum.

Sanchez CP(1), Liu CH(1), Mayer S(1), Nurhasanah A(2), Cyrklaff M(1), Mu J(3),
Ferdig MT(4), Stein WD(5), Lanzer M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Parasitology, Universitätsklinikum
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Parasitology, Universitätsklinikum
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany; Laboratory for the Development of Agroindustrial
and Biomedical Technology (LAPTIAB), Tangerang Selatan, Indonesia.
(3)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda,
Maryland, United States of America.
(4)The Eck Institute for Global Health, Department of Biological Sciences,
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, United States of America.
(5)Biological Chemistry, Silberman Institute of Life Sciences, Hebrew University 
of Jerusalem, Givat Ram, Jerusalem, Israel.

The emerging resistance to quinine jeopardizes the efficacy of a drug that has
been used in the treatment of malaria for several centuries. To identify factors 
contributing to differential quinine responses in the human malaria parasite
Plasmodium falciparum, we have conducted comparative quantitative trait locus
analyses on the susceptibility to quinine and also its stereoisomer quinidine,
and on the initial and steady-state intracellular drug accumulation levels in the
F1 progeny of a genetic cross. These data, together with genetic screens of field
isolates and laboratory strains associated differential quinine and quinidine
responses with mutated pfcrt, a segment on chromosome 13, and a novel candidate
gene, termed MAL7P1.19 (encoding a HECT ubiquitin ligase). Despite a strong
likelihood of association, episomal transfections demonstrated a role for the
HECT ubiquitin-protein ligase in quinine and quinidine sensitivity in only a
subset of genetic backgrounds, and here the changes in IC50 values were moderate 
(approximately 2-fold). These data show that quinine responsiveness is a complex 
genetic trait with multiple alleles playing a role and that more experiments are 
needed to unravel the role of the contributing factors.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004382 
PMCID: PMC4022464
PMID: 24830312  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

