
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014 Jun 5;8(6):e2882. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002882.
eCollection 2014 Jun.

A high resolution case study of a patient with recurrent Plasmodium vivax
infections shows that relapses were caused by meiotic siblings.

Bright AT(1), Manary MJ(1), Tewhey R(2), Arango EM(3), Wang T(4), Schork NJ(2),
Yanow SK(5), Winzeler EA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Program, School of Medicine, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, California, United States of America; Department of Pediatrics, 
School of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California,
United States of America.
(2)Scripps Genomic Medicine, The Scripps Translational Science Institute, La
Jolla, California, United States of America; Department of Molecular and
Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California,
United States of America.
(3)Grupo Salud y Comunidad, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Antioquia,
Medellín, Antioquia, Colombia.
(4)Biomedical Sciences Program, School of Medicine, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, California, United States of America.
(5)School of Public Health, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada;
Provincial Laboratory for Public Health, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, California, United States of America.

Plasmodium vivax infects a hundred million people annually and endangers 40% of
the world's population. Unlike Plasmodium falciparum, P. vivax parasites can
persist as a dormant stage in the liver, known as the hypnozoite, and these
dormant forms can cause malaria relapses months or years after the initial
mosquito bite. Here we analyze whole genome sequencing data from parasites in the
blood of a patient who experienced consecutive P. vivax relapses over 33 months
in a non-endemic country. By analyzing patterns of identity, read coverage, and
the presence or absence of minor alleles in the initial polyclonal and subsequent
monoclonal infections, we show that the parasites in the three infections are
likely meiotic siblings. We infer that these siblings are descended from a single
tetrad-like form that developed in the infecting mosquito midgut shortly after
fertilization. In this natural cross we find the recombination rate for P. vivax 
to be 10 kb per centimorgan and we further observe areas of disequilibrium
surrounding major drug resistance genes. Our data provide new strategies for
studying multiclonal infections, which are common in all types of infectious
diseases, and for distinguishing P. vivax relapses from reinfections in malaria
endemic regions. This work provides a theoretical foundation for studies that aim
to determine if new or existing drugs can provide a radical cure of P. vivax
malaria.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002882 
PMCID: PMC4046966
PMID: 24901334  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

