
1. Front Immunol. 2014 May 23;5:241. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2014.00241. eCollection
2014.

Biomarkers of safety and immune protection for genetically modified live
attenuated leishmania vaccines against visceral leishmaniasis - discovery and
implications.

Gannavaram S(1), Dey R(1), Avishek K(2), Selvapandiyan A(3), Salotra P(2),
Nakhasi HL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Emerging and Transfusion Transmitted Diseases, Center for
Biologics Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration , Bethesda, MD , 
USA.
(2)National Institute of Pathology, Indian Council of Medical Research , New
Delhi , India.
(3)Institute of Molecular Medicine , New Delhi , India.

Despite intense efforts there is no safe and efficacious vaccine against visceral
leishmaniasis, which is fatal and endemic in many tropical countries. A major
shortcoming in the vaccine development against blood-borne parasitic agents such 
as Leishmania is the inadequate predictive power of the early immune responses
mounted in the host against the experimental vaccines. Often immune correlates
derived from in-bred animal models do not yield immune markers of protection that
can be readily extrapolated to humans. The limited efficacy of vaccines based on 
DNA, subunit, heat killed parasites has led to the realization that acquisition
of durable immunity against the protozoan parasites requires a controlled
infection with a live attenuated organism. Recent success of irradiated malaria
parasites as a vaccine candidate further strengthens this approach to
vaccination. We developed several gene deletion mutants in Leishmania donovani as
potential live attenuated vaccines and reported extensively on the immunogenicity
of LdCentrin1 deleted mutant in mice, hamsters, and dogs. Additional limited
studies using genetically modified live attenuated Leishmania parasites as
vaccine candidates have been reported. However, for the live attenuated parasite 
vaccines, the primary barrier against widespread use remains the absence of clear
biomarkers associated with protection and safety. Recent studies in evaluation of
vaccines, e.g., influenza and yellow fever vaccines, using systems biology tools 
demonstrated the power of such strategies in understanding the immunological
mechanisms that underpin a protective phenotype. Applying similar tools in
isolated human tissues such as PBMCs from healthy individuals infected with live 
attenuated parasites such as LdCen(-/-) in vitro followed by human microarray
hybridization experiments will enable us to understand how early vaccine-induced 
gene expression profiles and the associated immune responses are coordinately
regulated in normal individuals. In addition, comparative analysis of biomarkers 
in PBMCs from asymptomatic or healed visceral leishmaniasis individuals in
response to vaccine candidates including live attenuated parasites may provide
clues about determinants of protective immunity and be helpful in shaping the
final Leishmania vaccine formulation in the clinical trials.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2014.00241 
PMCID: PMC4033241
PMID: 24904589 

