
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014 Jun 19;8(6):e2946. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002946.
eCollection 2014 Jun.

Identification and characterization of seminal fluid proteins in the Asian tiger 
mosquito, Aedes albopictus.

Boes KE(1), Ribeiro JM(2), Wong A(3), Harrington LC(4), Wolfner MF(5), Sirot
LK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, College of Wooster, Wooster, Ohio, United States of
America.
(2)Vector Biology Section, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Rockville, Maryland, United States 
of America.
(3)Department of Biology, Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Entomology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, United States 
of America.
(5)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New 
York, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014 Jul;8(7):e3073.

The Asian tiger mosquito (Aedes albopictus) is an important vector for pathogens 
that affect human health, including the viruses that cause dengue and Chikungunya
fevers. It is also one of the world's fastest-spreading invasive species. For
these reasons, it is crucial to identify strategies for controlling the
reproduction and spread of this mosquito. During mating, seminal fluid proteins
(Sfps) are transferred from male mosquitoes to females, and these Sfps modulate
female behavior and physiology in ways that influence reproduction. Despite the
importance of Sfps on female reproductive behavior in mosquitoes and other
insects, the identity of Sfps in Ae. albopictus has not previously been reported.
We used transcriptomics and proteomics to identify 198 Sfps in Ae. albopictus. We
discuss possible functions of these Sfps in relation to Ae. albopictus
reproduction-related biology. We additionally compare the sequences of these Sfps
with proteins (including reported Sfps) in several other species, including Ae.
aegypti. While only 72 (36.4%) of Ae. albopictus Sfps have putative orthologs in 
Ae. aegypti, suggesting low conservation of the complement of Sfps in these
species, we find no evidence for an elevated rate of evolution or positive
selection in the Sfps that are shared between the two Aedes species, suggesting
high sequence conservation of those shared Sfps. Our results provide a foundation
for future studies to investigate the roles of individual Sfps on feeding and
reproduction in this mosquito. Functional analysis of these Sfps could inform
strategies for managing the rate of pathogen transmission by Ae. albopictus.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002946 
PMCID: PMC4063707
PMID: 24945155  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

