
1. Parasit Vectors. 2014 Jun 23;7:286. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-7-286.

Different meal, same flavor: cospeciation and host switching of haemosporidian
parasites in some non-passerine birds.

Santiago-Alarcon D(1), Rodríguez-Ferraro A, Parker PG, Ricklefs RE.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Ecología A,C,, Biología y Conservación de Vertebrados, Carretera 
Antigua a Coatepec 351, El Haya, C,P,, Veracruz, Xalapa 91070, Mexico.
diego.santiago@inecol.mx.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have shown that haemosporidian parasites
(Haemoproteus (Parahaemoproteus) and Plasmodium) infecting passerine birds have
an evolutionary history of host switching with little cospeciation, in particular
at low taxonomic levels (e.g., below the family level), which is suggested as the
main speciation mechanism of this group of parasites. Recent studies have
characterized diverse clades of haemosporidian parasites (H. (Haemoproteus) and
H. (Parahaemoproteus)) infecting non-passerine birds (e.g., Columbiformes,
Pelecaniiformes). Here, we explore the cospeciation history of H. (Haemoproteus) 
and H. (Parahaemoproteus) parasites with their non-passerine hosts.
METHODS: We sequenced the mtDNA cyt b gene of both haemosporidian parasites and
their avian non-passerine hosts. We built Bayesian phylogenetic hypotheses and
created concensus phylograms that were subsequently used to conduct cospeciation 
analyses. We used both a global cospeciation test, PACo, and an event-cost
algorithm implemented in CoRe-PA.
RESULTS: The global test suggests that H. (Haemoproteus) and H.
(Parahaemoproteus) parasites have a diversification history dominated by
cospeciation events particularly at the family level. Host-parasite links from
the PACo analysis show that host switching events are common within families
(i.e., among genera and among species within genera), and occasionally across
different orders (e.g., Columbiformes to Pelecaniiformes). Event-cost analyses
show that haemosporidian coevolutionary history is dominated by host switching
and some codivergence, but with duplication events also present. Genetic lineages
unique to raptor species (e.g., FALC11) commonly switch between Falconiformes and
Strigiformes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results corroborate previous findings that have detected a
global cospeciation signal at the family taxonomic level, and they also support a
history of frequent switching closer to the tips of the host phylogeny, which
seems to be the main diversification mechanism of haemosporidians. Such dynamic
host-parasite associations are relevant to the epidemiology of emerging diseases 
because low parasite host specificity is a prerequisite for the emergence of
novel diseases. The evidence on host distributions suggests that haemosporidian
parasites have the potential to rapidly develop novel host-associations. This
pattern has also been recorded in fish-monogenean interactions, suggesting a
general diversification mechanism for parasites when host choice is not
restricted by ecological barriers.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-7-286 
PMCID: PMC4077843
PMID: 24957563  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

