
1. Mol Biosyst. 2014 Jul 29;10(9):2466-79. doi: 10.1039/c4mb00274a.

Comparative study of Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1-DBLα
domain variants with respect to antigenic variations and docking interaction
analysis with glycosaminoglycans.

Agrawal MR(1), Ozarkar AD, Gupta S, Deobagkar DN, Deobagkar DD.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Centre & Department of Zoology, Center of Advanced Studies,
University of Pune, Pune 411007, India. deepti.deobagkar@gmail.com.

The variant surface antigen PfEMP1 (Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane
protein 1) encoded by the polymorphic multi-copy var gene family plays an
important role in parasite biology and the host-parasite interactions.
Sequestration and antigenic variation is an essential component in the survival
and pathogenesis of Plasmodium falciparum and contributes to chronic infection.
The DBLα domain of PfEMP1 is a potential target for immuno-epidemiological
studies and has been visualized as a vaccine candidate against severe malaria.
Specific host receptors like heparin, heparan sulphate, blood group A and
complement receptor 1 have been reported to bind the DBLα domain. Although
heparin has been experimentally shown to disrupt the parasite-host interaction
and effectively disrupt rosetting, the binding sites for the DBLα domain and the 
mechanism behind heparin-mediated rosette inhibition have not been elucidated. In
this study, 3D structures and epitopes of the DBLα domain in 3D7 and in two
Indian isolates have been predicted and compared. We have carried out docking
studies on DBLα domains with human GAG receptors (heparin and heparan sulphate)
to predict the strength of association between the protein-ligand interactions.
The DBLα domain structures showed extensive diversity and polymorphism in their
binding sites. The docking results indicate that heparin binds more effectively
with high affinity as compared to heparan sulphate with some common interacting
residues. These common residues can play an important role in rosetting and will 
aid in the designing of inhibitors specific to the interactions between DBLα and 
heparin or heparan sulphate would be important in malaria treatment. Thus it may 
lead to the development of novel interference strategies to block red blood cell 
invasion and provide protection against malaria.

DOI: 10.1039/c4mb00274a 
PMID: 24995459  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

