
1. Mol Biosyst. 2014 Oct;10(10):2526-37. doi: 10.1039/c4mb00115j.

Modeling metabolism and stage-specific growth of Plasmodium falciparum HB3 during
the intraerythrocytic developmental cycle.

Fang X(1), Reifman J, Wallqvist A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Defense Biotechnology High Performance Computing Software
Applications Institute, Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center,
U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command, Ft. Detrick, MD 21702, USA.
jaques.reifman.civ@mail.mil.

The human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum goes through a complex life
cycle, including a roughly 48-hour-long intraerythrocytic developmental cycle
(IDC) in human red blood cells. A better understanding of the metabolic processes
required during the asexual blood-stage reproduction will enhance our basic
knowledge of P. falciparum and help identify critical metabolic reactions and
pathways associated with blood-stage malaria. We developed a metabolic network
model that mechanistically links time-dependent gene expression, metabolism, and 
stage-specific growth, allowing us to predict the metabolic fluxes, the biomass
production rates, and the timing of production of the different biomass
components during the IDC. We predicted time- and stage-specific production of
precursors and macromolecules for P. falciparum (strain HB3), allowing us to link
specific metabolites to specific physiological functions. For example, we
hypothesized that coenzyme A might be involved in late-IDC DNA replication and
cell division. Moreover, the predicted ATP metabolism indicated that energy was
mainly produced from glycolysis and utilized for non-metabolic processes.
Finally, we used the model to classify the entire tricarboxylic acid cycle into
segments, each with a distinct function, such as superoxide detoxification,
glutamate/glutamine processing, and metabolism of fumarate as a byproduct of
purine biosynthesis. By capturing the normal metabolic and growth progression in 
P. falciparum during the IDC, our model provides a starting point for further
elucidation of strain-specific metabolic activity, host-parasite interactions,
stress-induced metabolic responses, and metabolic responses to antimalarial drugs
and drug candidates.

DOI: 10.1039/c4mb00115j 
PMID: 25001103  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

