
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014 Jul 17;8(7):e3005. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003005.
eCollection 2014 Jul.

Transcriptome sequencing and developmental regulation of gene expression in
Anopheles aquasalis.

Costa-da-Silva AL(1), Marinotti O(2), Ribeiro JM(3), Silva MC(4), Lopes AR(5),
Barros MS(6), Sá-Nunes A(7), Kojin BB(2), Carvalho E(8), Suesdek L(9), Silva-Neto
MA(10), James AA(11), Capurro ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Mosquitos Geneticamente Modificados, Departamento de
Parasitologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade de São Paulo, São
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil; Instituto Nacional de Ciência e Tecnologia em
Entomologia Molecular, INCT-EM, Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California
Irvine, Irvine, California, United States of America.
(3)Section of Vector Biology, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
(4)Laboratório de Mosquitos Geneticamente Modificados, Departamento de
Parasitologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade de São Paulo, São
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Laboratório de Bioquímica e Biofísica, Instituto Butantan, São Paulo, São
Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Laboratório de Imunologia Experimental, Departamento de Imunologia, Instituto 
de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(7)Instituto Nacional de Ciência e Tecnologia em Entomologia Molecular, INCT-EM, 
Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Laboratório de Imunologia Experimental,
Departamento de Imunologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade de São
Paulo, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(8)Centro de Biotecnologia, Instituto Butantan, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(9)Laboratório de Mosquitos Geneticamente Modificados, Departamento de
Parasitologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade de São Paulo, São
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil; Laboratório de Parasitologia, Instituto Butantan, São
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(10)Instituto Nacional de Ciência e Tecnologia em Entomologia Molecular, INCT-EM,
Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Laboratório de Sinalização Celular,
Instituto de Bioquímica Médica, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(11)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California
Irvine, Irvine, California, United States of America; Department of Microbiology 
and Molecular Genetics, University of California Irvine, Irvine, California,
United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Anopheles aquasalis is a major malaria vector in coastal areas of
South and Central America where it breeds preferentially in brackish water. This 
species is very susceptible to Plasmodium vivax and it has been already
incriminated as responsible vector in malaria outbreaks. There has been no
high-throughput investigation into the sequencing of An. aquasalis genes,
transcripts and proteins despite its epidemiological relevance. Here we describe 
the sequencing, assembly and annotation of the An. aquasalis transcriptome.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: A total of 419 thousand cDNA sequence reads,
encompassing 164 million nucleotides, were assembled in 7544 contigs of ≥ 2
sequences, and 1999 singletons. The majority of the An. aquasalis transcripts
encode proteins with their closest counterparts in another neotropical malaria
vector, An. darlingi. Several analyses in different protein databases were used
to annotate and predict the putative functions of the deduced An. aquasalis
proteins. Larval and adult-specific transcripts were represented by 121 and 424
contig sequences, respectively. Fifty-one transcripts were only detected in
blood-fed females. The data also reveal a list of transcripts up- or
down-regulated in adult females after a blood meal. Transcripts associated with
immunity, signaling networks and blood feeding and digestion are discussed.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study represents the first large-scale effort to
sequence the transcriptome of An. aquasalis. It provides valuable information
that will facilitate studies on the biology of this species and may lead to novel
strategies to reduce malaria transmission on the South American continent. The
An. aquasalis transcriptome is accessible at
http://exon.niaid.nih.gov/transcriptome/An_aquasalis/Anaquexcel.xlsx.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003005 
PMCID: PMC4102416
PMID: 25033462  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

