
1. Infect Immun. 2014 Oct;82(10):4358-68. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01877-14. Epub 2014 Aug
4.

A conserved apicomplexan microneme protein contributes to Toxoplasma gondii
invasion and virulence.

Huynh MH(1), Boulanger MJ(2), Carruthers VB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan School of
Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry & Microbiology, University of Victoria, Victoria,
British Columbia, Canada.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan School of
Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA vcarruth@umich.edu.

The obligate intracellular parasite Toxoplasma gondii critically relies on host
cell invasion during infection. Proteins secreted from the apical micronemes are 
central components for host cell recognition, invasion, egress, and virulence.
Although previous work established that the sporozoite protein with an altered
thrombospondin repeat (SPATR) is a micronemal protein conserved in other
apicomplexan parasites, including Plasmodium, Neospora, and Eimeria, no genetic
evidence of its contribution to invasion has been reported. SPATR contains a
predicted epidermal growth factor domain and two thrombospondin type 1 repeats,
implying a role in host cell recognition. In this study, we assess the
contribution of T. gondii SPATR (TgSPATR) to T. gondii invasion by genetically
ablating it and restoring its expression by genetic complementation. Δspatr
parasites were ~50% reduced in invasion compared to parental strains, a defect
that was reversed in the complemented strain. In mouse virulence assays, Δspatr
parasites were significantly attenuated, with ~20% of mice surviving infection.
Given the conservation of this protein among the Apicomplexa, we assessed whether
the Plasmodium falciparum SPATR ortholog (PfSPATR) could complement the absence
of the TgSPATR. Although PfSPATR showed correct micronemal localization, it did
not reverse the invasion deficiency of Δspatr parasites, because of an apparent
failure in secretion. Overall, the results suggest that TgSPATR contributes to
invasion and virulence, findings that have implications for the many genera and
life stages of apicomplexans that express SPATR.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01877-14 
PMCID: PMC4187870
PMID: 25092910  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

