
1. Parasit Vectors. 2014 Sep 4;7:423. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-7-423.

Demographic history and population structure of Anopheles pseudopunctipennis in
Argentina based on the mitochondrial COI gene.

Dantur Juri MJ(1), Moreno M, Prado Izaguirre MJ, Navarro JC, Zaidenberg MO,
Almirón WR, Claps GL, Conn JE.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Superior de Entomología "Dr, Abraham Willink", Facultad de Ciencias 
Naturales e Instituto Miguel Lillo, Universidad Nacional de Tucumán, Miguel Lillo
205, San Miguel de Tucumán 4000, Tucumán, Argentina. juliadantur@yahoo.com.ar.

BACKGROUND: Anopheles pseudopunctipennis is an important malaria vector in the
Neotropical region and the only species involved in Plasmodium transmission in
the Andean foothills. Its wide geographical distribution in America, high
preference for biting humans and capacity to rest inside dwellings after feeding,
are attributes contributing to its vector status. Previous reports have tried to 
elucidate its taxonomic status, distinguishing populations from North, Central
and South America. In the present study we used a mitochondrial marker to examine
the demographic history of An. pseudopunctipennis in northwestern Argentina.
METHODS: Twelve localities were selected across 550 km of the distribution of
this species in Argentina, including two near the Bolivian border and several in 
South Tucumán, for sampling. A fragment of the cytochrome oxidase I (COI) gene
was sequenced and haplotype relationships were analyzed by a statistical
parsimony network and a Neighbor-Joining (NJ) tree. Genetic differentiation was
estimated with FST. Historical demographic processes were evaluated using
diversity measures, neutrality tests and mismatch distribution.
RESULTS: Forty-one haplotypes were identified, of which haplotype A was the most 
common and widely distributed. Neither the network nor the NJ tree showed any
geographic differentiation between northern and southern populations. Haplotype
diversities, Tajima's DT and Fu & Li's F and D neutrality tests and mismatch
distribution supported a scenario of Holocene demographic expansion.
CONCLUSION: The demographic pattern suggests that An. pseudopunctipennis has
undergone a single colonization process, and the ancestral haplotype is shared by
specimens from all localities, indicating mitochondrial gene flow. Genetic
differentiation was minimal, observed only between one northern and one southern 
locality. The estimated time of the population expansion of this species was
during the Holocene. These data suggest that regional vector control measures
would be equally effective in both northern and southern localities sampled, but 
also that insecticide resistant genes may spread rapidly within this region.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-7-423 
PMCID: PMC4261243
PMID: 25189813  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

