
1. Malar J. 2014 Sep 3;13:349. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-349.

Global distribution of malaria-resistant MHC-HLA alleles: the number and
frequencies of alleles and malaria risk.

Garamszegi LZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Evolutionary Ecology, Estación Biológica de Doñana-CSIC,
c/Americo Vespucio, s/n, 41092 Sevilla, Spain. laszlo.garamszegi@ebd.csic.es.

BACKGROUND: The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) is the most polymorphic
genetic region in vertebrates, but the origin of such genetic diversity remains
unresolved. Several studies have demonstrated at the within-population level that
individuals harbouring particular alleles can be less or more susceptible to
malaria, but these do not allow strong generalization.
METHODS: Here worldwide data on the frequencies of several hundred MHC alleles of
the human leucocyte antigen (HLA) system in relation to malaria risk at the
between-population level were analysed in a phylogenetic framework, and results
for different alleles were quantitatively summarized in a meta-analysis.
RESULTS: There was an overall positive relationship between malaria pressure and 
the frequency of several HLA alleles indicating that allele frequencies increase 
in countries with strong malaria pressure. Nevertheless, considerable
heterogeneity was observed across alleles, and some alleles showed a remarkable
negative relationship with malaria risk. When heterogeneities were partitioned
into different organization groups of the MHC, the strongest positive
relationships were detected for alleles of the HLA-A and HLA-B loci, but there
were also differences between MHC supertypes that constitute functionally
distinct nucleotide sequences. Finally, the number of MHC alleles that are
maintained within countries was also related to malaria risk.
CONCLUSION: Therefore, malaria represents a key selection pressure for the human 
MHC and has left clear evolutionary footprints on both the frequencies and the
number of alleles observed in different countries.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-349 
PMCID: PMC4162943
PMID: 25187124  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

