
1. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 10;9(9):e107295. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107295.
eCollection 2014.

Evidence for a lectin specific for sulfated glycans in the salivary gland of the 
malaria vector, Anopheles gambiae.

Francischetti IM(1), Ma D(1), Andersen JF(1), Ribeiro JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Vector Biology, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

Salivary gland homogenate (SGH) from the female mosquitoes Anopheles gambiae, An.
stephensi, An. freeborni, An. dirus and An. albimanus were found to exhibit
hemagglutinating (lectin) activity. Lectin activity was not found for male An.
gambiae, or female Ae aegypti, Culex quinquefasciatus, Phlebotomus duboscqi, and 
Lutzomyia longipalpis. With respect to species-specificity, An. gambiae SGH
agglutinates red blood cells (RBC) from humans, horse, sheep, goat, pig, and cow;
it is less active for rats RBC, and not detectable for guinea-pigs or chicken
RBC. Notably, lectin activity was inhibited by low concentrations of dextran
sulfate 50-500 K, fucoidan, heparin, laminin, heparin sulfate proteoglycan,
sialyl-containing glycans (e.g. 3'-sialyl Lewis X, and 6'-sialyl lactose), and
gangliosides (e.g. GM3, GD1, GD1b, GTB1, GM1, GQ1B), but not by simple sugars.
These results imply that molecule(s) in the salivary gland target sulfated
glycans. SGH from An. gambiae was also found to promote agglutination of HL-60
cells which are rich in sialyl Lewis X, a glycan that decorates PSGL-1, the
neutrophils receptor that interacts with endothelial cell P-selectin.
Accordingly, SGH interferes with HL-60 cells adhesion to immobilized P-selectin. 
Because An. gambiae SGH expresses galectins, one member of this family (herein
named Agalectin) was expressed in E. coli. Recombinant Agalectin behaves as a
non-covalent homodimer. It does not display lectin activity, and does not
interact with 500 candidates tested in a Glycan microarray. Gel-filtration
chromatography of the SGH of An. gambiae identified a fraction with
hemagglutinating activity, which was analyzed by 1D PAGE followed by in-gel
tryptic digestion, and nano-LC MS/MS. This approach identified several genes
which emerge as candidates for a lectin targeting sulfated glycans, the first
with this selectivity to be reported in the SGH of a blood-sucking arthropod. The
role of salivary molecules (sialogenins) with lectin activity is discussed in the
context of inflammation, and parasite-vector-host interactions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107295 
PMCID: PMC4160252
PMID: 25207644  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

