
1. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 2;9(9):e108930. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108930. eCollection
2014.

P. berghei telomerase subunit TERT is essential for parasite survival.

Religa AA(1), Ramesar J(2), Janse CJ(2), Scherf A(3), Waters AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Molecular Parasitology, Institute of Infection,
Immunity and Inflammation, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(2)Leiden Malaria Research Group, Parasitology, Leiden University Medical Centre,
Leiden, the Netherlands.
(3)Biology of Host-Parasite Interactions Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Telomeres define the ends of chromosomes protecting eukaryotic cells from
chromosome instability and eventual cell death. The complex regulation of
telomeres involves various proteins including telomerase, which is a specialized 
ribonucleoprotein responsible for telomere maintenance. Telomeres of chromosomes 
of malaria parasites are kept at a constant length during blood stage
proliferation. The 7-bp telomere repeat sequence is universal across different
Plasmodium species (GGGTTT/CA), though the average telomere length varies. The
catalytic subunit of telomerase, telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT), is
present in all sequenced Plasmodium species and is approximately three times
larger than other eukaryotic TERTs. The Plasmodium RNA component of TERT has
recently been identified in silico. A strategy to delete the gene encoding TERT
via double cross-over (DXO) homologous recombination was undertaken to study the 
telomerase function in P. berghei. Expression of both TERT and the RNA component 
(TR) in P. berghei blood stages was analysed by Western blotting and Northern
analysis. Average telomere length was measured in several Plasmodium species
using Telomere Restriction Fragment (TRF) analysis. TERT and TR were detected in 
blood stages and an average telomere length of ∼ 950 bp established. Deletion of 
the tert gene was performed using standard transfection methodologies and we show
the presence of tert- mutants in the transfected parasite populations. Cloning of
tert- mutants has been attempted multiple times without success. Thorough
analysis of the transfected parasite populations and the parasite obtained from
extensive parasite cloning from these populations provide evidence for a so
called delayed death phenotype as observed in different organisms lacking TERT.
The findings indicate that TERT is essential for P. berghei cell survival. The
study extends our current knowledge on telomere biology in malaria parasites and 
validates further investigations to identify telomerase inhibitors to induce
parasite cell death.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108930 
PMCID: PMC4183507
PMID: 25275500  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

