
1. J Virol. 2015 Jan 15;89(2):931-51. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02150-14. Epub 2014 Oct 29.

Discovery and characterization of auxiliary proteins encoded by type 3 simian
T-cell lymphotropic viruses.

Turpin J(1), Journo C(1), Ko NL(2), Sinet F(3), Carpentier A(4), Galioot A(3),
Edwards D(5), Vandamme AM(6), Gazzolo L(7), Duc Dodon M(7), Gessain A(2),
Kashanchi F(8), Balansard I(9), Lacoste R(10), Mahieux R(11).

Author information: 
(1)Equipe Oncogenèse Rétrovirale, Lyon, France Equipe Labellisée Ligue Nationale 
Contre le Cancer, Lyon, France International Center for Research in Infectiology,
INSERM U1111-CNRS UMR5308, Lyon, France Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Lyon,
France Université Lyon 1, Lyon, France.
(2)Epidémiologie et Physiopathologie des Virus Oncogènes, CNRS UMR 3569, Pasteur 
Institute, Paris, France.
(3)Equipe Oncogenèse Rétrovirale, Lyon, France Equipe Labellisée Ligue Nationale 
Contre le Cancer, Lyon, France International Center for Research in Infectiology,
INSERM U1111-CNRS UMR5308, Lyon, France Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Lyon,
France Université Lyon 1, Lyon, France Master Biosciences ENS Lyon, Lyon, France.
(4)Molecular and Cellular Epigenetics (GIGA) and Molecular Biology (Gembloux
Agro-Bio Tech), University of Liège, Liège, Belgium.
(5)Virus Tumor Biology Section, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(6)University of Leuven, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Rega
Institute for Medical Research, Clinical and Epidemiological Virology, Leuven,
Belgium, and Centro de Malária e outras Doenças Tropicais and Unidade de
Microbiologia, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical, Universidade Nova de
Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(7)Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Lyon, France Laboratoire de Biologie
Moléculaire de la Cellule, Unité Mixte de Recherche 5239, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, UMS3444 Biosciences Lyon-Gerland, Lyon, France.
(8)National Center for Biodefense and Infectious Diseases, George Mason
University, Manassas, Virginia, USA.
(9)UMS 3537 CNRS-AMU, Marseille, France.
(10)Station de Primatologie-UPS846-CNRS, Rousset sur Arc, France.
(11)Equipe Oncogenèse Rétrovirale, Lyon, France Equipe Labellisée Ligue Nationale
Contre le Cancer, Lyon, France International Center for Research in Infectiology,
INSERM U1111-CNRS UMR5308, Lyon, France Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Lyon,
France Université Lyon 1, Lyon, France renaud.mahieux@ens-lyon.fr.

Human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) and HTLV-2 encode auxiliary
proteins that play important roles in viral replication, viral latency, and
immune escape. The presence of auxiliary protein-encoding open reading frames
(ORFs) in HTLV-3, the latest HTLV to be discovered, is unknown. Simian T-cell
lymphotropic virus type 3 (STLV-3) is almost identical to HTLV-3. Given the lack 
of HTLV-3-infected cell lines, we took advantage of STLV-3-infected cells and of 
an STLV-3 molecular clone to search for the presence of auxiliary transcripts.
Using reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR), we first uncovered the presence of
three unknown viral mRNAs encoding putative proteins of 5, 8, and 9 kDa and
confirmed the presence of the previously reported RorfII transcript. The
existence of these viral mRNAs was confirmed by using splice site-specific RT-PCR
with ex vivo samples. We showed that p5 is distributed throughout the cell and
does not colocalize with a specific organelle. The p9 localization is similar to 
that of HTLV-1 p12 and induced a strong decrease in the calreticulin signal,
similarly to HTLV-1 p12. Although p8, RorfII, and Rex-3 share an N-terminal
sequence that is predicted to contain a nucleolar localization signal (NoLS),
only p8 is found in the nucleolus. The p8 location in the nucleolus is linked to 
a bipartite NoLS. p8 and, to a lesser extent, p9 repressed viral expression but
did not alter Rex-3-dependent mRNA export. Using a transformation assay, we
finally showed that none of the STLV-3 auxiliary proteins had the ability to
induce colony formation, while both Tax-3 and antisense protein of HTLV-3 (APH-3)
promoted cellular transformation. Altogether, these results complete the
characterization of the newly described primate T-lymphotropic virus type 3
(PTLV-3).IMPORTANCE: Together with their simian counterparts, HTLVs form the
primate T-lymphotropic viruses. HTLVs arose from interspecies transmission
between nonhuman primates and humans. HTLV-1 and HTLV-2 encode auxiliary proteins
that play important roles in viral replication, viral latency, and immune escape.
The presence of ORFs encoding auxiliary proteins in HTLV-3 or STLV-3 genomes was 
unknown. Using in silico analyses, ex vivo samples, or in vitro experiments, we
have uncovered the presence of 3 previously unknown viral mRNAs encoding putative
proteins and confirmed the presence of a previously reported viral transcript. We
characterized the intracellular localization of the four proteins. We showed that
two of these proteins repress viral expression but that none of them have the
ability to induce colony formation. However, both Tax and the antisense protein
APH-3 promote cell transformation. Our results allowed us to characterize 4 new
retroviral proteins for the first time.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02150-14 
PMCID: PMC4300634
PMID: 25355890  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

