
1. Infect Immun. 2015 Jan;83(1):276-85. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01979-14. Epub 2014 Nov 3.

Immune characterization of Plasmodium falciparum parasites with a shared genetic 
signature in a region of decreasing transmission.

Bei AK(1), Diouf A(2), Miura K(2), Larremore DB(3), Ribacke U(4), Tullo G(2),
Moss EL(5), Neafsey DE(5), Daniels RF(6), Zeituni AE(2), Nosamiefan I(4), Volkman
SK(7), Ahouidi AD(8), Ndiaye D(9), Dieye T(8), Mboup S(8), Buckee CO(3), Long
CA(2), Wirth DF(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA Laboratory of Bacteriology and Virology, Le
Dantec Hospital, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cheikh Anta Diop University,
Dakar, Senegal.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA Center for Communicable Disease Dynamics, Harvard School of
Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA.
(7)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA Simmons College, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(8)Laboratory of Bacteriology and Virology, Le Dantec Hospital, Faculty of
Medicine and Pharmacy, Cheikh Anta Diop University, Dakar, Senegal.
(9)Laboratory of Parasitology and Mycology, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Cheikh Anta Diop University, Dakar, Senegal.
(10)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA dfwirth@hsph.harvard.edu.

As the intensity of malaria transmission has declined, Plasmodium falciparum
parasite populations have displayed decreased clonal diversity resulting from the
emergence of many parasites with common genetic signatures (CGS). We have
monitored such CGS parasite clusters from 2006 to 2013 in Thiès, Senegal, using
the molecular barcode. The first, and one of the largest observed clusters of CGS
parasites, was present in 24% of clinical isolates in 2008, declined to 3.4% of
clinical isolates in 2009, and then disappeared. To begin to explore the
relationship between the immune responses of the population and the emergence and
decline of specific parasite genotypes, we have determined whether antibodies to 
CGS parasites correlate with their prevalence. We measured (i) antibodies capable
of inhibiting parasite growth in culture and (ii) antibodies recognizing the
surfaces of infected erythrocytes (RBCs). IgG obtained from volunteers in 2009
showed increased reactivity to the surfaces of CGS-parasitized erythrocytes over 
IgG from 2008. Since P. falciparum EMP-1 (PfEMP-1) is a major variant surface
antigen, we used var Ups quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR) and
sequencing with degenerate DBL1α domain primers to characterize the var genes
expressed by CGS parasites after short-term in vitro culture. CGS parasites show 
upregulation of UpsA var genes and 2-cysteine-containing PfEMP-1 molecules and
express the same dominant var transcript. Our work indicates that the CGS
parasites in this cluster express similar var genes, more than would be expected 
by chance in the population, and that there is year-to-year variation in immune
recognition of surface antigens on CGS parasite-infected erythrocytes. This study
lays the groundwork for detailed investigations of the mechanisms driving the
expansion or contraction of specific parasite clones in the population.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01979-14 
PMCID: PMC4288878
PMID: 25368109  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

