
1. J Infect Dis. 2015 Apr 15;211(8):1342-51. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiu614. Epub 2014
Nov 7.

Genome-level determination of Plasmodium falciparum blood-stage targets of
malarial clinical immunity in the Peruvian Amazon.

Torres KJ(1), Castrillon CE(1), Moss EL(2), Saito M(3), Tenorio R(4), Molina
DM(5), Davies H(6), Neafsey DE(2), Felgner P(6), Vinetz JM(7), Gamboa D(8).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Malaria, Laboratorios de Investigación y Desarrollo, Facultad
de Ciencias y Filosofía.
(2)Genome Sequencing and Analysis Program, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(3)Laboratorio de Malaria, Laboratorios de Investigación y Desarrollo, Facultad
de Ciencias y Filosofía Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, 
University of California-San Diego, La Jolla.
(4)Laboratorio de Malaria, Laboratorios de Investigación y Desarrollo, Facultad
de Ciencias y Filosofía Laboratorio Satelital, Universidad Peruana Cayetano
Heredia, Iquitos, Perú
(5)Antigen Discovery, Inc.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of
California-Irvine.
(7)Laboratorio de Malaria, Laboratorios de Investigación y Desarrollo, Facultad
de Ciencias y Filosofía Institute de Medicina Tropical, Universidad Peruana
Cayetano Heredia, Lima Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine,
University of California-San Diego, La Jolla.
(8)Laboratorio de Malaria, Laboratorios de Investigación y Desarrollo, Facultad
de Ciencias y Filosofía Institute de Medicina Tropical, Universidad Peruana
Cayetano Heredia, Lima.

BACKGROUND: Persons with blood-stage Plasmodium falciparum parasitemia in the
absence of symptoms are considered to be clinically immune. We hypothesized that 
asymptomatic subjects with P. falciparum parasitemia would differentially
recognize a subset of P. falciparum proteins on a genomic scale.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Compared with symptomatic subjects, sera from clinically
immune, asymptomatically infected individuals differentially recognized 51 P.
falciparum proteins, including the established vaccine candidate PfMSP1. Novel,
hitherto unstudied hypothetical proteins and other proteins not previously
recognized as potential vaccine candidates were also differentially recognized.
Genes encoding the proteins differentially recognized by the Peruvian clinically 
immune individuals exhibited a significant enrichment of nonsynonymous nucleotide
variation, an observation consistent with these genes undergoing immune
selection.
CONCLUSIONS: A limited set of P. falciparum protein antigens was associated with 
the development of naturally acquired clinical immunity in the low-transmission
setting of the Peruvian Amazon. These results imply that, even in a
low-transmission setting, an asexual blood-stage vaccine designed to reduce
clinical malaria symptoms will likely need to contain large numbers of
often-polymorphic proteins, a finding at odds with many current efforts in the
design of vaccines against asexual blood-stage P. falciparum.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiu614 
PMCID: PMC4402338
PMID: 25381370  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

