
1. Malar J. 2014 Nov 15;13:429. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-429.

High-resolution melting analysis reveals low Plasmodium parasitaemia infections
among microscopically negative febrile patients in western Kenya.

Kipanga PN, Omondi D, Mireji PO, Sawa P, Masiga DK, Villinger J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Martin Lüscher Emerging Infectious Diseases (ML-EID) Laboratory, Molecular
Biology and Bioinformatics Unit, International Centre of Insect Physiology and
Ecology (icipe), P,O, Box 30772, Nairobi 00100, Kenya. jandouwe@icipe.org.

BACKGROUND: Microscopy and rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) are common tools for
diagnosing malaria, but are deficient in detecting low Plasmodium parasitaemia. A
novel molecular diagnostic tool (nPCR-HRM) that combines the sensitivity and
specificity of nested PCR (nPCR) and direct PCR-high resolution melting analysis 
(dPCR-HRM) was developed. To evaluate patterns of anti-malarial drug
administration when no parasites are detected, nPCR-HRM was employed to screen
blood samples for low parasitaemia from febrile patients without microscopically 
detectable Plasmodium infections in a rural malaria-endemic setting.
METHODS: Blood samples (n = 197) were collected in two islands of Lake Victoria, 
Kenya, from febrile patients without Plasmodium detectable by microscopy or RDTs.
18S rRNA gene sequences were amplified from extracted DNA by nPCR-HRM, nPCR, and 
dPCR-HRM to detect and differentiate Plasmodium parasites. The limits of
detection (LoD) were compared using serial dilutions of the WHO International
Standard for P. falciparum DNA. Data on administration of anti-malarials were
collected to estimate prescription of anti-malarial drugs to patients with and
without low parasitaemia Plasmodium infections.
RESULTS: The coupled nPCR-HRM assay detected Plasmodium parasites with greater
sensitivity (LoD = 236 parasites/mL) than either nPCR (LoD = 4,700 parasites/mL) 
or dPCR-HRM (LoD = 1,490 parasites/mL). Moreover, nPCR-HRM detected and
differentiated low-parasitaemia infections in significantly greater proportions
of patients than did either nPCR or dPCR-HRM (p-value <0.001). Among these
low-parasitaemia infections, 67.7% of patients were treated with anti-malarials, 
whereas 81.5% of patients not infected with Plasmodium parasites were treated
with anti-malarials.
CONCLUSIONS: The enhanced sensitivity of nPCR-HRM demonstrates limitations of
differential febrile illness diagnostics in rural malaria endemic settings that
confound epidemiological estimates of malaria, and lead to inadvertent
misadministration of anti-malarial drugs. This is the first study that employs
low-parasitaemia Plasmodium diagnostics to quantify the prescription of
anti-malarial drugs to both non-malaria febrile patients and patients with
low-parasitaemia Plasmodium infections. nPCR-HRM enhances low-parasitaemia
malaria diagnosis and can potentially surmount the deficiencies of microscopy and
RDT-based results in determining low-parasitaemia Plasmodium infection rates for 
evaluating malaria elimination efforts. The findings highlight the need for
improved differential diagnostics of febrile illness in remote malaria endemic
regions.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-429 
PMCID: PMC4246433
PMID: 25399409  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

