
1. Int J Parasitol. 2015 Jan;45(1):51-62. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2014.08.012. Epub
2014 Oct 17.

Description of the first cryptic avian malaria parasite, Plasmodium
homocircumflexum n. sp., with experimental data on its virulence and development 
in avian hosts and mosquitoes.

Palinauskas V(1), Žiegytė R(2), Ilgūnas M(2), Iezhova TA(2), Bernotienė R(2),
Bolshakov C(3), Valkiūnas G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Ecology, Nature Research Centre, Akademijos 2, Vilnius 2100,
LT-08412, Lithuania. Electronic address: vaidas@ekoi.lt.
(2)Institute of Ecology, Nature Research Centre, Akademijos 2, Vilnius 2100,
LT-08412, Lithuania.
(3)Biological Station Rybachy, Zoological Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Rybachy 238535, Kaliningrad Reg., Russia.

For over 100 years studies on avian haemosporidian parasite species have relied
on similarities in their morphology to establish a species concept. Some
exceptional cases have also included information about the life cycle and
sporogonic development. More than 50 avian Plasmodium spp. have now been
described. However, PCR-based studies show a much broader diversity of
haemosporidian parasites, indicating the possible existence of a diverse group of
cryptic species. In the present study, using both similarity and phylogenetic
species definition concepts, we believe that we report the first characterised
cryptic speciation case of an avian Plasmodium parasite. We used sequence
information on the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene and constructed phylogenies of
identified Plasmodium spp. to define their position in the phylogenetic tree.
After analysis of blood stages, the morphology of the parasite was shown to be
identical to Plasmodium circumflexum. However, the geographic distribution of the
new parasite, the phylogenetic information, as well as patterns of development of
infection, indicate that this parasite differs from P. circumflexum. Plasmodium
homocircumflexum n. sp. was described based on information about genetic
differences from described lineages, phylogenetic position and biological
characters. This parasite develops parasitemia in experimentally infected birds -
the domestic canary Serinus canaria domestica, siskin Carduelis spinus and
crossbill Loxia curvirostra. Anaemia caused by high parasitemia, as well as
cerebral paralysis caused by exoerythrocytic stages in the brain, are the main
reasons for mortality. Exoerythrocytic stages also form in other organs (heart,
kidneys, liver, lungs, spleen, intestines and pectoral muscles). DNA
amplification was unsuccessful from faecal samples of heavily infected birds. The
sporogonic development initiates, but is abortive, at the oocyst stage in two
common European mosquito species, Culex pipiens pipiens (forms pipiens and
molestus) and Aedes vexans. Vectors of this Plasmodium sp. remain unknown.

Copyright © 2014 Australian Society for Parasitology Inc. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2014.08.012 
PMID: 25449950  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

