
1. Soc Sci Med. 2015 May;133:233-41. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2014.10.037. Epub 2014
Oct 19.

The geography of malaria genetics in the Democratic Republic of Congo: A complex 
and fragmented landscape.

Carrel M(1), Patel J(2), Taylor SM(3), Janko M(4), Mwandagalirwa MK(2), Tshefu
AK(5), Escalante AA(6), McCollum A(7), Alam MT(7), Udhayakumar V(7), Meshnick
S(2), Emch M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geographical & Sustainability Sciences, University of Iowa, Iowa
City, IA, USA. Electronic address: margaret-carrel@uiowa.edu.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health,
University of North Carolina- Chapel Hill Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health,
University of North Carolina- Chapel Hill Chapel Hill, NC, USA; Division of
Infectious Diseases and International Health, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC, USA; Duke Global Health Institute, Durham, NC, USA.
(4)Department of Geography, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC, USA.
(5)Ecole de Sante Publique, Faculte de Medecine, University of Kinshasa,
Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(6)Center for Evolutionary Medicine & Informatics, The Biodesign Institute,
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(7)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global 
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.

Understanding how malaria parasites move between populations is important,
particularly given the potential for malaria to be reintroduced into areas where 
it was previously eliminated. We examine the distribution of malaria genetics
across seven sites within the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and two nearby
countries, Ghana and Kenya, in order to understand how the relatedness of malaria
parasites varies across space, and whether there are barriers to the flow of
malaria parasites within the DRC or across borders. Parasite DNA was retrieved
from dried blood spots from 7 Demographic and Health Survey sample clusters in
the DRC. Malaria genetic characteristics of parasites from Ghana and Kenya were
also obtained. For each of 9 geographic sites (7 DRC, 1 Ghana and 1 Kenya), a
pair-wise RST statistic was calculated, indicating the genetic distance between
malaria parasites found in those locations. Mapping genetics across the spatial
extent of the study area indicates a complex genetic landscape, where relatedness
between two proximal sites may be relatively high (RST > 0.64) or low
(RST < 0.05), and where distal sites also exhibit both high and low genetic
similarity. Mantel's tests suggest that malaria genetics differ as geographic
distances increase. Principal Coordinate Analysis suggests that genetically
related samples are not co-located. Barrier analysis reveals no significant
barriers to gene flow between locations. Malaria genetics in the DRC have a
complex and fragmented landscape. Limited exchange of genes across space is
reflected in greater genetic distance between malaria parasites isolated at
greater geographic distances. There is, however, evidence for close genetic ties 
between distally located sample locations, indicating that movement of malaria
parasites and flow of genes is being driven by factors other than distance decay.
This research demonstrates the contributions that spatial disease ecology and
landscape genetics can make to understanding the evolutionary dynamics of
infectious diseases.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2014.10.037 
PMCID: PMC4402241
PMID: 25459204  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

