
1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Dec 4;10(12):e1004537. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004537.
eCollection 2014 Dec.

Differential PfEMP1 expression is associated with cerebral malaria pathology.

Tembo DL(1), Nyoni B(2), Murikoli RV(2), Mukaka M(1), Milner DA(3), Berriman
M(4), Rogerson SJ(5), Taylor TE(6), Molyneux ME(1), Mandala WL(7), Craig AG(8),
Montgomery J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malawi-Liverpool-Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Programme, College of
Medicine, Blantyre, Malawi; Department of Parasitology, Liverpool School of
Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(2)Malawi-Liverpool-Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Programme, College of
Medicine, Blantyre, Malawi.
(3)Blantyre Malaria Project, College of Medicine, Blantyre, Malawi; Department of
Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of 
America; Department of Immunology and Infectious Disease, Harvard School of
Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(4)Pathogen Sequencing Unit, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United
Kingdom.
(5)Department of Medicine, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(6)Blantyre Malaria Project, College of Medicine, Blantyre, Malawi; College of
Osteopathic Medicine, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, United
States of America.
(7)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Blantyre, Malawi.
(8)Department of Parasitology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, 
United Kingdom.

Plasmodium falciparum is unique among human malarias in its ability to sequester 
in post-capillary venules of host organs. The main variant antigens implicated
are the P. falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1), which can be
divided into three major groups (A-C). Our study was a unique examination of
sequestered populations of parasites for genetic background and expression of
PfEMP1 groups. We collected post-mortem tissue from twenty paediatric hosts with 
pathologically different forms of cerebral malaria (CM1 and CM2) and parasitaemic
controls (PC) to directly examine sequestered populations of parasites in the
brain, heart and gut. Use of two different techniques to investigate this
question produced divergent results. By quantitative PCR, group A var genes were 
upregulated in all three organs of CM2 and PC cases. In contrast, in CM1
infections displaying high levels of sequestration but negligible vascular
pathology, there was high expression of group B var. Cloning and sequencing of
var transcript tags from the same samples indicated a uniformly low expression of
group A-like var. Generally, within an organ sample, 1-2 sequences were expressed
at dominant levels. 23% of var tags were detected in multiple patients despite
the P. falciparum infections being genetically distinct, and two tags were
observed in up to seven hosts each with high expression in the brains of 3-4
patients. This study is a novel examination of the sequestered parasites
responsible for fatal cerebral malaria and describes expression patterns of the
major cytoadherence ligand in three organ-derived populations and three
pathological states.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004537 
PMCID: PMC4256257
PMID: 25473835  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

