
1. Genome Biol Evol. 2014 Dec 4;6(12):3281-94. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evu263.

Global phylogenomic analysis of nonencapsulated Streptococcus pneumoniae reveals 
a deep-branching classic lineage that is distinct from multiple sporadic
lineages.

Hilty M(1), Wüthrich D(2), Salter SJ(3), Engel H(4), Campbell S(4), Sá-Leão R(5),
de Lencastre H(6), Hermans P(7), Sadowy E(8), Turner P(9), Chewapreecha C(10),
Diggle M(11), Pluschke G(12), McGee L(13), Eser ÖK(14), Low DE(15), Smith-Vaughan
H(16), Endimiani A(4), Küffer M(4), Dupasquier M(17), Beaudoing E(17), Weber
J(17), Bruggmann R(2), Hanage WP(18), Parkhill J(3), Hathaway LJ(4), Mühlemann
K(19), Bentley SD(20).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Infectious Diseases, University of Bern, Switzerland Department 
of Infectious Diseases, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital and University of
Bern, Switzerland markus.hilty@ifik.unibe.ch.
(2)Interfaculty Bioinformatics Unit, University of Bern, Switzerland Swiss
Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom.
(4)Institute for Infectious Diseases, University of Bern, Switzerland.
(5)Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica, University of Lisbon, Portugal.
(6)Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica, University of Lisbon, Portugal
Laboratory of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, The Rockefeller University.
(7)Laboratory of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Radboud University Medical
Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(8)National Medicines Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
(9)Shoklo Malaria Research Unit, Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, 
Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Mae Sot, Thailand Centre for
Tropical Medicine, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, United 
Kingdom.
(10)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom Shoklo Malaria
Research Unit, Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Faculty of
Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Mae Sot, Thailand.
(11)Clinical Microbiology Department, Queens Medical Centre, Nottingham, United
Kingdom.
(12)Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, University of Basel, Switzerland.
(13)Respiratory Diseases Branch, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Georgia, Atlanta.
(14)Department of Microbiology, Medical Faculty, Hacettepe University, Ankara,
Turkey.
(15)Mt Sinai Hospital & Public Health Laboratories, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(16)Menzies School of Health Research, Charles Darwin University, Australia.
(17)Centre for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Switzerland.
(18)Department of Epidemiology, Center for Communicable Disease Dynamics, Harvard
School of Public Health.
(19)Institute for Infectious Diseases, University of Bern, Switzerland Department
of Infectious Diseases, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital and University of
Bern, Switzerland.
(20)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom Department of
Medicine, Addenbrookes Hospital, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom.

The surrounding capsule of Streptococcus pneumoniae has been identified as a
major virulence factor and is targeted by pneumococcal conjugate vaccines (PCV). 
However, nonencapsulated S. pneumoniae (non-Ec-Sp) have also been isolated
globally, mainly in carriage studies. It is unknown if non-Ec-Sp evolve
sporadically, if they have high antibiotic nonsusceptiblity rates and a unique,
specific gene content. Here, whole-genome sequencing of 131 non-Ec-Sp isolates
sourced from 17 different locations around the world was performed. Results
revealed a deep-branching classic lineage that is distinct from multiple sporadic
lineages. The sporadic lineages clustered with a previously sequenced, global
collection of encapsulated S. pneumoniae (Ec-Sp) isolates while the classic
lineage is comprised mainly of the frequently identified multilocus sequences
types (STs) ST344 (n = 39) and ST448 (n = 40). All ST344 and nine ST448 isolates 
had high nonsusceptiblity rates to β-lactams and other antimicrobials. Analysis
of the accessory genome reveals that the classic non-Ec-Sp contained an increased
number of mobile elements, than Ec-Sp and sporadic non-Ec-Sp. Performing
adherence assays to human epithelial cells for selected classic and sporadic
non-Ec-Sp revealed that the presence of a integrative conjugative element (ICE)
results in increased adherence to human epithelial cells (P = 0.005). In
contrast, sporadic non-Ec-Sp lacking the ICE had greater growth in vitro possibly
resulting in improved fitness. In conclusion, non-Ec-Sp isolates from the classic
lineage have evolved separately. They have spread globally, are well adapted to
nasopharyngeal carriage and are able to coexist with Ec-Sp. Due to continued use 
of PCV, non-Ec-Sp may become more prevalent.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evu263 
PMCID: PMC4986459
PMID: 25480686  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

