
1. Iran J Parasitol. 2013 Oct;8(4):536-44.

Genetic Variation and Selection of Domain I of the Plasmodium vivax Apical
Membrane Antigen-1(AMA-1) Gene in Clinical Isolates from Iran.

Heidari A(1), Keshavarz H(2), Hajjaran H(3), Ebrahimi SM(4), Kabir K(5), Naseri
MH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Parasitology, School of Medicine, Alborz University of Medical
Sciences, Karaj, Iran.
(2)Dept. of Medical Parasitology and Mycology, School of Public Health, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran ; Center for Research of Endemic
Parasites of Iran (CREPI), Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Dept. of Medical Parasitology and Mycology, School of Public Health, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Dept. of Anesthesiology, School of Allied Medical Sciences, Alborz University 
of Medical Sciences, Karaj, Iran.
(5)Dept. of Surgery, Baqiyatallah University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Dept. of Surgery, Baqiyatallah University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran ; 
Dept. of Surgery, Alborz University of Medical Sciences, Karaj, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Apical Membrane antigen 1 (AMA-1) is positioned on the surface of
merozoite and it may play a role in attack to red blood cells. The main aim of
present study was to determine the genetic variation, as well as, to detect of
selection at domain I of AMA-1 gene Plasmodium vivax isolates in Iran.
METHODS: Blood samples were collected from 58 patients positive for P. vivax,
mono infection and the domain I of AMA-1 gene was amplified by nested PCR and
then sequenced.
RESULTS: A total 33 different haplotypes were identified among 58 Iranian
sequences. The 23 new haplotypes were determined in this study that was not
reported previously in other regions of the world. There were totally observed 36
point mutations at the nucleotide level in the analyzed sequences. Sequences
analyses indicated 25 amino acid changes at 20 positions in which 5 sites
demonstrated thrimorphic polymorphism and the others were dimorphic in the domain
I of the Iranian PvAMA-1 isolates.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicated relatively high level of allelic diversity at 
the domain I of PvAMA-1 among P.vivax isolates of Iran. Since, PvAMA-1 is
considering as vaccine candidate antigen, these data provide valuable information
for the development of a PvAMA-1 based malaria vaccine.


PMCID: PMC4266117
PMID: 25516734 

