
1. J Appl Ecol. 2013 Oct;50(5):1216-1225. Epub 2013 Jul 23.

Modelling the spatial spread of a homing endonuclease gene in a mosquito
population.

North A(1), Burt A(2), Godfray HC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3PS,
UK.
(2)Department of Biology, Imperial College London Silwood Park, Ascot, Berks, SL5
7PY, UK.

SUMMARY: Homing endonuclease genes (HEGs) exist naturally in many single-celled
organisms and can show extremely strong genetic drive allowing them to spread
through populations into which they are introduced. They are being investigated
as tools to manipulate the populations of important vectors of human disease, in 
particular the mosquitoes that transmit malaria. Before HEGs can be deployed, it 
is important to study their spatial spread in order to design efficient release
strategies.A spatially explicit model is developed to study the spread of a HEG
through a landscape whose structure is defined by the distribution of mosquito
breeding and feeding sites. The model is motivated by the biology of the major
vectors of malaria in Africa. The conditions for spread, fixation and loss of two
major types of HEG are explored in different landscapes.In landscapes where
mosquito resources are abundant, the conditions for spread are well approximated 
by a mean-field model. Where a HEG imposes a genetic load, it can cause
population extinction, though spatial models more often predict population
suppression.In certain types of landscapes where mosquito resources are rare, an 
introduced HEG may be prevented from moving between local mosquito populations
and so a simple release strategy is unlikely to be effective, yet if the HEG
succeeds in spreading population extinction is a feasible outcome. Increasing the
number of release sites at the expense of releasing fewer mosquitoes per site
reduces the probability that a HEG will fail.Synthesis and applications. The
model presented asks for the first time how the spatial structure of mosquito
populations will influence the effectiveness of a technology that is being
rapidly developed for vector control. If homing endonuclease genes (HEGs) are to 
be used in this way, we have qualified the importance of accounting for landscape
characteristics in both the execution and the expectation of their application.
The next stage is to use the model to study the spread of HEGs through real
landscapes where releases may take place, something that will be facilitated by
the results of the present study.

DOI: 10.1111/1365-2664.12133 
PMCID: PMC4277857
PMID: 25558082 

