
1. Malar J. 2015 Jan 5;14:5. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-14-5.

CD4+ T cells apoptosis in Plasmodium vivax infection is mediated by activation of
both intrinsic and extrinsic pathways.

Hojo-Souza NS, Pereira DB, Mendes TA, Passos LS, Gazzinelli-Guimarães AC,
Gazzinelli-Guimarães PH, Tada MS, Zanini GM, Bartholomeu DC, Fujiwara RT, Bueno
LL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biological Science, Federal
University of Minas Gerais, Av, Antônio Carlos 6627, 31270-901 Belo Horizonte,
Minas Gerais, Brazil. lilacerdabueno@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Reduction in the number of circulating blood lymphocytes
(lymphocytopaenia) has been reported during clinical episodes of malaria and is
normalized after treatment with anti-malaria drugs. While this phenomenon is well
established in malaria infection, the underlying mechanisms are still not fully
elucidated. In the present study, the occurrence of apoptosis and its pathways in
CD4+ T cells was investigated in naturally Plasmodium vivax-infected individuals 
from a Brazilian endemic area (Porto Velho - RO).
METHODS: Blood samples were collected from P. vivax-infected individuals and
healthy donors. The apoptosis was characterized by cell staining with Annexin
V/FITC and propidium iodide and the apoptosis-associated gene expression profile 
was carried out using RT2 Profiler PCR Array-Human Apoptosis. The plasma TNF
level was determined by ELISA. The unpaired t-test or Mann-Whitney test was
applied according to the data distribution.
RESULTS: Plasmodium vivax-infected individuals present low number of leukocytes
and lymphocytes with a higher percentage of CD4+ T cells in early and/or late
apoptosis. Increased gene expression was observed for TNFRSF1B and Bid,
associated with a reduction of Bcl-2, in individuals with P. vivax malaria.
Furthermore, these individuals showed increased plasma levels of TNF compared to 
malaria-naive donors.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the present study suggest that P. vivax infection
induces apoptosis of CD4+ T cells mediated by two types of signaling: by
activation of the TNFR1 death receptor (extrinsic pathway), which is amplified by
Bid, and by decreased expression of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 (intrinsic
pathway). The T lymphocytes apoptosis could reflect a strategy of immune evasion 
triggered by the parasite, enabling their persistence but also limiting the
occurrence of immunopathology.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-14-5 
PMCID: PMC4326293
PMID: 25559491  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

