
1. Biol Direct. 2015 Jan 7;10:1. doi: 10.1186/s13062-014-0031-8.

A new ensemble coevolution system for detecting HIV-1 protein coevolution.

Li G(1), Theys K(2), Verheyen J(3), Pineda-Peña AC(4)(5), Khouri R(6),
Piampongsant S(7), Eusébio M(8), Ramon J(9), Vandamme AM(10)(11).

Author information: 
(1)KU Leuven - University of Leuven, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Rega Institute for Medical Research, Clinical and Epidemiological Virology,
Leuven, Belgium. liguangdi.research@gmail.com.
(2)KU Leuven - University of Leuven, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Rega Institute for Medical Research, Clinical and Epidemiological Virology,
Leuven, Belgium. Kristof.Theys@rega.kuleuven.be.
(3)Institute of Virology, University hospital, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, 
Germany. jens.verheyen@uk-essen.de.
(4)KU Leuven - University of Leuven, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Rega Institute for Medical Research, Clinical and Epidemiological Virology,
Leuven, Belgium. andrea.pinedapena@rega.kuleuven.be.
(5)Clinical and Molecular Infectious Disease Group, Faculty of Sciences and
Mathematics, Universidad del Rosario, Bogotá, Colombia.
andrea.pinedapena@rega.kuleuven.be.
(6)KU Leuven - University of Leuven, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Rega Institute for Medical Research, Clinical and Epidemiological Virology,
Leuven, Belgium. ricardo_khouri@hotmail.com.
(7)KU Leuven - University of Leuven, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Rega Institute for Medical Research, Clinical and Epidemiological Virology,
Leuven, Belgium. supinya.piampongsant@student.kuleuven.be.
(8)Centro de Malária e Outras Doenças Tropicais and Unidade de Microbiologia,
Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Lisboa,
Portugal. monicasdeusebio@gmail.com.
(9)Department of Computer Science, KU Leuven - University of Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium. jan.ramon@cs.kuleuven.be.
(10)KU Leuven - University of Leuven, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 
Rega Institute for Medical Research, Clinical and Epidemiological Virology,
Leuven, Belgium. Annemie.Vandamme@uzleuven.be.
(11)Centro de Malária e Outras Doenças Tropicais and Unidade de Microbiologia,
Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Lisboa,
Portugal. Annemie.Vandamme@uzleuven.be.

BACKGROUND: A key challenge in the field of HIV-1 protein evolution is the
identification of coevolving amino acids at the molecular level. In the past
decades, many sequence-based methods have been designed to detect
position-specific coevolution within and between different proteins. However, an 
ensemble coevolution system that integrates different methods to improve the
detection of HIV-1 protein coevolution has not been developed.
RESULTS: We integrated 27 sequence-based prediction methods published between
2004 and 2013 into an ensemble coevolution system. This system allowed
combinations of different sequence-based methods for coevolution predictions.
Using HIV-1 protein structures and experimental data, we evaluated the
performance of individual and combined sequence-based methods in the prediction
of HIV-1 intra- and inter-protein coevolution. We showed that sequence-based
methods clustered according to their methodology, and a combination of four
methods outperformed any of the 27 individual methods. This four-method
combination estimated that HIV-1 intra-protein coevolving positions were mainly
located in functional domains and physically contacted with each other in the
protein tertiary structures. In the analysis of HIV-1 inter-protein coevolving
positions between Gag and protease, protease drug resistance positions near the
active site mostly coevolved with Gag cleavage positions (V128, S373-T375, A431, 
F448-P453) and Gag C-terminal positions (S489-Q500) under selective pressure of
protease inhibitors.
CONCLUSIONS: This study presents a new ensemble coevolution system which detects 
position-specific coevolution using combinations of 27 different sequence-based
methods. Our findings highlight key coevolving residues within HIV-1 structural
proteins and between Gag and protease, shedding light on HIV-1 intra- and
inter-protein coevolution.

DOI: 10.1186/s13062-014-0031-8 
PMCID: PMC4332441
PMID: 25564011  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

