
1. Parasit Vectors. 2015 Jan 13;8:16. doi: 10.1186/s13071-015-0637-4.

Screening blood-fed mosquitoes for the diagnosis of filarioid helminths and avian
malaria.

Zittra C(1), Kocziha Z(2), Pinnyei S(3), Harl J(4), Kieser K(5), Laciny A(6),
Eigner B(7), Silbermayr K(8), Duscher GG(9), Fok É(10), Fuehrer HP(11).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Parasitology, Department of Pathobiology, University of
Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria. carina.zittra@vetmeduni.ac.at.
(2)Department of Parasitology and Zoology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Szent
István University, Budapest, Hungary. zsaca89@gmail.com.
(3)Institute of Animal Sciences and Wildlife Management, Faculty of Agriculture, 
Szeged University, Hódmezővásárhely, Hungary. pinnyeysz@citromail.hu.
(4)Institute of Parasitology, Department of Pathobiology, University of
Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria. josef.harl@vetmeduni.ac.at.
(5)Institute of Parasitology, Department of Pathobiology, University of
Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria. katrin.kieser@gmail.com.
(6)Institute of Parasitology, Department of Pathobiology, University of
Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria. a.laciny@gmx.at.
(7)Institute of Parasitology, Department of Pathobiology, University of
Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria. barbara.eigner@vetmeduni.ac.at.
(8)Institute of Parasitology, Department of Pathobiology, University of
Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria. katja.silbermayr@vetmeduni.ac.at.
(9)Institute of Parasitology, Department of Pathobiology, University of
Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria. georg.duscher@vetmeduni.ac.at.
(10)Department of Parasitology and Zoology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Szent 
István University, Budapest, Hungary. Fok.Eva@aotk.szie.hu.
(11)Institute of Parasitology, Department of Pathobiology, University of
Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria. hans-peter.fuehrer@vetmeduni.ac.at.

BACKGROUND: Both Dirofilaria repens and recently D. immitis are known to be
endemic in Hungary. As one of several recent cases, the fatal case of a dog
infested with D. immitis in Szeged, Southern Hungary, received attention from the
media. Hence it was decided to catch mosquitoes in the garden where the dog lived
to screen for filarioid helminths and Plasmodium spp. using molecular tools.
METHODS: Mosquitoes were caught in Szeged, in the garden where the infected dog
was kept, in July 2013 with M-360 electric mosquito traps and were stored in
ethanol until further procedure. Female mosquitoes were classified to genus level
by morphology. Each mosquito was homogenized and analyzed for filarioid helminths
and avian malaria using standardized PCR techniques. Positive mosquito samples
were further identified to species level by comparing a section of the
mitochondrial COI gene to GenBank® entries.
RESULTS: In this study, 267 blood-fed mosquitoes were caught in July 2013 in
Szeged. Subsequent molecular screening revealed that not only D. immitis was
present in the analyzed specimens but also DNA of D. repens, Setaria tundra and
Plasmodium spp. was confirmed.
CONCLUSIONS: The analysis of blood-fed mosquitoes for the diagnosis of
Dirofilaria spp. and other mosquito-borne pathogens seems to be an adequate
technique to evaluate if filarioid helminths are present in a certain area.
Usually only unfed female mosquitoes are analyzed for epidemiological studies.
However, blood-fed mosquitoes can only be used for screening if a pathogen is
present because the role of the mosquito as vector cannot be classified (blood of
bitten host). Furthermore, Setaria tundra was confirmed for the first time in
Hungary.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-015-0637-4 
PMCID: PMC4305256
PMID: 25582219  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

