
1. Mol Biol Evol. 2015 May;32(5):1255-67. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msv016. Epub 2015 Jan 
29.

The avian transcriptome response to malaria infection.

Videvall E(1), Cornwallis CK(2), Palinauskas V(3), Valkiūnas G(3), Hellgren O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden elin.videvall@biol.lu.se 
olof.hellgren@biol.lu.se.
(2)Department of Biology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(3)Institute of Ecology, Nature Research Centre, Vilnius, Lithuania.

Malaria parasites are highly virulent pathogens which infect a wide range of
vertebrates. Despite their importance, the way different hosts control and
suppress malaria infections remains poorly understood. With recent developments
in next-generation sequencing techniques, however, it is now possible to quantify
the response of the entire transcriptome to infections. We experimentally
infected Eurasian siskins (Carduelis spinus) with avian malaria parasites
(Plasmodium ashfordi), and used high-throughput RNA-sequencing to measure the
avian transcriptome in blood collected before infection (day 0), during peak
parasitemia (day 21 postinfection), and when parasitemia was decreasing (day 31).
We found considerable differences in the transcriptomes of infected and
uninfected individuals, with a large number of genes differentially expressed
during both peak and decreasing parasitemia stages. These genes were
overrepresented among functions involved in the immune system, stress response,
cell death regulation, metabolism, and telomerase activity. Comparative analyses 
of the differentially expressed genes in our study to those found in other hosts 
of malaria (human and mouse) revealed a set of genes that are potentially
involved in highly conserved evolutionary responses to malaria infection. By
using RNA-sequencing we gained a more complete view of the host response, and
were able to pinpoint not only well-documented host genes but also unannotated
genes with clear significance during infection, such as microRNAs. This study
shows how the avian blood transcriptome shifts in response to malaria infection, 
and we believe that it will facilitate further research into the diversity of
molecular mechanisms that hosts utilize to fight malaria infections.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msv016 
PMCID: PMC4408411
PMID: 25636457  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

