
1. Sci Rep. 2015 Feb 6;5:8308. doi: 10.1038/srep08308.

Analysis of major genome loci underlying artemisinin resistance and pfmdr1 copy
number in pre- and post-ACTs in western Kenya.

Ngalah BS(1), Ingasia LA(2), Cheruiyot AC(2), Chebon LJ(1), Juma DW(2), Muiruri
P(1), Onyango I(2), Ogony J(2), Yeda RA(2), Cheruiyot J(3), Mbuba E(4), Mwangoka 
G(4), Achieng AO(3), Ng'ang'a Z(5), Andagalu B(2), Akala HM(2), Kamau E(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Emerging Infectious Diseases-Global Emerging Infections
Surveillance and Response System (DEID-GEIS) Program, United States Army Medical 
Research Unit-Kenya (USAMRU-K), Kenya Medical Research Institute (KEMRI)-Walter
Reed Project, Kisumu, Kenya [2] Institute of Tropical Medicine and Infectious
Diseases, College of Health Sciences, Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and
Technology, Nairobi, Kenya.
(2)Department of Emerging Infectious Diseases-Global Emerging Infections
Surveillance and Response System (DEID-GEIS) Program, United States Army Medical 
Research Unit-Kenya (USAMRU-K), Kenya Medical Research Institute (KEMRI)-Walter
Reed Project, Kisumu, Kenya.
(3)1] Department of Emerging Infectious Diseases-Global Emerging Infections
Surveillance and Response System (DEID-GEIS) Program, United States Army Medical 
Research Unit-Kenya (USAMRU-K), Kenya Medical Research Institute (KEMRI)-Walter
Reed Project, Kisumu, Kenya [2] School of Biological/physical sciences,
Department of Zoology, Maseno University, Maseno, Kenya.
(4)Ifakara Health Institute, Bagamoyo, Tanzania.
(5)Institute of Tropical Medicine and Infectious Diseases, College of Health
Sciences, Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology, Nairobi, Kenya.

Genetic analysis of molecular markers is critical in tracking the emergence
and/or spread of artemisinin resistant parasites. Clinical isolates collected in 
western Kenya pre- and post- introduction of artemisinin combination therapies
(ACTs) were genotyped at SNP positions in regions of strong selection signatures 
on chromosome 13 and 14, as described in Southeast Asia (SEA). Twenty five SNPs
were genotyped using Sequenom MassArray and pfmdr1 gene copy number by real-time 
PCR. Parasite clearance half-life and in vitro drug sensitivity testing were
performed using standard methods. One hundred twenty nine isolates were
successfully analyzed. Fifteen SNPs were present in pre-ACTs isolates and six in 
post-ACTs. None of the SNPs showed association with parasite clearance half-life.
Post-ACTs parasites had significantly higher pfmdr1 copy number compared to
pre-ACTs. Seven of eight parasites with multiple pfmdr1 were post-ACTs. When in
vitro IC50s were compared for parasites with single vs. multiple gene copies,
only amodiaquine and piperaquine reached statistical significance. Data showed
SNPs on chromosome 13 and 14 had different frequency and trend in western Kenya
parasites compared SEA. Increase in pfmdr1 gene copy is consistent with recent
studies in African parasites. Data suggests genetic signature of artemisinin
resistance in Africa might be different from SEA.

DOI: 10.1038/srep08308 
PMCID: PMC4319159
PMID: 25655315  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

