
1. J Anim Ecol. 2015 Jul;84(4):985-98. doi: 10.1111/1365-2656.12354. Epub 2015 Mar
16.

Differences in host species relationships and biogeographic influences produce
contrasting patterns of prevalence, community composition and genetic structure
in two genera of avian malaria parasites in southern Melanesia.

Olsson-Pons S(1), Clark NJ(1)(2), Ishtiaq F(3), Clegg SM(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Futures Research Institute and School of Environment, Griffith
University, Gold Coast Campus, Gold Coast, Qld, 4222, Australia.
(2)Natural Environments Program, Queensland Museum, PO Box 3300, South Brisbane, 
Qld, 4101, Australia.
(3)Centre for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore,
Karnataka, 560012, India.
(4)Edward Grey Institute, Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, South
Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3PS, UK.

Host-parasite interactions have the potential to influence broadscale ecological 
and evolutionary processes, levels of endemism, divergence patterns and
distributions in host populations. Understanding the mechanisms involved requires
identification of the factors that shape parasite distribution and prevalence. A 
lack of comparative information on community-level host-parasite associations
limits our understanding of the role of parasites in host population divergence
processes. Avian malaria (haemosporidian) parasites in bird communities offer a
tractable model system to examine the potential for pathogens to influence
evolutionary processes in natural host populations. Using cytochrome b variation,
we characterized phylogenetic diversity and prevalence of two genera of avian
haemosporidian parasites, Plasmodium and Haemoproteus, and analysed biogeographic
patterns of lineages across islands and avian hosts, in southern Melanesian bird 
communities to identify factors that explain patterns of infection. Plasmodium
spp. displayed isolation-by-distance effects, a significant amount of genetic
variation distributed among islands but insignificant amounts among host species 
and families, and strong local island effects with respect to prevalence.
Haemoproteus spp. did not display isolation-by-distance patterns, showed marked
structuring of genetic variation among avian host species and families, and
significant host species prevalence patterns. These differences suggest that
Plasmodium spp. infection patterns were shaped by geography and the abiotic
environment, whereas Haemoproteus spp. infection patterns were shaped
predominantly by host associations. Heterogeneity in the complement and
prevalence of parasite lineages infecting local bird communities likely exposes
host species to a mosaic of spatially divergent disease selection pressures
across their naturally fragmented distributions in southern Melanesia. Host
associations for Haemoproteus spp. indicate a capacity for the formation of
locally co-adapted host-parasite relationships, a feature that may limit
intraspecific gene flow or range expansions of closely related host species.

© 2015 The Authors. Journal of Animal Ecology © 2015 British Ecological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/1365-2656.12354 
PMID: 25704868  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

