
1. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 24;10(2):e0116661. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116661.
eCollection 2015.

Genetic diversity and host specificity varies across three genera of blood
parasites in ducks of the Pacific Americas Flyway.

Reeves AB(1), Smith MM(1), Meixell BW(1), Fleskes JP(2), Ramey AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Geological Survey, Alaska Science Center, Anchorage, Alaska, United
States of America.
(2)U.S. Geological Survey, Western Ecological Research Center, Dixon Field
Station, Dixon, California, United States of America.

Birds of the order Anseriformes, commonly referred to as waterfowl, are
frequently infected by Haemosporidia of the genera Haemoproteus, Plasmodium, and 
Leucocytozoon via dipteran vectors. We analyzed nucleotide sequences of the
Cytochrome b (Cytb) gene from parasites of these genera detected in six species
of ducks from Alaska and California, USA to characterize the genetic diversity of
Haemosporidia infecting waterfowl at two ends of the Pacific Americas Flyway. In 
addition, parasite Cytb sequences were compared to those available on a public
database to investigate specificity of genetic lineages to hosts of the order
Anseriformes. Haplotype and nucleotide diversity of Haemoproteus Cytb sequences
was lower than was detected for Plasmodium and Leucocytozoon parasites. Although 
waterfowl are presumed to be infected by only a single species of Leucocytozoon, 
L. simondi, diversity indices were highest for haplotypes from this genus and
sequences formed five distinct clades separated by genetic distances of
4.9%-7.6%, suggesting potential cryptic speciation. All Haemoproteus and
Leucocytozoon haplotypes derived from waterfowl samples formed monophyletic
clades in phylogenetic analyses and were unique to the order Anseriformes with
few exceptions. In contrast, waterfowl-origin Plasmodium haplotypes were
identical or closely related to lineages found in other avian orders. Our results
suggest a more generalist strategy for Plasmodium parasites infecting North
American waterfowl as compared to those of the genera Haemoproteus and
Leucocytozoon.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116661 
PMCID: PMC4339737
PMID: 25710468  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

