
1. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Mar 18;11(3):e1004760. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004760.
eCollection 2015 Mar.

A Plasmodium phospholipase is involved in disruption of the liver stage
parasitophorous vacuole membrane.

Burda PC(1), Roelli MA(2), Schaffner M(2), Khan SM(3), Janse CJ(3), Heussler
VT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland; Graduate
School of Cellular Biology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(3)Leiden Malaria Research Group, Department of Parasitology, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

The coordinated exit of intracellular pathogens from host cells is a process
critical to the success and spread of an infection. While phospholipases have
been shown to play important roles in bacteria host cell egress and virulence,
their role in the release of intracellular eukaryotic parasites is largely
unknown. We examined a malaria parasite protein with phospholipase activity and
found it to be involved in hepatocyte egress. In hepatocytes, Plasmodium
parasites are surrounded by a parasitophorous vacuole membrane (PVM), which must 
be disrupted before parasites are released into the blood. However, on a
molecular basis, little is known about how the PVM is ruptured. We show that
Plasmodium berghei phospholipase, PbPL, localizes to the PVM in infected
hepatocytes. We provide evidence that parasites lacking PbPL undergo completely
normal liver stage development until merozoites are produced but have a defect in
egress from host hepatocytes. To investigate this further, we established a
live-cell imaging-based assay, which enabled us to study the temporal dynamics of
PVM rupture on a quantitative basis. Using this assay we could show that
PbPL-deficient parasites exhibit impaired PVM rupture, resulting in delayed
parasite egress. A wild-type phenotype could be re-established by gene
complementation, demonstrating the specificity of the PbPL deletion phenotype. In
conclusion, we have identified for the first time a Plasmodium phospholipase that
is important for PVM rupture and in turn for parasite exit from the infected
hepatocyte and therefore established a key role of a parasite phospholipase in
egress.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004760 
PMCID: PMC4364735
PMID: 25786000  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

