
1. J Vector Borne Dis. 2015 Mar;52(1):95-8.

Status of DDT and pyrethroid resistance in Indian Aedes albopictus and absence of
knockdown resistance (kdr) mutation.

Kushwah RB, Mallick PK, Ravikumar H, Dev V, Kapoor N, Adak TP, Singh OP(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Malaria Research, New Delhi, India.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVES: Aedes albopictus is one of the vectors for dengue and
chikungunya and emergence of pyrethroid resistance in this species could be of a 
major concern in controlling the vector. This study reports insecticide
susceptibility status of Ae. albopictus to DDT and pyrethroids in some Indian
populations and status of presence of knockdown resistance (kdr) mutations.
METHODS: Three to four day old adult female Ae. albopictus collected from Delhi, 
Gurgaon (Haryana), Hardwar (Uttarakhand), Guwahati (Assam) and Kottayam (Kerala) 
were bio-assayed with DDT (4%), permethrin (0.75%) and deltamethrin (0.05%)
impregnated papers using WHO standard susceptibility test kit. Mosquitoes were
PCRgenotyped for F1534C kdr-mutation in the voltage-gated sodium channel (VGSC)
gene. DDT and pyrethroid resistant individuals were sequenced for partial domain 
II, III and IV of VGSC targeting residues S989, I1011, V1016, F1534 and D1794
where kdr mutations are reported in Ae. aegypti.
RESULTS: Adult bioassays revealed varying degree of resistance against DDT among 
five populations of Ae. albopictus with corrected mortalities ranging between 61 
and 92%. Kerala and Delhi populations showed incipient resistance against
permethrin and deltamethrin respectively. All other populations were susceptible 
for both the synthetic pyrethroids. None of the kdr mutations was detected in any
of DDT, deltamethrin and permethrin resistant individuals.
INTERPRETATION & CONCLUSION: Ae. albopictus has developed resistance against DDT 
and there is emergence of incipient resistance against pyrethroids in some
populations. So far, there is no evidence of presence of knockdown resistance
(kdr) mutation in Ae. albopictus.


PMID: 25815873  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

