
1. PLoS Genet. 2015 Mar 26;11(3):e1005052. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005052.
eCollection 2015 Mar.

A genomic portrait of haplotype diversity and signatures of selection in
indigenous southern African populations.

Chimusa ER(1), Meintjies A(2), Tchanga M(2), Mulder N(2), Seoighe C, Soodyall
H(4), Ramesar R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Computational Biology Group, Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular
Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa; Centre for Proteomic 
and Genomic Research, Cape Town, South Africa.
(2)Computational Biology Group, Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular
Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(3)School of Mathematics, Statistics and Applied Mathematics, National University
of Ireland Galway, Galway, Ireland.
(4)Division of Human Genetics, School of Pathology, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Witwatersrand and the National Health Laboratory Service,
Johannesburg, South Africa.
(5)MRC Human Genetics Research Unit, Division of Human Genetics, Institute of
Infectious Disease and Molecular Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town,
South Africa.

Erratum in
    PLoS Genet. 2015 Jul;11(7):e1005363. Seioghe, Cathal [corrected to Seoighe,
Cathal].

We report a study of genome-wide, dense SNP (∼ 900K) and copy number polymorphism
data of indigenous southern Africans. We demonstrate the genetic contribution to 
southern and eastern African populations, which involved admixture between
indigenous San, Niger-Congo-speaking and populations of Eurasian ancestry. This
finding illustrates the need to account for stratification in genome-wide
association studies, and that admixture mapping would likely be a successful
approach in these populations. We developed a strategy to detect the signature of
selection prior to and following putative admixture events. Several genomic
regions show an unusual excess of Niger-Kordofanian, and unusual deficiency of
both San and Eurasian ancestry, which were considered the footprints of selection
after population admixture. Several SNPs with strong allele frequency differences
were observed predominantly between the admixed indigenous southern African
populations, and their ancestral Eurasian populations. Interestingly, many
candidate genes, which were identified within the genomic regions showing signals
for selection, were associated with southern African-specific high-risk, mostly
communicable diseases, such as malaria, influenza, tuberculosis, and human
immunodeficiency virus/AIDs. This observation suggests a potentially important
role that these genes might have played in adapting to the environment.
Additionally, our analyses of haplotype structure, linkage disequilibrium,
recombination, copy number variation and genome-wide admixture highlight, and
support the unique position of San relative to both African and non-African
populations. This study contributes to a better understanding of population
ancestry and selection in south-eastern African populations; and the data and
results obtained will support research into the genetic contributions to
infectious as well as non-communicable diseases in the region.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005052 
PMCID: PMC4374865
PMID: 25811879  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

