
1. BMC Genomics. 2015 Apr 10;16:278. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1436-1.

Endogenous siRNAs and piRNAs derived from transposable elements and genes in the 
malaria vector mosquito Anopheles gambiae.

Biryukova I(1), Ye T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vector Biology, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology
(MPIIB), Berlin, 10117, Germany. inbiryukova@gmail.com.
(2)Microarrays and deep sequencing platform, Institut de Génétique et de Biologie
Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), Illkirch, Cedex 67404, France. yetao@igbmc.fr.

BACKGROUND: The siRNA and piRNA pathways have been shown in insects to be
essential for regulation of gene expression and defence against exogenous and
endogenous genetic elements (viruses and transposable elements). The vast
majority of endogenous small RNAs produced by the siRNA and piRNA pathways
originate from repetitive or transposable elements (TE). In D. melanogaster,
TE-derived endogenous siRNAs and piRNAs are involved in genome surveillance and
maintenance of genome integrity. In the medically relevant malaria mosquito
Anopheles gambiae TEs constitute 12-16% of the genome size. Genetic variations
induced by TE activities are known to shape the genome landscape and to alter the
fitness in An. gambiae.
RESULTS: Here, using bioinformatics approaches we analyzed the small RNA data
sets from 6 libraries formally reported in a previous study and examined the
expression of the mixed germline/somatic siRNAs and piRNAs produced in adult An. 
gambiae females. We characterized a large population of TE-derived endogenous
siRNAs and piRNAs, which constitutes 56-60% of the total siRNA and piRNA reads in
the analysed libraries. Moreover, we identified a number of protein coding genes 
producing gene-specific siRNAs and piRNAs that were generally expressed at much
lower levels than the TE-associated small RNAs. Detailed sequence analysis
revealed that An. gambiae piRNAs were produced by both "ping-pong" dependent
(TE-associated piRNAs) and independent mechanisms (genic piRNAs). Similarly to D.
melanogaster, more than 90% of the detected piRNAs were produced from
TE-associated clusters in An. gambiae. We also found that biotic stress as blood 
feeding and infection with Plasmodium parasite, the etiological agent of malaria,
modulated the expression levels of the endogenous siRNAs and piRNAs in An.
gambiae.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a large and diverse set of the endogenously derived
siRNAs and piRNAs that share common and distinct aspects of small RNA expression 
across insect species, and inferred their impact on TE and gene activity in An.
gambiae. The TE-specific small RNAs produced by both the siRNA and piRNA pathways
represent an important aspect of genome stability and genetic variation, which
might have a strong impact on the evolution of the genome and vector competence
in the malaria mosquitoes.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-015-1436-1 
PMCID: PMC4423592
PMID: 25879960  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

