
1. Malar J. 2015 Feb 8;14:70. doi: 10.1186/s12936-015-0562-1.

Identification of important interacting proteins (IIPs) in Plasmodium falciparum 
using large-scale interaction network analysis and in-silico knock-out studies.

Bhattacharyya M(1), Chakrabarti S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biology and Bioinformatics Division, Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, Kolkata, 700032, West
Bengal, India. madhu84.life@gmail.com.
(2)Structural Biology and Bioinformatics Division, Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, Kolkata, 700032, West
Bengal, India. saikat@iicb.res.in.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium falciparum causes the most severe form of malaria and
affects 3.2 million people annually. Due to the increasing incidence of
resistance to existing drugs, there is a growing need to discover new and more
effective drugs against malaria. Despite the global importance of P. falciparum, 
vast majority of its proteins are uncharacterized experimentally. Application of 
newer approaches using several "omics" data has become successful for exploring
the biological interactions underlying cellular processes. Till date not many
system level study has been published using P. falciparum protein protein
interaction. Hence, the purpose of this study is to develop a standardized
pipeline for structural, functional, and topographical analysis of large scale
protein protein interaction network (PPIN) in order to identify proteins
important for network topology and integrity. Here, P. falciparum PPIN has been
utilized as a model for better understanding of the molecular mechanisms of
survival and pathogenesis of malaria parasite.
METHODS: Various graph theoretical approaches were implemented to identify highly
interacting hub and central proteins that are crucial for network integrity.
Further, potential network perturbing proteins via an in-silico knock-out (KO)
analysis to isolate important interacting proteins (IIPs), which in principle,
can elicit significant impact on the global and local environments of the P.
falciparum interaction network.
RESULTS: 177 hubs and 132 central proteins were identified from the malarial
(proteins: 1607; interactions: 4750) PPI networks. Using the in-silico knock-out 
exercise 131 and 99 global and local network perturbing proteins were also
identified. Finally, 271 proteins from P. falciparum were shortlisted as
important interacting proteins (IIPs), which not only play crucial role in
intra-pathogen network integrity, stage specificity but also interact with
various human proteins involved in multiple metabolic pathways within the host
cell. These IIPs could be used as potential drug targets in malarial research.
CONCLUSION: Graph theoretical analysis of PPIN can be a very useful approach to
identify proteins that are important for regulation of the interactions required 
for an organism's survival. Important interacting proteins (IIPs) identified
using P. falciparum PPIN provides a useful dataset containing probable candidates
for future drug target analysis.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-015-0562-1 
PMCID: PMC4333160
PMID: 25879642  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

