
1. PLoS Genet. 2015 Apr 16;11(4):e1005141. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005141.
eCollection 2015 Apr.

Experimental swap of Anopheles gambiae's assortative mating preferences
demonstrates key role of X-chromosome divergence island in incipient sympatric
speciation.

Aboagye-Antwi F(1), Alhafez N(2), Weedall GD(3), Brothwood J(2), Kandola S(2),
Paton D(2), Fofana A(4), Olohan L(3), Betancourth MP(2), Ekechukwu NE(2), Baeshen
R(2), Traorè SF(4), Diabate A(5), Tripet F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Entomology and Parasitology, School of Life Sciences, Keele
University, Staffordshire, United Kingdom; Department of Animal Biology and
Conservation Science, Faculty of Sciences, University of Ghana, Legon, Ghana.
(2)Centre for Applied Entomology and Parasitology, School of Life Sciences, Keele
University, Staffordshire, United Kingdom.
(3)Centre for Genomic Research, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United
Kingdom.
(4)Malaria Research and Training Center, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry,
University of Mali, Bamako, Mali.
(5)Institut de Recherche en Sciences de la Santé/Centre Muraz, Bobo-Dioulasso,
Burkina Faso.

Although many theoretical models of sympatric speciation propose that genes
responsible for assortative mating amongst incipient species should be associated
with genomic regions protected from recombination, there are few data to support 
this theory. The malaria mosquito, Anopheles gambiae, is known for its sympatric 
cryptic species maintained by pre-mating reproductive isolation and its putative 
genomic islands of speciation, and is therefore an ideal model system for
studying the genomic signature associated with incipient sympatric speciation.
Here we selectively introgressed the island of divergence located in the
pericentric region of the X chromosome of An. gambiae s.s. into its sister taxon 
An. coluzzii through 5 generations of backcrossing followed by two generations of
crosses within the introgressed strains that resulted in An. coluzzii-like
recombinant strains fixed for the M and S marker in the X chromosome island. The 
mating preference of recombinant strains was then tested by giving virgin
recombinant individuals a choice of mates with X-islands matching and
non-matching their own island type. We show through genetic analyses of
transferred sperm that recombinant females consistently mated with matching
island-type males thereby associating assortative mating genes with the X-island 
of divergence. Furthermore, full-genome sequencing confirmed that protein-coding 
differences between recombinant strains were limited to the experimentally
swapped pericentromeric region. Finally, targeted-genome comparisons showed that 
a number of these unique differences were conserved in sympatric field
populations, thereby revealing candidate speciation genes. The functional
demonstration of a close association between speciation genes and the X-island of
differentiation lends unprecedented support to island-of-speciation models of
sympatric speciation facilitated by pericentric recombination suppression.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005141 
PMCID: PMC4400153
PMID: 25880677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

