
1. BMC Immunol. 2015 Mar 26;16:14. doi: 10.1186/s12865-015-0078-z.

The genetic control of immunity to Plasmodium infection.

Grant AV(1)(2), Roussilhon C(3)(4), Paul R(5)(6), Sakuntabhai A(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Unité de la Génétique Fonctionnelle des Maladies Infectieuses, Institut
Pasteur, Paris, France. audrey.grant@pasteur.fr.
(2)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, URA3012, Paris, France.
audrey.grant@pasteur.fr.
(3)Unité de la Génétique Fonctionnelle des Maladies Infectieuses, Institut
Pasteur, Paris, France. roussilo@pasteur.fr.
(4)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, URA3012, Paris, France.
roussilo@pasteur.fr.
(5)Unité de la Génétique Fonctionnelle des Maladies Infectieuses, Institut
Pasteur, Paris, France. richard.paul@pasteur.fr.
(6)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, URA3012, Paris, France.
richard.paul@pasteur.fr.
(7)Unité de la Génétique Fonctionnelle des Maladies Infectieuses, Institut
Pasteur, Paris, France. anavaj@pasteur.fr.
(8)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, URA3012, Paris, France.
anavaj@pasteur.fr.

BACKGROUND: Malaria remains a major worldwide public health problem with ~207
million cases and ~627,000 deaths per year, mainly affecting children under five 
years of age in Africa. Recent efforts at elaborating a genetic architecture of
malaria have focused on severe malaria, leading to the identification of two new 
genes and confirmation of previously known variants in HBB, ABO and G6PD, by
exploring the whole human genome in genome-wide association (GWA) studies.
Molecular pathways controlling phenotypes representing effectiveness of host
immunity, notably parasitemia and IgG levels, are of particular interest given
the current lack of an efficacious vaccine and the need for new treatment
options.
RESULTS: We propose a global causal framework of malaria phenotypes implicating
progression from the initial infection with Plasmodium spp. to the development of
the infection through liver and blood-stage multiplication cycles (parasitemia as
a quantitative trait), to clinical malaria attack, and finally to severe malaria.
Genetic polymorphism may control any of these stages, such that preceding stages 
act as mediators of subsequent stages. A biomarker of humoral immunity, IgG
levels, can also be integrated into the framework, potentially mediating the
impact of polymorphism by limiting parasitemia levels. Current knowledge of the
genetic basis of parasitemia levels and IgG levels is reviewed through key
examples including the hemoglobinopathies, showing that the protective effect of 
HBB variants on malaria clinical phenotypes may partially be mediated through
parasitemia and cytophilic IgG levels. Another example is the IgG receptor
FcγRIIa, encoded by FCGR2A, such that H131 homozygotes displayed higher IgG2
levels and were protective against high parasitemia and onset of malaria symptoms
as shown in a causal diagram.
CONCLUSIONS: We thus underline the value of parasitemia and IgG levels as
phenotypes in the understanding of the human genetic architecture of malaria, and
the need for applying GWA approaches to these phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1186/s12865-015-0078-z 
PMCID: PMC4374205
PMID: 25887595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

