
1. Cytokine. 2015 Aug;74(2):273-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2015.03.020. Epub 2015 Apr
25.

Humoral immune responses against the malaria vaccine candidate antigen Plasmodium
vivax AMA-1 and IL-4 gene polymorphisms in individuals living in an endemic area 
of the Brazilian Amazon.

Tomaz FM(1), da Cruz Furini AA(2), Capobianco MP(3), Póvoa MM(4), Trindade PC(5),
Fraga VD(6), Conceição LM(7), de Azevedo LR(8), Oliani SM(9), Cassiano GC(10),
Cavasini CE(11), Dos Santos SE(12), Machado RL(13).

Author information: 
(1)Microorganism Research Center, Department of Dermatological, Infectious, and
Parasitic Diseases, Faculdade de Medicina de São José do Rio Preto, São Paulo,
Brazil. Electronic address: mairabiomed@hotmail.com.
(2)Microorganism Research Center, Department of Dermatological, Infectious, and
Parasitic Diseases, Faculdade de Medicina de São José do Rio Preto, São Paulo,
Brazil. Electronic address: adriana.cruz.furini@gmail.com.
(3)Microorganism Research Center, Department of Dermatological, Infectious, and
Parasitic Diseases, Faculdade de Medicina de São José do Rio Preto, São Paulo,
Brazil; Júlio de Mesquita Filho, Universidade Estadual Paulista, São José do Rio 
Preto, São Paulo State, Brazil. Electronic address: mpcapobianco@yahoo.com.br.
(4)Evandro Chagas Institute, MS/SVS, Ananindeua, Pará, Brazil. Electronic
address: povoamm@gmail.com.
(5)Microorganism Research Center, Department of Dermatological, Infectious, and
Parasitic Diseases, Faculdade de Medicina de São José do Rio Preto, São Paulo,
Brazil. Electronic address: pamella.trindade@hotmail.com.
(6)Microorganism Research Center, Department of Dermatological, Infectious, and
Parasitic Diseases, Faculdade de Medicina de São José do Rio Preto, São Paulo,
Brazil. Electronic address: valeriafraga@famerp.br.
(7)Microorganism Research Center, Department of Dermatological, Infectious, and
Parasitic Diseases, Faculdade de Medicina de São José do Rio Preto, São Paulo,
Brazil. Electronic address: lucianamoran@famerp.br.
(8)Júlio de Mesquita Filho, Universidade Estadual Paulista, São José do Rio
Preto, São Paulo State, Brazil. Electronic address: azevedolucasr@gmail.com.
(9)Júlio de Mesquita Filho, Universidade Estadual Paulista, São José do Rio
Preto, São Paulo State, Brazil. Electronic address: smoliani@ibilce.unesp.br.
(10)Microorganism Research Center, Department of Dermatological, Infectious, and 
Parasitic Diseases, Faculdade de Medicina de São José do Rio Preto, São Paulo,
Brazil; Júlio de Mesquita Filho, Universidade Estadual Paulista, São José do Rio 
Preto, São Paulo State, Brazil. Electronic address: gcapatti@hotmail.com.
(11)Microorganism Research Center, Department of Dermatological, Infectious, and 
Parasitic Diseases, Faculdade de Medicina de São José do Rio Preto, São Paulo,
Brazil. Electronic address: cecavasini@famerp.br.
(12)Federal University of Pará, Institute of Biological Sciences, Belém, Pará,
Brazil. Electronic address: sidneysantos@ufpa.br.
(13)Microorganism Research Center, Department of Dermatological, Infectious, and 
Parasitic Diseases, Faculdade de Medicina de São José do Rio Preto, São Paulo,
Brazil; Júlio de Mesquita Filho, Universidade Estadual Paulista, São José do Rio 
Preto, São Paulo State, Brazil; Evandro Chagas Institute, MS/SVS, Ananindeua,
Pará, Brazil. Electronic address: ricardomachado@iec.pa.gov.br.

BACKGROUND: Several studies have recently demonstrated that the immune responses 
against malaria is governed by different factors, including the genetic
components of the host. The IL-4 gene appears to be a strong candidate factor
because of its role in the regulation of the Th2 response. The present study
investigated the role of IL-4 polymorphisms in the development of IgG antibodies 
against PvAMA-1 and the IL-4 levels in individuals infected with Plasmodium vivax
in a malaria endemic area in the Brazilian Amazon.
METHODS: The study sample included 83 patients who were diagnosed with P. vivax
infection using thick smear and confirmed by nested-PCR. The IL-4 -590C>T and
IL-4 -33C>T polymorphisms were genotyped by PCR-RFLP, and the intron 3 VNTR was
genotyped by PCR. A standardised ELISA protocol was used to measure the total IgG
against PvAMA-1. The cytokine/chemokine levels were measured using a Milliplex
multiplex assay (Millipore). All of the subjects were genotyped with 48 ancestry 
informative markers to determine the proportions of African, European and
Amerindian ancestry using STRUCTURE software.
RESULTS: Of the 83 patients, 60 (73%) produced IgG antibodies against PvAMA-1. A 
significant decrease in the percentage of respondents was observed among the
primo-infected individuals. No significant differences were observed in the
frequencies of genotypes and haplotypes among individuals who were positive or
negative for IgG antibodies against PvAMA-1. Furthermore, no significant
correlation was observed between the IL-4 polymorphisms, antibody levels, IL-4
levels, and parasitemia.
CONCLUSIONS: This study indicated that the polymorphisms identified in the IL-4
gene are not likely to play a role in the regulation of the antibody response
against PvAMA-1 and IL-4 production in vivax malaria.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2015.03.020 
PMID: 25922277  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

