
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2015 May 8;9(5):e0003711. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003711. 
eCollection 2015 May.

Morphological and Molecular Descriptors of the Developmental Cycle of Babesia
divergens Parasites in Human Erythrocytes.

Rossouw I(1), Maritz-Olivier C(1), Niemand J(2), van Biljon R(2), Smit A(2),
Olivier NA(3), Birkholtz LM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Centre for Sustainable Malaria Control, University
of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa.
(3)Department of Plant Sciences, African Centre for Gene Technologies (ACGT)
Microarray facility, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa.

Human babesiosis, especially caused by the cattle derived Babesia divergens
parasite, is on the increase, resulting in renewed attentiveness to this
potentially life threatening emerging zoonotic disease. The molecular mechanisms 
underlying the pathophysiology and intra-erythrocytic development of these
parasites are poorly understood. This impedes concerted efforts aimed at the
discovery of novel anti-babesiacidal agents. By applying sensitive cell
biological and molecular functional genomics tools, we describe the
intra-erythrocytic development cycle of B. divergens parasites from immature,
mono-nucleated ring forms to bi-nucleated paired piriforms and ultimately
multi-nucleated tetrads that characterizes zoonotic Babesia spp. This is further 
correlated for the first time to nuclear content increases during
intra-erythrocytic development progression, providing insight into the part of
the life cycle that occurs during human infection. High-content temporal
evaluation elucidated the contribution of the different stages to life cycle
progression. Moreover, molecular descriptors indicate that B. divergens parasites
employ physiological adaptation to in vitro cultivation. Additionally,
differential expression is observed as the parasite equilibrates its
developmental stages during its life cycle. Together, this information provides
the first temporal evaluation of the functional transcriptome of B. divergens
parasites, information that could be useful in identifying biological processes
essential to parasite survival for future anti-babesiacidal discoveries.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003711 
PMCID: PMC4425553
PMID: 25955414  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

