
1. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 5;10(6):e0127804. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127804.
eCollection 2015.

Adaptive Potential of Hybridization among Malaria Vectors: Introgression at the
Immune Locus TEP1 between Anopheles coluzzii and A. gambiae in 'Far-West' Africa.

Mancini E(1), Spinaci MI(1), Gordicho V(2), Caputo B(1), Pombi M(1), Vicente
JL(2), Dinis J(3), Rodrigues A(3), Petrarca V(4), Weetman D(5), Pinto J(2), Della
Torre A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Pasteur-Fondazione Cenci-Bolognetti, Dipartimento di Sanità Pubblica 
e Malattie Infettive, "Sapienza" Università di Roma, Rome, Italy.
(2)UEI Parasitologia Médica, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal; Centro de Malária e outras Doenças
Tropicais Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, 
Lisbon, Portugal.
(3)Instituto Nacional de Saúde Pública., Bissau, Guinea Bissau.
(4)Dipartimento di Biologia e Biotecnologie "C. Darwin", "Sapienza" Università di
Roma, Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Vector Biology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine,
Liverpool, United Kingdom.

"Far-West" Africa is known to be a secondary contact zone between the two major
malaria vectors Anopheles coluzzii and A. gambiae. We investigated gene-flow and 
potentially adaptive introgression between these species along a west-to-east
transect in Guinea Bissau, the putative core of this hybrid zone. To evaluate the
extent and direction of gene flow, we genotyped site 702 in Intron-1 of the para 
Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel gene, a species-diagnostic nucleotide position
throughout most of A. coluzzii and A. gambiae sympatric range. We also analyzed
polymorphism in the thioester-binding domain (TED) of the innate immunity-linked 
thioester-containing protein 1 (TEP1) to investigate whether elevated
hybridization might facilitate the exchange of variants linked to adaptive
immunity and Plasmodium refractoriness. Our results confirm asymmetric
introgression of genetic material from A. coluzzii to A. gambiae and disruption
of linkage between the centromeric "genomic islands" of inter-specific
divergence. We report that A. gambiae from the Guinean hybrid zone possesses an
introgressed TEP1 resistant allelic class, found exclusively in A. coluzzii
elsewhere and apparently swept to fixation in West Africa (i.e. Mali and Burkina 
Faso). However, no detectable fixation of this allele was found in Guinea Bissau,
which may suggest that ecological pressures driving segregation between the two
species in larval habitats in this region may be different from those experienced
in northern and more arid parts of the species' range. Finally, our results also 
suggest a genetic subdivision between coastal and inland A. gambiae Guinean
populations and provide clues on the importance of ecological factors in
intra-specific differentiation processes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127804 
PMCID: PMC4457524
PMID: 26047479  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

