
1. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 2;10(7):e0130347. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130347.
eCollection 2015.

Unravelling the Evolution of the Allatostatin-Type A, KISS and Galanin
Peptide-Receptor Gene Families in Bilaterians: Insights from Anopheles
Mosquitoes.

Felix RC(1), Trindade M(1), Pires IR(2), Fonseca VG(1), Martins RS(1), Silveira
H(2), Power DM(1), Cardoso JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Comparative Endocrinology and Integrative Biology, Centre of Marine Sciences, 
Universidade do Algarve, Campus de Gambelas, 8005-139, Faro, Portugal.
(2)Centro de Malária e outras Doenças Tropicais, UEI Parasitologia Médica,
Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Rua da
Junqueira 100, 1349-008, Lisboa, Portugal.

Allatostatin type A receptors (AST-ARs) are a group of G-protein coupled
receptors activated by members of the FGL-amide (AST-A) peptide family that
inhibit food intake and development in arthropods. Despite their physiological
importance the evolution of the AST-A system is poorly described and relatively
few receptors have been isolated and functionally characterised in insects. The
present study provides a comprehensive analysis of the origin and comparative
evolution of the AST-A system. To determine how evolution and feeding modified
the function of AST-AR the duplicate receptors in Anopheles mosquitoes, were
characterised. Phylogeny and gene synteny suggested that invertebrate AST-A
receptors and peptide genes shared a common evolutionary origin with KISS/GAL
receptors and ligands. AST-ARs and KISSR emerged from a common gene ancestor
after the divergence of GALRs in the bilaterian genome. In arthropods, the AST-A 
system evolved through lineage-specific events and the maintenance of two
receptors in the flies and mosquitoes (Diptera) was the result of a gene
duplication event. Speciation of Anopheles mosquitoes affected receptor gene
organisation and characterisation of AST-AR duplicates (GPRALS1 and 2) revealed
that in common with other insects, the mosquito receptors were activated by
insect AST-A peptides and the iCa2+-signalling pathway was stimulated. GPRALS1
and 2 were expressed mainly in mosquito midgut and ovaries and transcript
abundance of both receptors was modified by feeding. A blood meal strongly
up-regulated expression of both GPRALS in the midgut (p < 0.05) compared to
glucose fed females. Based on the results we hypothesise that the AST-A system in
insects shared a common origin with the vertebrate KISS system and may also share
a common function as an integrator of metabolism and reproduction.HIGHLIGHTS:
AST-A and KISS/GAL receptors and ligands shared common ancestry prior to the
protostome-deuterostome divergence. Phylogeny and gene synteny revealed that
AST-AR and KISSR emerged after GALR gene divergence. AST-AR genes were present in
the hemichordates but were lost from the chordates. In protostomes, AST-ARs
persisted and evolved through lineage-specific events and duplicated in the
arthropod radiation. Diptera acquired and maintained functionally divergent
duplicate AST-AR genes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130347 
PMCID: PMC4489612
PMID: 26135459  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

