
1. Malar J. 2015 Jul 8;14:264. doi: 10.1186/s12936-015-0783-3.

Identification of large variation in pfcrt, pfmdr-1 and pfubp-1 markers in
Plasmodium falciparum isolates from Ethiopia and Tanzania.

Golassa L(1)(2), Kamugisha E(3), Ishengoma DS(4), Baraka V(5)(6), Shayo A(7),
Baliraine FN(8), Enweji N(9), Erko B(10), Aseffa A(11), Choy A(12), Swedberg
G(13).

Author information: 
(1)Aklilu Lemma Institute of Pathobiology, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia. lgolassa@gmail.com.
(2)Armauer Hansen Research Institute, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. lgolassa@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Catholic University of Health and Allied
Sciences-Bugando, Mwanza, Tanzania. erasmuskamugisha@yahoo.com.
(4)National Institute for Medical Research, Tanga, Tanzania. deusishe@yahoo.com.
(5)National Institute for Medical Research, Tanga, Tanzania.
vitobaraka@gmail.com.
(6)International Health Unit, Department of Epidemiology, University of Antwerp, 
Antwerp, Belgium. vitobaraka@gmail.com.
(7)The Nelson Mandela African Institution of Science and Technology, Arusha,
Tanzania. alex.shayo@mail.com.
(8)Department of Biology, LeTourneau University, Longview, TX, USA.
fredbaliraine@letu.edu.
(9)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. nizar.enweji@imbim.uu.se.
(10)Aklilu Lemma Institute of Pathobiology, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa, 
Ethiopia. be7roro@gmail.com.
(11)Armauer Hansen Research Institute, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. aseffaa@gmail.com.
(12)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. choy.angel@gmail.com.
(13)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. gote.swedberg@imbim.uu.se.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium falciparum resistance to anti-malarials is a major
drawback in effective malaria control and elimination globally.
Artemisinin-combination therapy (ACT) is currently the key first-line treatment
for uncomplicated falciparum malaria. Plasmodium falciparum genetic signatures at
pfmdr-1, pfcrt, and pfubp-1 loci are known to modulate in vivo and in vitro
parasite response to ACT. The objective of this study was to assess the
distribution of these resistance gene markers in isolates collected from
different malaria transmission intensity in Ethiopia and Tanzania.
METHODS: Plasmodium falciparum clinical isolates were collected from different
regions of Ethiopia and Tanzania. Genetic polymorphisms in the genes pfcrt,
pfmdr-1 and pfubp-1 were analysed by PCR and sequencing. Frequencies of the
different alleles in the three genes were compared within and between regions,
and between the two countries.
RESULTS: The majority of the isolates from Ethiopia were mutant for the pfcrt 76 
and wild-type for pfmdr-1 86. In contrast, the majority of the Tanzanian samples 
were wild-type for both pfcrt and pfmdr-1 loci. Analysis of a variable linker
region in pfmdr-1 showed substantial variation in isolates from Tanzania as
compared to Ethiopian isolates that had minimal variation. Direct sequencing of
the pfubp-1 region showed that 92.8% (26/28) of the Ethiopian isolates had
identical genome sequence with the wild type reference P. falciparum strain 3D7. 
Of 42 isolates from Tanzania, only 13 (30.9%) had identical genome sequences with
3D7. In the Tanzanian samples, 10 variant haplotypes were identified.
CONCLUSION: The majority of Ethiopian isolates carried the main marker for
chloroquine (CQ) resistance, while the majority of the samples from Tanzania
carried markers for CQ susceptibility. Polymorphic genes showed substantially
more variation in Tanzanian isolates. The low variability in the polymorphic
region of pfmdr-1 in Ethiopia may be a consequence of low transmission intensity 
as compared to high transmission intensity and large variations in Tanzania.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-015-0783-3 
PMCID: PMC4495614
PMID: 26152336  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

