
1. Physiol Genomics. 2015 Sep;47(9):376-85. doi: 10.1152/physiolgenomics.00028.2015.
Epub 2015 Jul 7.

Identification of gene signatures regulated by carvedilol in mouse heart.

Teoh JP(1), Park KM(1), Broskova Z(1), Jimenez FR(1), Bayoumi AS(1), Archer K(2),
Su H(3), Johnson J(4), Weintraub NL(5), Tang Y(5), Kim IM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Biology Center, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, Georgia;
(2)Department of Medicine, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, Georgia; and.
(3)Vascular Biology Center, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, Georgia; Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical 
College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia;
(4)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia
Regents University, Augusta, Georgia;
(5)Vascular Biology Center, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, Georgia; Department of Medicine, Medical College of Georgia,
Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia; and.
(6)Vascular Biology Center, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, Georgia; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia
ilkim@gru.edu.

Chronic treatment with the β-blocker carvedilol has been shown to reduce
established maladaptive left ventricle (LV) hypertrophy and to improve LV
function in experimental heart failure. However, the detailed mechanisms by which
carvedilol improves LV failure are incompletely understood. We previously showed 
that carvedilol is a β-arrestin-biased β1-adrenergic receptor ligand, which
activates cellular pathways in the heart independent of G protein-mediated second
messenger signaling. More recently, we have demonstrated by microRNA (miR)
microarray analysis that carvedilol upregulates a subset of mature and pre-mature
miRs, but not their primary miR transcripts in mouse hearts. Here, we next sought
to identify the effects of carvedilol on LV gene expression on a genome-wide
basis. Adult mice were treated with carvedilol or vehicle for 1 wk. RNA was
isolated from LV tissue and hybridized for microarray analysis. Gene expression
profiling analysis revealed a small group of genes differentially expressed after
carvedilol treatment. Further analysis categorized these genes into pathways
involved in tight junction, malaria, viral myocarditis, glycosaminoglycan
biosynthesis, and arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy. Genes encoding
proteins in the tight junction, malaria, and viral myocarditis pathways were
upregulated in the LV by carvedilol, while genes encoding proteins in the
glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis and arrhythmogenic right ventricular
cardiomyopathy pathways were downregulated by carvedilol. These gene expression
changes may reflect the molecular mechanisms that underlie the functional
benefits of carvedilol therapy.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/physiolgenomics.00028.2015 
PMCID: PMC4556938
PMID: 26152686  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

