
1. J Vis Exp. 2015 Jun 25;(100):e52803. doi: 10.3791/52803.

Intranasal Administration of Recombinant Influenza Vaccines in Chimeric Mouse
Models to Study Mucosal Immunity.

Pérez-Girón JV(1), Gómez-Medina S(1), Lüdtke A(1), Munoz-Fontela C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Emerging Viruses, Heinrich Pette Institute, Leibniz Institute
for Experimental Virology.
(2)Laboratory of Emerging Viruses, Heinrich Pette Institute, Leibniz Institute
for Experimental Virology; cesar.munoz-fontela@hpi.uni-hamburg.de.

Vaccines are one of the greatest achievements of mankind, and have saved millions
of lives over the last century. Paradoxically, little is known about the
physiological mechanisms that mediate immune responses to vaccines perhaps due to
the overall success of vaccination, which has reduced interest into the molecular
and physiological mechanisms of vaccine immunity. However, several important
human pathogens including influenza virus still pose a challenge for vaccination,
and may benefit from immune-based strategies. Although influenza reverse genetics
has been successfully applied to the generation of live-attenuated influenza
vaccines (LAIVs), the addition of molecular tools in vaccine preparations such as
tracer components to follow up the kinetics of vaccination in vivo, has not been 
addressed. In addition, the recent generation of mouse models that allow specific
depletion of leukocytes during kinetic studies has opened a window of opportunity
to understand the basic immune mechanisms underlying vaccine-elicited protection.
Here, we describe how the combination of reverse genetics and chimeric mouse
models may help to provide new insights into how vaccines work at physiological
and molecular levels, using as example a recombinant, cold-adapted,
live-attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV). We utilized laboratory-generated LAIVs 
harboring cell tracers as well as competitive bone marrow chimeras (BMCs) to
determine the early kinetics of vaccine immunity and the main physiological
mechanisms responsible for the initiation of vaccine-specific adaptive immunity. 
In addition, we show how this technique may facilitate gene function studies in
single animals during immune responses to vaccines. We propose that this
technique can be applied to improve current prophylactic strategies against
pathogens for which urgent medical countermeasures are needed, for example
influenza, HIV, Plasmodium, and hemorrhagic fever viruses such as Ebola virus.

DOI: 10.3791/52803 
PMCID: PMC4544921
PMID: 26168339  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

