
1. J Proteomics. 2015 Oct 14;128:58-68. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2015.07.005. Epub 2015 
Jul 17.

Modulation of host immunity by tick saliva.

Kotál J(1), Langhansová H(2), Lieskovská J(2), Andersen JF(3), Francischetti
IM(3), Chavakis T(4), Kopecký J(2), Pedra JH(5), Kotsyfakis M(6), Chmelař J(7).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Science, University of South Bohemia in České Budějovice, Budweis, 
Czech Republic; Laboratory of Genomics and Proteomics of Disease Vectors,
Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre, Czech Academy of Sciences, Budweis,
Czech Republic.
(2)Faculty of Science, University of South Bohemia in České Budějovice, Budweis, 
Czech Republic.
(3)Section of Vector Biology, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)Department of Clinical Pathobiochemistry, Technische Universität Dresden,
Dresden, Germany.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(6)Laboratory of Genomics and Proteomics of Disease Vectors, Institute of
Parasitology, Biology Centre, Czech Academy of Sciences, Budweis, Czech Republic.
Electronic address: mich_kotsyfakis@yahoo.com.
(7)Faculty of Science, University of South Bohemia in České Budějovice, Budweis, 
Czech Republic; Department of Clinical Pathobiochemistry, Technische Universität 
Dresden, Dresden, Germany.

Next generation sequencing and proteomics have helped to comprehensively
characterize gene expression in tick salivary glands at both the transcriptome
and the proteome level. Functional data are, however, lacking. Given that tick
salivary secretions are critical to the success of the tick transmission
lifecycle and, as a consequence, for host colonization by the pathogens they
spread, we thoroughly review here the literature on the known interactions
between tick saliva (or tick salivary gland extracts) and the innate and adaptive
vertebrate immune system. The information is intended to serve as a reference for
functional characterization of the numerous genes and proteins expressed in tick 
salivary glands with an ultimate goal to develop novel vector and pathogen
control strategies.SIGNIFICANCE: We overview all the known interactions of tick
saliva with the vertebrate immune system. The provided information is important, 
given the recent developments in high-throughput transcriptomic and proteomic
analysis of gene expression in tick salivary glands, since it may serve as a
guideline for the functional characterization of the numerous newly-discovered
genes expressed in tick salivary glands.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2015.07.005 
PMCID: PMC4619117
PMID: 26189360  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

