
1. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2015 Sep 5;370(1676). pii: 20140245. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2014.0245.

Trade-offs in antibody repertoires to complex antigens.

Childs LM(1), Baskerville EB(2), Cobey S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Communicable Disease Dynamics, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public
Health, Boston, MA, USA Department of Epidemiology, Harvard T.H. Chan School of
Public Health, Boston, MA, USA lchilds@hsph.harvard.edu.
(2)Ecology and Evolution, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

Pathogens vary in their antigenic complexity. While some pathogens such as
measles present a few relatively invariant targets to the immune system, others
such as malaria display considerable antigenic diversity. How the immune response
copes in the presence of multiple antigens, and whether a trade-off exists
between the breadth and efficacy of antibody (Ab)-mediated immune responses, are 
unsolved problems. We present a theoretical model of affinity maturation of
B-cell receptors (BCRs) during a primary infection and examine how variation in
the number of accessible antigenic sites alters the Ab repertoire. Naive B cells 
with randomly generated receptor sequences initiate the germinal centre (GC)
reaction. The binding affinity of a BCR to an antigen is quantified via a
genotype-phenotype map, based on a random energy landscape, that combines local
and distant interactions between residues. In the presence of numerous antigens
or epitopes, B-cell clones with different specificities compete for stimulation
during rounds of mutation within GCs. We find that the availability of many
epitopes reduces the affinity and relative breadth of the Ab repertoire. Despite 
the stochasticity of somatic hypermutation, patterns of immunodominance are
strongly shaped by chance selection of naive B cells with specificities for
particular epitopes. Our model provides a mechanistic basis for the diversity of 
Ab repertoires and the evolutionary advantage of antigenically complex pathogens.

DOI: 10.1098/rstb.2014.0245 
PMCID: PMC4528422
PMID: 26194759  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

