
1. Genome Biol Evol. 2015 Jul 20;7(8):2237-44. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evv137.

The Large Mitochondrial Genome of Symbiodinium minutum Reveals Conserved
Noncoding Sequences between Dinoflagellates and Apicomplexans.

Shoguchi E(1), Shinzato C(2), Hisata K(2), Satoh N(2), Mungpakdee S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Marine Genomics Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate
University, Onna, Okinawa, Japan eiichi@oist.jp.
(2)Marine Genomics Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate
University, Onna, Okinawa, Japan.

Even though mitochondrial genomes, which characterize eukaryotic cells, were
first discovered more than 50 years ago, mitochondrial genomics remains an
important topic in molecular biology and genome sciences. The Phylum Alveolata
comprises three major groups (ciliates, apicomplexans, and dinoflagellates), the 
mitochondrial genomes of which have diverged widely. Even though the gene content
of dinoflagellate mitochondrial genomes is reportedly comparable to that of
apicomplexans, the highly fragmented and rearranged genome structures of
dinoflagellates have frustrated whole genomic analysis. Consequently, noncoding
sequences and gene arrangements of dinoflagellate mitochondrial genomes have not 
been well characterized. Here we report that the continuous assembled genome
(∼326 kb) of the dinoflagellate, Symbiodinium minutum, is AT-rich (∼64.3%) and
that it contains three protein-coding genes. Based upon in silico analysis, the
remaining 99% of the genome comprises transcriptomic noncoding sequences. RNA
edited sites and unique, possible start and stop codons clarify conserved regions
among dinoflagellates. Our massive transcriptome analysis shows that almost all
regions of the genome are transcribed, including 27 possible fragmented ribosomal
RNA genes and 12 uncharacterized small RNAs that are similar to mitochondrial RNA
genes of the malarial parasite, Plasmodium falciparum. Gene map comparisons show 
that gene order is only slightly conserved between S. minutum and P. falciparum. 
However, small RNAs and intergenic sequences share sequence similarities with P. 
falciparum, suggesting that the function of noncoding sequences has been
preserved despite development of very different genome structures.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evv137 
PMCID: PMC4558855
PMID: 26199191  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

