
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2015 Jun;201(2):100-7. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2015.07.001. Epub 2015 Jul 26.

Global expression profiling reveals shared and distinct transcript signatures in 
arrested act2(-) and CDPK4(-) Plasmodium berghei gametocytes.

Andreadaki M(1), Mollenkopf HJ(2), Nika F(1), Brady D(3), Tewari R(3),
Matuschewski K(4), Siden-Kiamos I(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology - Hellas, Heraklion, Greece; Department of Biology, University of
Crete, Heraklion, Greece.
(2)Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Centre for Genetics and Genomics, School of Life Sciences, Queens Medical
Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(4)Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Berlin, Germany; Institute of
Biology, Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology - Hellas, Heraklion, Greece. Electronic address: inga@imbb.forth.gr.

Gametocytogenesis and gametogenesis in malaria parasites are complex processes of
cell differentiation and development likely involving many gene products.
Gametocytes develop in the blood of the vertebrate host but mature gametocytes
are not activated until taken up by the mosquito vector. Several distinct mutants
have been described that block gametogenesis but the detailed molecular causes
for the mutant phenotypes are not understood. To investigate whether a block in
gametogenesis also results in a changed transcriptional profile we studied two
gene deletions mutants; act2(-) lacking stage-specific actin II and CDPK4(-)
lacking calcium-dependent protein kinase 4. Whole genome microarray analysis was 
performed from RNA of mature gametocytes to compare the transcriptomes of the
mutants with wild-type Plasmodium berghei. The microarray analysis identified
∼12% of all genes being differentially expressed in either or both mutants
compared to normal gametocytes, as defined by at least two-fold change in
transcript abundance. A large proportion of the differentially expressed genes
overlapped in the two mutants, consistent with a related outcome of gametocyte
arrest. Distinct profiles in each mutant were also observed. Among the
down-regulated genes were thioredoxin 2 and members of the merozoite surface
protein 7 family. Generation and characterization of a msp7(-)/mspr1(-)/mspr2(-) 
triple mutant and re-analysis of trx2(-) parasites revealed no impairment of life
cycle progression. Together, our analysis provides a resource for molecular
signatures of Plasmodium berghei gametogenesis and exemplifies the potential of
expression profiling of distinct genetically arrested parasites.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2015.07.001 
PMID: 26222913  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

