
1. J Proteomics. 2015 Oct 14;128:272-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2015.08.002. Epub 2015 
Aug 10.

Candidate biomarkers for mosquito age-grading identified by label-free
quantitative analysis of protein expression in Aedes albopictus females.

Iovinella I(1), Caputo B(2), Michelucci E(3), Dani FR(4), della Torre A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health & Infectious Diseases, Università "La Sapienza",
Roma, Italy; Biology Department, Università di Firenze, Italy.
(2)Department of Public Health & Infectious Diseases, Università "La Sapienza",
Roma, Italy.
(3)CISM, Mass Spectrometry Centre, Università di Firenze, Italy.
(4)CISM, Mass Spectrometry Centre, Università di Firenze, Italy; Biology
Department, Università di Firenze, Italy. Electronic address:
francescaromana.dani@unifi.it.

We applied a "shotgun" approach based on nanoliquid chromatography-high
resolution mass spectrometry associated to label free quantification (LFQ) to
identify proteins varying with age, independently from the physiological state,
in Aedes albopictus, a mosquito species which in the last decades invaded
temperate regions in North America and Europe, creating concerns for associated
high nuisance and risk of arbovirus transmission. The combined "shotgun" and LFQ 
approach was shown to be highly suitable to simultaneously compare several
biological samples, as needed in a study aimed to analyze different age-groups
and physiological states of adult mosquito females. The results obtained
represent the first wide-scale analysis of protein expression in Ae. albopictus
females: >1000 and 665 proteins were identified from few micrograms of crude
protein extracts of mosquito heads and thoraxes, respectively. Six of these
proteins were shown to significantly vary from 2- to 16-day-old females,
independently from their physiological state (i.e. virgin, mated, host-seeking,
blood-fed, and gravid).BIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE: Mosquito-borne diseases, such as 
malaria, dengue and other arboviroses, are a persistent cause of global mortality
and morbidity, affecting hundreds of thousands of people. Billions of people
living in tropical areas are at risk of being bitten every day by an infective
mosquito female and the spread of tropical species such as Aedes albopictus to
temperate areas is creating alarm in the northern hemisphere. Mosquito longevity 
is a critical factor affecting mosquito-borne pathogen transmission cycles and
the mosquito capacity to transmit pathogens. However, large scale analyses of the
age structure of mosquito field populations is hampered by the lack of optimal
age-grading approaches. Our findings open new perspectives for the development of
reliable, simple and cheap protein-based assays to age-grade Ae. albopictus
females and, most likely, other mosquito species of higher medical relevance,
such as the main dengue vector, Aedes aegypti, and the major Afrotropical malaria
vectors. These assays would greatly contribute to epidemiological studies aimed
at defining the actual vectorial capacity of a given mosquito species. Moreover, 
they would be very valuable in assessing the effectiveness of mosquito control
interventions based on the relative ratio between young and old individuals
before and after the intervention.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2015.08.002 
PMID: 26271156  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

