
1. Malar J. 2015 Sep 17;14:352. doi: 10.1186/s12936-015-0885-y.

Bio-efficacy of new long-lasting insecticide-treated bed nets against Anopheles
funestus and Anopheles gambiae from central and northern Mozambique.

Abílio AP(1), Marrune P(2), de Deus N(3), Mbofana F(4), Muianga P(5), Kampango
A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Entomologia, Instituto Nacional de Saúde (INS), Av. Eduardo
Mondlane/Salvador Allende, no 1008, C.P. 246, Maputo, Mozambique.
anabilio1408@gmail.com.
(2)Programa Nacional de Controlo da Malária (PNCM), Direcção Provincial de Saúde 
de Cabo Delgado, Cabo Delgado Province, Mozambique. pelagiomarrune@gmail.com.
(3)Departamento de Pesquisa, Instituto Nacional de Saúde (INS), Av. Eduardo
Mondlane/Salvador Allende, no 1008, C.P. 246, Maputo, Mozambique.
ndeus1@yahoo.com.
(4)Direcção Nacional de Saúde Pública (DNSP), Av. Eduardo Mondlane/Salvador
Allende, no 1008, C.P. 246, Maputo, Mozambique. mbofana98@yahoo.com.
(5)Abt Associates Inc/AIRS, Zambezia Province, Mozambique.
pedro_muianga@africairs.net.
(6)Laboratório de Entomologia, Instituto Nacional de Saúde (INS), Av. Eduardo
Mondlane/Salvador Allende, no 1008, C.P. 246, Maputo, Mozambique.
akampango@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Long-lasting insecticide-treated nets (LLINs) are one of the main
methods used for controlling malaria transmission in Mozambique. The
proliferation of several types of LLINs and the re-emergence of insecticide
resistance in the local vector populations poses challenges to the local malaria 
control programme on selecting suitable insecticide-based vector control
products. Therefore, this study evaluated the insecticide susceptibility and
bio-efficacy of selected new LLINs against wild populations of Anopheles funestus
sensu lato and A. gambiae s.l. from Northern and Central Mozambique. The study
also investigated whether the insecticide contents on the LINNs fabrics were
within the WHOPES recommended target range.
METHODS: The susceptibility of 2-5 day old wild female A. funestus and A. gambiae
sensu stricto against the major classes of insecticides used for vector control, 
viz: deltamethrin (0.05 %), permethrin (0.75 %), propoxur (0.1 %), bendiocarb
(0.1 %) and DDT (4 %), was determined using WHO cylinder susceptibility tests.
WHO cone bioassays were conducted to determine the bio-efficacy of both
pyrethroid-only LLINs (Olyset(®), Permanet 2.0(®), NetProtect(®) and
Interceptor(®)) and, Permanet 3.0(®) a combination LLIN against A. funestus s.s, 
from Balama, Mocuba and Milange districts, respectively. The bio-efficacy of
LLINs against the insectary-susceptible A. arabiensis (Durban strain) was
assessed, as well. Untreated bed net swatches were used as negative controls.
Chemical analyses, by high performance liquid chromatography, were undertaken to 
assess whether the insecticide contents on the LLINs fabrics fell within
recommended target dose ranges. The frequency of kdr gene mutations was
determined from a random sample of A. gambiae s.s. from both WHO susceptibility
and cone bioassay experiments.
RESULTS: Anopheles funestus from Balama district showed resistance to
deltamethrin and possible resistance to permethrin, propoxur and bendiocarb,
whilst A. gambiae from Mocuba district was susceptible to deltamethrin,
bendiocarb and propoxur. There were no kdr mutants found in the sample of 256 A. 
gambiae tested. Overall, 186 LLIN swatches were tested. Mosquitoes exposed to
Olyset(®) had the lowest knockdown (±standard error) and mortality rate
(±standard error) in all studied sites regardless of vectors species tested.
Permanet 3.0 showed the highest bio-efficacy independent of vector species tested
and level of insecticide resistance detected. All types of LLINs effectively
killed susceptible A. arabiensis Durban strain. The insecticide content of
Olyset(®) and Permanet 2.0(®) was higher than the target dose but NetProtect(®)
had a lower insecticide content than the target dose.
CONCLUSION: The study shows evidence of considerable heterogeneity in both
insecticide susceptibility and the level of bio-efficacy of commonly available
types of LLINs against wild A. funestus and A. gambiae from Balama, Mocuba and
Milange districts, located in north and centre of Mozambique. The findings
suggest that vector control approaches combining different types of insecticides 
might help to tackle the apparent problem of pyrethroid resistance in the vector 
populations from these three sites. Results from bioassays on
laboratory-susceptible A. arabiensis strongly suggest that LLINs can offer some
protection against susceptible malaria vectors.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-015-0885-y 
PMCID: PMC4574012
PMID: 26377825  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

