
1. Malar J. 2015 Sep 17;14:354. doi: 10.1186/s12936-015-0892-z.

Falciparum malaria molecular drug resistance in the Democratic Republic of Congo:
a systematic review.

Mvumbi DM(1), Kayembe JM(2), Situakibanza H(3), Bobanga TL(4), Nsibu CN(5),
Mvumbi GL(6), Melin P(7), De Mol P(8), Hayette MP(9).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Unit, Department of Basic Sciences, School 
of Medicine, University of Kinshasa, Kinshasa, DR Congo. didimvumbi@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Kinshasa,
Kinshasa, DR Congo. dr12jmkayembe@yahoo.com.
(3)Department of Tropical Medicine and Infectious Disease, School of Medicine,
University of Kinshasa, Kinshasa, DR Congo. hsitua@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Tropical Medicine and Infectious Disease, School of Medicine,
University of Kinshasa, Kinshasa, DR Congo. tbobanga@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Paediatric, School of Medicine, University of Kinshasa,
Kinshasa, DR Congo. celnsibu@hotmail.fr.
(6)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Unit, Department of Basic Sciences, School 
of Medicine, University of Kinshasa, Kinshasa, DR Congo. mvumbilelo@yahoo.fr.
(7)Department of Clinical Microbiology, University Hospital of Liège, Liège,
Belgium. pierrette.melin@chu.ulg.ac.be.
(8)Department of Clinical Microbiology, University Hospital of Liège, Liège,
Belgium. P.DeMol@ulg.ac.be.
(9)Department of Clinical Microbiology, University Hospital of Liège, Liège,
Belgium. mphayette@chu.ulg.ac.be.

BACKGROUND: Malaria cases were estimated to 207 million in 2013. One of the
problems of malaria control is the emergence and spread of Plasmodium falciparum 
strains that become resistant to almost all drugs available. Monitoring drug
resistance is essential for early detection and subsequent prevention of the
spread of drug resistance by timely changes of treatment policy. This review was 
performed to gather all data available on P. falciparum molecular resistance in
DR Congo, as baseline for future assessments.
METHODS: The search for this review was undertaken using the electronic databases
PubMed and Google Scholar using the terms "malaria", "Congo", "resistance",
"molecular", "antimalarial", "efficacy". Articles were classified based on year
of collecting, year of publication, sample size and characteristics, molecular
markers analysed and polymorphisms detected.
RESULTS: Thirteen articles were included and five genes have been analysed in
these studies: pfcrt, pfdhps, pfdhfr, pfmdr1 and K13-propeller. The majority of
studies included were not representative of the whole country.
CONCLUSION: This systematic review demonstrates the lack of molecular resistance 
studies in DRC. Only 13 studies were identified in almost 15 years. The MOH must 
implement a national surveillance system for monitoring malaria drug resistance
and this surveillance should be conducted frequently and country-representative.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-015-0892-z 
PMCID: PMC4574228
PMID: 26376639  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

