
1. Curr Protein Pept Sci. 2016;17(3):220-7.

Multi-output Model with Box-Jenkins Operators of Quadratic Indices for Prediction
of Malaria and Cancer Inhibitors Targeting Ubiquitin- Proteasome Pathway (UPP)
Proteins.

Casañola-Martin GM, Le-Thi-Thu H, Pérez-Giménez F, Marrero-Ponce Y,
Merino-Sanjuán M, Abad C, González-Díaz H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, Universitat de València,
E-46100 Burjassot, Spain and IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, 48011,
Bilbao, Spain. humberto.gonzalezdiaz@ehu.es.

The ubiquitin-proteasome pathway (UPP) is the primary degradation system of
short-lived regulatory proteins. Cellular processes such as the cell cycle,
signal transduction, gene expression, DNA repair and apoptosis are regulated by
this UPP and dysfunctions in this system have important implications in the
development of cancer, neurodegenerative, cardiac and other human pathologies.
UPP seems also to be very important in the function of eukaryote cells of the
human parasites like Plasmodium falciparum, the causal agent of the neglected
disease Malaria. Hence, the UPP could be considered as an attractive target for
the development of compounds with Anti-Malarial or Anti-cancer properties. Recent
online databases like ChEMBL contains a larger quantity of information in terms
of pharmacological assay protocols and compounds tested as UPP inhibitors under
many different conditions. This large amount of data give new openings for the
computer-aided identification of UPP inhibitors, but the intrinsic data diversity
is an obstacle for the development of successful classifiers. To solve this
problem here we used the Bob-Jenkins moving average operators and the atom-based 
quadratic molecular indices calculated with the software TOMOCOMD-CARDD (TC) to
develop a quantitative model for the prediction of the multiple outputs in this
complex dataset. Our multi-target model can predict results for drugs against 22 
molecular or cellular targets of different organisms with accuracies above 70% in
both training and validation sets.

DOI: 10.2174/1389203717999160226173500 
PMID: 26427384  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

