
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015 Oct 19;60(1):198-205. doi:
10.1128/AAC.01479-15. Print 2016 Jan.

Pharmacokinetic-Pharmacodynamic Model for the Effect of l-Arginine on Endothelial
Function in Patients with Moderately Severe Falciparum Malaria.

Brussee JM(1), Yeo TW(2), Lampah DA(3), Anstey NM(4), Duffull SB(5).

Author information: 
(1)Otago Pharmacometrics Group, School of Pharmacy, University of Otago, Dunedin,
New Zealand Division of Pharmacology, LACDR, Leiden University, Leiden, The
Netherlands.
(2)Global and Tropical Health Division, Menzies School of Health Research and
Charles Darwin University, Darwin, NT, Australia Lee Kong Chian School of
Medicine, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore Insitute of Infectious
Disease and Epidemiology, Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore.
(3)National Institute of Health Research and Development-Menzies School of Health
Research Malaria Research Program, Timika, Indonesia.
(4)Global and Tropical Health Division, Menzies School of Health Research and
Charles Darwin University, Darwin, NT, Australia Division of Medicine, Royal
Darwin Hospital, Darwin, NT, Australia.
(5)Otago Pharmacometrics Group, School of Pharmacy, University of Otago, Dunedin,
New Zealand stephen.duffull@otago.ac.nz.

Impaired organ perfusion in severe falciparum malaria arises from microvascular
sequestration of parasitized cells and endothelial dysfunction. Endothelial
dysfunction in malaria is secondary to impaired nitric oxide (NO)
bioavailability, in part due to decreased plasma concentrations of l-arginine,
the substrate for endothelial cell NO synthase. We quantified the time course of 
the effects of adjunctive l-arginine treatment on endothelial function in 73
patients with moderately severe falciparum malaria derived from previous studies.
Three groups of 10 different patients received 3 g, 6 g, or 12 g of l-arginine as
a half-hour infusion. The remaining 43 received saline placebo. A
pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic (PKPD) model was developed to describe the time
course of changes in exhaled NO concentrations and reactive hyperemia-peripheral 
arterial tonometry (RH-PAT) index values describing endothelial function and then
used to explore optimal dosing regimens for l-arginine. A PK model describing
arginine concentrations in patients with moderately severe malaria was extended
with two pharmacodynamic biomeasures, the intermediary biochemical step (NO
production) and endothelial function (RH-PAT index). A linear model described the
relationship between arginine concentrations and exhaled NO. NO concentrations
were linearly related to RH-PAT index. Simulations of dosing schedules using this
PKPD model predicted that the time within therapeutic range would increase with
increasing arginine dose. However, simulations demonstrated that regimens of
continuous infusion over longer periods would prolong the time within the
therapeutic range even more. The optimal dosing regimen for l-arginine is likely 
to be administration schedule dependent. Further studies are necessary to
characterize the effects of such continuous infusions of l-arginine on NO and
microvascular reactivity in severe malaria.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01479-15 
PMCID: PMC4704226
PMID: 26482311  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

