
1. J Infect Dis. 2016 Mar 1;213(5):800-10. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiv509. Epub 2015 Oct
26.

Verapamil-Sensitive Transport of Quinacrine and Methylene Blue via the Plasmodium
falciparum Chloroquine Resistance Transporter Reduces the Parasite's
Susceptibility to these Tricyclic Drugs.

van Schalkwyk DA(1), Nash MN(1), Shafik SH(1), Summers RL(1), Lehane AM(1), Smith
PJ(2), Martin RE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research School of Biology, Australian National University, Canberra,
Australia.
(2)Division of Pharmacology, Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town,
Rondebosch, South Africa.

BACKGROUND: It is becoming increasingly apparent that certain mutations in the
Plasmodium falciparum chloroquine resistance transporter (PfCRT) alter the
parasite's susceptibility to diverse compounds. Here we investigated the
interaction of PfCRT with 3 tricyclic compounds that have been used to treat
malaria (quinacrine [QC] and methylene blue [MB]) or to study P. falciparum
(acridine orange [AO]).
METHODS: We measured the antiplasmodial activities of QC, MB, and AO against
chloroquine-resistant and chloroquine-sensitive P. falciparum and determined
whether QC and AO affect the accumulation and activity of chloroquine in these
parasites. We also assessed the ability of mutant (PfCRT(Dd2)) and wild-type
(PfCRT(D10)) variants of the protein to transport QC, MB, and AO when expressed
at the surface of Xenopus laevis oocytes.
RESULTS: Chloroquine resistance-conferring isoforms of PfCRT reduced the
susceptibility of the parasite to QC, MB, and AO. In chloroquine-resistant (but
not chloroquine-sensitive) parasites, AO and QC increased the parasite's
accumulation of, and susceptibility to, chloroquine. All 3 compounds were shown
to bind to PfCRT(Dd2), and the transport of QC and MB via this protein was
saturable and inhibited by the chloroquine resistance-reverser verapamil.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings reveal that the PfCRT(Dd2)-mediated transport of
tricyclic antimalarials reduces the parasite's susceptibility to these drugs.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiv509 
PMID: 26503982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

