
1. Malar J. 2015 Oct 29;14:424. doi: 10.1186/s12936-015-0951-5.

Enhanced artemisinin yield by expression of rol genes in Artemisia annua.

Dilshad E(1), Cusido RM(2), Palazon J(3), Estrada KR(4), Bonfill M(5), Mirza
B(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Quaid-i-Azam
University, Islamabad, Pakistan. erum.dilshad@gmail.com.
(2)Laboratorio de Fisiologia Vegetal, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. rcusido@ub.edu.
(3)Laboratorio de Fisiologia Vegetal, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. javierpalazon@ub.edu.
(4)Laboratorio de Fisiologia Vegetal, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. kems3estrada@gmail.com.
(5)Laboratorio de Fisiologia Vegetal, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. mbonfill@ub.edu.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Quaid-i-Azam
University, Islamabad, Pakistan. bushramirza@qau.edu.pk.

BACKGROUND: Despite of many advances in the treatment of malaria, it is still the
fifth most prevalent disease worldwide and is one of the major causes of death in
the developing countries which accounted for 584,000 deaths in 2013, as estimated
by World Health Organization. Artemisinin from Artemisia annua is still one of
the most effective treatments for malaria. Increasing the artemisinin content of 
A. annua plants by genetic engineering would improve the availability of this
much-needed drug.
METHODS: In this regard, a high artemisinin-yielding hybrid of A. annua produced 
by the centre for novel agricultural products of the University of York, UK, was 
selected (artemisinin maximally 1.4 %). As rol genes are potential candidates of 
biochemical engineering, genetic transformation of A. annua with Agrobacterium
tumefaciens GV3101 harbouring vectors with rol B and rol C genes was carried out 
with the objective of enhancement of artemisinin content. Transgenic lines
produced were analysed by the LC-MS for quantitative analysis of artemisinin and 
analogues. These high artemisinin yielding transgenics were also analysed by real
time quantitative PCR to find the molecular dynamics of artemisinin enhancement. 
Genes of artemisinin biosynthetic pathway were studied including amorphadiene
synthase (ADS), cytochrome P450, (CYP71AV1) and aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1).
Trichome-specific fatty acyl-CoA reductase 1(TAFR1) is an enzyme involved in both
trichome development and sesquiterpenoid biosynthesis and both processes are
important for artemisinin biosynthesis. Thus, real time qPCR analysis of the
TAFR1 gene was carried out, and trichome density was determined.
RESULTS: Transgenics of rol B gene showed two- to ninefold (the decimal adds
nothing in the abstract, please simplify to two- to ninefold) increase in
artemisinin, 4-12-fold increase in artesunate and 1.2-3-fold increase in
dihydroartemisinin. Whereas in the case of rol C gene transformants, a fourfold
increase in artemisinin, four to ninefold increase in artesunate and one- to
twofold increase in dihydroartemisinin concentration was observed. Transformants 
with the rol B gene had higher expression of these genes than rol C
transformants. TAFR1 was also found to be more expressed in rol gene transgenics 
than wild type A. annua, which was also in accordance with the trichome density
of the respective plant.
CONCLUSION: Thus it was proved that rol B and rol C genes are effective in the
enhancement of artemisinin content of A. annua, rol B gene being more active to
play part in this enhancement than rol C gene.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-015-0951-5 
PMCID: PMC4625606
PMID: 26510528  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

