
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015 Nov 2;60(1):361-7. doi: 10.1128/AAC.02207-15.
Print 2016 Jan.

Expression of Plasmodium vivax crt-o Is Related to Parasite Stage but Not Ex Vivo
Chloroquine Susceptibility.

Pava Z(1), Handayuni I(1), Wirjanata G(1), To S(1), Trianty L(2), Noviyanti R(2),
Poespoprodjo JR(3), Auburn S(1), Price RN(4), Marfurt J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Global and Tropical Health Division, Menzies School of Health Research,
Charles Darwin University, Darwin, Australia.
(2)Eijkman Institute for Molecular Biology, Jakarta, Indonesia.
(3)Papuan Health and Community Development Foundation (PHCDF), Timika, Papua,
Indonesia Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Gadjah Mada University,
Yogyakarta, Indonesia.
(4)Global and Tropical Health Division, Menzies School of Health Research,
Charles Darwin University, Darwin, Australia Centre for Tropical Medicine and
Global Health, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom.
(5)Global and Tropical Health Division, Menzies School of Health Research,
Charles Darwin University, Darwin, Australia jutta.marfurt@menzies.edu.au.

Chloroquine (CQ)-resistant Plasmodium vivax is present in most countries where P.
vivax infection is endemic, but the underlying molecular mechanisms responsible
remain unknown. Increased expression of P. vivax crt-o (pvcrt-o) has been
correlated with in vivo CQ resistance in an area with low-grade resistance. We
assessed pvcrt-o expression in isolates from Papua (Indonesia), where P. vivax is
highly CQ resistant. Ex vivo drug susceptibilities to CQ, amodiaquine,
piperaquine, mefloquine, and artesunate were determined using a modified schizont
maturation assay. Expression levels of pvcrt-o were measured using a novel
real-time quantitative reverse transcription-PCR method. Large variations in
pvcrt-o expression were observed across the 51 isolates evaluated, with the fold 
change in expression level ranging from 0.01 to 59 relative to that seen with the
P. vivax β-tubulin gene and from 0.01 to 24 relative to that seen with the P.
vivax aldolase gene. Expression was significantly higher in isolates with the
majority of parasites at the ring stage of development (median fold change, 1.7) 
compared to those at the trophozoite stage (median fold change, 0.5; P < 0.001). 
Twenty-nine isolates fulfilled the criteria for ex vivo drug susceptibility
testing and showed high variability in CQ responses (median, 107.9 [range, 6.5 to
345.7] nM). After controlling for the parasite stage, we found that pvcrt-o
expression levels did not correlate with the ex vivo response to CQ or with that 
to any of the other antimalarials tested. Our results highlight the importance of
development-stage composition for measuring pvcrt-o expression and suggest that
pvcrt-o transcription is not a primary determinant of ex vivo drug
susceptibility. A comprehensive transcriptomic approach is warranted for an
in-depth investigation of the role of gene expression levels and P. vivax drug
resistance.

Copyright © 2015 Pava et al.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02207-15 
PMCID: PMC4704153
PMID: 26525783  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

