
1. BMC Infect Dis. 2015 Nov 11;15:511. doi: 10.1186/s12879-015-1272-6.

Performance of C-reactive protein and procalcitonin to distinguish viral from
bacterial and malarial causes of fever in Southeast Asia.

Lubell Y(1)(2), Blacksell SD(3)(4), Dunachie S(5)(6), Tanganuchitcharnchai A(7), 
Althaus T(8), Watthanaworawit W(9)(10), Paris DH(11)(12), Mayxay M(13)(14)(15),
Peto TJ(16)(17), Dondorp AM(18)(19), White NJ(20)(21), Day NP(22)(23), Nosten
F(24)(25)(26), Newton PN(27)(28), Turner P(29)(30)(31).

Author information: 
(1)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit (MORU), Faculty of Tropical
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. yoel@tropmedres.ac.
(2)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. yoel@tropmedres.ac.
(3)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit (MORU), Faculty of Tropical
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. stuart@tropmedres.ac.
(4)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. stuart@tropmedres.ac.
(5)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit (MORU), Faculty of Tropical
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. susie@tropmedres.ac.
(6)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. susie@tropmedres.ac.
(7)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit (MORU), Faculty of Tropical
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. ampai@tropmedres.ac.
(8)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit (MORU), Faculty of Tropical
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. Thomas.A@tropmedres.ac.
(9)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit (MORU), Faculty of Tropical
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. wanitda@tropmedres.ac.
(10)Shoklo Malaria Research Unit (SMRU), Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine
Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Mae Sot,
Thailand. wanitda@tropmedres.ac.
(11)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit (MORU), Faculty of Tropical
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. parigi@tropmedres.ac.
(12)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. parigi@tropmedres.ac.
(13)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. mayfong@tropmedres.ac.
(14)Lao-Oxford-Mahosot Hospital-Wellcome Trust Research Unit (LOMWRU), Mahosot
Hospital, Vientiane, Laos. mayfong@tropmedres.ac.
(15)Faculty of Postgraduate Studies, University of Health Sciences, Vientiane,
Laos. mayfong@tropmedres.ac.
(16)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit (MORU), Faculty of Tropical
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. tom@tropmedres.ac.
(17)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. tom@tropmedres.ac.
(18)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit (MORU), Faculty of Tropical
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. arjen@tropmedres.ac.
(19)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. arjen@tropmedres.ac.
(20)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit (MORU), Faculty of Tropical
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. nickwdt@tropmedres.ac.
(21)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. nickwdt@tropmedres.ac.
(22)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit (MORU), Faculty of Tropical
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. nickd@tropmedres.ac.
(23)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. nickd@tropmedres.ac.
(24)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit (MORU), Faculty of Tropical
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. francois@tropmedres.ac.
(25)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. francois@tropmedres.ac.
(26)Shoklo Malaria Research Unit (SMRU), Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine
Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Mae Sot,
Thailand. francois@tropmedres.ac.
(27)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. paul@tropmedres.ac.
(28)Lao-Oxford-Mahosot Hospital-Wellcome Trust Research Unit (LOMWRU), Mahosot
Hospital, Vientiane, Laos. paul@tropmedres.ac.
(29)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit (MORU), Faculty of Tropical
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. pault@tropmedres.ac.
(30)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. pault@tropmedres.ac.
(31)Cambodia Oxford Medical Research Unit, Angkor Hospital for Children, Siem
Reap, Cambodia. pault@tropmedres.ac.

BACKGROUND: Poor targeting of antimicrobial drugs contributes to the millions of 
deaths each year from malaria, pneumonia, and other tropical infectious diseases.
While malaria rapid diagnostic tests have improved use of antimalarial drugs,
there are no similar tests to guide the use of antibiotics in undifferentiated
fevers. In this study we estimate the diagnostic accuracy of two well established
biomarkers of bacterial infection, procalcitonin and C-reactive protein (CRP) in 
discriminating between common viral and bacterial infections in malaria endemic
settings of Southeast Asia.
METHODS: Serum procalcitonin and CRP levels were measured in stored serum samples
from febrile patients enrolled in three prospective studies conducted in
Cambodia, Laos and, Thailand. Of the 1372 patients with a microbiologically
confirmed diagnosis, 1105 had a single viral, bacterial or malarial infection.
Procalcitonin and CRP levels were compared amongst these aetiological groups and 
their sensitivity and specificity in distinguishing bacterial infections and
bacteraemias from viral infections were estimated using standard thresholds.
RESULTS: Serum concentrations of both biomarkers were significantly higher in
bacterial infections and malaria than in viral infections. The AUROC for CRP in
discriminating between bacterial and viral infections was 0.83 (0.81-0.86)
compared with 0.74 (0.71-0.77) for procalcitonin (p < 0.0001). This relative
advantage was evident in all sites and when stratifying patients by age and
admission status. For CRP at a threshold of 10 mg/L, the sensitivity of detecting
bacterial infections was 95% with a specificity of 49%. At a threshold of 20 mg/L
sensitivity was 86% with a specificity of 67%. For procalcitonin at a low
threshold of 0.1 ng/mL the sensitivity was 90% with a specificity of 39%. At a
higher threshold of 0.5 ng/ul sensitivity was 60% with a specificity of 76%.
CONCLUSION: In samples from febrile patients with mono-infections from rural
settings in Southeast Asia, CRP was a highly sensitive and moderately specific
biomarker for discriminating between viral and bacterial infections. Use of a CRP
rapid test in peripheral health settings could potentially be a simple and
affordable measure to better identify patients in need of antibacterial treatment
and part of a global strategy to combat the emergence of antibiotic resistance.

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-015-1272-6 
PMCID: PMC4642613
PMID: 26558692  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

