
1. Genome Biol Evol. 2015 Nov 26;7(12):3484-95. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evv236.

Extensive Admixture and Selective Pressure Across the Sahel Belt.

Triska P(1), Soares P(2), Patin E(3), Fernandes V(4), Cerny V(5), Pereira L(6).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde (i3S), Universidade do Porto,
Porto, Portugal Instituto de Patologia e Imunologia Molecular da Universidade do 
Porto (IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar
da Universidade do Porto (ICBAS), Porto, Portugal.
(2)Instituto de Patologia e Imunologia Molecular da Universidade do Porto
(IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal Department of Biology, CBMA (Centre of Molecular and 
Environmental Biology), University of Minho, Braga, Portugal.
(3)Unit of Human Evolutionary Genetics, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique, Paris, France.
(4)Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde (i3S), Universidade do Porto,
Porto, Portugal Instituto de Patologia e Imunologia Molecular da Universidade do 
Porto (IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal.
(5)Archaeogenetics Laboratory, Institute of Archaeology of the Academy of
Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic.
(6)Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde (i3S), Universidade do Porto,
Porto, Portugal Instituto de Patologia e Imunologia Molecular da Universidade do 
Porto (IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade do Porto,
Porto, Portugal lpereira@ipatimup.pt.

Genome-wide studies of African populations have the potential to reveal powerful 
insights into the evolution of our species, as these diverse populations have
been exposed to intense selective pressures imposed by infectious diseases, diet,
and environmental factors. Within Africa, the Sahel Belt extensively overlaps the
geographical center of several endemic infections such as malaria,
trypanosomiasis, meningitis, and hemorrhagic fevers. We screened 2.5 million
single nucleotide polymorphisms in 161 individuals from 13 Sahelian populations, 
which together with published data cover Western, Central, and Eastern Sahel, and
include both nomadic and sedentary groups. We confirmed the role of this Belt as 
a main corridor for human migrations across the continent. Strong admixture was
observed in both Central and Eastern Sahelian populations, with North Africans
and Near Eastern/Arabians, respectively, but it was inexistent in Western
Sahelian populations. Genome-wide local ancestry inference in admixed Sahelian
populations revealed several candidate regions that were significantly enriched
for non-autochthonous haplotypes, and many showed to be under positive selection.
The DARC gene region in Arabs and Nubians was enriched for African ancestry,
whereas the RAB3GAP1/LCT/MCM6 region in Oromo, the TAS2R gene family in Fulani,
and the ALMS1/NAT8 in Turkana and Samburu were enriched for non-African ancestry.
Signals of positive selection varied in terms of geographic amplitude. Some
genomic regions were selected across the Belt, the most striking example being
the malaria-related DARC gene. Others were Western-specific (oxytocin, calcium,
and heart pathways), Eastern-specific (lipid pathways), or even
population-restricted (TAS2R genes in Fulani, which may reflect sexual
selection).

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evv236 
PMCID: PMC4700964
PMID: 26614524  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

