
1. Malar J. 2015 Dec 2;14:486. doi: 10.1186/s12936-015-1021-8.

Attenuation of Plasmodium falciparum in vitro drug resistance phenotype following
culture adaptation compared to fresh clinical isolates in Cambodia.

Chaorattanakawee S(1), Lanteri CA(2)(3), Sundrakes S(4), Yingyuen K(5), Gosi
P(6), Chanarat N(7), Wongarunkochakorn S(8), Buathong N(9), Chann S(10),
Kuntawunginn W(11), Arsanok M(12), Lin JT(13), Juliano JJ(14), Tyner SD(15)(16), 
Char M(17), Lon C(18), Saunders DL(19).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Medicine, Armed Forces Research Institute of
Medical Science, Bangkok, Thailand. SuwannaC2.fsn@afrims.org.
(2)Department of Immunology and Medicine, Armed Forces Research Institute of
Medical Science, Bangkok, Thailand. charlotte.a.lanteri.mil@mail.mil.
(3)Microbiology Section, Department of Pathology and Area Laboratory Services,
Brooke Army Medical Center, San Antonio, TX, USA.
charlotte.a.lanteri.mil@mail.mil.
(4)Department of Immunology and Medicine, Armed Forces Research Institute of
Medical Science, Bangkok, Thailand. SiratchanaS.ca@afrims.org.
(5)Department of Immunology and Medicine, Armed Forces Research Institute of
Medical Science, Bangkok, Thailand. KritsanaiY.fsn@afrims.org.
(6)Department of Immunology and Medicine, Armed Forces Research Institute of
Medical Science, Bangkok, Thailand. PanitaG.fsn@afrims.org.
(7)Department of Immunology and Medicine, Armed Forces Research Institute of
Medical Science, Bangkok, Thailand. NitimaC.ca@afrims.org.
(8)Department of Immunology and Medicine, Armed Forces Research Institute of
Medical Science, Bangkok, Thailand. SaowalukW.ca@afrims.org.
(9)Department of Immunology and Medicine, Armed Forces Research Institute of
Medical Science, Bangkok, Thailand. NillawanB.fsn@afrims.org.
(10)Department of Immunology and Medicine, Armed Forces Research Institute of
Medical Science, Bangkok, Thailand. ChannS.ctr@afrims.org.
(11)Department of Immunology and Medicine, Armed Forces Research Institute of
Medical Science, Bangkok, Thailand. WorachetK.fsn@afrims.org.
(12)Department of Immunology and Medicine, Armed Forces Research Institute of
Medical Science, Bangkok, Thailand. MontriA.fsn@afrims.org.
(13)Division of Infectious Diseases, School of Medicine, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. jessica_lin@med.unc.edu.
(14)Division of Infectious Diseases, School of Medicine, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. jonathan_juliano@med.unc.edu.
(15)Department of Immunology and Medicine, Armed Forces Research Institute of
Medical Science, Bangkok, Thailand. stuart.d.tyner.mil@mail.mil.
(16)US Army Institute of Surgical Research, Joint Base San Antonio-Fort Sam
Houston, San Antonio, TX, USA. stuart.d.tyner.mil@mail.mil.
(17)National Centre for Parasitology, Entomology and Malaria Control, Phnom Penh,
Cambodia. mengchuor@gmail.com.
(18)Department of Immunology and Medicine, Armed Forces Research Institute of
Medical Science, Bangkok, Thailand. ChanthapL@afrims.org.
(19)Department of Immunology and Medicine, Armed Forces Research Institute of
Medical Science, Bangkok, Thailand. david.saunders@afrims.org.

BACKGROUND: There is currently no standardized approach for assessing in vitro
anti-malarial drug susceptibility. Potential alterations in drug susceptibility
results between fresh immediate ex vivo (IEV) and cryopreserved culture-adapted
(CCA) Plasmodium falciparum isolates, as well as changes in parasite genotype
during culture adaptation were investigated.
METHODS: The 50 % inhibitory concentration (IC50) of 12 P. falciparum isolates
from Cambodia against a panel of commonly used drugs were compared using both IEV
and CCA. Results were compared using both histidine-rich protein-2 ELISA (HRP-2) 
and SYBR-Green I fluorescence methods. Molecular genotyping and amplicon deep
sequencing were also used to compare multiplicity of infection and genetic
polymophisms in fresh versus culture-adapted isolates.
RESULTS: IC50 for culture-adapted specimens were significantly lower compared to 
the original fresh isolates for both HRP-2 and SYBR-Green I assays, with greater 
than a 50 % decline for the majority of drug-assay combinations. There were
correlations between IC50s from IEV and CCA for most drugs assays. Infections
were nearly all monoclonal, with little or no change in merozoite surface protein
1 (MSP1), MSP2, glutamate-rich protein (GLURP) or apical membrane antigen 1
(AMA1) polymorphisms, nor differences in P. falciparum multidrug resistance 1
gene (PfMDR1) copy number or single nucleotide polymorphisms following culture
adaptation.
CONCLUSIONS: The overall IC50 reduction combined with the correlation between
fresh isolates and culture-adapted drug susceptibility assays suggests the
utility of both approaches, as long as there is consistency of method, and
remaining mindful of possible attenuation of resistance phenotype occurring in
culture. Further study should be done in higher transmission settings where
polyclonal infections are prevalent.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-015-1021-8 
PMCID: PMC4667454
PMID: 26626127  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

