
1. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2015 Nov 25;9:6235-46. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S94673. eCollection
2015.

The antiplasmodial and spleen protective role of crude Indigofera oblongifolia
leaf extract traditionally used in the treatment of malaria in Saudi Arabia.

Dkhil MA(1), Lubbad MY(2), Al-Shaebi EM(3), Delic D(4), Al-Quraishy S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia ; Department of Zoology and Entomology, Faculty of Science, Helwan
University, Helwan, Egypt.
(2)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia ; General Directorate of Environmental and Occupational Health, Public
Health Agency, Ministry of Health, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia.
(4)Boehringer-Ingelheim Pharma, Biberach, Germany.

Malaria is one of the most serious natural hazards faced by human society.
Although plant leaves of Indigofera oblongifolia have been used for the treatment
of malaria in Saudi Arabian society, there is no laboratory-based evidence for
the effectiveness and safety of the plant. This study therefore was designed to
investigate the antimalarial and spleen protective activity of I. oblongifolia
leaf extract (IOLE) in mice. Three doses (100, 200 and 300 mg/kg) of IOLE were
used to treat mice infected with Plasmodium chabaudi-parasitized erythrocytes.
The suppressive effect produced by the 100 mg/kg dose on parasitemia was highly
significant compared to the infected nontreated group. This dose was also able to
repair the change in the thickness of the mice spleen and significantly lower the
number of apoptotic cells in the spleen. Moreover, I. oblongifolia also altered
gene expression in the infected spleen. On day 7 postinfection, the mRNA
expression of six genes - with immune response functions - was upregulated by
more than twofold, while that of 24 other genes was downregulated. Among the
differentially up- and downregulated genes under the effect of IOLE, we
quantified the expression of Ccl8, Saa3, Cd209a, and Cd209b mRNAs. The expression
data, determined by microarrays, were largely consistent with the expression
analyses we performed with several arbitrarily selected genes using quantitative 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Based on our results, I. oblongifolia exhibits
antimalarial activity and could protect the spleen from P. chabaudi-induced
injury.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S94673 
PMCID: PMC4664501
PMID: 26648699  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

