
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016 Jan 6;10(1):e0004340. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004340.
eCollection 2016 Jan.

Proteomic Identification of Oxidized Proteins in Entamoeba histolytica by
Resin-Assisted Capture: Insights into the Role of Arginase in Resistance to
Oxidative Stress.

Shahi P(1), Trebicz-Geffen M(1), Nagaraja S(1), Alterzon-Baumel S(1), Hertz R(1),
Methling K(2), Lalk M(2), Ankri S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine,
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
(2)University of Greifswald, Institute of Biochemistry, Greifswald, Germany.

Entamoeba histolytica is an obligate protozoan parasite of humans, and amebiasis,
an infectious disease which targets the intestine and/or liver, is the second
most common cause of human death due to a protozoan after malaria. Although
amebiasis is usually asymptomatic, E. histolytica has potent pathogenic
potential. During host infection, the parasite is exposed to reactive oxygen
species that are produced and released by cells of the innate immune system at
the site of infection. The ability of the parasite to survive oxidative stress
(OS) is essential for a successful invasion of the host. Although the effects of 
OS on the regulation of gene expression in E. histolytica and the
characterization of some proteins whose function in the parasite's defense
against OS have been previously studied, our knowledge of oxidized proteins in E.
histolytica is lacking. In order to fill this knowledge gap, we performed a
large-scale identification and quantification of the oxidized proteins in
oxidatively stressed E. histolytica trophozoites using resin-assisted capture
coupled to mass spectrometry. We detected 154 oxidized proteins (OXs) and the
functions of some of these proteins were associated with antioxidant activity,
maintaining the parasite's cytoskeleton, translation, catalysis, and transport.
We also found that oxidation of the Gal/GalNAc impairs its function and
contributes to the inhibition of E. histolytica adherence to host cells. We also 
provide evidence that arginase, an enzyme which converts L-arginine into
L-ornithine and urea, is involved in the protection of the parasite against OS.
Collectively, these results emphasize the importance of OS as a critical
regulator of E. histolytica's functions and indicate a new role for arginase in
E. histolytica's resistance to OS.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004340 
PMCID: PMC4703340
PMID: 26735309  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

