
1. J Med Entomol. 2016 May;53(3):500-504. Epub 2016 Jan 21.

Tick Salivary Cholinesterase: A Probable Immunomodulator of Host-parasite
Interactions.

Temeyer KB(1), Tuckow AP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Knipling-Bushland U.S. Livestock Insects Research Laboratory, U.S. Department 
of Agriculture-Agricultural Research Service, 2700 Fredericksburg Road,
Kerrville, Texas 78028 (Kevin.Temeyer@ars.usda.gov; atuckow@gmail.com) and
Kevin.Temeyer@ars.usda.gov.
(2)Knipling-Bushland U.S. Livestock Insects Research Laboratory, U.S. Department 
of Agriculture-Agricultural Research Service, 2700 Fredericksburg Road,
Kerrville, Texas 78028 (Kevin.Temeyer@ars.usda.gov; atuckow@gmail.com) and.

The southern cattle tick, Rhipicephalus (Boophilus) microplus (Canestrini), is
the most economically important cattle ectoparasite in the world. Rhipicephalus
microplus and Rhipicephalus annulatus (Say) continue to threaten U.S. cattle
producers despite eradication and an importation barrier based on inspection,
dipping of imported cattle in organophosphate (OP) acaricide, and quarantine of
infested premises. OP acaricides inhibit acetylcholinesterase (AChE), essential
to tick central nervous system function. Unlike vertebrates, ticks possess at
least three genes encoding AChEs, differing in amino acid sequence and
biochemical properties. Genomic analyses of R. microplus and the related tick,
Ixodes scapularis, suggest that ticks contain many genes encoding different
AChEs. This work is the first report of a salivary cholinesterase (ChE) activity 
in R. microplus, and discusses complexity of the cholinergic system in ticks and 
significance of tick salivary ChE at the tick-host interface. It further provides
three hypotheses that the salivary ChE plausibly functions 1) to reduce presence 
of potentially toxic acetylcholine present in the large bloodmeal imbibed during 
rapid engorgement, 2) to modulate the immune response (innate and/or acquired) of
the host to tick antigens, and 3) to influence transmission and establishment of 
pathogens within the host animal. Ticks are vectors for a greater number and
variety of pathogens than any other parasite, and are second only to mosquitoes
(owing to malaria) as vectors of serious human disease. Saliva-assisted
transmission (SAT) of pathogens is well-known; however, the salivary components
participating in the SAT process remain to be elucidated.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Entomological Society of
America 2016. This work is written by US Government employees and is in the
public domain in the US.

DOI: 10.1093/jme/tjv252 
PMID: 26794231  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

