
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016 Jan 26;10(1):e0004401. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0004401. eCollection 2016 Jan.

Yeast-Based High-Throughput Screens to Identify Novel Compounds Active against
Brugia malayi.

Bilsland E(1)(2), Bean DM(1), Devaney E(3), Oliver SG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Systems Biology Centre and Department of Biochemistry, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Structural and Functional Biology, Institute of Biology,
UNICAMP, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health and Comparative Medicine, University 
of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Lymphatic filariasis is caused by the parasitic worms Wuchereria
bancrofti, Brugia malayi or B. timori, which are transmitted via the bites from
infected mosquitoes. Once in the human body, the parasites develop into adult
worms in the lymphatic vessels, causing severe damage and swelling of the
affected tissues. According to the World Health Organization, over 1.2 billion
people in 58 countries are at risk of contracting lymphatic filariasis. Very few 
drugs are available to treat patients infected with these parasites, and these
have low efficacy against the adult stages of the worms, which can live for 7-15 
years in the human body. The requirement for annual treatment increases the risk 
of drug-resistant worms emerging, making it imperative to develop new drugs
against these devastating diseases.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have developed a yeast-based, high-throughput 
screening system whereby essential yeast genes are replaced with their filarial
or human counterparts. These strains are labeled with different fluorescent
proteins to allow the simultaneous monitoring of strains with parasite or human
genes in competition, and hence the identification of compounds that inhibit the 
parasite target without affecting its human ortholog. We constructed yeast
strains expressing eight different Brugia malayi drug targets (as well as seven
of their human counterparts), and performed medium-throughput drug screens for
compounds that specifically inhibit the parasite enzymes. Using the Malaria Box
collection (400 compounds), we identified nine filarial specific inhibitors and
confirmed the antifilarial activity of five of these using in vitro assays
against Brugia pahangi.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We were able to functionally complement yeast deletions
with eight different Brugia malayi enzymes that represent potential drug targets.
We demonstrated that our yeast-based screening platform is efficient in
identifying compounds that can discriminate between human and filarial enzymes.
Hence, we are confident that we can extend our efforts to the construction of
strains with further filarial targets (in particular for those species that
cannot be cultivated in the laboratory), and perform high-throughput drug screens
to identify specific inhibitors of the parasite enzymes. By establishing
synergistic collaborations with researchers working directly on different
parasitic worms, we aim to aid antihelmintic drug development for both human and 
veterinary infections.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004401 
PMCID: PMC4727890
PMID: 26812604  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

