
1. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 1;11(2):e0148446. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148446.
eCollection 2016.

Evidence for the Nucleo-Apical Shuttling of a Beta-Catenin Like Plasmodium
falciparum Armadillo Repeat Containing Protein.

Mitra P(1), Gupta ED(1), Sahar T(1), Pandey AK(1), Dangi P(1), Reddy KS(1),
Chauhan VS(1), Gaur D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology 
(ICGEB), New Delhi, India.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vaccine Research, School of Biotechnology,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India.

Eukaryotic Armadillo (ARM) repeat proteins are multifaceted with prominent roles 
in cell-cell adhesion, cytoskeletal regulation and intracellular signaling among 
many others. One such ARM repeat containing protein, ARM Repeats Only (ARO), has 
recently been demonstrated in both Toxoplasma (TgARO) and Plasmodium (PfARO)
parasites to be targeted to the rhoptries during the late asexual stages. TgARO
has been implicated to play an important role in rhoptry positioning i.e.
directing the rhoptry towards the apical end of the parasite. Here, we report for
the first time that PfARO exhibits a DNA binding property and a dynamic
sub-cellular localization between the nucleus (early schizont) and rhoptry (late 
schizont) during the different stages of the asexual blood-stage life cycle.
PfARO possesses a putative nuclear export signal (NES) and the nucleo-apical
shuttling was sensitive to Leptomycin B (LMB) suggesting that the nuclear export 
was mediated by CRM1. Importantly, PfARO specifically bound an A-T rich DNA
sequence of the P. falciparum Gyrase A (PfgyrA) gene, suggesting that the DNA
binding specificity of PfARO is likely due to the AT-richness of the probe. This 
is a novel functional characteristic that has not been reported previously for
any P. falciparum ARM containing protein and suggests a putative role for PfARO
in gene regulation. This study describes for the first time a conserved P.
falciparum ARM repeat protein with a high degree of functional versatility.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148446 
PMCID: PMC4734682
PMID: 26828945  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

