
1. Acta Trop. 2016 May;157:131-5. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2016.02.002. Epub 2016 
Feb 6.

How heterogeneous is the involvement of ABC transporters against insecticides?

Porretta D(1), Epis S(2), Mastrantonio V(3), Ferrari M(4), Bellini R(5), Favia
G(6), Urbanelli S(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Biology, University "La Sapienza" of Rome, Italy. 
Electronic address: daniele.porretta@uniroma1.it.
(2)Department of Veterinary Science and Public Health, University of Milan,
Italy. Electronic address: sara.epis@unimi.it.
(3)Department of Environmental Biology, University "La Sapienza" of Rome, Italy. 
Electronic address: valentina.mastrantonio@uniroma1.it.
(4)Department of Veterinary Science and Public Health, University of Milan,
Italy. Electronic address: marco.ferrari@unimi.it.
(5)Agriculture Environment Centre "G. Nicoli", Crevalcore, Italy. Electronic
address: rbellini@caa.it.
(6)School of Bioscience and Veterinary Medicine, University of Camerino, Italy.
Electronic address: guido.favia@unicam.it.
(7)Department of Environmental Biology, University "La Sapienza" of Rome, Italy. 
Electronic address: sandra.urbanelli@uniroma1.it.

Understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying cellular defense against
xenobiotic compounds is a main research issue in medical and veterinary
entomology, as insecticide/acaricide resistance is a major threat in the control 
of arthropods. ABC transporters are recognized as a component of the detoxifying 
mechanism in arthropods. We investigated the possible involvement of ABC
transporters in defense to the organophosphate insecticide temephos in the
malarial vector Anopheles stephensi. We performed bioassays on larvae of An.
stephensi, using insecticide alone and in combination with ABC-transporter
inhibitors, to assess synergism between these compounds. Next, we investigated
the expression profiles of six ABC transporter genes in larvae exposed to
temephos. Surprisingly, neither bioassays nor gene expression analyses provided
any evidence for a major role of ABC transporters in defense against temephos in 
An. stephensi. We thus decided to review existing literature to generate a record
of other studies that failed to reveal a role for ABC transporters against
particular insecticides/acaricides. A review of the scientific literature led to 
the recovery of 569 papers about ABC transporters; among these, 50 involved
arthropods, and 10 reported negative results. Our study on An. stephensi and
accompanying literature review highlight the heterogeneity that exists in ABC
transporter involvement in defense/resistance mechanisms in arthropods.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2016.02.002 
PMID: 26855383  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

