
1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Feb 8;7:111. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00111. eCollection
2016.

Ionic Liquids as Unforeseen Assets to Fight Life-Threatening Mycotic Diseases.

Hartmann DO(1), Petkovic M(1), Silva Pereira C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica António Xavier, Universidade Nova 
de Lisboa Oeiras, Portugal.

Ionic liquids discovery has celebrated 100 years. They consist solely of ions,
one of which is typically organic and asymmetrical. Remarkable physical and
chemical properties stirred their use as alternative solvents in many chemical
processes. The recent demonstration of their occurrence in nature might boost
their interest in biological sciences. In the search of mechanistic
understandings of ionic liquids' ecotoxicological impacts in fungi, we have
analyzed the proteome, transcriptome, and metabolome responses to this chemical
stress. Data illuminated new hypotheses that altered our research path - exploit 
ionic liquids as tools for the discovery of pathways and metabolites that may
impact fungal development and pathogenicity. As we get closer to solve the
primary effects of each ionic liquid family and their specific gene targets, the 
vision of developing antifungal ionic liquids and/or materials, by taking
advantage of elegant progresses in this field, might become a reality.
Task-designed formulations may improve the performance of conventional antifungal
drugs, build functional coatings for reducing allergens production, or aid in the
recovery of antifungal plant polymers. The frontier research in this
cross-disciplinary field may provide us unforeseen means to address the global
concern of mycotic diseases. Pathogenic and opportunistic fungi are responsible
for numerous infections, killing annually nearly 1.5 million immunocompromised
individuals worldwide, a similar rate to malaria or tuberculosis. This
perspective will review our major findings and current hypotheses,
contextualizing how they might bring us closer to efficient strategies to prevent
and fight mycotic diseases.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00111 
PMCID: PMC4744837
PMID: 26903990 

