
1. Parasit Vectors. 2016 Feb 27;9:109. doi: 10.1186/s13071-016-1394-8.

Investigating associations between biting time in the malaria vector Anopheles
arabiensis Patton and single nucleotide polymorphisms in circadian clock genes:
support for sub-structure among An. arabiensis in the Kilombero valley of
Tanzania.

Maliti DV(1)(2)(3), Marsden CD(4), Main BJ(5), Govella NJ(6), Yamasaki Y(7),
Collier TC(8), Kreppel K(9), Chiu JC(10), Lanzaro GC(11), Ferguson HM(12), Lee
Y(13).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health and Ecological Sciences Thematic Group, Ifakara Health
Institute, Ifakara, Morogoro, Tanzania. dmaliti@ihi.or.tz.
(2)Nelson Mandela African Institute of Science and Technology Tanzania, School of
Life Sciences, Arusha, Tanzania. dmaliti@ihi.or.tz.
(3)Institute of Biodiversity Animal Health and Comparative Medicine, University
of Glasgow, Glasgow, Lancashire, UK. dmaliti@ihi.or.tz.
(4)School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California Davis, Davis, CA, USA.
cmarsdenresearch@gmail.com.
(5)School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California Davis, Davis, CA, USA.
bmain@usc.edu.
(6)Environmental Health and Ecological Sciences Thematic Group, Ifakara Health
Institute, Ifakara, Morogoro, Tanzania. govella@ihi.or.tz.
(7)School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California Davis, Davis, CA, USA.
ykyamasaki@ucdavis.edu.
(8)School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California Davis, Davis, CA, USA.
travcollier@gmail.com.
(9)Institute of Biodiversity Animal Health and Comparative Medicine, University
of Glasgow, Glasgow, Lancashire, UK. kkreppel@ihi.or.tz.
(10)Department of Entomology and Nematology, University of California Davis,
Davis, CA, USA. jcchiu@ucdavis.edu.
(11)School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California Davis, Davis, CA,
USA. gclanzaro@gmail.com.
(12)Department of Entomology and Nematology, University of California Davis,
Davis, CA, USA. Heather.Ferguson@glasgow.ac.uk.
(13)School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California Davis, Davis, CA,
USA. yoosook.lee@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: There is growing evidence that the widespread use of Long-Lasting
Insecticidal Nets (LLINs) is prompting malaria vectors to shift their biting
towards times and places where people are not protected, such as earlier in the
evening and/or outdoors. It is uncertain whether these behavioural shifts are due
to phenotypic plasticity and/or ecological changes within vector communities that
favour more exophilic species, or involve genetic factors within vector species
to limit their contact with LLINs. Possibly variation in the time and location of
mosquito biting has a genetic basis, but as yet this phenomenon has received
little investigation. Here we used a candidate gene approach to investigate
whether polymorphisms in selected circadian clock genes could explain variation
in the time and location of feeding (indoors versus outside) within a natural
population of the major African malaria vector Anopheles arabiensis.
METHODS: Host-seeking An. arabiensis were collected from two villages (Lupiro and
Sagamaganga) in Tanzania by Human Landing Catch (HLC) technique. Mosquitoes were 
classified into phenotypes of "early" (7 pm-10 pm) or "late" biting (4 am -7 am),
and host-seeking indoors or outdoors. In these samples we genotyped 34 coding
SNPs in 8 clock genes (PER, TIM, CLK, CYC, PDP1, VRI, CRY1, and CRY2), and tested
for associations between these SNPs and biting phenotypes. SNPs in 8
mitochondrial genes (ATP6, ATP8, COX1, COX2, COX3, ND3, ND5 and CYTB) were also
genotyped to test population subdivision within An. arabiensis.
RESULTS: The candidate clock genes exhibited polymorphism within An. arabiensis, 
but it was unrelated to variation in the timing and location of their biting
activity. However, there was evidence of strong genetic structure within An.
arabiensis populations in association with the TIM, which was unrelated to
geographic distance. Substructure within An. arabiensis was also detected using
mitochondrial markers.
CONCLUSIONS: The variable timing and location of biting in An. arabiensis could
not be linked to candidate clock genes that are known to influence behaviour in
other Diptera. This finding does not rule out the possibility of a genetic basis 
to biting behaviour in this malaria vector, but suggests these are complex
phenotypes that require more intensive ecological, neuronal and genomic analyses 
to understand.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-016-1394-8 
PMCID: PMC4769569
PMID: 26920563  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

