
1. Malar J. 2016 Mar 9;15:150. doi: 10.1186/s12936-016-1189-6.

Expression of complement and toll-like receptor pathway genes is associated with 
malaria severity in Mali: a pilot case control study.

Sobota RS(1)(2), Dara A(3)(4), Manning JE(5), Niangaly A(6), Bailey JA(7), Kone
AK(8), Thera MA(9), Djimdé AA(10), Vernet G(11), Leissner P(12), Williams SM(13),
Plowe CV(14), Doumbo OK(15).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt Genetics
Institute, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA. rafal4484@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine, Dartmouth College, Hanover,
NH, USA. rafal4484@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Epidemiology of Parasitic Diseases, Malaria Research and
Training Center, University of Sciences, Techniques and Technology of Bamako,
Bamako, Mali. tonydara@gmail.com.
(4)Division of Malaria Research, Institute for Global Health, University of
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. tonydara@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
jess.manning@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Epidemiology of Parasitic Diseases, Malaria Research and
Training Center, University of Sciences, Techniques and Technology of Bamako,
Bamako, Mali. abniangaly@gmail.com.
(7)Division of Malaria Research, Institute for Global Health, University of
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. Jbail006@umaryland.edu.
(8)Department of Epidemiology of Parasitic Diseases, Malaria Research and
Training Center, University of Sciences, Techniques and Technology of Bamako,
Bamako, Mali. fankone@icermali.org.
(9)Department of Epidemiology of Parasitic Diseases, Malaria Research and
Training Center, University of Sciences, Techniques and Technology of Bamako,
Bamako, Mali. mthera@icermali.org.
(10)Department of Epidemiology of Parasitic Diseases, Malaria Research and
Training Center, University of Sciences, Techniques and Technology of Bamako,
Bamako, Mali. adjimde@icermali.org.
(11)Pasteur Institute of Cameroon, Yaounde, Cameroon, Fondation Merieux, Lyon,
France. vernet@pasteur-yaounde.org.
(12)BioMerieux, Grenoble, France. philippe.leissner@biomerieux.com.
(13)Department of Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine, Dartmouth College,
Hanover, NH, USA. Scott.Williams@dartmouth.edu.
(14)Division of Malaria Research, Institute for Global Health, University of
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. cplowe@medicine.umaryland.edu.
(15)Department of Epidemiology of Parasitic Diseases, Malaria Research and
Training Center, University of Sciences, Techniques and Technology of Bamako,
Bamako, Mali. okd@icermali.org.

BACKGROUND: The host response to infection by Plasmodium falciparum, the parasite
most often responsible for severe malaria, ranges from asymptomatic parasitaemia 
to death. The clinical trajectory of malaria is influenced by host genetics and
parasite load, but the factors determining why some infections produce
uncomplicated malaria and some proceed to severe disease remain incompletely
understood.
METHODS: To identify molecular markers of severe falciparum malaria, human gene
expression patterns were compared between children aged 6 months to 5 years with 
severe and uncomplicated malaria who were enrolled in a case-control study in
Bandiagara, Mali. Microarrays were used to obtain expression data on severe cases
and uncomplicated controls at the time of acute disease presentation (five
uncomplicated and five severe), 1 week after presentation (three uncomplicated
and three severe) and treatment initiation, and in the subsequent dry season
(late convalescence, four uncomplicated and four severe). This is a pilot study
for the first use of microarray technology in Mali.
RESULTS: Complement and toll-like receptor (TLR) pathways were differentially
expressed, with severe cases showing higher expression of the C1q, TLR2, TLR4,
TLR8, and CR1 genes. Other genes previously associated with malaria pathogenesis,
GZMB, FOS and HSPA6, were also higher among severe cases. TLR2, TLR4, TLR8, CR1, 
GZMB, FOS, and HSPA6 genes were expressed at lower levels in severe cases at late
convalescence.
CONCLUSIONS: Overexpression of genes previously associated with uncomplicated
malaria was associated with severe disease. Low baseline expression of these
genes may represent candidate markers for severe malaria. Despite the small
sample size, results of this pilot study offer promising targets for follow-up
analyses.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-016-1189-6 
PMCID: PMC4784286
PMID: 26961973  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

