
1. Malar J. 2016 Apr 12;15:206. doi: 10.1186/s12936-016-1258-x.

Plasmodium copy number variation scan: gene copy numbers evaluation in haploid
genomes.

Beghain J(1), Langlois AC(2), Legrand E(3), Grange L(4), Khim N(2), Witkowski
B(2), Duru V(2), Ma L(5), Bouchier C(5), Ménard D(2), Paul RE(4), Ariey F(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Génome et Génomique des Insectes Vecteurs, Paris, France.
johann.beghain@wanadoo.fr.
(2)Institut Pasteur du Cambodge, Epidémiologie Moléculaire du Paludisme, Phnom
Penh, Cambodia.
(3)Institut Pasteur, Génome et Génomique des Insectes Vecteurs, Paris, France.
(4)Institut Pasteur, Génétique Fonctionnelle des Maladies Infectieuses, Paris,
France.
(5)Institut Pasteur, Plate Forme Génomique, Paris, France.
(6)INSERM U 1016, Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes Sorbonne Paris
Cité, Faculté de Médecine, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: In eukaryotic genomes, deletion or amplification rates have been
estimated to be a thousand more frequent than single nucleotide variation. In
Plasmodium falciparum, relatively few transcription factors have been identified,
and the regulation of transcription is seemingly largely influenced by gene
amplification events. Thus copy number variation (CNV) is a major mechanism
enabling parasite genomes to adapt to new environmental changes.
METHODS: Currently, the detection of CNVs is based on quantitative PCR (qPCR),
which is significantly limited by the relatively small number of genes that can
be analysed at any one time. Technological advances that facilitate whole-genome 
sequencing, such as next generation sequencing (NGS) enable deeper analyses of
the genomic variation to be performed. Because the characteristics of Plasmodium 
CNVs need special consideration in algorithms and strategies for which classical 
CNV detection programs are not suited a dedicated algorithm to detect CNVs across
the entire exome of P. falciparum was developed. This algorithm is based on a
custom read depth strategy through NGS data and called PlasmoCNVScan.
RESULTS: The analysis of CNV identification on three genes known to have
different levels of amplification and which are located either in the nuclear,
apicoplast or mitochondrial genomes is presented. The results are correlated with
the qPCR experiments, usually used for identification of locus specific
amplification/deletion.
CONCLUSIONS: This tool will facilitate the study of P. falciparum genomic
adaptation in response to ecological changes: drug pressure, decreased
transmission, reduction of the parasite population size (transition to
pre-elimination endemic area).

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-016-1258-x 
PMCID: PMC4828863
PMID: 27066902  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

