
1. Malar J. 2016 Apr 12;15:201. doi: 10.1186/s12936-016-1248-z.

A highly infectious Plasmodium yoelii parasite, bearing Plasmodium falciparum
circumsporozoite protein.

Zhang M(1)(2), Kaneko I(3), Tsao T(1), Mitchell R(4), Nardin EH(4), Iwanaga S(5),
Yuda M(6), Tsuji M(7).

Author information: 
(1)HIV and Malaria Vaccine Program, Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center, Affiliate
of The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY,
USA.
(3)Department of Medical Zoology, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine,
Tsu, Mie, Japan.
(4)Division of Parasitology, Department of Microbiology, New York University
School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(5)Department of Medical Zoology, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine,
Tsu, Mie, Japan. iwanaga@doc.medic.mie-u.ac.jp.
(6)Department of Medical Zoology, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine,
Tsu, Mie, Japan. m-yuda@doc.medic.mie-u.ac.jp.
(7)HIV and Malaria Vaccine Program, Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center, Affiliate
of The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA. mtsuji@adarc.org.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium circumsporozoite protein (CSP) is a major surface antigen 
present in the sporozoite (Spz) stage of a malaria parasite. RTS, S vaccine, the 
most clinically advanced malaria vaccine, consists of a large portion of
Plasmodium falciparum CSP (PfCSP). A highly infectious, recombinant rodent
malaria, Plasmodium yoelii parasite bearing a full-length PfCSP, PfCSP/Py Spz,
was needed as a tool to evaluate the role of PfCSP in mediating, protective,
anti-malaria immunity in a mouse model.
METHODS: A transgenic parasite, PfCSP/Py Spz, was generated by inserting a
construct expressing the PfCSP at the locus of the P. yoelii CSP gene by double
cross-over homologous recombination. Then the biological and protective
properties of PfCSP/Py Spz were determined.
RESULTS: This PfCSP/Py parasite produced up to 30,000 Spz in mosquito salivary
glands, which is equal or even higher than the number of Spz produced by
wild-type P. yoelii parasites. Five bites of PfCSP/Py-infected mosquitoes could
induce blood infection in BALB/c mice.
CONCLUSIONS: The current study has demonstrated a successful establishment of a
transgenic P. yoelii parasite clone that is able to express a full-length PfCSP, 
PfCSP/Py parasite. Importantly, this PfCSP/Py parasite can be as infectious as
the wild-type P. yoelii parasite both in mosquito vector and in mouse, a
mammalian host. A new transgenic parasite that expresses a full-length PfCSP may 
become a useful tool for researchers to investigate immunity against PfCSP in a
mouse model.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-016-1248-z 
PMCID: PMC4828769
PMID: 27068454  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

