
1. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2016 Apr;50(2):266-77.

[Detection of Echinococcus granulosus and Echinococcus multilocularis in cyst
samples using a novel single tube multiplex real-time polymerase chain reaction].

[Article in Turkish]

Can H, İnceboz T, Caner A, Atalay Şahar E, Karakavuk M, Döşkaya M(1), Çelebi F,
Değirmenci Döşkaya A, Gülçe İz S, Gürüz Y, Korkmaz M.

Author information: 
(1)Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Parasitology, Izmir, Turkey.
mert.doskaya@ege.edu.tr.

Cystic echinococcosis (CE) and alveolar echinococcosis (AE) caused by
Echinococcus granulosus and Echinococcus multilocularis, respectively, are
important helminthic diseases worldwide as well as in our country.
Epidemiological studies conducted in Turkey showed that the prevalence of CE is
291-585/100.000. It has also been showed that the seroprevalence of AE is 3.5%.
For the diagnosis of CE and AE, radiological (ultrasonography, computed
tomography, magnetic resonance) and serological methods, in addition to clinical 
findings, are being used. The definitive diagnosis relies on pathological
examination When the hydatid cysts are sterile or does not contain protoscolex,
problems may occur during pathological discrimination of E.granulosus and
E.multilocularis species. In this study, we aimed to develop a novel multiplex
real-time polymerase chain reaction (M-RT-PCR) targeting mitochondrial 12S rRNA
gene of E.granulosus and E.multilocularis using Echi S
(5'-TTTATGAATATTGTGACCCTGAGAT-3') and Echi A (5'-GGTCTTAACTCAACTCATGGAG-3')
primers and three different probes; Anchor Ech
(5'-GTTTGCCACCTCGATGTTGACTTAG-fluoroscein-3'), Granulosus
(5'-LC640-CTAAGGTTTTGGTGTAGTAATTGATATTTT-phosphate-3') and Multilocularis
(5'-LC705-CTGTGATCTTGGTGTAGTAGTTGAGATT-phosphate-3') that will enable the
diagnosis of CE and AE in same assay. During M-RTR-PCR, plasmids containing
E.granulosus (GenBank: AF297617.1) and E.multilocularis (GenBank: NC_000928.2)
mitochondrial 12S rRNA regions were used as positive controls. Cysts samples of
patients which were pathologically confirmed to be CE (n: 10) and AE (n: 15) and 
healthy human DNA samples (n: 25) as negative control as well as DNA samples of
12 different parasites (Taenia saginata, Hymenolepis nana, Trichuris trichiura,
Fasciola hepatica, Enterobius vermicularis, Toxoplasma gondii, Pneumocystis
jirovecii, Trichomonas vaginalis, Cryptosporidium hominis, Strongyloides
stercoralis, Plasmodium falciparum, Plasmodium vivax) were used to develop
M-RT-PCR. E.granulosus and E.multilocularis control plasmids were constructed to 
detect analytic sensitivity of the test using TOPO cloning. Positive control
plasmids were diluted to determine analytical sensitivity and specificity by
distilled water at 10(6)-10(5)-10(4)-10(3)-10(2)-10(1)-1 plasmid copy of dilution
in each reaction. According to the results, analytical sensitivity of the assay
for E.granulosus and E.multilocularis was 1 copy plasmid/µl reaction. The
non-existence of cross reactivity with 12 different parasites' DNA samples showed
the analytical specificity of the assay. Displaying Echinococcus DNA in cyst
samples among 25 patients and species discrimination as well as non-existence of 
cross reactivity with human DNA samples showed that the clinical sensitivity and 
specificity of the assay were 100%. As a result, the M-RT-PCR developed in the
present study provided a sensitive, specific, rapid, and reliable method in the
diagnosis of echinococcosis and the discrimination of E.granulosus and
E.multilocularis from cyst samples.

DOI: 10.5578/mb.21005 
PMID: 27175499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

