
1. J Vector Borne Dis. 2016 Apr-Jun;53(2):149-55.

Molecular identification of Aedes aegypti mosquitoes from Pilani region of
Rajasthan, India.

Gupta K(1), Dhawan R(1), Kajla M(1), Kumar S(1), Jnanasiddhy B(1), Singh NK(1),
Dixit R(2), Bihani A(1), Gupta L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Parasitology and Vector Biology Laboratory, Department of Biological
Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS), Pilani, Rajasthan,
India.
(2)Host-Parasite Interaction Biology Group, National Institute of Malaria
Research, New Delhi, India.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVES: Aedes aegypti is the most important vector of dengue
virus infection in humans worldwide. Accurate identification and colonization are
the essential requirements to understand vector biology as well as its diseases
transmission potential. In this study, we have used molecular approaches for the 
identification of Ae. aegypti mosquitoes that were collected from the Pilani
region of Rajasthan, India Methods: Field collected mosquito larvae were
colonized under laboratory conditions. Conserved genetic markers, ITS-2 and mtCOI
were used for amplification through species-specific primers to identify the
mosquito species/ strain. Sequencing result of this strain was phylogenetically
compared with other global strains through MEGA software.
RESULTS: A comprehensive multiple sequence alignment and phylogenetic analysis
revealed that COI gene of Ae. aegypti has extremely low genetic variability with 
one of the Indian isolate from Thirumala, Andhra Pradesh region (GenBank:
HM807262.1). However, in context of different geographical locations, it
indicated close similarity with Thailand's strain and high variability when
compared with Madagascar strain. On the other hand, ITS-2 illustrated highest
identity with Ae. aegypti of Saudi Arabia (GenBank: JX423807.1) whereas, high
divergence was observed from Mayotte, France strain (GenBank: KF135506).
INTERPRETATION & CONCLUSION: The findings suggest that this isolate from
Rajasthan is similar to other Asian continent strains possibly due to the same
origin. Understanding the vectorial capacity of these geographically distributed 
mosquito strains will enhance our knowledge to improve existing vector
surveillance and control programme.


PMID: 27353585  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

