
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Jul 7;6:29185. doi: 10.1038/srep29185.

A novel Plasmodium falciparum rhoptry associated adhesin mediates erythrocyte
invasion through the sialic-acid dependent pathway.

Anand G(1), Reddy KS(1), Pandey AK(1), Mian SY(2), Singh H(1), Mittal SA(1),
Amlabu E(1), Bassat Q(3)(4), Mayor A(3)(4), Chauhan VS(1), Gaur D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology 
(ICGEB), New Delhi, India.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vaccine Research, School of Biotechnology,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India.
(3)ISGlobal, Barcelona Ctr. Int. Health Res. (CRESIB), Hospital Clínic -
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Centro de Investigação em Saude de Manhiça (CISM), Maputo, Mozambique.

Erythrocyte invasion by Plasmodium falciparum merozoites is central to
blood-stage infection and malaria pathogenesis. This intricate process is
coordinated by multiple parasite adhesins that bind erythrocyte receptors and
mediate invasion through several alternate pathways. P. falciparum expresses 2700
genes during the blood-stages, of which the identity and function of many remains
unknown. Here, we have identified and characterized a novel P. falciparum rhoptry
associated adhesin (PfRA) that mediates erythrocyte invasion through the
sialic-acid dependent pathway. PfRA appears to play a significant functional role
as it is conserved across different Plasmodium species. It is localized in the
rhoptries and further translocated to the merozoite surface. Both native and
recombinant PfRA specifically bound erythrocytes in a sialic-acid dependent,
chymotrypsin and trypsin resistant manner, which was abrogated by PfRA antibodies
confirming a role in erythrocyte invasion. PfRA antibodies inhibited erythrocyte 
invasion and in combination with antibodies against other parasite ligands
produced an additive inhibitory effect, thus validating its important role in
erythrocyte invasion. We have thus identified a novel P. falciparum adhesin that 
binds with a sialic acid containing erythrocyte receptor. Our observations
substantiate the strategy to block P. falciparum erythrocyte invasion by
simultaneously targeting multiple conserved merozoite antigens involved in
alternate invasion pathways.

DOI: 10.1038/srep29185 
PMCID: PMC4935899
PMID: 27383149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

