
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016 Jul 13;10(7):e0004771. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0004771. eCollection 2016 Jul.

Molecular Diversity between Salivary Proteins from New World and Old World Sand
Flies with Emphasis on Bichromomyia olmeca, the Sand Fly Vector of Leishmania
mexicana in Mesoamerica.

Abdeladhim M(1), V Coutinho-Abreu I(1), Townsend S(1), Pasos-Pinto S(2), Sanchez 
L(2), Rasouli M(1), B Guimaraes-Costa A(1), Aslan H(3), Francischetti IM(4),
Oliveira F(1), Becker I(2), Kamhawi S(1), Ribeiro JM(4), Jochim RC(1), Valenzuela
JG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vector Molecular Biology Section, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Rockville, Maryland, United States of America.
(2)Unidad de Investigación en Medicina Experimental, Centro de Medicina Tropical,
Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México City,
Mexico.
(3)Faculty of Health Science, Selahaddin Eyyubi University, Diyarbakir, Turkey.
(4)Vector Biology Section, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Rockville, Maryland, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Sand fly saliva has been shown to have proteins with potent
biological activities, salivary proteins that can be used as biomarkers of vector
exposure, and salivary proteins that are candidate vaccines against different
forms of leishmaniasis. Sand fly salivary gland transcriptomic approach has
contributed significantly to the identification and characterization of many of
these salivary proteins from important Leishmania vectors; however, sand fly
vectors in some regions of the world are still neglected, as Bichromomyia olmeca 
(formerly known as Lutzomyia olmeca olmeca), a proven vector of Leishmania
mexicana in Mexico and Central America. Despite the importance of this vector in 
transmitting Leishmania parasite in Mesoamerica there is no information on the
repertoire of B. olmeca salivary proteins and their relationship to salivary
proteins from other sand fly species.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: A cDNA library of the salivary glands of wild-caught B.
olmeca was constructed, sequenced, and analyzed. We identified transcripts
encoding for novel salivary proteins from this sand fly species and performed a
comparative analysis between B. olmeca salivary proteins and those from other
sand fly species. With this new information we present an updated catalog of the 
salivary proteins specific to New World sand flies and salivary proteins common
to all sand fly species. We also report in this work the anti-Factor Xa activity 
of Lofaxin, a salivary anticoagulant protein present in this sand fly species.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides information on the first transcriptome of a sand
fly from Mesoamerica and adds information to the limited repertoire of salivary
transcriptomes from the Americas. This comparative analysis also shows a fast
degree of evolution in salivary proteins from New World sand flies as compared
with Old World sand flies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004771 
PMCID: PMC4943706
PMID: 27409591  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

