
1. Mol Ecol. 2016 Sep;25(17):4234-46. doi: 10.1111/mec.13759. Epub 2016 Aug 10.

Landscape-scale variation in an anthropogenic factor shapes immune gene variation
within a wild population.

Gonzalez-Quevedo C(1)(2), Davies RG(1), Phillips KP(1)(3), Spurgin LG(1),
Richardson DS(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich Research
Park, Norwich, NR4 7TJ, UK.
(2)Grupo Ecología y Evolución de Vertebrados, Instituto de Biología, Facultad de 
Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de Antioquia, Calle 70 No. 52-21,
Medellín, Colombia.
(3)Evolutionary Biology Group, Institute of Environmental Biology, Faculty of
Biology, Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznań, Poland.

Understanding the spatial scale at which selection acts upon adaptive genetic
variation in natural populations is fundamental to our understanding of
evolutionary ecology, and has important ramifications for conservation. The
environmental factors to which individuals of a population are exposed can vary
at fine spatial scales, potentially generating localized patterns of adaptation. 
Here, we compared patterns of neutral and major histocompatibility complex (MHC) 
variation within an island population of Berthelot's pipit (Anthus berthelotii)
to assess whether landscape-level differences in pathogen-mediated selection
generate fine-scale spatial structuring in these immune genes. Specifically, we
tested for spatial associations between the distribution of avian malaria, and
the factors previously shown to influence that distribution, and MHC variation
within resident individuals. Although we found no overall genetic structure
across the population for either neutral or MHC loci, we did find localized
associations between environmental factors and MHC variation. One MHC class I
allele (ANBE48) was directly associated with malaria infection risk, while the
presence of the ANBE48 and ANBE38 alleles within individuals correlated
(positively and negatively, respectively) with distance to the nearest poultry
farm, an anthropogenic factor previously shown to be an important determinant of 
disease distribution in the study population. Our findings highlight the
importance of considering small spatial scales when studying the patterns and
processes involved in evolution at adaptive loci.

© 2016 The Authors. Molecular Ecology Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.13759 
PMID: 27411090  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

