
1. Parasit Vectors. 2016 Jul 14;9(1):397. doi: 10.1186/s13071-016-1634-y.

Larval application of sodium channel homologous dsRNA restores pyrethroid
insecticide susceptibility in a resistant adult mosquito population.

Bona AC(1), Chitolina RF(1), Fermino ML(1), de Castro Poncio L(1), Weiss A(2),
Lima JB(3), Paldi N(2), Bernardes ES(1)(4), Henen J(2), Maori E(5).

Author information: 
(1)Forrest Brasil Tecnologia Ltda, Curitiba, PR, Brazil.
(2)Forrest Innovations Ltd, Caesarea, Israel.
(3)Instituto Oswaldo Cruz - Fiocruz, Laboratório de Fisiologia e Controle de
artrópodes vetores, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(4)Nuclear Energy Research Institute, Radiopharmacy Center, São Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Forrest Innovations Ltd, Caesarea, Israel. Eyal@forrestinnovations.com.

BACKGROUND: Mosquitoes host and pass on to humans a variety of disease-causing
pathogens such as infectious viruses and other parasitic microorganisms. The
emergence and spread of insecticide resistance is threatening the effectiveness
of current control measures for common mosquito vector borne diseases, such as
malaria, dengue and Zika. Therefore, the emerging resistance to the widely used
pyrethroid insecticides is an alarming problem for public health. Herein we
demonstrated the use of RNA interference (RNAi) to increase susceptibility of
adult mosquitoes to a widely used pyrethroid insecticide.
METHODS: Experiments were performed on a field-collected pyrethroid resistant
strain of Ae. aegypti (Rio de Janeiro; RJ). Larvae from the resistant Ae. aegypti
population were soaked with double-stranded RNAs (dsRNAs) that correspond either 
to voltage-gate sodium channel (VGSC), P-glycoprotein, or P450 detoxification
genes and reared to adulthood. Adult mortality rates in the presence of various
Deltamethrin pyrethroid concentrations were used to assess mosquito insecticide
susceptibility.
RESULTS: We characterized the RJ Ae. aegypti strain with regard to its level of
resistance to a pyrethroid insecticide and found that it was approximately 6
times more resistant to Deltamethrin compared to the laboratory Rockefeller
strain. The RJ strain displayed a higher frequency of Val1016Ile and Phe1534Cys
substitutions of the VGSC gene. The resistant strain also displayed a higher
basal expression level of VGSC compared to the Rockefeller strain. When
dsRNA-treated mosquitoes were subjected to a standard pyrethroid contact
bioassay, only dsRNA targeting VGSC increased the adult mortality of the
pyrethroid resistant strain. The dsRNA treatment proved effective in increasing
adult mosquito susceptibility over a range of pyrethroid concentrations and these
results were associated with dsRNA-specific small interfering RNAs in treated
adults, and the corresponding specific down regulation of VGSC gene expression
level. Finally, we demonstrated that the efficiency of our approach was further
improved by 'tiling' along the VGSC gene in order to identify the most potent
dsRNA sequences.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that dsRNA applied to mosquito larvae
retains its biological activity into adulthood. Thus, the RNAi system reported
here could be a useful approach to control the widespread insecticide resistance 
in mosquitoes and other insect vectors of human diseases.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-016-1634-y 
PMCID: PMC4946210
PMID: 27416771  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

