
1. Malar J. 2016 Aug 11;15(1):407. doi: 10.1186/s12936-016-1421-4.

Spatial distributions of Anopheles species in relation to malaria incidence at 70
localities in the highly endemic Northwest and South Pacific coast regions of
Colombia.

Ahumada ML(1)(2), Orjuela LI(3), Pareja PX(3), Conde M(4), Cabarcas DM(5),
Cubillos EF(6), Lopez JA(7), Beier JC(8), Herrera S(6), Quiñones ML(4).

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Entomología, Instituto Nacional de Salud, Bogotá, DC, Colombia.
mahumada@ins.gov.co.
(2)Departamento de Salud Pública, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Nacional de
Colombia, Bogotá, DC, Colombia. mahumada@ins.gov.co.
(3)Grupo de Entomología, Instituto Nacional de Salud, Bogotá, DC, Colombia.
(4)Departamento de Salud Pública, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Nacional de
Colombia, Bogotá, DC, Colombia.
(5)Secretaria de Desarrollo de la Salud de Córdoba, Córdoba, Colombia.
(6)Caucaseco Scientific Research Center/Immunology Institute, Universidad del
Valle, Cali, Colombia.
(7)Instituto Departamental de Salud de Nariño, Nariño, Colombia.
(8)Department of Public Health Sciences, Miller School of Medicine, University of
Miami, Miami, FL, USA.

BACKGROUND: A proper identification of malaria vectors is essential for any
attempt to control this disease. Between 40 and 47 Anopheles species have been
recorded in Colombia, and eight species complexes have been identified in the
last decade. An update of Anopheles species distribution and its relationship
with malaria is required, particularly for newly identified members of species
complexes.
METHODS: A cross-sectional entomological study was conducted at 70 localities in 
the highest malaria transmission areas in Colombia. In each locality, immature
and adult mosquitoes were collected. All specimens were determined using
morphological characters and confirmed used restriction profiles of Internal
Transcribed Spacer 2 (PCR-RFLP-ITS2), and Cytochrome c Oxidase I (COI) sequence
gene. To detect natural Plasmodium infections, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
and nested PCR analysis were used. Distribution of Anopheles species was
spatially associated with malaria incidence.
RESULTS: A total of 1736 larvae and 12,052 adult mosquitoes were determined in
the 70 localities. Thirteen Anopheles species were identified. COI sequence
analysis suggested 4 new lineages for Colombia: for Anopheles albimanus (An.
albimanus B), Anopheles pseudopunctipennis s.l., Anopheles neivai (An. neivai nr.
neivai 4), and Anopheles apicimacula. Two members of species complexes were
identified, as: Anopheles nuneztovari C, and Anopheles albitarsis I. Another
seven species were confirmed. Four mosquitoes were infected with Plasmodium
species, An. albimanus B and An. nuneztovari C. In Northwest of Colombia, An.
nuneztovari C, An. albimanus, and Anopheles darlingi were present in the
municipalities with highest annual parasitic index (API) (>35 cases/1000
inhabitants). In the north of South Pacific coast, with a similar API, An.
nuneztovari C were widely distributed inland, and the main species in coastal
regions were An. albimanus B and An. neivai s.l. In the South Pacific coast
bordering with Ecuador, 3 Anopheles species were found in municipalities with
high API (15-88 cases/1000 inhabitants): An. albimanus B, Anopheles calderoni and
An. neivai s.l.
CONCLUSIONS: In the highest malaria areas of Colombia, 13 Anopheles species and
four new lineages were found, which highlights the need for updating the species 
distribution. A DNA barcode analysis allowed the taxonomic identification to be
refined, particularly for species complexes, and to improve the further
understanding of their relation with malaria transmission.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-016-1421-4 
PMCID: PMC4981953
PMID: 27515166  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

