
1. Antiviral Res. 2016 Sep;133:223-33. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2016.08.010. Epub
2016 Aug 10.

Chloroquine inhibits lytic replication of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus
by disrupting mTOR and p38-MAPK activation.

Yang M(1), Huang L(1), Li X(2), Kuang E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Virology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Institute of Human Virology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: lixjuan3@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(3)Institute of Human Virology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou, China; Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Control (Sun
Yat-Sen University), Ministry of Education, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address:
kuangersh@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Lytic infection is essential for the persistent infection and pathogenesis of
Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV), and inhibiting KSHV lytic
replication may effectively prevent the occurrence of KSHV-related diseases.
Chloroquine (CQ), a well-known antimalarial drug and autophagy inhibitor, exerts 
broad-spectrum antiviral effects and shows anti-cancer therapeutic potential.
However, the ability of CQ and its derivatives to control infection of oncogenic 
γ-herpesvirus remains undefined. Here we reveal that CQ suppresses KSHV lytic
gene expression and virion production, and shows cytotoxicity toward KSHV
lytically infected B cells at clinically acceptable doses. CQ suppresses mTOR and
p38-MAPK pathway activation during KSHV lytic replication but not latent
infection. Furthermore, CQ blocks Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) lytic replication via 
a distinct mechanism that is invoked to block virion production but does not
affect viral gene expression. These results suggest that CQ is an effective
antiviral drug against KSHV lytic infection. Our findings indicate that CQ
treatment should be considered for controlling KSHV-related diseases,
particularly for primary use in co-infection of KSHV with malaria.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2016.08.010 
PMID: 27521848  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

