
1. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2016 Jul;50(3):484-90.

[The first monkey malaria in Turkey: a case of Plasmodium knowlesi].

[Article in Turkish]

Özbilgin A(1), Çavuş İ, Yıldırım A, Gündüz C.

Author information: 
(1)Celal Bayar University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Parasitology,
Manisa, Turkey. a.ozbilgin@yahoo.com.

Plasmodium knowlesi is now added to the known four Plasmodium species (P.vivax,
P.falciparum, P.malariae, P.ovale) as a cause of malaria in humans because of the
recent increasing rate of cases reported from countries of southeastern Asia.
P.knowlesi which infects macaque monkeys (Macaca fascicularis and M.nemestrina)
is transmitted to humans especially by Anopheles leucosphyrus and An.hackeri
mosquitos. First human cases of P.knowlesi malaria have been detected in Malaysia
which have reached high numbers in recent years and also have been reported from 
countries of Southeast Asia such as Thailand, Philippines, Myanmar, Singapore and
Vietnam. However the number of cases reported from western countries are rare and
limited only within voyagers. This report is the first presentation of an
imported case of P.knowlesi malaria in Turkey and aims to draw attention to the
point that it could also be detected in future. A 33-year-old male patient from
Myanmar who has migrated to Turkey as a refugee, was admitted to a health center 
with the complaints of fever with a periodicity of 24 hours, headache, fatigue,
cough, sore throat, anorexia, myalgia and arthralgia. He was prediagnosed as
upper respiratory tract infection, however because of his periodical fever and
background in Myanmar, thick and thin blood films were prepared and sent to our
laboratory for further examinations. Microscopic examination of the thin blood
films revealed erythrocytic stages compatible with P.knowlesi (three large early 
trophozoites in an erythrocyte, three late trophozoites with compact view, and
three late band-form trophozoites). Upon this, both real-time polymerase chain
reaction (Rt-PCR) targeting the small subunit ribosomal RNA (SSU-rRNA) genes of
Plasmodium genus and DNA sequence analysis targeting P.knowlesi rRNA gene were
performed. As a result, the suspected identification of P.knowlesi by microscopy 
was confirmed by Rt-PCR and DNA sequencing. The patient was treated with
chloroquine and primaquine combination and in the follow-up on the seventh day
after the treatment, his parasitemia and symptoms had ceased. Although there were
some previous reports concerning about imported patients infected with different 
Plasmodium species in our country, no cases of P.knowlesi have been reported.
This first case presented here emphasizes the occurence of P.knowlesi malaria in 
Turkey hereinafter due to the increasing number of refugees.

DOI: 10.5578/mb.27788 
PMID: 27525405  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

