
1. Mol Biol Evol. 2016 Dec;33(12):3108-3132. Epub 2016 Sep 7.

Evolutionary Dynamics of Abundant Stop Codon Readthrough.

Jungreis I(1)(2), Chan CS(1)(2), Waterhouse RM(1)(2)(3)(4), Fields G(5), Lin
MF(6), Kellis M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Cambridge, MA
iljungr@csail.mit.edu manoli@mit.edu.
(2)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA.
(3)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical
School, rue Michel-Servet 1, Geneva, Switzerland.
(4)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, rue Michel-Servet 1, Geneva, Switzerland.
(5)MIT, Cambridge, MA iljungr@csail.mit.edu manoli@mit.edu.
(6)DNAnexus, Mountain View, CA iljungr@csail.mit.edu manoli@mit.edu.

Translational stop codon readthrough emerged as a major regulatory mechanism
affecting hundreds of genes in animal genomes, based on recent comparative
genomics and ribosomal profiling evidence, but its evolutionary properties remain
unknown. Here, we leverage comparative genomic evidence across 21 Anopheles
mosquitoes to systematically annotate readthrough genes in the malaria vector
Anopheles gambiae, and to provide the first study of abundant readthrough
evolution, by comparison with 20 Drosophila species. Using improved comparative
genomics methods for detecting readthrough, we identify evolutionary signatures
of conserved, functional readthrough of 353 stop codons in the malaria vector,
Anopheles gambiae, and of 51 additional Drosophila melanogaster stop codons,
including several cases of double and triple readthrough and of readthrough of
two adjacent stop codons. We find that most differences between the readthrough
repertoires of the two species arose from readthrough gain or loss in existing
genes, rather than birth of new genes or gene death; that readthrough-associated 
RNA structures are sometimes gained or lost while readthrough persists; that
readthrough is more likely to be lost at TAA and TAG stop codons; and that
readthrough is under continued purifying evolutionary selection in mosquito,
based on population genetic evidence. We also determine readthrough-associated
gene properties that predate readthrough, and identify differences in the
characteristic properties of readthrough genes between clades. We estimate more
than 600 functional readthrough stop codons in mosquito and 900 in fruit fly,
provide evidence of readthrough control of peroxisomal targeting, and refine the 
phylogenetic extent of abundant readthrough as following divergence from
centipede.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msw189 
PMCID: PMC5100048
PMID: 27604222  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

