
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2016 Nov 2;95(5):1077-1085. Epub 2016 Sep 6.

Genetic Diversity and Population Structure of Plasmodium falciparum in Lake
Victoria Islands, A Region of Intense Transmission.

Mulenge FM(1), Hunja CW(2), Magiri E(3), Culleton R(4), Kaneko A(5)(6), Aman
RA(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and
Technology, Nairobi, Kenya. felixmulenge@yahoo.com chunja@seku.ac.ke.
(2)South Eastern Kenya University, Kitui, Kenya. felixmulenge@yahoo.com
chunja@seku.ac.ke.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and
Technology, Nairobi, Kenya.
(4)Malaria Unit, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki,
Japan.
(5)Island Malaria Group, Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Department of Parasitology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka City
University, Osaka, Japan.
(7)Center for Research in Therapeutic Sciences, Strathmore University, Nairobi,
Kenya.
(8)African Center for Clinical Trials, Nairobi, Kenya.

Understanding the genetic structure and transmission dynamics of Plasmodium
falciparum parasites in malaria-endemic regions is crucial before the
implementation of interventions. Located in a high-transmission region of western
Kenya where P. falciparum is the predominant species, the Lake Victoria islands
are ideal for feasibility of malaria elimination studies. We analyzed genetic
variation in eight microsatellite loci to examine parasite population structure
and gene flow patterns across five sites. High levels of genetic diversity were
measured throughout the region (mean heterozygosity index = 0.84). The overall
fixation index value between the sites was 0.044, indicating that approximately
5% of the overall allelic variation is due to differences between the
populations. Based on these results, we concluded that parasite population
structure in the studied islands is shaped by human migration patterns that
maintain extensive parasite gene flow between the sites. Consequently, any
malaria elimination and interventions strategies in the study area will have to
be carried out broadly on all four islands and adjoining mainland region.

© The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.16-0383 
PMCID: PMC5094220
PMID: 27601522  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

