
1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Sep 21;7:1485. eCollection 2016.

Persistent Infection by Wolbachia wAlbB Has No Effect on Composition of the Gut
Microbiota in Adult Female Anopheles stephensi.

Chen S(1), Zhao J(2), Joshi D(1), Xi Z(1), Norman B(1), Walker ED(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing MI, USA.
(2)Department of Animal Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville AR, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, 
East LansingMI, USA; Department of Entomology, Michigan State University, East
LansingMI, USA.

The bacteria in the midgut of Anopheles stephensi adult females from laboratory
colonies were studied by sequencing the V4 region of 16S rRNA genes, with respect
to three experimental factors: stable or cured Wolbachia infection; sugar or
blood diet; and age. Proteobacteria and Bacteroidetes dominated the community
[>90% of operational taxonomic units (OTUs)]; most taxa were in the classes
Flavobacteriia, Gammaproteobacteria, and Alphaproteobacteria, and were assigned
to Elizabethkingia (46.9%), Asaia (6.4%) and Pseudomonas (6.0%), or unclassified 
Enterobacteriaceae (37.2%). Bacterial communities were similar between
Wolbachia-cured and Wolbachia-infected mosquito lines, indicating that the gut
microbiota were not dysregulated in the presence of Wolbachia. The proportion of 
Enterobacteriaceae was higher in mosquitoes fed a blood meal compared to those
provided a sugar meal. Collectively, the bacterial community had a similar
structure in older Wolbachia-infected mosquitoes 8 days after the blood meal, as 
in younger Wolbachia-infected mosquitoes before a blood meal, except that older
mosquitoes had a higher proportion of Enterobacteriaceae and lower proportion of 
Elizabethkingia. Consistent presence of certain predominant bacteria
(Elizabethkingia, Asaia, Pseudomonas, and Enterobacteriaceae) suggests they would
be useful for paratransgenesis to control malaria infection, particularly when
coupled to a Wolbachia-based intervention strategy.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01485 
PMCID: PMC5030273
PMID: 27708633 

