
1. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2016 Oct 6;70(0):1068-1086.

Can mutations in the gene encoding transcription factor EKLF (Erythroid
Krüppel-Like Factor) protect us against infectious and parasitic diseases?

Mikołajczyk K(1), Kaczmarek R(1), Czerwiński M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorium Immunochemii Glikokoniugatów, Instytut Immunologii i Terapii
Doświadczalnej PAN im. Ludwika Hirszfelda we Wrocławiu.
(2)Laboratorium Immunochemii Glikokoniugatów, Instytut Immunologii i Terapii
Doświadczalnej PAN im. Ludwika Hirszfelda we Wrocławiu; Wydział Wychowania
Fizycznego i Fizjoterapii, Politechnika Opolska, Opole.

Transcription factor EKLF (Erythroid Krüppel-Like Factor) belongs to the group of
Krüppellike factors, which regulate proliferation, differentiation, development
and apoptosis of mammalian cells. EKLF factor is present in erythroid cells,
where it participates in regulation of hematopoiesis, expression of genes
encoding transmembrane proteins (including blood group antigens), and heme
biosynthesis enzymes. It is also a key factor in downregulation of γ-globins and 
activation of β-globin gene expression. The EKLF factor consists of two domains: 
proline-rich transactivation domain and DNA-binding domain containing three zinc 
finger motifs, which recognize DNA. EKLF can act as a transcription activator
(for example in the case of β-globin gene) or repressor, which depends on the
type of posttranslational modification (phosphorylation, SUMOylation,
ubiquitination and acetylation). Mutations in the gene encoding EKLF may cause
hemoglobinopathies, such as hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin and
β-thalassemia intermedia, and congenital dyserythropoietic anemia type IV, which 
is a hematopoietic disorder. These changes may impede invasion of red blood cells
by malaria merozoites and cause faster removal of invaded erythrocytes. In
addition, mutations in KLF1 may decrease the number of erythrocyte surface
antigens that belong to blood group systems such as MN, P1PK, Lutheran, Duffy,
Diego and OK. Such antigens can be receptors for protozoans (such as Plasmodium
falciparum or Plasmodium vivax), bacteria (like uropathogenic strains of
Escherichia coli, Neisseria meningitidis), and toxins (Shiga toxins), which may
cause several dangerous diseases including malaria, pyelonephritis, hemorrhagic
colitis, hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) and meningitis. Here, we propose a
hypothesis on possible liaisons between mutations in the gene encoding EKLF and
resistance to pathogens.

DOI: 10.5604/17322693.1221384 
PMID: 27708211  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

