
1. PLoS One. 2016 Oct 6;11(10):e0164054. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0164054.
eCollection 2016.

Spatial Effects on the Multiplicity of Plasmodium falciparum Infections.

Karl S(1)(2)(3), White MT(1)(4), Milne GJ(5), Gurarie D(6), Hay SI(7)(8), Barry
AE(1)(2), Felger I(9)(10), Mueller I(1)(2)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Population-Based Biology Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical 
Research, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia.
(3)Vector-borne Diseases Unit, Papua New Guinea Insititute of Medical Research,
Madang, Madang Province, Papua New Guinea.
(4)MRC Centre for Outbreak Analysis & Modelling, Department of Infectious Disease
Epidemiology, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom.
(5)School of Computer Science and Software Engineering, The University of Western
Australia, Perth, WA, Australia.
(6)Department of Mathematics, Applied Mathematics and Statistics, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.
(7)Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, Seattle, Washington, United
States of America.
(8)Fogarty International Center, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, United States of America.
(9)Department of Medical Parasitology and Infection Biology Swiss Tropical and
Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland.
(10)University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(11)Malaria: Parasites and Hosts Unit, Department of Parasites & Insect Vectors, 
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

As malaria is being pushed back on many frontiers and global case numbers are
declining, accurate measurement and prediction of transmission becomes
increasingly difficult. Low transmission settings are characterised by high
levels of spatial heterogeneity, which stands in stark contrast to the widely
used assumption of spatially homogeneous transmission used in mathematical
transmission models for malaria. In the present study an individual-based
mathematical malaria transmission model that incorporates multiple parasite
clones, variable human exposure and duration of infection, limited mosquito
flight distance and most importantly geographically heterogeneous human and
mosquito population densities was used to illustrate the differences between
homogeneous and heterogeneous transmission assumptions when aiming to predict
surrogate indicators of transmission intensity such as population parasite
prevalence or multiplicity of infection (MOI). In traditionally highly malaria
endemic regions where most of the population harbours malaria parasites, humans
are often infected with multiple parasite clones. However, studies have shown
also in areas with low overall parasite prevalence, infection with multiple
parasite clones is a common occurrence. Mathematical models assuming homogeneous 
transmission between humans and mosquitoes cannot explain these observations.
Heterogeneity of transmission can arise from many factors including acquired
immunity, body size and occupational exposure. In this study, we show that
spatial heterogeneity has a profound effect on predictions of MOI and parasite
prevalence. We illustrate, that models assuming homogeneous transmission
underestimate average MOI in low transmission settings when compared to field
data and that spatially heterogeneous models predict stable transmission at much 
lower overall parasite prevalence. Therefore it is very important that models
used to guide malaria surveillance and control strategies in low transmission and
elimination settings take into account the spatial features of the specific
target area, including human and mosquito vector distribution.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0164054 
PMCID: PMC5053403
PMID: 27711149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

