
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2016 Nov 21;60(12):7407-7414. Print 2016 Dec.

A Novel Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer-Based Screen in High-Throughput
Format To Identify Inhibitors of Malarial and Human Glucose Transporters.

Kraft TE(1), Heitmeier MR(2), Putanko M(2), Edwards RL(2), Ilagan MX(3), Payne
MA(2), Autry JM(4), Thomas DD(4), Odom AR(2)(5), Hruz PW(1)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA thomas.e.kraft@gmail.com hruz_p@kids.wustl.edu.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA.
(3)High Throughput Screening Core, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, Missouri, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(5)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(6)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.

The glucose transporter PfHT is essential to the survival of the malaria parasite
Plasmodium falciparum and has been shown to be a druggable target with high
potential for pharmacological intervention. Identification of compounds against
novel drug targets is crucial to combating resistance against current
therapeutics. Here, we describe the development of a cell-based assay system
readily adaptable to high-throughput screening that directly measures compound
effects on PfHT-mediated glucose transport. Intracellular glucose concentrations 
are detected using a genetically encoded fluorescence resonance energy transfer
(FRET)-based glucose sensor. This allows assessment of the ability of small
molecules to inhibit glucose uptake with high accuracy (Z' factor of >0.8),
thereby eliminating the need for radiolabeled substrates. Furthermore, we have
adapted this assay to counterscreen PfHT hits against the human orthologues
GLUT1, -2, -3, and -4. We report the identification of several hits after
screening the Medicines for Malaria Venture (MMV) Malaria Box, a library of 400
compounds known to inhibit erythrocytic development of P. falciparum Hit
compounds were characterized by determining the half-maximal inhibitory
concentration (IC50) for the uptake of radiolabeled glucose into isolated P.
falciparum parasites. One of our hits, compound MMV009085, shows high potency and
orthologue selectivity, thereby successfully validating our assay for
antimalarial screening.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00218-16 
PMCID: PMC5119023
PMID: 27736766  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

