
1. Malar J. 2016 Oct 18;15(1):501.

Size polymorphism and low sequence diversity in the locus encoding the Plasmodium
vivax rhoptry neck protein 4 (PvRON4) in Colombian isolates.

Buitrago SP(1)(2), Garzón-Ospina D(1)(3), Patarroyo MA(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Fundación Instituto de Inmunología de Colombia (FIDIC), Carrera 50 No. 26-20, 
Bogotá D.C., Colombia.
(2)Microbiology Postgraduate Program, Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Bogotá
D.C., Colombia.
(3)School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universidad del Rosario, Bogotá D.C., 
Colombia.
(4)Fundación Instituto de Inmunología de Colombia (FIDIC), Carrera 50 No. 26-20, 
Bogotá D.C., Colombia. mapatarr.fidic@gmail.com.
(5)School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universidad del Rosario, Bogotá D.C., 
Colombia. mapatarr.fidic@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Designing a vaccine against Plasmodium vivax has focused on selecting
antigens involved in invasion mechanisms that must have domains with low
polymorphism for avoiding allele-specific immune responses. The rhoptry neck
protein 4 (RON4) forms part of the tight junction, which is essential in the
invasion of hepatocytes and/or erythrocytes; however, little is known about this 
locus' genetic diversity.
METHODS: DNA sequences from 73 Colombian clinical isolates from pvron4 gene were 
analysed for characterizing their genetic diversity; pvron4 haplotype number and 
distribution, as well as the evolutionary forces determining diversity pattern,
were assessed by population genetics and molecular evolutionary approaches.
RESULTS: ron4 has low genetic diversity in P. vivax at sequence level; however, a
variable amount of tandem repeats at the N-terminal region leads to extensive
size polymorphism. This region seems to be exposed to the immune system. The
central region has a putative esterase/lipase domain which, like the protein's
C-terminal fragment, is highly conserved at intra- and inter-species level. Both 
regions are under purifying selection.
CONCLUSIONS: pvron4 is the locus having the lowest genetic diversity described to
date for P. vivax. The repeat regions in the N-terminal region could be
associated with immune evasion mechanisms while the central region and the
C-terminal region seem to be under functional or structural constraint. Bearing
such results in mind, the PvRON4 central and/or C-terminal portions represent
promising candidates when designing a subunit-based vaccine as they are aimed at 
avoiding an allele-specific immune response, which might limit vaccine efficacy.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-016-1563-4 
PMCID: PMC5069803
PMID: 27756311  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

