
1. mBio. 2016 Oct 18;7(5). pii: e01538-16. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01538-16.

Exported Epoxide Hydrolases Modulate Erythrocyte Vasoactive Lipids during
Plasmodium falciparum Infection.

Spillman NJ(1)(2), Dalmia VK(3), Goldberg DE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Molecular Microbiology, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA spillmannj@wustl.edu
dgoldberg@wustl.edu.
(2)Research School of Biology, The Australian National University, Canberra,
Australian Capital Territory, Australia.
(3)Departments of Medicine and Molecular Microbiology, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.

Comment in
    MBio. 2017 Mar 7;8(2):.
    MBio. 2017 Mar 7;8(2):.

Erythrocytes are reservoirs of important epoxide-containing lipid signaling
molecules, including epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs). EETs function as
vasodilators and anti-inflammatory modulators in the bloodstream. Bioactive EETs 
are hydrolyzed to less active diols (dihydroxyeicosatrienoic acids) by epoxide
hydrolases (EHs). The malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum infects host red
blood cells (RBCs) and exports hundreds of proteins into the RBC compartment. In 
this study, we show that two parasite epoxide hydrolases, P falciparum epoxide
hydrolases 1 (PfEH1) and 2 (PfEH2), both with noncanonical serine nucleophiles,
are exported to the periphery of infected RBCs. PfEH1 and PfEH2 were successfully
expressed in Escherichia coli, and they hydrolyzed physiologically relevant
erythrocyte EETs. Mutations in active site residues of PfEH1 ablated the ability 
of the enzyme to hydrolyze an epoxide substrate. Overexpression of PfEH1 or PfEH2
in parasite-infected RBCs resulted in a significant alteration in the epoxide
fatty acids stored in RBC phospholipids. We hypothesize that the parasite
disruption of epoxide-containing signaling lipids leads to perturbed vascular
function, creating favorable conditions for binding and sequestration of infected
RBCs to the microvascular endothelium.IMPORTANCE: The malaria parasite exports
hundreds of proteins into the erythrocyte compartment. However, for most of these
proteins, their physiological function is unknown. In this study, we investigate 
two "hypothetical" proteins of the α/β-hydrolase fold family that share sequence 
similarity with epoxide hydrolases (EHs)-enzymes that destroy bioactive epoxides.
Altering EH expression in parasite-infected erythrocytes resulted in a
significant change in the epoxide fatty acids stored in the host cell. We propose
that these EH enzymes may help the parasite to manipulate host blood vessel
opening and inflame the vessel walls as they pass through the circulation system.
Understanding how the malaria parasite interacts with its host RBCs will aid in
our ability to combat this deadly disease.

Copyright © 2016 Spillman et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01538-16 
PMCID: PMC5082902
PMID: 27795395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

