
1. PLoS Pathog. 2016 Nov 10;12(11):e1005976. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005976.
eCollection 2016 Nov.

Evolution of Fitness Cost-Neutral Mutant PfCRT Conferring P. falciparum
4-Aminoquinoline Drug Resistance Is Accompanied by Altered Parasite Metabolism
and Digestive Vacuole Physiology.

Gabryszewski SJ(1), Dhingra SK(1), Combrinck JM(2), Lewis IA(3), Callaghan PS(4),
Hassett MR(4), Siriwardana A(4), Henrich PP(1), Lee AH(1), Gnädig NF(1), Musset
L(5), Llinás M(6), Egan TJ(7), Roepe PD(4), Fidock DA(1)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, New York, United States of America.
(2)Division of Pharmacology, Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town,
Cape Town, South Africa.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta,
Canada.
(4)Departments of Chemistry and of Biochemistry and Cellular & Molecular Biology,
Georgetown University, Washington, DC, United States of America.
(5)Laboratoire de Parasitologie, WHO Collaborating Center for Surveillance of
Anti-Malarial Drug Resistance, Institut Pasteur de la Guyane, Cayenne, French
Guiana.
(6)Departments of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology and Chemistry, Center for
Malaria Research and Center for Infectious Diseases Dynamics, Pennsylvania State 
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(7)Department of Chemistry, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(8)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, New York, United States of America.

Southeast Asia is an epicenter of multidrug-resistant Plasmodium falciparum
strains. Selective pressures on the subcontinent have recurrently produced
several allelic variants of parasite drug resistance genes, including the P.
falciparum chloroquine resistance transporter (pfcrt). Despite significant
reductions in the deployment of the 4-aminoquinoline drug chloroquine (CQ), which
selected for the mutant pfcrt alleles that halted CQ efficacy decades ago, the
parasite pfcrt locus is continuously evolving. This is highlighted by the
presence of a highly mutated allele, Cam734 pfcrt, which has acquired the
singular ability to confer parasite CQ resistance without an associated fitness
cost. Here, we used pfcrt-specific zinc-finger nucleases to genetically dissect
this allele in the pathogenic setting of asexual blood-stage infection.
Comparative analysis of drug resistance and growth profiles of recombinant
parasites that express Cam734 or variants thereof, Dd2 (the most common Southeast
Asian variant), or wild-type pfcrt, revealed previously unknown roles for PfCRT
mutations in modulating parasite susceptibility to multiple antimalarial agents. 
These results were generated in the GC03 strain, used in multiple earlier pfcrt
studies, and might differ in natural isolates harboring this allele. Results
presented herein show that Cam734-mediated CQ resistance is dependent on the rare
A144F mutation that has not been observed beyond Southeast Asia, and reveal
distinct impacts of this and other Cam734-specific mutations on CQ resistance and
parasite growth rates. Biochemical assays revealed a broad impact of mutant PfCRT
isoforms on parasite metabolism, including nucleoside triphosphate levels,
hemoglobin catabolism and disposition of heme, as well as digestive vacuole
volume and pH. Results from our study provide new insights into the complex
molecular basis and physiological impact of PfCRT-mediated antimalarial drug
resistance, and inform ongoing efforts to characterize novel pfcrt alleles that
can undermine the efficacy of first-line antimalarial drug regimens.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005976 
PMCID: PMC5104409
PMID: 27832198  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

