
1. PLoS Pathog. 2016 Nov 16;12(11):e1005917. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005917.
eCollection 2016 Nov.

Variant Exported Blood-Stage Proteins Encoded by Plasmodium Multigene Families
Are Expressed in Liver Stages Where They Are Exported into the Parasitophorous
Vacuole.

Fougère A(1)(2), Jackson AP(3), Bechtsi DP(4), Braks JA(1), Annoura T(1)(5),
Fonager J(1)(6), Spaccapelo R(2), Ramesar J(1), Chevalley-Maurel S(1), Klop
O(1)(7), van der Laan AM(8), Tanke HJ(8), Kocken CH(7), Pasini EM(7), Khan SM(1),
Böhme U(9), van Ooij C(4), Otto TD(9), Janse CJ(1), Franke-Fayard B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Leiden Malaria Research Group, Parasitology, Center of infectious Diseases,
Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC), Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Perugia, Italy.
(3)Department of Infection Biology, Institute of Infection and Global Health,
University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UnitedKingdom.
(4)The Francis Crick Institute, Mill Hill Laboratory, Mill Hill, London,
UnitedKingdom.
(5)Department of Department of Parasitology, National Institute of Infectious
Diseases (NIID), Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Microbiological Diagnostics and Virology, Statens Serum
Institute, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(7)Biomedical Primate Research Centre (BPRC), Rijswijk, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC),
Leiden, The Netherlands.
(9)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, UnitedKingdom.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2016 Dec 14;12 (12 ):e1006107.
    PLoS Pathog. 2017 Jan 17;13(1):e1006128.

Many variant proteins encoded by Plasmodium-specific multigene families are
exported into red blood cells (RBC). P. falciparum-specific variant proteins
encoded by the var, stevor and rifin multigene families are exported onto the
surface of infected red blood cells (iRBC) and mediate interactions between iRBC 
and host cells resulting in tissue sequestration and rosetting. However, the
precise function of most other Plasmodium multigene families encoding exported
proteins is unknown. To understand the role of RBC-exported proteins of rodent
malaria parasites (RMP) we analysed the expression and cellular location by
fluorescent-tagging of members of the pir, fam-a and fam-b multigene families.
Furthermore, we performed phylogenetic analyses of the fam-a and fam-b multigene 
families, which indicate that both families have a history of functional
differentiation unique to RMP. We demonstrate for all three families that
expression of family members in iRBC is not mutually exclusive. Most tagged
proteins were transported into the iRBC cytoplasm but not onto the iRBC plasma
membrane, indicating that they are unlikely to play a direct role in iRBC-host
cell interactions. Unexpectedly, most family members are also expressed during
the liver stage, where they are transported into the parasitophorous vacuole.
This suggests that these protein families promote parasite development in both
the liver and blood, either by supporting parasite development within hepatocytes
and erythrocytes and/or by manipulating the host immune response. Indeed, in the 
case of Fam-A, which have a steroidogenic acute regulatory-related lipid transfer
(START) domain, we found that several family members can transfer
phosphatidylcholine in vitro. These observations indicate that these proteins may
transport (host) phosphatidylcholine for membrane synthesis. This is the first
demonstration of a biological function of any exported variant protein family of 
rodent malaria parasites.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005917 
PMCID: PMC5113031
PMID: 27851824  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

