
1. PLoS One. 2016 Dec 2;11(12):e0166814. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0166814.
eCollection 2016.

Molecular Markers of Radiation Induced Attenuation in Intrahepatic Plasmodium
falciparum Parasites.

Oakley MS(1), Verma N(1), Zheng H(2), Anantharaman V(3), Takeda K(4), Gao Y(4),
Myers TG(5), Pham PT(2), Mahajan B(2), Kumar N(6), Sangweme D(6), Tripathi AK(6),
Mlambo G(6), Aravind L(3), Kumar S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bacterial, Parasitic, and Allergenic Products, Center for
Biologics Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring,
Maryland, United States.
(2)Division of Emerging and Transfusion Transmitted Diseases, Center for
Biologics Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring,
Maryland, United States.
(3)National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine,
NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, United States.
(4)Division of Viral Products, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, Food
and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland, United States.
(5)Genomics Technologies Section, Research Technologies Branch, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, United
States.
(6)Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
Maryland, United States.

Experimental immunization with radiation attenuated sporozoites (RAS) and
genetically attenuated sporozoites has proved to be a promising approach for
malaria vaccine development. However, parasite biomarkers of growth attenuation
and enhanced immune protection in response to radiation remain poorly understood.
Here, we report on the effect of an attenuating dose of γ-irradiation (15 krad)
on the Plasmodium falciparum sporozoite (PfSPZ) ultrastructure by electron
microscopy, growth rate of liver stage P. falciparum in liver cell cultures, and 
genome-wide transcriptional profile of liver stage parasites by microarray. We
find that γ-irradiation treated PfSPZ retained a normal cellular structure except
that they were vacuous with a partially disrupted plasma membrane and inner
membrane complex. A similar infection rate was observed by γ-irradiation-treated 
and untreated PfSPZ in human HCO-4 liver cells (0.47% versus 0.49%, respectively)
on day 3 post-infection. In the microarray studies, cumulatively, 180 liver stage
parasite genes were significantly transcriptionally altered on day 3 and/or 6
post-infection. Among the transcriptionally altered biomarkers, we identified a
signature of seven candidate parasite genes that associated with functionally
diverse pathways that may regulate radiation induced cell cycle arrest of the
parasite within the hepatocyte. A repertoire of 14 genes associated with protein 
translation is transcriptionally overexpressed within the parasite by radiation. 
Additionally, 37 genes encode proteins expressed on the cell surface or exported 
into the host cell, 4 encode membrane associated transporters, and 10 encode
proteins related to misfolding and stress-related protein processing. These
results have significantly increased the repertoire of novel targets for 1)
biomarkers of safety to define proper attenuation, 2) generating genetically
attenuated parasite vaccine candidates, and 3) subunit candidate vaccines against
liver stage malaria.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0166814 
PMCID: PMC5135057
PMID: 27911910  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

