
1. J Proteome Res. 2017 Feb 3;16(2):368-383. doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b01052.
Epub 2017 Jan 3.

Proteomic Identification and Analysis of Arginine-Methylated Proteins of
Plasmodium falciparum at Asexual Blood Stages.

Zeeshan M(1)(2), Kaur I(1), Joy J(2), Saini E(1), Paul G(1), Kaushik A, Dabral
S(1), Mohmmed A(3), Gupta D(2), Malhotra P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Biology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology (ICGEB) , Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi 110067, India.
(2)Translational Bioinformatics Group, International Centre for Genetic
Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB) , Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi 110067,
India.
(3)Parasite Cell Biology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and 
Biotechnology (ICGEB) , Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi 110067, India.

Plasmodium falciparum undergoes a tightly regulated developmental process in
human erythrocytes, and recent studies suggest an important regulatory role of
post-translational modifications (PTMs). As compared with Plasmodium
phosphoproteome, little is known about other PTMs in the parasite. In the present
study, we performed a global analysis of asexual blood stages of Plasmodium
falciparum to identify arginine-methylated proteins. Using two different methyl
arginine-specific antibodies, we immunoprecipitated the arginine-methylated
proteins from the stage-specific parasite lysates and identified 843 putative
arginine-methylated proteins by LC-MS/MS. Motif analysis of the protein sequences
unveiled that the methylation sites are associated with the previously known
methylation motifs such as GRx/RGx, RxG, GxxR, or WxxxR. We identified Plasmodium
homologues of known arginine-methylated proteins in trypanosomes, yeast, and
human. Hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) was performed on the
immunoprecipitates from the trophozoite stage to enrich arginine-methylated
peptides. Mass spectrometry analysis of immunoprecipitated and HILIC fractions
identified 55 arginine-methylated peptides having 62 methylated arginine sites.
Functional classification revealed that the arginine-methylated proteins are
involved in RNA metabolism, protein synthesis, intracellular protein trafficking,
proteolysis, protein folding, chromatin organization, hemoglobin metabolic
process, and several other functions. Summarily, the findings suggest that
protein methylation of arginine residues is a widespread phenomenon in
Plasmodium, and the PTM may play an important regulatory role in a diverse set of
biological pathways, including host-pathogen interactions.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b01052 
PMID: 27933903  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

