
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jan 24;7:41108. doi: 10.1038/srep41108.

Overlap Extension Barcoding for the Next Generation Sequencing and Genotyping of 
Plasmodium falciparum in Individual Patients in Western Kenya.

Levitt B(1), Obala A(2), Langdon S(3), Corcoran D(4), O'Meara WP(5), Taylor
SM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(2)Moi University School of Medicine, College of Health Sciences, Nandi Rd,
Eldoret, Kenya.
(3)Duke University DNA Analysis Facility, Department of Immunology, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(4)Duke Center for Genomic and Computational Biology, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham NC, USA.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases and Duke Global Health Institute, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.

Large-scale molecular epidemiologic studies of Plasmodium falciparum parasites
have provided insights into parasite biology and transmission, can identify the
spread of drug resistance, and are useful in assessing vaccine targets. The
polyclonal nature infections in high transmission settings is problematic for
traditional genotyping approaches. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) approaches to
parasite genotyping allow sensitive detection of minority variants,
disaggregation of complex parasite mixtures, and scalable processing of large
samples sets. Therefore, we designed, validated, and applied to field parasites
an approach that leverages sequencing of individually barcoded samples in a
multiplex manner. We utilize variant barcodes, invariant linker sequences and
modular template-specific primers to allow for the simultaneous generation of
high-dimensional sequencing data of multiple gene targets. This modularity
permits a cost-effective and reproducible way to query many genes at once. In
mixtures of reference parasite genomes, we quantitatively detected unique
haplotypes comprising as little as 2% of a polyclonal infection. We applied this 
genotyping approach to field-collected parasites collected in Western Kenya in
order to simultaneously obtain parasites genotypes at three unlinked loci. In
summary, we present a rapid, scalable, and flexible method for genotyping
individual parasites that enables molecular epidemiologic studies of parasite
evolution, population structure and transmission.

DOI: 10.1038/srep41108 
PMCID: PMC5259759
PMID: 28117350  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

