
1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2017 Jan 26;13(1):e1005348. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005348. 
eCollection 2017 Jan.

THE REAL McCOIL: A method for the concurrent estimation of the complexity of
infection and SNP allele frequency for malaria parasites.

Chang HH(1), Worby CJ(1), Yeka A(2)(3), Nankabirwa J(3)(4), Kamya MR(3)(4),
Staedke SG(5), Dorsey G(6), Murphy M(6), Neafsey DE(7), Jeffreys AE(8), Hubbart
C(8), Rockett KA(8)(9), Amato R(9), Kwiatkowski DP(8)(9), Buckee CO(1),
Greenhouse B(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Communicable Disease Dynamics, Department of Epidemiology, Harvard 
T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States.
(2)Makerere University School of Public Health, College of Health Sciences,
Kampala, Uganda.
(3)Infectious Disease Research Collaboration, Kampala, Uganda.
(4)Department of Medicine, Makerere University College of Health Sciences,
Kampala, Uganda.
(5)London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, United States.
(7)Genome Sequencing and Analysis Program, Broad Institute, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, United States.
(8)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom.
(9)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

As many malaria-endemic countries move towards elimination of Plasmodium
falciparum, the most virulent human malaria parasite, effective tools for
monitoring malaria epidemiology are urgent priorities. P. falciparum population
genetic approaches offer promising tools for understanding transmission and
spread of the disease, but a high prevalence of multi-clone or polygenomic
infections can render estimation of even the most basic parameters, such as
allele frequencies, challenging. A previous method, COIL, was developed to
estimate complexity of infection (COI) from single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) 
data, but relies on monogenomic infections to estimate allele frequencies or
requires external allele frequency data which may not available. Estimates
limited to monogenomic infections may not be representative, however, and when
the average COI is high, they can be difficult or impossible to obtain.
Therefore, we developed THE REAL McCOIL, Turning HEterozygous SNP data into
Robust Estimates of ALelle frequency, via Markov chain Monte Carlo, and
Complexity Of Infection using Likelihood, to incorporate polygenomic samples and 
simultaneously estimate allele frequency and COI. This approach was tested via
simulations then applied to SNP data from cross-sectional surveys performed in
three Ugandan sites with varying malaria transmission. We show that THE REAL
McCOIL consistently outperforms COIL on simulated data, particularly when most
infections are polygenomic. Using field data we show that, unlike with COIL, we
can distinguish epidemiologically relevant differences in COI between and within 
these sites. Surprisingly, for example, we estimated high average COI in a
peri-urban subregion with lower transmission intensity, suggesting that many of
these cases were imported from surrounding regions with higher transmission
intensity. THE REAL McCOIL therefore provides a robust tool for understanding the
molecular epidemiology of malaria across transmission settings.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005348 
PMCID: PMC5300274
PMID: 28125584  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

