
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Feb 15;7:42850. doi: 10.1038/srep42850.

Recombinant vacuolar iron transporter family homologue PfVIT from human
malaria-causing Plasmodium falciparum is a Fe2+/H+exchanger.

Labarbuta P(1), Duckett K(1), Botting CH(2), Chahrour O(3), Malone J(3), Dalton
JP(1), Law CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Medical Biology Centre, Queen's University
Belfast, Belfast BT9 7BL, United Kingdom.
(2)School of Biology, Biomedical Sciences Research Complex, University of St
Andrews, North Haugh, St Andrews, Fife KY16 9ST, United Kingdom.
(3)Spectroscopy Group, Analytical Services, Almac, 20 Seagoe Industrial Estate,
Craigavon BT63 5QD, United Kingdom.

Vacuolar iron transporters (VITs) are a poorly understood family of integral
membrane proteins that can function in iron homeostasis via sequestration of
labile Fe2+ into vacuolar compartments. Here we report on the heterologous
overexpression and purification of PfVIT, a vacuolar iron transporter homologue
from the human malaria-causing parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Use of synthetic, 
codon-optimised DNA enabled overexpression of functional PfVIT in the inner
membrane of Escherichia coli which, in turn, conferred iron tolerance to the
bacterial cells. Cells that expressed PfVIT had decreased levels of total
cellular iron compared with cells that did not express the protein. Qualitative
transport assays performed on inverted vesicles enriched with PfVIT revealed that
the transporter catalysed Fe2+/H+ exchange driven by the proton electrochemical
gradient. Furthermore, the PfVIT transport function in this system did not
require the presence of any Plasmodium-specific factor such as post-translational
phosphorylation. PfVIT purified as a monomer and, as measured by intrinsic
protein fluorescence quenching, bound Fe2+ in detergent solution with low
micromolar affinity. This study of PfVIT provides material for future detailed
biochemical, biophysical and structural studies to advance understanding of the
vacuolar iron transporter family of membrane proteins from important human
pathogens.

DOI: 10.1038/srep42850 
PMCID: PMC5309874
PMID: 28198449  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

