
1. PLoS Genet. 2017 Feb 16;13(2):e1006508. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006508.
eCollection 2017 Feb.

Interacting networks of resistance, virulence and core machinery genes identified
by genome-wide epistasis analysis.

Skwark MJ(1), Croucher NJ(2), Puranen S(3), Chewapreecha C(4), Pesonen M(3), Xu
YY(3), Turner P(5)(6), Harris SR(7), Beres SB(8), Musser JM(8)(9), Parkhill J(7),
Bentley SD(7), Aurell E(10)(11)(12), Corander J(7)(13)(14)(15).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, United States
of America.
(2)Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Imperial College London,
London, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Espoo, Finland.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(5)Shoklo Malaria Research Unit, Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, 
Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Mae Sot, Thailand.
(6)Centre for Tropical Medicine, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(7)Pathogen Genomics, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(8)Center for Molecular and Translational Human Infectious Diseases Research,
Department of Pathology and Genomic Medicine, Houston Methodist Research
Institute, and Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, Texas, United States of
America.
(9)Departments of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and Microbiology and
Immunology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, United States of
America.
(10)Department of Computational Biology, KTH-Royal Institute of Technology,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(11)Departments of Applied Physics and Computer Science, Aalto University, Espoo,
Finland.
(12)Institute of Theoretical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China.
(13)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland.
(14)Department of Biostatistics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(15)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.

Comment in
    PLoS Genet. 2017 Feb 16;13(2):e1006558.

Recent advances in the scale and diversity of population genomic datasets for
bacteria now provide the potential for genome-wide patterns of co-evolution to be
studied at the resolution of individual bases. Here we describe a new statistical
method, genomeDCA, which uses recent advances in computational structural biology
to identify the polymorphic loci under the strongest co-evolutionary pressures.
We apply genomeDCA to two large population data sets representing the major human
pathogens Streptococcus pneumoniae (pneumococcus) and Streptococcus pyogenes
(group A Streptococcus). For pneumococcus we identified 5,199 putative epistatic 
interactions between 1,936 sites. Over three-quarters of the links were between
sites within the pbp2x, pbp1a and pbp2b genes, the sequences of which are
critical in determining non-susceptibility to beta-lactam antibiotics. A
network-based analysis found these genes were also coupled to that encoding
dihydrofolate reductase, changes to which underlie trimethoprim resistance.
Distinct from these antibiotic resistance genes, a large network component of 384
protein coding sequences encompassed many genes critical in basic cellular
functions, while another distinct component included genes associated with
virulence. The group A Streptococcus (GAS) data set population represents a
clonal population with relatively little genetic variation and a high level of
linkage disequilibrium across the genome. Despite this, we were able to pinpoint 
two RNA pseudouridine synthases, which were each strongly linked to a separate
set of loci across the chromosome, representing biologically plausible targets of
co-selection. The population genomic analysis method applied here identifies
statistically significantly co-evolving locus pairs, potentially arising from
fitness selection interdependence reflecting underlying protein-protein
interactions, or genes whose product activities contribute to the same phenotype.
This discovery approach greatly enhances the future potential of epistasis
analysis for systems biology, and can complement genome-wide association studies 
as a means of formulating hypotheses for targeted experimental work.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006508 
PMCID: PMC5312804
PMID: 28207813  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

