
1. J Med Life. 2015;8(Spec Iss 2):14-18.

Genetic diversity of Plasmodium Vivax in South of Iran: A cross-sectional study.

Sharifi-Sarasiabi K(1), Hosseiniteshnizi S(2), Dehghan F(3), Madani A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Research Center, Hormozgan University of Medical Sciences, 
Bandar Abbas, Iran and Khalij Fars Hospital, Bandar Abbas, Iran; Infectious and
Tropical Diseases Research Center, Hormozgan University of Medical Sciences,
Bandar Abbas, Iran.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Faculty of Para-Medicine, Hormozgan University of
Medical Sciences, Bandar Abbas, Iran.
(3)Molecular Medicine Research Center, Hormozgan University of Medical Sciences, 
Bandar Abbas, Iran and Khalij Fars Hospital, Bandar Abbas, Iran.
(4)Social Determinants in Health Promotion Research Center, Hormozgan University 
of Medical Sciences, Bandar Abbas, Iran.

Despite declining the number of malaria cases in Iran, increased prevalence of
malaria is supposed to be due to migration from eastern neighboring countries of 
Iran, which are abundant in Plasmodium vivax (P. vivax). The circumsporozoite
protein (CSP) of the P. vivax, is one of the candidate antigens for antimalaria
vaccine. The diversity of P. vivax populations circulating in Iran has been
investigated by using circumsporozoite protein (CSP) in this study. A hundred and
eighteen blood samples were collected from patients diagnosed with P. vivax
malaria from south of Iran during 2007-2008. All samples were analyzed by using
nested PCR/ RFLP and 18 were sequenced. Genotyping of Pvcsp gene showed that
VK210 type was predominant (95%) in south of Iran. Sequence analysis of Pvcsp
gene revealed 6 distinct allelic variants in VK210 type. The present data
indicate that there is some degree of genetic diversity among P. vivax
populations in Hormozgan province of Iran. It seems that in neighbors of Iran,
VK210 type is predominant, probably due to similar vector of malaria in these
regions.


PMCID: PMC5327707
PMID: 28255391 

