
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2017 Jun;50:87-92. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2017.03.001. Epub
2017 Mar 6.

Increased susceptibility of blood type O individuals to develop anemia in
Plasmodium vivax infection.

Resende SS(1), Milagres VG(2), Chaves DG(3), Fontes CJF(4), Carvalho LH(5), Sousa
TN(6), Brito CFA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Pesquisas René Rachou, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (FIOCRUZ), Belo
Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil. Electronic address: stela@cpqrr.fiocruz.br.
(2)Centro de Pesquisas René Rachou, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (FIOCRUZ), Belo
Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil. Electronic address:
vanessa.milagres@yahoo.com.br.
(3)Serviço de Pesquisa, Fundação Hemominas, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
Electronic address: daniel.chaves@hemominas.mg.gov.br.
(4)Hospital Julio Muller, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso, Cuiabá, Mato
Grosso, Brazil. Electronic address: corfontes@gmail.com.
(5)Centro de Pesquisas René Rachou, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (FIOCRUZ), Belo
Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil. Electronic address: lhcarvalho@cpqrr.fiocruz.br.
(6)Centro de Pesquisas René Rachou, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (FIOCRUZ), Belo
Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil. Electronic address: tais@cpqrr.fiocruz.br.
(7)Centro de Pesquisas René Rachou, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (FIOCRUZ), Belo
Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil. Electronic address: cristiana@cpqrr.fiocruz.br.

Plasmodium vivax has been reported to cause severe malaria, and one of the main
resulting complications is anemia. Considering that P. vivax infects only young
erythrocytes, anemia has been associated with the destruction of infected and
non-infected erythrocytes. However, few studies have focused on understanding the
relationship between the pathogenesis of P. vivax malaria and human genetic
polymorphisms. Although ABO groups seem to influence the outcome of Plasmodium
falciparum malaria, the association between P. vivax and ABO blood groups has
been minimally investigated. Thus, we investigate the correlation between ABO
blood groups and anemia induced by P. vivax infection. Five single nucleotide
polymorphisms at the ABO gene were genotyped by PCR-RFLP and Real-Time PCR in P. 
vivax-infected subjects. The ABO blood types were associated with the
hematological data of the patients. Our main finding was that type O
infected-individuals showed lower levels of hemoglobin and hematocrit compared to
type A-infected individuals. The correlation between ABO blood groups and
hemoglobin levels remained significant when a multiple linear regression was
applied with the possible confounding effects of clinical-epidemiologic variables
taken into account. The finding that type O individuals have a higher frequency
of anemia is a first step to understand the mechanisms involved in malaria
anemia, which could be associated to increased destruction of type O
erythrocytes.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2017.03.001 
PMID: 28274886  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

