
1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2017 Mar 23;13(3):e1005397. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005397. 
eCollection 2017 Mar.

Bioenergetics-based modeling of Plasmodium falciparum metabolism reveals its
essential genes, nutritional requirements, and thermodynamic bottlenecks.

Chiappino-Pepe A(1), Tymoshenko S(1)(2), Ataman M(1), Soldati-Favre D(2),
Hatzimanikatis V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Computational Systems Biotechnology, École Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Geneva, CMU, Geneva, Switzerland.

Novel antimalarial therapies are urgently needed for the fight against
drug-resistant parasites. The metabolism of malaria parasites in infected cells
is an attractive source of drug targets but is rather complex. Computational
methods can handle this complexity and allow integrative analyses of cell
metabolism. In this study, we present a genome-scale metabolic model (iPfa) of
the deadliest malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum, and its
thermodynamics-based flux analysis (TFA). Using previous absolute concentration
data of the intraerythrocytic parasite, we applied TFA to iPfa and predicted up
to 63 essential genes and 26 essential pairs of genes. Of the 63 genes, 35 have
been experimentally validated and reported in the literature, and 28 have not
been experimentally tested and include previously hypothesized or novel
predictions of essential metabolic capabilities. Without metabolomics data, four 
of the genes would have been incorrectly predicted to be non-essential. TFA also 
indicated that substrate channeling should exist in two metabolic pathways to
ensure the thermodynamic feasibility of the flux. Finally, analysis of the
metabolic capabilities of P. falciparum led to the identification of both the
minimal nutritional requirements and the genes that can become indispensable upon
substrate inaccessibility. This model provides novel insight into the metabolic
needs and capabilities of the malaria parasite and highlights metabolites and
pathways that should be measured and characterized to identify potential
thermodynamic bottlenecks and substrate channeling. The hypotheses presented seek
to guide experimental studies to facilitate a better understanding of the
parasite metabolism and the identification of targets for more efficient
intervention.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005397 
PMCID: PMC5363809
PMID: 28333921  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

