
1. Mol Ecol. 2017 Jul;26(13):3458-3471. doi: 10.1111/mec.14118. Epub 2017 Apr 28.

Blood transcriptomes and de novo identification of candidate loci for mating
success in lekking great snipe (Gallinago media).

Höglund J(1), Wang B(1), Saether SA(2), Blom MPK(1)(3), Fiske P(2), Halvarsson
P(1), Horsburgh GJ(4), Burke T(4), Kålås JA(2), Ekblom R(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Genetics, Evolutionary Biology Centre, Uppsala
University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Norwegian Institute for Nature Research (NINA), Trondheim, Norway.
(3)Division of Evolution, Ecology and Genetics, Research School of Biology, The
Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia.
(4)Department of Animal and Plant Sciences, University of Sheffield, Sheffield,
UK.

We assembled the great snipe blood transcriptome using data from fourteen lekking
males, in order to de novo identify candidate genes related to sexual selection, 
and determined the expression profiles in relation to mating success. The three
most highly transcribed genes were encoding different haemoglobin subunits. All
tended to be overexpressed in males with high mating success. We also called
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from the transcriptome data and found
considerable genetic variation for many genes expressed during lekking. Among
these, we identified 14 polymorphic candidate SNPs that had a significant
genotypic association with mating success (number of females mated with) and/or
mating status (mated or not). Four of the candidate SNPs were found in HBAA
(encoding the haemoglobin α-chain). Heterozygotes for one of these and one SNP in
the gene PABPC1 appeared to enjoy higher mating success compared to males
homozygous for either of the alleles. In a larger data set of individuals, we
genotyped 38 of the identified SNPs but found low support for consistent
selection as only one of the zygosities of previously identified candidate SNPs
and none of their genotypes were associated with mating status. However,
candidate SNPs generally showed lower levels of spatial genetic structure
compared to noncandidate markers. We also scored the prevalence of avian malaria 
in a subsample of birds. Males infected with avian malaria parasites had lower
mating success in the year of sampling than noninfected males. Parasite infection
and its interaction with specific genes may thus affect performance on the lek.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.14118 
PMID: 28345264  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

