
1. Parasitol Int. 2018 Feb;67(1):47-58. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2017.03.003. Epub 2017
Mar 23.

Plant hormone cytokinins control cell cycle progression and plastid replication
in apicomplexan parasites.

Andrabi SBA(1), Tahara M(2), Matsubara R(2), Toyama T(3), Aonuma H(4), Sakakibara
H(5), Suematsu M(6), Tanabe K(7), Nozaki T(8), Nagamune K(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, 
Japan; School of Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Parasitology, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, 
Japan; Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Ibaraki, Japan.
(3)Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan;
Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.
(4)Department of Parasitology, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, 
Japan; Department of Tropical Medicine, The Jikei University School of Medicine, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(5)RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science, Kanagawa, Japan.
(6)School of Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.
(8)Department of Parasitology, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, 
Japan; Faculty of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Ibaraki, Japan.
(9)Department of Parasitology, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, 
Japan; Faculty of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Ibaraki, Japan. Electronic address: nagamune@niid.go.jp.

Cytokinins are plant hormones that are involved in regulation of cell
proliferation, cell cycle progression, and cell and plastid development. Here, we
show that the apicomplexan parasites Toxoplasma gondii and Plasmodium berghei, an
opportunistic human pathogen and a rodent malaria agent, respectively, produce
cytokinins via a biosynthetic pathway similar to that in plants. Cytokinins
regulate the growth and cell cycle progression of T. gondii by mediating
expression of the cyclin gene TgCYC4. A natural form of cytokinin, trans-zeatin
(t-zeatin), upregulated expression of this cyclin, while a synthetic cytokinin,
thidiazuron, downregulated its expression. Immunofluorescence microscopy and
quantitative PCR analysis showed that t-zeatin increased the genome-copy number
of apicoplast, which are non-photosynthetic plastid, in the parasite, while
thidiazuron led to their disappearance. Thidiazuron inhibited growth of T. gondii
and Plasmodium falciparum, a human malaria parasite, suggesting that thidiazuron 
has therapeutic potential as an inhibitor of apicomplexan parasites.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2017.03.003 
PMID: 28344153  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

