
1. Int J Parasitol Drugs Drug Resist. 2017 Aug;7(2):138-146. doi:
10.1016/j.ijpddr.2017.03.004. Epub 2017 Mar 22.

Using a genome-scale metabolic network model to elucidate the mechanism of
chloroquine action in Plasmodium falciparum.

Tewari SG(1), Prigge ST(2), Reifman J(3), Wallqvist A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Defense Biotechnology High Performance Computing Software
Applications Institute, Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center, US 
Army Medical Research and Materiel Command, Ft. Detrick, MD 21702, USA.
Electronic address: stewari@bhsai.org.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. Electronic address: sprigge2@jhu.edu.
(3)Department of Defense Biotechnology High Performance Computing Software
Applications Institute, Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center, US 
Army Medical Research and Materiel Command, Ft. Detrick, MD 21702, USA.
Electronic address: jaques.reifman.civ@mail.mil.
(4)Department of Defense Biotechnology High Performance Computing Software
Applications Institute, Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center, US 
Army Medical Research and Materiel Command, Ft. Detrick, MD 21702, USA.
Electronic address: sven.a.wallqvist.civ@mail.mil.

Chloroquine, long the default first-line treatment against malaria, is now
abandoned in large parts of the world because of widespread drug-resistance in
Plasmodium falciparum. In spite of its importance as a cost-effective and
efficient drug, a coherent understanding of the cellular mechanisms affected by
chloroquine and how they influence the fitness and survival of the parasite
remains elusive. Here, we used a systems biology approach to integrate
genome-scale transcriptomics to map out the effects of chloroquine, identify
targeted metabolic pathways, and translate these findings into mechanistic
insights. Specifically, we first developed a method that integrates
transcriptomic and metabolomic data, which we independently validated against a
recently published set of such data for Krebs-cycle mutants of P. falciparum. We 
then used the method to calculate the effect of chloroquine treatment on the
metabolic flux profiles of P. falciparum during the intraerythrocytic
developmental cycle. The model predicted dose-dependent inhibition of DNA
replication, in agreement with earlier experimental results for both
drug-sensitive and drug-resistant P. falciparum strains. Our simulations also
corroborated experimental findings that suggest differences in chloroquine
sensitivity between ring- and schizont-stage P. falciparum. Our analysis also
suggests that metabolic fluxes that govern reduced thioredoxin and
phosphoenolpyruvate synthesis are significantly decreased and are pivotal to
chloroquine-based inhibition of P. falciparum DNA replication. The consequences
of impaired phosphoenolpyruvate synthesis and redox metabolism are reduced carbon
fixation and increased oxidative stress, respectively, both of which eventually
facilitate killing of the parasite. Our analysis suggests that a combination of
chloroquine (or an analogue) and another drug, which inhibits carbon fixation
and/or increases oxidative stress, should increase the clearance of P. falciparum
from the host system.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpddr.2017.03.004 
PMCID: PMC5376308
PMID: 28355531  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

