
1. mBio. 2017 Mar 28;8(2). pii: e02317-16. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02317-16.

Plasmodium falciparum Maf1 Confers Survival upon Amino Acid Starvation.

McLean KJ(1), Jacobs-Lorena M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins Malaria Research Institute, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins Malaria Research Institute, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA ljacob13@jhu.edu.

The target of rapamycin complex 1 (TORC1) pathway is a highly conserved signaling
pathway across eukaryotes that integrates nutrient and stress signals to regulate
the cellular growth rate and the transition into and maintenance of dormancy. The
majority of the pathway's components, including the central TOR kinase, have been
lost in the apicomplexan lineage, and it is unknown how these organisms detect
and respond to nutrient starvation in its absence. Plasmodium falciparum encodes 
a putative ortholog of the RNA polymerase (Pol) III repressor Maf1, which has
been demonstrated to modulate Pol III transcription in a TOR-dependent manner in 
a number of organisms. Here, we investigate the role of P. falciparum Maf1
(PfMaf1) in regulating RNA Pol III expression under conditions of nutrient
starvation and other stresses. Using a transposon insertion mutant with an
altered Maf1 expression profile, we demonstrated that proper Maf1 expression is
necessary for survival of the dormancy-like state induced by prolonged amino acid
starvation and is needed for full recovery from other stresses that slow or stall
the parasite cell cycle. This Maf1 mutant is defective in the downregulation of
pre-tRNA synthesis under nutrient-limiting conditions, indicating that the
function of Maf1 as a stress-responsive regulator of structural RNA transcription
is conserved in P. falciparum Recent work has demonstrated that parasites
carrying artemisinin-resistant K13 alleles display an enhanced ability to recover
from drug-induced growth retardation. We show that one such artemisinin-resistant
line displays greater regulation of pre-tRNA expression and higher survival upon 
prolonged amino acid starvation, suggesting that overlapping, PfMaf1-associated
pathways may regulate growth recovery from both artemisinin treatment and amino
acid starvation.IMPORTANCE Eukaryote organisms sense changes in their environment
and integrate this information through signaling pathways to activate response
programs to ensure survival. The TOR pathway is a well-studied signaling pathway 
found throughout eukaryotes that is known to integrate a variety of signals to
regulate organismal growth in response to starvation and other stresses. The
human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum appears to have lost the TOR pathway
over the course of evolution, and it is unclear how the parasite modulates its
growth in response to starvation and drug treatment. Here, we show that Maf1, a
protein regulated by TOR in other eukaryotes, plays an important role in
maintaining the parasite's viability in the face of starvation and other forms of
stress. This suggests that PfMaf1 is a component of a yet-to-be-described
nutrient and stress response pathway.

Copyright © 2017 McLean and Jacobs-Lorena.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02317-16 
PMCID: PMC5371417
PMID: 28351924  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

