
1. Malar J. 2017 Apr 20;16(1):156. doi: 10.1186/s12936-017-1799-7.

Insecticide resistance patterns in Uganda and the effect of indoor residual
spraying with bendiocarb on kdr L1014S frequencies in Anopheles gambiae s.s.

Abeku TA(1), Helinski MEH(2), Kirby MJ(2)(3), Ssekitooleko J(4), Bass C(5)(6),
Kyomuhangi I(4), Okia M(7)(8), Magumba G(4), Meek SR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Consortium, Development House, 56-64 Leonard Street, London, EC2A 4LT,
UK. t.abeku@malariaconsortium.org.
(2)Malaria Consortium, Development House, 56-64 Leonard Street, London, EC2A 4LT,
UK.
(3)London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, WC1E 7HT, UK.
(4)Malaria Consortium Uganda, Plot 25, Upper Naguru East Road, Naguru, Kampala,
Uganda.
(5)University of Exeter, Penryn Campus, Treliever Road, Penryn, TR10 9FE, UK.
(6)Rothamsted Research, Harpenden, Hertfordshire, AL5 2JQ, UK.
(7)National Malaria Control Programme, Ministry of Health, Kampala, Uganda.
(8)Uganda IRS Project Phase II/Abt Associates Inc., Kampala, Uganda.

BACKGROUND: Resistance of malaria vectors to pyrethroid insecticides has been
attributed to selection pressure from long-lasting insecticidal nets (LLINs),
indoor residual spraying (IRS), and the use of chemicals in agriculture. The use 
of different classes of insecticides in combination or by rotation has been
recommended for resistance management. The aim of this study was to understand
the role of IRS with a carbamate insecticide in management of pyrethroid
resistance.
METHODS: Anopheles mosquitoes were collected from multiple sites in nine
districts of Uganda (up to five sites per district). Three districts had been
sprayed with bendiocarb. Phenotypic resistance was determined using standard
susceptibility tests. Molecular assays were used to determine the frequency of
resistance mutations. The kdr L1014S homozygote frequency in Anopheles gambiae
s.s. was used as the outcome measure to test the effects of various factors using
a logistic regression model. Bendiocarb coverage, annual rainfall, altitude,
mosquito collection method, LLIN use, LLINs distributed in the previous 5 years, 
household use of agricultural pesticides, and malaria prevalence in children
2-9 years old were entered as explanatory variables.
RESULTS: Tests with pyrethroid insecticides showed resistance and suspected
resistance levels in all districts except Apac (a sprayed district). Bendiocarb
resistance was not detected in sprayed sites, but was confirmed in one unsprayed 
site (Soroti). Anopheles gambiae s.s. collected from areas sprayed with
bendiocarb had significantly less kdr homozygosity than those collected from
unsprayed areas. Mosquitoes collected indoors as adults had significantly higher 
frequency of kdr homozygotes than mosquitoes collected as larvae, possibly
indicating selective sampling of resistant adults, presumably due to exposure to 
insecticides inside houses that would disproportionately affect susceptible
mosquitoes. The effect of LLIN use on kdr homozygosity was significantly modified
by annual rainfall. In areas receiving high rainfall, LLIN use was associated
with increased kdr homozygosity and this association weakened as rainfall
decreased, indicating more frequency of exposure to pyrethroids in relatively wet
areas with high vector density.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that using a carbamate insecticide for IRS in
areas with high levels of pyrethroid resistance may reduce kdr frequencies in An.
gambiae s.s.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-017-1799-7 
PMCID: PMC5397803
PMID: 28427415  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

