
1. Mol Cancer Res. 2017 May;15(5):563-576. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-16-0305.

Comprehensive Transcriptome and Mutational Profiling of Endemic Burkitt Lymphoma 
Reveals EBV Type-Specific Differences.

Kaymaz Y(1), Oduor CI(2)(3), Yu H(4), Otieno JA(5), Ong'echa JM(2), Moormann
AM(6), Bailey JA(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Bioinformatics and Integrative Biology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts.
(2)Center for Global Health Research, Kenya Medical Research Institute, Kisumu,
Kenya.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Technology, Maseno University, Maseno,
Kenya.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts.
(5)Jaramogi Oginga Odinga Teaching and Referral Hospital, Ministry of Health,
Kisumu, Kenya.
(6)Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts.
(7)Program in Bioinformatics and Integrative Biology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts. jeffrey.bailey@umassmed.edu.
(8)Division of Transfusion Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts.

Endemic Burkitt lymphoma (eBL) is the most common pediatric cancer in
malaria-endemic equatorial Africa and nearly always contains Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV), unlike sporadic Burkitt lymphoma (sBL) that occurs with a lower incidence 
in developed countries. Given these differences and the variable clinical
presentation and outcomes, we sought to further understand pathogenesis by
investigating transcriptomes using RNA sequencing (RNAseq) from multiple primary 
eBL tumors compared with sBL tumors. Within eBL tumors, minimal expression
differences were found based on: anatomical presentation site, in-hospital
survival rates, and EBV genome type, suggesting that eBL tumors are homogeneous
without marked subtypes. The outstanding difference detected using surrogate
variable analysis was the significantly decreased expression of key genes in the 
immunoproteasome complex (PSMB9/β1i, PSMB10/β2i, PSMB8/β5i, and PSME2/PA28β) in
eBL tumors carrying type 2 EBV compared with type 1 EBV. Second, in comparison
with previously published pediatric sBL specimens, the majority of the expression
and pathway differences was related to the PTEN/PI3K/mTOR signaling pathway and
was correlated most strongly with EBV status rather than geographic designation. 
Third, common mutations were observed significantly less frequently in eBL tumors
harboring EBV type 1, with mutation frequencies similar between tumors with EBV
type 2 and without EBV. In addition to the previously reported genes, a set of
new genes mutated in BL, including TFAP4, MSH6, PRRC2C, BCL7A, FOXO1, PLCG2,
PRKDC, RAD50, and RPRD2, were identified. Overall, these data establish that EBV,
particularly EBV type 1, supports BL oncogenesis, alleviating the need for
certain driver mutations in the human genome.IMPLICATIONS: Genomic and mutational
analyses of Burkitt lymphoma tumors identify key differences based on viral
content and clinical outcomes suggesting new avenues for the development of
prognostic molecular biomarkers and therapeutic interventions.

©2017 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-16-0305 
PMCID: PMC5471630
PMID: 28465297  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

