
1. mBio. 2017 May 9;8(3). pii: e00303-17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00303-17.

A Variant PfCRT Isoform Can Contribute to Plasmodium falciparum Resistance to the
First-Line Partner Drug Piperaquine.

Dhingra SK(1), Redhi D(2), Combrinck JM(2), Yeo T(1), Okombo J(3), Henrich PP(1),
Cowell AN(4), Gupta P(5), Stegman ML(6), Hoke JM(7), Cooper RA(6)(7), Winzeler
E(5), Mok S(1), Egan TJ(3), Fidock DA(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, New York, USA.
(2)Division of Pharmacology, Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town,
Cape Town, South Africa.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of California, San Diego, California, USA.
(5)Division of Host-Microbe Systems & Therapeutics, Department of Pediatrics,
University of California, San Diego, California, USA.
(6)Department of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, Dominican University of
California, San Rafael, California, USA.
(7)Department of Biological Sciences, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, Virginia,
USA.
(8)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, New York, USA df2260@cumc.columbia.edu.
(9)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, New York, USA.

Current efforts to reduce the global burden of malaria are threatened by the
rapid spread throughout Asia of Plasmodium falciparum resistance to
artemisinin-based combination therapies, which includes increasing rates of
clinical failure with dihydroartemisinin plus piperaquine (PPQ) in Cambodia.
Using zinc finger nuclease-based gene editing, we report that addition of the
C101F mutation to the chloroquine (CQ) resistance-conferring PfCRT Dd2 isoform
common to Asia can confer PPQ resistance to cultured parasites. Resistance was
demonstrated as significantly higher PPQ concentrations causing 90% inhibition of
parasite growth (IC90) or 50% parasite killing (50% lethal dose [LD50]). This
mutation also reversed Dd2-mediated CQ resistance, sensitized parasites to
amodiaquine, quinine, and artemisinin, and conferred amantadine and blasticidin
resistance. Using heme fractionation assays, we demonstrate that PPQ causes a
buildup of reactive free heme and inhibits the formation of chemically inert
hemozoin crystals. Our data evoke inhibition of heme detoxification in the
parasite's acidic digestive vacuole as the primary mode of both the
bis-aminoquinoline PPQ and the related 4-aminoquinoline CQ. Both drugs also
inhibit hemoglobin proteolysis at elevated concentrations, suggesting an
additional mode of action. Isogenic lines differing in their pfmdr1 copy number
showed equivalent PPQ susceptibilities. We propose that mutations in PfCRT could 
contribute to a multifactorial basis of PPQ resistance in field
isolates.IMPORTANCE The global agenda to eliminate malaria depends on the
continued success of artemisinin-based combination therapies (ACTs), which target
the asexual blood stages of the intracellular parasite Plasmodium Partial
resistance to artemisinin, however, is now established in Southeast Asia,
exposing the partner drugs to increased selective pressure. Plasmodium falciparum
resistance to the first-line partner piperaquine (PPQ) is now spreading rapidly
in Cambodia, resulting in clinical treatment failures. Here, we report that a
variant form of the Plasmodium falciparum chloroquine resistance transporter,
harboring a C101F mutation edited into the chloroquine (CQ)-resistant Dd2 isoform
prevalent in Asia, can confer PPQ resistance in cultured parasites. This was
accompanied by a loss of CQ resistance. Biochemical assays showed that PPQ, like 
CQ, inhibits the detoxification of reactive heme that is formed by
parasite-mediated catabolism of host hemoglobin. We propose that novel PfCRT
variants emerging in the field could contribute to a multigenic basis of PPQ
resistance.

Copyright © 2017 Dhingra et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00303-17 
PMCID: PMC5424201
PMID: 28487425  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

