
1. Malar J. 2017 Jun 2;16(1):234. doi: 10.1186/s12936-017-1876-y.

Molecular characterization of Anopheline (Diptera: Culicidae) mosquitoes from
eight geographical locations of Sri Lanka.

Weeraratne TC(1), Surendran SN(2), Reimer LJ(3), Wondji CS(3), Perera MDB(4),
Walton C(5), Parakrama Karunaratne SHP(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, University of Peradeniya,
Peradeniya, Sri Lanka.
(2)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, University of Jaffna, Jaffna, Sri
Lanka.
(3)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, UK.
(4)Regional Malaria Office, Kurunegala, Sri Lanka.
(5)School of Earth and Environment, Faculty of Science and Engineering,
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(6)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, University of Peradeniya,
Peradeniya, Sri Lanka. shppk@pdn.ac.lk.
(7)National Institute of Fundamental Studies, Hantana, Kandy, Sri Lanka.
shppk@pdn.ac.lk.

BACKGROUND: Genus Anopheles is a major mosquito group of interest in Sri Lanka as
it includes vectors of malaria and its members exist as species complexes.
Taxonomy of the group is mainly based on morphological features, which are not
conclusive and can be easily erased while handling the specimens. A combined
effort, using morphology and DNA barcoding (using the markers cytochrome c
oxidase subunit I (COI) gene and internal transcribed spacer 2 (ITS2) region, was
made during the present study to recognize anophelines collected from eight
districts of Sri Lanka for the first time.
METHODS: Cytochrome c oxidase subunit I and ITS2 regions of morphologically
identified anopheline mosquitoes from Sri Lanka were sequenced. These sequences
together with GenBank sequences were used in phylogenetic tree construction and
molecular characterization of mosquitoes.
RESULTS: According to morphological identification, the field-collected adult
mosquitoes belonged to 15 species, i.e., Anopheles aconitus, Anopheles annularis,
Anopheles barbirostris, Anopheles culicifacies, Anopheles jamesii, Anopheles
karwari, Anopheles maculatus, Anopheles nigerrimus, Anopheles pallidus, Anopheles
peditaeniatus, Anopheles pseudojamesi, Anopheles subpictus, Anopheles
tessellatus, Anopheles vagus, and Anopheles varuna. However, analysis of 123 COI 
sequences (445 bp) (16 clades supported by strong bootstrap value in the
neighbour joining tree and inter-specific distances of >3%) showed that there are
16 distinct species. Identity of the morphologically identified species, except
An. subpictus, was comparable with the DNA barcoding results. COI sequence
analysis showed that morphologically identified An. subpictus is composed of two 
genetic entities: An. subpictus species A and species B (inter-specific K2P
distance 0.128). All the four haplotypes of An. culicifacies discovered during
the present study belonged to a single species. ITS2 sequences (542 bp) were
obtained for all the species except for An. barbirostris, An. subpictus species
B, An. tessellatus, and An. varuna. Each of these sequences was represented by a 
single species-specific haplotype.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study reflects the importance and feasibility of COI and
ITS2 genetic markers in identifying anophelines and their sibling species, and
the significance of integrated systematic approach in mosquito taxonomy. Wide
distribution of malaria vectors in the country perhaps indicates the potential
for re-emergence of malaria in the country.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-017-1876-y 
PMCID: PMC5457728
PMID: 28578667  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

