
1. J Infect Dis. 2017 Jul 15;216(2):267-275. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jix280.

Functional Analysis Reveals Geographical Variation in Inhibitory Immune Responses
Against a Polymorphic Malaria Antigen.

Bei AK(1)(2)(3), Ahouidi AD(2), Dvorin JD(1)(4), Miura K(5), Diouf A(5), Ndiaye
D(3), Premji Z(6)(7), Diakite M(8), Mboup S(2)(9), Long CA(5), Duraisingh MT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T. H. Chan School of
Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Laboratory of Bacteriology and Virology, Le Dantec Hospital, Faculty of
Medicine and Pharmacy, Cheikh Anta Diop University, Dakar, Senegal.
(3)Laboratory of Parasitology and Mycology, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Cheikh Anta Diop University, Dakar, Senegal.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Massachusetts.
(5)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(6)Department of Parasitology and Medical Entomology, Muhimbili University of
Health and Allied Sciences, Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania.
(7)Department of Pathology, Aga Khan University Hospital, Nairobi, Kenya.
(8)Malaria Research and Training Center, Faculty of Medicine, Pharmacy and
Odontostomatology, University of Science, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako, 
Mali.
(9)Institut de Recherche en Santé, de Surveillance Epidemiologique et de
Formations, Dakar, Senegal.

Background: Plasmodium falciparum reticulocyte-binding protein homologue 2b
(PfRh2b) is an invasion ligand that is a potential blood-stage vaccine candidate 
antigen; however, a naturally occurring deletion within an immunogenic domain is 
present at high frequencies in Africa and has been associated with alternative
invasion pathway usage. Standardized tools that provide antigenic specificity in 
in vitro assays are needed to functionally assess the neutralizing potential of
humoral responses against malaria vaccine candidate antigens.
Methods: Transgenic parasite lines were generated to express the PfRh2b deletion.
Total immunoglobulin G (IgG) from individuals residing in malaria-endemic regions
in Tanzania, Senegal, and Mali were used in growth inhibition assays with
transgenic parasite lines.
Results: While the PfRh2b deletion transgenic line showed no change in invasion
pathway utilization compared to the wild-type in the absence of specific
antibodies, it outgrew wild-type controls in competitive growth experiments.
Inhibition differences with total IgG were observed in the different endemic
sites, ranging from allele-specific inhibition to allele-independent inhibitory
immune responses.
Conclusions: The PfRh2b deletion may allow the parasite to escape neutralizing
antibody responses in some regions. This difference in geographical inhibition
was revealed using transgenic methodologies, which provide valuable tools for
functionally assessing neutralizing antibodies against vaccine-candidate antigens
in regions with varying malaria endemicity.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jix280 
PMCID: PMC5853457
PMID: 28605544  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

