
1. J Proteomics. 2018 May 30;180:61-69. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2017.06.002. Epub 2017 
Jun 5.

Proteomic profiling of the brain of mice with experimental cerebral malaria.

Moussa E(1), Huang H(2), Ahras M(3), Lall A(3), Thezenas ML(2), Fischer R(2),
Kessler BM(2), Pain A(4), Billker O(3), Casals-Pascual C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, UK; King Abdulla University 
of Science and Technology, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, UK.
(3)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, UK.
(4)King Abdulla University of Science and Technology, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, UK. Electronic address:
ccasals@well.ox.ac.uk.

Cerebral malaria (CM) is a severe neurological complication of malaria infection 
in both adults and children. In pursuit of effective treatment of CM, clinical
studies, postmortem analysis and animal models have been employed to understand
the pathology and identify effective interventions. In this study, a shotgun
proteomics analysis was conducted to profile the proteomic signature of the brain
tissue of mice with experimental cerebral malaria (ECM) in order to further
understand the underlying pathology. To identify CM-associated response,
proteomic signatures of the brains of C57/Bl6N mice infected with P. berghei ANKA
that developed neurological syndrome were compared to those of mice infected with
P. berghei NK65 that developed equally high parasite burdens without neurological
signs, and to those of non-infected mice. The results show that the CM-associated
response in mice that developed neurological signs comprise mainly acute-phase
reaction and coagulation cascade activation, and indicate the leakage of plasma
proteins into the brain parenchyma.SIGNIFICANCE: Cerebral malaria (CM) remains a 
major cause of death in children. The majority of these deaths occur in
sub-Saharan Africa. Even with adequate access to treatment, mortality remains
high and neurological sequelae can be found in up to 20% of survivors. No
adjuvant treatment to date has been shown to reduce mortality and the
pathophysiology of CM is largely unknown. Experimental cerebral malaria (ECM) is 
a well-established model that may contribute to identify and test druggable
targets. In this study we have identified the disruption of the blood-brain
barrier following inflammatory and vascular injury as a mechanism of disease. In 
this study we report a number of proteins that could be validated as potential
biomarkers of ECM. Further studies, will be required to validate the clinical
relevance of these biomarkers in human CM.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2017.06.002 
PMID: 28602553  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

