
1. Malar J. 2017 Jul 14;16(1):286. doi: 10.1186/s12936-017-1932-7.

Vector control with driving Y chromosomes: modelling the evolution of resistance.

Beaghton A(1), Beaghton PJ(2), Burt A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences, Imperial College, Silwood Park, Ascot, Berkshire, SL5 7PY, UK. 
a.beaghton@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)Life Sciences, Imperial College, Silwood Park, Ascot, Berkshire, SL5 7PY, UK.

BACKGROUND: The introduction of new malaria control interventions has often led
to the evolution of resistance, both of the parasite to new drugs and of the
mosquito vector to new insecticides, compromising the efficacy of the
interventions. Recent progress in molecular and population biology raises the
possibility of new genetic-based interventions, and the potential for resistance 
to evolve against these should be considered. Here, population modelling is used 
to determine the main factors affecting the likelihood that resistance will
evolve against a synthetic, nuclease-based driving Y chromosome that produces a
male-biased sex ratio.
METHODS: A combination of deterministic differential equation models and
stochastic analyses involving branching processes and Gillespie simulations is
utilized to assess the probability that resistance evolves against a driving Y
that otherwise is strong enough to eliminate the target population. The model
considers resistance due to changes at the target site such that they are no
longer cleaved by the nuclease, and due to trans-acting autosomal suppressor
alleles.
RESULTS: The probability that resistance evolves increases with the mutation rate
and the intrinsic rate of increase of the population, and decreases with the
strength of drive and any pleiotropic fitness costs of the resistant allele. In
seasonally varying environments, the time of release can also affect the
probability of resistance evolving. Trans-acting suppressor alleles are more
likely to suffer stochastic loss at low frequencies than target site resistant
alleles.
CONCLUSIONS: As with any other intervention, there is a risk that resistance will
evolve to new genetic approaches to vector control, and steps should be taken to 
minimize this probability. Two design features that should help in this regard
are to reduce the rate at which resistant mutations arise, and to target
sequences such that if they do arise, they impose a significant fitness cost on
the mosquito.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-017-1932-7 
PMCID: PMC5513332
PMID: 28705249  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

