
1. BMC Genomics. 2017 Jul 19;18(1):543. doi: 10.1186/s12864-017-3905-1.

Novel Plasmodium falciparum metabolic network reconstruction identifies shifts
associated with clinical antimalarial resistance.

Carey MA(1), Papin JA(2), Guler JL(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Cancer Biology, University of
Virginia, School of Medicine, Charlottesville, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Virginia, Charlottesville,
USA. papin@virginia.edu.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, USA.
jlg5fw@virginia.edu.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, University of
Virginia, School of Medicine, Charlottesville, USA. jlg5fw@virginia.edu.

BACKGROUND: Malaria remains a major public health burden and resistance has
emerged to every antimalarial on the market, including the frontline drug,
artemisinin. Our limited understanding of Plasmodium biology hinders the
elucidation of resistance mechanisms. In this regard, systems biology approaches 
can facilitate the integration of existing experimental knowledge and further
understanding of these mechanisms.
RESULTS: Here, we developed a novel genome-scale metabolic network
reconstruction, iPfal17, of the asexual blood-stage P. falciparum parasite to
expand our understanding of metabolic changes that support resistance. We
identified 11 metabolic tasks to evaluate iPfal17 performance. Flux balance
analysis and simulation of gene knockouts and enzyme inhibition predict candidate
drug targets unique to resistant parasites. Moreover, integration of clinical
parasite transcriptomes into the iPfal17 reconstruction reveals patterns
associated with antimalarial resistance. These results predict that artemisinin
sensitive and resistant parasites differentially utilize scavenging and
biosynthetic pathways for multiple essential metabolites, including folate and
polyamines. Our findings are consistent with experimental literature, while
generating novel hypotheses about artemisinin resistance and parasite biology. We
detect evidence that resistant parasites maintain greater metabolic flexibility, 
perhaps representing an incomplete transition to the metabolic state most
appropriate for nutrient-rich blood.
CONCLUSION: Using this systems biology approach, we identify metabolic shifts
that arise with or in support of the resistant phenotype. This perspective allows
us to more productively analyze and interpret clinical expression data for the
identification of candidate drug targets for the treatment of resistant
parasites.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-017-3905-1 
PMCID: PMC5518114
PMID: 28724354  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

