
1. mBio. 2017 Aug 8;8(4). pii: e00547-17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00547-17.

Chromosome End Repair and Genome Stability in Plasmodium falciparum.

Calhoun SF(1), Reed J(1)(2), Alexander N(2), Mason CE(2), Deitsch KW(1), Kirkman 
LA(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, New York, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, New York, USA lak9015@med.cornell.edu.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Weill Medical College
of Cornell University, New York, New York, USA.

The human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum replicates within circulating
red blood cells, where it is subjected to conditions that frequently cause DNA
damage. The repair of DNA double-stranded breaks (DSBs) is thought to rely almost
exclusively on homologous recombination (HR), due to a lack of efficient
nonhomologous end joining. However, given that the parasite is haploid during
this stage of its life cycle, the mechanisms involved in maintaining genome
stability are poorly understood. Of particular interest are the subtelomeric
regions of the chromosomes, which contain the majority of the multicopy variant
antigen-encoding genes responsible for virulence and disease severity. Here, we
show that parasites utilize a competitive balance between de novo telomere
addition, also called "telomere healing," and HR to stabilize chromosome ends.
Products of both repair pathways were observed in response to DSBs that occurred 
spontaneously during routine in vitro culture or resulted from experimentally
induced DSBs, demonstrating that both pathways are active in repairing DSBs
within subtelomeric regions and that the pathway utilized was determined by the
DNA sequences immediately surrounding the break. In combination, these two repair
pathways enable parasites to efficiently maintain chromosome stability while also
contributing to the generation of genetic diversity.IMPORTANCE Malaria is a major
global health threat, causing approximately 430,000 deaths annually. This
mosquito-transmitted disease is caused by Plasmodium parasites, with infection
with the species Plasmodium falciparum being the most lethal. Mechanisms
underlying DNA repair and maintenance of genome integrity in P. falciparum are
not well understood and represent a gap in our understanding of how parasites
survive the hostile environment of their vertebrate and insect hosts. Our work
examines DNA repair in real time by using single-molecule real-time (SMRT)
sequencing focused on the subtelomeric regions of the genome that harbor the
multicopy gene families important for virulence and the maintenance of infection.
We show that parasites utilize two competing molecular mechanisms to repair
double-strand breaks, homologous recombination and de novo telomere addition,
with the pathway used being determined by the surrounding DNA sequence. In
combination, these two pathways balance the need to maintain genome stability
with the selective advantage of generating antigenic diversity.

Copyright © 2017 Calhoun et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00547-17 
PMCID: PMC5550746
PMID: 28790200  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

