
1. Malar J. 2017 Aug 17;16(1):343. doi: 10.1186/s12936-017-1976-8.

A new method for sequencing the hypervariable Plasmodium falciparum gene var2csa 
from clinical samples.

Dara A(1), Travassos MA(1), Adams M(1), Schaffer DeRoo S(1), Drábek EF(2),
Agrawal S(2), Laufer MK(1), Plowe CV(1), Silva JC(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Malaria Research, Institute for Global Health, University of
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA. jcsilva@som.umaryland.edu.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. jcsilva@som.umaryland.edu.

BACKGROUND: VAR2CSA, a member of the Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane
protein 1 (PfEMP1) family, mediates the binding of P. falciparum-infected
erythrocytes to chondroitin sulfate A, a surface-associated molecule expressed in
placental cells, and plays a central role in the pathogenesis of placental
malaria. VAR2CSA is a target of naturally acquired immunity and, as such, is a
leading vaccine candidate against placental malaria. This protein is very
polymorphic and technically challenging to sequence. Published var2csa sequences,
mostly limited to specific domains, have been generated through the sequencing of
cloned PCR amplicons using capillary electrophoresis, a method that is both time 
consuming and costly, and that performs poorly when applied to clinical samples
that are commonly polyclonal. A next-generation sequencing platform, Pacific
Biosciences (PacBio), offers an alternative approach to overcome these issues.
METHODS: PCR primers were designed that target a 5 kb segment in the 5' end of
var2csa and the resulting amplicons were sequenced using PacBio sequencing. The
primers were optimized using two laboratory strains and were validated on DNA
from 43 clinical samples, extracted from dried blood spots on filter paper or
from cryopreserved P. falciparum-infected erythrocytes. Sequence reads were
assembled using the SMRT-analysis ConsensusTools module.
RESULTS: Here, a PacBio sequencing-based approach for recovering a segment
encoding the majority of VAR2CSA's extracellular region is described; this
segment includes the totality of the first four domains in the 5' end of var2csa 
(~5 kb), from clinical malaria samples. The feasibility of the method is
demonstrated, showing a high success rate from cryopreserved samples and more
limited success from dried blood spots stored at room temperature, and
characterized the genetic variation of the var2csa locus.
CONCLUSIONS: This method will facilitate a detailed analysis of var2csa genetic
variation and can be adapted to sequence other hypervariable P. falciparum genes.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-017-1976-8 
PMCID: PMC5561619
PMID: 28818101  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

