
1. mBio. 2017 Aug 22;8(4). pii: e00579-17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00579-17.

The Toxoplasma Centrocone Houses Cell Cycle Regulatory Factors.

Naumov A(1), Kratzer S(1), Ting LM(2), Kim K(2), Suvorova ES(1), White MW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Global Health and Florida Center for Drug Discovery and
Innovation, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA.
(2)Departments of Medicine, Pathology, and Microbiology & Immunology, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.
(3)Department of Global Health and Florida Center for Drug Discovery and
Innovation, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA
mwhite.usf@gmail.com.

Our knowledge of cell cycle regulatory mechanisms in apicomplexan parasites is
very limited. In this study, we describe a novel Toxoplasma gondii factor that
has a vital role in chromosome replication and the regulation of cytoplasmic and 
nuclear mitotic structures, and we named this factor ECR1 for essential for
chromosome replication 1. ECR1 was discovered by complementation of a
temperature-sensitive (ts) mutant that suffers lethal, uncontrolled chromosome
replication at 40°C similar to a ts mutant carrying a defect in topoisomerase.
ECR1 is a 52-kDa protein containing divergent RING and TRAF-Sina-like zinc
binding domains that are dynamically expressed in the tachyzoite cell cycle. ECR1
first appears in the unique spindle compartment of the Apicomplexa (centrocone)
of the nuclear envelope in early S phase and then in the nucleus in late S phase 
where it reaches maximum expression. Following nuclear division, but before
daughter parasites separate from the mother parasite, ECR1 is downregulated and
is absent in new daughter parasites. The proteomics of ECR1 identified
interactions with the ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation machinery and the
minichromosome maintenance complex, and the loss of ECR1 led to increased
stability of a key member of this complex, MCM2. ECR1 also forms a stable complex
with the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)-related kinase, Tgondii Crk5 (TgCrk5),
which displays a similar cell cycle expression and localization during tachyzoite
replication. Importantly, the localization of ECR1/TgCrk5 in the centrocone
indicates that this Apicomplexa-specific spindle compartment houses important
regulatory factors that control the parasite cell cycle.IMPORTANCE Parasites of
the apicomplexan family are important causes of human disease, including malaria,
toxoplasmosis, and cryptosporidiosis. Parasite growth is the underlying cause of 
pathogenesis, yet despite this importance, the molecular basis for parasite
replication is poorly understood. Filling this knowledge gap cannot be
accomplished by mining recent whole-genome sequencing data because apicomplexan
cell cycles differ substantially and lack many of the key regulatory factors of
well-studied yeast and mammalian cell division models. We have utilized forward
genetics to discover essential factors that regulate cell division in these
parasites using the Toxoplasma gondii model. An example of this approach is
described here with the discovery of a putative E3 ligase/protein kinase
mechanism involved in regulating chromosome replication and mitotic processes of 
asexual stage parasites.

Copyright © 2017 Naumov et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00579-17 
PMCID: PMC5565962
PMID: 28830940  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

