
1. Parasit Vectors. 2017 Aug 29;10(1):401. doi: 10.1186/s13071-017-2326-y.

Differential gene expression in Anopheles stephensi following infection with
drug-resistant Plasmodium yoelii.

Zhang J(1), Huang J(2), Zhu F(1), Zhang J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, the Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, 
People's Republic of China.
(2)Students brigade 5, The Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, People's
Republic of China.
(3)Department of Pathobiology, the Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, 
People's Republic of China. zhangjiansp@163.com.

BACKGROUND: The transmission of drug-resistant parasites by the mosquito may be
influenced by the altered biological fitness of drug-resistant parasites and
different immune reactions or metabolic change in the mosquito. At this point,
little is known about the variations in mosquito immunity and metabolism when
mosquitoes are infected with drug-resistant parasites. To understand the
differential gene expression in Anopheles following infection with drug-resistant
Plasmodium, we conducted a genome-wide transcriptomic profiling analysis of
Anopheles stephensi following feeding on mice with drug-resistant or
drug-sensitive P. yoelii, observed changes in gene expression profiles and
identified transcripts affected by the drug-resistant parasite.
RESULTS: To study the impact of drug-resistant Plasmodium infections on An.
stephensi gene transcription, we analyzed the three major transition stages of
Plasmodium infections: at 24 h and 13 and 19 days after blood-feeding. Six cDNA
libraries (R-As24h, R-As13d, R-As19d,S-As24h, S-As13dand S-As19d) were
constructed, and RNA sequencing was subsequently performed. In total,
approximately 50.1 million raw reads, 47.9 million clean reads and 7.18G clean
bases were obtained. Following differentially expressed gene (DEG) analysis, GO
enrichment analysis of DEGs, and functional classification by KEGG, we showed
that the variations in gene expression in An. stephensi infected by the
drug-resistant P. yoelii NSM occurred mainly at 13 days after blood meal during
sporozoite migration through the hemolymph. The differentially expressed genes
included those functioning in some important immune reaction and iron metabolism 
pathways, such as pattern recognition receptors, regulators of the JNK pathway,
components of the phagosome pathway, regulators of the melanization response,
activators of complement reactions, insulin signaling cascade members, oxidative 
stress and detoxification proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study shows that drug-resistant P. yoelii NSM has an impact on
the transcript abundance levels of An.stephensi mostly at 13 days after blood
meal during sporozoite migration through the hemolymph and that most
differentially expressed genes were downregulated. Our results highlight the need
for a better understanding of selective pressures from these differentially
expressed genes of the drug-resistant Plasmodium in the mosquito and the
different transmission patterns of drug-resistant Plasmodium by Anopheles.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-017-2326-y 
PMCID: PMC5576267
PMID: 28851458  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

