
1. PLoS One. 2017 Sep 13;12(9):e0184504. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0184504.
eCollection 2017.

Chronic Plasmodium brasilianum infections in wild Peruvian tamarins.

Erkenswick GA(1)(2), Watsa M(2)(3), Pacheco MA(4), Escalante AA(4), Parker
PG(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Whitney R. Harris World Ecology Center, University
of Missouri-St. Louis, Saint Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(2)Field Projects International, Saint Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(3)Department of Anthropology, Washington University in St. Louis, Saint Louis,
Missouri, United States of America.
(4)Department of Biology/Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine (igem),
Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(5)WildCare Institute, Saint Louis Zoo, Saint Louis, Missouri, United States of
America.

There is an increased interest in potential zoonotic malarias. To date,
Plasmodium malariae that infects humans remains indistinguishable from Plasmodium
brasilianum, which is widespread among New World primates. Distributed throughout
tropical Central and South America, the Callitrichidae are small arboreal
primates in which detection of natural Plasmodium infection has been extremely
rare. Most prior screening efforts have been limited to small samples, the use of
low-probability detection methods, or both. Rarely have screening efforts
implemented a longitudinal sampling design. Through an annual mark-recapture
program of two sympatric callitrichids, the emperor (Saguinus imperator) and
saddleback (Saguinus fuscicollis) tamarins, whole blood samples were screened for
Plasmodium by microscopy and nested PCR of the cytochrome b gene across four
consecutive years (2012-2015). Following the first field season, approximately
50% of the samples collected each subsequent year were from recaptured
individuals. In particular, out of 245 samples from 129 individuals, 11 samples
from 6 individuals were positive for Plasmodium, and all but one of these
infections was found in S. imperator. Importantly, the cytochrome b sequences
were 100% identical to former isolates of P. malariae from humans and P.
brasilianum from Saimiri sp. Chronic infections were detected as evidenced by
repeated infections (7) from two individuals across the 4-year study period.
Furthermore, 4 of the 5 infected emperor tamarins were part of a single group
spanning the entire study period. Overall, the low prevalence reported here is
consistent with previous findings. This study identifies two new natural hosts
for P. brasilianum and provides evidence in support of chronic infections in
wildlife populations. Given that callitrichids are often found in mixed-species
associations with other primates and can be resilient to human-disturbed
environments, they could contribute to the maintenance of P. malariae populations
if future work provides entomological and epidemiological evidence indicating
human zoonotic infections.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0184504 
PMCID: PMC5597185
PMID: 28902879  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

