
1. Am J Primatol. 2017 Oct;79(10). doi: 10.1002/ajp.22690. Epub 2017 Sep 13.

Genetic variants related to disease susceptibility and immunotolerance in the
Duffy antigen receptor for chemokines (DARC, Fy) gene in the black lion tamarin
(Leontopithecus chrysopygus, primates).

Ansel A(1), Lewis JD(1)(2), Melnick DJ(3), Martins C(4), Valladares-Padua C(4),
Perez-Sweeney B(1)(2)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Fordham University, Bronx, New York.
(2)Louis Calder Center-Biological Field Station, Fordham University, Armonk, New 
York.
(3)Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Environmental Biology, Columbia
University, New York, New York.
(4)IPÊ Instituto de Pesquisas Ecológicas, Escola Superior de Conservação
Ambiental e Sustentabilidade-ESCAS, Nazaré Paulista, Brazil.
(5)Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.

The DARC (Duffy antigen receptor for chemokines) gene encodes the DARC protein,
which serves multiple roles in the immune system, as a binding site for the
malarial parasites Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium knowlesi, a promiscuous
chemokine receptor and a blood group antigen. Variation in DARC may play
particularly significant roles in innate immunity, immunotolerance and pathogen
entry in callitrichines, such as the black lion tamarin (Leontopithecus
chrysopygus). We compared amino acid sequences of DARC in the black lion tamarin 
(BLT) to non-human Haplorhine primates and Homo sapiens. Consistent with prior
studies in other Haplorhines, we observed that the chemokine receptor experiences
two opposing selection forces: (1) positive selection on the Plasmodium binding
site and (2) purifying selection. We observed also that D21N, F22L, and V25L
differentiated BLT from humans at a critical site for P. vivax and P. knowlesi
binding. One amino acid residue, F22L, was subject to both positive selection and
fixation in New World monkeys, suggesting a beneficial role as an adaptive
barrier to Plasmodium entry. Unlike in humans, we observed no variation in DARC
among BLTs, suggesting that the protein does not play a role in immunotolerance. 
In addition, lion tamarins differed from humans at the blood compatibility Fya
/Fyb antigen-binding site 44, as well as at the putative destabilizing residues
A61, T68, A187, and L215, further supporting a difference in the functional role 
of DARC in these primates compared with humans. Further research is needed to
determine whether changes in the Plasmodium and Fya /Fyb antigen-binding sites
disrupt DARC function in callitrichines.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajp.22690 
PMID: 28902417  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

