
1. Malar J. 2017 Sep 22;16(1):384. doi: 10.1186/s12936-017-2029-z.

Integrative analysis associates monocytes with insufficient erythropoiesis during
acute Plasmodium cynomolgi malaria in rhesus macaques.

Tang Y(1)(2), Joyner CJ(2), Cabrera-Mora M(2), Saney CL(2), Lapp SA(2), Nural
MV(2)(3)(4), Pakala SB(2)(3), DeBarry JD(2)(3), Soderberg S(2); MaHPIC
Consortium, Kissinger JC(2)(3)(5)(6)(4), Lamb TJ(2)(7), Galinski MR(2)(8),
Styczynski MP(9)(10).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(2)Malaria Host-Pathogen Interaction Center, Emory Vaccine Center, Yerkes
National Primate Research Center, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(3)Institute of Bioinformatics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA.
(4)Department of Computer Science, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA.
(5)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA.
(6)Center for Tropical and Emerging Global Diseases, University of Georgia,
Athens, GA, USA.
(7)Department of Pathology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(8)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Emory University,
Atlanta, GA, USA.
(9)School of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA. mark.styczynski@chbe.gatech.edu.
(10)Malaria Host-Pathogen Interaction Center, Emory Vaccine Center, Yerkes
National Primate Research Center, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
mark.styczynski@chbe.gatech.edu.

Erratum in
    Malar J. 2017 Dec 4;16(1):486.

BACKGROUND: Mild to severe anaemia is a common complication of malaria that is
caused in part by insufficient erythropoiesis in the bone marrow. This study used
systems biology to evaluate the transcriptional and alterations in cell
populations in the bone marrow during Plasmodium cynomolgi infection of rhesus
macaques (a model of Plasmodium vivax malaria) that may affect erythropoiesis.
RESULTS: An appropriate erythropoietic response did not occur to compensate for
anaemia during acute cynomolgi malaria despite an increase in erythropoietin
levels. During this period, there were significant perturbations in the bone
marrow transcriptome. In contrast, relapses did not induce anaemia and minimal
changes in the bone marrow transcriptome were detected. The differentially
expressed genes during acute infection were primarily related to ongoing
inflammatory responses with significant contributions from Type I and Type II
Interferon transcriptional signatures. These were associated with increased
frequency of intermediate and non-classical monocytes. Recruitment and/or
expansion of these populations was correlated with a decrease in the erythroid
progenitor population during acute infection, suggesting that monocyte-associated
inflammation may have contributed to anaemia. The decrease in erythroid
progenitors was associated with downregulation of genes regulated by GATA1 and
GATA2, two master regulators of erythropoiesis, providing a potential molecular
basis for these findings.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest the possibility that malarial anaemia may be
driven by monocyte-associated disruption of GATA1/GATA2 function in erythroid
progenitors resulting in insufficient erythropoiesis during acute infection.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-017-2029-z 
PMCID: PMC5610412
PMID: 28938907  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

