
1. J Infect Dis. 2017 Aug 15;216(4):468-476. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jix334.

Association of a Novel Mutation in the Plasmodium falciparum Chloroquine
Resistance Transporter With Decreased Piperaquine Sensitivity.

Agrawal S(1), Moser KA(2), Morton L(1), Cummings MP(3), Parihar A(2), Dwivedi
A(2), Shetty AC(2), Drabek EF(2), Jacob CG(1), Henrich PP(4), Parobek CM(5),
Jongsakul K(6), Huy R(7), Spring MD(6), Lanteri CA(6), Chaorattanakawee S(6)(8), 
Lon C(9)(6), Fukuda MM(6), Saunders DL(6), Fidock DA(4)(10), Lin JT(5), Juliano
JJ(5), Plowe CV(1), Silva JC(2), Takala-Harrison S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Malaria Research, Institute for Global Health.
(2)Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore.
(3)Center for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of Maryland,
College Park.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
(6)Armed Forces Research Institute of Medical Sciences, Department of Immunology 
and Medicine.
(7)National Center for Parasitology Entomology and Malaria Control, Phnom Penh,
Cambodia.
(8)Department of Parasitology and Entomology, Faculty of Public Health, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(9)Armed Forces Research Institute of Medical Sciences.
(10)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Columbia University 
Medical Center, New York.

Background: Amplified copy number in the plasmepsin II/III genes within
Plasmodium falciparum has been associated with decreased sensitivity to
piperaquine. To examine this association and test whether additional loci might
also contribute, we performed a genome-wide association study of ex vivo P.
falciparum susceptibility to piperaquine.
Methods: Plasmodium falciparum DNA from 183 samples collected primarily from
Cambodia was genotyped at 33716 genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs). Linear mixed models and random forests were used to estimate associations
between parasite genotypes and piperaquine susceptibility. Candidate
polymorphisms were evaluated for their association with
dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine treatment outcomes in an independent dataset.
Results: Single nucleotide polymorphisms on multiple chromosomes were associated 
with piperaquine 90% inhibitory concentrations (IC90) in a genome-wide analysis. 
Fine-mapping of genomic regions implicated in genome-wide analyses identified
multiple SNPs in linkage disequilibrium with each other that were significantly
associated with piperaquine IC90, including a novel mutation within the gene
encoding the P. falciparum chloroquine resistance transporter, PfCRT. This
mutation (F145I) was associated with dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine treatment
failure after adjusting for the presence of amplified plasmepsin II/III, which
was also associated with decreased piperaquine sensitivity.
Conclusions: Our data suggest that, in addition to plasmepsin II/III copy number,
other loci, including pfcrt, may also be involved in piperaquine resistance.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jix334 
PMCID: PMC5853219
PMID: 28931241  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

