
1. JCI Insight. 2017 Sep 21;2(18). pii: 95352. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.95352.
eCollection 2017 Sep 21.

Monocyte dysregulation and systemic inflammation during pediatric falciparum
malaria.

Dobbs KR(1)(2), Embury P(1), Vulule J(3), Odada PS(3), Rosa BA(4), Mitreva M(4), 
Kazura JW(1), Dent AE(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Global Health and Diseases, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(2)Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, University Hospitals Rainbow Babies
and Children's Hospital, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(3)Centre for Global Health Research, Kenya Medical Research Institute, Kisumu,
Kenya.
(4)McDonnell Genome Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri, USA.

BACKGROUND: Inflammation and monocytes are thought to be important to human
malaria pathogenesis. However, the relationship of inflammation and various
monocyte functions to acute malaria, recovery from acute malaria, and
asymptomatic parasitemia in endemic populations is poorly understood.
METHODS: We evaluated plasma cytokine levels, monocyte subsets, monocyte
functional responses, and monocyte inflammatory transcriptional profiles of 1- to
10-year-old Kenyan children at the time of presentation with acute uncomplicated 
malaria and at recovery 6 weeks later; these results were compared with analogous
data from asymptomatic children and adults in the same community.
RESULTS: Acute malaria was marked by elevated levels of proinflammatory and
regulatory cytokines and expansion of the inflammatory "intermediate" monocyte
subset that returned to levels of healthy asymptomatic children 6 weeks later.
Monocytes displayed activated phenotypes during acute malaria, with changes in
surface expression of markers important to innate and adaptive immunity.
Functionally, acute malaria monocytes and monocytes from asymptomatic infected
children had impaired phagocytosis of P. falciparum-infected erythrocytes
relative to asymptomatic children with no blood-stage infection. Monocytes from
both acute malaria and recovery time points displayed strong and equivalent
cytokine responsiveness to innate immune agonists that were independent of
infection status. Monocyte transcriptional profiles revealed regulated and
balanced proinflammatory and antiinflammatory and altered phagocytosis gene
expression patterns distinct from malaria-naive monocytes.
CONCLUSION: These observations provide insights into monocyte functions and the
innate immune response during uncomplicated malaria and suggest that asymptomatic
parasitemia in children is not clinically benign.
FUNDING: Support for this work was provided by NIH/National Institute of Allergy 
and Infectious Diseases (R01AI095192-05), the Burroughs Wellcome Fund/American
Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, and the Rainbow Babies & Children's
Foundation.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.95352 
PMCID: PMC5621919
PMID: 28931756  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

