
1. Hum Mol Genet. 2017 Oct 1;26(R2):R225-R236. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddx253.

The genomic landscape of African populations in health and disease.

Rotimi CN(1), Bentley AR(1), Doumatey AP(1), Chen G(1), Shriner D(1), Adeyemo
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research on Genomics and Global Health, National Human Genome
Research Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

A deeper appreciation of the complex architecture of African genomes is critical 
to the global effort to understand human history, biology and differential
distribution of disease by geography and ancestry. Here, we report on how the
growing engagement of African populations in genome science is providing new
insights into the forces that shaped human genomes before and after the
Out-of-Africa migrations. As a result of this human evolutionary history, African
ancestry populations have the greatest genomic diversity in the world, and this
diversity has important ramifications for genomic research. In the case of
pharmacogenomics, for instance, variants of consequence are not limited to those 
identified in other populations, and diversity within African ancestry
populations precludes summarizing risk across different African ethnic groups.
Exposure of Africans to fatal pathogens, such as Plasmodium falciparum, Lassa
Virus and Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense, has resulted in elevated frequencies of
alleles conferring survival advantages for infectious diseases, but that are
maladaptive in modern-day environments. Illustrating with cardiometabolic traits,
we show that while genomic research in African ancestry populations is still in
early stages, there are already many examples of novel and African
ancestry-specific disease loci that have been discovered. Furthermore, the
shorter haplotypes in African genomes have facilitated fine-mapping of loci
discovered in other human ancestry populations. Given the insights already gained
from the interrogation of African genomes, it is imperative to continue and
increase our efforts to describe genomic risk in and across African ancestry
populations.

Published by Oxford University Press 2017. This work is written by US Government 
employees and is in the public domain in the US.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddx253 
PMCID: PMC6075021
PMID: 28977439  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

