
1. Brief Funct Genomics. 2018 Nov 26;17(6):441-450. doi: 10.1093/bfgp/elx024.

Analysis of protein targets in pathogen-host interaction in infectious diseases: 
a case study on Plasmodium falciparum and Homo sapiens interaction network.

Saha S(1), Sengupta K(2), Chatterjee P(3), Basu S(2), Nasipuri M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering at Dr Sudhir Chandra Sur Degree
Engineering College, India.
(2)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Jadavpur University, India.
(3)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Netaji Subhash Engineering
College, Garia, India.

Infection and disease progression is the outcome of protein interactions between 
pathogen and host. Pathogen, the role player of Infection, is becoming a severe
threat to life as because of its adaptability toward drugs and evolutionary
dynamism in nature. Identifying protein targets by analyzing protein interactions
between host and pathogen is the key point. Proteins with higher degree and
possessing some topologically significant graph theoretical measures are found to
be drug targets. On the other hand, exceptional nodes may be involved in
infection mechanism because of some pathway process and biologically unknown
factors. In this article, we attempt to investigate characteristics of
host-pathogen protein interactions by presenting a comprehensive review of
computational approaches applied on different infectious diseases. As an
illustration, we have analyzed a case study on infectious disease malaria, with
its causative agent Plasmodium falciparum acting as 'Bait' and host, Homo
sapiens/human acting as 'Prey'. In this pathogen-host interaction network based
on some interconnectivity and centrality properties, proteins are viewed as
central, peripheral, hub and non-hub nodes and their significance on infection
process. Besides, it is observed that because of sparseness of the pathogen and
host interaction network, there may be some topologically unimportant but
biologically significant proteins, which can also act as Bait/Prey. So,
functional similarity or gene ontology mapping can help us in this case to
identify these proteins.

DOI: 10.1093/bfgp/elx024 
PMID: 29028886  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

