
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2017 Oct 16;11(10):e0005930. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0005930. eCollection 2017 Oct.

Substantial population structure of Plasmodium vivax in Thailand facilitates
identification of the sources of residual transmission.

Kittichai V(1), Koepfli C(2), Nguitragool W(3), Sattabongkot J(1), Cui L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Mahidol Vivax Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University,
Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.
(3)Department of Molecular Tropical Medicine, Faculty of Tropical Medicine,
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Department of Entomology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium vivax transmission in Thailand has been substantially
reduced over the past 10 years, yet it remains highly endemic along international
borders. Understanding the genetic relationship of residual parasite populations 
can help track the origins of the parasites that are reintroduced into
malaria-free regions within the country.
METHODOLOGY/RESULTS: A total of 127 P. vivax isolates were genotyped from two
western provinces (Tak and Kanchanaburi) and one eastern province (Ubon
Ratchathani) of Thailand using 10 microsatellite markers. Genetic diversity was
high, but recent clonal expansion was detected in all three provinces.
Substantial population structure and genetic differentiation of parasites among
provinces suggest limited gene flow among these sites. There was no haplotype
sharing among the three sites, and a reduced panel of four microsatellite markers
was sufficient to assign the parasites to their provincial origins.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Significant parasite genetic differentiation between
provinces shows successful interruption of parasite spread within Thailand, but
high diversity along international borders implies a substantial parasite
population size in these regions. The provincial origin of P. vivax cases can be 
reliably determined by genotyping four microsatellite markers, which should be
useful for monitoring parasite reintroduction after malaria elimination.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0005930 
PMCID: PMC5658191
PMID: 29036178  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

