
1. Mol Biol Evol. 2018 Feb 1;35(2):287-298. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msx258.

Whole-Genome Sequencing of African Dogs Provides Insights into Adaptations
against Tropical Parasites.

Liu YH(1)(2), Wang L(1), Xu T(3), Guo X(3), Li Y(3), Yin TT(2)(4), Yang HC(5), Hu
Y(6), Adeola AC(2)(4), Sanke OJ(7), Otecko NO(2)(4), Wang M(1), Ma Y(1), Charles 
OS(8), Sinding MS(9)(10), Gopalakrishnan S(9), Alfredo Samaniego J(9), Hansen
AJ(9), Fernandes C(11), Gaubert P(12), Budd J(13), Dawuda PM(14), Knispel Rueness
E(15), Jiang L(6), Zhai W(5), Gilbert MTP(9)(16)(17), Peng MS(2)(4), Qi X(3),
Wang GD(2)(4), Zhang YP(1)(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Bio-Resources in
Yunnan, and School of Life Sciences, Yunnan University, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, and Yunnan Laboratory
of Molecular Biology of Domestic Animals, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of Chinese
Academy of Sciences/Key Laboratory of Bioactive Peptides of Yunnan Province,
Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan,
China.
(4)Sino-Africa Joint Research Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming,
Yunnan, China.
(5)Human Genetics, Genome Institute of Singapore, A*STAR, Singapore.
(6)CAS Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology and Immunology, Institut Pasteur of
Shanghai, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(7)Taraba State Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Jalingo, Taraba
State, Nigeria.
(8)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria.
(9)Natural History Museum of Denmark, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(10)Natural History Museum, University of Oslo, Blindern, Oslo, Norway.
(11)CE3C-Centre for Ecology, Evolution and Environmental Changes, Departamento de
Biologia Animal, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal.
(12)Institut des Sciences de l'Evolution de Montpellier (ISEM)-UM-CNRS-IRD-EPHE, 
Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(13)Breeding Centre for Endangered Arabian Wildlife, Sharjah, United Arab
Emirates.
(14)Department of Veterinary Surgery and Theriogenology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Agriculture Makurdi, Benue State, Nigeria.
(15)Centre for Ecological and Evolutionary Synthesis (CEES), Department of
Biosciences, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(16)Trace and Environmental DNA Laboratory, Department of Environment and
Agriculture, Curtin University, Perth, WA, Australia.
(17)Norwegian University of Science and Technology, University Museum, Trondheim,
Norway.

Comment in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2018 Feb 1;35(2):523.

Natural selection in domestic dogs is of great interest in evolutionary biology
since dogs have migrated to every inhabited continent of the world alongside
humans, and adapted to diverse environments. Here, we explored their demographic 
history and genetic basis of adaptation to the tropical African environment using
whole genome analyses of 19 African indigenous dogs from Nigeria. Demographic
analysis suggests that the ancestors of these dogs migrated into Africa from
Eurasia 14,000 years ago and underwent a severe founder effect before population 
expansion. Admixture analysis further reveals that African dog genomes contain
about 1.88-3.50% introgression from African golden wolves (Canis anthus).
Population genetic analysis identifies 50 positively selected genes linked with
immunity, angiogenesis, ultraviolet protection, as well as insulin secretion and 
sensitivity that may contribute to adaptation to tropical conditions. One of the 
positively selected genes, adhesion G protein-coupled receptor E1 (ADGRE1), has
also been found to be association with severe malaria resistance in African human
populations. Functional assessments showed that ADGRE1 provides protective host
defense against Plasmodium infections. This result, together with the fact that
the inflammatory response to canine babesiosis is similar to complicated
falciparum malaria in humans, support the dogs as a model for the study of
malaria control and treatment.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msx258 
PMID: 29040727  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

