
1. Insect Mol Biol. 2018 Feb;27(1):110-122. doi: 10.1111/imb.12351. Epub 2017 Oct
25.

The Anopheles gambiae ATP-binding cassette transporter family: phylogenetic
analysis and tissue localization provide clues on function and role in
insecticide resistance.

Pignatelli P(1), Ingham VA(1), Balabanidou V(2)(3), Vontas J(2)(4), Lycett G(1), 
Ranson H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vector Biology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine,
Liverpool, UK.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology-Hellas, Heraklion, Greece.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Crete, Heraklion, Greece.
(4)Faculty of Crop Science, Pesticide Science Lab, Agricultural University of
Athens, Athens, Greece.

The role of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters in conferring insecticide
resistance has received much attention recently. Here we identify ABC
transporters differentially expressed in insecticide-resistant populations of the
malaria vector, Anopheles gambiae. Although we found little evidence that the
orthologues of the multidrug resistance proteins described in other species are
associated with resistance in An. gambiae we did identify a subset of ABC
proteins consistently differentially expressed in pyrethroid-resistant
populations from across Africa. We present information on the phylogenetic
relationship, primary sites of expression and potential role of ABC transporters 
in mediating the mosquito's response to insecticides. Furthermore we demonstrate 
that a paralogous group of eight ABCG transporters, clustered on chromosome 3R,
are highly enriched in the legs of An. gambiae mosquitoes, consistent with a
proposed role for this ABC subfamily in transport of lipids to the outer surface 
of the cuticle. Finally, antibodies raised against one of the most highly
expressed ABC transporters in adult females, ABCG7 (AGAP009850), localized this
transporter to the pericardial cells. These data will help prioritize members of 
this gene family for further localization and functional validation studies to
identify the in vivo function of these transporters in the mosquito and determine
whether elevated expression of members of this family contribute to insecticide
resistance.

© 2017 The Authors. Insect Molecular Biology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
on behalf of Royal Entomological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/imb.12351 
PMID: 29068552  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

