
1. PLoS One. 2017 Nov 7;12(11):e0187595. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0187595.
eCollection 2017.

Simultaneous genome-wide gene expression and transcript isoform profiling in the 
human malaria parasite.

Turnbull LB(1)(2), Siwo GH(1)(3), Button-Simons KA(1), Tan A(1)(4), Checkley
LA(1), Painter HJ(5), Llinás M(5)(6), Ferdig MT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Eck Institute for Global Health, University
of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, United States of America.
(2)Ryan White Center for Pediatric Infectious Diseases and Global Health, Indiana
University, Indianapolis, Indiana, United States of America.
(3)IBM Research Africa, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(4)Illumina, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.
(5)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology and Center for Malaria
Research, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania, United
States of America.
(6)Department of Chemistry, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Gene expression DNA microarrays have been vital for characterizing whole-genome
transcriptional profiles. Nevertheless, their effectiveness relies heavily on the
accuracy of genome sequences, the annotation of gene structures, and the
sequence-dependent performance of individual probes. Currently available gene
expression arrays for the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum rely on an
average of 2 probes per gene, usually positioned near the 3' end of genes;
consequently, existing designs are prone to measurement bias and cannot capture
complexities such as the occurrence of transcript isoforms arising from
alternative splicing or alternative start/ stop sites. Here, we describe two
novel gene expression arrays with exon-focused probes designed with an average of
12 and 20 probes spanning each gene. This high probe density minimizes signal
noise inherent in probe-to-probe sequence-dependent hybridization intensity. We
demonstrate that these exon arrays accurately profile genome-wide expression,
comparing favorably to currently available arrays and RNA-seq profiling, and can 
detect alternatively spliced transcript isoforms as well as non-coding RNAs
(ncRNAs). Of the 964 candidate alternate splicing events from published RNA-seq
studies, 162 are confirmed using the exon array. Furthermore, the exon array
predicted 330 previously unidentified alternate splicing events. Gene expression 
microarrays continue to offer a cost-effective alternative to RNA-seq for the
simultaneous monitoring of gene expression and alternative splicing events.
Microarrays may even be preferred in some cases due to their affordability and
the rapid turn-around of results when hundreds of samples are required for
fine-scale systems biology investigations, including the monitoring of the
networks of gene co-expression in the emergence of drug resistance.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0187595 
PMCID: PMC5675406
PMID: 29112986  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

