
1. Mol Ecol. 2018 Jan;27(1):297-309. doi: 10.1111/mec.14436. Epub 2017 Dec 9.

Wolbachia infection alters the relative abundance of resident bacteria in adult
Aedes aegypti mosquitoes, but not larvae.

Audsley MD(1)(2), Seleznev A(1), Joubert DA(3), Woolfit M(3), O'Neill SL(3),
McGraw EA(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, Vic., Australia.
(2)Infection & Immunity Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute and
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton,
Vic., Australia.
(3)Institute of Vector-Borne Disease, Monash University, Clayton, Vic.,
Australia.
(4)Entomology Department & The Center for Infectious Disease Dynamics, The
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA.

Insect-symbiont interactions are known to play key roles in host functions and
fitness. The common insect endosymbiont Wolbachia can reduce the ability of
several human pathogens, including arboviruses and the malaria parasite, to
replicate in insect hosts. Wolbachia does not naturally infect Aedes aegypti, the
primary vector of dengue virus, but transinfected Ae. aegypti have antidengue
virus properties and are currently being trialled as a dengue biocontrol
strategy. Here, we assess the impact of Wolbachia infection of Ae. aegypti on the
microbiome of wild mosquito populations (adults and larvae) collected from
release sites in Cairns, Australia, by profiling the 16S rRNA gene using
next-generation sequencing. Our data indicate that Wolbachia reduces the relative
abundance of a large proportion of bacterial taxa in Ae. aegypti adults, that is 
in accordance with the known pathogen-blocking effects of Wolbachia on a variety 
of bacteria and viruses. In adults, several of the most abundant bacterial genera
were found to undergo significant shifts in relative abundance. However, the
genera showing the greatest changes in relative abundance in Wolbachia-infected
adults represented a low proportion of the total microbiome. In addition, there
was little effect of Wolbachia infection on the relative abundance of bacterial
taxa in larvae, or on species diversity (accounting for species richness and
evenness together) detected in adults or larvae. These results offer insight into
the effects of Wolbachia on the Ae. aegypti microbiome in a native setting, an
important consideration for field releases of Wolbachia into the population.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.14436 
PMID: 29165845  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

