
1. BMC Genomics. 2017 Dec 1;18(1):927. doi: 10.1186/s12864-017-4311-4.

The insect pathogenic bacterium Xenorhabdus innexi has attenuated virulence in
multiple insect model hosts yet encodes a potent mosquitocidal toxin.

Kim IH(1)(2), Aryal SK(3), Aghai DT(4), Casanova-Torres ÁM(4), Hillman K(4),
Kozuch MP(4), Mans EJ(4)(5), Mauer TJ(4)(5), Ogier JC(6), Ensign JC(4),
Gaudriault S(6), Goodman WG(1), Goodrich-Blair H(7)(8), Dillman AR(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.
(2)Present address: Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Rockville, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Nematology, University of California, Riverside, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology, University of Tennessee-Knoxville, Knoxville, TN, 
USA.
(6)DGIMI, INRA, Université de Montpellier, 34095, Montpellier, France.
(7)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.
hgblair@utk.edu.
(8)Department of Microbiology, University of Tennessee-Knoxville, Knoxville, TN, 
USA. hgblair@utk.edu.
(9)Department of Nematology, University of California, Riverside, CA, USA.
adlerd@ucr.edu.

BACKGROUND: Xenorhabdus innexi is a bacterial symbiont of Steinernema scapterisci
nematodes, which is a cricket-specialist parasite and together the nematode and
bacteria infect and kill crickets. Curiously, X. innexi expresses a potent
extracellular mosquitocidal toxin activity in culture supernatants. We sequenced 
a draft genome of X. innexi and compared it to the genomes of related pathogens
to elucidate the nature of specialization.
RESULTS: Using green fluorescent protein-expressing X. innexi we confirm previous
reports using culture-dependent techniques that X. innexi colonizes its nematode 
host at low levels (~3-8 cells per nematode), relative to other
Xenorhabdus-Steinernema associations. We found that compared to the
well-characterized entomopathogenic nematode symbiont X. nematophila, X. innexi
fails to suppress the insect phenoloxidase immune pathway and is attenuated for
virulence and reproduction in the Lepidoptera Galleria mellonella and Manduca
sexta, as well as the dipteran Drosophila melanogaster. To assess if, compared to
other Xenorhabdus spp., X. innexi has a reduced capacity to synthesize virulence 
determinants, we obtained and analyzed a draft genome sequence. We found no
evidence for several hallmarks of Xenorhabdus spp. toxicity, including Tc and Mcf
toxins. Similar to other Xenorhabdus genomes, we found numerous loci predicted to
encode non-ribosomal peptide/polyketide synthetases. Anti-SMASH predictions of
these loci revealed one, related to the fcl locus that encodes fabclavines and
zmn locus that encodes zeamines, as a likely candidate to encode the X. innexi
mosquitocidal toxin biosynthetic machinery, which we designated Xlt. In support
of this hypothesis, two mutants each with an insertion in an Xlt biosynthesis
gene cluster lacked the mosquitocidal compound based on HPLC/MS analysis and
neither produced toxin to the levels of the wild type parent.
CONCLUSIONS: The X. innexi genome will be a valuable resource in identifying loci
encoding new metabolites of interest, but also in future comparative studies of
nematode-bacterial symbiosis and niche partitioning among bacterial pathogens.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-017-4311-4 
PMCID: PMC5709968
PMID: 29191166  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

