
1. Cell Microbiol. 2018 Apr;20(4). doi: 10.1111/cmi.12817. Epub 2018 Jan 12.

Plasmodium yoelii S4/CelTOS is important for sporozoite gliding motility and cell
traversal.

Steel RWJ(1), Pei Y(1), Camargo N(1), Kaushansky A(1)(2), Dankwa DA(1), Martinson
T(1), Nguyen T(1), Betz W(1), Cardamone H(1), Vigdorovich V(1), Dambrauskas N(1),
Carbonetti S(1), Vaughan AM(1), Sather DN(1), Kappe SHI(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Disease Research, formerly Seattle Biomedical Research
Institute, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(2)Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
USA.

Gliding motility and cell traversal by the Plasmodium ookinete and sporozoite
invasive stages allow penetration of cellular barriers to establish infection of 
the mosquito vector and mammalian host, respectively. Motility and traversal are 
not observed in red cell infectious merozoites, and we have previously classified
genes that are expressed in sporozoites but not merozoites (S genes) in order to 
identify proteins involved in these processes. The S4 gene has been described as 
criticaly involved in Cell Traversal for Ookinetes and Sporozoites (CelTOS), yet 
knockout parasites (s4/celtos¯) do not generate robust salivary gland sporozoite 
numbers, precluding a thorough analysis of S4/CelTOS function during host
infection. We show here that a failure of oocysts to develop or survive in the
midgut contributes to the poor mosquito infection by Plasmodium yoelii (Py)
s4/celtos¯ rodent malaria parasites. We rescued this phenotype by expressing
S4/CelTOS under the ookinete-specific circumsporozoite protein and
thrombospondin-related anonymous protein-related protein (CTRP) promoter
(S4/CelTOSCTRP ), generating robust numbers of salivary gland sporozoites lacking
S4/CelTOS that were suitable for phenotypic analysis. Py S4/CelTOSCTRP
sporozoites showed reduced infectivity in BALB/c mice when compared to wild-type 
sporozoites, although they appeared more infectious than sporozoites deficient in
the related traversal protein PLP1/SPECT2 (Py plp1/spect2¯). Using in vitro
assays, we substantiate the role of S4/CelTOS in sporozoite cell traversal, but
also uncover a previously unappreciated role for this protein for sporozoite
gliding motility.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12817 
PMID: 29253313  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

