
1. Proteomics Clin Appl. 2018 Jul;12(4):e1700139. doi: 10.1002/prca.201700139. Epub 
2018 Jan 19.

A Perspective on Proteomics of Infectious Diseases.

Venkatesh A(1), Gil C(2), Fuentes M(3)(4), LaBaer J(5), Srivastava S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology
Bombay, Mumbai, India.
(2)Department of Microbiology II and Proteomics Unit, Plaza de Ramón y Cajal s/n,
Complutense University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Medicine and General Cytometry Service-Nucleus, Cancer Research 
Centre (IBMCC/CSIC/USAL/IBSAL), Salamanca, Spain.
(4)Proteomics Unit, Cancer Research Centre (IBMCC/CSIC/USAL/IBSAL), Salamanca,
Spain.
(5)Biodesign Institute, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.

Pneumonia, HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and several other diseases caused by
pathogens largely contribute to the enormous burden of infectious diseases. Over 
the last few decades, the impact of infectious diseases on a population has been 
drastic and remains a major health concern even today. Despite advances in
science and technology in this era of health and development, there is a
substantial knowledge gap in our understanding of the molecular basis of these
infectious diseases. The availability of valuable genomic information for a
number of pathogens and their hosts has improved our understanding of disease
pathogenesis but has not always been useful in addressing important biological
questions. The primary reason lies in the fact that genes do not best reflect the
status of a cell. Proteins represent the functional molecules of a cell and are
ultimately responsible for controlling most aspects of cellular function. Their
existence as different isoforms owing to posttranslational modifications suggests
that many proteins can be produced by the same gene. Furthermore, not all mRNAs
are translated at all times justifying the need to develop additional tools to
study proteins as separate molecular entities. Their presence or absence under
disease conditions, varying levels, different forms, and functions need to be
carefully studied to understand molecular alterations in response to a disease.
Here, we describe the applications of proteomics-based approaches to study
infectious diseases with a note on the objectives of the Human Proteome Project
(HPP)-Human Infectious Diseases (HID) project under the HUPO's flagship program.

© 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/prca.201700139 
PMID: 29282898  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

