
1. J Proteomics. 2018 Mar 1;174:47-60. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2017.12.016. Epub 2017
Dec 27.

Exploring the molecular complexity of Triatoma dimidiata sialome.

Santiago PB(1), de Araújo CN(2), Charneau S(3), Bastos IMD(3), Assumpção TCF(4), 
Queiroz RML(3), Praça YR(1), Cordeiro TM(3), Garcia CHS(3), da Silva IG(5), Raiol
T(6), Motta FN(7), de Araújo Oliveira JV(8), de Sousa MV(3), Ribeiro JMC(4), de
Santana JM(9).

Author information: 
(1)Programa Pós-Graduação em Ciências Médicas, Faculty of Medicine, The
University of Brasília, Brasília, Brazil.
(2)Programa Pós-Graduação em Ciências Médicas, Faculty of Medicine, The
University of Brasília, Brasília, Brazil; Faculty of Ceilândia, The University of
Brasília, Brasília, Brazil. Electronic address: cnunes@unb.br.
(3)Department of Cell Biology, The University of Brasília, Brasília, Brazil.
(4)Vector Biology Section, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease, Rockville, United States.
(5)Department of Parasitology, The University of Goiás, Brazil.
(6)Department of Cell Biology, The University of Brasília, Brasília, Brazil;
Instituto Leônidas e Maria Deane - Fiocruz Amazônia, Manaus, AM, Brazil.
(7)Faculty of Ceilândia, The University of Brasília, Brasília, Brazil.
(8)Department of Computer Science, The University of Brasília, Brasília, Brazil.
(9)Programa Pós-Graduação em Ciências Médicas, Faculty of Medicine, The
University of Brasília, Brasília, Brazil; Department of Cell Biology, The
University of Brasília, Brasília, Brazil.

Triatoma dimidiata, a Chagas disease vector widely distributed along Central
America, has great capability for domestic adaptation as the majority of
specimens caught inside human dwellings or in peridomestic areas fed human blood.
Exploring the salivary compounds that overcome host haemostatic and immune
responses is of great scientific interest. Here, we provide a deeper insight into
its salivary gland molecules. We used high-throughput RNA sequencing to examine
in depth the T. dimidiata salivary gland transcriptome. From >51 million reads
assembled, 92.21% are related to putative secreted proteins. Lipocalin is the
most abundant gene family, confirming it is an expanded family in Triatoma genus 
salivary repertoire. Other putatively secreted members include phosphatases,
odorant binding protein, hemolysin, proteases, protease inhibitors, antigen-5 and
antimicrobial peptides. This work expands the previous set of functionally
annotated sequences from T. dimidiata salivary glands available in NCBI from 388 
to 3815. Additionally, we complemented the salivary analysis through proteomics
(available data via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD008510), disclosing the
set complexity of 119 secreted proteins and validating the transcriptomic
results. Our large-scale approach enriches the pharmacologically active molecules
database and improves our knowledge about the complexity of salivary compounds
from haematophagous vectors and their biological interactions.SIGNIFICANCE:
Several haematophagous triatomine species can transmit Trypanosoma cruzi, the
etiological agent of Chagas disease. Due to the reemergence of this disease, new 
drugs for its prevention and treatment are considered priorities. For this
reason, the knowledge of vector saliva emerges as relevant biological finding,
contributing to the design of different strategies for vector control and disease
transmission. Here we report the transcriptomic and proteomic compositions of the
salivary glands (sialome) of the reduviid bug Triatoma dimidiata, a relevant
Chagas disease vector in Central America. Our results are robust and disclosed
unprecedented insights into the notable diversity of its salivary glands content,
revealing relevant anti-haemostatic salivary gene families. Our work expands
almost ten times the previous set of functionally annotated sequences from T.
dimidiata salivary glands available in NCBI. Moreover, using an integrated
transcriptomic and proteomic approach, we showed a correlation pattern of
transcription and translation processes for the main gene families found, an
important contribution to the research of triatomine sialomes. Furthermore, data 
generated here reinforces the secreted proteins encountered can greatly
contribute for haematophagic habit, Trypanosoma cruzi transmission and
development of therapeutic agent studies.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2017.12.016 
PMCID: PMC5803406
PMID: 29288089  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

