
1. Parasit Vectors. 2018 Jan 3;11(1):3. doi: 10.1186/s13071-017-2601-y.

Genotype and biotype of invasive Anopheles stephensi in Mannar Island of Sri
Lanka.

Surendran SN(1), Sivabalakrishnan K(2), Gajapathy K(2), Arthiyan S(2), Jayadas
TTP(2), Karvannan K(2), Raveendran S(3), Parakrama Karunaratne SHP(4), Ramasamy
R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Jaffna, Jaffna, Sri Lanka.
noble@jfn.ac.lk.
(2)Department of Zoology, University of Jaffna, Jaffna, Sri Lanka.
(3)Department of Geography, University of Jaffna, Jaffna, Sri Lanka.
(4)Department of Zoology, University of Peradeniya, Peradeniya, Sri Lanka.
(5)ID-FISH Technology Inc., 797 San Antonio Road, Palo Alto, CA, 94303, USA.

BACKGROUND: Anopheles stephensi, the major vector of urban malaria in India, was 
recently detected for the first time in Sri Lanka in Mannar Island on the
northwestern coast. Since there are different biotypes of An. stephensi with
different vector capacities in India, a study was undertaken to further
characterise the genotype and biotype of An. stephensi in Mannar Island.
METHODS: Mosquito larvae were collected in Pesalai village in Mannar and
maintained in the insectary until adulthood. Adult An. stephensi were identified 
morphologically using published keys. Identified adult An. stephensi were
molecularly characterized using two mitochondrial (cox1 and cytb) and one nuclear
(ITS2) markers. Their PCR-amplified target fragments were sequenced and checked
against available sequences in GenBank for phylogenetic analysis. The average
spiracular and thoracic lengths and the spiracular index were determined to
identify biotypes based on corresponding indices for Indian An. stephensi.
RESULTS: All DNA sequences for the Mannar samples matched reported sequences for 
An. stephensi from the Middle East and India. However, a single nucleotide
variation in the cox1 sequence suggested an amino acid change from valine to
methionine in the cox1 protein in Sri Lankan An. stephensi. Morphological data
was consistent with the presence of the Indian urban vector An. stephensi
type-form in Sri Lanka.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study provides a more detailed molecular
characterization of An. stephensi and suggests the presence of the type-form of
the vector for the first time in Sri Lanka. The single mutation in the cox1 gene 
may be indicative of a founder effect causing the initial diversification of An. 
stephensi in Sri Lanka from the Indian form. The distribution of the potent urban
vector An. stephensi type-form needs to be established by studies throughout the 
island as its spread adds to the challenge of maintaining the country's
malaria-free status.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-017-2601-y 
PMCID: PMC5753456
PMID: 29298698  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

