
1. Malar J. 2018 Jan 8;17(1):12. doi: 10.1186/s12936-017-2165-5.

Parasitaemia data and molecular characterization of Haemoproteus catharti from
New World vultures (Cathartidae) reveals a novel clade of Haemosporida.

Yabsley MJ(1)(2), Vanstreels RET(3)(4), Martinsen ES(5)(6), Wickson AG(7),
Holland AE(7)(8), Hernandez SM(7)(9), Thompson AT(7), Perkins SL(10), West
CJ(11), Bryan AL(8), Cleveland CA(7)(9), Jolly E(7), Brown JD(12), McRuer D(13), 
Behmke S(14), Beasley JC(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Warnell School of Forestry and Natural Resources, The University of Georgia,
Athens, GA, USA. myabsley@uga.edu.
(2)Southeastern Cooperative Wildlife Disease Study, Department of Population
Health, College of Veterinary Medicine, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA,
USA. myabsley@uga.edu.
(3)Marine Apex Predator Research Unit, Institute for Coastal and Marine Research,
Nelson Mandela University, Port Elizabeth, South Africa.
(4)DST/NRF Centre of Excellence at the Percy FitzPatrick Institute, Department of
Zoology, Nelson Mandela University, Port Elizabeth, South Africa.
(5)Center for Conservation and Evolutionary Genetics, Smithsonian Conservation
Biology Institute, National Zoological Park, Washington DC, USA.
(6)Department of Biology, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, USA.
(7)Warnell School of Forestry and Natural Resources, The University of Georgia,
Athens, GA, USA.
(8)Savannah River Ecology Laboratory, University of Georgia, Aiken, SC, USA.
(9)Southeastern Cooperative Wildlife Disease Study, Department of Population
Health, College of Veterinary Medicine, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA,
USA.
(10)Sackler Institute for Comparative Genomics, American Museum of Natural
History, New York, NY, USA.
(11)Yurok Tribe Wildlife Program, Klamath, CA, USA.
(12)Pennsylvania Game Commission, Animal Diagnostic Laboratory, University Park, 
PA, USA.
(13)Wildlife Center of Virginia, Waynesboro, VA, USA.
(14)Davis College of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Design, Division of
Forestry and Natural Resources, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV, USA.

BACKGROUND: New World vultures (Cathartiformes: Cathartidae) are obligate
scavengers comprised of seven species in five genera throughout the Americas. Of 
these, turkey vultures (Cathartes aura) and black vultures (Coragyps atratus) are
the most widespread and, although ecologically similar, have evolved differences 
in morphology, physiology, and behaviour. Three species of haemosporidians have
been reported in New World vultures to date: Haemoproteus catharti, Leucocytozoon
toddi and Plasmodium elongatum, although few studies have investigated
haemosporidian parasites in this important group of species. In this study,
morphological and molecular methods were used to investigate the epidemiology and
molecular biology of haemosporidian parasites of New World vultures in North
America.
METHODS: Blood and/or tissue samples were obtained from 162 turkey vultures and
95 black vultures in six states of the USA. Parasites were identified based on
their morphology in blood smears, and sequences of the mitochondrial cytochrome b
and nuclear adenylosuccinate lyase genes were obtained for molecular
characterization.
RESULTS: No parasites were detected in black vultures, whereas 24% of turkey
vultures across all sampling locations were positive for H. catharti by blood
smear analysis and/or PCR testing. The phylogenetic analysis of cytochrome b gene
sequences revealed that H. catharti is closely related to MYCAMH1, a yet
unidentified haemosporidian from wood storks (Mycteria americana) in southeastern
USA and northern Brazil. Haemoproteus catharti and MYCAMH1 represent a clade that
is unmistakably separate from all other Haemoproteus spp., being most closely
related to Haemocystidium spp. from reptiles and to Plasmodium spp. from birds
and reptiles.
CONCLUSIONS: Haemoproteus catharti is a widely-distributed parasite of turkey
vultures in North America that is evolutionarily distinct from other
haemosporidian parasites. These results reveal that the genetic diversity and
evolutionary relationships of avian haemosporidians are still being uncovered,
and future studies combining a comprehensive evaluation of morphological and life
cycle characteristics with the analysis of multiple nuclear and mitochondrial
genes will be useful to redefine the genus boundaries of these parasites and to
re-evaluate the relationships amongst haemosporidians of birds, reptiles and
mammals.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-017-2165-5 
PMCID: PMC5759834
PMID: 29310650  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

