
1. Parasit Vectors. 2018 Jan 15;11(1):38. doi: 10.1186/s13071-018-2619-9.

Molecular characterization of Babesia microti thioredoxin (BmTrx2) and its
expression patterns induced by antiprotozoal drugs.

Huang J(1), Xiong K(1), Zhang H(1), Zhao Y(1), Cao J(1), Gong H(1), Zhou Y(1),
Zhou J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Parasitology of Ministry of Agriculture, Shanghai
Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Shanghai, 200241, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Animal Parasitology of Ministry of Agriculture, Shanghai
Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Shanghai, 200241, China. jinlinzhou@shvri.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Human babesiosis is an infectious disease that is epidemic in various
regions all over the world. The predominant causative pathogen of this disease is
the intra-erythrocytic parasite Babesia microti. The thioredoxin system is one of
the major weapons that is used in the resistance to the reactive oxygen species
(ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) produced by host immune system. In
other intra-erythrocytic apicomplexans like the malaria parasite Plasmodium
falciparum, anti-oxidative proteins are promising targets for the development of 
anti-parasitic drugs. However, to date, the sequences and biological properties
of thioredoxins and thioredoxin-like molecules of B. microti remain unknown.
Understanding the molecular characterization and function of B. microti
thioredoxins may help to develop anti-Babesia drugs and controlling babesiosis.
METHODS: The full-length B. microti thioredoxin 2 (BmTrx2) gene was obtained
using a rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) method, and the deduced BmTrx2
amino acid sequence was analyzed using regular bioinformatics tools. Recombinant 
BmTrx2 protein was expressed in vitro and purified using His-tag protein affinity
chromatography resins. Reverse transcription PCR, quantitative real-time PCR and 
Western blot were employed to detect the expression and native proteins of
BmTrx2. Indirect immunofluorescence assay was used to localize BmTrx2 in B.
microti. Bovine insulin reduction assays were used to determine the enzyme
activity of the purified recombinant BmTrx2 protein.
RESULTS: The full-length BmTrx2 was 564 bp with a 408 bp open reading frame
encoding a protein of 135 amino acids. The predicted molecular weight of the
protein was 15.5 kDa. A conserved thioredoxin-like family domain was found in
BmTrx2. The expression of BmTrx2 was upregulated on both the third and eighth day
post-infection in mice, whereas expression was downregulated during the beginning
and later stages. The results of Western blot analysis showed the native BmTrx2
in parasite lysates could be detected by mouse anti-BmTrx2 serum and that the
recombinant BmTrx2 protein could be recognized by serum of B. microti-infected
mice. Immunofluorescence microscopy showed that BmTrx2 localized in the cell
cytoplasm of B. microti merozoites in B. microti-infected red blood cells. The
results of bovine insulin reduction assay indicated the purified recombinant
BmTrx2 protein possesses antioxidant enzyme activity. Dihydroartemisinin and
quinine, known anti-malaria drugs, and clindamycin, a known anti-babesiosis drug,
induced significantly higher upregulation of BmTrx2 mRNA.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that BmTrx2 is a functional enzyme with
antioxidant activity and may be involved in the response of B. microti to
anti-parasite drugs.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-018-2619-9 
PMCID: PMC5769273
PMID: 29335000  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

