
1. Malar J. 2018 Jan 16;17(1):33. doi: 10.1186/s12936-018-2179-7.

Blood parasite infections in a wild population of ravens (Corvus corax) in
Bulgaria.

Shurulinkov P(1), Spasov L(2), Stoyanov G(2), Chakarov N(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Museum of Natural History, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia,
Bulgaria.
(2)Birds of Prey Protection Society, Sofia, Bulgaria.
(3)Department of Animal Behaviour, Bielefeld University, 33501, Bielefeld,
Germany. nayden.chakarov@uni-bielefeld.de.
(4)Molecular Ecology and Evolution Lab, Department of Biology, Lund University,
Lund, Sweden. nayden.chakarov@uni-bielefeld.de.

BACKGROUND: Blood parasites have been studied intensely in many families of avian
hosts, but corvids, a particularly cosmopolitan family, remain underexplored.
Haemosporidian parasites of the common raven (Corvus corax) have not been
studied, although it is the largest, most adaptable, and widespread corvid.
Genetic sequence data from parasites of ravens can enhance the understanding of
speciation patterns and specificity of haemosporidian parasites in corvids, and
shed light how these hosts cope with parasite pressure.
METHODS: A baited cage trap was used to catch 86 ravens and a nested PCR protocol
was used to amplify a 479 bp fragment of the haemosporidian cytochrome b gene
from the samples. The obtained sequences were compared with the MalAvi database
of all published haemosporidian lineages and a phylogenetic tree including all
detected raven parasites was constructed. An examination of blood smears was
performed for assessment of infection intensity.
RESULTS: Twenty blood parasite lineages were recovered from ravens caught in a
wild population in Bulgaria. The prevalence of generalist Plasmodium lineages was
49%, and the prevalence of Leucocytozoon lineages was 31%. Out of 13 detected
Leucocytozoon lineages six were known from different corvids, while seven others 
seem to be specific to ravens. A phylogenetic reconstruction suggests that
Leucocytozoon lineages of ravens and other corvids are not monophyletic, with
some groups appearing closely related to parasites of other host families.
CONCLUSIONS: Several different, morphologically cryptic groups of Leucocytozoon
parasites appear to infect corvids. Ravens harbour both generalist corvid
Leucocytozoon as well as apparently species-specific lineages. The extraordinary 
breeding ecology and scavenging lifestyle possibly allow ravens to evade vectors 
and have relatively low blood parasite prevalence compared to other corvids.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-018-2179-7 
PMCID: PMC5771030
PMID: 29338711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

