
1. Transgenic Res. 2018 Feb;27(1):51-60. doi: 10.1007/s11248-018-0057-2. Epub 2018
Jan 18.

Malaria infectivity of xanthurenic acid-deficient anopheline mosquitoes produced 
by TALEN-mediated targeted mutagenesis.

Yamamoto DS(1), Sumitani M(2), Hatakeyama M(3), Matsuoka H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Zoology, Department of Infection and Immunity, Jichi
Medical University, Yakushiji, Shimotsuke, Tochigi, 329-0498, Japan.
daisukey@jichi.ac.jp.
(2)Transgenic Silkworm Research Unit, Genetically Modified Organism Research
Center, Institute of Agrobiological Sciences, National Agriculture and Food
Research Organization (NARO), Owashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(3)Insect Genome Research and Engineering Unit, Institute of Agrobiological
Sciences, National Agriculture and Food Research Organization (NARO), Owashi,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(4)Division of Medical Zoology, Department of Infection and Immunity, Jichi
Medical University, Yakushiji, Shimotsuke, Tochigi, 329-0498, Japan.

Anopheline mosquitoes are major vectors of malaria parasites. When the
gametocytes of the malaria parasite are transferred from a vertebrate to
mosquitoes, they differentiate into gametes, and are fertilized in the midguts of
mosquitoes. Xanthurenic acid (XA), a waste product of the ommochrome synthesis
pathway, has been shown to induce exflagellation during microgametogenesis in
vitro; however, it currently remains unclear whether endogenous XA affects the
infectivity of anopheline mosquitoes to malaria parasites in vivo due to the lack
of appropriate experimental systems such as a XA-deficient line. In the present
study, we produced a XA-deficient line in Anopheles stephensi using transcription
activator-like effector nuclease (TALEN)-mediated gene targeting (knockout) of
the kynurenine 3-monooxygenase (kmo) gene, which encodes an enzyme that
participates in the ommochrome synthesis pathway. The knockout of kmo resulted in
the absence of XA, and oocyst formation was inhibited in the midguts of these
XA-deficient mosquitoes, which, in turn, reduced sporozoite numbers in their
salivary glands. These results suggest that endogenous XA stimulates
exflagellation, and enhances the infectivity of anopheline mosquitoes to malaria 
parasites in vivo. The XA-deficient line of the anopheline mosquito provides a
useful system for analyzing and understanding the associated factors of malaria
gametogenesis in the mosquito midgut.

DOI: 10.1007/s11248-018-0057-2 
PMID: 29349579  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

