
1. mBio. 2018 Jan 23;9(1). pii: e02237-17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02237-17.

Adaptive Evolution of RH5 in Ape Plasmodium species of the Laverania Subgenus.

Plenderleith LJ(1)(2), Liu W(3), MacLean OA(1)(2), Li Y(3), Loy DE(3)(4),
Sundararaman SA(3)(4), Bibollet-Ruche F(3), Learn GH(3), Hahn BH(3)(4), Sharp
PM(5)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Centre for Immunity, Infection and Evolution, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA.
(5)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United 
Kingdom paul.sharp@ed.ac.uk.

Comment in
    mBio. 2018 May 22;9(3):.
    mBio. 2018 May 22;9(3):.

Plasmodium falciparum, the major cause of malaria morbidity and mortality in
humans, has been shown to have emerged after cross-species transmission of one of
six host-specific parasites (subgenus Laverania) infecting wild chimpanzees (Pan 
troglodytes) and western gorillas (Gorilla gorilla). Binding of the
parasite-encoded ligand RH5 to the host protein basigin is essential for
erythrocyte invasion and has been implicated in host specificity. A recent study 
claimed to have found two amino acid changes in RH5 that "drove the host shift
leading to the emergence of P. falciparum as a human pathogen." However, the ape 
Laverania data available at that time, which included only a single distantly
related chimpanzee parasite sequence, were inadequate to justify any such
conclusion. Here, we have investigated Laverania Rh5 gene evolution using
sequences from all six ape parasite species. Searching for gene-wide episodic
selection across the entire Laverania phylogeny, we found eight codons to be
under positive selection, including three that correspond to contact residues
known to form hydrogen bonds between P. falciparum RH5 and human basigin. One of 
these sites (residue 197) has changed subsequent to the transmission from apes to
humans that gave rise to P. falciparum, suggesting a possible role in the
adaptation of the gorilla parasite to the human host. We also found evidence that
the patterns of nucleotide polymorphisms in P. falciparum are not typical of
Laverania species and likely reflect the recent demographic history of the human 
parasite.IMPORTANCE A number of closely related, host-specific malaria parasites 
infecting wild chimpanzees and gorillas have recently been described. The most
important cause of human malaria, Plasmodium falciparum, is now known to have
resulted from a cross-species transmission of one of the gorilla parasites.
Overcoming species-specific interactions between a parasite ligand, RH5, and its 
receptor on host cells, basigin, was likely an important step in the origin of
the human parasite. We have investigated the evolution of the Rh5 gene and found 
evidence of adaptive changes during the diversification of the ape parasite
species at sites that are known to form bonds with human basigin. One of these
changes occurred at the origin of P. falciparum, implicating it as an important
adaptation to the human host.

Copyright © 2018 Plenderleith et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02237-17 
PMCID: PMC5784257
PMID: 29362238  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

