
1. Malar J. 2018 Feb 8;17(1):75. doi: 10.1186/s12936-018-2185-9.

Tools for surveillance of anti-malarial drug resistance: an assessment of the
current landscape.

Nsanzabana C(1), Djalle D(2), Guérin PJ(3)(4), Ménard D(5), González IJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics (FIND), Geneva, Switzerland.
nsanzabana.christian@gmail.com.
(2)Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics (FIND), Geneva, Switzerland.
(3)WorldWide Antimalarial Resistance Network, Oxford, UK.
(4)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(5)Unité Biologie des Interactions Hôte-Parasite, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.

To limit the spread and impact of anti-malarial drug resistance and react
accordingly, surveillance systems able to detect and track in real-time its
emergence and spread need to be strengthened or in some places established.
Currently, surveillance of anti-malarial drug resistance is done by any of three 
approaches: (1) in vivo studies to assess the efficacy of drugs in patients; (2) 
in vitro/ex vivo studies to evaluate parasite susceptibility to the drugs; and/or
(3) molecular assays to detect validated gene mutations and/or gene copy number
changes that are associated with drug resistance. These methods are
complementary, as they evaluate different aspects of resistance; however,
standardization of methods, especially for in vitro/ex vivo and molecular
techniques, is lacking. The World Health Organization has developed a standard
protocol for evaluating the efficacy of anti-malarial drugs, which is used by
National Malaria Control Programmes to conduct their therapeutic efficacy
studies. Regional networks, such as the East African Network for Monitoring
Antimalarial Treatment and the Amazon Network for the Surveillance of
Antimalarial Drug Resistance, have been set up to strengthen regional capacities 
for monitoring anti-malarial drug resistance. The Worldwide Antimalarial
Resistance Network has been established to collate and provide global spatial and
temporal trends information on the efficacy of anti-malarial drugs and
resistance. While exchange of information across endemic countries is essential
for monitoring anti-malarial resistance, sustainable funding for the surveillance
and networking activities remains challenging. The technology landscape for
molecular assays is progressing quite rapidly, and easy-to-use and affordable new
techniques are becoming available. They also offer the advantage of high
throughput analysis from a simple blood spots obtained from a finger prick. New
technologies combined with the strengthening of national reference laboratories
in malaria-endemic countries through standardized protocols and training plus the
availability of a proficiency testing programme, would contribute to the
improvement and sustainability of anti-malarial resistance surveillance networks 
worldwide.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-018-2185-9 
PMCID: PMC5806256
PMID: 29422048  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

