
1. PLoS Pathog. 2018 Feb 22;14(2):e1006836. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006836.
eCollection 2018 Feb.

Two essential Thioredoxins mediate apicoplast biogenesis, protein import, and
gene expression in Toxoplasma gondii.

Biddau M(1), Bouchut A(2), Major J(1), Saveria T(2), Tottey J(1), Oka O(3),
van-Lith M(3), Jennings KE(4), Ovciarikova J(1), DeRocher A(2), Striepen B(4),
Waller RF(5), Parsons M(2)(6), Sheiner L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Centre for Molecular Parasitology, University of Glasgow, 120
University Place Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(2)Center for Infectious Disease Research, Seattle, WA, United States of America.
(3)Institute of Molecular Cell and Systems Biology, Wolfson Link Building,
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(4)Center for Tropical & Emerging Global Diseases, University of Georgia, Brooks 
Dr. Athens, GA, United States of America.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.
(6)Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United
States of America.

Apicomplexan parasites are global killers, being the causative agents of diseases
like toxoplasmosis and malaria. These parasites are known to be hypersensitive to
redox imbalance, yet little is understood about the cellular roles of their
various redox regulators. The apicoplast, an essential plastid organelle, is a
verified apicomplexan drug target. Nuclear-encoded apicoplast proteins traffic
through the ER and multiple apicoplast sub-compartments to their place of
function. We propose that thioredoxins contribute to the control of protein
trafficking and of protein function within these apicoplast compartments. We
studied the role of two Toxoplasma gondii apicoplast thioredoxins (TgATrx), both 
essential for parasite survival. By describing the cellular phenotypes of the
conditional depletion of either of these redox regulated enzymes we show that
each of them contributes to a different apicoplast biogenesis pathway. We provide
evidence for TgATrx1's involvement in ER to apicoplast trafficking and TgATrx2 in
the control of apicoplast gene expression components. Substrate pull-down further
recognizes gene expression factors that interact with TgATrx2. We use genetic
complementation to demonstrate that the function of both TgATrxs is dependent on 
their disulphide exchange activity. Finally, TgATrx2 is divergent from human
thioredoxins. We demonstrate its activity in vitro thus providing scope for drug 
screening. Our study represents the first functional characterization of
thioredoxins in Toxoplasma, highlights the importance of redox regulation of
apicoplast functions and provides new tools to study redox biology in these
parasites.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006836 
PMCID: PMC5823475
PMID: 29470517  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

