
1. PLoS One. 2018 Mar 5;13(3):e0193591. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0193591.
eCollection 2018.

Molecular taxonomy and evolutionary relationships in the Oswaldoi-Konderi complex
(Anophelinae: Anopheles: Nyssorhynchus) from the Brazilian Amazon region.

Saraiva JF(1), Souto RNP(2), Scarpassa VM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Genética de Populações e Evolução de Mosquitos Vetores de
Malária e Dengue, Coordenação de Biodiversidade, Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas 
da Amazônia, Manaus, Amazonas, Brazil.
(2)Laboratório de Arthropoda, Departamento de Ciências Biológicas e da Saúde,
Universidade Federal do Amapá, Macapá, Amapá, Brazil.

Recent studies have shown that Anopheles oswaldoi sensu lato comprises a cryptic 
species complex in South America. Anopheles konderi, which was previously raised 
to synonymy with An. oswaldoi, has also been suggested to form a species complex.
An. oswaldoi has been incriminated as a malaria vector in some areas of the
Brazilian Amazon, Colombia, Peru and Venezuela, but was not recognized as a
vector in the remaining regions in its geographic distribution. The role of An.
konderi as a malaria vector is unknown or has been misattributed to An. oswaldoi.
The focus of this study was molecular identification to infer the evolutionary
relationships and preliminarily delimit the geographic distribution of the
members of these complexes in the Brazilian Amazon region. The specimens were
sampled from 18 localities belonging to five states in the Brazilian Amazon and
sequenced for two molecular markers: the DNA barcode region (COI gene of
mitochondrial DNA) and Internal Transcribed Spacer 2 (ITS2 ribosomal DNA). COI
(83 sequences) and ITS2 (27 sequences) datasets generated 43 and 10 haplotypes,
respectively. Haplotype networks and phylogenetic analyses generated with the
barcode region (COI gene) recovered five groups corresponding to An. oswaldoi
s.s., An. oswaldoi B, An. oswaldoi A, An. konderi and An. sp. nr. konderi; all
pairwise genetic distances were greater than 3%. The group represented by An.
oswaldoi A exhibited three strongly supported lineages. The molecular dating
indicated that the diversification process in these complexes started
approximately 2.8 Mya, in the Pliocene. These findings confirm five very closely 
related species and present new records for these species in the Brazilian Amazon
region. The paraphyly observed for the An. oswaldoi complex suggests that An.
oswaldoi and An. konderi complexes may comprise a unique species complex named
Oswaldoi-Konderi. Anopheles oswaldoi B may be a potential malaria vector in the
extreme north of the Brazilian Amazon, whereas evidence of sympatry for the
remaining species in other parts of the Brazilian Amazon (Acre, Amazonas, Pará
and Rondônia) precluded identification of probable vectors in those areas.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0193591 
PMCID: PMC5837296
PMID: 29505595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

