
1. Insect Mol Biol. 2018 Aug;27(4):429-438. doi: 10.1111/imb.12383. Epub 2018 Mar 9.

Eater and draper are involved in the periostial haemocyte immune response in the 
mosquito Anopheles gambiae.

Sigle LT(1), Hillyer JF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.

Haemocytes respond to infection by phagocytosing pathogens, producing the enzymes
that drive the phenoloxidase-based melanization cascade, secreting lytic factors,
and producing other humoral proteins. A subset of haemocytes, called periostial
haemocytes, aggregate on the surface of the heart of mosquitoes and kill
pathogens in areas of high haemolymph flow. Periostial haemocytes are always
present, but an infection induces the recruitment of additional haemocytes to
these regions. Here, we tested whether members of the Nimrod gene family are
involved in the periostial immune response of the African malaria mosquito,
Anopheles gambiae. Using organismal manipulations, RNA interference (RNAi) and
microscopy, we show that, following an infection with Escherichia coli, nimrod - 
the orthologue of Drosophila NimB2 - is not involved in periostial responses. At 
4 h postinfection, however, RNAi-based knockdown of draper results in a marginal 
increase in the number of periostial haemocytes and a doubling of E. coli
accumulation at the periostial regions. Finally, at 24 h postinfection, knockdown
of eater decreases the number of periostial haemocytes and decreases the
phagocytosis of E. coli on the surface of the heart. Phagocytosis of bacteria is 
more prevalent in the periostial regions of the mid abdominal segments, and
knockdown of draper, nimrod or eater does not alter this distribution. Finally,
knockdown of Nimrod family genes did not have a meaningful effect on the
accumulation of melanin at the periostial regions. This study identifies roles
for eater and draper in the functional integration of the mosquito immune and
circulatory systems.

© 2018 The Royal Entomological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/imb.12383 
PMID: 29520896  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

