
1. Parasit Vectors. 2018 Mar 12;11(1):172. doi: 10.1186/s13071-018-2734-7.

Analysis of microRNA profile of Anopheles sinensis by deep sequencing and
bioinformatic approaches.

Feng X(1)(2), Zhou X(3), Zhou S(4), Wang J(5), Hu W(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, National Health
and Family Planning Commission, WHO Collaborating Center for Tropical Diseases,
National Center for International Research on Tropical Diseases, Shanghai,
200025, People's Republic of China.
(2)Joint Research Laboratory of Genetics and Ecology on Parasites-hosts
Interaction, National Institute of Parasitic Diseases - Fudan University,
Shanghai, 200025, China.
(3)Institute of Software Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310011,
China.
(4)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, National Health
and Family Planning Commission, WHO Collaborating Center for Tropical Diseases,
National Center for International Research on Tropical Diseases, Shanghai,
200025, People's Republic of China. zss163@hotmail.com.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Ministry of Education Key
Laboratory of Contemporary Anthropology, Collaborative Innovation Center for
Genetics and Development, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai,
200438, People's Republic of China. jingwenwang@fudan.edu.cn.
(6)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, National Health
and Family Planning Commission, WHO Collaborating Center for Tropical Diseases,
National Center for International Research on Tropical Diseases, Shanghai,
200025, People's Republic of China. huwwyz@163.com.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Ministry of Education Key
Laboratory of Contemporary Anthropology, Collaborative Innovation Center for
Genetics and Development, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai,
200438, People's Republic of China. huwwyz@163.com.

BACKGROUND: microRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs widely identified in
many mosquitoes. They are reported to play important roles in development,
differentiation and innate immunity. However, miRNAs in Anopheles sinensis, one
of the Chinese malaria mosquitoes, remain largely unknown.
METHODS: We investigated the global miRNA expression profile of An. sinensis
using Illumina Hiseq 2000 sequencing. Meanwhile, we applied a bioinformatic
approach to identify potential miRNAs in An. sinensis. The identified miRNA
profiles were compared and analyzed by two approaches. The selected miRNAs from
the sequencing result and the bioinformatic approach were confirmed with qRT-PCR.
Moreover, target prediction, GO annotation and pathway analysis were carried out 
to understand the role of miRNAs in An. sinensis.
RESULTS: We identified 49 conserved miRNAs and 12 novel miRNAs by next-generation
high-throughput sequencing technology. In contrast, 43 miRNAs were predicted by
the bioinformatic approach, of which two were assigned as novel. Comparative
analysis of miRNA profiles by two approaches showed that 21 miRNAs were shared
between them. Twelve novel miRNAs did not match any known miRNAs of any organism,
indicating that they are possibly species-specific. Forty miRNAs were found in
many mosquito species, indicating that these miRNAs are evolutionally conserved
and may have critical roles in the process of life. Both the selected known and
novel miRNAs (asi-miR-281, asi-miR-184, asi-miR-14, asi-miR-nov5, asi-miR-nov4,
asi-miR-9383, and asi-miR-2a) could be detected by quantitative real-time PCR
(qRT-PCR) in the sequenced sample, and the expression patterns of these miRNAs
measured by qRT-PCR were in concordance with the original miRNA sequencing data. 
The predicted targets for the known and the novel miRNAs covered many important
biological roles and pathways indicating the diversity of miRNA functions. We
also found 21 conserved miRNAs and eight counterparts of target immune pathway
genes in An. sinensis based on the analysis of An. gambiae.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide the first lead to the elucidation of the miRNA
profile in An. sinensis. Unveiling the roles of mosquito miRNAs will undoubtedly 
lead to a better understanding of mosquito biology and mosquito-pathogen
interactions. This work lays the foundation for the further functional study of
An. sinensis miRNAs and will facilitate their application in vector control.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-018-2734-7 
PMCID: PMC5848538
PMID: 29530087  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

