
1. J Infect Dis. 2018 Jun 5;218(1):35-43. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiy170.

Human Immunization With a Polymorphic Malaria Vaccine Candidate Induced
Antibodies to Conserved Epitopes That Promote Functional Antibodies to Multiple
Parasite Strains.

Feng G(1)(2), Boyle MJ(1), Cross N(1), Chan JA(1), Reiling L(1), Osier
F(1)(3)(4), Stanisic DI(5), Mueller I(6), Anders RF(7), McCarthy JS(8), Richards 
JS(1)(2)(9), Beeson JG(1)(2)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Burnet Institute, Melbourne.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia.
(3)Centre for Geographic Medicine - Coast, Kenya Medical Research Institute,
Kilifi, Kenya.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Parasitology, Universitätsklinikum
Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Institute for Glycomics, Griffith University, Southport.
(6)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville.
(7)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, La Trobe University, Melbourne.
(8)Clinical Tropical Medicine Laboratory, Queensland Institute of Medical
Research Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston.
(9)Central Clinical School and Department of Microbiology, Monash University,
Melbourne, Australia.

Comment in
    J Infect Dis. 2018 Jun 5;218(1):5-6.

Background: Overcoming antigenic diversity is a key challenge in the development 
of effective Plasmodium falciparum malaria vaccines. Strategies that promote the 
generation of antibodies targeting conserved epitopes of vaccine antigens may
provide protection against diverse parasites strains. Understanding differences
between vaccine-induced and naturally acquired immunity is important to achieving
this goal.
Methods: We analyzed antibodies generated in a phase 1 human vaccine trial,
MSP2-C1, which included 2 allelic forms of MSP2, an abundant vaccine antigen on
the merozoite surface. Vaccine-induced responses were assessed for functional
activity against multiple parasite strains, and cross-reactivity of antibodies
was determined using competition ELISA and epitope mapping approaches.
Results: Vaccination induced cytophilic antibody responses with
strain-transcending opsonic phagocytosis and complement-fixing function. In
contrast to antibodies acquired via natural infection, vaccine-induced antibodies
were directed towards conserved epitopes at the C-terminus of MSP2, whereas
naturally acquired antibodies mainly targeted polymorphic epitopes. Functional
activity of C-terminal-targeted antibodies was confirmed using monoclonal
antibodies that promoted opsonic phagocytosis against multiple parasite strains.
Conclusion: Vaccination generated markedly different responses to polymorphic
antigens than naturally acquired immunity and targeted conserved functional
epitopes. Induction of antibodies targeting conserved regions of malaria antigens
provides a promising vaccine strategy to overcome antigenic diversity for
developing effective malaria vaccines.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiy170 
PMCID: PMC6904323
PMID: 29584918  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

