
1. PLoS One. 2018 Mar 29;13(3):e0194899. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0194899.
eCollection 2018.

Investigation of the seasonal microbiome of Anopheles coluzzii mosquitoes in
Mali.

Krajacich BJ(1), Huestis DL(1), Dao A(2), Yaro AS(2), Diallo M(2), Krishna A(1), 
Xu J(3), Lehmann T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, NIAID, NIH, Rockville, Maryland,
United States of America.
(2)Malaria Research and Training Center (MRTC), Faculty of Medicine, Pharmacy and
Odonto-stomatology, University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies, Bamako, 
Mali.
(3)Biology Department, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, New Mexico,
United states of America.

The poorly understood mechanisms of dry season persistence of Anopheles spp.
mosquitoes through the dry season in Africa remain a critical gap in our
knowledge of Plasmodium disease transmission. While it is thought that adult
mosquitoes remain in a dormant state throughout this seven-month dry season, the 
nature of this state remains unknown and has largely not been recapitulated in
laboratory settings. To elucidate possible connections of this state with
microbial composition, the whole body microbiomes of adult mosquitoes in the dry 
and wet seasons in two locations of Mali with varying water availability were
compared by sequencing the 16S ribosomal RNA gene. These locations were a village
near the Niger River with year-round water sources (N'Gabakoro, "riparian"), and 
a typical Sahelian area with highly seasonal breeding sites (Thierola Area,
"Sahelian"). The 16S bacterial data consisted of 2057 sequence variants in 426
genera across 184 families. From these data, we found several compositional
differences that were seasonally and spatially linked. Counter to our initial
hypothesis, there were more pronounced seasonal differences in the bacterial
microbiome of riparian, rather than Sahelian areas. These seasonal shifts were
primarily in Ralstonia, Sphingorhabdus, and Duganella spp. bacteria that are
usually soil and water-associated, indicating these changes may be from bacteria 
acquired in the larval environment, rather than adulthood. In Sahelian dry season
mosquitoes, there was a unique intracellular bacteria, Anaplasma, which likely
was acquired through non-human blood feeding. Cytochrome B analysis of blood
meals showed greater heterogeneity in host choice of An. coluzzii independent of 
season in the Thierola area compared to N'Gabakoro (77.5% vs. 94.6% human-origin 
blood meal, respectively), indicating a relaxation of anthropophily. Overall,
this exploratory study provides valuable indications of spatial and seasonal
differences in bacterial composition which help refine this difficult to study
state.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0194899 
PMCID: PMC5875798
PMID: 29596468  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

