
1. Int J Parasitol. 2018 Jul;48(8):657-670. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2018.02.003. Epub 
2018 Apr 3.

Primers targeting mitochondrial genes of avian haemosporidians: PCR detection and
differential DNA amplification of parasites belonging to different genera.

Pacheco MA(1), Cepeda AS(2), Bernotienė R(3), Lotta IA(2), Matta NE(2), Valkiūnas
G(3), Escalante AA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology/Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine (iGEM),
Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA. Electronic address:
Maria.Pacheco@temple.edu.
(2)Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Sede Bogotá-Facultad de Ciencias,
Departamento de Biología, Grupo de Investigación Caracterización genética e
inmunología, Carrera 30 No. 45-03, Bogotá 111321, Colombia.
(3)Nature Research Centre, Akademijos 2, LT-08412 Vilnius, Lithuania.
(4)Department of Biology/Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine (iGEM),
Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA. Electronic address:
Ananias.Escalante@temple.edu.

Haemosporida is a diverse group of vector-borne parasitic protozoa, ubiquitous in
terrestrial vertebrates worldwide. The renewed interest in their diversity has
been driven by the extensive use of molecular methods targeting mitochondrial
genes. Unfortunately, most studies target a 478 bp fragment of the cytochrome b
(cytb) gene, which often cannot be used to separate lineages from different
genera found in mixed infections that are common in wildlife. In this
investigation, an alignment constructed with 114 mitochondrial genome sequences
belonging to four genera (Leucocytozoon, Haemoproteus, Plasmodium and
Hepatocystis) was used to design two different sets of primers targeting the cytb
gene as well as the other two mitochondrial DNA genes: cytochrome c oxidase
subunit 1 and cytochrome c oxidase subunit 3. The design of each pair of primers 
required consideration of different criteria, including a set for detection and
another for differential amplification of DNA from parasites belonging to
different avian haemosporidians. All pairs of primers were tested in three
laboratories to assess their sensitivity and specificity under diverse practices 
and across isolates from different genera including single and natural mixed
infections as well as experimental mixed infections. Overall, these primers
exhibited high sensitivity regardless of the differences in laboratory practices,
parasite species, and parasitemias. Furthermore, those primers designed to
separate parasite genera showed high specificity, as confirmed by sequencing. In 
the case of cytb, a nested multiplex (single tube PCR) test was designed and
successfully tested to differentially detect lineages of Plasmodium and
Haemoproteus parasites by yielding amplicons with different sizes detectable in a
standard agarose gel. To our knowledge, the designed assay is the first test for 
detection and differentiation of species belonging to these two genera in a
single PCR. The experiments across laboratories provided recommendations that can
be of use to those researchers seeking to standardise these or other primers to
the specific needs of their field investigations.

Copyright © 2018 Australian Society for Parasitology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2018.02.003 
PMCID: PMC6004333
PMID: 29625126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

