
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2018 Apr 13;12(4):e0006410. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0006410. eCollection 2018 Apr.

Sialome diversity of ticks revealed by RNAseq of single tick salivary glands.

Perner J(1), Kropáčková S(2), Kopáček P(1), Ribeiro JMC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre of the Czech Academy of Sciences,
České Budějovice, Czech Republic.
(2)Faculty of Science, University of South Bohemia, České Budějovice, Czech
Republic.
(3)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, Bethesda MD, United States of America.

Ticks salivate while feeding on their hosts. Saliva helps blood feeding through
host anti-hemostatic and immunomodulatory components. Previous transcriptomic and
proteomic studies revealed the complexity of tick saliva, comprising hundreds of 
polypeptides grouped in several multi-genic families such as lipocalins,
Kunitz-domain containing peptides, metalloproteases, basic tail secreted
proteins, and several other families uniquely found in ticks. These studies also 
revealed that the composition of saliva changes with time; expression of
transcripts from the same family wax and wane as a function of feeding time.
Here, we examined whether host immune factors could influence sialome switching
by comparing sialomes of ticks fed naturally on a rabbit, to ticks artificially
fed on defibrinated blood depleted of immune components. Previous studies were
based on transcriptomes derived from pools of several individuals. To get an
insight into the uniqueness of tick sialomes, we performed transcriptomic
analyses of single salivary glands dissected from individual adult female I.
ricinus ticks. Multivariate analysis identified 1,279 contigs differentially
expressed as a function of time and/or feeding mode. Cluster analysis of these
contigs revealed nine clusters of differentially expressed genes, four of which
appeared consistently across several replicates, but five clusters were
idiosyncratic, pointing to the uniqueness of sialomes in individual ticks. The
disclosure of tick quantum sialomes reveals the unique salivary composition
produced by individual ticks as they switch their sialomes throughout the blood
meal, a possible mechanism of immune evasion.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0006410 
PMCID: PMC5919021
PMID: 29652888  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

