
1. Mol Ecol. 2018 Jun;27(11):2594-2603. doi: 10.1111/mec.14592. Epub 2018 May 15.

Blood parasites shape extreme major histocompatibility complex diversity in a
migratory passerine.

Biedrzycka A(1), Bielański W(1), Ćmiel A(1), Solarz W(1), Zając T(1), Migalska
M(2), Sebastian A(2), Westerdahl H(3), Radwan J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Nature Conservation, Polish Academy of Sciences, Kraków, Poland.
(2)Evolutionary Biology Group, Faculty of Biology, Adam Mickiewicz University,
Poznań, Poland.
(3)Department of Biology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

Pathogens are one of the main forces driving the evolution and maintenance of the
highly polymorphic genes of the vertebrate major histocompatibility complex
(MHC). Although MHC proteins are crucial in pathogen recognition, it is still
poorly understood how pathogen-mediated selection promotes and maintains MHC
diversity, and especially so in host species with highly duplicated MHC genes.
Sedge warblers (Acrocephalus schoenobaenus) have highly duplicated MHC genes, and
using data from high-throughput MHC genotyping, we were able to investigate to
what extent avian malaria parasites explain temporal MHC class I supertype
fluctuations in a long-term study population. We investigated infection status
and infection intensities of two different strains of Haemoproteus, that is avian
malaria parasites that are known to have significant fitness consequences in
sedge warblers. We found that prevalence of avian malaria in carriers of specific
MHC class I supertypes was a significant predictor of their frequency changes
between years. This finding suggests that avian malaria infections partly drive
the temporal fluctuations of the MHC class I supertypes. Furthermore, we found
that individuals with a large number of different supertypes had higher
resistance to avian malaria, but there was no evidence for an optimal MHC class I
diversity. Thus, the two studied malaria parasite strains appear to select for a 
high MHC class I supertype diversity. Such selection may explain the maintenance 
of the extremely high number of MHC class I gene copies in sedge warblers and
possibly also in other passerines where avian malaria is a common disease.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.14592 
PMID: 29654666  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

