
1. Infect Immun. 2018 Jun 21;86(7). pii: e00899-17. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00899-17. Print
2018 Jul.

TCRβ Combinatorial Immunoreceptor Expression by Neutrophils Correlates with
Parasite Burden and Enhanced Phagocytosis during a Plasmodium berghei ANKA
Malaria Infection.

Chorazeczewski JK(1), Aleshnick M(2), Majam V(2), Okoth WA(1), Kurapova R(2),
Akue A(1), Kukuruga M(1), Kumar S(2), Oakley MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mucosal Pathogens and Cellular Immunology, Division of
Bacterial, Parasitic, and Allergenic Products, Office of Vaccine Research and
Review, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Emerging Pathogens, Division of Emerging and Transfusion
Transmitted Diseases, Office of Blood Research and Review, Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland,
USA.
(3)Laboratory of Mucosal Pathogens and Cellular Immunology, Division of
Bacterial, Parasitic, and Allergenic Products, Office of Vaccine Research and
Review, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA
miranda.oakley@fda.hhs.gov.

Recent studies have demonstrated that a subpopulation of neutrophils express the 
TCRαβ combinatorial immunoreceptor in humans and mice. Here, we report that a
Plasmodium berghei ANKA murine malaria infection induces expansion of TCRβ
expressing CD11b+ Ly6G+ neutrophils in the spleen during the early phase of
infection. Measurement of TCRβ transcript and protein levels of neutrophils in
wild-type versus nude and Rag1 knockout mice establishes that the observed
expression is not a consequence of nonspecific antibody staining or passive
receptor expression due to phagocytosis or trogocytosis of peripheral T cells.
Remarkably, on day 3 postinfection, we observed a highly significant correlation 
between the proportion of neutrophils that express TCRβ and peripheral blood
parasite burden. In addition, TCRβ+ neutrophils phagocytose parasitized
erythrocytes with 4-fold greater efficiency than TCRβ- neutrophils. Together
these results signify that TCR expression by the neutrophil plays an important
role in the regulation of parasite burden by enhancing the phagocytic capacity of
the neutrophil.

This is a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection 
in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00899-17 
PMCID: PMC6013678
PMID: 29685989  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

