
1. Ecol Evol. 2018 Mar 1;8(7):3574-3588. doi: 10.1002/ece3.3803. eCollection 2018
Apr.

Signatures of competition and strain structure within the major blood-stage
antigen of Plasmodium falciparum in a local community in Ghana.

Rorick MM(1)(2), Artzy-Randrup Y(3), Ruybal-Pesántez S(4)(5), Tiedje KE(4)(5),
Rask TS(4)(5), Oduro A(6), Ghansah A(7), Koram K(7), Day KP(4)(5), Pascual
M(1)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolution University of Chicago Chicago IL USA.
(2)Department of Biology University of Utah Salt Lake City UT USA.
(3)Theoretical Ecology Group Institute for Biodiversity and Ecosystem Dynamics
University of Amsterdam Amsterdam The Netherlands.
(4)School of Biosciences Bio21 Institute The University of Melbourne Melbourne
Vic. Australia.
(5)Department of Microbiology New York University New York NY USA.
(6)Navrongo Health Research Center Navrongo Ghana.
(7)Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research University of Ghana Legon
Ghana.
(8)The Santa Fe Institute Santa Fe NM USA.

The concept of niche partitioning has received considerable theoretical attention
at the interface of ecology and evolution of infectious diseases. Strain theory
postulates that pathogen populations can be structured into distinct
nonoverlapping strains by frequency-dependent selection in response to
intraspecific competition for host immune space. The malaria parasite Plasmodium 
falciparum presents an opportunity to investigate this phenomenon in nature,
under conditions of high recombination rate and extensive antigenic diversity.
The parasite's major blood-stage antigen, Pf EMP1, is encoded by the hyperdiverse
var genes. With a dataset that includes thousands of var DBLα sequence types
sampled from asymptomatic cases within an area of high endemicity in Ghana, we
address how var diversity is distributed within isolates and compare this to the 
distribution of microsatellite allelic diversity within isolates to test whether 
antigenic and neutral regions of the genome are structured differently. With
respect to var DBLα sequence types, we find that on average isolates exhibit
significantly lower overlap than expected randomly, but that there also exists
frequent pairs of isolates that are highly related. Furthermore, the linkage
network of var DBLα sequence types reveals a pattern of nonrandom modularity
unique to these antigenic genes, and we find that modules of highly linked DBLα
types are not explainable by neutral forces related to var recombination
constraints, microsatellite diversity, sampling location, host age, or
multiplicity of infection. These findings of reduced overlap and modularity among
the var antigenic genes are consistent with a role for immune selection as
proposed by strain theory. Identifying the evolutionary and ecological dynamics
that are responsible for the nonrandom structure in P. falciparum antigenic
diversity is important for designing effective intervention in endemic areas.

DOI: 10.1002/ece3.3803 
PMCID: PMC5901166
PMID: 29686839 

