
1. PLoS One. 2018 Apr 25;13(4):e0195011. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0195011.
eCollection 2018.

Oligomeric interfaces as a tool in drug discovery: Specific interference with
activity of malate dehydrogenase of Plasmodium falciparum in vitro.

Lunev S(1), Butzloff S(2), Romero AR(1), Linzke M(3), Batista FA(1), Meissner
KA(3), Müller IB(2), Adawy A(1), Wrenger C(3), Groves MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biology Unit, XB20 Drug Design, Department of Pharmacy, University 
of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)LG Müller, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Unit for Drug Discovery, Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences, University of São Paulo, Saõ Paulo, Brazil.

Malaria remains a major threat to human health, as strains resistant to current
therapeutics are discovered. Efforts in finding new drug targets are hampered by 
the lack of sufficiently specific tools to provide target validation prior to
initiating expensive drug discovery projects. Thus, new approaches that can
rapidly enable drug target validation are of significant interest. In this
manuscript we present the crystal structure of malate dehydrogenase from
Plasmodium falciparum (PfMDH) at 2.4 Å resolution and structure-based mutagenic
experiments interfering with the inter-oligomeric interactions of the enzyme. We 
report decreased thermal stability, significantly decreased specific activity and
kinetic parameters of PfMDH mutants upon mutagenic disruption of either
oligomeric interface. In contrast, stabilization of one of the interfaces
resulted in increased thermal stability, increased substrate/cofactor affinity
and hyperactivity of the enzyme towards malate production at sub-millimolar
substrate concentrations. Furthermore, the presented data show that our designed 
PfMDH mutant could be used as specific inhibitor of the wild type PfMDH activity,
as mutated PfMDH copies were shown to be able to self-incorporate into the native
assembly upon introduction in vitro, yielding deactivated mutant:wild-type
species. These data provide an insight into the role of oligomeric assembly in
regulation of PfMDH activity and reveal that recombinant mutants could be used as
probe tool for specific modification of the wild type PfMDH activity, thus
offering the potential to validate its druggability in vivo without recourse to
complex genetics or initial tool compounds. Such tool compounds often lack
specificity between host or pathogen proteins (or are toxic in in vivo trials)
and result in difficulties in assessing cause and effect-particularly in cases
when the enzymes of interest possess close homologs within the human host.
Furthermore, our oligomeric interference approach could be used in the future in 
order to assess druggability of other challenging human pathogen drug targets.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0195011 
PMCID: PMC5919072
PMID: 29694407  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

