
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2018 May 2;12(5):e0006463. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0006463.
eCollection 2018 May.

microRNA profiles and functions in mosquitoes.

Feng X(1)(2), Zhou S(1), Wang J(3), Hu W(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, National Health
and Family Planning Commission, WHO Collaborating Center for Tropical Diseases,
National Center for International Research on Tropical Diseases, Shanghai, PR
China.
(2)Joint Research Laboratory of Genetics and Ecology on Parasites-hosts
Interaction, National Institute of Parasitic Diseases-Fudan University, Shanghai,
PR China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Ministry of Education Key
Laboratory of Contemporary Anthropology, Collaborative Innovation Center for
Genetics and Development, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, PR
China.

Mosquitoes are incriminated as vectors for many crippling diseases, including
malaria, West Nile fever, Dengue fever, and other neglected tropical diseases
(NTDs). microRNAs (miRNAs) can interact with multiple target genes to elicit
biological functions in the mosquitoes. However, characterization and function of
individual miRNAs and their potential targets have not been fully determined to
date. We conducted a systematic review of published literature following PRISMA
guidelines. We summarize the information about miRNAs in mosquitoes to better
understand their metabolism, development, and responses to microorganisms.
Depending on the study, we found that miRNAs were dysregulated in a species-,
sex-, stage-, and tissue/organ-specific manner. Aberrant miRNA expressions were
observed in development, metabolism, host-pathogen interactions, and insecticide 
resistance. Of note, many miRNAs were down-regulated upon pathogen infection. The
experimental studies have expanded the identification of miRNA target from the 3'
untranslated regions (UTRs) of mRNAs of mosquitoes to the 5' UTRs of mRNAs of the
virus. In addition, we discuss current trends in mosquito miRNA research and
offer suggestions for future studies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0006463 
PMCID: PMC5951587
PMID: 29718912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

