
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2018 Jun 26;62(7). pii: e00288-18. doi:
10.1128/AAC.00288-18. Print 2018 Jul.

The Artemisinin Derivative Artemisone Is a Potent Inhibitor of Human
Cytomegalovirus Replication.

Oiknine-Djian E(1)(2)(3), Weisblum Y(1)(2)(3), Panet A(2), Wong HN(4), Haynes
RK(4), Wolf DG(5)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Virology Unit, Hadassah Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, 
Israel.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and the Chanock Center for Virology, IMRIC, the
Hebrew University Faculty of Medicine, Jerusalem, Israel.
(3)The Lautenberg Center for General and Tumor Immunology, IMRIC, the Hebrew
University Faculty of Medicine, Jerusalem, Israel.
(4)Pharmacen, Faculty of Health Sciences, North-West University, Potchefstroom,
South Africa.
(5)Clinical Virology Unit, Hadassah Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, 
Israel dana.wolf@ekmd.huji.ac.il.

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a major cause of disease in immunocompromised
individuals and the most common cause of congenital infection and neurosensorial 
disease. The expanding target populations for HCMV antiviral treatment along with
the limitations of the currently available HCMV DNA polymerase inhibitors
underscore the need for new antiviral agents with alternative modes of action.
The antimalarial artemisinin derivative artesunate was shown to inhibit HCMV in
vitro yet has demonstrated limited antiviral efficacy in vivo, prompting our
search for more potent anti-HCMV artemisinin derivatives. Here we show that the
innovative artemisinin derivative artemisone, which has been screened for its
activity against malaria parasites in human clinical studies, is a potent and
noncytotoxic inhibitor of HCMV. Artemisone exhibited an antiviral efficacy
comparable to that of ganciclovir (50% effective concentration, 1.20 ± 0.46 μM)
in human foreskin fibroblasts, with enhanced relative potency in lung fibroblasts
and epithelial cells. Significantly, the antiviral efficacy of artemisone was
consistently ≥10-fold superior to that of artesunate in all cells. Artemisone
effectively inhibited both laboratory-adapted and low-passage-number clinical
strains, as well as drug-resistant HCMV strains. By using quantitative viral
kinetics and gene expression studies, we show that artemisone is a reversible
inhibitor targeting an earlier phase of the viral replication cycle than
ganciclovir. Importantly, artemisone most effectively inhibited HCMV infection ex
vivo in a clinically relevant multicellular model of integral human placental
tissues maintained in organ culture. Our promising findings encourage preclinical
and clinical studies of artemisone as a new inhibitor against HCMV.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00288-18 
PMCID: PMC6021623
PMID: 29712656  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

