
1. Sci Rep. 2018 Jun 11;8(1):8896. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-27073-1.

Elevated plasma abscisic acid is associated with asymptomatic falciparum malaria 
and with IgG-/caspase-1-dependent immunity in Plasmodium yoelii-infected mice.

Glennon EKK(1)(2), Megawati D(1)(3), Torrevillas BK(1)(3), Ssewanyana I(4)(5),
Huang L(6), Aweeka F(6), Greenhouse B(7), Adams LG(8), Luckhart S(9)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of California
Davis, Davis, California, United States of America.
(2)Center for Infectious Disease Research, Seattle, Washington, United States of 
America.
(3)Department of Entomology, Plant Pathology and Nematology and Department of
Biological Sciences, University of Idaho, Moscow, Idaho, United States of
America.
(4)Infectious Disease Research Collaboration, Kampala, Uganda.
(5)London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Drug Research Unit, Department of Clinical Pharmacology, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America.
(7)University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United
States of America.
(8)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, United States 
of America.
(9)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of California
Davis, Davis, California, United States of America. sluckhart@uidaho.edu.
(10)Department of Entomology, Plant Pathology and Nematology and Department of
Biological Sciences, University of Idaho, Moscow, Idaho, United States of
America. sluckhart@uidaho.edu.

Abscisic acid (ABA) is an ancient stress hormone and is detectable in a wide
variety of organisms where it regulates innate immunity and inflammation.
Previously, we showed that oral supplementation with ABA decreased parasitemia in
a mouse model of malaria, decreased liver and spleen pathology and reduced
parasite transmission to mosquitoes. Here, we report that higher circulating ABA 
levels were associated with a reduced risk of symptomatic malaria in a cohort of 
Plasmodium falciparum-infected Ugandan children. To understand possible
mechanisms of ABA protection in malaria, we returned to our mouse model to show
that ABA effects on Plasmodium yoelii 17XNL infection were accompanied by minimal
effects on complete blood count and blood chemistry analytes, suggesting a
benefit to host health. In addition, orally delivered ABA induced patterns of
gene expression in mouse liver and spleen that suggested enhancement of host
anti-parasite defenses. To test these inferences, we utilized passive
immunization and knockout mice to demonstrate that ABA supplementation increases 
circulating levels of protective, parasite-specific IgG and requires caspase-1 to
reduce parasitemia. Collectively, ABA induces host responses that ameliorate
infection and disease in an animal model and suggest that further studies of ABA 
in the context of human malaria are warranted.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-27073-1 
PMCID: PMC5995817
PMID: 29891920  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

