
1. Yao Xue Xue Bao. 2016 Nov;51(11):1791-8.

[Molecular cloning and functional characterization of the gene encoding
hydroxy-2-methyl-2-(E)-butenyl 4-diphosphate reductase gene from Artemisia annua 
L.].

[Article in Chinese]

Cao F, Xia J, Chen YP, Zhang M, Xiang LE, Zeng JL, Chen M, Lan XZ, Liao ZH.

Artemisinin is the first choice for malaria treatment. The plastidial MEP pathway
provides 5-carbon precursors (IPP and its isomer DMAPP) for the biosynthesis of
isoprenoid (including artemisinin). Hydroxy-2-methyl-2-(E)-butenyl 4-diphosphate 
reductase (HDR) is the last enzyme involved in the MEP pathway, which catalyzes
HMBPP to form IPP and DMAPP. In this study, we isolated the full-length cDNA of
HDR from Artemisia annua L. (AaHDR2) and performed functional analysis. According
to gene expression analysis of AaHDR2 (GenBank: KX058541) and AaHDR1 reported
ever (GenBank: ADC84348.1) by qPCR, we found that AaHDR1 and AaHDR2 had much
higher expression level in trichomes than that in roots, stems, leaves and
flowers. AaHDR2 had much higher expression level in flowers than that in leaves. 
Further, the plant hormones such as Me JA and ABA respectively up-regulated the
expression level of AaHDR1 and AaHDR2 significantly, but GA3 up-regulated the
expression level of AaHDR2 only. The gene expression analysis of AaHDR1 and
AaHDR2 showed that AaHDR2 had a greater contribution than AaHDR1 to isoprenoid
biosynthesis(including artemisinin). We used AaHDR2 for the following
experiments. Bioinformatic analysis indicated that AaHDR2 belonged to the HDR
family and the functional complementation assay showed that AaHDR2 did have the
enzymatic function of HDR, using E. coli mutant MG1655(ara)<>HDR as host cell.
The subcellular localization assay showed that AaHDR2 fused with GFP at its
N-terminal specifically targeted in chloroplasts. Finally, AaHDR2 was
overexpressed in Arabidopsis thaliana. The AaHDR2-overexpressing plants produced 
the isoprenoids including chlorophyll a, chlorophyll b and carotenoids at
significantly higher levels than the wild-type Arabidopsis plants. In summary,
AaHDR2 might be a candidate gene for genetic improvement of the isoprenoid
biosynthesis.


PMID: 29908529  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

