
1. J Evol Biol. 2018 Oct;31(10):1544-1557. doi: 10.1111/jeb.13349. Epub 2018 Jul 19.

Major histocompatibility complex variation and blood parasites in resident and
migratory populations of the common yellowthroat.

Whittingham LA(1), Dunn PO(1), Freeman-Gallant CR(2), Taff CC(3), Johnson JA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Behavioral and Molecular Ecology Group, Department of Biological Sciences,
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, WI, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Skidmore College, Saratoga Springs, NY, USA.
(3)Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, Institute of Applied Sciences, University
of North Texas, Denton, TX, USA.

Genes of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) are a critical part of the
adaptive immune response, and the most polymorphic genes in the vertebrate
genome, especially in passerine birds. This diversity is thought to be influenced
by exposure to pathogens which can vary in relation to numerous factors.
Migratory behaviour may be a particularly important trait to consider because
migratory birds are exposed to a greater number of different pathogens and
parasites at both breeding (i.e. temperate) and overwintering (i.e. tropical and 
subtropical) areas, as well as at stopover sites during migration. Thus, migrants
are predicted to have greater MHC diversity than residents. We compared MHC
variation, at both class I and II, and levels of haemosporidian infection between
one resident and two migratory populations of the common yellowthroat (Geothlypis
trichas). We found that residents were less likely to be infected with
haemosporidian parasites and had lower MHC diversity at class I; however,
variation at MHC class II was greater in residents than migrants, contrary to our
prediction. These patterns were not likely to be caused by differences in
population demography as genomewide heterozygosity (based on 9225 single
nucleotide polymorphisms) was high in all three populations and not correlated
with MHC variation. Our different results for MHC class I and II suggest that
studies of immune gene variation in relation to life history need to consider
that there could be different selection pressures arising from intracellular
(class I) and extracellular (class II) pathogens in different populations.

© 2018 European Society For Evolutionary Biology. Journal of Evolutionary Biology
© 2018 European Society For Evolutionary Biology.

DOI: 10.1111/jeb.13349 
PMID: 29964353  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

