
1. Malar J. 2018 Jul 20;17(1):271. doi: 10.1186/s12936-018-2419-x.

Genetic diversity and population structure of malaria vector mosquitoes Anopheles
subpictus, Anopheles peditaeniatus, and Anopheles vagus in five districts of Sri 
Lanka.

Weeraratne TC(1), Surendran SN(2), Walton C(3), Karunaratne SHPP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, University of Peradeniya,
Peradeniya, Sri Lanka.
(2)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, University of Jaffna, Jaffna, Sri
Lanka.
(3)School of Earth and Environment, Faculty of Science and Engineering,
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(4)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, University of Peradeniya,
Peradeniya, Sri Lanka. shppkaru@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Although Sri Lanka is considered as a malaria-free nation, the threat
of re-emergence of outbreaks still remains due to the high prevalence and
abundance of malaria vectors. Analysis of population genetic structure of malaria
vectors is considered to be one of the vital components in implementing
successful vector control programmes. The present study was conducted to
determine the population genetic structure of three abundant malaria vectors;
Anopheles subpictus sensu lato (s.l.), Anopheles peditaneatus and Anopheles vagus
from five administrative districts in two climatic zones; intermediate zone
(Badulla and Kurunegala districts) and dry zone (Ampara, Batticoloa and Jaffna
districts) of Sri Lanka using the mitochondrial gene, cytochrome c oxidase
subunit I (COI).
METHODS: Adult mosquitoes of An. subpictus s.l., An. peditaeniatus, and An. vagus
were collected from five study sites located in five districts using cattle
baited traps and backpack aspirators. Representative samples of each species that
were morphologically confirmed were selected from each locality in generating COI
sequences (> 6 good quality sequences per species per locality).
RESULTS: Anopheles subpictus s.l. specimens collected during the study belonged
to two sibling species; An. subpictus 'A' (from all study sites except from
Jaffna) and An. subpictus 'B' (only from Jaffna). The results of haplotype and
nucleotide diversity indices showed that all the three species are having high
genetic diversity. Although a high significant pairwise difference was observed
between An. subpictus 'A' and 'B' (Fst> 0.950, p < 0.05), there were no
significant genetic population structures within An. peditaeniatus, An. vagus and
An. subpictus species A (p > 0.05), indicating possible gene flow between these
populations.
CONCLUSIONS: Gene flow among the populations of An. peditaeniatus, An. vagus and 
An. subpictus species A was evident. Application of vector control measures
against all mosquito species must be done with close monitoring since gene flow
can assist the spread of insecticide resistance genes over a vast geographical
area.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-018-2419-x 
PMCID: PMC6053832
PMID: 30029664  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

