
1. J Eukaryot Microbiol. 2019 Mar;66(2):354-368. doi: 10.1111/jeu.12673. Epub 2018
Aug 25.

Discrimination Experiments in Entamoeba and Evidence from Other Protists Suggest 
Pathogenic Amebas Cooperate with Kin to Colonize Hosts and Deter Rivals.

Espinosa A(1)(2), Paz-Y-Miño-C G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Roger Williams University, Bristol, Rhode Island.
(2)New England Center for the Public Understanding of Science, Roger Williams
University, Bristol, Rhode Island.

Entamoeba histolytica is one of the least understood protists in terms of taxa,
clone, and kin discrimination/recognition ability. However, the capacity to tell 
apart same or self (clone/kin) from different or nonself (nonclone/nonkin) has
long been demonstrated in pathogenic eukaryotes like Trypanosoma and Plasmodium, 
free-living social amebas (Dictyostelium, Polysphondylium), budding yeast
(Saccharomyces), and in numerous bacteria and archaea (prokaryotes). Kin
discrimination/recognition is explained under inclusive fitness theory; that is, 
the reproductive advantage that genetically closely related organisms (kin) can
gain by cooperating preferably with one another (rather than with distantly
related or unrelated individuals), minimizing antagonism and competition with
kin, and excluding genetic strangers (or cheaters = noncooperators that benefit
from others' investments in altruistic cooperation). In this review, we rely on
the outcomes of in vitro pairwise discrimination/recognition encounters between
seven Entamoeba lineages to discuss the biological significance of taxa, clone,
and kin discrimination/recognition in a range of generalist and specialist
species (close or distantly related phylogenetically). We then focus our
discussion on the importance of these laboratory observations for
E. histolytica's life cycle, host infestation, and implications of these features
of the amebas' natural history for human health (including mitigation of
amebiasis).

© 2018 International Society of Protistologists.

DOI: 10.1111/jeu.12673 
PMCID: PMC6349510
PMID: 30055104  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

