
1. Malar J. 2018 Jul 27;17(1):274. doi: 10.1186/s12936-018-2423-1.

Diversity and natural selection on the thrombospondin-related adhesive protein
(TRAP) gene of Plasmodium knowlesi in Malaysia.

Ahmed MA(1), Lau YL(2), Quan FS(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Zoology, Kyung Hee University School of Medicine, Seoul,
130-705, South Korea.
(2)Department of Parasitology, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Medical Zoology, Kyung Hee University School of Medicine, Seoul,
130-705, South Korea. fquan01@gmail.com.
(4)Biomedical Science Institute, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, 130-705, South
Korea. fquan01@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium knowlesi a parasite of the macaques is currently the most 
common cause of human malaria in Malaysia. The thrombospondin-related adhesive
protein (TRAP) gene is pre-erythrocytic stage antigen. It is a well-characterized
vaccine candidate in Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium falciparum, however, no
study has been done in the orthologous gene of P. knowlesi. This study
investigates nucleotide diversity, haplotypes, natural selection and population
differentiation of full-length pktrap genes in clinical samples from Malaysia.
METHODS: Forty full-length pktrap sequences from clinical isolates of Malaysia
along with the reference H-strain were downloaded from published databases.
Genetic diversity, polymorphism, haplotype and natural selection were determined 
using DnaSP 5.10 software. McDonald-Kreitman test was conducted using P. vivax
and Plasmodium coatneyi as ortholog sequence in DnaSP 5.10 software. Population
genetic differentiation index (FST) of parasite populations was determined using 
Arlequin v3.5. Phylogenetic relationships between trap ortholog genes were
determined using MEGA 5.0 software.
RESULTS: Comparison of 40 full-length pktrap sequences along with the H-strain
identified 74 SNPs (53 non-synonymous and 21 synonymous substitutions) resulting 
in 29 haplotypes. Analysis of the full-length gene showed that the nucleotide
diversity was lower compared to its nearest ortholog pvtrap. Domain-wise analysis
indicated that the proline/asparagine rich region had higher nucleotide diversity
compared to the von Willebrand factor domain and the thrombospondin-type-1
domain. McDonald-Kreitman test identified that the ratio of the number of
nonsynonymous to synonymous polymorphic sites within P. knowlesi was
significantly higher than that of the number of nonsynonymous to synonymous fixed
sites between P. knowlesi and P. vivax. The von Willebrand factor domain also
indicated balancing selection using MK test, however, it did not give significant
results when tested with P. coatneyi as an outgroup. Phylogenetic analysis of
full-length genes identified three distinct sub-clusters of P. knowlesi, one
originating from Peninsular Malaysia and two originating from Malaysian Borneo.
High population differentiation values was observed within samples from
Peninsular Malaysia and Malaysian Borneo.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first to report on the genetic diversity and
natural selection of full-length pktrap. Low level of genetic diversity was found
across the full-length gene of pktrap. Balancing selection of the von Willebrand 
factor domain indicated that TRAP could be a target in inducing immune response
against P. knowlesi infections. However, higher number of samples would be
necessary to further confirm the findings.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-018-2423-1 
PMCID: PMC6062916
PMID: 30053885  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

