
1. J Med Entomol. 2018 Oct 25;55(6):1486-1495. doi: 10.1093/jme/tjy137.

A Multi-Gene Analysis and Potential Spatial Distribution of Species of the
Strodei Subgroup of the Genus Nyssorhynchus (Diptera: Culicidae).

Greni SE(1), Demari-Silva B(1), de Oliveira TMP(1), Suesdek L(2)(3), Laporta
GZ(4), Sallum MAM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Epidemiologia, Faculdade de Saúde Pública, Universidade de São
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Laboratório de Parasitologia, Instituto Butantan, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Pós-graduação do Instituto de Medicina Tropical, Universidade de São Paulo,
São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Setor de Pós-graduação, Pesquisa e Inovação, Faculdade de Medicina do ABC,
Santo André, Brazil.

Nyssorhynchus strodei (Root) is an understudied species of potential
epidemiological importance, having been found naturally infected in Brazil with
Plasmodium falciparum Welch, Plasmodium vivax Grassi & Feletti, and Plasmodium
malariae Feletti & Grassi. It belongs to the strodei subgroup that includes
Nyssorhynchus albertoi (Unti), Nyssorhynchus arthuri (Unti), Nyssorhynchus
rondoni (Neiva & Pinto), Nyssorhynchus striatus (Sant'Ana & Sallum), and three
unnamed species, Nyssorhynchus arthuri B, Nyssorhynchus arthuri C, and
Nyssorhynchus arthuri D. As the accurate identification of vector species is of
fundamental importance for public health entomology, the aim of the study was to 
provide additional information for the presence of seven species that had been
previously misidentified as Ny. strodei. Bayesian phylogenetic analyses using DNA
sequences of the genes COI mtDNA, white, CAD and CAT nuclear genes confirmed Ny. 
albertoi, Ny. arthuri, Ny. strodei, and Ny. striatus as distinct groups within
the strodei subgroup and corroborated the presence of three undescribed species
under the name Ny. arthuri. Results of the GMYC model analysis corroborated Ny.
arthuri B, Ny. arthuri C, and Ny. arthuri D; however, they did not distinguish
between Ny. strodei and Ny. albertoi. Predicted distribution of seven species
based on maximum entropy in MaxEnt showed that each species has its specific
ecological niche suitability.

DOI: 10.1093/jme/tjy137 
PMID: 30107605  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

