
1. Malar J. 2018 Aug 17;17(1):297. doi: 10.1186/s12936-018-2425-z.

Diversity pattern of Duffy binding protein sequence among Duffy-negatives and
Duffy-positives in Sudan.

Hoque MR(1), Elfaki MMA(2)(3), Ahmed MA(1), Lee SK(1), Muh F(1), Ali Albsheer
MM(2), Hamid MMA(4), Han ET(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Environmental Biology and Tropical Medicine, School of
Medicine, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, Gangwon-do, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Parasitology and Medical Entomology, Institute of Endemic
Diseases, University of Khartoum, Qassr Street, Khartoum, Sudan.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Jazan
University, Jizan, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Parasitology and Medical Entomology, Institute of Endemic
Diseases, University of Khartoum, Qassr Street, Khartoum, Sudan. mahdi@iend.org.
(5)Department of Medical Environmental Biology and Tropical Medicine, School of
Medicine, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, Gangwon-do, Republic of Korea. 
etaekhan@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Vivax malaria is a leading public health concern worldwide. Due to
the high prevalence of Duffy-negative blood group population, Plasmodium vivax in
Africa historically is less attributable and remains a neglected disease. The
interaction between Duffy binding protein and its cognate receptor, Duffy antigen
receptor for chemokine plays a key role in the invasion of red blood cells and
serves as a novel vaccine candidate against P. vivax. However, the polymorphic
nature of P. vivax Duffy binding protein (DBP), particularly N-terminal
cysteine-rich region (PvDBPII), represents a major obstacle for the successful
design of a DBP-based vaccine to enable global protection. In this study, the
level of pvdbpII sequence variations, Duffy blood group genotypes, number of
haplotypes circulating, and the natural selection at pvdbpII in Sudan isolates
were analysed and the implication in terms of DBP-based vaccine design was
discussed.
METHODS: Forty-two P. vivax-infected blood samples were collected from patients
from different areas of Sudan during 2014-2016. For Duffy blood group genotyping,
the fragment that indicates GATA-1 transcription factor binding site of the FY
gene (- 33T > C) was amplified by PCR and sequenced by direct sequencing. The
region II flanking pvdbpII was PCR amplified and sequenced by direct sequencing. 
The genetic diversity and natural selection of pvdbpII were done using DnaSP ver 
5.0 and MEGA ver 5.0 programs. Based on predominant, non-synonymous, single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), prevalence of Sudanese haplotypes was assessed
in global isolates.
RESULTS: Twenty SNPs (14 non-synonymous and 6 synonymous) were identified in
pvdbpII among the 42 Sudan P. vivax isolates. Sequence analysis revealed that 11 
different PvDBP haplotypes exist in Sudan P. vivax isolates and the region has
evolved under positive selection. Among the identified PvDBP haplotypes five
PvDBP haplotypes were shared among Duffy-negative as well as Duffy-positive
individuals. The high selective pressure was mainly found on the known B cell
epitopes (H3) of pvdbpII. Comparison of Sudanese haplotypes, based on 10
predominant non-synonymous SNPs with 10 malaria-endemic countries, demonstrated
that Sudanese haplotypes were prevalent in most endemic countries.
CONCLUSION: This is the first pvdbp genetic diversity study from an African
country. Sudanese isolates display high haplotype diversity and the gene is under
selective pressure. Haplotype analysis indicated that Sudanese haplotypes are a
representative sample of the global population. However, studies with a large
number of samples are needed. These findings would be valuable for the
development of PvDBP-based malaria vaccine.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-018-2425-z 
PMCID: PMC6098642
PMID: 30119671  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

