
1. Sci Rep. 2018 Aug 22;8(1):12622. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-30593-5.

Fitness Loss under Amino Acid Starvation in Artemisinin-Resistant Plasmodium
falciparum Isolates from Cambodia.

Bunditvorapoom D(1)(2)(3), Kochakarn T(1)(4), Kotanan N(1), Modchang C(5),
Kümpornsin K(1)(6), Loesbanluechai D(1), Krasae T(7), Cui L(8), Chotivanich
K(9)(10), White NJ(10)(11), Wilairat P(4), Miotto O(10)(6)(12), Chookajorn T(13).

Author information: 
(1)Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine Unit (GEM), Center of Excellence in Malaria
Research, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
Siriraj Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Molecular Medicine Graduate Program, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University,
Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand.
(5)Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand.
(6)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK.
(7)Laboratory Animal Science Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(8)Department of Entomology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, 
USA.
(9)Department of Clinical Tropical Medicine, Faculty of Tropical Medicine,
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(10)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine,
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(11)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(12)Medical Research Council (MRC) Centre for Genomics and Global Health,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(13)Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine Unit (GEM), Center of Excellence in
Malaria Research, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand. thanat.cho@mahidol.edu.

Artemisinin is the most rapidly effective drug for Plasmodium falciparum malaria 
treatment currently in clinical use. Emerging artemisinin-resistant parasites
pose a great global health risk. At present, the level of artemisinin resistance 
is still relatively low with evidence pointing towards a trade-off between
artemisinin resistance and fitness loss. Here we show that artemisinin-resistant 
P. falciparum isolates from Cambodia manifested fitness loss, showing fewer
progenies during the intra-erythrocytic developmental cycle. The loss in fitness 
was exacerbated under the condition of low exogenous amino acid supply. The
resistant parasites failed to undergo maturation, whereas their drug-sensitive
counterparts were able to complete the erythrocytic cycle under conditions of
amino acid deprivation. The artemisinin-resistant phenotype was not stable, and
loss of the phenotype was associated with changes in the expression of a putative
target, Exp1, a membrane glutathione transferase. Analysis of SNPs in haemoglobin
processing genes revealed associations with parasite clearance times, suggesting 
changes in haemoglobin catabolism may contribute to artemisinin resistance. These
findings on fitness and protein homeostasis could provide clues on how to contain
emerging artemisinin-resistant parasites.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-30593-5 
PMCID: PMC6105667
PMID: 30135481  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

