
1. Int J Parasitol. 2018 Oct;48(12):955-968. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2018.05.013. Epub
2018 Aug 31.

Glycolysis is important for optimal asexual growth and formation of mature tissue
cysts by Toxoplasma gondii.

Shukla A(1), Olszewski KL(2), Llinás M(3), Rommereim LM(4), Fox BA(4), Bzik
DJ(4), Xia D(5), Wastling J(6), Beiting D(7), Roos DS(8), Shanmugam D(9).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemical Sciences Division, CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory, Pune, India.
(2)Department of Metabolomics, Kadmon Corporation, New York, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Department of Chemistry, 
Huck Center for Malaria Research, The Pennsylvania State University, W126
Millennium Science Complex, University Park, PA, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth, Lebanon, NH, USA.
(5)The Royal Veterinary College, London NW1 0TU, UK.
(6)Faculty of Natural Sciences, Keele University, Keele, Staffordshire, ST5 5BG, 
UK.
(7)School of Veterinary Medicine, Dept. of Pathobiology, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(8)Department of Biology and Penn Genome Frontiers Institute, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Electronic address: droos@sas.upenn.edu.
(9)Biochemical Sciences Division, CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory, Pune, India.
Electronic address: d.shanmugam@ncl.res.in.

Toxoplasma gondii can grow and replicate using either glucose or glutamine as the
major carbon source. Here, we have studied the essentiality of glycolysis in the 
tachyzoite and bradyzoite stages of T. gondii, using transgenic parasites that
lack a functional hexokinase gene (Δhk) in RH (Type-1) and Prugniaud (Type-II)
strain parasites. Tachyzoite stage Δhk parasites exhibit a fitness defect similar
to that reported previously for the major glucose transporter mutant, and remain 
virulent in mice. However, although Prugniaud strain Δhk tachyzoites were capable
of transforming into bradyzoites in vitro, they were severely compromised in
their ability to make mature bradyzoite cysts in the brain tissue of mice.
Isotopic labelling studies reveal that glucose-deprived tacyzoites utilise
glutamine to replenish glycolytic and pentose phosphate pathway intermediates via
gluconeogenesis. Interestingly, while glutamine-deprived intracellular Δhk
tachyzoites continued to replicate, extracellular parasites were unable to
efficiently invade host cells. Further, studies on mutant tachyzoites lacking a
functional phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (Δpepck1) revealed that
glutaminolysis is the sole source of gluconeogenic flux in glucose-deprived
parasites. In addition, glutaminolysis is essential for sustaining oxidative
phosphorylation in Δhk parasites, while wild type (wt) and Δpepck1 parasites can 
obtain ATP from either glycolysis or oxidative phosphorylation. This study
provides insights into the role of nutrient metabolism during asexual propagation
and development of T. gondii, and validates the versatile nature of central
carbon and energy metabolism in this parasite.

Copyright © 2018 Australian Society for Parasitology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2018.05.013 
PMID: 30176233  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

