
1. Evol Lett. 2018 Jan 26;2(1):22-36. doi: 10.1002/evl3.38. eCollection 2018 Feb.

Genomic associations with bill length and disease reveal drift and selection
across island bird populations.

Armstrong C(1), Richardson DS(1), Hipperson H(2), Horsburgh GJ(2), Küpper C(3),
Percival-Alwyn L(4), Clark M(4), Burke T(2), Spurgin LG(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of East Anglia Norwich Research Park
Norwich NR4 7TJ United Kingdom.
(2)NERC Biomolecular Analysis Facility, Department of Animal and Plant Sciences
University of Sheffield Sheffield S10 2TN United Kingdom.
(3)Max Planck Institute for Ornithology 82319 Seewiesen Germany.
(4)Earlham Institute Norwich Research Park Norwich NR4 7UZ United Kingdom.

Island species provide excellent models for investigating how selection and drift
operate in wild populations, and for determining how these processes act to
influence local adaptation and speciation. Here, we examine the role of selection
and drift in shaping genomic and phenotypic variation across recently separated
populations of Berthelot's pipit (Anthus berthelotii), a passerine bird endemic
to three archipelagos in the Atlantic. We first characterized genetic diversity
and population structuring that supported previous inferences of a history of
recent colonizations and bottlenecks. We then tested for regions of the genome
associated with the ecologically important traits of bill length and malaria
infection, both of which vary substantially across populations in this species.
We identified a SNP associated with variation in bill length among individuals,
islands, and archipelagos; patterns of variation at this SNP suggest that both
phenotypic and genotypic variation in bill length is largely shaped by founder
effects. Malaria was associated with SNPs near/within genes involved in the
immune response, but this relationship was not consistent among archipelagos,
supporting the view that disease resistance is complex and rapidly evolving.
Although we found little evidence for divergent selection at candidate loci for
bill length and malaria resistance, genome scan analyses pointed to several genes
related to immunity and metabolism as having important roles in divergence and
adaptation. Our findings highlight the utility and challenges involved with
combining association mapping and population genetic analysis in nonequilibrium
populations, to disentangle the effects of drift and selection on shaping
genotypes and phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1002/evl3.38 
PMCID: PMC6121843
PMID: 30283662 

