
1. Ticks Tick Borne Dis. 2019 Jan;10(1):219-240. doi: 10.1016/j.ttbdis.2018.09.010. 
Epub 2018 Oct 1.

Argasid and ixodid systematics: Implications for soft tick evolution and
systematics, with a new argasid species list.

Mans BJ(1), Featherston J(2), Kvas M(2), Pillay KA(2), de Klerk DG(3), Pienaar
R(3), de Castro MH(3), Schwan TG(4), Lopez JE(5), Teel P(6), Pérez de León AA(7),
Sonenshine DE(8), Egekwu NI(9), Bakkes DK(3), Heyne H(3), Kanduma EG(10),
Nyangiwe N(11), Bouattour A(12), Latif AA(13).

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology, Parasites and Vectors, Agricultural Research
Council-Onderstepoort Veterinary Research, Onderstepoort 0110, South Africa;
Department of Life and Consumer Sciences, University of South Africa, South
Africa. Electronic address: mansb@arc.agric.za.
(2)The Biotechnology Platform, Agricultural Research Council-Biotechnology
Platform, Onderstepoort 0110, South Africa.
(3)Epidemiology, Parasites and Vectors, Agricultural Research
Council-Onderstepoort Veterinary Research, Onderstepoort 0110, South Africa.
(4)Laboratory of Bacteriology, Rocky Mountain Laboratories, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Hamilton, MT, United States.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, National School of Tropical Medicine, Paediatric
Tropical Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States.
(6)Department of Entomology, Texas A&M AgriLife Research, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX, United States.
(7)USDA-ARS Knipling-Bushland U.S. Livestock Insects Research Laboratory and
Veterinary Pest Genomics Center, Kerrville, TX, United States.
(8)Department of Biological Sciences, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA,
United States; Vector Biology Section, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIH), Rockville, MD,
United States.
(9)Agricultural Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture,
Washington, D.C., United States.
(10)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of Nairobi, P.O
BOX 30197, 00100, Nairobi, Kenya.
(11)Döhne Agricultural Development Institute, Private Bag X15, Stutterheim, 4930,
South Africa.
(12)Laboratoire d'Entomologie, Institut Pasteur de Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia.
(13)School of Life Sciences, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, Westville,
South Africa.

The systematics of the genera and subgenera within the soft tick family Argasidae
is not adequately resolved. Different classification schemes, reflecting diverse 
schools of scientific thought that elevated or downgraded groups to genera or
subgenera, have been proposed. In the most recent classification scheme, Argas
and Ornithodoros are paraphyletic and the placement of various subgenera remains 
uncertain because molecular data are lacking. Thus, reclassification of the
Argasidae is required. This will enable an understanding of soft tick systematics
within an evolutionary context. This study addressed that knowledge gap using
mitochondrial genome and nuclear (18S and 28S ribosomal RNA) sequence data for
representatives of the subgenera Alectorobius, Argas, Chiropterargas, Ogadenus,
Ornamentum, Ornithodoros, Navis (subgen. nov.), Pavlovskyella, Persicargas,
Proknekalia, Reticulinasus and Secretargas, from the Afrotropical, Nearctic and
Palearctic regions. Hard tick species (Ixodidae) and a new representative of
Nuttalliella namaqua (Nuttalliellidae), were also sequenced with a total of 83
whole mitochondrial genomes, 18S rRNA and 28S rRNA genes generated. The study
confirmed the utility of next-generation sequencing to retrieve systematic
markers. Paraphyly of Argas and Ornithodoros was resolved by systematic analysis 
and a new species list is proposed. This corresponds broadly with the
morphological cladistic analysis of Klompen and Oliver (1993). Estimation of
divergence times using molecular dating allowed dissection of phylogeographic
patterns for argasid evolution. The discovery of cryptic species in the subgenera
Chiropterargas, Ogadenus and Ornithodoros, suggests that cryptic speciation is
common within the Argasidae. Cryptic speciation has implications for past
biological studies of soft ticks. These are discussed in particular for the
Ornithodoros (Ornithodoros) moubata and Ornithodoros (Ornithodoros) savignyi
groups.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ttbdis.2018.09.010 
PMID: 30309738  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

