
1. Int J Parasitol. 2018 Dec;48(14):1137-1148. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2018.10.002.
Epub 2018 Oct 24.

Combining morphological and molecular data to reconstruct the phylogeny of avian 
Haemosporida.

Hernández-Lara C(1), Espinosa de Los Monteros A(2), Ibarra-Cerdeña CN(3),
García-Feria L(1), Santiago-Alarcon D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Red de Biología y Conservación de Vertebrados, Instituto de Ecología A.C.,
Carretera Antigua a Coatepec 351, El Haya, C.P. 91070 Xalapa, Veracruz, Mexico.
(2)Biología Evolutiva, Instituto de Ecología A.C., Carretera Antigua a Coatepec, 
351 El Haya, C.P. 91070 Xalapa, Veracruz, Mexico.
(3)Departamento de Ecología Humana, Centro de Investigación y de Estudios
Avanzados (Cinvestav) Unidad Mérida, Antigua carretera a Progreso Km. 6,
Cordemex, C.P. 97310 Mérida, Yucatán, Mexico.
(4)Red de Biología y Conservación de Vertebrados, Instituto de Ecología A.C.,
Carretera Antigua a Coatepec 351, El Haya, C.P. 91070 Xalapa, Veracruz, Mexico.
Electronic address: diego.santiago@inecol.mx.

The traditional classification of avian Haemosporida is based mainly on
morphology and life history traits. Recently, molecular hypotheses have
challenged the traditional classification, leading to contradictory opinions on
whether morphology is phylogenetically informative. However, the morphology has
never been used to reconstruct the relationships within the group. We inferred
the phylogeny of avian Haemosporida from 133 morphological characters present in 
blood stages. We included all species with at least one mitochondrial gene
characterized (n = 93). The morphological hypothesis was compared with the one
retrieved from mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) nucleotide sequences and a hypothesis
that used a combination of morphological and molecular data (i.e., total
evidence). In order to recover the evolutionary history and identify
phylogenetically and taxonomically informative characters, they were mapped on
the total evidence phylogeny. The morphological hypothesis presented more
polytomies than the other two, especially within Haemoproteus. In the molecular
hypothesis, the two Haemoproteus subgenera are paraphyletic, and some
relationships within Parahaemoproteus were resolved. By combining the
morphological and molecular data, we were able to resolve the majority of
polytomies and posterior probabilities increased. We identified a unique
combination of morphological traits, clearly differentiating avian Haemosporida
genera, sub-genera of Leucocytozoon and Haemoproteus, and some Plasmodium
sub-genera. Plasmodium had the highest number of synapomorphies. Furthermore, 86%
of the species presented a unique combination of taxonomically informative
characters. A limiting factor was the mismatch of traits characterized in species
descriptions, leading to a morphological matrix with a considerable amount of
missing data, particularly for the stages of early young and young gametocytes
(67% of all missing data). Characters lacking information for the majority of
species included the colour of pigment granules, the cytoplasm appearance, and
the presence and dimensions of vacuoles. According to our results, the
combination of morphology and mtDNA proved to be a robust alternative to
reconstruct the relationships among avian Haemosporida, obtaining a resolution
and support similar to that obtained using full mitochondrial genome sequences
for over 100 lineages.

Copyright © 2018 Australian Society for Parasitology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2018.10.002 
PMID: 30367869  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

