
1. mBio. 2018 Oct 30;9(5). pii: e01796-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01796-18.

Aspartyl Protease 5 Matures Dense Granule Proteins That Reside at the
Host-Parasite Interface in Toxoplasma gondii.

Coffey MJ(1)(2), Dagley LF(1)(2), Seizova S(1)(2), Kapp EA(1)(2), Infusini
G(1)(2), Roos DS(3), Boddey JA(1)(2), Webb AI(1)(2), Tonkin CJ(4)(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia.
(2)Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
Australia.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
USA.
(4)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia 
tonkin@wehi.edu.au.

Toxoplasma gondii infects approximately 30% of the world's population, causing
disease primarily during pregnancy and in individuals with weakened immune
systems. Toxoplasma secretes and exports effector proteins that modulate the host
during infection, and several of these proteins are processed by the
Golgi-associated aspartyl protease 5 (ASP5). Here, we identify ASP5 substrates by
selectively enriching N-terminally derived peptides from wild-type and Δasp5
parasites. We reveal more than 2,000 unique Toxoplasma N-terminal peptides,
mapping to both natural N termini and protease cleavage sites. Several of these
peptides mapped directly downstream of the characterized ASP5 cleavage site,
arginine-arginine-leucine (RRL). We validate candidates as true ASP5 substrates, 
revealing they are not processed in parasites lacking ASP5 or in wild-type
parasites following mutation of the motif from RRL to ARL. All identified ASP5
substrates are dense granule proteins, and interestingly, none appear to be
exported, thus differing from the analogous system in related Plasmodium spp.
Instead we show that the majority of substrates reside within the parasitophorous
vacuole (PV), and its membrane (the PVM), including two kinases and one
phosphatase. We show that genetic deletion of WNG2 leads to attenuation in a
mouse model, suggesting that this putative kinase is a new virulence factor in
Toxoplasma Collectively, these data constitute the first in-depth analyses of
ASP5 substrates and shed new light on the role of ASP5 as a maturase of dense
granule proteins during the Toxoplasma lytic cycle.IMPORTANCE Toxoplasma gondii
is one of the most successful human parasites. Central to its success is the
arsenal of virulence proteins introduced into the infected host cell. Several of 
these virulence proteins require direct maturation by the aspartyl protease ASP5,
and all require ASP5 for translocation into the host cell, yet the true number of
ASP5 substrates and complete repertoire of effectors is currently unknown. Here
we selectively enrich N-terminally derived peptides using Terminal Amine Isotopic
Labeling of Substrates (TAILS) and use quantitative proteomics to reveal novel
ASP5 substrates. We identify, using two different enrichment techniques, new ASP5
substrates and their specific cleavage sites. ASP5 substrates include two kinases
and one phosphatase that reside at the host-parasite interface, which are
important for infection.

Copyright © 2018 Coffey et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01796-18 
PMCID: PMC6212819
PMID: 30377279  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

