
1. Iran J Parasitol. 2018 Jul-Sep;13(3):440-447.

Genetic Diversity in C-terminal of SERA5 Gene in the Blood Stage of Human
Isolates of Plasmodium vivax in Sistan and Baluchistan, Iran.

Abolghazi A(1), Heidari A(2), Moin-Vaziri V(1), Haghighi A(1), Seyyed Tabaei
SJ(1), Keshavarz H(3)(4), Shojaee S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Parasitology and Mycology, School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Dept. of Medical Parasitology, School of Medicine, Alborz University of
Medical Sciences, Karaj, Iran.
(3)Dept. of Medical Parasitology and Mycology, School of Public Health, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Center for Research of Endemic Parasites of Iran (CREPI), Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Background: Vivax malaria is more prevalent in the malarious areas of Iran, which
makes vaccine research a high priority. Serine Repeat Antigens (SERA) have
essential role in the parasite life cycle and high expression profiles of PvSERA5
make it suitable vaccine candidates. This study aimed to evaluate the genetic
diversity of C-terminal region of PvSERA5 in Iranian isolates of Plasmodium vivax
in Sistan and Baluchistan.
Methods: Totally, 49 blood samples were taken from symptomatic malaria patients
in Sistan and Baluchistan Province in 2016. Mono-infection to P. vivax was
confirmed by 18srRNA-Nested-PCR. Genomic DNA was extracted and C-terminal region 
of PvSERA5 was amplified by specific primers. PCR-products have been sequenced
and analysis was done by using bioinformatics software, mainly DnaSP & MEGA5.
Results: Genetic diversity was calculated 14.8% in C-terminal region of PvSERA5
in Iranian isolates, 19 different sequences and 4 haplotypes existed. The amount 
of Tajima's D (0.3805) and ratio of non-synonymous to synonymous mutation (1.82) 
showed that C-terminal region of PvSERA5 is under positive natural selection;
also intragenic recombination could interfere.
Conclusion: Results could be helpful in any research, regarding this antigen as
vaccine candidate in Iran or worldwide.


PMCID: PMC6243169
PMID: 30483336 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that
there is no conflict of interests.

