
1. Cell Microbiol. 2019 Feb;21(2):e12987. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12987. Epub 2019 Jan 4.

The relapsing fever spirochete Borrelia turicatae persists in the highly
oxidative environment of its soft-bodied tick vector.

Bourret TJ(1), Boyle WK(1), Zalud AK(1), Valenzuela JG(2), Oliveira F(2), Lopez
JE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Creighton University,
Omaha, Nebraska.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland.
(3)Departments of Pediatrics and Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.

The relapsing fever spirochete Borrelia turicatae possesses a complex life cycle 
in its soft-bodied tick vector, Ornithodoros turicata. Spirochetes enter the tick
midgut during a blood meal, and, during the following weeks, spirochetes
disseminate throughout O. turicata. A population persists in the salivary glands 
allowing for rapid transmission to the mammalian hosts during tick feeding.
Little is known about the physiological environment within the salivary glands
acini in which B. turicatae persists. In this study, we examined the salivary
gland transcriptome of O. turicata ticks and detected the expression of 57 genes 
involved in oxidant metabolism or antioxidant defences. We confirmed the
expression of five of the most highly expressed genes, including glutathione
peroxidase (gpx), thioredoxin peroxidase (tpx), manganese superoxide dismutase
(sod-1), copper-zinc superoxide dismutase (sod-2), and catalase (cat) by
reverse-transcriptase droplet digital polymerase chain reaction (RT-ddPCR). We
also found distinct differences in the expression of these genes when comparing
the salivary glands and midguts of unfed O. turicata ticks. Our results indicate 
that the salivary glands of unfed O. turicata nymphs are highly oxidative
environments where reactive oxygen species (ROS) predominate, whereas midgut
tissues comprise a primarily nitrosative environment where nitric oxide synthase 
is highly expressed. Additionally, B. turicatae was found to be hyperresistant to
ROS compared with the Lyme disease spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi, suggesting it
is uniquely adapted to the highly oxidative environment of O. turicata salivary
gland acini.

© 2018 The Authors Cellular Microbiology Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12987 
PMCID: PMC6454574
PMID: 30489694  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

