
1. PLoS Pathog. 2018 Nov 29;14(11):e1007436. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007436.
eCollection 2018 Nov.

A forward genetic screen reveals a primary role for Plasmodium falciparum
Reticulocyte Binding Protein Homologue 2a and 2b in determining alternative
erythrocyte invasion pathways.

Campino S(1)(2), Marin-Menendez A(1), Kemp A(1), Cross N(1), Drought L(1), Otto
TD(1)(3), Benavente ED(2), Ravenhall M(2), Schwach F(1), Girling G(1), Manske
M(1), Theron M(1), Gould K(1), Drury E(1), Clark TG(2)(4), Kwiatkowski DP(1)(5), 
Pance A(1), Rayner JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Programme, Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(2)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Centre of Immunobiology, Institute of Infection, Immunity & Inflammation,
College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow,
United Kingdom.
(4)Faculty of Epidemiology and Population Health, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom.

Invasion of human erythrocytes is essential for Plasmodium falciparum parasite
survival and pathogenesis, and is also a complex phenotype. While some later
steps in invasion appear to be invariant and essential, the earlier steps of
recognition are controlled by a series of redundant, and only partially
understood, receptor-ligand interactions. Reverse genetic analysis of laboratory 
adapted strains has identified multiple genes that when deleted can alter
invasion, but how the relative contributions of each gene translate to the
phenotypes of clinical isolates is far from clear. We used a forward genetic
approach to identify genes responsible for variable erythrocyte invasion by
phenotyping the parents and progeny of previously generated experimental genetic 
crosses. Linkage analysis using whole genome sequencing data revealed a single
major locus was responsible for the majority of phenotypic variation in two
invasion pathways. This locus contained the PfRh2a and PfRh2b genes, members of
one of the major invasion ligand gene families, but not widely thought to play
such a prominent role in specifying invasion phenotypes. Variation in invasion
pathways was linked to significant differences in PfRh2a and PfRh2b expression
between parasite lines, and their role in specifying alternative invasion was
confirmed by CRISPR-Cas9-mediated genome editing. Expansion of the analysis to a 
large set of clinical P. falciparum isolates revealed common deletions,
suggesting that variation at this locus is a major cause of invasion phenotypic
variation in the endemic setting. This work has implications for blood-stage
vaccine development and will help inform the design and location of future
large-scale studies of invasion in clinical isolates.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007436 
PMCID: PMC6289454
PMID: 30496294  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

