
1. PLoS One. 2018 Dec 5;13(12):e0207621. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0207621.
eCollection 2018.

Essentiality of Plasmodium falciparum plasmepsin V.

Boonyalai N(1), Collins CR(2), Hackett F(2), Withers-Martinez C(2), Blackman
MJ(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Kasetsart University,
Chatuchak, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Malaria Biochemistry Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London, United
Kingdom.
(3)Department of Pathogen Molecular Biology, London School of Hygiene & Tropical 
Medicine, London, United Kingdom.

The malaria parasite replicates within erythrocytes. The pathogenesis of clinical
malaria is in large part due to the capacity of the parasite to remodel its host 
cell. To do this, intraerythrocytic stages of Plasmodium falciparum export more
than 300 proteins that dramatically alter the morphology of the infected
erythrocyte as well as its mechanical and adhesive properties. P. falciparum
plasmepsin V (PfPMV) is an aspartic protease that processes proteins for export
into the host erythrocyte and is thought to play a key role in parasite virulence
and survival. However, although standard techniques for gene disruption as well
as conditional protein knockdown have been previously attempted with the pfpmv
gene, complete gene removal or knockdown was not achieved so direct genetic proof
that PMV is an essential protein has not been established. Here we have used a
conditional gene excision approach combining CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing and
DiCre-mediated recombination to functionally inactivate the pfpmv gene. The
resulting mutant parasites displayed a severe growth defect. Detailed phenotypic 
analysis showed that development of the mutant parasites was arrested early in
the ring-to-trophozoite transition in the erythrocytic cycle following gene
excision. Our findings are the first to elucidate the effects of PMV gene
disruption, showing that it is essential for parasite viability in asexual blood 
stages. The mutant parasites can now be used as a platform to further dissect the
Plasmodium protein export pathway.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0207621 
PMCID: PMC6281190
PMID: 30517136  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

