
1. Malar J. 2018 Dec 17;17(1):472. doi: 10.1186/s12936-018-2623-8.

Characterization of Plasmodium falciparum structure in Nigeria with malaria SNPs 
barcode.

Bankole BE(1)(2), Kayode AT(1)(2), Nosamiefan IO(1), Eromon P(1), Baniecki ML(3),
Daniels RF(4), Hamilton EJ(4), Durfee K(4), MacInnis B(3), Okafor H(5), Sowunmi
A(6), Volkman SK(3)(4), Sabeti P(3)(4)(7), Wirth D(3)(4), Happi CT(1)(2), Folarin
OA(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)African Centre of Excellence for Genomics of Infectious Diseases, Redeemer's
University, Ede, Osun State, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Redeemer's University, Ede, Osun State,
Nigeria.
(3)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, Institute of Child Health, University of Nigeria
Teaching Hospital, Enugu, Enugu State, Nigeria.
(6)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, College of Basic Medical
Sciences, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Oyo State, Nigeria.
(7)Simmons College, Boston, MA, USA.
(8)African Centre of Excellence for Genomics of Infectious Diseases, Redeemer's
University, Ede, Osun State, Nigeria. folarino@run.edu.ng.
(9)Department of Biological Sciences, Redeemer's University, Ede, Osun State,
Nigeria. folarino@run.edu.ng.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium falciparum malaria remains a major health challenge in
Nigeria despite the global decline of its incidence and mortality rates. Although
significant progress has been made in preventing the transmission of P.
falciparum and controlling the spread of the infection, there is much to be done 
in the area of proper monitoring, surveillance of the parasite, investigating the
population dynamics and drug resistance profiling of the parasite as these are
important to its eventual eradication. Polymorphic loci of msp1, msp2 and/or
glurp genes or microsatellites have been traditionally used to characterize P.
falciparum population structure in various parts of Nigeria. The lack of
standardization in the interpretation of results, as well as the inability of
these methods to distinguish closely related parasites, remains a limitation of
these techniques. Conversely, the recently developed 24 single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP)-based molecular barcode assay has the possibility of
differentiating between closely related parasites and offer additional
information in determining the population diversity of P. falciparum within and
between parasite populations. This study is therefore aimed at defining the
population diversity of P. falciparum in and between two localities in Nigeria
using the SNPs barcode technique.
METHODS: The 24-SNP high-resolution melt (HRM) barcode assay and msp2 genotyping 
was used to investigate both intra and inter population diversity of the parasite
population in two urban cities of Nigeria.
RESULTS: Based on SNP barcode analysis, polygenomic malaria infections were
observed in 17.9% and 13.5% of population from Enugu and Ibadan, respectively,
while msp2 analyses showed 21% and 19.4% polygenomic infections in Enugu and
Ibadan, respectively. Low levels of genetic diversity (π) of 0.328 and 0.318 were
observed in Enugu and Ibadan parasite populations, respectively, while the FST
value of 0.02 (p = 0.055) was obtained when the genetic divergence of both
populations was considered.
CONCLUSIONS: The 24-SNP barcode assay was effective in analysing P. falciparum
population diversity. This study also showed that P. falciparum populations in
Enugu and Ibadan had a degree of intra-population diversity, but very low
divergence between the population. A low degree of polygenomic infections were
also observed in the two parasite populations unlike previous years. This maybe
as a result of the effect of artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT),
long-lasting insecticide-treated nets (LLITNs) and intermittent preventive
treatments in the study populations.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-018-2623-8 
PMCID: PMC6296064
PMID: 30558627  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

