
1. Parasit Vectors. 2018 Dec 24;11(Suppl 2):659. doi: 10.1186/s13071-018-3216-7.

Isolation and characterization of a temperature-sensitive lethal strain of
Anopheles arabiensis for SIT-based application.

Ndo C(1)(2)(3), Poumachu Y(4)(5), Metitsi D(4)(6), Awono-Ambene HP(4), Tchuinkam 
T(5), Gilles JLR(7), Bourtzis K(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche de Yaoundé (IRY), Organisation de Coordination pour la
lutte contre les Endémies en Afrique Centrale (OCEAC), P.O Box 288, Yaoundé,
Cameroon. cyrndo@yahoo.fr.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Douala, Douala,
Cameroon. cyrndo@yahoo.fr.
(3)Centre for Research in Infectious Diseases (CRID), P.O Box 13591, Yaoundé,
Cameroon. cyrndo@yahoo.fr.
(4)Institut de Recherche de Yaoundé (IRY), Organisation de Coordination pour la
lutte contre les Endémies en Afrique Centrale (OCEAC), P.O Box 288, Yaoundé,
Cameroon.
(5)Vector Borne Parasitic and Infectious diseases Unit of the Laboratory of
Applied Biology and Ecology (VBID-LABEA), Departement of Animal Biology, Faculty 
of Sciences of the University of Dschang, P.O Box 067, Dschang, Cameroon.
(6)Faculty of Sciences, University of Yaoundé I, P.O. Box 337, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(7)Insect Pest Control Laboratory, Joint FAO/IAEA Programme of Nuclear Technique 
in Food and Agriculture, Vienna, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Malaria is still a global health problem and vector control is the
cornerstone of disease control strategies using indoor residual insecticide
spraying (IRS) and insecticide-treated nets. The situation is becoming acute with
widespread resistance to the limited arsenal of available insecticide classes.
Therefore, new and innovative tools to reduce Plasmodium transmission are in need
and this situation raised considerable interest in using sterile insect technique
(SIT) against human pest insects, particularly Anopheles malaria vectors. When
considering a mosquito release programme, one of the first issues to be addressed
is how to eliminate/separate the hematophagous vector females. In this paper, we 
report the development and evaluation of an Anopheles arabiensis
temperature-sensitive lethal (tsl) strain towards its potential use for the
development of a genetic sexing strain (GSS). Anopheles arabiensis male
mosquitoes originated from North Cameroon were treated with 0.05% ethyl
methanesulfonate (EMS). The mutagen was added to 10% sucrose solution and
mosquitoes fed ad-libitum for 24h and 48h on a cotton wool soaked with
sucrose-mutagen solution placed at the top of the cup. Treated males were then
allowed to mate with wild virgin females and their progenies were screened for
heat sensitivity from F3 to F8, until the isolation and establishment of a tsl
strain which was further characterized by assessing its productivity (fecundity
and fertility), larval development, adult longevity as well as nature and
inheritance pattern of the tsl.
RESULTS: Observations showed that the number of eggs laid and their hatch rate
were similar between females that mated with mutagenized males and those from the
control suggesting that mutagenesis didn't affect An. arabiensis male fecundity
and fertility. At F3, fourteen isofemale families out of 88 tested, which showed 
mortalities ranged between 50 and 80 %, were selected as lines potentially
containing a tsl mutation. From F4 to F8, a tsl strain was isolated and
established by screening L1 larvae at 41°C for 3 hours. This strain showed
similar life history traits compared to the wild type strain in terms of
fertility, larval development time and adult's emergence. Crossing experiments to
further assess the nature and inheritance pattern of the tsl phenotype showed
that it is due to a recessive allele located on an autosome.
CONCLUSION: The successful establishment of the An. arabiensis tsl strain is a
valuable tool towards the development of a GSS for SIT applications against this 
species. This will be done by induction of a Y-autosome translocation to link the
wild-type allele to the Y chromosome in such manner that males are wild-type
(temperature resistant) and females are mutant (temperature sensitive).

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-018-3216-7 
PMCID: PMC6304777
PMID: 30583745  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

