
1. Parasit Vectors. 2018 Dec 24;11(Suppl 2):646. doi: 10.1186/s13071-018-3219-4.

A review on the progress of sex-separation techniques for sterile insect
technique applications against Anopheles arabiensis.

Mashatola T(1)(2)(3), Ndo C(4)(5)(6), Koekemoer LL(1)(2), Dandalo LC(1)(2), Wood 
OR(1)(2), Malakoane L(1)(2), Poumachu Y(3)(4)(7), Lobb LN(1)(2), Kaiser M(1)(2), 
Bourtzis K(3), Munhenga G(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Emerging Zoonotic and Parasitic Diseases, National Institute for
Communicable Diseases of the National Health Laboratory Service, Johannesburg,
South Africa.
(2)Wits Research Institute for Malaria, MRC Collaborating Centre for
Multi-Disciplinary Research on Malaria, School of Pathology, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(3)Insect Pest Control Laboratory, Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Nuclear Techniques 
in Food and Agriculture, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Organisation de Coordination pour la lutte Contre les Endémies en Afrique
Centrale (OCEAC), Institut de recherche de Yaoundé (IRY), Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of Douala, Douala, Cameroon.
(6)Centre for Research in Infectious Disease (CRI), Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(7)Vector Borne Disease Laboratory of the Applied Biology and Ecology Research
Unit (VBDL-URBEA) Department of Animal Biology, Faculty of Sciences of the
University of Dschang, Dschang, Cameroon.
(8)Centre for Emerging Zoonotic and Parasitic Diseases, National Institute for
Communicable Diseases of the National Health Laboratory Service, Johannesburg,
South Africa. givemorem@nicd.ac.za.
(9)Wits Research Institute for Malaria, MRC Collaborating Centre for
Multi-Disciplinary Research on Malaria, School of Pathology, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
givemorem@nicd.ac.za.

The feasibility of the sterile insect technique (SIT) as a malaria vector control
strategy against Anopheles arabiensis has been under investigation over the past 
decade. One of the critical steps required for the application of this technique 
to mosquito control is the availability of an efficient and effective
sex-separation system. Sex-separation systems eliminate female mosquitoes from
the production line prior to irradiation and field release of sterile males. This
is necessary because female mosquitoes can transmit pathogens such as malaria
and, therefore, their release must be prevented. Sex separation also increases
the efficiency of an SIT programme. Various sex-separation strategies have been
explored including the exploitation of developmental and behavioural differences 
between male and female mosquitoes, and genetic approaches. Most of these are
however species-specific and are not indicated for the major African malaria
vectors such as An. arabiensis. As there is currently no reliable sex-separation 
method for An. arabiensis, various strategies were explored in an attempt to
develop a robust system that can be applied on a mass-rearing scale. The progress
and challenges faced during the development of a sexing system for future pilot
and/or large-scale SIT release programmes against An. arabiensis are reviewed
here. Three methods of sex separation were examined. The first is the use of
pupal size for gender prediction. The second is the elimination of blood-feeding 
adult females through the addition of an endectocide to a blood meal source. The 
third is the establishment of a genetic sexing strain (GSS) carrying an
insecticide resistance selectable marker (dieldrin-resistance rdl gene and/or
other GABA receptor antagonists that can be used as alternative insecticides to
dieldrin) or a temperature-sensitive lethal marker.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-018-3219-4 
PMCID: PMC6304763
PMID: 30583746  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

