
1. Parasit Vectors. 2018 Dec 24;11(Suppl 2):648. doi: 10.1186/s13071-018-3211-z.

Effects of stable ectopic expression of the primary sex determination gene Yob in
the mosquito Anopheles gambiae.

Krzywinska E(1), Krzywinski J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Vector Molecular Biology Group, The Pirbright Institute, Pirbright, UK.
(2)Vector Molecular Biology Group, The Pirbright Institute, Pirbright, UK.
jaroslaw.krzywinski@pirbright.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Mosquito-borne diseases, such as malaria, are controlled primarily by
suppressing mosquito vector populations using insecticides. The current control
programmes are seriously threatened by the emergence and rapid spread of
resistance to approved insecticides. Genetic approaches proposed to complement
the existing control efforts may be a more sustainable solution to mosquito
control. All such approaches would rely on releases of modified male mosquitoes, 
because released females would contribute to biting and pathogen transmission.
However, no sufficiently large-scale methods for sex separation in mosquitoes
exist.
RESULTS: Here we exploited the female embryo-killing property of the sex
determining gene Yob from the African malaria mosquito, Anopheles gambiae, to
evaluate the feasibility of creating transgenic An. gambiae sexing strains with a
male-only phenotype. We generated An. gambiae lines with Yob expression, in both 
sexes, controlled by the vas2 promoter. Penetrance of the female-lethal phenotype
was highly dependent on the location of the transgenic construct within the
genome. A strong male bias was observed in one of the lines. All the females that
survived to adulthood in that line possessed masculinized head appendages and
terminal abdominal segments. They did not feed on blood, lacked host-seeking
behavior, and thus were effectively sterile. Males, however, were not affected by
Yob overexpression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates that ectopic expression of Yob results in a
recovery of viable, fertile males, and in death, or otherwise strongly
deleterious effects, in females. This result shows potential for generation of
transgenic sexing strains of Anopheles gambiae with a conditional male-only
phenotype.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-018-3211-z 
PMCID: PMC6304757
PMID: 30583747  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

