
1. PLoS One. 2018 Dec 31;13(12):e0209699. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0209699.
eCollection 2018.

Characterization of a protozoan Phosducin-like protein-3 (PhLP-3) reveals
conserved redox activity.

Kooistra RL(1), David R(1), Ruiz AC(1), Powers SW(1), Haselton KJ(1), Kiernan
K(1), Blagborough AM(2), Solamen L(1)(3), Olsen KW(4), Putonti C(1)(3)(5), Kanzok
SM(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States
of America.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, South Kensington Campus,
London, United Kingdom.
(3)Bioinformatics Program, Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States 
of America.
(4)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, 
IL, United States of America.
(5)Department of Computer Science, Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, IL, United
States of America.

We recently identified three novel thioredoxin-like genes in the genome of the
protozoan parasite Plasmodium that belong to the Phosducin-like family of
proteins (PhLP). PhLPs are small cytosolic proteins hypothesized to function in
G-protein signaling and protein folding. Although PhLPs are highly conserved in
eukaryotes from yeast to mammals, only a few representatives have been
experimentally characterized to date. In addition, while PhLPs contain a
thioredoxin domain, they lack a CXXC motif, a strong indicator for redox
activity, and it is unclear whether members of the PhLP family are enzymatically 
active. Here, we describe PbPhLP-3 as the first phosducin-like protein of a
protozoan organism, Plasmodium berghei. Initial transcription analysis revealed
continuous low-level expression of pbphlp-3 throughout the complex Plasmodium
life cycle. Attempts to knockout pbphlp-3 in P. berghei did not yield live
parasites, suggesting an essential role for the gene in Plasmodium. We cloned,
expressed and purified PbPhLP-3 and determined that the recombinant protein is
redox active in vitro in a thioredoxin-coupled redox assay. It also has the
capacity to reduce the organic compound tert-Butyl hydroperoxide (TBHP) in vitro,
albeit at low efficiency. Sequence analysis, structural modeling, and
site-directed mutagenesis revealed a conserved cysteine in the thioredoxin domain
to be the redox active residue. Lastly, we provide evidence that recombinant
human PhLP-3 exhibits redox activity similar to that of PbPhLP-3 and suggest that
redox activity may be conserved in PhLP-3 homologs of other species. Our data
provide new insight into the function of PhLP-3, which is hypothesized to act as 
co-chaperones in the folding and regulation of cytoskeletal proteins. We discuss 
the potential implications of PhLP-3 as a thioredoxin-target protein and possible
links between the cellular redox network and the eukaryotic protein folding
machinery.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0209699 
PMCID: PMC6312279
PMID: 30596727  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

