
1. Life Sci Alliance. 2019 Jan 2;2(1):e201800191. doi: 10.26508/lsa.201800191.
eCollection 2019 Feb.

Evolution of gene expression levels in the male reproductive organs of Anopheles 
mosquitoes.

Izquierdo A(1), Fahrenberger M(1), Persampieri T(2), Benedict MQ(3), Giles T(4), 
Catteruccia F(5), Emes RD(1)(4), Dottorini T(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Veterinary Medicine and Science, Sutton Bonington Campus, University
of Nottingham, Leicestershire, UK.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(3)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Division of Parasitic Diseases and
Malaria, Entomology Branch, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(4)Advanced Data Analysis Centre, Sutton Bonington Campus, University of
Nottingham, Leicestershire, UK.
(5)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T. H. Chan School of
Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.

Modifications in gene expression determine many of the phenotypic
differentiations between closely related species. This is particularly evident in
reproductive tissues, where evolution of genes is more rapid, facilitating the
appearance of distinct reproductive characteristics which may lead to species
isolation and phenotypic variation. Large-scale, comparative analyses of
transcript expression levels have been limited until recently by lack of
inter-species data mining solutions. Here, by combining expression normalisation 
across lineages, multivariate statistical analysis, evolutionary rate, and
protein-protein interaction analysis, we investigate ortholog transcripts in the 
male accessory glands and testes across five closely related species in the
Anopheles gambiae complex. We first demonstrate that the differentiation by
transcript expression is consistent with the known Anopheles phylogeny. Then,
through clustering, we discover groups of transcripts with tissue-dependent
expression patterns conserved across lineages, or lineage-dependent patterns
conserved across tissues. The strongest associations with reproductive function, 
transcriptional regulatory networks, protein-protein subnetworks, and
evolutionary rate are found for the groups of transcripts featuring large
expression differences in lineage or tissue-conserved patterns.

DOI: 10.26508/lsa.201800191 
PMCID: PMC6315087
PMID: 30623175  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

