
1. Int J Parasitol. 2019 Mar;49(3-4):235-246. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2018.08.009.
Epub 2019 Jan 20.

Parasites in space and time: a case study of haemosporidian spatiotemporal
prevalence in urban birds.

Santiago-Alarcon D(1), MacGregor-Fors I(2), Falfán I(2), Lüdtke B(3), Segelbacher
G(3), Schaefer HM(3), Renner S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Red de Biología y Conservación de Vertebrados, Instituto de Ecología, A.C.
Xalapa, Veracruz, Mexico. Electronic address: diego.santiago@inecol.mx.
(2)Red de Ambiente y Sustentabilidad, Instituto de Ecología A.C., Xalapa 91070,
Veracruz, Mexico.
(3)Department of Wildlife Ecology and Management, University of Freiburg,
Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Institute of Zoology, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences,
Vienna, Austria.

Prevalence responses to anthropic factors differ across hosts and parasite
species. We here analyzed the spatiotemporal variation of avian haemosporidian
prevalence in bird assemblages of the Mooswald forest (i.e., urban greenspace;
Freiburg, Germany), in response to local environmental features (e.g., water
sources, human presence (visited)/absence (unvisited)) and bird-level traits
(e.g., body condition, age, sex) in 2 years. We used a nested PCR protocol
(mitochondrial (mt)DNA cytochrome b (cyt b) gene) and microscopy to determine
haemosporidian infections. Prevalence was analyzed using a general linear
multi-model (glmulti) approach with Akaike information criterion corrected for
small samples (AICc), with subsequent model inferences using a GLMM on the best
selected model, considering bird species as a random factor. Analyses were
conducted for the main understory bird species (Blackcap - Sylvia atricapilla,
Chaffinch - Coereba flaveola, Great Tit - Parus major, Blue Tit - Cyanistes
caeruleus, European Robin - Erithacus rubecula, Blackbird - Turdus merula, Song
Thrush - Turdus philomelos). We further conducted spatial autocorrelation
analyses for all haemosporidian infections, and classification and regression
trees (CARTs) for focal species. We analyzed a total of 544 samples of seven bird
species. In 2011 prevalence for Haemoproteus/Plasmodium was 25.8% and 11.7% for
Leucocytozoon. In 2013 prevalence for Haemoproteus/Plasmodium was 26.5% and 35.5%
for Leucocytozoon. Haemosporidian prevalence was significantly different between 
some focal species. There was a negative association between distance to the
nearest water source and prevalence in the year 2011, and the opposite pattern
for the year 2013. However, when analyzed for the six focal species separately,
such a relationship could change from a negative to a positive one, or there
could be no relationship at all. For Leucocytozoon there was higher prevalence in
the section of the forest visited by humans. We did not find spatial
autocorrelation for prevalence across the study site, but there were
statistically significant local spatial clusters in the visited section. Although
there were similar responses of prevalence to some factors, infection patterns
were generally bird species-specific. Thus, prevalence is a labile
epidemiological parameter, varying spatiotemporally in an idiosyncratic way.

Copyright © 2019 Australian Society for Parasitology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2018.08.009 
PMID: 30673588  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

