
1. Genome Biol Evol. 2019 Feb 1;11(2):497-507. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evz015.

Tail Wags the Dog? Functional Gene Classes Driving Genome-Wide GC Content in
Plasmodium spp.

Castillo AI(1), Nelson ADL(2), Lyons E(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Environmental Science, Policy, and Management, University of
California, Berkeley.
(2)School of Plant Sciences, University of Arizona.
(3)BIO5 Institute, School of Plant Sciences, University of Arizona.

Plasmodium parasites are valuable models to understand how nucleotide composition
affects mutation, diversification, and adaptation. No other observed eukaryotes
have undergone such large changes in genomic Guanine-Cytosine (GC) content as
seen in the genus Plasmodium (∼30% within 35-40 Myr). Although mutational biases 
are known to influence GC content in the human-infective Plasmodium vivax and
Plasmodium falciparum; no study has addressed how different gene functional
classes contribute to genus-wide compositional changes, or if Plasmodium GC
content variation is driven by natural selection. Here, we tested the hypothesis 
that certain gene processes and functions drive variation in global GC content
between Plasmodium species. We performed a large-scale comparative genomic
analysis using the genomes and predicted genes of 17 Plasmodium species
encompassing a wide genomic GC content range. Genic GC content was sorted and
divided into ten equally sized quantiles that were then assessed for functional
enrichment classes. In agreement that selection on gene classes may drive genomic
GC content, trans-membrane proteins were enriched within extreme GC content
quantiles (Q1 and Q10). Specifically, variant surface antigens, which primarily
interact with vertebrate immune systems, showed skewed GC content distributions
compared with other trans-membrane proteins. Although a definitive causation
linking GC content, expression, and positive selection within variant surface
antigens from Plasmodium vivax, Plasmodium berghei, and Plasmodium falciparum
could not be established, we found that regardless of genomic nucleotide
composition, genic GC content and expression were positively correlated during
trophozoite stages. Overall, these data suggest that, alongside mutational
biases, functional protein classes drive Plasmodium GC content change.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evz015 
PMCID: PMC6385630
PMID: 30689842  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

