
1. Malar J. 2019 Jan 25;18(1):24. doi: 10.1186/s12936-019-2663-8.

Streamlined SMFA and mosquito dark-feeding regime significantly improve malaria
transmission-blocking assay robustness and sensitivity.

Habtewold T(1), Tapanelli S(2), Masters EKG(2), Hoermann A(2), Windbichler N(2), 
Christophides GK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, UK.
t.habtewold@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(3)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, UK.
g.christophides@imperial.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: The development of malaria transmission-blocking strategies including
the generation of malaria refractory mosquitoes to replace the wild populations
through means of gene drives hold great promise. The standard membrane feeding
assay (SMFA) that involves mosquito feeding on parasitized blood through an
artificial membrane system is a vital tool for evaluating the efficacy of
transmission-blocking interventions. However, despite the availability of several
published protocols, the SMFA remains highly variable and broadly insensitive.
METHODS: The SMFA protocol was optimized through coordinated culturing of
Anopheles coluzzii mosquitoes and Plasmodium falciparum parasite coupled with
placing mosquitoes under a strict dark regime before, during, and after the
gametocyte feed.
RESULTS: A detailed description of essential steps is provided toward
synchronized generation of highly fit An. coluzzii mosquitoes and P. falciparum
gametocytes in preparation for an SMFA. A dark-infection regime that emulates the
natural vector-parasite interaction system is described, which results in a
significant increase in the infection intensity and prevalence. Using this
optimal SMFA pipeline, a series of putative transmission-blocking antimicrobial
peptides (AMPs) were screened, confirming that melittin and magainin can
interfere with P. falciparum development in the vector.
CONCLUSION: A robust SMFA protocol that enhances the evaluation of interventions 
targeting human malaria transmission in laboratory setting is reported. Melittin 
and magainin are identified as highly potent antiparasitic AMPs that can be used 
for the generation of refractory Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-019-2663-8 
PMCID: PMC6347765
PMID: 30683107  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

