
1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2019 Jul 1;74(7):1890-1893. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkz098.

Plasmodium falciparum K13 expression associated with parasite clearance during
artemisinin-based combination therapy.

Silva M(1)(2), Ferreira PE(1)(2), Otienoburu SD(3), Calçada C(1)(2), Ngasala
B(4)(5), Björkman A(6), Mårtensson A(5), Gil JP(5)(7)(8), Veiga MI(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Medicine,
University of Minho, Campus de Gualtar, Braga, Portugal.
(2)ICVS/3B's - PT Government Associate Laboratory, Braga/Guimarães, Campus de
Gualtar, Braga, Portugal.
(3)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Johnson C. Smith University,
Charlotte, NC, USA.
(4)Muhimbili University of Health and Allied Sciences, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(5)Department of Women's and Children's Health, International Maternal and Child 
Health (IMCH), Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(6)Malaria Research Unit, Department of Microbiology, Tumour and Cell Biology,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)Division of Pharmacogenetics, Department of Physiology and Pharmacology,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(8)Center for Biodiversity, Functional & Integrative Genomics, Faculdade de
Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.

BACKGROUND: Delayed parasite clearance and, consequently, reduced efficacy of
artemisinin-based combination therapies have been linked with Plasmodium
falciparum K13 gene SNPs in Southeast Asia. In Africa, significantly prolonged
clearance has not yet been observed and the presently restricted variation in
parasite clearance cannot be explained by K13 polymorphisms.
OBJECTIVES: Our aim was to study the in vivo pfK13 transcriptional response in
patients treated with artemether-lumefantrine and explore whether the pfk13
transcripts can explain the patients' parasite clearance outcomes.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 47 Tanzanian children with microscopically
confirmed uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria were hospitalized and received
artemether-lumefantrine treatment (clinical trial ID: NCT00336375). RNA was
extracted from venous blood samples collected before treatment initiation and at 
five more timepoints after treatment. cDNA was synthesized and pfk13 transcripts 
measured by real-time PCR.
RESULTS: A wide range of pfk13 transcript variation was observed throughout all
timepoints after artemether-lumefantrine treatment. Taking parasite clearance
data together with the pfk13 transcripts profile, we observed a negative
correlation inferring that pfk13 down-regulation is associated with longer
parasite clearance time.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings suggest that a reduced PfK13 transcriptional response
may represent a first step towards artemisinin tolerance/resistance.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkz098 
PMID: 30869127  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

