
1. Malar J. 2019 Mar 19;18(1):86. doi: 10.1186/s12936-019-2720-3.

Short-term metabolic adjustments in Plasmodium falciparum counter hypoxanthine
deprivation at the expense of long-term viability.

Tewari SG(1)(2), Rajaram K(3), Schyman P(4)(5), Swift R(3), Reifman J(5), Prigge 
ST(3), Wallqvist A(6).

Author information: 
(1)The Henry M. Jackson Foundation for the Advancement of Military Medicine, Inc.
(HJF), Bethesda, MD, USA. stewari@bhsai.org.
(2)Department of Defense Biotechnology High Performance Computing Software
Applications Institute, Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center,
U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command, Ft. Detrick, MD, USA.
stewari@bhsai.org.
(3)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)The Henry M. Jackson Foundation for the Advancement of Military Medicine, Inc.
(HJF), Bethesda, MD, USA.
(5)Department of Defense Biotechnology High Performance Computing Software
Applications Institute, Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center,
U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command, Ft. Detrick, MD, USA.
(6)Department of Defense Biotechnology High Performance Computing Software
Applications Institute, Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center,
U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command, Ft. Detrick, MD, USA.
sven.a.wallqvist.civ@mail.mil.

BACKGROUND: The malarial parasite Plasmodium falciparum is an auxotroph for
purines, which are required for nucleic acid synthesis during the
intra-erythrocytic developmental cycle (IDC) of the parasite. The capabilities of
the parasite and extent to which it can use compensatory mechanisms to adapt to
purine deprivation were studied by examining changes in its metabolism under
sub-optimal concentrations of hypoxanthine, the primary precursor utilized by the
parasite for purine-based nucleic acid synthesis.
METHODS: The concentration of hypoxanthine that caused a moderate growth defect
over the course of one IDC was determined. At this concentration of hypoxanthine 
(0.5 μM), transcriptomic and metabolomic data were collected during one IDC at
multiple time points. These data were integrated with a metabolic network model
of the parasite embedded in a red blood cell (RBC) to interpret the metabolic
adaptation of P. falciparum to hypoxanthine deprivation.
RESULTS: At a hypoxanthine concentration of 0.5 μM, vacuole-like structures in
the cytosol of many P. falciparum parasites were observed after the 24-h midpoint
of the IDC. Parasites grown under these conditions experienced a slowdown in the 
progression of the IDC. After 72 h of deprivation, the parasite growth could not 
be recovered despite supplementation with 90 µM hypoxanthine. Simulations of P.
falciparum metabolism suggested that alterations in ubiquinone, isoprenoid,
shikimate, and mitochondrial metabolism occurred before the appearance of these
vacuole-like structures. Alterations were found in metabolic reactions associated
with fatty acid synthesis, the pentose phosphate pathway, methionine metabolism, 
and coenzyme A synthesis in the latter half of the IDC. Furthermore, gene set
enrichment analysis revealed that P. falciparum activated genes associated with
rosette formation, Maurer's cleft and protein export under two different
nutrient-deprivation conditions (hypoxanthine and isoleucine).
CONCLUSIONS: The metabolic network analysis presented here suggests that P.
falciparum invokes specific purine-recycling pathways to compensate for
hypoxanthine deprivation and maintains a hypoxanthine pool for purine-based
nucleic acid synthesis. However, this compensatory mechanism is not sufficient to
maintain long-term viability of the parasite. Although P. falciparum can complete
a full IDC in low hypoxanthine conditions, subsequent cycles are disrupted.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-019-2720-3 
PMCID: PMC6423861
PMID: 30890151  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

