
1. Malar J. 2019 May 7;18(1):163. doi: 10.1186/s12936-019-2784-0.

Use cases for genetic epidemiology in malaria elimination.

Dalmat R(1)(2), Naughton B(3)(2), Kwan-Gett TS(4)(2), Slyker J(1)(3)(2), Stuckey 
EM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)Strategic Analysis Research and Training Center, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(4)Department of Health Services, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(5)Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Seattle, WA, USA.
erin.stuckey@gatesfoundation.org.

BACKGROUND: While traditional epidemiological approaches have supported
significant reductions in malaria incidence across many countries, higher
resolution information about local and regional malaria epidemiology will be
needed to efficiently target interventions for elimination. The application of
genetic epidemiological methods for the analysis of parasite genetics has, thus
far, primarily been confined to research settings. To illustrate how these
technical methods can be used to advance programmatic and operational needs of
National Malaria Control Programmes (NMCPs), and accelerate global progress to
eradication, this manuscript presents seven use cases for which genetic
epidemiology approaches to parasite genetic data are informative to the
decision-making of NMCPs.
METHODS: The use cases were developed through a highly iterative process that
included an extensive review of the literature and global guidance documents,
including the 2017 World Health Organization's Framework for Malaria Elimination,
and collection of stakeholder input. Semi-structured interviews were conducted
with programmatic and technical experts about the needs and opportunities for
genetic epidemiology methods in malaria elimination.
RESULTS: Seven use cases were developed: Detect resistance, Assess drug
resistance gene flow, Assess transmission intensity, Identify foci, Determine
connectivity of parasite populations, Identify imported cases, and Characterize
local transmission chains. The method currently used to provide the information
sought, population unit for implementation, the pre-conditions for using these
approaches, and post-conditions intended as a product of the use case were
identified for each use case.
DISCUSSION: This framework of use cases will prioritize research and development 
of genetic epidemiology methods that best achieve the goals of NMCPs, and
ultimately, inform the establishment of normative policy guidance for their uses.
With significant engagement of stakeholders from malaria endemic countries and
collaboration with local programme experts to ensure strategic implementation,
genetic epidemiological approaches have tremendous potential to accelerate global
malaria elimination efforts.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-019-2784-0 
PMCID: PMC6503548
PMID: 31064369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

