
1. J Med Entomol. 2019 Sep 3;56(5):1239-1252. doi: 10.1093/jme/tjz049.

Is Genetic Continuity Between Anopheles sinensis (Diptera: Culicidae) and its
Sibling Species Due to Gene Introgression or Incomplete Speciation?

Wang G(1)(2), Guo X(1), Song F(3), Zheng W(2), Tan W(4), Huang E(5), Wu J(6),
Wang C(7), Yang Q(8)(9), Li C(1), Zhao T(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, Institute of Microbiology
and Epidemiology, Beijing, China.
(2)Zhejiang International Travel Healthcare Center, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Liaoning International Travel Healthcare Center, Dalian, China.
(4)Center for Disease Control and Prevention of Nanjing Command, Nanjing, China.
(5)Fujian International Travel Healthcare Center, Fuzhou, China.
(6)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Guizhou Medical University, Guiyang, China.
(7)Hainan International Travel Healthcare Center, Haikou, China.
(8)Jiangsu Academy of Science and Technology for Inspection and Quarantine,
Nanjing, China.
(9)Jiangsu International Travel Healthcare Center, Nanjing, China.

Erratum in
    J Med Entomol. 2019 Sep 3;56(5):1446.

The Anopheles mosquito Hyrcanus Group is widely distributed geographically across
both Palearctic and Oriental regions and comprises 26 valid species. Although the
species Anopheles sinensis Wiedemann (1828) is the most common in China and has a
low potential vector rank, it has nevertheless long been thought to be an
important natural malaria vector within the middle and lower reaches of the
Yangtze River. A number of previous research studies have found evidence to
support the occurrence of natural hybridization between An. sinensis and
Anopheles kleini Rueda, 2005 (a competent malaria vector). We, therefore,
collected a sample series of An. sinensis and morphologically similar species
across China and undertook ribosomal and mitochondrial DNA analyses in order to
assess genetic differentiation (Fst) and gene flow (Nm) amongst different groups.
This enabled us to evaluate divergence times between morphologically similar
species using the cytochrome oxidase I (COI) gene. The results of this study
reveal significant genetic similarities between An. sinensis, An. kleini, and
Anopheles belenrae Rueda, 2005 and therefore imply that correct molecular
identifications will require additional molecular markers. As results also reveal
the presence of gene flow between these three species, their taxonomic status
will require further work. Data suggest that An. kleini is the most basal of the 
three species, while An. sinensis and An. belenrae share the closest genetic
relationship.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
Entomological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jme/tjz049 
PMID: 31066895  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

