
1. Plant Cell Physiol. 2019 Aug 1;60(8):1747-1760. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcz084.

Light-Induced Artemisinin Biosynthesis Is Regulated by the bZIP Transcription
Factor AaHY5 in Artemisia annua.

Hao X(1), Zhong Y(1), Nï Tzmann HW(2), Fu X(1), Yan T(1), Shen Q(1), Chen M(1),
Ma Y(1), Zhao J(1), Osbourn A(3), Li L(1), Tang K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic and Developmental
Sciences, Key Laboratory of Urban Agriculture (South) Ministry of Agriculture,
Plant Biotechnology Research Center, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, The Milner Centre for Evolution,
University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath, UK.
(3)Department of Metabolic Biology, John Innes Centre, Norwich Research Park,
Norwich, UK.

Artemisinin, the frontline drug against malaria, is a sesquiterpenoid extracted
from Artemisia annua. Light has been proposed to play an important role in the
activation of artemisinin biosynthesis. Here, we report the basic leucine zipper 
transcription factor (TF) AaHY5 as a key regulator of light-induced biosynthesis 
of artemisinin. We show that AaHY5 transcription overlaps with that of
artemisinin biosynthesis genes in response to light and in A. annua tissues.
Analysis of AaHY5 overexpression and RNAi-suppression lines suggests that AaHY5
is a positive regulator of the expression of artemisinin biosynthesis genes and
accumulation of artemisinin. We show that AaHY5 complements the hy5 mutant in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Our data further suggest that AaHY5 interacts with AaCOP1, 
the ubiquitin E3 ligase CONSTITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENIC1 in A. annua. In yeast
one-hybrid and transient expression assays, we demonstrate that AaHY5 acts via
the TF GLANDULAR TRICHOME-SPECIFIC WRKY 1 (AaGSW1) in artemisinin regulation. In 
summary, we present a novel regulator of artemisinin gene expression and propose 
a model in which AaHY5 indirectly controls artemisinin production in response to 
changing light conditions.

ï¿½ The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
Japanese Society of Plant Physiologists. All rights reserved. For permissions,
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/pcp/pcz084 
PMID: 31076768  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

