
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2019 Jul 25;63(8). pii: e02550-18. doi:
10.1128/AAC.02550-18. Print 2019 Aug.

Evolution and Genetic Diversity of the k13 Gene Associated with Artemisinin
Delayed Parasite Clearance in Plasmodium falciparum.

Pacheco MA(1), Kadakia ER(1), Chaudhary Z(1), Perkins DJ(2), Kelley J(3),
Ravishankar S(4), Cranfield M(5), Talundzic E(6), Udhayakumar V(6), Escalante
AA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology/Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine (iGEM),
Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Center for Global Health, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center,
Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA.
(3)Atlanta Research and Education Foundation, VAMC, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta,
Georgia, USA.
(5)Gorilla Doctors, Wildlife Health Department, University of California, Davis, 
Davis, California, USA.
(6)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global 
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(7)Department of Biology/Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine (iGEM),
Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA Ananias.Escalante@temple.edu.

Mutations in the Plasmodium falciparum k13 (Pfk13) gene are linked to delayed
parasite clearance in response to artemisinin-based combination therapies (ACTs) 
in Southeast Asia. To explore the evolutionary rate and constraints acting on
this gene, k13 orthologs from species sharing a recent common ancestor with P.
falciparum and Plasmodium vivax were analyzed. These comparative studies were
followed by genetic polymorphism analyses within P. falciparum using 982 complete
Pfk13 sequences from public databases and new data obtained by next-generation
sequencing from African and Haitian isolates. Although k13 orthologs evolve at
heterogeneous rates, the gene was conserved across the genus, with only
synonymous substitutions being found at residues where mutations linked to the
delayed parasite clearance phenotype have been reported. This suggests that those
residues were under constraint from undergoing nonsynonymous changes during
evolution of the genus. No fixed nonsynonymous differences were found between
Pfk13 and its orthologs in closely related species found in African apes. This
indicates that all nonsynonymous substitutions currently found in Pfk13 are
younger than the time of divergence between P. falciparum and its closely related
species. At the population level, no mutations linked to delayed parasite
clearance were found in our samples from Africa and Haiti. However, there is a
high number of single Pfk13 mutations segregating in P. falciparum populations,
and two predominant alleles are distributed worldwide. This pattern is discussed 
in terms of how changes in the efficacy of natural selection, affected by
population expansion, may have allowed for the emergence of mutations tolerant to
ACTs.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02550-18 
PMCID: PMC6658766
PMID: 31085516  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

