
1. Am J Hematol. 2019 Sep;94(9):963-974. doi: 10.1002/ajh.25543. Epub 2019 Jun 18.

Generation of an immortalized erythroid progenitor cell line from peripheral
blood: A model system for the functional analysis of Plasmodium spp. invasion.

Scully EJ(1)(2)(3), Shabani E(2), Rangel GW(2), Grüring C(2), Kanjee U(2), Clark 
MA(2), Chaand M(2), Kurita R(4), Nakamura Y(5), Ferreira MU(6), Duraisingh MT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
(2)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T.H. Chan School of 
Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(4)Department of Research and Development, Central Blood Institute, Japanese Red 
Cross Society, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Cell Engineering Division, RIKEN BioResource Center, Ibaraki, Japan.
(6)Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of
Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

Malaria pathogenesis is caused by the replication of Plasmodium parasites within 
the red blood cells (RBCs) of the vertebrate host. This selective pressure has
favored the evolution of protective polymorphisms in erythrocyte proteins, a
subset of which serve as cognate receptors for parasite invasion ligands.
Recently, the generation of RBCs from immortalized hematopoietic stem cells
(HSCs) has offered a more tractable system for genetic manipulation and long-term
in vitro culture, enabling elucidation of the functional determinants of host
susceptibility in vitro. Here we report the generation of an immortalized
erythroid progenitor cell line (EJ cells) from as few as 100 000 peripheral blood
mononuclear cells. It offers a robust method for the creation of customized model
systems from small volumes of peripheral blood. The EJ cell differentiation
mirrored erythropoiesis of primary HSCs, yielding orthochromatic erythroblasts
and enucleated RBCs after eight days (ejRBCs). The ejRBCs supported invasion by
both P. vivax and P. falciparum. To demonstrate the genetic tractability of this 
system, we used CRISPR/Cas9 to disrupt the Duffy Antigen/Receptor for Chemokines 
(DARC) gene, which encodes the canonical receptor of P. vivax in humans. Invasion
of P. vivax into this DARC-knockout cell line was strongly inhibited providing
direct genetic evidence that P. vivax requires DARC for RBC invasion. Further,
genetic complementation of DARC restored P. vivax invasion. Taken together, the
peripheral blood immortalization method presented here offers the capacity to
generate biologically representative model systems for studies of blood-stage
malaria invasion from the peripheral blood of donors harboring unique genetic
backgrounds, or rare polymorphisms.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.25543 
PMCID: PMC6984401
PMID: 31148215  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

