
1. Malar J. 2019 Jul 1;18(1):222. doi: 10.1186/s12936-019-2857-0.

Plasticity and genetic variation in traits underpinning asexual replication of
the rodent malaria parasite, Plasmodium chabaudi.

Birget PLG(1)(2), Prior KF(3)(4), Savill NJ(1)(2), Steer L(1)(2), Reece SE(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University
of Edinburgh, Charlotte Auerbach Road, Edinburgh, EH9 3FL, UK.
(2)Institute of Immunology and Infection Research, School of Biological Sciences,
University of Edinburgh, Charlotte Auerbach Road, Edinburgh, EH9 3FL, UK.
(3)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University
of Edinburgh, Charlotte Auerbach Road, Edinburgh, EH9 3FL, UK.
kimberley.prior@ed.ac.uk.
(4)Institute of Immunology and Infection Research, School of Biological Sciences,
University of Edinburgh, Charlotte Auerbach Road, Edinburgh, EH9 3FL, UK.
kimberley.prior@ed.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: The ability of malaria (Plasmodium) parasites to adjust investment
into sexual transmission stages versus asexually replicating stages is well
known, but plasticity in other traits underpinning the replication rate of
asexual stages in the blood has received less attention. Such traits include
burst size (the number of merozoites produced per schizont), the duration of the 
asexual cycle, and invasion preference for different ages of red blood cell
(RBC).
METHODS: Here, plasticity [environment (E) effects] and genetic variation
[genotype (G) effects] in traits relating to asexual replication rate are
examined for 4 genotypes of the rodent malaria parasite Plasmodium chabaudi. An
experiment tested whether asexual dynamics differ between parasites infecting
control versus anaemic hosts, and whether variation in replication rate can be
explained by differences in burst size, asexual cycle, and invasion rates.
RESULTS: The within-host environment affected each trait to different extents but
generally had similar impacts across genotypes. The dynamics of asexual densities
exhibited a genotype by environment effect (G×E), in which one of the genotypes
increased replication rate more than the others in anaemic hosts. Burst size and 
cycle duration varied between the genotypes (G), while burst size increased and
cycle duration became longer in anaemic hosts (E). Variation in invasion rates of
differently aged RBCs was not explained by environmental or genetic effects.
Plasticity in burst size and genotype are the only traits making significant
contributions to the increase in asexual densities observed in anaemic hosts,
together explaining 46.4% of the variation in replication rate.
CONCLUSIONS: That host anaemia induces several species of malaria parasites to
alter conversion rate is well documented. Here, previously unknown plasticity in 
other traits underpinning asexual replication is revealed. These findings
contribute to mounting evidence that malaria parasites deploy a suite of
sophisticated strategies to maximize fitness by coping with, or exploiting the
opportunities provided by, the variable within-host conditions experienced during
infections. That genetic variation and genotype by environment interactions also 
shape these traits highlights their evolutionary potential. Asexual replication
rate is a major determinant of virulence and so, understanding the evolution of
virulence requires knowledge of the ecological (within-host environment) and
genetic drivers of variation among parasites.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-019-2857-0 
PMCID: PMC6604315
PMID: 31262304  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

