
1. PLoS One. 2019 Jul 5;14(7):e0218982. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0218982.
eCollection 2019.

Assessment of malaria real-time PCR methods and application with focus on
low-level parasitaemia.

Haanshuus CG(1), Mørch K(1)(2), Blomberg B(1)(2), Strøm GEA(3), Langeland
N(1)(2)(4), Hanevik K(1)(2), Mohn SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Norwegian National Advisory Unit on Tropical Infectious Diseases, Department
of Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(2)Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(3)Department of Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(4)Haraldsplass Deaconess Hospital, Bergen, Norway.

In epidemiological surveys and surveillance the application of molecular tools is
essential in detecting submicroscopic malaria. A genus-specific conventional
cytochrome b (cytb) PCR has shown high sensitivity in field studies, detecting
70% submicroscopic malaria. The main objective of this study was to assess the
conversion from conventional to real-time PCR testing both SYBR and probe
protocols, and including quantitative (q) PCR. The protocols were assessed
applying well-defined clinical patient material consisting of 33 positive and 80 
negative samples. Sequencing of positive PCR products was performed. In addition,
a sensitivity comparison of real-time PCR methods was done by including five
relevant assays investigating the effect of amplification target and platform.
Sensitivity was further examined using field material consisting of 111
P.falciparum positive samples from Tanzanian children (< 5 years), as well as
using related patient data to assess the application of q-PCR with focus on
low-level parasitaemia. Both the cytb SYBR and probe PCR protocols showed as high
sensitivity and specificity as their conventional counterpart, except missing one
P. malariae sample. The SYBR protocol was more sensitive and specific than using 
probe. Overall, choice of amplification target applied is relevant for achieving 
ultra-sensitivity, and using intercalating fluorescence dye rather than labelled 
hydrolysis probes is favourable. Application of q-PCR analysis in field projects 
is important for the awareness and understanding of low-level parasitaemia. For
use in clinical diagnosis and epidemiological studies the highly sensitive and
user-friendly cytb SYBR q-PCR method is a relevant tool. The genus-specific
method has the advantage that species identification by sequencing can be
performed as an alternative to species-specific PCR.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0218982 
PMCID: PMC6611585
PMID: 31276473  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

