
1. PLoS Pathog. 2019 Jul 11;15(7):e1007906. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007906.
eCollection 2019 Jul.

Controlled human malaria infection with Plasmodium falciparum demonstrates impact
of naturally acquired immunity on virulence gene expression.

Bachmann A(1)(2), Bruske E(3), Krumkamp R(2)(4), Turner L(5), Wichers JS(1),
Petter M(6)(7), Held J(3), Duffy MF(7), Sim BKL(8), Hoffman SL(8), Kremsner
PG(3)(9), Lell B(3)(10)(11), Lavstsen T(5), Frank M(3), Mordmüller B(3)(9),
Tannich E(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Parasitology, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical
Medicine, Hamburg, Germany.
(2)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), partner site
Hamburg-Borstel-Lübeck-Riems, Germany.
(3)Institute of Tropical Medicine, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen,
Germany.
(4)Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical
Medicine, Hamburg, Germany.
(5)Centre for Medical Parasitology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen K,
Denmark.
(6)Mikrobiologisches Institut-Klinische Mikrobiologie, Immunologie und Hygiene,
Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität (FAU)
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(7)School of BioSciences, Bio21 Institute, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia.
(8)Sanaria Inc., Rockville, MD, United States of America.
(9)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), partner site Tübingen, Germany.
(10)Centre de Recherches Médicales de Lambaréné (CERMEL), Lambaréné, Gabon.
(11)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), African partner institution,
CERMEL, Gabon.

The pathogenesis of Plasmodium falciparum malaria is linked to the variant
surface antigen PfEMP1, which mediates tethering of infected erythrocytes to the 
host endothelium and is encoded by approximately 60 var genes per parasite
genome. Repeated episodes of malaria infection result in the gradual acquisition 
of protective antibodies against PfEMP1 variants. The antibody repertoire is
believed to provide a selective pressure driving the clonal expansion of
parasites expressing unrecognized PfEMP1 variants, however, due to the lack of
experimental in vivo models there is only limited experimental evidence in
support of this concept. To get insight into the impact of naturally acquired
immunity on the expressed var gene repertoire early during infection we performed
controlled human malaria infections of 20 adult African volunteers with life-long
malaria exposure using aseptic, purified, cryopreserved P. falciparum sporozoites
(Sanaria PfSPZ Challenge) and correlated serological data with var gene
expression patterns from ex vivo parasites. Among the 10 African volunteers who
developed patent infections, individuals with low antibody levels showed a steep 
rise in parasitemia accompanied by broad activation of multiple, predominantly
subtelomeric var genes, similar to what we previously observed in naïve
volunteers. In contrast, individuals with intermediate antibody levels developed 
asymptomatic infections and the ex vivo parasite populations expressed only few
var gene variants, indicative of clonal selection. Importantly, in contrast to
parasites from naïve volunteers, expression of var genes coding for endothelial
protein C receptor (EPCR)-binding PfEMP1 that are associated with severe
childhood malaria was rarely detected in semi-immune adult African volunteers.
Moreover, we followed var gene expression for up to six parasite replication
cycles and demonstrated for the first time in vivo a shift in the dominant var
gene variant. In conclusion, our data suggest that P. falciparum activates
multiple subtelomeric var genes at the onset of blood stage infection
facilitating rapid expansion of parasite clones which express PfEMP1 variants
unrecognized by the host's immune system, thus promoting overall parasite
survival in the face of host immunity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007906 
PMCID: PMC6650087
PMID: 31295334  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: BKLS (Executive Vice President Process
Development and Manufacturing) and SLH (Chief Executive and Scientific Officer)
are employees of Sanaria Inc. This affiliation does not alter our adherence to
all PLOS policies on sharing data and materials. All other authors declare that
no competing interests exist.

