
1. PLoS One. 2019 Jul 29;14(7):e0220225. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0220225.
eCollection 2019.

Genome annotation improvements from cross-phyla proteogenomics and time-of-day
differences in malaria mosquito proteins using untargeted quantitative
proteomics.

Imrie L(1), Le Bihan T(1)(2)(3), O'Toole Á(4), Hickner PV(5), Dunn WA(6), Weise
B(2), Rund SSC(2)(5).

Author information: 
(1)SynthSys-Synthetic and Systems Biology, School of Biological Sciences,
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(2)Centre for Immunity, Infection and Evolution, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(3)Rapid Novor, Kitchener, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United 
Kingdom.
(5)Eck Institute for Global Health, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame,
Indiana, United States of America.
(6)Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

The malaria mosquito, Anopheles stephensi, and other mosquitoes modulate their
biology to match the time-of-day. In the present work, we used a non-hypothesis
driven approach (untargeted proteomics) to identify proteins in mosquito tissue, 
and then quantified the relative abundance of the identified proteins from An.
stephensi bodies. Using these quantified protein levels, we then analyzed the
data for proteins that were only detectable at certain times-of-the day,
highlighting the need to consider time-of-day in experimental design. Further, we
extended our time-of-day analysis to look for proteins which cycle in a rhythmic 
24-hour ("circadian") manner, identifying 31 rhythmic proteins. Finally, to
maximize the utility of our data, we performed a proteogenomic analysis to
improve the genome annotation of An. stephensi. We compare peptides that were
detected using mass spectrometry but are 'missing' from the An. stephensi
predicted proteome, to reference proteomes from 38 other primarily human disease 
vector species. We found 239 such peptide matches and reveal that genome
annotation can be improved using proteogenomic analysis from taxonomically
diverse reference proteomes. Examination of 'missing' peptides revealed reading
frame errors, errors in gene-calling, overlapping gene models, and suspected gaps
in the genome assembly.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0220225 
PMCID: PMC6663012
PMID: 31356616  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: TLB has received salary from Rapid Novor. TLB’s
employment at Rapid Novor does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on
sharing data and materials. The other authors have declared that no competing
interests exist. The specific roles of all authors are articulated in the ‘author
contributions’ section.

