
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2019 Jul 12;9:252. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2019.00252.
eCollection 2019.

Thymic Microenvironment Is Modified by Malnutrition and Leishmania infantum
Infection.

Losada-Barragán M(1)(2), Umaña-Pérez A(3), Durães J(1), Cuervo-Escobar S(4),
Rodríguez-Vega A(1), Ribeiro-Gomes FL(5), Berbert LR(6), Morgado F(1), Porrozzi
R(1), Mendes-da-Cruz DA(6)(7), Aquino P(8), Carvalho PC(9), Savino W(6)(7),
Sánchez-Gómez M(3), Padrón G(1), Cuervo P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Pesquisa em Leishmanioses, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Fiocruz, Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)Grupo de Investigación en Biología Celular y Funcional e Ingeniería de
Biomoléculas, Departamento de Biologia, Universidad Antonio Nariño, Bogotá,
Colombia.
(3)Grupo de Investigación en Hormonas, Departamento de Química, Universidad
Nacional de Colombia, Bogotá, Colombia.
(4)Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Ciencias Aplicadas y Ambientales, Bogotá,
Colombia.
(5)Laboratório de Pesquisa em Malária, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Fiocruz, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.
(6)Laboratório de Pesquisas sobre o Timo, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Fiocruz, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.
(7)Instituto Nacional de Ciência e Tecnologia em Neuroimunomodulação, Fiocruz,
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(8)Instituto Leônidas e Maria Deane, Fiocruz, Manaus, Brazil.
(9)Computational Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Group, Fiocruz, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil.

Detrimental effects of malnutrition on immune responses to pathogens have long
been recognized and it is considered a main risk factor for various infectious
diseases, including visceral leishmaniasis (VL). Thymus is a target of both
malnutrition and infection, but its role in the immune response to Leishmania
infantum in malnourished individuals is barely studied. Because we previously
observed thymic atrophy and significant reduction in cellularity and chemokine
levels in malnourished mice infected with L. infantum, we postulated that the
thymic microenvironment is severely compromised in those animals. To test this,
we analyzed the microarchitecture of the organ and measured the protein abundance
in its interstitial space in malnourished BALB/c mice infected or not with L.
infantum. Malnourished-infected animals exhibited a significant reduction of the 
thymic cortex:medulla ratio and altered abundance of proteins secreted in the
thymic interstitial fluid. Eighty-one percent of identified proteins are secreted
by exosomes and malnourished-infected mice showed significant decrease in
exosomal proteins, suggesting that exosomal carrier system, and therefore
intrathymic communication, is dysregulated in those animals.
Malnourished-infected mice also exhibited a significant increase in the abundance
of proteins involved in lipid metabolism and tricarboxylic acid cycle, suggestive
of a non-proliferative microenvironment. Accordingly, flow cytometry analysis
revealed decreased proliferation of single positive and double positive T cells
in those animals. Together, the reduced cortical area, decreased proliferation,
and altered protein abundance suggest a dysfunctional thymic microenvironment
where T cell migration, proliferation, and maturation are compromised,
contributing for the thymic atrophy observed in malnourished animals. All these
alterations could affect the control of the local and systemic infection,
resulting in an impaired response to L. infantum infection.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2019.00252 
PMCID: PMC6639785
PMID: 31355153  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

