
1. Pest Manag Sci. 2020 Feb;76(2):769-778. doi: 10.1002/ps.5579. Epub 2019 Sep 5.

Mitochondrial genes associated with pyrethroid resistance revealed by
mitochondrial genome and transcriptome analyses in the malaria vector Anopheles
sinensis (Diptera: Culicidae).

Ding YR(1), Yan ZT(1), Si FL(1), Li XD(1), Mao QM(1), Asghar S(1), Chen B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Vector Insects; Institute of Entomology and
Molecular Biology, Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing, China.

BACKGROUND: Insecticides are still the main method of mosquito control, but
mosquito resistance presents a large obstacle. The function of mitochondrial
genes in the evolution of insecticide resistance is still poorly understood.
Pyrethroid is the most commonly used insecticide, and Anopheles sinensis is an
important malaria vector in China and Southeast Asia. In this study, we
investigated the mitochondrial genes associated with pyrethroid resistance
through their genetic and expression variation based on analyses of
transcriptomes and 36 individuals with resequencing in three geographical
populations in China.
RESULTS: The nucleotide diversity (Pi) in 18 resistant individuals was much lower
than that in 18 susceptible individuals, which suggests that some sites
experienced purifying selection subject to pyrethroid stress. Ka/Ks and amino
acid analyses showed that ND4 experienced positive selection and had 23 amino
acid mutations due to pyrethroid stress. These mutations might change the ND4
structure and function and thus alter the efficiency of the respiratory chain.
ND5 was significantly upregulated, and ATP8 was significantly downregulated in
these three pyrethroid resistant populations, which suggests that these two genes
function in the production and maintenance of pyrethroid resistance. There are
differences in mitochondrial genes involved in pyrethroid resistance among these 
three populations.
CONCLUSION: This is the first study to reveal the association of mitochondrial
genes in the evolution of insecticide resistance through amino acid mutation and 
expression patterns and can help us further understand insecticide resistance
mechanisms. © 2019 Society of Chemical Industry.

© 2019 Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/ps.5579 
PMID: 31392850  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

