
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2019 Aug 20;13(8):e0007241. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0007241. eCollection 2019 Aug.

Detection of classic and cryptic Strongyloides genotypes by deep amplicon
sequencing: A preliminary survey of dog and human specimens collected from remote
Australian communities.

Beknazarova M(1), Barratt JLN(2)(3), Bradbury RS(2), Lane M(2)(4), Whiley H(1),
Ross K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health, Flinders University, Adelaide, Australia.
(2)Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, United States of America.
(3)Oak Ridge Associated Universities, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, United States of
America.
(4)Synergy America Inc., Duluth, Georgia, United States of America.

Strongyloidiasis is caused by the human infective nematodes Strongyloides
stercoralis, Strongyloides fuelleborni subsp. fuelleborni and Strongyloides
fuelleborni subsp. kellyi. The zoonotic potential of S. stercoralis and the
potential role of dogs in the maintenance of strongyloidiasis transmission has
been a topic of interest and discussion for many years. In Australia,
strongyloidiasis is prevalent in remote socioeconomically disadvantaged
communities in the north of the continent. Being an isolated continent that has
been separated from other regions for a long geological period, description of
diversity of Australian Strongyloides genotypes adds to our understanding of the 
genetic diversity within the genus. Using PCR and amplicon sequencing (Illumina
sequencing technology), we sequenced the Strongyloides SSU rDNA hyper-variable I 
and hyper-variable IV regions using Strongyloides-specific primers, and a
fragment of the mtDNA cox1 gene using primers that are broadly specific for
Strongyloides sp. and hookworms. These loci were amplified from DNA extracted
from Australian human and dog faeces, and one human sputum sample. Using this
approach, we confirm for the first time that potentially zoonotic S. stercoralis 
populations are present in Australia, suggesting that dogs represent a potential 
reservoir of human strongyloidiasis in remote Australian communities.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0007241 
PMCID: PMC6716672
PMID: 31430282  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

