
1. Malar J. 2019 Sep 24;18(1):330. doi: 10.1186/s12936-019-2968-7.

Transcriptome analysis of Plasmodium berghei during exo-erythrocytic development.

Caldelari R(1), Dogga S(2), Schmid MW(3), Franke-Fayard B(4), Janse CJ(4),
Soldati-Favre D(2), Heussler V(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
reto.caldelari@izb.unibe.ch.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Geneva CMU, Geneva, Switzerland.
(3)MWSchmid GmbH, Zurich, Switzerland.
(4)Leiden Malaria Research Group, Department of Parasitology, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(5)Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
volker.heussler@izb.unibe.ch.

BACKGROUND: The complex life cycle of malaria parasites requires
well-orchestrated stage specific gene expression. In the vertebrate host the
parasites grow and multiply by schizogony in two different environments: within
erythrocytes and within hepatocytes. Whereas erythrocytic parasites are
well-studied in this respect, relatively little is known about the
exo-erythrocytic stages.
METHODS: In an attempt to fill this gap, genome wide RNA-seq analyses of various 
exo-erythrocytic stages of Plasmodium berghei including sporozoites, samples from
a time-course of liver stage development and detached cells were performed. These
latter contain infectious merozoites and represent the final step in
exo-erythrocytic development.
RESULTS: The analysis represents the complete transcriptome of the entire life
cycle of P. berghei parasites with temporal detailed analysis of the liver stage 
allowing comparison of gene expression across the progression of the life cycle. 
These RNA-seq data from different developmental stages were used to cluster genes
with similar expression profiles, in order to infer their functions. A comparison
with published data from other parasite stages confirmed stage-specific gene
expression and revealed numerous genes that are expressed differentially in blood
and exo-erythrocytic stages. One of the most exo-erythrocytic stage-specific
genes was PBANKA_1003900, which has previously been annotated as a "gametocyte
specific protein". The promoter of this gene drove high GFP expression in
exo-erythrocytic stages, confirming its expression profile seen by RNA-seq.
CONCLUSIONS: The comparative analysis of the genome wide mRNA expression profiles
of erythrocytic and different exo-erythrocytic stages could be used to improve
the understanding of gene regulation in Plasmodium parasites and can be used to
model exo-erythrocytic stage metabolic networks toward the identification of
differences in metabolic processes during schizogony in erythrocytes and
hepatocytes.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-019-2968-7 
PMCID: PMC6760107
PMID: 31551073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

