
1. Genome Med. 2019 Oct 22;11(1):63. doi: 10.1186/s13073-019-0673-3.

Advances in omics-based methods to identify novel targets for malaria and other
parasitic protozoan infections.

Cowell AN(1), Winzeler EA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Global Health, Department of Medicine,
University of California, San Diego, Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA.
acowell@ucsd.edu.
(2)Division of Host-Microbe Systems and Therapeutics, Department of Pediatrics,
University of California, San Diego, Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA.

A major advance in antimalarial drug discovery has been the shift towards
cell-based phenotypic screening, with notable progress in the screening of
compounds against the asexual blood stage, liver stage, and gametocytes. A
primary method for drug target deconvolution in Plasmodium falciparum is in vitro
evolution of compound-resistant parasites followed by whole-genome scans. Several
of the most promising antimalarial drug targets, such as translation elongation
factor 2 (eEF2) and phenylalanine tRNA synthetase (PheRS), have been identified
or confirmed using this method. One drawback of this method is that if a mutated 
gene is uncharacterized, a substantial effort may be required to determine
whether it is a drug target, a drug resistance gene, or if the mutation is merely
a background mutation. Thus, the availability of high-throughput, functional
genomic datasets can greatly assist with target deconvolution. Studies mapping
genome-wide essentiality in P. falciparum or performing transcriptional profiling
of the host and parasite during liver-stage infection with P. berghei have
identified potentially druggable pathways. Advances in mapping the epigenomic
regulation of the malaria parasite genome have also enabled the identification of
key processes involved in parasite development. In addition, the examination of
the host genome during infection has identified novel gene candidates associated 
with susceptibility to severe malaria. Here, we review recent studies that have
used omics-based methods to identify novel targets for interventions against
protozoan parasites, focusing on malaria, and we highlight the advantages and
limitations of the approaches used. These approaches have also been extended to
other protozoan pathogens, including Toxoplasma, Trypanosoma, and Leishmania
spp., and these studies highlight how drug discovery efforts against these
pathogens benefit from the utilization of diverse omics-based methods to identify
promising drug targets.

DOI: 10.1186/s13073-019-0673-3 
PMCID: PMC6805675
PMID: 31640748  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

