
1. Molecules. 2019 Oct 23;24(21). pii: E3822. doi: 10.3390/molecules24213822.

Insights into Heterologous Biosynthesis of Arteannuin B and Artemisinin in
Physcomitrella patens.

Ikram NKK(1)(2), Kashkooli AB(3)(4), Peramuna A(5), Krol ARV(6), Bouwmeester
H(7)(8), Simonsen HT(9).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of Malaya,
Kuala Lumpur 50603, Malaysia. nkusaira@um.edu.my.
(2)Centre for Research in Biotechnology for Agriculture (CEBAR), University of
Malaya, Kuala Lumpur 50603, Malaysia. nkusaira@um.edu.my.
(3)Laboratory of Plant Physiology, Wageningen University and Research,
Droevendaalsesteeg 1, 6708 PB Wageningen, The Netherlands.
arman.beyraghdarkashkooli@wur.nl.
(4)Bioscience, Wageningen Plant Research, Wageningen University and Research,
Droevendaalsesteeg 1, 6708 PB Wageningen, The Netherlands.
arman.beyraghdarkashkooli@wur.nl.
(5)Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, 
Søltofts Plads, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark. aperamuna@gmail.com.
(6)Laboratory of Plant Physiology, Wageningen University and Research,
Droevendaalsesteeg 1, 6708 PB Wageningen, The Netherlands.
sander.vanderkrol@wur.nl.
(7)Laboratory of Plant Physiology, Wageningen University and Research,
Droevendaalsesteeg 1, 6708 PB Wageningen, The Netherlands.
h.j.bouwmeester@uva.nl.
(8)Plant Hormone Biology group, Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences,
University of Amsterdam, 1098 XH Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
h.j.bouwmeester@uva.nl.
(9)Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, 
Søltofts Plads, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark. hets@dtu.dk.

: Metabolic engineering is an integrated bioengineering approach, which has made 
considerable progress in producing terpenoids in plants and fermentable hosts.
Here, the full biosynthetic pathway of artemisinin, originating from Artemisia
annua, was integrated into the moss Physcomitrella patens. Different combinations
of the five artemisinin biosynthesis genes were ectopically expressed in P.
patens to study biosynthesis pathway activity, but also to ensure survival of
successful transformants. Transformation of the first pathway gene, ADS, into P. 
patens resulted in the accumulation of the expected metabolite,
amorpha-4,11-diene, and also accumulation of a second product, arteannuin B. This
demonstrates the presence of endogenous promiscuous enzyme activity, possibly
cytochrome P450s, in P. patens. Introduction of three pathway genes,
ADS-CYP71AV1-ADH1 or ADS-DBR2-ALDH1 both led to the accumulation of artemisinin, 
hinting at the presence of one or more endogenous enzymes in P. patens that can
complement the partial pathways to full pathway activity. Transgenic P. patens
lines containing the different gene combinations produce artemisinin in varying
amounts. The pathway gene expression in the transgenic moss lines correlates well
with the chemical profile of pathway products. Moreover, expression of the
pathway genes resulted in lipid body formation in all transgenic moss lines,
suggesting that these may have a function in sequestration of heterologous
metabolites. This work thus provides novel insights into the metabolic response
of P. patens and its complementation potential for A. annua artemisinin pathway
genes. Identification of the related endogenous P. patens genes could contribute 
to a further successful metabolic engineering of artemisinin biosynthesis, as
well as bioengineering of other high-value terpenoids in P. patens.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules24213822 
PMCID: PMC6864739
PMID: 31652784  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest. HTS is co-founder of Mosspiration Biotech IVS that aim to produce
fragrances in P. patens, but not artemisinin.

