
1. BMC Public Health. 2019 Nov 6;19(1):1456. doi: 10.1186/s12889-019-7767-0.

Farmers' pesticide usage practices in the malaria endemic region of North-Western
Tanzania: implications to the control of malaria vectors.

Philbert A(1), Lyantagaye SL(2), Nkwengulila G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Wildlife Conservation, University of Dar es Salaam, 
Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. annybyabato@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Dar es
Salaam, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(3)Department of Zoology and Wildlife Conservation, University of Dar es Salaam, 
Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.

BACKGROUND: Pesticides remain the mainstay for the control of agricultural pests 
and disease vectors. However, their indiscriminate use in agriculture has led to 
development of resistance to both crop pests and disease vectors. This threatens 
to undermine the success gained through the implementation of chemical based
vector control programs. We investigated the practices of farmers with regard to 
pesticide usage in the vegetable growing areas and their impact on susceptibility
status of An. gambiae s.l.
METHODS: A stratified multistage sampling technique using the administrative
structure of the Tanzanian districts as sampling frame was used. Wards, villages 
and then participants with farms where pesticides are applied were purposively
recruited at different stages of the process, 100 participants were enrolled in
the study. The same villages were used for mosquito larvae sampling from the
farms and the surveys were complimented by the entomological study. Larvae were
reared in the insectary and the emerging 2-3 days old female adults of Anopheles 
gambiae s.l were subjected to susceptibility test.
RESULTS: Forty eight pesticides of different formulations were used for control
of crop and Livestock pests. Pyrethroids were the mostly used class of pesticides
(50%) while organophosphates and carbamates were of secondary importance. Over
80% of all farmers applied pesticides in mixed form. Susceptibility test results 
confirmed high phenotypic resistance among An. gambiae populations against DDT
and the pyrethroids (Permethrin-0.75%, Cyfluthrin-0.15%, Deltametrin-0.05% and
Lambdacyhalothrin-0.05%) with mortality rates 54, 61, 76 and 71%, respectively.
Molecular analysis showed An. arabiensis as a dominant species (86%) while An.
gambiae s.s constituted only 6%. The kdr genes were not detected in all of the
specimens that survived insecticide exposures.
CONCLUSION: The study found out that there is a common use of pyrethroids in
farms, Livestocks as well as in public health. The study also reports high
phenotypic resistance among An. gambiae s.l against most of the pyrethroids
tested. The preponderance of pyrethroids in agriculture is of public health
concern because this is the class of insecticides widely used in vector control
programs and this calls for combined integrated pest and vector management
(IPVM).

DOI: 10.1186/s12889-019-7767-0 
PMCID: PMC6833290
PMID: 31694595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

