
1. J Arthropod Borne Dis. 2019 Jun 24;13(2):135-144. eCollection 2019 Jun.

Molecular Characterization of Anopheles sacharovi Based on Sequences of ITS2-rDNA
Region and COI Gene in North of Iran.

Gholami S(1), Bakhshi H(1)(2), Moosa-Kazemi SH(1), Zahraei-Ramazani A(1),
Chavshin A(3), Sedaghat MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Entomology, School of Public Health, Tehran University
of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Malaria and Vector Research Group, Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur
Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Medical Entomology, School of Public Health, Urmia University of
Medical Sciences, Urmia, Iran.

Background: Malaria is an important mosquito-borne disease considered as one of
the public health concerns across many countries. Anopheles mosquitoes are the
main vectors of Plasmodium parasites, which cause malaria. Some of these vectors 
such as Anopheles maculipennis s.l. and Anopheles sacharovi are considered as
complex of sibling species distributed in north of Iran.
Methods: This study was conducted in north and northwest of Iran including East
Azerbaijan, West Azerbaijan, Ardabil, Golestan and North Khorasan provinces with 
emphasis on the northern borders of the country during 2015-2016. Adult specimens
were collected and subjected to morphological identification as well as molecular
analysis.
Results: Overall, 10405 mosquitoes were collected comprising 21 species. Culex
pipiens and Cx. theileri were found as the most frequent species in whole study
area. Morphological identification showed that out of 1455 female Anopheles
specimens, 77% belonged to An. maculipennis Group. Out of the identified species,
ITS2 region and COI gene sequences of 8 An. maculipennis s.s. and 31 An.
sacharovi representing all provinces were obtained and submitted to GenBank. The 
COI sequences for An. sacharovi revealed the presence of 9 haplotypes with
similarity of 98.17-100%.
Conclusion: Some investigations have reported An. martinius as a member of
sibling species of An. sacharovi among Iranian Anopheles genus; while based on
our study, there was no evidence of the presence of this species in north and
northwest of Iran.

Copyright© Iranian Society of Medical Entomology & Tehran University of Medical
Sciences.


PMCID: PMC6885140
PMID: 31803774 

