
1. Front Microbiol. 2019 Dec 6;10:2823. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02823. eCollection
2019.

Adaptation of Translational Machinery in Malaria Parasites to Accommodate
Translation of Poly-Adenosine Stretches Throughout Its Life Cycle.

Erath J(1), Djuranovic S(1), Djuranovic SP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States.

Malaria is caused by unicellular apicomplexan parasites of the genus Plasmodium, 
which includes the major human parasite Plasmodium falciparum. The complex cycle 
of the malaria parasite in both mosquito and human hosts has been studied
extensively. There is tight control of gene expression in each developmental
stage, and at every level of gene synthesis: from RNA transcription, to its
subsequent translation, and finally post-translational modifications of the
resulting protein. Whole-genome sequencing of P. falciparum has laid the
foundation for significant biological advances by revealing surprising genomic
information. The P. falciparum genome is extremely AT-rich (∼80%), with a
substantial portion of genes encoding intragenic polyadenosine (polyA) tracks
being expressed throughout the entire parasite life cycle. In most eukaryotes,
intragenic polyA runs act as negative regulators of gene expression. Recent
studies have shown that translation of mRNAs containing 12 or more consecutive
adenosines results in ribosomal stalling and frameshifting; activating mRNA
surveillance mechanisms. In contrast, P. falciparum translational machinery can
efficiently and accurately translate polyA tracks without activating mRNA
surveillance pathways. This unique feature of P. falciparum raises interesting
questions: (1) How is P. falciparum able to efficiently and correctly translate
polyA track transcripts, and (2) What are the specifics of the translational
machinery and mRNA surveillance mechanisms that separate P. falciparum from other
organisms? In this review, we analyze possible evolutionary shifts in P.
falciparum protein synthesis machinery that allow efficient translation of an AU 
rich-transcriptome. We focus on physiological and structural differences of P.
falciparum stage specific ribosomes, ribosome-associated proteins, and changes in
mRNA surveillance mechanisms throughout the complete parasite life cycle, with an
emphasis on the mosquito and liver stages.

Copyright © 2019 Erath, Djuranovic and Djuranovic.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02823 
PMCID: PMC6908487
PMID: 31866984 

