
1. Indian J Pharmacol. 2019 Nov-Dec;51(6):389-399. doi: 10.4103/ijp.IJP_535_19. Epub
2020 Jan 16.

Investigation of hub genes and their nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphism
analysis in Plasmodium falciparum for designing therapeutic methodologies using
next-generation sequencing approach.

Singh SK(1), Reddy SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology,
Patiala, Punjab, India.

BACKGROUND: Incidences of resistance to current drugs by Plasmodium is
increasing, hence, it is necessary to investigate and explore new drug targets to
combat malarial disease.
OBJECTIVE: Analysis of the transcriptome sequence information to characterize hub
genes and their nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs) to derive 
therapeutic objectives for Plasmodium falciparum.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Differentially expressed genes between Ring and other
stages of P. falciparum were identified using Cufflinks tool. Using DAVID and
KAAS programs, the gene ontology and pathway analysis were performed. The
networks of protein-protein interaction (PPI) were developed by Search Tool for
the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins and Cytoscape, and the node degree in
the network was calculated by using Network Analyzer, and MCODE plugins of
Cytoscape. SIFT, PROVEAN, and PredictSNP programs were used to study the genetic 
variations, which affect protein functions.
RESULTS: A list of 4196 nonredundant genes was used for functional annotation
cluster analysis, and 8 significant hub genes have been picked from the PPI
network using MCODE plugins of Cytoscape. Various nsSNPs were identified in these
8 hub genes and were investigated both for its native and mutant stage for
solvent accessibility and alteration in secondary structure protein residues.
CONCLUSION: Hub genes identified in this study serve as potential targets to
develop therapy to suppress the pathogenic action of P. falciprum through
experimental techniques.

Copyright: © 2020 Indian Journal of Pharmacology.

DOI: 10.4103/ijp.IJP_535_19 
PMCID: PMC6984025
PMID: 32029961  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.

