
1. Parasitol Int. 2020 Jun;76:102069. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2020.102069. Epub 2020
Feb 4.

A new Real Time PCR with species-specific primers from Plasmodium malariae/P.
brasilianum mitochondrial cytochrome b gene.

Dos Santos EH(1), Yamamoto L(1), Domingues W(1), di Santi SM(2), Kanunfre KA(3), 
Okay TS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Medicina Tropical, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP,
Brazil.
(2)Instituto de Medicina Tropical, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP,
Brazil; Núcleo de Estudos em Malária, Superintendência de Controle de Endemias
(SUCEN), São Paulo, SP, Brazil; Departamento de Moléstias Infecciosas e
Parasitárias, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP,
Brazil.
(3)Instituto de Medicina Tropical, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP,
Brazil; LIM 48, Laboratório de Investigação Médica, Departamento de Moléstias
Infecciosas e Parasitárias, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo, São
Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(4)Instituto de Medicina Tropical, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP,
Brazil; Departamento de Pediatria, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de São
Paulo, SP, Brazil. Electronic address: thelma.okay@usp.br.

Plasmodium malariae mainly causes asymptomatic submicroscopic parasitemia in the 
endemic Amazon and non-endemic Atlantic Forest, where the number of cases and
transmission of malaria through blood transfusion has increased. This study
developed a P. malariae/P. brasilianum Real Time PCR (rtPCR) targeting the
cytochrome b oxidase (cytb), a highly repetitive gene (20-150 copies/parasite)
that should detect more cases than the 18S rRNA (4-8 copies/parasite) gene-based 
amplification systems. Cytb from human and non-human Plasmodium species
(including P. brasilianum) aligned to the only 20 African P. malariae cytb
sequences identified polymorphic regions within which we designed P. malariae
species-specific primers. Non-human Plasmodium species, related parasites,
anemia-causing microorganisms, normal human DNA and 47 blood bank donors samples 
that were truly negative to malaria accessed rtPCR specificity. Truly positive
samples (n = 101) with species identification by semi-nested, nested or TaqMan
PCR, and four samples from the Atlantic Forest that were suspected of malaria but
three of them had negative genus TaqMan and 18S rRNA nested PCR. The cloned
amplification product used in standard curves determined qPCR detection limit
(0.5-1 parasite equivalent/μL). The 10 positive P. malariae samples among truly
positives yielded positive rtPCR results and more importantly, rtPCR detected the
four samples suspected of malaria from the Atlantic Forest. The rtPCR specificity
was 100%, reproducibility 11.1% and repeatability 6.7%. In conclusion, the
proposed rtPCR is fast, apparently more sensitive than all 18S rRNA amplification
systems for detecting extremely low parasitemia. The rtPCR is also specific to P.
malariae/P. brasilianum species. This new molecular tool could be applied to the 
detection of P. malariae/brasilianum infections with submicroscopic parasitemias 
in the context of epidemiological studies and blood bank safety programs.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2020.102069 
PMID: 32032726  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
have no conflict of interest to declare.

