
1. J Med Entomol. 2020 Jul 4;57(4):1168-1175. doi: 10.1093/jme/tjaa023.

Potential Roles of Environmental and Socio-Economic Factors in the Distribution
of Insecticide Resistance in Anopheles gambiae sensu lato (Culicidae: Diptera)
Across Togo, West Africa.

Ahadji-Dabla KM(1)(2), Romero-Alvarez D(2), Djègbè I(3)(4), Amoudji AD(1),
Apétogbo GY(1), Djouaka R(3), Oboussoumi K(5), Aawi A(5), Atcha-Oubou T(5),
Peterson AT(2), Ketoh GK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Université de
Lomé, Lomé, Togo.
(2)Department of Ecology & Evolutionary Biology and Biodiversity Institute,
University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS.
(3)National University of Sciences, Technologies, Engineering and Mathematics,
Ecole Normale Supérieure de Natitingou, Natitingou, BP, Benin.
(4)The AgroEcoHealth Platform, International Institute of Tropical Agriculture,
Cotonou, Benin.
(5)National Malaria Control Programme/Ministry of Health, Lomé Togo.

Vector control strategies recommended by the World Health Organization are
threatened by resistance of Anopheles mosquitoes to insecticides. Information on 
the distribution of resistant genotypes of malaria vectors is increasingly needed
to address the problem. Ten years of published and unpublished data on malaria
vector susceptibility/resistance and resistance genes have been collected across 
Togo. Relationships between the spatial distribution of resistance status and
environmental, socio-economic, and landscape features were tested using
randomization tests, and calculating Spearman rank and Pearson correlation
coefficients between mosquito mortality and different gridded values. Anopheles
gambiae sensu lato was resistant to DDT, pyrethroids, and the majority of
carbamates and organophosphates. Three sibling species were found (i.e., An.
gambiae, Anopheles coluzzii, and Anopheles arabiensis) with four resistance
genes, including kdr (L1014F, L1014S, and N1575Y) and ace1 (G119S). The most
frequent resistance gene was L1014F. Overall, no association was found between
the susceptibility/resistance status and environmental features, suggesting that 
evolution of resistance may be most closely related to extreme selection from
local insecticide use. Nevertheless, further research is necessary for firm
conclusions about this lack of association, and the potential role of landscape
characteristics such as presence of crops and percentage of tree cover.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
Entomological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jme/tjaa023 
PMID: 32112104 

