
1. J Parasitol. 2020 Apr 1;106(2):211-220. doi: 10.1645/19-130.

Haemosporidian Parasites of Chilean Ducks: The Importance of Biogeography and
Nonpasserine Hosts.

Bell JA(1), González-Acuña D(2), Tkach VV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of North Dakota, 10 Cornell Street STOP
9019, Grand Forks, North Dakota 58202.
(2)Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Veterinary Sciences, Universidad de
Concepción, Box 10 537, Chillán 3780000, Chile.

Biogeography is known to have shaped the diversity and evolutionary history of
avian haemosporidian parasites across the Neotropics. However, a paucity of
information exists for the temperate Neotropics and especially from nonpasserine 
hosts. To understand the effect of biogeography in the temperate Neotropics on
haemosporidians of nonpasserine hosts we screened ducks (Anseriformes) from
central Chile for the presence of these parasites. Forty-two individuals of 4
duck species (Anas flavirostris, Anas georgica, Mareca sibilatrix, Spatula
cyanoptera cyanoptera) were collected and assessed for haemosporidian parasite
infections by real-time polymerase chain reaction screening and subsequent
sequencing of the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene. Haemoproteus (subgenus
Haemoproteus) and Plasmodium were detected in 2 host species, A. georgica and S. 
c. cyanoptera, with no Leucocytozoon found. Overall haemosporidian prevalence was
low (14.2%), with the prevalence of Plasmodium (11.9%) being substantially
greater than that of Haemoproteus (4.8%). Six haemosporidian cytochrome b
lineages were recovered, 2 Haemoproteus and 4 Plasmodium, with all 6 lineages
identified for the first time. In phylogenetic reconstruction, the Chilean
Plasmodium lineages were more closely related to South American lineages from
passerine birds than to known lineages from anseriforms. The subgenus
Haemoproteus known from nonpasseriformes has never been identified from any
anseriform host; however, we recovered 2 lineages from this subgenus, one from
each A. georgica and S. c. cyanoptera. Further work is needed to determine if
this presents true parasitism in ducks or only a spillover infection. The results
of phylogenetic reconstruction demonstrate a unique evolutionary history of these
Chilean parasites, differing from what is known for this host group. The unique
geography of Chile, with a large part of the country being relatively isolated by
the Atacama Desert in the north and the Andes in the east and south, would
present opportunities for parasite diversification. Further work is needed to
investigate how strongly the biogeographical isolation has shaped the
haemosporidian parasites of this area. Our results add to the growing body of
evidence that nonpasserine hosts support unique lineages of haemosporidian
parasites, while also demonstrating the role of biogeography in haemosporidian
parasite diversity in the temperate Neotropics.

© American Society of Parasitologists 2020.

DOI: 10.1645/19-130 
PMID: 32164026  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

