
1. Gates Open Res. 2020 Mar 10;4:28. doi: 10.12688/gatesopenres.13115.1. eCollection
2020.

Piloting a surveillance system to monitor the global patterns of drug efficacy
and the emergence of anthelmintic resistance in soil-transmitted helminth control
programs: a Starworms study protocol.

Vlaminck J(1), Cools P(1), Albonico M(2)(3), Ame S(4), Chanthapaseuth T(5),
Viengxay V(6), Do Trung D(7), Osei-Atweneboana MY(8), Asuming-Brempong E(8),
Jahirul Karim M(9), Al Kawsar A(9), Keiser J(10), Khieu V(11), Faye B(12), Turate
I(13), Mbonigaba JB(13), Ruijeni N(14), Shema E(14), Luciañez A(15), Santiago
Nicholls R(15), Jamsheed M(16), Mikhailova A(17), Montresor A(17), Mupfasoni
D(17), Yajima A(18), Ngina Mwinzi P(19), Gilleard J(20), Prichard RK(21), Verweij
JJ(22), Vercruysse J(1), Levecke B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Parasitology and Immunology, Ghent University,
Merelbeke, Belgium.
(2)Center for Tropical Diseases, Sacro Cuore Don Calabria Hospital, Negrar,
Italy.
(3)Department of Life Sciences and Systems Biology, University of Turin, Turin,
Italy.
(4)Laboratory of Parasitology, Public Health Laboratory Ivo de Carneri, Chake
Chake, Tanzania.
(5)Vientiane Office, World Health Organization, Vientiane, Lao People's
Democratic Republic.
(6)National institute of Health, Ministry of Health, Vientiane, Lao People's
Democratic Republic.
(7)National Institute of Malariology, Parasitology and Entomology, Ministry of
Health, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(8)Biomedical and Public Health Research Unit, CSIR-Water Research Institute,
Accra, Ghana.
(9)Filariasis Elimination, STH Control and Little Doctor Programme, CDC,
Directorate General of Health Services, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(10)Department of Medical Parasitology and Infection Biology, Swiss Tropical and 
Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland.
(11)National Centre for Parasitology, Entomology and Malaria Control, Ministry of
Health, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
(12)Service of Parasitology and Mycology, University of Cheikh Anta DIOP, Dakar, 
Senegal.
(13)The institute of HIV/AIDS Disease Prevention and Control, Rwanda Biomedical
Center, Kigali, Rwanda.
(14)College of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Rwanda, Kigali,
Rwanda.
(15)Neglected Tropical Diseases, Communicable Diseases and Environmental
Determinants of Health, Pan American Health Organization, Washington D.C., USA.
(16)Department of Communicable Diseases, World Health Organization, New Delhi,
India.
(17)Department of Control of Neglected Tropical Diseases, World Health
organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
(18)Western Pacific Regional Office, World Health Organization, Manilla,
Philippines.
(19)Expanded Special Project for Elimination of NTDs (ESPEN), World Health
Organization, Brazzaville, Congo.
(20)Department of Comparative Biology and Experimental Medicine, University of
Calgary, Calgary, Canada.
(21)Institute of Parasitology, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.
(22)Laboratory for Parasitology, Elisabeth-Tweesteden Hospital, Tilburg, The
Netherlands.

To eliminate soil-transmitted helminth (STH) infections as a public health
problem, the administration of benzimidazole (BZ) drugs to children has recently 
intensified. But, as drug pressure increases, the development of anthelmintic
drug resistance (AR) becomes a major concern. Currently, there is no global
surveillance system to monitor drug efficacy and the emergence of AR.
Consequently, it is unclear what the current efficacy of the used drugs is and
whether AR is already present. The aim of this study is to pilot a global
surveillance system to assess anthelmintic drug efficacy and the emergence of AR 
in STH control programs. For this, we will incorporate drug efficacy trials into 
national STH control programs of eight countries (Bangladesh, Cambodia, Lao PDR, 
Vietnam, Ghana, Rwanda, Senegal and a yet to be defined country in the Americas).
In each country, one trial will be performed in one program implementation unit
to assess the efficacy of BZ drugs against STHs in school-aged children by faecal
egg count reduction test. Stool samples will be collected before and after
treatment with BZs for Kato-Katz analysis and preserved to purify parasite DNA.
The presence and frequency of known single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the
β-tubulin genes of the different STHs will subsequently be assessed. This study
will provide a global pattern of drug efficacy and emergence of AR in STH control
programs. The results will provide complementary insights on the validity of
known SNPs in the ß-tubulin gene as a marker for AR in human STHs as well as
information on the technical and financial resources required to set up a
surveillance system. Finally, the collected stool samples will be an important
resource to validate different molecular technologies for the detection of AR
markers or to identify novel potential molecular markers associated with AR in
STH.

Copyright: © 2020 Vlaminck J et al.

DOI: 10.12688/gatesopenres.13115.1 
PMCID: PMC7120503
PMID: 32266328 

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.

