
1. Int J Infect Dis. 2020 Jun;95:198-203. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2020.03.081. Epub 2020
Apr 8.

The spread of chloramphenicol-resistant Neisseria meningitidis in Southeast Asia.

Batty EM(1), Cusack TP(2), Thaipadungpanit J(3), Watthanaworawit W(4), Carrara
V(5), Sihalath S(6), Hopkins J(7), Soeng S(7), Ling C(8), Turner P(9), Dance
DAB(10).

Author information: 
(1)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, 
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand; Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global
Health, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom. Electronic address: elizabeth.b@tropmedres.ac.
(2)Lao-Oxford-Mahosot Hospital-Wellcome Trust Research Unit, Microbiology
Laboratory, Mahosot Hospital, Vientiane, Lao Democratic People's Republic;
National Infection Service, Public Health England, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, 
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand; Department of Clinical Tropical Medicine, 
Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Shoklo Malaria Research Unit, Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, 
Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Mae Sot, Thailand.
(5)Shoklo Malaria Research Unit, Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, 
Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Mae Sot, Thailand; Department
of Medicine, Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland.
(6)Lao-Oxford-Mahosot Hospital-Wellcome Trust Research Unit, Microbiology
Laboratory, Mahosot Hospital, Vientiane, Lao Democratic People's Republic.
(7)Cambodia Oxford Medical Research Unit, Angkor Hospital for Children, Siem
Reap, Cambodia.
(8)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom; Shoklo Malaria Research
Unit, Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical
Medicine, Mahidol University, Mae Sot, Thailand.
(9)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom; Cambodia Oxford Medical
Research Unit, Angkor Hospital for Children, Siem Reap, Cambodia.
(10)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom; Lao-Oxford-Mahosot
Hospital-Wellcome Trust Research Unit, Microbiology Laboratory, Mahosot Hospital,
Vientiane, Lao Democratic People's Republic; Faculty of Infectious and Tropical
Diseases, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.

OBJECTIVES: Invasive disease caused by Neisseria meningitidis is a significant
health concern globally, but our knowledge of the prevailing serogroups,
antimicrobial susceptibility patterns, and genetics of N. meningitidis in
Southeast Asia is limited. Chloramphenicol resistance in N. meningitidis has
rarely been reported, but was first described in isolates from Vietnam in 1998.
We aimed to characterise eight chloramphenicol resistant meningococcal isolates
collected between 2007 and 2018 from diagnostic microbiology laboratories in
Cambodia, Thailand and the Lao People's Democratic Republic (Laos).
METHODS: Whole-genome sequencing was used to generate genome sequences from 18
meningococcal isolates including the eight chloramphenicol resistant isolates. We
identified antimicrobial resistance genes present in these strains, and examined 
the phylogenetic relationships between strains.
RESULTS: The eight resistant strains all contain the same chloramphenicol
resistance gene first described in 1998, and are closely related to each other.
Strains resistant to penicillin, tetracycline, and ciprofloxacin were also
observed, including a chloramphenicol-resistant strain which has acquired
penicillin and ciprofloxacin resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that chloramphenicol-resistant N. meningitidis
is more widespread than previously thought, and that the previously-identified
resistant lineage is now found in multiple countries in Southeast Asia.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2020.03.081 
PMCID: PMC7294222
PMID: 32278109  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

