
1. J Cell Physiol. 2020 Dec;235(12):9644-9666. doi: 10.1002/jcp.29777. Epub 2020 May
11.

Temporal modulation of calcium sensing in hematopoietic stem cells is crucial for
proper stem cell expansion and engraftment.

Uslu M(1)(2), Albayrak E(1)(2), Kocabaş F(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Regenerative Biology Research Laboratory, Department of Genetics and
Bioengineering, Faculty of Engineering, Yeditepe University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Graduate School of Natural and Applied Sciences, Yeditepe University,
Istanbul, Turkey.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are known to reside in a bone marrow (BM) niche, 
which is associated with relatively higher calcium content. HSCs sense and
respond to calcium changes. However, how calcium-sensing components modulate HSC 
function and expansion is largely unknown. We investigated temporal modulation of
calcium sensing and Ca2+ homeostasis during ex vivo HSC culture and in vivo.
Murine BM-HSCs, human BM, and umbilical cord blood (UCB) mononuclear cells (MNCs)
were treated with store-operated calcium entry (SOCE) inhibitors SKF 96365
hydrochloride (abbreviated as SKF) and 2-aminoethoxydiphenyl borate (2-APB).
Besides, K+ channel inhibitor TEA chloride (abbreviated as TEA) was used to
compare the relationship between calcium-activated potassium channel activities. 
Seven days of SKF treatment induced mouse and human ex vivo BM-HSC expansion as
well as UCB-derived primitive HSC expansion. SKF treatment induced the surface
expression of CaSR, CXCR4, and adhesion molecules on human hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells. HSCs expanded with SKF successfully differentiated into blood
lineages in recipient animals and demonstrated a higher repopulation capability. 
Furthermore, modulation of SOCE in the BM-induced HSC content and differentially 
altered niche-related gene expression profile in vivo. Intriguingly, treatments
with SOCE inhibitors SKF and 2-APB boosted the mouse BM mesenchymal stem cell
(MSC) and human adipose-derived MSCs proliferation, whereas they did not affect
the endothelial cell proliferation. These findings suggest that temporal
modulation of calcium sensing is crucial in expansion and maintenance of murine
HSCs, human HSCs, and mouse BM-MSCs function.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.29777 
PMID: 32394484 

