
1. J Community Health. 2020 Oct;45(5):1073-1080. doi: 10.1007/s10900-020-00832-w.

Etiologic Agents of Fever of Unknown Origin Among Patients Attending Mnazi Mmoja 
Hospital, Zanzibar.

Ali MA(1), James OC(2), Mohamed AA(3), Joachim A(4), Mubi M(5), Omodior O(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Muhimbili University of Health
and Allied Sciences, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(2)Department of Pathology and Biochemistry, State University of Zanzibar,
Zanzibar, Tanzania.
(3)Centre for Diseases Control (CDC), Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Muhimbili University of Health and 
Allied Sciences, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(5)Department of Parasitology and Entomology, Muhimbili University of Health and 
Allied Sciences, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(6)Department of Recreation, Parks, and Tourism Studies, Indiana University
School of Public Health-Bloomington, 1025 E. 7th Street, Bloomington, IN, 47405, 
USA. oomodior@indiana.edu.

BACKGROUND: Fever of unknown origin (FUO) remains an important public health
problem. With malaria transmission declining in some parts of Africa, the
evidence suggests other infectious agents now account for most FUO. The purpose
of this study was to identify the etiologic agents of FUO in a cross-section of
patients at the Mnazi Mmoja hospital in Zanzibar, Tanzania.
METHODOLOGY: A multiplex TaqMan gene expression Array Card (TAC) and plates were 
used for detection and classification of different pathogens in blood samples
obtained from patients with FUO. Logistic regression analyses was performed using
pathogens detected and sociodemographic characteristics as outcome and exposure
variables respectively. Odd ratios and 95% confidence interval were calculated
and statistical significance was set at P < .05.
RESULT: Thirty-three different pathogens were detected in 27 patient blood
samples. The following pathogens were detected in decreasing order of prevalence;
Dengue virus, Plasmodium species, Rickettsia, Brucella species, Salmonella typhi,
and less than 1% for each of Bartonella, Coxiella burnetii, Salmonella species,
and Leptospira. Co-infections of Plasmodium with Dengue and S. typhi were also
detected, including one case with three different pathogens-Plasmodium,
Rickettsia and Brucella. There was no association between the etiologic agents of
FUO and demographic or clinical characteristics.
CONCLUSIONS: Zoonotic and arboviral etiological agents of fever of unknown origin
are present among patients at the Mnazi Mmoja hospital in Zanzibar, Tanzania.
There is a need to develop a baseline of standardized diagnostic approaches
particularly within the hospital setting. In areas with low malaria prevalence
like Zanzibar, Dengue, Rickettsia, Coxiella burnetii, Brucellosis should be
considered by clinicians in the differential diagnoses of FUO.

DOI: 10.1007/s10900-020-00832-w 
PMID: 32399732 

