
1. Elife. 2020 May 29;9. pii: e57799. doi: 10.7554/eLife.57799.

Plasmodium falciparum translational machinery condones polyadenosine repeats.

Pavlovic Djuranovic S(#)(1), Erath J(#)(1), Andrews RJ(2), Bayguinov PO(3), Chung
JJ(4), Chalker DL(4), Fitzpatrick JA(1)(3)(5)(6), Moss WN(2), Szczesny P(7),
Djuranovic S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, United States.
(2)Roy J. Carver Department of Biochemistry, Biophysics, and Molecular Biology,
Iowa State University, Ames, United States.
(3)Washington University Center for Cellular Imaging, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, United States.
(4)Department of Biology, Washington University, St Louis, United States.
(5)Department of Neuroscience, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, United States.
(6)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Washington University, St Louis, United 
States.
(7)Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics Polish Academy of Sciences,
Department of Bioinformatics, Warsaw, Poland.
(#)Contributed equally

Plasmodium falciparum is a causative agent of human malaria. Sixty percent of
mRNAs from its extremely AT-rich (81%) genome harbor long polyadenosine (polyA)
runs within their ORFs, distinguishing the parasite from its hosts and other
sequenced organisms. Recent studies indicate polyA runs cause ribosome stalling
and frameshifting, triggering mRNA surveillance pathways and attenuating protein 
synthesis. Here, we show that P. falciparum is an exception to this rule. We
demonstrate that both endogenous genes and reporter sequences containing long
polyA runs are efficiently and accurately translated in P. falciparum cells. We
show that polyA runs do not elicit any response from No Go Decay (NGD) or result 
in the production of frameshifted proteins. This is in stark contrast to what we 
observe in human cells or T. thermophila, an organism with similar AT-content.
Finally, using stalling reporters we show that Plasmodium cells evolved not to
have a fully functional NGD pathway.

© 2020, Pavlovic Djuranovic et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.57799 
PMCID: PMC7295572
PMID: 32469313 

Conflict of interest statement: SP, JE, RA, PB, JC, DC, JF, WM, PS, SD No
competing interests declared

