
1. Clin Transl Immunology. 2020 Jun 18;9(6):e1144. doi: 10.1002/cti2.1144.
eCollection 2020.

Transcriptional profiling and immunophenotyping show sustained activation of
blood monocytes in subpatent Plasmodium falciparum infection.

Loughland JR(1)(2), Woodberry T(2)(3)(4), Field M(5)(6), Andrew DW(1), SheelaNair
A(1), Dooley NL(1), Piera KA(2)(3), Amante FH(1), Kenangalem E(7)(8), Price
RN(2)(3)(9)(10), Engwerda CR(1), Anstey NM(2)(3), McCarthy JS(1), Boyle MJ(1)(2),
Minigo G(2)(3)(11).

Author information: 
(1)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute Brisbane QLD Australia.
(2)Menzies School of Health Research Darwin NT Australia.
(3)Charles Darwin University Darwin NT Australia.
(4)Present address: The University of Newcastle Callaghan NSW Australia.
(5)Australian Institute of Tropical Health and Medicine and Centre for Tropical
Bioinformatics and Molecular Biology James Cook University Cairns QLD Australia.
(6)John Curtin School of Medical Research Australian National University Canberra
ACT Australia.
(7)Timika Malaria Research Program Papuan Health and Community Development
Foundation Timika Indonesia.
(8)District Health Authority Timika Indonesia.
(9)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health Nuffield Department of Clinical
Medicine University of Oxford Oxford UK.
(10)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit Faculty of Tropical Medicine
Mahidol University Bangkok Thailand.
(11)College of Health and Human Sciences Charles Darwin University Darwin NT
Australia.

Objectives: Malaria, caused by Plasmodium infection, remains a major global
health problem. Monocytes are integral to the immune response, yet their
transcriptional and functional responses in primary Plasmodium falciparum
infection and in clinical malaria are poorly understood.
Methods: The transcriptional and functional profiles of monocytes were examined
in controlled human malaria infection with P. falciparum blood stages and in
children and adults with acute malaria. Monocyte gene expression and functional
phenotypes were examined by RNA sequencing and flow cytometry at peak infection
and compared to pre-infection or at convalescence in acute malaria.
Results: In subpatent primary infection, the monocyte transcriptional profile was
dominated by an interferon (IFN) molecular signature. Pathways enriched included 
type I IFN signalling, innate immune response and cytokine-mediated signalling.
Monocytes increased TNF and IL-12 production upon in vitro toll-like receptor
stimulation and increased IL-10 production upon in vitro parasite restimulation. 
Longitudinal phenotypic analyses revealed sustained significant changes in the
composition of monocytes following infection, with increased CD14+CD16- and
decreased CD14-CD16+ subsets. In acute malaria, monocyte CD64/FcγRI expression
was significantly increased in children and adults, while HLA-DR remained stable.
Although children and adults showed a similar pattern of differentially expressed
genes, the number and magnitude of gene expression change were greater in
children.
Conclusions: Monocyte activation during subpatent malaria is driven by an IFN
molecular signature with robust activation of genes enriched in pathogen
detection, phagocytosis, antimicrobial activity and antigen presentation. The
greater magnitude of transcriptional changes in children with acute malaria
suggests monocyte phenotypes may change with age or exposure.

© 2020 The Authors. Clinical & Translational Immunology published by John Wiley &
Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Australian and New Zealand Society for
Immunology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/cti2.1144 
PMCID: PMC7302943
PMID: 32566226 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

