
1. Nat Ecol Evol. 2020 Oct;4(10):1395-1401. doi: 10.1038/s41559-020-1264-9. Epub
2020 Aug 3.

Male swarming aggregation pheromones increase female attraction and mating
success among multiple African malaria vector mosquito species.

Mozūraitis R(1)(2), Hajkazemian M(3), Zawada JW(4)(5), Szymczak J(3), Pålsson
K(6), Sekar V(3)(7), Biryukova I(3)(7), Friedländer MR(3)(7), Koekemoer LL(4)(5),
Baird JK(8)(9), Borg-Karlson AK(6)(10), Emami SN(11)(12)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical and Behavioural Ecology, Institute of Ecology, Nature
Research Centre, Vilnius, Lithuania.
(2)Department of Zoology, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Wenner-Gren Institute, Stockholm
University, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Wits Research Institute for Malaria, School of Pathology, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(5)Centre for Emerging Zoonotic and Parasitic Diseases, National Institute for
Communicable Diseases of the National Health Laboratory Service, Johannesburg,
South Africa.
(6)Department of Chemistry, School of Engineering Sciences in Chemistry,
Biotechnology and Health, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Molecular Biosciences, Wenner-Gren 
Institute, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.
(8)Eijkman Oxford Clinical Research Unit, Eijkman Institute for Molecular
Biology, Jakarta, Indonesia.
(9)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(10)Department of Chemical Engineering, Mid Sweden University, Sundsvall, Sweden.
(11)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Wenner-Gren Institute, Stockholm
University, Stockholm, Sweden. noushin.emami@su.se.
(12)Molecular Attraction AB, Stockholm, Sweden. noushin.emami@su.se.
(13)Natural Resources Institute, FES, University of Greenwich, London, UK.
noushin.emami@su.se.

Accumulating behavioural data indicate that aggregation pheromones may mediate
the formation and maintenance of mosquito swarms. However, chemical cues possibly
luring mosquitoes to swarms have not been adequately investigated, and the likely
molecular incitants of these complex reproductive behaviours remain unknown. Here
we show that males of the important malaria vector species Anopheles arabiensis
and An. gambiae produce and release aggregation pheromones that attract
individuals to the swarm and enhance mating success. We found that males of both 
species released significantly higher amounts of 3-hydroxy-2-butanone (acetoin), 
6-methyl-5-hepten-2-one (sulcatone), octanal, nonanal and decanal during swarming
in the laboratory. Feeding males with stable-isotope-labelled glucose revealed
that the males produced these five compounds. A blend composed of synthetic
analogues to these swarming odours proved highly attractive to virgin males and
females of both species under laboratory conditions and substantially increased
mating in five African malaria vectors (An. gambiae, An. coluzzii, An.
arabiensis, An. merus and An. funestus) in semi-field experiments. Our results
not only narrow a conspicuous gap in understanding a vital aspect of the chemical
ecology of male mosquitoes but also demonstrate fundamental roles of rhythmic and
metabolic genes in the physiology and behavioural regulation of these vectors.
These identified aggregation pheromones have great potential for exploitation
against these highly dangerous insects. Manipulating such pheromones could
increase the efficacy of malaria-vector control programmes.

DOI: 10.1038/s41559-020-1264-9 
PMID: 32747772 

