
1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2020 Aug 14;16(8):e1008121. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008121. 
eCollection 2020 Aug.

Vector genetics, insecticide resistance and gene drives: An agent-based modeling 
approach to evaluate malaria transmission and elimination.

Selvaraj P(1), Wenger EA(1), Bridenbecker D(1), Windbichler N(2), Russell JR(1), 
Gerardin J(1)(3), Bever CA(1), Nikolov M(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Disease Modeling, Bellevue, Washington, United States of
America.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, South Kensington, United
Kingdom.
(3)Department of Preventive Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois,
United States of America.
(4)Sage Bionetworks, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.

Vector control has been a key component in the fight against malaria for decades,
and chemical insecticides are critical to the success of vector control programs 
worldwide. However, increasing resistance to insecticides threatens to undermine 
these efforts. Understanding the evolution and propagation of resistance is thus 
imperative to mitigating loss of intervention effectiveness. Additionally,
accelerated research and development of new tools that can be deployed alongside 
existing vector control strategies is key to eradicating malaria in the near
future. Methods such as gene drives that aim to genetically modify large mosquito
populations in the wild to either render them refractory to malaria or impair
their reproduction may prove invaluable tools. Mathematical models of gene flow
in populations, which is the transfer of genetic information from one population 
to another through migration, can offer invaluable insight into the behavior and 
potential impact of gene drives as well as the spread of insecticide resistance
in the wild. Here, we present the first multi-locus, agent-based model of vector 
genetics that accounts for mutations and a many-to-many mapping cardinality of
genotypes to phenotypes to investigate gene flow, and the propagation of gene
drives in Anopheline populations. This model is embedded within a large scale
individual-based model of malaria transmission representative of a high burden,
high transmission setting characteristic of the Sahel. Results are presented for 
the selection of insecticide-resistant vectors and the spread of resistance
through repeated deployment of insecticide treated nets (ITNs), in addition to
scenarios where gene drives act in concert with existing vector control tools
such as ITNs. The roles of seasonality, spatial distribution of vector habitat
and feed sites, and existing vector control in propagating alleles that confer
phenotypic traits via gene drives that result in reduced transmission are
explored. The ability to model a spectrum of vector species with different
genotypes and phenotypes in the context of malaria transmission allows us to test
deployment strategies for existing interventions that reduce the deleterious
effects of resistance and allows exploration of the impact of new tools being
proposed or developed.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008121 
PMCID: PMC7449459
PMID: 32797077  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

