
1. Malar J. 2020 Aug 24;19(1):299. doi: 10.1186/s12936-020-03372-9.

The biology of unconventional invasion of Duffy-negative reticulocytes by
Plasmodium vivax and its implication in malaria epidemiology and public health.

Golassa L(1), Amenga-Etego L(2), Lo E(3), Amambua-Ngwa A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Aklilu Lemma Institute of Pathobiology, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia. lgolassa@gmail.com.
(2)West African Center for Cell Biology of Infectious Pathogens, University of
Ghana, Accra, Ghana.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, 
Charlotte, NC, USA.
(4)Medical Research Council Unit, The Gambia at London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, Banjul, The Gambia.

Plasmodium vivax has been largely neglected over the past century, despite a
widespread recognition of its burden across region where it is endemic. The
parasite invades reticulocytes, employing the interaction between Plasmodium
vivax Duffy binding protein (PvDBP) and human Duffy antigen receptor for
chemokines (DARC). However, P. vivax has now been observed in Duffy-negative
individuals, presenting a potentially serious public health problem as the
majority of African populations are Duffy-negative. Invasion of Duffy-negative
reticulocytes is suggested to be through duplication of the PvDBP and a novel
protein encoded by P. vivax erythrocyte binding protein (EBP) genes. The
emergence and spread of specific P. vivax strains with ability to invade
Duffy-negative reticulocytes has, therefore, drawn substantial attention and
further complicated the epidemiology and public health implication of vivax
malaria. Given the right environment and vectorial capacity for transmission
coupled with the parasite's ability to invade Duffy-negative individuals, P.
vivax could increase its epidemiological significance in Africa. In this review, 
authors present accruing knowledge on the paradigm shift in P. vivax invasion of 
Duffy-negative reticulocytes against the established mechanism of invading only
Duffy-positive individuals and offer a perspective on the epidemiological
diagnostic and public health implication in Africa.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-020-03372-9 
PMCID: PMC7443611
PMID: 32831093 

