
1. Malar J. 2020 Aug 27;19(1):307. doi: 10.1186/s12936-020-03381-8.

Evaluating the predictive performance of malaria antibodies and FCGR3B gene
polymorphisms on Plasmodium falciparum infection outcome: a prospective cohort
study.

Dwomoh D(1), Adu B(2), Dodoo D(2), Theisen M(3)(4)(5), Iddi S(6), Gerds TA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of Ghana,
Accra, Ghana. duahdwomoh@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Immunology, Noguchi Memorial Institute of Medical Research,
College of Health Sciences, University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana.
(3)Department for Congenital Disorders, Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
(4)Centre for Medical Parasitology at Department of International Health,
Immunology and Microbiology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, Copenhagen University Hospital,
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(6)Department of Statistics and Actuarial Sciences, University of Ghana, Accra,
Ghana.
(7)Section of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Malaria antigen-specific antibodies and polymorphisms in host
receptors involved in antibody functionality have been associated with different 
outcomes of Plasmodium falciparum infections. Thus, to identify key prospective
malaria antigens for vaccine development, there is the need to evaluate the
associations between malaria antibodies and antibody dependent host factors with 
more rigorous statistical methods. In this study, different statistical models
were used to evaluate the predictive performance of malaria-specific antibodies
and host gene polymorphisms on P. falciparum infection in a longitudinal cohort
study involving Ghanaian children.
METHODS: Models with different functional forms were built using known predictors
(age, sickle cell status, blood group status, parasite density, and mosquito bed 
net use) and malaria antigen-specific immunoglobulin (Ig) G and IgG subclasses
and FCGR3B polymorphisms shown to mediate antibody-dependent cellular functions. 
Malaria antigens studied were Merozoite surface proteins (MSP-1 and MSP-3),
Glutamate Rich Protein (GLURP)-R0, R2, and the Apical Membrane Antigen (AMA-1).
The models were evaluated through visualization and assessment of differences
between the Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve and Brier
Score estimated by suitable internal cross-validation designs.
RESULTS: This study found that the FCGR3B-c.233C>A genotype and IgG against AMA1 
were relatively better compared to the other antibodies and FCGR3B genotypes
studied in classifying or predicting malaria risk among children.
CONCLUSIONS: The data supports the P. falciparum, AMA1 as an important malaria
vaccine antigen, while FCGR3B-c.233C>A under the additive and dominant models of 
inheritance could be an important modifier of the effect of malaria protective
antibodies.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-020-03381-8 
PMCID: PMC7450914
PMID: 32854708 

