
1. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2020 Aug 25. doi: 10.1097/QAI.0000000000002489.
[Epub ahead of print]

Cessation of long-term cotrimoxazole prophylaxis in HIV-infected children does
not alter the carriage of antimicrobial resistance genes.

Francis F(1), Gough EK(2), Edens TJ(3), Berejena C(4), Bwakura-Dangarembizi M(4),
Shonhai A(4), Nathoo KJ(4), Glass M(5), Gibb DM(6), Prendergast AJ(7)(8), Manges 
AR(5)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver BC, Canada.
(2)Department of International Health, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public
Health, Baltimore MD, USA.
(3)Devil's Staircase Consulting, West Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(4)University of Zimbabwe College of Health Sciences, Harare, Zimbabwe.
(5)School of Population and Public Health, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver BC, Canada.
(6)MRC Clinical Trials Unit at University College London, London, U.K.
(7)Blizard Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London, U.K.
(8)Zvitambo Institute for Maternal and Child Health Research, Harare, Zimbabwe.
(9)British Columbia Centre for Disease Control (BCCDC), Vancouver, BC, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Cotrimoxazole (CTX) is a broad-spectrum antimicrobial, combining
trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole. CTX prophylaxis reduces mortality and
morbidity among people living with HIV in regions with high prevalence of
bacterial infections and malaria. The Antiretroviral research for Watoto (ARROW) 
trial evaluated the effect of stopping versus continuing CTX prophylaxis in
sub-Saharan Africa.
METHODS: In this study, 72 HIV-infected Zimbabwean children, on antiretroviral
therapy, provided fecal samples at 84- and 96-weeks after randomization to
continue or stop CTX. DNA was extracted for whole metagenome shotgun sequencing, 
with sequencing reads mapped to the Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database 
(CARD) to identify CTX and other antimicrobial resistance genes.
RESULTS: There were minimal differences in the carriage of CTX resistance genes
between groups. The dfrA1 gene, conferring trimethoprim resistance, was
significantly higher in the continue group (p=0.039) and the tetA(P) gene
conferring resistance to tetracycline was significantly higher in the stop group 
(p=0.013). CTX prophylaxis has a role in shaping the resistome, however stopping 
prophylaxis does not decrease resistance gene abundance.
CONCLUSION: No differences were observed in resistance gene carriage between the 
stop and continue groups. The previously shown multi-faceted protective effects
of CTX in ARROW Trial clinical outcomes are not outweighed by the risk of
multi-drug resistance gene selection due to prophylaxis. These findings are
reassuring, given current recommendations for long-term CTX prophylaxis among
children living with HIV in sub-Saharan Africa to decrease mortality and
morbidity.

DOI: 10.1097/QAI.0000000000002489 
PMID: 32852361 

