
1. J Infect Dis. 2020 Sep 9. pii: jiaa562. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiaa562. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Dormant Plasmodium falciparum parasites in human infections following artesunate 
therapy.

Peatey C(1), Chen N(1), Gresty K(1)(2), Anderson K(1)(2), Pickering P(1), Watts
R(3), Gatton ML(4), McCarthy J(3), Cheng Q(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Drug Resistance and Diagnostics, Australian Defence Force Malaria and
Infectious Disease Institute, Brisbane, Australia.
(2)The AMI laboratory, QIMR-Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane,
Australia.
(3)Clinical Tropical Medicine, QIMR-Berghofer Medical Research Institute,
Brisbane, Australia.
(4)School of Public Health and Social Work , Queensland University of Technology,
Brisbane, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Artemisinin monotherapy of Plasmodium falciparum infection is
frequently ineffective due to recrudescence. Artemisinin-induced dormancy, shown 
in vitro and in animal models, provides a plausible explanation. To date, direct 
evidence of artemisinin-induced dormancy in humans is lacking.
METHODS: Blood samples were collected from Plasmodium falciparum 3D7- or
K13-infected participants before and 48-72 hours after single dose artesunate
(AS) treatment. Parasite morphology, molecular signature of dormancy, capability 
and dynamics of seeding in vitro cultures, and genetic mutations in the K13 gene 
were investigated.
RESULTS: Dormant parasites were observed in post-AS blood samples of 3D7- and
K13-infected participants. The molecular signature of dormancy, an up-regulation 
of acetyl CoA carboxylase, was detected in 3D7 and K13 samples post-AS, but not
in pre-AS samples. Post-treatment samples successfully seeded in vitro cultures, 
with a significant delay in time to reach 2% parasitemia compared to
pre-treatment samples.
CONCLUSION: This study provides strong evidence for the presence of
artemisinin-induced dormant parasites in P. falciparum infections. These
parasites are a likely reservoir for recrudescent infection following artemisinin
monotherapy and artemisinin combination therapy (ACT). Combination regimens that 
target dormant parasites or remain at therapeutic levels for a sufficient time to
kill recovering parasites will likely improve efficacy of ACTs.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiaa562 
PMID: 32901248 

