
1. Insect Mol Biol. 2020 Oct 3. doi: 10.1111/imb.12670. [Epub ahead of print]

Genetic transformation of mosquitoes by microparticle bombardment.

Lule-Chávez AN(1), Carballar-Lejarazú R(1)(2), Cabrera-Ponce JL(1), Lanz-Mendoza 
H(2), Ibarra JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados del IPN (Cinvestav-IPN),
Unidad Irapuato, Irapuato, Mexico.
(2)Centro de Investigaciones sobre Enfermedades Infecciosas, Instituto Nacional
de Salud Pública, Cuernavaca, Mexico.

Mosquitoes constitute the major living beings causing human deaths in the world. 
They are vectors of malaria, yellow fever, dengue, zika, filariases, chikungunya,
among other diseases. New strategies to control/eradicate mosquito populations
are based on newly developed genetic manipulation techniques. However, genetic
transformation of mosquitoes is a major technical bottleneck due to low
efficiency, the need of sophisticated equipment, and highly trained personnel.
The present report shows the transgenerational genetic transformation of Aedes
aegypti, using the particle inflow gun (PIG), by integrating the ecfp gene in the
AAEL000582 mosquito gene with the CRISPR-Cas9 technique, achieving a mean
efficiency of 44.5% of bombarded individuals (G0) that showed ECFP expression in 
their tissues, and a mean of 28.5% transformation efficiency measured on G1
individuals. The same transformation technique was used to integrate the
egfp/scorpine genes cloned in the Minos transposon pMinHygeGFP into the Anopheles
albimanus genome, achieving a mean efficiency of 43.25% of bombarded individuals 
(G0) that showed EGFP expression in their tissues. Once the technique was
standardized, transformation of Ae. aegypti neonate larvae and An. albimanus eggs
was achieved when exposed to gold microparticle bombardment. Integration of genes
and heterologous protein expression were confirmed by PCR, sequencing,
fluorescent microscopy, mass spectrometry, Western blot and dot blot analyses.
Transgenerational inheritance of the transgenes was observed only on Ae. aegypti,
as all transformed An. albimanus individuals died at the pupal stage of the G0
generation. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/imb.12670 
PMID: 33009687 

