
1. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol X. 2020 Sep 22;8:100118. doi:
10.1016/j.eurox.2020.100118. eCollection 2020 Oct.

Blood gene transcript signature profiling in pregnancies resulting in preterm
birth: A systematic review.

Brummaier T(1)(2)(3)(4), Kabeer BSA(5), Chaussabel D(5), Utzinger J(3)(4),
McGready R(1)(2), Paris DH(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Shoklo Malaria Research Unit, Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, 
Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Mae Sot, Thailand.
(2)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(5)Sidra Medicine, Doha, Qatar.

Objective: To pursue a systematic review and summarise the current evidence for
the potential of transcriptome molecular profiling in investigating the preterm
phenotype.
Study design: We systematically reviewed the literature, using readily available 
electronic databases (i.e. PubMed/Medline, Embase, Scopus and Web of Science)
from inception until March 2020 to identify investigations of maternal
blood-derived RNA profiling in preterm birth (PTB). Studies were included if
circulating coding or non-coding RNA was analysed in maternal blood during
pregnancy and/or at delivery. Interventional trials were not included. The
primary outcome was the availability of whole genome expression patterns
evaluated in pregnancies resulting in preterm deliveries.
Results: A total of 35 articles were included in the final analysis. Most of the 
studies were conducted in high-income countries and published in the last decade.
Apart from spontaneous PTB, a variety of phenotypes leading to preterm delivery
were reported. Differences in sampling methods, target gene selection and
laboratory protocols severely limited any quantitative comparisons. Most of the
studies revealed that gene expression profiling during pregnancy has high
potential for identifying women at risk of spontaneous and/or non-spontaneous PTB
as early as in the first trimester.
Conclusion: Assessing maternal blood-derived transcriptional signatures for PTB
risk in pregnant women holds promise as a screening approach. However,
longitudinally followed, prospective pregnancy cohorts are lacking. These are
relevant for identifying causes leading to PTB and whether prediction of
spontaneous PTB or co-morbidities associated with PTB is achievable. More
emphasis on widely employed standardised protocols is required to ensure
comparability of results.

© 2020 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.eurox.2020.100118 
PMCID: PMC7528201
PMID: 33024956 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no declarations of interest.

