
1. Parasitol Res. 2020 Oct 8. doi: 10.1007/s00436-020-06908-9. [Epub ahead of print]

Molecular diversity and coalescent species delimitation of avian haemosporidian
parasites in an endemic bird species of South America.

Oliveira L(1), Dias RJP(2)(3), Rossi MF(4)(5), D'Agosto M(2), Santos HA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Parasitology, Veterinary Institute, Federal Rural
University of Rio de Janeiro, Seropédica, RJ, Brazil.
(2)Department of Zoology (LabProto), Biological Sciences Institute, Federal
University of Juiz de Fora, Juiz de Fora, MG, Brazil.
(3)Laboratory of Protozoology (LabProto), Biological Sciences Institute, Federal 
University of Juiz de Fora, Juiz de Fora, MG, Brazil.
(4)Department of Zoology (LabProto), Biological Sciences Institute, Federal
University of Juiz de Fora, Juiz de Fora, MG, Brazil. mfonsecarossi@gmail.com.
(5)Laboratory of Protozoology (LabProto), Biological Sciences Institute, Federal 
University of Juiz de Fora, Juiz de Fora, MG, Brazil. mfonsecarossi@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Veterinary Institute, Federal
Rural University of Rio de Janeiro, Seropédica, RJ, Brazil.

Haemoproteus spp. and Plasmodium spp. are blood parasites that occur in birds
worldwide. Identifying the species within this group is complex, especially in
wild birds that present low parasitemia when captured, making morphological
identification very difficult. Thus, the use of alternative tools to identify
species may be useful in the elucidation of the distribution of parasites that
circulate in bird populations. The objectives of this study were to determine the
prevalence and parasitemia of the genera Plasmodium and Haemoproteus in
Tachyphonus coronatus in the Atlantic Forest, Brazil, and to evaluate the
molecular diversity, geographic distribution, and specificity of these parasites 
based on coalescent species delimitation methods. Microscopic analysis, PCR, cyt 
b gene sequencing, phylogenetic analysis and coalescent species delimitation
using single-locus algorithms were performed (Poisson tree process (PTP) and
multi-rate Poisson tree process (MPTP) methods). The analyses were performed in
117 avian host individuals. The prevalence was 55.5% for Plasmodium and 1.7% for 
Haemoproteus, with a mean parasitemia of 0.06%. Twenty-five Plasmodium and two
Haemoproteus lineages were recovered. The MPTP method recovered seven different
evolutionarily significant units (ESUs) of Plasmodium and one of Haemoproteus,
whereas PTP presented fourteen ESUs of Plasmodium and one of Haemoproteus. The
MPTP was more consistent with current taxonomy, while PTP overestimated the
number of lineages. These ESUs are widely distributed and have already been found
in 22 orders of birds that, all together, inhabit every continent, except
Antarctica. The computational methods of species delimitation proved to be
effective in cases where the classification of Haemosporida based just on
morphology is insufficient.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-020-06908-9 
PMID: 33030600 

