
1. Genome Biol Evol. 2020 Oct 13. pii: evaa198. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evaa198. [Epub
ahead of print]

Phylogenomics of the epigenetic toolkit reveals punctate retention of genes
across eukaryotes.

Weiner AKM(1), Cerón-Romero MA(1)(2), Yan Y(1), Katz LA(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Smith College, 44 College Lane,
Northampton, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Program in Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, University of Massachusetts
Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts, USA.

Epigenetic processes in eukaryotes play important roles through regulation of
gene expression, chromatin structure and genome rearrangements. Mechanisms such
as chromatin modification (e.g. DNA methylation, histone modification) and
non-protein-coding RNAs (npc-RNAs) have been well studied in animals and plants. 
With the exception of a few model organisms (e.g. Saccharomyces, Plasmodium),
much less is known about epigenetic toolkits across the remainder of the
eukaryotic tree of life. Even with limited data, previous work suggested the
existence of an ancient epigenetic toolkit in the last eukaryotic common ancestor
(LECA). We use PhyloToL, our taxon-rich phylogenomic pipeline, to detect homologs
of epigenetic genes and evaluate their macroevolutionary patterns among
eukaryotes. In addition to data from GenBank, we increase taxon sampling from
understudied clades of SAR (Stramenopila, Alveolata and Rhizaria) and Amoebozoa
by adding new single-cell transcriptomes from ciliates, foraminifera and testate 
amoebae. We focus on 118 gene families, 94 involved in chromatin modification and
24 involved in npc-RNA processes based on the epigenetics literature. Our results
indicate: 1) the presence of a large number of epigenetic gene families in LECA; 
2) differential conservation among major eukaryotic clades, with a notable
paucity of genes within Excavata; and 3) punctate distribution of epigenetic gene
families between species consistent with rapid evolution leading to gene loss.
Together these data demonstrate the power of taxon-rich phylogenomic studies for 
illuminating evolutionary patterns at scales of > 1 billion years of evolution
and suggest that macroevolutionary phenomena, such as genome conflict, have
shaped the evolution of the eukaryotic epigenetic toolkit.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evaa198 
PMID: 33049043 

