
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2020 Oct 20;14(10):e0008729. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0008729. eCollection 2020 Oct.

An updated antennal lobe atlas for the yellow fever mosquito Aedes aegypti.

Shankar S(1), McMeniman CJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns 
Hopkins Malaria Research Institute, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public
Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United States of America.
(2)The Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States of America.

The yellow fever mosquito Aedes aegypti is a prolific vector of arboviral and
filarial diseases that largely relies on its sense of smell to find humans. To
facilitate in-depth analysis of the neural circuitry underlying Ae. aegypti
olfactory-driven behaviors, we generated an updated in vitro atlas for the
antennal lobe olfactory brain region of this disease vector using two independent
neuronal staining methods. We performed morphological reconstructions with
replicate fixed, dissected and stained brain samples from adult male and female
Ae. aegypti of the LVPib12 genome reference strain and determined that the
antennal lobe in both sexes is comprised of approximately 80 discrete glomeruli. 
Guided by landmark features in the antennal lobe, we found 63 of these glomeruli 
are stereotypically located in spatially invariant positions within these in
vitro preparations. A posteriorly positioned, mediodorsal glomerulus denoted MD1 
was identified as the largest spatially invariant glomerulus in the antennal
lobe. Spatial organization of glomeruli in a recently field-derived strain of Ae.
aegypti from Puerto Rico was conserved, despite differences in antennal lobe
shape relative to the inbred LVPib12 strain. This model in vitro atlas will serve
as a useful community resource to improve antennal lobe annotation and
anatomically map projection patterns of neurons expressing target genes in this
olfactory center. It will also facilitate the development of chemotopic maps of
odor representation in the mosquito antennal lobe to decode the molecular and
cellular basis of Ae. aegypti attraction to human scent and other chemosensory
cues.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0008729 
PMID: 33079925 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

