
1. Immunol Rev. 1999 Dec;172:285-96.

The molecular basis of CD1-mediated presentation of lipid antigens.

Moody DB(1), Besra GS, Wilson IA, Porcelli SA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The CD1 family of proteins mediates a newly described pathway for presentation of
lipids and glycolipids for specific recognition by T cells. All four of the known
human CD1 proteins (CD1a, CD1b, CD1c and CD1d) as well as murine CD1d have now
been shown to mediate T-cell recognition of lipid or glycolipid antigens. These
antigens include naturally occurring foreign glycolipids from intracellular
pathogens or synthetic glycolipids that are related in structure to mammalian
glycolipids. The CD1b and CD1d-presented antigens differ in their fine structures
but reveal a general motif in which a rigid hydrophilic cap is bound to two
aliphatic hydrocarbon chains. Different T-cell populations recognize individual
antigens without cross-reactivity to closely related antigen structures or CD1
isoforms, documenting the complexity and fine specificity of CD1-mediated T-cell 
responses. Mapping of the molecular determinants of recognition for CD1b and
CD1d-presented antigens reveals that T cells discriminate the fine structure of
the hydrophilic cap of the antigen, but both the length and structure of the
lipid chains may be altered without loss of recognition. This pattern of lipid
antigen recognition may be accounted for by a simple molecular mechanism of
presentation that parallels the known mechanism for presentation of peptides, but
solves the special problems related to the hydrophobic chemical nature of the
lipid antigens. We propose that CD1 binds antigen by accommodating the two lipid 
tails within the hydrophobic groove of its two membrane distal domains,
positioning the rigid hydrophilic cap of the antigen on the solvent-exposed
surface of the CD1 protein, where it can directly contact the T-cell antigen
receptor. This model provides a molecular basis for recognition of a new and
diverse set of T-cell antigens contained within the lipid bilayers of cellular
membranes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-065x.1999.tb01373.x 
PMID: 10631954  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

