
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Apr 11;97(8):4204-8.

Relative contributions of distinct MHC class I-dependent cell populations in
protection to tuberculosis infection in mice.

Sousa AO(1), Mazzaccaro RJ, Russell RG, Lee FK, Turner OC, Hong S, Van Kaer L,
Bloom BR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461,
USA.

A necessary role for cytotoxic T lymphocytes in protection against Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis (MTB) has been suggested by studies of the
beta2-microglobulin-deficient mouse, which is unable to present antigens through 
MHC class I and class I-like molecules and invariably succumbs early after
infection. To identify the relative contributions of distinct putative MHC class 
I-dependent cell populations in protection against tuberculosis, we compared a
variety of gene-disrupted mouse strains for susceptibility to MTB infection.
Among the strains tested, the most susceptible mice, as measured by survival time
and bacterial loads, were the beta2-microglobulin(-/-), followed by transporter
associated with antigen processing deficient (TAP1(-/-)), CD8alpha(-/-),
perforin(-/-), and CD1d(-/-) mice. These findings indicated that (i) CD8(+) T
cells contribute to protection against MTB, and their protective activity is only
partially dependent on perforin; (ii) beta2-microglobulin-dependent T cell
populations distinct from CD8(+) T cells also contribute to anti-MTB immunity;
and (iii) protective immune mechanisms are predominantly TAP-dependent, although 
TAP-independent mechanisms also contribute to protection. Because CD1d-deficient 
animals were fully resistant to MTB, other TAP-independent mechanisms must
contribute to protection. We suggest here that both classical and nonclassical
MHC class I-restricted T cells, distinct from CD1d-restricted cells, may be
involved in protective immune responses against tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.97.8.4204 
PMCID: PMC18197
PMID: 10760288  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

