
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2000 Jul;44(7):1825-31.

Peptide deformylase in Staphylococcus aureus: resistance to inhibition is
mediated by mutations in the formyltransferase gene.

Margolis PS(1), Hackbarth CJ, Young DC, Wang W, Chen D, Yuan Z, White R, Trias J.

Author information: 
(1)Versicor, Inc., Fremont, California 94555, USA.

Peptide deformylase, a bacterial enzyme, represents a novel target for antibiotic
discovery. Two deformylase homologs, defA and defB, were identified in
Staphylococcus aureus. The defA homolog, located upstream of the transformylase
gene, was identified by genomic analysis and was cloned from chromosomal DNA by
PCR. A distinct homolog, defB, was cloned from an S. aureus genomic library by
complementation of the arabinose-dependent phenotype of a P(BAD)-def Escherichia 
coli strain grown under arabinose-limiting conditions. Overexpression in E. coli 
of defB, but not defA, correlated to increased deformylase activity and decreased
susceptibility to actinonin, a deformylase-specific inhibitor. The defB gene
could not be disrupted in wild-type S. aureus, suggesting that this gene, which
encodes a functional deformylase, is essential. In contrast, the defA gene could 
be inactivated; the function of this gene is unknown. Actinonin-resistant mutants
grew slowly in vitro and did not show cross-resistance to other classes of
antibiotics. When compared to the parent, an actinonin-resistant strain produced 
an attenuated infection in a murine abscess model, indicating that this strain
also has a growth disadvantage in vivo. Sequence analysis of the
actinonin-resistant mutants revealed that each harbors a loss-of-function
mutation in the fmt gene. Susceptibility to actinonin was restored when the
wild-type fmt gene was introduced into these mutant strains. An S. aureus
Deltafmt strain was also resistant to actinonin, suggesting that a functional
deformylase activity is not required in a strain that lacks formyltransferase
activity. Accordingly, the defB gene could be disrupted in an fmt mutant.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.44.7.1825-1831.2000 
PMCID: PMC89968
PMID: 10858337  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

