
1. Arch Latinoam Nutr. 1999 Dec;49(4):358-62.

[Listeria monocytogenes incidence and evaluation of the sanitary quality of
filleted fresh fish from the Metropolitan Area of San José].

[Article in Spanish]

Bianchini M(1), Arias ML, Herrera C, Zúñiga C.

Author information: 
(1)Facultad de Microbiología, Universidad de Costa Rica, Centro de Investigación 
en Enfermedades Tropicales, CIET.

Fish constitutes a very important part of human diet due to its protein content. 
The poor commercialization system existing in Costa Rica for this product causes 
an important secondary contamination that may include microorganisms such as
fecal coliforms, Staphylococcus aureus and even pathogens such as Listeria
monocytogenes. There is a lack of recent information about the microbiological
quality of the fish that arrives to the Metropolitan Area of San José, Costa
Rica, so the aim of this work was to study it through the detection of
microbiological indicators and the incidence of L. monocytogenes. Five different 
samplings were realized to 27 fisheries located in two different areas from San
José, Costa Rica: the Central Market and the rest of the Metropolitan Area. Each 
time, a 500 g sample of fresh filleted fish was taken and transported to the Food
Microbiology Laboratory, Universidad de Costa Rica, for performing the different 
analysis, which included the presence/absence of L. monocytogenes, total plate
count, total and fecal coliforms count and Most Probable Number of Staphylococcus
aureus. Also, a hygiene evaluation of the different fisheries was performed.
According to this, 22.2% of the fisheries were classified as excellent, 14.8% as 
good, 40.8% as regular and 22.2% as bad. Fisheries hygiene is independent of the 
incidence of L. monocytogenes with a 95% confidence level, and there is no
significant relationship between hygiene and the other indicators analyzed. There
is a significant relationship between the incidence of Listeria sp. and the
hygiene of the Central Market area. It was determined that 96.3% and 29.6% of the
fisheries accomplish with the microbiological limits established by ICMSF for S. 
aureus and total plate count, respectively. Listeria sp. was found in 65.2% of
the fish samples analyzed. From these, 52.3% was L. monocytogenes, 43.2% L.
innocua, 3.4% L. ivanovii and 1.1% L. seeligeri. In 88.9% of the fisheries the
presence of L. monocytogenes was positive at least once.


PMID: 10883301  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

