
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2000 Aug;121(2):181-6.

Staphylococcal toxin-induced T cell proliferation in atopic eczema correlates
with increased use of superantigen-reactive Vbeta-chains in cutaneous
lymphocyte-associated antigen (CLA)-positive lymphocytes.

Davison S(1), Allen M, Vaughan R, Barker J.

Author information: 
(1)St. John's Institute of Dermatology, Department of Tissue Typing, King's
College, London, UK.

Staphylococcal superantigens have been implicated in the pathogenesis of atopic
dermatitis (AD). This may occur through superantigenic activation of T
lymphocytes and their subsequent induction of the skin homing receptor CLA on
activated cells. We investigated the proliferative responses of peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells (PBMC) from 10 patients with an infective exacerbation of AD
and six normal controls to the staphylococcal superantigens, staphylococcal
enterotoxin A and B (SEA, SEB) and toxic shock syndrome toxin-1 (TSST-1), and the
mitogens phytohaemagglutinin (PHA) and concanavalin A (Con A). We also assessed
CLA and T cell receptor (TCR) Vbeta-chain expression by immunofluorescence and
flow cytometry before and after stimulation. PBMC from AD patients showed
two-fold increased proliferation to SEA and SEB (P < 0.01) compared with normals,
whereas the response to mitogenic stimulation was identical. Analysis of (TCR)
Vbeta-chain expression demonstrated increased use of superantigen-reactive Vbeta 
families in freshly isolated PBMC in AD patients compared with controls. This
pattern of Vbeta-chain expression was only observed in the CLA+ but not the total
population of T cells. Furthermore, there was a positive correlation between the 
enhanced PBMC proliferative response and increased expression of
superantigen-reactive Vbeta families in atopic patients. These data support the
concept that superantigens are important in the pathogenesis of this common
condition, and also provide evidence that the increased use of certain Vbeta
families in circulating, CLA+, skin homing lymphocytes is of functional
significance.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2249.2000.01270.x 
PMCID: PMC1905717
PMID: 10931129  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

