
1. Metab Eng. 2000 Oct;2(4):328-38.

Low-copy plasmids can perform as well as or better than high-copy plasmids for
metabolic engineering of bacteria.

Jones KL(1), Kim SW, Keasling JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley,
California 94720-1462, USA.

Multicopy plasmids are often chosen for the expression of recombinant genes in
Escherichia coli. The high copy number is generally desired for maximum gene
expression; however, the metabolic burden effects that usually result from
multiple plasmid copies could prove to be detrimental for maximum productivity in
certain metabolic engineering applications. In this study, low-copy mini-F
plasmids were compared to high-copy pMB1-based plasmids for production of two
metabolites in E. coli: polyphosphate (polyP) and lycopene derived from
isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP). The stationary-phase accumulation of polyP on a
per cell basis was enhanced approximately 80% when either high- or low-copy
plasmids were used, from 120 micromol/g DCW without augmented polyP kinase (PPK) 
activity to approximately 220 micromol/g DCW. The cell density of the high-copy
plasmid-containing culture at stationary phase was approximately 24% lower than
the low-copy culture and 30% lower than the control culture. This difference in
cell density is likely a metabolic burden effect and resulted in a lower overall 
product concentration for the high-copy culture (approximately 130 micromol/L
culture) relative to the low-copy culture (approximately 160 micromol/L culture).
When the gene for DXP (1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate) synthase, the first enzyme
in the IPP mevalonate-independent biosynthetic pathway, was expressed from the
tac promoter on multicopy and low-copy plasmids, lycopene production was enhanced
two- to threefold over that found in cells expressing the chromosomal copy only. 
Cell growth and lycopene production decreased substantially when isopropyl
beta-D-thiogalactosidase (IPTG) was added to the high-copy plasmid-containing
culture, suggesting that overexpression of DXP synthase was a significant
metabolic burden. In the low-copy plasmid-containing culture, no differences in
cell growth or lycopene production were observed with any IPTG concentrations.
When dxs was placed under the control of the arabinose-inducible promoter
(P(BAD)) on the low-copy plasmid, the amount of lycopene produced was
proportional to the arabinose concentration and no significant changes in cell
growth resulted. These results suggest that low-copy plasmids may be useful in
metabolic engineering applications, particularly when one or more of the
substrates used in the recombinant pathway are required for normal cellular
metabolism.

DOI: 10.1006/mben.2000.0161 
PMID: 11120644  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

