
1. J Immunol. 2001 Apr 1;166(7):4634-43.

CXC chemokine receptor-2 ligands are required for neutrophil-mediated host
defense in experimental brain abscesses.

Kielian T(1), Barry B, Hickey WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Dartmouth Medical School, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical
Center, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA. tammy.kielian@dartmouth.edu

We have developed a mouse brain abscess model by using Staphylococcus aureus, one
of the main etiologic agents of brain abscesses in humans. Direct damage to the
blood-brain barrier was observed from 24 h to 7 days after S. aureus exposure as 
demonstrated by the accumulation of serum IgG in the brain parenchyma. Evaluation
of brain abscesses by immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry revealed a
prominent neutrophil infiltrate. To address the importance of neutrophils in the 
early containment of S. aureus infection in the brain, mice were transiently
depleted of neutrophils before implantation of bacteria-laden beads.
Neutrophil-depleted animals consistently demonstrated more severe brain abscesses
and higher CNS bacterial burdens compared with control animals. S. aureus led to 
the induction of numerous chemokines in the brain, including
macrophage-inflammatory protein (MIP)-1alpha/CCL3, MIP-1beta/CCL4, MIP-2/CXCL1,
monocyte chemoattractant protein-1/CCL2, and TCA-3/CCL1, within 6 h after
bacterial exposure. These chemokines also were expressed by both primary cultures
of neonatal mouse microglia and astrocytes exposed to heat-inactivated S. aureus 
in vitro. Because neutrophils constitute the majority of the cellular infiltrate 
in early brain abscess development, subsequent analysis focused on MIP-2 and
KC/CXCL1, two neutrophil-attracting CXC chemokines. Both MIP-2 and KC protein
levels were significantly elevated in the brain after S. aureus exposure.
Neutrophil extravasation into the brain parenchyma was impaired in CXCR2 knockout
mice and was associated with increased bacterial burdens. These studies
demonstrate the importance of the CXCR2 ligands MIP-2 and KC and neutrophils in
the acute host response to S. aureus in the brain.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.166.7.4634 
PMID: 11254722  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

