
1. Clin Cancer Res. 2001 Mar;7(3):709-23.

Inhibition of interleukin 10 by rituximab results in down-regulation of bcl-2 and
sensitization of B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma to apoptosis.

Alas S(1), Emmanouilides C, Bonavida B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, Jonsson
Comprehensive Cancer Center, UCLA School of Medicine, University of California,
Los Angeles 90095, USA.

Treatment of patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) is frequently hampered by
development of chemoresistance. Rituximab is a chimeric mouse antihuman CD20
antibody that offers an alternative; however, its mechanism of action is not
clearly understood. Treatment of lymphoma cell lines with Rituximab sensitizes
the cells to the cytotoxic and apoptotic effects of therapeutic drugs, e.g.,
cisplatin, fludarabine, vinblastine, and Adriamycin. This study investigated the 
mechanism(s) involved in the reversal of drug resistance by Rituximab therapy.
NHL cells synthesize and secrete antiapoptotic cytokines implicated in drug
resistance, including interleukin (IL)-6, IL-10, and tumor necrosis factor alpha.
We hypothesized, therefore, that sensitization by Rituximab may be due in part to
modification of cytokine production. In this study, examination of cytokine
secretion by NHL 2F7 tumor cells revealed down-regulation of IL-10 by Rituximab
treatment. Moreover, cytotoxicity assays using exogenous IL-10 and
IL-10-neutralizing antibodies demonstrated that IL-10 serves as an
antiapoptotic/protective factor in these tumor cells against cytotoxic drugs.
Furthermore, expression in 2F7 cells of the protective factor, Bcl-2, was shown
to be dependent on IL-10 levels and down-regulated by Rituximab. Other gene
products such as Bax, Bcl-x, Bad, p53, c-myc, and latent membrane protein-1 (LMP)
were not affected by Rituximab treatment. Drug sensitization, as well as
down-regulation of both IL-10 and Bcl-2, was corroborated in experiments using
the NHL cell line 10C9. The Ramos and Daudi NHL cell lines were not sensitizable,
nor did their Bcl-2 or IL-10 levels change. These studies demonstrate that one
mechanism by which Rituximab sensitizes NHL to chemotherapeutic drugs is mediated
through down-regulation of antiapoptotic IL-10 autocrine/paracrine loops and
Bcl-2. The clinical relevance of these findings is discussed.


PMID: 11297268  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

