
1. J Bacteriol. 2001 Aug;183(15):4626-35.

Evolution of an autotransporter: domain shuffling and lateral transfer from
pathogenic Haemophilus to Neisseria.

Davis J(1), Smith AL, Hughes WR, Golomb M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences and Department of Molecular Microbiology and
Immunology, School of Medicine, University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, MO
65211, USA.

The genomes of pathogenic Haemophilus influenzae strains are larger than that of 
Rd KW20 (Rd), the nonpathogenic laboratory strain whose genome has been
sequenced. To identify potential virulence genes, we examined genes possessed by 
Int1, an invasive nonencapsulated isolate from a meningitis patient, but absent
from Rd. Int1 was found to have a novel gene termed lav, predicted to encode a
member of the AIDA-I/VirG/PerT family of virulence-associated autotransporters
(ATs). Associated with lav are multiple repeats of the tetranucleotide GCAA,
implicated in translational phase variation of surface molecules. Laterally
acquired by H. influenzae, lav is restricted in distribution to a few pathogenic 
strains, including H. influenzae biotype aegyptius and Brazilian purpuric fever
isolates. The DNA sequence of lav is surprisingly similar to that of a gene
previously described for Neisseria meningitidis. Sequence comparisons suggest
that lav was transferred relatively recently from Haemophilus to Neisseria,
shortly before the divergence of N. meningitidis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae.
Segments of lav predicted to encode passenger and beta-domains differ sharply in 
G+C base content, supporting the idea that AT genes have evolved by fusing
domains which originated in different genomes. Homology and base sequence
comparisons suggest that a novel biotype aegyptius AT arose by swapping an
unrelated sequence for the passenger domain of lav. The unusually mobile lav
locus joins a growing list of genes transferred from H. influenzae to Neisseria. 
Frequent gene exchange suggests a common pool of hypervariable contingency genes 
and may help to explain the origin of invasiveness in certain respiratory
pathogens.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.183.15.000-000.2001 
PMCID: PMC95358
PMID: 11443098  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

