
1. J Physiol Pharmacol. 2001 Aug;52(1 Suppl 1):3-31.

Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection in coronary artery disease: influence
of H. pylori eradication on coronary artery lumen after percutaneous transluminal
coronary angioplasty. The detection of H. pylori specific DNA in human coronary
atherosclerotic plaque.

Kowalski M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Heart-Center Osnabruck-Bad Rothenfelde, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The role of infections in pathogenesis of atherosclerosis has been a 
point of extensive discussion and research. Chronic infection has been proposed
to account for the formation and progression of atherosclerotic plaques. Gastric 
mucosal damage caused by Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) involves various
bacterial and host-dependent toxic substances that have been recently associated 
with increased risk of coronary artery disease (CAD).
AIMS: This study was designed to: 1) to determine the seroprevalence of H. pylori
and its cytotoxin associated gene A (CagA) in patients with and without CAD
(group A), 2) to evaluate the influence of infection with H. pylori expressing
CagA (Cytotoxin associated gene A--as a determinant of high virulence) on
coronary arterial lumen reduction in patients after percutaneous transluminal
coronary angioplasty (PTCA) with stent (group B), 3) to assess the effect of H.
pylori eradication on coronary artery lumen reduction after PTCA (group C), 4) to
determine the influence of the H. pylori eradication on plasma levels of
cytokines, lipids and coagulation factors in the same patients before and after
PTCA (group C) and 5) to analyse coronary specimens in patients with severe CAD
for the presence of H. pylori originated specific DNA (Group D).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Group A included 96 patients with CAD (subgroup I) and 96
patients without CAD (subgroup II). For H. pylori seroprevalence, plasma anti-H. 
pylori and anti-CagA IgG were examined by ELISA and Western blot. Group B
included 135 patients (86 male, 49 female, mean age 67 +/- 12 years) who had
underwent PTCA with stent implantation initially and recoronaro-angiography about
6 months afterwards. All patients were tested for H. pylori--specific antibodies 
(IgG and CagA). Patients were divided into three subgroup "a": 34 patients with
H. pylori IgG and CagA seropositivity, subgroup "b": 37 patients infected with H.
pylori positive and CagA negative germs and subgroup "c": 64 patients with H.
pylori IgG sero-negativity serving as control group. For all patients coronary
lumen loss (percentage) in the dilated segment was measured at the end of PTCA
and during re-coronaro-angiography and obtained values were considered taking
into account the major risk factors of CAD (hypertension, hyperlipidemia,
diabetes, obesity and smoking). Group C included 40 patients with significant
single-vessel CAD and H. pylori infection confirmed by 13C-urea breath test (UBT)
and serologically using anti-H. pylori and anti-CagA IgG. In addition, plasma
interleukin (IL)-1beta and IL-8 and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) levels
were measured by ELISA. Plasma total triglycerides, cholesterol, low (LDL) and
high density lipoproteins (HDL), homocysteine levels, as well as some clotting
factors such as thromboplastin and fibrinogen levels, thrombin time and platelet 
count were determined. All patients of group B undergoing PTCA were divided into 
two matched subgroups I and II used in exploratory study; subgroup I (20
patients) received H. pylori eradication triple-therapy for one week
(Clarithromycin, Amoxicillin and Omeprazole), while subgroup II (20 patients)
received similarly prepared placebo for the same time period starting immediately
after PTCA. Six months after PTCA, the H. pylori status was re-assessed by UBT
and found to be negative in all but two patients of subgroup I subjected to H.
pylori therapy. Coronary angiography and laboratory tests were repeated in both
subgroups of group B included into the trial and the reduction in coronary artery
lumen in these subgroups was compared to baseline after PTCA considered as 100%. 
Large atherosclerotic plaques from coronary endatherectomy were obtained in 46
consecutive patients (9 female, 37 male, mean age 63 +/- 9 years) during coronary
bypass procedures (group D). Serum was analysed for positive IgG antibodies
specific for H. pylori by enzyme-linked-immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Antibodies
specific for the CagA were detected by immunoblot analysis. Polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) was used to identify bacterial DNA with primers encoding for the
16 S ribosomal RNA of H. pylori. Sequence analysis of PCR-products confirmed the 
specificity of the gene products for H. pylori. Coronary artery biopsies from 19 
autopsies from a Forensic Medicine Department without coronary atherosclerosis
were examined as a control group.
RESULTS: The H. pylori seropositivity reached 69.79% (67 pts) of CAD (subgroup I 
of group A) and it was significantly higher than that in controls without CAD
(subgroup II)--40.62% (39 pts), the odds ratio (OR) being 3.38 95% CI:
1.8598-6.1306 for H. pylori in CAD. CagA IgG detection was also significantly
higher (58.20%) in CAD group than in controls (35.89%) giving the OR about 2.49
(95% CI: 1.1012-5.6175). Mean lumen loss in group B in H. pylori-positive
subjects was 37.0% +/- 17.3%, whereas for H. pylori negative patients 29.9 +/-
13.8% were measured compared to initial values following PTCA (p = 0.0196). Even 
subgroup analysis and analysis regarding risk factors show significantly higher
lumen loss for H. pylori-positive patients (especially CagA positive) compared to
H. pylori negative patients. Mean coronary artery lumen reduction in patients
undergoing PTCA + H. pylori eradication therapy (subgroup I of group C) was found
to be significantly (P < 0.05) smaller compared to PTCA + placebo-treated
subgroup II (22% vs 41%). The plasma cytokines such as TNFalpha, IL-1beta and
IL-8 were significantly lower after the H. pylori-eradication in PTCA patients,
while changes in plasma lipids, homocysteine and clotting factors were not
significantly affected by H. pylori eradication. In group D thirty two patients
(69.5%) were H. pylori-seropositive, 14 patients out of 32 H. pylori-positive
were CagA positive. Eighteen of these patients showed positive results for H.
pylori DNA, whereas 4 patients of the seronegative group also showed positive DNA
results, but all 4 had undergone eradication therapy within the past two years. A
total of 22 patients (47.8%) of the CAD group and none of the 19 controls
revealed positive DNA assessed by PCR. Out of 14 anti-Cag A positive patients 11 
showed positive detection of H. pylori DNA (p = 0.015)
CONCLUSIONS: 1) There is a significant link between CAD and infection with H.
pylori, especially expressing CagA proteins; 2) Patients infected with
CagA-positive H. pylori show significantly greater coronary artery lumen loss and
arterial re-stenosis after PTCA with stent implantation; 3) H. pylori eradication
significantly attenuates the reduction in coronary artery lumen in CAD patients
after PTCA possibly due to the elimination of chronic inflammation and the
decline in proinflammatory cytokine release and 4) The identification of DNA in
atherosclerotic plaques of patients with severe CAD supports the hypothesis that 
infection with H. pylori (especially CagA positive) may influence the development
of atherosclerosis.


PMID: 11795863  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

