
1. Comp Med. 2001 Aug;51(4):361-8.

High mortality in a large-scale zebrafish colony (Brachydanio rerio Hamilton &
Buchanan, 1822) associated with Lecythophora mutabilis (van Beyma) W. Gams &
McGinnis.

Dykstra MJ(1), Astrofsky KM, Schrenzel MD, Fox JG, Bullis RA, Farrington S,
Sigler L, Rinaldi MG, McGinnis MR.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology, Pathology and Parasitology Department, College of Veterinary
Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh 27606, USA.

Zebrafish (Brachydanio rerio) have become an important model system for studying 
vertebrate embryonic development and gene function through manipulation of
genotype and characterization of resultant phenotypes. An established research
zebrafish colony without substantial disease problems for more than 7 years of
operation began experiencing appreciable mortalities in November of 1997. Young
fish (fry), from five to 24 days after hatching, spontaneously developed elongate
strands of organic material protruding from the mouth, operculum, and anal pore, 
leading workers in the laboratory to describe the infected fish as "bearded."
Unlike typical freshwater fish fungal infections, the skin surface did not have
evidence of fungal colonization. The disease was associated with progressive
lethargy, reduced feeding, and subsequent mortality. From 10 to 100% of the fry
in a given tank were affected. Initial examination indicated that the biofilm
around the head of affected fry consisted of bundles of septate fungal hyphae,
large numbers of mixed bacterial populations, and protozoans. Environmental
samples of air and water in the laboratory were obtained to ascertain the source 
of the infective agent and to isolate and identify the fungus. A fungus
identified as Lecythophora mutabilis was isolated repeatedly from infected fish
and water samples from infected fish tanks, and from the main laboratory water
supply tanks, but not from laboratory air. Some biofilm beards on fish were found
to consist of relatively pure bacterial populations, and beards on occasional
fish examined in the later part of the study consisted of hyphae and spores of
the oomycete genus Aphanomyces. Lecythophora mutabilis did not invade tissues;
however, elimination of the epizootic correlated with reduction in the number of 
L. mutabilis conidia in the water following modification of the laboratory water 
system by use of new filtration and sterilization systems. We conclude that the
dense hyphal strands of L. mutabilis composing the predominant biofilm type,
along with mixed bacteria and protozoa, contributed to the die-off in young fry
by occluding the oral cavity and/or gills, leading to starvation and/or
asphyxiation.


PMID: 11924796  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

