
1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 7;278(6):4358-67. Epub 2002 Dec 2.

Cross-linking of surface IgM in the Burkitt's lymphoma cell line ST486 provides
protection against arsenite- and stress-induced apoptosis that is mediated by ERK
and phosphoinositide 3-kinase signaling pathways.

Muscarella DE(1), Bloom SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New
York 14853, USA. dem10@cornell.edu

The ST486 cell line, derived from a human Burkitt's lymphoma, is a model for
antigen-induced clonal deletion in germinal center B-lymphocytes, with apoptosis 
induced upon cross-linking of surface IgM. Moreover, this cell line is highly
sensitive to the induction of apoptosis by many chemicals, including sodium
arsenite, a significant environmental contaminant with immunotoxic activity. In
contrast to arsenite and other chemicals, surface IgM cross-linking induces
apoptosis in ST486 cells with delayed kinetics. Moreover, the initial signaling
events following IgM stimulation are associated with cell survival and
proliferation and include activation of the extracellular-signal regulated kinase
(ERK) and the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathways. We examined the question
of whether IgM-mediated activation of the ERK and PI3K pathways can influence the
apoptotic response of ST486 cells following exposure to arsenite and selected
drugs with different molecular targets, including cycloheximide, etoposide, and
camptothecin, and a physical stress, hyperthermia. Our findings show that
IgM-stimulated cells are significantly protected against arsenite and
drug-induced apoptosis during a window of several hours after surface IgM
cross-linking, as evidenced by an inhibition of cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase and lack of morphological changes indicative of apoptosis.
Significantly, surface IgM cross-linking also protects against arsenite-induced
mitochondrial depolarization as well as caspase-9 cleavage. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that this IgM-mediated protection requires the activation of the ERK 
and PI3K pathways, because inhibition of either pathway blocks the ability of
antigen receptor activation to protect against apoptosis. Our study also provides
evidence for p90(S6) ribosomal kinase as a point of convergence between the two
signaling pathways resulting in the phosphorylation of the pro-apoptotic Bcl-2
family member Bad at serine 112. This investigation demonstrates, for the first
time, that specific signals transduced by activation of the B-cell receptor
protect cells at a common point of regulation in the apoptotic pathways for
diverse stresses.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M208779200 
PMID: 12464623  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

