
1. Infect Immun. 2003 May;71(5):2468-77.

Gamma interferon production by hepatic NK T cells during Escherichia coli
infection is resistant to the inhibitory effects of oxidative stress.

Zhang G(1), Nichols RD, Taniguchi M, Nakayama T, Parmely MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Molecular Genetics and Immunology, University of
Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160-7420, USA.

The reductive-oxidative status of tissues regulates the expression of many
inflammatory genes that are induced during gram-negative bacterial infections.
The cytokine gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) is a potent stimulus for host
inflammatory gene expression, and oxidative stress has been shown to inhibit its 
production in mice challenged with Escherichia coli bacteria. The objective of
the present study was to characterize the cells that produced IFN-gamma in a
mouse bacterial peritonitis model and determine the effects of oxidative stress
on their activation. The liver contained large numbers of IFN-gamma-expressing
lymphocytes following challenge with viable E. coli bacteria. The surface
phenotypes of IFN-gamma-expressing hepatic lymphocytes were those of natural
killer (NK) cells (NK1.1(+) CD3(-)), conventional T cells (NK1.1(-) CD3(+)), and 
NK T cells (NK1.1(+) CD3(+)). Treating mice with diethyl maleate to deplete
tissue thiols significantly impaired IFN-gamma production by NK cells,
conventional T cells, and CD1d-restricted NK T cells in response to E. coli
challenge. However, IFN-gamma expression by a subset of NK T cells, which did not
bind alpha-galactosylceramide-CD1d tetramers, was resistant to the inhibitory
effects of tissue oxidative stress. Stress-resistant IFN-gamma-expressing cells
were also predominantly CD8(+) and bore gamma delta T-cell antigen receptors. The
residual IFN-gamma response by NK T cells may explain previous reports of hepatic
gene expression following gram-negative bacterial challenge in thiol-depleted
mice. The finding also demonstrates that innate immune cells differ significantly
in their responses to altered tissue redox status.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.71.5.2468-2477.2003 
PMCID: PMC153215
PMID: 12704118  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

