
1. J Periodontol. 2003 Jul;74(7):937-44.

A salivary incubation test for evaluation of oral malodor: a pilot study.

Quirynen M(1), Zhao H, Avontroodt P, Soers C, Pauwels M, Coucke W, van
Steenberghe D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, School of Dentistry, Oral Pathology and
Maxillo-Facial Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Catholic University of Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium. Marc.Quirynen@med.kuleuven.ac.be

BACKGROUND: Breath odor is scored by different techniques, each with its own
shortcomings. Organoleptic ratings are uncomfortable for the patient, subjective,
influenced by external parameters including food and cosmetics, and especially
lack international calibration. Portable sulphide monitors are relatively
expensive and neglect several major malodorous molecules (e.g., butyric and
propionic acids, putrescine, and cadaverine). Gas chromatography necessitates
expensive devices and experienced technicians. This pilot study explored the
applicability of a new technique (saliva incubation) by comparing its
discrimination power, in a morning bad breath inhibition study of antiseptics, to
those of hydrogen sulphide (H2S) measurement devices and organoleptic ratings.
METHODS: After a professional cleaning, 8 periodontally healthy students
abstained from all means of mechanical plaque control for 5 experimental periods 
of 7 days, with intervening washout periods of at least 2 weeks. During each
experimental period, the students rinsed only twice daily with different
antiseptics. At day 7, morning breath was scored clinically (volatile sulphide
compound [VSC] level and organoleptic ratings), and 1.5 ml of saliva was
collected and divided between 3 glass tubes that were sealed and incubated (37
degrees C, anaerobic chamber). Immediately after collection and after 3 and 6
hours of incubation, the headspace air in one of the tubes was examined for VSC
production and organoleptic measurements.
RESULTS: The investigations of the incubated saliva correlated well with the
7-day intraoral VSC recordings and organoleptic ratings (P < or = 0.005).
Moreover, evaluations showed a similar interproduct ranking for their efficacy in
malodor control. The power analyses indicated a higher discrimination power for
the saliva incubation test than for the intraoral registrations.
CONCLUSIONS: The strong correlation between odor production of incubated saliva
and clinical assessments suggests that the saliva incubation test may be used as 
an indirect method to measure oral malodor and can be employed to investigate the
antimalodor effectiveness of oral hygiene products.

DOI: 10.1902/jop.2003.74.7.937 
PMID: 12931755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

