
1. J Immunol. 2003 Oct 1;171(7):3775-84.

Immunomodulatory role of CXCR2 during experimental septic peritonitis.

Ness TL(1), Hogaboam CM, Strieter RM, Kunkel SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109, USA.

The loss of CXCR2 expression by neutrophils is a well-described, but poorly
understood, consequence of clinical sepsis. To address the potential impact of
this CXCR2 deficit during the septic response, we examined the role of CXCR2 in a
murine model of septic peritonitis provoked by cecal ligation and puncture (CLP).
CLP-induced mouse mortality was significantly attenuated with i.v. or i.p.
administration of an affinity-purified murine CXCR2-specific polyclonal Ab. Mouse
survival required Ab administration before and every 2 days following CLP.
Furthermore, mice deficient in CXCR2 (CXCR2(-/-)) were significantly protected
against CLP-induced mortality compared with control (CXCR2(+/+)) mice. The
anti-CXCR2 Ab treatment delayed, but did not completely inhibit, the recruitment 
of leukocytes, specifically neutrophils, into the peritoneal cavity. Peritoneal
macrophages from anti-CXCR2 Ab-treated mice exhibited markedly increased RNA and 
protein levels of several key proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines.
Specifically, isolated preparations of these cells released approximately 11-fold
more CXCL10 protein compared with peritoneal macrophages from control-treated or 
naive mice. CXCR2(-/-) mice had higher resting and CLP-induced levels of
peritoneal CXCL10 compared with CXCR2(+/+) mice. Administration of a
neutralizing, affinity-purified, murine CXCL10-specific polyclonal Ab before CLP 
in wild-type mice and every 2 days after surgery significantly increased
mortality compared with control Ab-treated mice. Anti-CXCL10 treatment in
CXCR2(-/-) mice negated the protective effect associated with the absence of
CXCR2. In summary, these data demonstrate that the absence of CXCR2 protects mice
from septic injury potentially by delaying inflammatory cell recruitment and
enhancing CXCL10 expression in the peritoneum.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.171.7.3775 
PMID: 14500678  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

