
1. J Microbiol Methods. 2003 Dec;55(3):709-16.

Identification of foodborne bacteria by infrared spectroscopy using cellular
fatty acid methyl esters.

Whittaker P(1), Mossoba MM, Al-Khaldi S, Fry FS, Dunkel VC, Tall BD, Yurawecz MP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Research and Applied Technology, ONPLDS, Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (CFSAN), 5100 
Paint Branch Parkway, College Park, MD 20740-3835, USA.

Identification of bacterial species by profiling fatty acid methyl esters (FAMEs)
has commonly been carried out by using a 20-min capillary gas chromatographic
procedure followed by library matching of FAME profiles using commercial MIDI
databases and proprietary pattern recognition software. Fast GC (5 min) FAME
procedures and mass spectrometric methodologies that require no lipid separation 
have also been reported. In this study, bacterial identification based on the
rapid (2 min) infrared measurement of FAME mixtures was demonstrated. The
microorganisms investigated included Gram positive bacteria Staphylococcus
aureus, Listeria monocytogenes, Bacillus anthracis, and Bacillus cereus, and Gram
negative bacteria from the family Enterobacteriacae: Yersinia enterocolitica,
Salmonella typhimurium, Shigella sonnei, and Escherichia coli (four strains of E.
coli), and non-Enterobacteriacae: Vibrio cholerae, Vibrio vulnificus, and Vibrio 
parahemolyticus. Foodborne bacterial mixtures of FAMEs were measured by using an 
attenuated total reflection (ATR)-Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopic
procedure and discriminated by multivariate analysis. Results showed that the
Enterobacteriacae could be discriminated from the vibrios. The identification was
at the level of species (for the Bacillus and Vibrio genera) or strains (for the 
E. coli species). A series of bacterial FAME test samples were prepared and
analyzed for accuracy of identification, and all were correctly identified. Our
results suggest that this infrared strategy could be used to identify foodborne
pathogens.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mimet.2003.07.005 
PMID: 14607413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

