
1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2003 Nov;2(11):1183-93.

Rituximab (anti-CD20) selectively modifies Bcl-xL and apoptosis protease
activating factor-1 (Apaf-1) expression and sensitizes human non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma B cell lines to paclitaxel-induced apoptosis.

Jazirehi AR(1), Gan XH, De Vos S, Emmanouilides C, Bonavida B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, David Geffen
School of Medicine at UCLA, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

The anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody rituximab (Rituxan, IDEC-C2B8) has shown
promising results in the clinical treatment of a subset of patients with low
grade or follicular non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL). However, chemotherapy- and
rituximab-refractory NHL patients may benefit from a regimen in which rituximab
acts as a sensitizing agent. This study examined the apoptotic signaling mediated
by rituximab on rituximab- and paclitaxel-resistant CD20(+) NHL B cell lines
(Ramos, Raji, Daudi, and 2F7). Treatment with either rituximab (20 micro g/ml) or
paclitaxel (0.1-1000 nM) inhibited viable cell recovery of NHL lines. Neither
rituximab nor paclitaxel induced significant apoptosis, although the combination 
treatment resulted in synergy in apoptosis. Rituximab selectively down-regulated 
Bcl-xL and induced apoptosis protease activating factor 1 (Apaf-1) expressions in
Ramos cells. Paclitaxel down-regulated the expression of Bcl-xL and inhibitor of 
apoptosis proteins (c-IAP-1) and up-regulated the expression of Bad and Apaf-1.
The combination treatment resulted in the formation of truncated Bid, cytosolic
accumulation of cytochrome c and second mitochondria-derived activator of
caspase/direct inhibitor of apoptosis-binding protein with low PI, activation of 
caspase-9, caspase-7, caspase-3, and cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. The
findings identify two potential novel intracellular targets of rituximab-mediated
signaling in Ramos NHL cells (i.e., Bcl-xL and Apaf-1). Further, the findings
show that both rituximab and paclitaxel selectively modify the expression pattern
of proteins involved in the apoptosis signal transduction pathway and, through
functional complementation, the combination results in synergy in apoptosis. The 
potential therapeutic significance of these findings is discussed.


PMID: 14617792  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

