
1. Compend Contin Educ Dent. 2003 Sep;24(9 Suppl):14-9; quiz 42.

The effects of a new therapeutic triclosan/copolymer/sodium-fluoride dentifrice
on oral bacteria, including odorigenic species.

Furgang D(1), Sreenivasan PK, Zhang YP, Fine DH, Cummins D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, New Jersey Dental School, University of Medicine
and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey, USA.

This investigation examined the in vitro and ex vivo antimicrobial effects of a
new dentifrice, Colgate Total Advanced Fresh, formulated with
triclosan/copolymer/sodium fluoride, on oral bacteria, including those odorigenic
bacteria implicated in bad breath. The effects of Colgate Total Advanced Fresh
were compared to commercially available fluoride dentifrices that served as
controls. Three experimental approaches were undertaken for these studies. In the
first approach, the dentifrice formulations were tested in vitro against 13
species of oral bacteria implicated in bad breath. The second approach examined
the antimicrobial activity derived from dentifrice that was adsorbed to and
released from hydroxyapatite disks. In this approach, dentifrice-treated
hydroxyapatite disks were immersed in a suspension of bacteria, and reduction in 
bacterial viability from the release of bioactive agents from hydroxyapatite was 
determined. The third approach examined the effect of treating bacteria
immediately after their removal from the oral cavity of 11 adult human
volunteers. This ex vivo study examined the viability of cultivable oral bacteria
after dentifrice treatment for 2 minutes. Antimicrobial effects were determined
by plating Colgate Total Advanced Fresh and control-dentifrice-treated samples on
enriched media (for all cultivable oral bacteria) and indicator media (for
hydrogen-sulfide-producing organisms), respectively. Results indicated that the
antimicrobial effects of Colgate Total Advanced Fresh were significantly greater 
than either of the other dentifrices for all 13 oral odorigenic bacterial strains
tested in vitro (P < or = 0.05). In the second approach, Colgate Total Advanced
Fresh-treated hydroxyapatite disks were significantly more active in reducing
bacterial growth than the other dentifrices tested (P < or = 0.05). Finally, ex
vivo treatment of oral bacteria with Colgate Total Advanced Fresh demonstrated a 
90.9% reduction of all oral cultivable bacteria and a 91.5% reduction of oral
bacteria producing hydrogen sulfide compared with the control dentifrice. In
conclusion, these results, taken together with the significant reductions in
clinical malodor scores by Colgate Total Advanced Fresh demonstrated in
organoleptic studies, strongly suggest that this dentifrice kills the bacteria
that are implicated in the cause of bad breath.


PMID: 14692207  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

