
1. J Food Prot. 2004 Nov;67(11):2555-9.

Detection and identification of bacteria in a juice matrix with Fourier
transform-near infrared spectroscopy and multivariiate analysis.

Rodriguez-Saona LE(1), Khambaty FM, Fry FS, Dubois J, Calvey EM.

Author information: 
(1)Joint Institute for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition--University of Maryland,
College Park, Maryland 20742, USA.

The use of Fourier transform-near infrared (FT-NIR) spectroscopy combined with
multivariate pattern recognition techniques was evaluated to address the need for
a fast and senisitive method for the detection of bacterial contamination in
liquids. The complex cellular composition of bacteria produces FT-NIR vibrational
transitions (overtone and combination bands), forming the basis for
identification and subtyping. A database including strains of Escherichia coli,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Bacillus subtilis, Bacillus cereus, and Bacillus
thuringiensis was built, with special care taken to optimize sample preparation. 
The bacterial cells were treated with 70% (vol/vol) ethanolto enhance safe
handling of pathogenic strains and then concentrated on an aluminum oxide
membrane to obtain a thin bacterial film. This simple membrane filtration
procedure generated reproducible FT-NIR spectra that allowed for the rapid
discrimination among closely related strains. Principal component analysis and
soft independent modeling of class analogy of transformed spectra in the region
5,100 to 4,400 cm(-1) were able to discriminate between bacterial species.
Spectroscopic analysis of apple juices inoculated with different strains of E.
coli at approximately 10(5) CFU/ml showed that FT-NIR spectralfeatures are
consistent with bacterial contamination and soft independent modeling of class
analogy correctly predicted the identity of the contaminant as strains of E.
coli. FT-NIR in conjunction with multivariate techniques can be used for the
rapid and accurate evaluation of potential bacterial contamination in liquids
with minimal sample manipulation, and hence limited exposure of the laboratory
worker to the agents.

DOI: 10.4315/0362-028x-67.11.2555 
PMID: 15553641  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

