
1. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2005 Oct 20;92(2):223-30.

How reliable are thermodynamic feasibility statements of biochemical pathways?

Maskow T(1), von Stockar U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Microbiology, UFZ Centre for Environmental
Research Leipzig-Halle GmbH, Germany. thomas.maskow@ufz.de

The driving force for organo- or lithotrophic growth as well as for each step in 
the metabolic network is the Gibbs reaction energy. For each enzymatic step it
must be negative. Thermodynamics contributes therefore to the in-silico
description of living systems. It may be used for assessing the feasibility of a 
given pathway because it provides a further constraint for those pathways which
are feasible from the point of view of mass balance calculations (metabolic flux 
analysis) and the genetic potential of an organism. However, when this constraint
was applied to lactic acid fermentation according to a method proposed by
Mavrovouniotis (1993a, ISMB 93:273-283) it turned out that an unrealistically
wide metabolite concentration range had to be assumed to make this well-known
glycolytic pathway thermodynamically feasible. During a search for the reasons of
this surprising result the insufficient consideration of the activity
coefficients was identified as main cause. However, it is shown in the present
contribution that the influence of the activity coefficients on Gibbs reaction
energy can be easily taken into account based on the intracellular ionic
strength. The uncertainty of the tabulated equilibrium constants and of the
apparent standard Gibbs energies derived from them was found to be the second
most important reason for the erroneous result of the feasibility analysis.
Deviations of intracellular pH from the standard value and bad estimations of
currency metabolites, e.g., NAD(+) and NADH, were found to be of lesser
importance but not negligible. The pH dependency of Gibbs reaction enthalpy was
proved to be easily taken into account. Therefore, the application of
thermodynamics for a better in-silico prediction of the behavior of living cell
factories calls predominantly for better equilibrium data determined under well
defined conditions and also for a more detailed knowledge about the intracellular
ionic strength and pH value.

Copyright 2005 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bit.20572 
PMID: 15962336  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

