
1. J Exp Med. 2005 Jul 18;202(2):295-308. Epub 2005 Jul 11.

Human CD1-restricted T cell recognition of lipids from pollens.

Agea E(1), Russano A, Bistoni O, Mannucci R, Nicoletti I, Corazzi L, Postle AD,
De Libero G, Porcelli SA, Spinozzi F.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology and Allergy, Department of Clinical and Experimental
Medicine, University of Perugia, Italy.

Plant pollens are an important source of environmental antigens that stimulate
allergic responses. In addition to acting as vehicles for foreign protein
antigens, they contain lipids that incorporate saturated and unsaturated fatty
acids, which are necessary in the reproduction of higher plants. The CD1 family
of nonpolymorphic major histocompatibility complex-related molecules is highly
conserved in mammals, and has been shown to present microbial and self lipids to 
T cells. Here, we provide evidence that pollen lipids may be recognized as
antigens by human T cells through a CD1-dependent pathway. Among phospholipids
extracted from cypress grains, phosphatidyl-choline and phosphatidyl-ethanolamine
were able to stimulate the proliferation of T cells from cypress-sensitive
subjects. Recognition of phospholipids involved multiple cell types, mostly
CD4(+) T cell receptor for antigen (TCR)alphabeta(+), some CD4(-)CD8(-)
TCRgammadelta(+), but rarely Valpha24i(+) natural killer-T cells, and required
CD1a(+) and CD1d(+) antigen presenting cell. The responding T cells secreted both
interleukin (IL)-4 and interferon-gamma, in some cases IL-10 and transforming
growth factor-beta, and could provide help for immunoglobulin E (IgE) production.
Responses to pollen phospholipids were maximally evident in blood samples
obtained from allergic subjects during pollinating season, uniformly absent in
Mycobacterium tuberculosis-exposed health care workers, but occasionally seen in 
nonallergic subjects. Finally, allergic, but not normal subjects, displayed
circulating specific IgE and cutaneous weal and flare reactions to phospholipids.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20050773 
PMCID: PMC2213012
PMID: 16009719  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

