
1. Infect Immun. 2006 Jan;74(1):410-24.

DNA adenine methyltransferase influences the virulence of Aeromonas hydrophila.

Erova TE(1), Pillai L, Fadl AA, Sha J, Wang S, Galindo CL, Chopra AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
3.142D Medical Research Building, 301 University Boulevard, Galveston, TX
77555-1070, USA.

Among the various virulence factors produced by Aeromonas hydrophila, a type II
secretion system (T2SS)-secreted cytotoxic enterotoxin (Act) and the T3SS are
crucial in the pathogenesis of Aeromonas-associated infections. Our laboratory
molecularly characterized both Act and the T3SS from a diarrheal isolate, SSU of 
A. hydrophila, and defined the role of some regulatory genes in modulating the
biological effects of Act. In this study, we cloned, sequenced, and expressed the
DNA adenine methyltransferase gene of A. hydrophila SSU (dam(AhSSU)) in a T7
promoter-based vector system using Escherichia coli ER2566 as a host strain,
which could alter the virulence potential of A. hydrophila. Recombinant Dam,
designated as M.AhySSUDam, was produced as a histidine-tagged fusion protein and 
purified from an E. coli cell lysate using nickel affinity chromatography. The
purified Dam had methyltransferase activity, based on its ability to transfer a
methyl group from S-adenosyl-l-methionine to N(6)-methyladenine-free lambda DNA
and to protect methylated lambda DNA from digestion with DpnII but not against
the DpnI restriction enzyme. The dam gene was essential for the viability of the 
bacterium, and overproduction of Dam in A. hydrophila SSU, using an
arabinose-inducible, P(BAD) promoter-based system, reduced the virulence of this 
pathogen. Specifically, overproduction of M.AhySSUDam decreased the motility of
the bacterium by 58%. Likewise, the T3SS-associated cytotoxicity, as measured by 
the release of lactate dehydrogenase enzyme in murine macrophages infected with
the Dam-overproducing strain, was diminished by 55% compared to that of a control
A. hydrophila SSU strain harboring the pBAD vector alone. On the contrary,
cytotoxic and hemolytic activities associated with Act as well as the protease
activity in the culture supernatant of a Dam-overproducing strain were increased 
by 10-, 3-, and 2.4-fold, respectively, compared to those of the control A.
hydrophila SSU strain. The Dam-overproducing strain was not lethal to mice (100% 
survival) when given by the intraperitoneal route at a dose twice that of the 50%
lethal dose, which within 2 to 3 days killed 100% of the animals inoculated with 
the A. hydrophila control strain. Taken together, our data indicated alteration
of A. hydrophila virulence by overproduction of Dam.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.74.1.410-424.2006 
PMCID: PMC1346675
PMID: 16368997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

