
1. Infect Immun. 1991 Nov;59(11):3849-58.

DNA sequences of three papA genes from uropathogenic Escherichia coli strains:
evidence of structural and serological conservation.

Denich K(1), Blyn LB, Craiu A, Braaten BA, Hardy J, Low DA, O'Hanley PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Stanford University, California 94305.

Pyelonephritis-associated pili (Pap) are important in the pathogenesis of
ascending, unobstructive Escherichia coli-caused renal infections because these
surface bacterial organelles mediate digalactoside-specific binding to host
uroepithelial cells. Pap are composed of many different polypeptides, of which
only the tip proteins mediate specific binding. The PapA moiety polymerizes to
form the bulk of the pilus structure and has been employed in vaccines despite
its lack of Gal alpha(1-4)Gal receptor specificity. Animal recipients of PapA
pilus-based vaccines are protected against experimental pyelonephritis caused by 
homologous and heterologous Gal-Gal-binding uropathogenic E. coli strains.
Specific PapA immunoglobulin G antibodies in urine are correlated with protection
in these infection models. The nucleotide sequences of the gene encoding PapA
were determined for three E. coli clones expressing F7(1), F7(2), and F9 pili and
were compared with corresponding sequences for other F serotypes. Specific rabbit
antisera were employed in enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays to study the
cross-reactivity between Gal-Gal pili purified from recombinant strains
expressing F7(1), F7(2), F9, or F13 pili and among 60 Gal-Gal-binding wild-type
strains. We present data which corroborate the concept that papA genes are highly
homologous and encode proteins which exhibit greater than 70% homology among pili
of different serotypes. The differences primarily occur in the cysteine-cysteine 
loop and variable regions and constitute the basis for serological diversity of
these pili. Although there are differences in primary structures among these
pili, antisera raised against pili of one serotype cross-reacted frequently with 
many other Gal-Gal pili of different serotypes. Furthermore, antisera raised
against pili of the F13 serotype cross-reacted strongly or moderately with 52
(86%) of 60 wild-type Gal-Gal-binding E. coli strains. These data suggest that
there are common immunogenic domains among these proteins. These additional data 
further support the hypothesis that broadly cross-protective PapA pilus vaccines 
for the immunoprophylaxis of pyelonephritis might be developed.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.59.11.3849-3858.1991 
PMCID: PMC258967
PMID: 1682251  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

