
1. Int Microbiol. 2006 Sep;9(3):207-15.

Corynebacterium glutamicum as a model bacterium for the bioremediation of
arsenic.

Mateos LM(1), Ordóñez E, Letek M, Gil JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology, Genetics and Microbiology, Area of Microbiology,
Faculty of Biology, University of Leon, Spain.

Arsenic is an extremely toxic metalloid that, when present in high
concentrations, severely threatens the biota and human health. Arsenic
contamination of soil, water, and air is a global growing environmental problem
due to leaching from geological formations, the burning of fossil fuels, wastes
generated by the gold mining industry present in uncontrolled landfills, and
improper agriculture or medical uses. Unlike organic contaminants, which are
degraded into harmless chemical species, metals and metalloids cannot be
destroyed, but they can be immobilized or transformed into less toxic forms. The 
ubiquity of arsenic in the environment has led to the evolution in microbes of
arsenic defense mechanisms. The most common of these mechanisms is based on the
presence of the arsenic resistance operon (ars), which codes for: (i) a
regulatory protein, ArsR; (ii) an arsenite permease, ArsB; and (iii) an enzyme
involved in arsenate reduction, ArsC. Corynebacterium glutamicum, which is used
for the industrial production of amino acids and nucleotides, is one of the most 
arsenic-resistant microorganisms described to date (up to 12 mM arsenite and >400
mM arseniate). Analysis of the C. glutamicum genome revealed the presence of two 
complete ars operons (ars1 and ars2) comprising the typical three-gene structure 
arsRBC, with an extra arsC1 located downstream from arsC1 (ars1 operon), and two 
orphan genes (arsB3 and arsC4). The involvement of both ars operons in arsenic
resistance in C. glutamicum was confirmed by disruption and amplification of
those genes. The strains obtained were resistant to up to 60 mM arsenite, one of 
the highest levels of bacterial resistance to arsenite so far described. Using
tools for the genetic manipulation of C. glutamicum that were developed in our
laboratory, we are attempting to obtain C. glutamicum mutant strains able to
remove arsenic from contaminated water.


PMID: 17061211  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

