
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2007 Jan;73(1):259-70. Epub 2006 Nov 3.

Communities of archaea and bacteria in a subsurface radioactive thermal spring in
the Austrian Central Alps, and evidence of ammonia-oxidizing Crenarchaeota.

Weidler GW(1), Dornmayr-Pfaffenhuemer M, Gerbl FW, Heinen W, Stan-Lotter H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Department of Microbiology, University of
Salzburg, Billrothstrasse 11, A-5020 Salzburg, Austria.

Scanning electron microscopy revealed great morphological diversity in biofilms
from several largely unexplored subterranean thermal Alpine springs, which
contain radium 226 and radon 222. A culture-independent molecular analysis of
microbial communities on rocks and in the water of one spring, the
"Franz-Josef-Quelle" in Bad Gastein, Austria, was performed. Four hundred fifteen
clones were analyzed. One hundred thirty-two sequences were affiliated with 14
bacterial operational taxonomic units (OTUs) and 283 with four archaeal OTUs.
Rarefaction analysis indicated a high diversity of bacterial sequences, while
archaeal sequences were less diverse. The majority of the cloned archaeal 16S
rRNA gene sequences belonged to the soil-freshwater-subsurface (1.1b)
crenarchaeotic group; other representatives belonged to the
freshwater-wastewater-soil (1.3b) group, except one clone, which was related to a
group of uncultivated Euryarchaeota. These findings support recent reports that
Crenarchaeota are not restricted to high-temperature environments. Most of the
bacterial sequences were related to the Proteobacteria (alpha, beta, gamma, and
delta), Bacteroidetes, and Planctomycetes. One OTU was allied with Nitrospina sp.
(delta-Proteobacteria) and three others grouped with Nitrospira. Statistical
analyses suggested high diversity based on 16S rRNA gene analyses; the
rarefaction plot of archaeal clones showed a plateau. Since Crenarchaeota have
been implicated recently in the nitrogen cycle, the spring environment was probed
for the presence of the ammonia monooxygenase subunit A (amoA) gene. Sequences
were obtained which were related to crenarchaeotic amoA genes from marine and
soil habitats. The data suggested that nitrification processes are occurring in
the subterranean environment and that ammonia may possibly be an energy source
for the resident communities.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01570-06 
PMCID: PMC1797131
PMID: 17085711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

