
1. Rev Biol Trop. 2004 Dec;52(4):937-43.

[Effect of the probiotic Bacillus subtilis on the growth and food utilization of 
tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus) and prawn (Macrobrachium rosenbergii) under
laboratory conditions].

[Article in Spanish]

Günther J(1), Jiménez-Montealegre R.

Author information: 
(1)Escuela de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Nacional, Heredia, Costa Rica.
jgunther@una.ac.cr

Three experiments were conducted to analyze the effect of the probiotic Bacillus 
subtilis on the growth of juvenile tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus) and freshwater
prawn (Macrobrachium rosenbergii). The experiments were conducted under
laboratory conditions, minimizing the indirect effects of the probiotic on the
water quality and leaving only the possible bactericidal and digestion-support
effects. A model of stress was also designed in tilapia to compare the effect
with tilapia under normal conditions. The dose in the food was 0.1% of the
probiotic (5 x 10(8) CFU/g and 99.9 % maltrine) in the dry diet. Every 14 days
the animals were weighed in group (tilapias +/- 0.1 g, prawns +/- 0.001 g) to
estimate average body weight. In the first experiment (tilapia) the specific
growth rate (SGR) and the feed conversion ratio (FCR) were bad in relation with
the factor probiotic, but the differences were not significant. In the second
experiment (tilapia) both the SGR and the FCR deteriorated with the addition of
B. subtilis to the diet; the difference was significant to 94%. The stress
factor, on the contrary, caused a notable worsening of both the growth and the
food utilization. In the experiment with prawns the addition of B. subtilis
caused a light deterioration of the growth and of the food utilization, with a
statistical probability of mistake of 10% in case of the growth. During the
experiment the direct effects over the digestive system should have prevailed,
either by the contribution of macro- and micronutrients, or by the enzymes that
contribute to the digestion. The negative effect due to the addition of the
probiotic to the food was small (about 10% in both the SGR and the FCR) being
difficult to detect statistically. The reports on the positive action of
probiotics on the growth in aquatic animals have been conducted mainly in ponds, 
and our information does not contradict directly a possible positive action of B.
subtilis in this type of systems. Since the effect on the digestive system seems 
to be relatively small, in those environments the effect might be compensated by 
other positive effects on water quality, and by bactericidal effects on
pathogenic bacteria.


PMID: 17354405  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

