
1. Eukaryot Cell. 2007 Aug;6(8):1486-96. Epub 2007 Jun 1.

Identification and characterization of CPS1 as a hyaluronic acid synthase
contributing to the pathogenesis of Cryptococcus neoformans infection.

Jong A(1), Wu CH, Chen HM, Luo F, Kwon-Chung KJ, Chang YC, Lamunyon CW, Plaas A, 
Huang SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
CA 90027, USA. ajong@chla.usc.edu

Cryptococcus neoformans is a pathogenic yeast that often causes devastating
meningoencephalitis in immunocompromised individuals. We have previously
identified the C. neoformans CPS1 gene, which is required for a capsular layer on
the outer cell wall. In this report, we investigate the function of the CPS1 gene
and its pathogenesis. We demonstrated that treatment of yeast with either
4-methylumbelliferone or hyaluronidase resulted in a reduction of the level of C.
neoformans binding to human brain microvascular endothelial cells (HBMEC). Yeast 
extracellular structures were also altered accordingly in hyaluronidase-treated
cells. Furthermore, observation of yeast strains with different hyaluronic acid
contents showed that the ability to bind to HBMEC is proportional to the
hyaluronic acid content. A killing assay with Caenorhabditis elegans demonstrated
that the CPS1 wild-type strain is more virulent than the cps1Delta strain. When
CPS1 is expressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Escherichia coli, hyaluronic
acid can be detected in the cells. Additionally, we determined by
fluorophore-assisted carbohydrate electrophoretic analysis that hyaluronic acid
is a component of the C. neoformans capsule. The size of hyaluronic acid
molecules is evaluated by gel filtration and transmission electron microscopy
studies. Together, our results support that C. neoformans CPS1 encodes hyaluronic
acid synthase and that its product, hyaluronic acid, plays a role as an adhesion 
molecule during the association of endothelial cells with yeast.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.00120-07 
PMCID: PMC1951127
PMID: 17545316  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

