
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2007 Jul 15;117(3):306-11. Epub 2007 May 17.

Survey of domestic food handling practices in New Zealand.

Gilbert SE(1), Whyte R, Bayne G, Paulin SM, Lake RJ, van der Logt P.

Author information: 
(1)Food Safety Programme, Institute of Environmental Science and Research,
Christchurch, Science Centre, P O Box 29-181, Christchurch, New Zealand.

The purpose of this survey was to obtain information on the domestic meat and
poultry handling practices of New Zealanders in order to support the development 
of quantitative risk models, as well as providing data to underpin food safety
campaigns to consumers. A sample of 1000 New Zealand residents, over 18 years of 
age, were randomly selected from the electoral roll and asked to participate in a
national postal food safety study during 2005. Three hundred and twenty six
respondents completed and returned questionnaires containing usable answers, and 
most of these respondents 'always' prepared the main meal within the household.
The majority of meat (84.6%) and poultry (62.9%) purchased by New Zealanders was 
fresh (rather than frozen), and most consumers (94.4%) claimed that the time
taken from food selection to reaching their home was 1 h or less. The majority
(approximately 64%) of fresh meat and poultry was frozen in the home and the most
favoured method of thawing was at room temperature for up to 12 h. The most
common time period for storing cooked or raw meat and poultry in domestic
refrigerators was up to 2 days. Most survey respondents preferred their meat and 
poultry to be cooked either medium or well done. The most popular cooking method 
for chicken was roasting or baking, while most respondents preferred to pan-fry
steak/beef cuts, minced beef or sausages/hamburgers. The potential for
undercooking was greatest with pan-fried steak with 19.8% of respondents
preferring to consume this meat raw or rare. In answer to questions relating to
food handling hygiene practices, 52.2% of respondents selected a hand washing
sequence that would help prevent cross contamination. However, it was estimated
that 41% and 28% of respondents would use knives and kitchen surfaces
respectively in a manner that could allow cross contamination. The data in this
survey are self-reported and, particularly for the hygiene questions, respondents
may report an answer that they perceive as being correct rather than reflecting
their actual behaviour. Nevertheless, the data on food processing, transport,
storage and cooking preferences represent useful inputs into the assessment of
food safety along the meat and poultry food chains.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2007.05.004 
PMID: 17566578  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

