
1. Oecologia. 2007 Sep;153(3):675-86. Epub 2007 Jun 22.

Food web structure in exotic and native mangroves: a Hawaii-Puerto Rico
comparison.

Demopoulos AW(1), Fry B, Smith CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oceanography, SOEST, University of Hawaii, 1000 Pope Road,
Honolulu, HI 96822, USA. amandad@usgs.gov

Plant invasions can fundamentally alter detrital inputs and the structure of
detritus-based food webs. We examined the detrital pathways in mangrove food webs
in native (Puerto Rican) and introduced (Hawaiian) Rhizophora mangle forests
using a dual isotope approach and a mixing model. Based on trophic-level
fractionation of 0-1 per thousand for delta(13)C and 2-3 per thousand for
delta(15)N, among the invertebrates, only nematodes, oligochaetes, and nereid
polychaetes from native mangroves exhibited stable isotopes consistent with a
mangrove-derived diet. Certain fauna, in particular tubificid oligochaetes, had
delta(13)C values consistent with the consumption of mangrove leaves, but they
were depleted in (15)N, suggesting their primary nitrogen source was low in
(15)N, and was possibly N(2)-fixing bacteria. In introduced mangroves, all
feeding groups appeared to rely heavily on non-mangrove sources, especially
phytoplankton inputs. Mixing model results and discriminant analysis showed clear
separation of introduced and native mangrove sites based on differential food
source utilization within feeding groups, with stronger and more diverse use of
benthic foods observed in native forests. Observed differences between native and
invasive mangrove food webs may be due to Hawaiian detritivores being poorly
adapted to utilizing the tannin-rich, nitrogen-poor mangrove detritus. In
addition, differential utilization of mangrove detritus between native and
introduced mangroves may be a consequence of forest age. We postulate that
increasing mangrove forest age may promote diversification of bacterial food webs
important in N and S cycling. Our results also suggest a potentially important
role for sulfur bacteria in supporting the most abundant infaunal consumers,
nematodes, in the most mature systems.

DOI: 10.1007/s00442-007-0751-x 
PMID: 17587064  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

