
1. Environ Biosafety Res. 2007 Jan-Jun;6(1-2):101-12. Epub 2007 Sep 20.

Transformation of Acinetobacter baylyi in non-sterile soil using recombinant
plant nuclear DNA.

Simpson DJ(1), Fry JC, Rogers HJ, Day MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff School of Biosciences, Main Building, Cardiff University, Park Place, 
Cardiff, UK.

To provide estimates of horizontal gene transfer from transgenic crops to
indigenous soil bacteria, transformation frequencies were obtained for naturally 
transformable Acinetobacter baylyi BD413 using a chromosomally integrated plant
transgene. The transgene comprised sequences for two phenotypic markers:
kanamycin resistance (npt II) and green fluorescent protein (gfp), expressed from
their own bacterial promoters. Recipient bacteria carried a copy of these two
genes, with deletions in their 3'-termini abolishing the marker activity, these
genes were integrated into a 16S rRNA gene in the bacterial chromosomal genome or
carried on a broad host range plasmid. Successful recombination between the plant
transgene and the bacterial genome resulted in restoration of the markers,
allowing detection through antibiotic selection and fluorescence. Transformation 
parameters of increasing complexity, without any enrichment steps, were used to
approach the field conditions, while still obtaining measurable transformation
frequencies. In pure culture filter experiments, transformation was detected
using ground, chopped and whole leaves, as well as whole sterile seedlings, and
ground roots. In sterile soil microcosms, transformation was detected using pure 
plant DNA (3.6 x 10(-8) transformants per recipient) and ground leaves (2.5 x
10(-11)). Transformation was also detected for the first time in non-sterile soil
using pure plant DNA (5.5 x 10(-11)). Since the same constructs were used
throughout, these data allow predictions of even more complex environmental
systems where measurable frequencies are not easily obtainable.

DOI: 10.1051/ebr:2007024 
PMID: 17961484  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

