
1. Egypt J Immunol. 2006;13(1):67-78.

Human natural killer T cells (NKT), NK and T cells in pulmonary tuberculosis:
potential indicators for disease activity and prognosis.

Zahran WA(1), Ghonaim MM, Koura BA, El-Banna H, Ali SM, El-Sheikh N.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology & Immunology department, Faculty of Medicine, Menofiya
University, Egypt.

One third of the world's population is infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis
(MTB). However, active disease can develop only in a small percentage, when the
immunity is weakened. The acquired immune response to MTB is primarily mediated
by T cells. Natural killer (NK) cells play a central role in innate immunity to
microbial pathogens. Human NKT cells have characteristics of both T and NK cells 
and also exhibit antimycobacterial activity. This work aimed to enumerate T, NK
and NKT cells in active pulmonary TB compared with healthy controls and to study 
the correlation between these cells with different factors affecting prognosis of
pulmonary TB as disease severity, complications or associated diseases,
antitubrculosis chemotherapy, and age & gender. Of the 22 active tuberculosis
patients examined, 17 were recent cases and 5 recurrent. Healthy controls were
divided into 14 individuals with detectable reaction to purified protein
derivative (PPD+) and 14 individuals without detectable reaction to PPD-. The
percentages of T, NK and NKT cells in erythrocyte-lysed whole blood samples were 
determined using flowcytometry. The percentage of NKT cells was significantly
higher among the recently diagnosed MTB cases as compared with both PPD+ (P <
0.01) and PPD- (P < 0.01) healthy controls, while no significant difference could
be found in the percentages of T or NK cells among these groups. However,
comparing recurrent cases with recently diagnosed cases showed a significant
difference only in the percentage of T cells (P < 0.01). There was also a
significant difference in the percentage of T cells according to severity of
disease (P < 0.01) and in the association of diabetes mellitus (P < 0.01). Age,
gender and treatment with antituberculosis chemotherapy had no effect on the
percentages of T, NK or NKT cells. It is concluded that T and NKT cells play an
important role in immunity against TB. In active pulmonary tuberculosis,
increased T cell count points to severity of the disease, while their reduced
count predicts bad prognosis. Human NKT cell count is a marker of disease
activity. Enumeration of these cells in peripheral blood can be used as a
non-invasive prognostic indicator for patients with active pulmonary TB.


PMID: 17974151  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

