
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2008 Feb;74(4):1064-75. Epub 2007 Dec 21.

Genetic tools for select-agent-compliant manipulation of Burkholderia
pseudomallei.

Choi KH(1), Mima T, Casart Y, Rholl D, Kumar A, Beacham IR, Schweizer HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology, Rocky Mountain Regional 
Center of Excellence for Biodefense and Emerging Infectious Diseases Research,
Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523-1682, USA.

Erratum in
    Appl Environ Microbiol. 2008 Aug;74(16):5265.

Because of Burkholderia pseudomallei's classification as a select agent in the
United States, genetic manipulation of this bacterium is strictly regulated. Only
a few antibiotic selection markers, including gentamicin, kanamycin, and zeocin, 
are currently approved for use with this bacterium, but wild-type strains are
highly resistant to these antibiotics. To facilitate routine genetic
manipulations of wild-type strains, several new tools were developed. A
temperature-sensitive pRO1600 broad-host-range replicon was isolated and used to 
construct curable plasmids where the Flp and Cre recombinase genes are expressed 
from the rhamnose-regulated Escherichia coli P(BAD) promoter and kanamycin (nptI)
and zeocin (ble) selection markers from the constitutive Burkholderia
thailandensis ribosomal P(S12) or synthetic bacterial P(EM7) promoter. Flp and
Cre site-specific recombination systems allow in vivo excision and recycling of
nptII and ble selection markers contained on FRT or loxP cassettes. Finally,
expression of Tn7 site-specific transposase from the constitutive P1 integron
promoter allowed development of an efficient site-specific chromosomal
integration system for B. pseudomallei. In conjunction with a natural
transformation method, the utility of these new tools was demonstrated by
isolating an unmarked delta(amrRAB-oprA) efflux pump mutant. Exploiting natural
transformation, chromosomal DNA fragments carrying this mutation marked with
zeocin resistance were transferred between the genomes of two different B.
pseudomallei strains. Lastly, the deletion mutation was complemented by a
chromosomally integrated mini-Tn7 element carrying the amrAB-oprA operon. The new
tools allow routine select-agent-compliant genetic manipulations of B.
pseudomallei and other Burkholderia species.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02430-07 
PMCID: PMC2258562
PMID: 18156318  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

