
1. Helicobacter. 2008 Feb;13(1):1-19. doi: 10.1111/j.1523-5378.2008.00559.x.

Conventional, regulatory, and unconventional T cells in the immunologic response 
to Helicobacter pylori.

O'Keeffe J(1), Moran AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland.

Infection by the gastroduodenal pathogen Helicobacter pylori elicits a complex
immunologic response in the mucosa involving neutrophils, plasma cells,
eosinophils, and lymphocytes, of which T cells are the principal orchestrators of
immunity. While so-called classical T cells (e.g. T-helper cells) that are
activated by peptide fragments presented on antigen-presenting cells have
received much attention in H. pylori infection, there exists a diverse array of
other T cell populations that are potentially important for the outcome of the
ensuing immune response, some of which have not been extensively studied in H.
pylori infection. Pathogen-specific regulatory T cells that control and prevent
the development of immunopathology associated with H. pylori infection have been 
investigated, but these cells can also benefit the bacterium in helping to
prolong the chronicity of the infection by suppressing protective immune
responses. An overlooked T cell population, the more recently described Th17
cells, may play a role in H. pylori-induced inflammation, due to triggering
responses that ultimately lead to the recruitment of polymorphs, including
neutrophils. The so-called innate or unconventional T cells, that include two
conserved T cell subsets expressing invariant antigen-specific receptors, the
CD1d-restricted natural killer T cells which are activated by glycolipids, and
the mucosal-associated invariant T cells which play a role in defense against
orally acquired pathogens in the intestinal mucosa, have only begun to receive
attention. A greater knowledge of the range of T cell responses induced by H.
pylori is required for a deeper understanding of the pathogenesis of this
bacterium and its ability to perpetuate chronic infection, and could reveal new
strategies for therapeutic exploitation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1523-5378.2008.00559.x 
PMID: 18205661  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

