
1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2008 Feb;47(2):212-8. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/kem351.

Evaluation of latent tuberculosis infection in patients with inflammatory
arthropathies before treatment with TNF-alpha blocking drugs using a novel
flow-cytometric interferon-gamma release assay.

Dinser R(1), Fousse M, Sester U, Albrecht K, Singh M, Köhler H, Müller-Ladner U, 
Sester M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Rheumatology, Justus-Liebig University of 
Giessen, Kerckhoff Clinic, Benekestrasse 2-8, D-61231 Bad Nauheim, Germany.
r.dinser@kerckhoff-klinik.de

Comment in
    Nat Clin Pract Rheumatol. 2008 Sep;4(9):456-7.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the efficacy of the conventional skin test and a novel flow
cytometric whole blood assay in the diagnosis of latent tuberculosis infection
(LTBI) in patients with rheumatological diseases evaluated for treatment with
TNF-alpha-blocking agents.
METHODS: Prospective study of 97 consecutively enrolled patients, who were
assessed for the presence of LTBI through clinical history, Mendel-Mantoux skin
testing and chest X-ray. In addition, T-cell reactivity towards tuberculin (PPD, 
purified protein derivative) and the Mycobacterium tuberculosis-specific proteins
ESAT-6 and CFP-10 was determined ex vivo using a flow cytometric whole blood
assay.
RESULTS: After standard screening, 15% of patients receiving TNF-alpha-blocking
therapy were pretreated with isoniazide (INH), another 5% of patients did not
receive TNF-alpha-blocking therapy because of LTBI. PPD-reactivity in the skin
was observed in 14% of patients compared with 39% with the whole blood test.
Analysis of the M. tuberculosis-specific response to ESAT-6 and CFP-10 revealed
positive results in 16% of patients. Using a decision tree incorporating history,
chest X-ray and either skin-test or ESAT-6/CFP-10 results, 18 or 22% of the
patients, respectively, were classified as latently infected with M.
tuberculosis. Four patients treated with INH because of a positive skin reaction 
did not show reactivity to ESAT-6/CFP-10 in the whole blood assays. Another six
patients not pretreated with INH because of negative skin tests would have
received INH, had the results of the whole blood assay been taken into account.
CONCLUSION: The Mendel-Mantoux skin test has a low sensitivity and specificity
for the diagnosis of LTBI in this cohort of patients, potentially resulting in
both over- and under-treatment with prophylactic INH when compared with the flow 
cytometric analysis of whole blood T-cell reactivity to proteins specific to M.
tuberculosis. Use of T-cell based in vitro tests may help to refine diagnostic
testing for LTBI.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/kem351 
PMID: 18208824  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

