
1. Lab Invest. 2008 Nov;88(11):1227-44. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2008.84. Epub 2008
Sep 8.

Epithelial cell expression of BCL-2 family proteins predicts mechanisms that
regulate Helicobacter pylori-induced pathology in the mouse stomach.

Hagen SJ(1), Yang DX, Tashima K, Taylor NS, Fox JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA 02215,
USA. shagen@bidmc.harvard.edu

Corpus-predominant infection with Helicobacter pylori (HP) results in the
activation of programmed cell death pathways in surface, parietal, and chief
cells. At present, mechanisms that regulate these pathways to result in
HP-associated pathology are not fully understood. Because it is not known which
survival and death pathways are present in gastric epithelial cells, we used an
antibody panel to evaluate the expression of BCL-2 family prosurvival proteins or
multi-Bcl-2 homology (BH)-domains (group 1) or BH3-only (group-2) proapoptotic
proteins in the stomachs of uninfected or HP-infected C57BL/6 mice. This strategy
identified BCL-2, BAK, and BAD as the major prosurvival and proapoptotic
proteins, in surface cells and BAD as the only BCL-2 family protein expressed in 
parietal cells. Chief cells express altogether different effectors, including
BCL-X(L)/BCL-2, for survival but have no constitutively expressed proapoptotic
proteins. In model chief cells, however, the group 1 proapoptotic protein
BCL-X(S) was expressed after exposure to proinflammatory cytokines concomitant
with reduced viability, demonstrating that chief cells can transcriptionally
regulate the induction of proapoptotic proteins to execute apoptosis. During HP
infection, no additional BCL-2 family proteins were expressed in epithelial
cells, whereas those present either remained unchanged or were reduced as cell
deletion occurred over time. Additional studies demonstrated that the
posttranslational regulation of BAD in surface and parietal cells was negatively 
affected by HP infection, a result that may be directly related to an increase in
apoptosis during infection. Thus, gastric epithelial cells express cell-specific 
prosurvival and proapoptotic pathways. From the results presented here,
mechanisms that regulate HP-related changes in the survival and death profile of 
gastric epithelial cells can be predicted and then tested, with the ultimate goal
of elucidating important therapeutic targets to inhibit the progression of
HP-related pathology in the stomach.

DOI: 10.1038/labinvest.2008.84 
PMCID: PMC2766781
PMID: 18779780  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

