
1. Phytopathology. 2009 Jan;99(1):82-8. doi: 10.1094/PHYTO-99-1-0082.

Characterization of Phytophthora infestans populations in Colombia: first report 
of the A2 mating type.

Vargas AM(1), Quesada Ocampo LM, Céspedes MC, Carreño N, González A, Rojas A,
Zuluaga AP, Myers K, Fry WE, Jiménez P, Bernal AJ, Restrepo S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Micología y Fitopatología, Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá,
Colombia.

Phytophthora infestans, the causal agent of late blight in crops of the
Solanaceae family, is one of the most important plant pathogens in Colombia. Not 
only are Solanum lycopersicum, and S. tuberosum at risk, but also several other
solanaceous hosts (Physalis peruviana, S. betaceum, S. phureja, and S. quitoense)
that have recently gained importance as new crops in Colombia may be at risk.
Because little is known about the population structure of Phytophthora infestans 
in Colombia, we report here the phenotypic and molecular characterization of 97
isolates collected from these six different solanaceous plants in Colombia. All
the isolates were analyzed for mating type, mitochondrial haplotypes, genotype
for several microsatellites, and sequence of the internal transcribed spacer
(ITS) region. This characterization identified a single individual of A2 mating
type (from Physalis peruviana) for the first time in Colombia. All isolates had
an ITS sequence that was at least 97% identical to the consensus sequence. Of the
97 isolates, 96 were mitochondrial haplotype IIa, with the single A2 isolate
being Ia. All isolates were invariant for the microsatellites. Additionally,
isolates collected from S. tuberosum and P. peruviana (64 isolates) were tested
for: aggressiveness on both hosts, genotype for the isozymes (glucose-6-phosphate
isomerase and peptidase), and restriction fragment length polymorphism
fingerprint pattern as detected by RG57. Isolates from S. tuberosum were
preferentially pathogenic on S. tuberosum, and isolates from P. peruviana were
preferentially pathogenic on P. peruviana. The population from these two hosts
was dominated by a single clonal lineage (59 of 64 individuals assayed),
previously identified from Ecuador and Peru as EC-1. This lineage was mating type
A1, IIa for mitochondrial DNA, invariant for two microsatellites, and invariant
for both isozymes. The remaining four A1 isolates were in lineages very closely
related to EC-1 (named EC-1.1, CO-1, and CO-2). The remaining lineage (the A2
mating type) had characteristics of the US-8 lineage (previously identified in
Mexico, the United States, and Canada). These results have important
epidemiological implications for the production of these two crops in Colombia.

DOI: 10.1094/PHYTO-99-1-0082 
PMID: 19055438  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

