
1. Exp Cell Res. 1991 Nov;197(1):125-36.

Characteristics of an infinite life span diploid human fibroblast cell strain and
a near-diploid strain arising from a clone of cells expressing a transfected
v-myc oncogene.

Morgan TL(1), Yang DJ, Fry DG, Hurlin PJ, Kohler SK, Maher VM, McCormick JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Michigan State University, East Lansing 48824.

Diploid human fibroblasts were transfected with a plasmid carrying a v-myc
oncogene linked to the neo gene or with a vector control carrying a neo gene.
Drug-resistant clones were isolated and subcultured as needed. All populations
went into crisis and eventually senesced. But while they were senescing,
viable-appearing clones were noted among the progeny of a transfected population 
that expressed the v-myc oncogene. After several months, these cells began
replicating more rapidly. Karyotype analysis indicated that they were clonally
derived since all of them had 45 chromosomes, including 2 marker chromosomes.
This cell strain was designated MSU-1.1. Similar analysis showed that cells from 
an earlier passage were diploid. These cells were designated MSU-1.0. Both
strains have undergone more than 200 population doublings since their siblings
senesced, without any change in chromosome complement. Both strains express the
v-myc protein and have the same integration site for the transfected v-myc and
neo genes. The MSU-1.0 cells cannot grow without exogenously added growth
factors. The MSU-1.1 cells grow moderately well under the same conditions and
grow to a higher saturation density than MSU-1.0 cells. Since the chance of human
cells acquiring an infinite life span in culture is very rare, the data suggest
that MSU-1.1 cells are derived from MSU-1.0 cells. The expression of v-myc is
probably required for acquisition of an infinite life span, since this phenotype 
did not develop in populations not expressing this oncogene. However, expression 
of v-myc is clearly not sufficient, since all of the progeny of the clone that
gave rise to the MSU-1.0 cells expressed this oncogene, but the vast majority of 
them senesced.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-4827(91)90489-h 
PMID: 1915659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

