
1. Nature. 2009 Sep 17;461(7262):393-8. doi: 10.1038/nature08358. Epub 2009 Sep 9.

Genome sequence and analysis of the Irish potato famine pathogen Phytophthora
infestans.

Haas BJ(1), Kamoun S, Zody MC, Jiang RH, Handsaker RE, Cano LM, Grabherr M,
Kodira CD, Raffaele S, Torto-Alalibo T, Bozkurt TO, Ah-Fong AM, Alvarado L,
Anderson VL, Armstrong MR, Avrova A, Baxter L, Beynon J, Boevink PC, Bollmann SR,
Bos JI, Bulone V, Cai G, Cakir C, Carrington JC, Chawner M, Conti L, Costanzo S, 
Ewan R, Fahlgren N, Fischbach MA, Fugelstad J, Gilroy EM, Gnerre S, Green PJ,
Grenville-Briggs LJ, Griffith J, Grünwald NJ, Horn K, Horner NR, Hu CH, Huitema
E, Jeong DH, Jones AM, Jones JD, Jones RW, Karlsson EK, Kunjeti SG, Lamour K, Liu
Z, Ma L, Maclean D, Chibucos MC, McDonald H, McWalters J, Meijer HJ, Morgan W,
Morris PF, Munro CA, O'Neill K, Ospina-Giraldo M, Pinzón A, Pritchard L,
Ramsahoye B, Ren Q, Restrepo S, Roy S, Sadanandom A, Savidor A, Schornack S,
Schwartz DC, Schumann UD, Schwessinger B, Seyer L, Sharpe T, Silvar C, Song J,
Studholme DJ, Sykes S, Thines M, van de Vondervoort PJ, Phuntumart V, Wawra S,
Weide R, Win J, Young C, Zhou S, Fry W, Meyers BC, van West P, Ristaino J, Govers
F, Birch PR, Whisson SC, Judelson HS, Nusbaum C.

Author information: 
(1)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02141, USA.

Phytophthora infestans is the most destructive pathogen of potato and a model
organism for the oomycetes, a distinct lineage of fungus-like eukaryotes that are
related to organisms such as brown algae and diatoms. As the agent of the Irish
potato famine in the mid-nineteenth century, P. infestans has had a tremendous
effect on human history, resulting in famine and population displacement. To this
day, it affects world agriculture by causing the most destructive disease of
potato, the fourth largest food crop and a critical alternative to the major
cereal crops for feeding the world's population. Current annual worldwide potato 
crop losses due to late blight are conservatively estimated at $6.7 billion.
Management of this devastating pathogen is challenged by its remarkable speed of 
adaptation to control strategies such as genetically resistant cultivars. Here we
report the sequence of the P. infestans genome, which at approximately 240
megabases (Mb) is by far the largest and most complex genome sequenced so far in 
the chromalveolates. Its expansion results from a proliferation of repetitive DNA
accounting for approximately 74% of the genome. Comparison with two other
Phytophthora genomes showed rapid turnover and extensive expansion of specific
families of secreted disease effector proteins, including many genes that are
induced during infection or are predicted to have activities that alter host
physiology. These fast-evolving effector genes are localized to highly dynamic
and expanded regions of the P. infestans genome. This probably plays a crucial
part in the rapid adaptability of the pathogen to host plants and underpins its
evolutionary potential.

DOI: 10.1038/nature08358 
PMID: 19741609  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

