
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Jun;38(11):e121. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq039. Epub 2010 Mar
17.

Evaluating oligonucleotide properties for DNA microarray probe design.

Xia XQ(1), Jia Z, Porwollik S, Long F, Hoemme C, Ye K, Müller-Tidow C, McClelland
M, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Lechner-Haag Genomics Core, Vaccine Research Institute of San Diego, 10835
Road to the Cure, Suite 150, San Diego, CA 92121, USA. xqxia70@gmail.com

Most current microarray oligonucleotide probe design strategies are based on
probe design factors (PDFs), which include probe hybridization free energy
(PHFE), probe minimum folding energy (PMFE), dimer score, hairpin score, homology
score and complexity score. The impact of these PDFs on probe performance was
evaluated using four sets of microarray comparative genome hybridization (aCGH)
data, which included two array manufacturing methods and the genomes of two
species. Since most of the hybridizing DNA is equimolar in CGH data, such data
are ideal for testing the general hybridization properties of almost all
candidate oligonucleotides. In all our data sets, PDFs related to probe secondary
structure (PMFE, hairpin score and dimer score) are the most significant factors 
linearly correlated with probe hybridization intensities. PHFE, homology and
complexity score are correlating significantly with probe specificities, but in a
non-linear fashion. We developed a new PDF, pseudo probe binding energy (PPBE),
by iteratively fitting dinucleotide positional weights and dinucleotide stacking 
energies until the average residue sum of squares for the model was minimized.
PPBE showed a better correlation with probe sensitivity and a better specificity 
than all other PDFs, although training data are required to construct a PPBE
model prior to designing new oligonucleotide probes. The physical properties that
are measured by PPBE are as yet unknown but include a platform-dependent
component. A practical way to use these PDFs for probe design is to set cutoff
thresholds to filter out bad quality probes. Programs and correlation parameters 
from this study are freely available to facilitate the design of DNA microarray
oligonucleotide probes.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkq039 
PMCID: PMC2887943
PMID: 20236987  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

