
1. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 17;5(12):e14374. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014374.

Α-galactosylceramide analogs with weak agonist activity for human iNKT cells
define new candidate anti-inflammatory agents.

Bricard G(1), Venkataswamy MM, Yu KO, Im JS, Ndonye RM, Howell AR, Veerapen N,
Illarionov PA, Besra GS, Li Q, Chang YT, Porcelli SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America.

CD1d-restricted natural killer T cells with invariant T cell receptor α chains
(iNKT cells) are a unique lymphocyte subset that responds to recognition of
specific lipid and glycolipid antigens. They are conserved between mice and
humans and exert various immunoregulatory functions through their rapid secretion
of a variety of cytokines and secondary activation of dendritic cells, B cells
and NK cells. In the current study, we analyzed the range of functional
activation states of human iNKT cells using a library of novel analogs of
α-galactosylceramide (αGalCer), the prototypical iNKT cell antigen. Measurement
of cytokines secreted by human iNKT cell clones over a wide range of glycolipid
concentrations revealed that iNKT cell ligands could be classified into
functional groups, correlating with weak versus strong agonistic activity. The
findings established a hierarchy for induction of different cytokines, with
thresholds for secretion being consistently lowest for IL-13, higher for
interferon-γ (IFNγ), and even higher for IL-4. These findings suggested that
human iNKT cells can be intrinsically polarized to selective production of IL-13 
by maintaining a low level of activation using weak agonists, whereas selective
polarization to IL-4 production cannot be achieved through modulating the
strength of the activating ligand. In addition, using a newly designed in vitro
system to assess the ability of human iNKT cells to transactivate NK cells, we
found that robust secondary induction of interferon-γ secretion by NK cells was
associated with strong but not weak agonist ligands of iNKT cells. These results 
indicate that polarization of human iNKT cell responses to Th2-like or
anti-inflammatory effects may best be achieved through selective induction of
IL-13 and suggest potential discrepancies with findings from mouse models that
may be important in designing iNKT cell-based therapies in humans.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014374 
PMCID: PMC3003687
PMID: 21179412  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

