
1. PLoS Genet. 2011 Feb 3;7(2):e1001287. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001287.

Whole-genome comparison reveals novel genetic elements that characterize the
genome of industrial strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Borneman AR(1), Desany BA, Riches D, Affourtit JP, Forgan AH, Pretorius IS,
Egholm M, Chambers PJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Australian Wine Research Institute, Adelaide, Australia.
anthony.borneman@awri.com.au

Human intervention has subjected the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae to multiple
rounds of independent domestication and thousands of generations of artificial
selection. As a result, this species comprises a genetically diverse collection
of natural isolates as well as domesticated strains that are used in specific
industrial applications. However the scope of genetic diversity that was captured
during the domesticated evolution of the industrial representatives of this
important organism remains to be determined. To begin to address this, we have
produced whole-genome assemblies of six commercial strains of S. cerevisiae (four
wine and two brewing strains). These represent the first genome assemblies
produced from S. cerevisiae strains in their industrially-used forms and the
first high-quality assemblies for S. cerevisiae strains used in brewing. By
comparing these sequences to six existing high-coverage S. cerevisiae genome
assemblies, clear signatures were found that defined each industrial class of
yeast. This genetic variation was comprised of both single nucleotide
polymorphisms and large-scale insertions and deletions, with the latter often
being associated with ORF heterogeneity between strains. This included the
discovery of more than twenty probable genes that had not been identified
previously in the S. cerevisiae genome. Comparison of this large number of S.
cerevisiae strains also enabled the characterization of a cluster of five ORFs
that have integrated into the genomes of the wine and bioethanol strains on
multiple occasions and at diverse genomic locations via what appears to involve
the resolution of a circular DNA intermediate. This work suggests that, despite
the scrutiny that has been directed at the yeast genome, there remains a
significant reservoir of ORFs and novel modes of genetic transmission that may
have significant phenotypic impact in this important model and industrial
species.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001287 
PMCID: PMC3033381
PMID: 21304888  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: BAD, DR, JPA, and ME were employees of 454 Life
Sciences, A Roche Company, at the time this work was performed.

