
1. Swed Dent J. 2010;34(4):197-206.

Influence of dietary supplementation with Lactobacillus reuteri on the oral flora
of healthy subjects.

Sinkiewicz G(1), Cronholm S, Ljunggren L, Dahlén G, Bratthall G.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Laboratory Science, Faculty of Health and Society, Malmö
University, Malmö, Sweden.

Investigate the presence of Lactobacillus reuteri in saliva after supplementation
with L. reuteri and the probiotic effect of L. reuteri on plaque index and supra-
and subgingival microbiota.MATERIAL AND METHODS: The study included 23 healthy
individuals, randomised into test or control subjects. At baseline and after 12
weeks saliva samples, plaque index and supra- and subgingival plaque samples were
obtained. The test subjects were given the study product (containing L. reuteri, 
ATCC 55730 and ATCC PTA 5289) and the control subjects placebo for 12 weeks.
Microbiological analyses were done by checkerboard DNA-DNA hybridization
technique and selective culturing for lactobacilli determination.
RESULTS: A significant increase in total Lactobacillus counts in saliva occurred 
in both groups (p < 0.05) with a significant increase of L. reuteri (p = 0.008)
in the test group.Termination of intervention resulted in a wash out of L.
reuteri. The control group demonstrated a statistically significant increase in
PII after 12 weeks (p = 0.023) whilst there was no significant change in the test
group. A significant increase was found for most bacterial species in both groups
in supra- and subgingival plaque with no significant difference for any of the
species between the groups. The ratio between "bad/good" supragingival bacteria
decreased for the test group but this decrease did not reach significance. The
corresponding ratio for subgingival bacteria decreased significantly in both
groups. Supplementation of L. reuteri resulted in presence of L. reuteri in
saliva but L. reuteri was washed out after termination of intervention. No
significant effect on supra- or subgingival microbiota was observed. The
significant increase in PII in the control group with no significant change in
the test group may, however, indicate a probiotic effect of L. reuteri in this
study population.


PMID: 21306085  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

