
1. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 18;6(3):e17962. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017962.

Genomes of the most dangerous epidemic bacteria have a virulence repertoire
characterized by fewer genes but more toxin-antitoxin modules.

Georgiades K(1), Raoult D.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherche en Maladies Infectieuses Tropicales Emergentes, CNRS-IRD
UMR 6236, Faculté de la Médecine, Université de la Méditerranée, Marseille,
France.

BACKGROUND: We conducted a comparative genomic study based on a neutral approach 
to identify genome specificities associated with the virulence capacity of
pathogenic bacteria. We also determined whether virulence is dictated by rules,
or if it is the result of individual evolutionary histories. We systematically
compared the genomes of the 12 most dangerous pandemic bacteria for humans ("bad 
bugs") to their closest non-epidemic related species ("controls").
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We found several significantly different features
in the "bad bugs", one of which was a smaller genome that likely resulted from a 
degraded recombination and repair system. The 10 Cluster of Orthologous Group
(COG) functional categories revealed a significantly smaller number of genes in
the "bad bugs", which lacked mostly transcription, signal transduction
mechanisms, cell motility, energy production and conversion, and metabolic and
regulatory functions. A few genes were identified as virulence factors, including
secretion system proteins. Five "bad bugs" showed a greater number of poly (A)
tails compared to the controls, whereas an elevated number of poly (A) tails was 
found to be strongly correlated to a low GC% content. The "bad bugs" had fewer
tandem repeat sequences compared to controls. Moreover, the results obtained from
a principal component analysis (PCA) showed that the "bad bugs" had surprisingly 
more toxin-antitoxin modules than did the controls.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We conclude that pathogenic capacity is not the result 
of "virulence factors" but is the outcome of a virulent gene repertoire resulting
from reduced genome repertoires. Toxin-antitoxin systems could participate in the
virulence repertoire, but they may have developed independently of selfish
evolution.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017962 
PMCID: PMC3060909
PMID: 21437250  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

