
1. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 18;6(3):e17624. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017624.

Structure and function of the first full-length murein peptide ligase (Mpl) cell 
wall recycling protein.

Das D(1), Hervé M, Feuerhelm J, Farr CL, Chiu HJ, Elsliger MA, Knuth MW, Klock
HE, Miller MD, Godzik A, Lesley SA, Deacon AM, Mengin-Lecreulx D, Wilson IA.

Author information: 
(1)Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource, SLAC National Accelerator
Laboratory, Menlo Park, California, United States of America.

Bacterial cell walls contain peptidoglycan, an essential polymer made by enzymes 
in the Mur pathway. These proteins are specific to bacteria, which make them
targets for drug discovery. MurC, MurD, MurE and MurF catalyze the synthesis of
the peptidoglycan precursor
UDP-N-acetylmuramoyl-L-alanyl-γ-D-glutamyl-meso-diaminopimelyl-D-alanyl-D-alanine
by the sequential addition of amino acids onto UDP-N-acetylmuramic acid
(UDP-MurNAc). MurC-F enzymes have been extensively studied by biochemistry and
X-ray crystallography. In gram-negative bacteria, ∼30-60% of the bacterial cell
wall is recycled during each generation. Part of this recycling process involves 
the murein peptide ligase (Mpl), which attaches the breakdown product, the
tripeptide L-alanyl-γ-D-glutamyl-meso-diaminopimelate, to UDP-MurNAc. We present 
the crystal structure at 1.65 Å resolution of a full-length Mpl from the
permafrost bacterium Psychrobacter arcticus 273-4 (PaMpl). Although the Mpl
structure has similarities to Mur enzymes, it has unique sequence and structure
features that are likely related to its role in cell wall recycling, a function
that differentiates it from the MurC-F enzymes. We have analyzed the
sequence-structure relationships that are unique to Mpl proteins and compared
them to MurC-F ligases. We have also characterized the biochemical properties of 
this enzyme (optimal temperature, pH and magnesium binding profiles and kinetic
parameters). Although the structure does not contain any bound substrates, we
have identified ∼30 residues that are likely to be important for recognition of
the tripeptide and UDP-MurNAc substrates, as well as features that are unique to 
Psychrobacter Mpl proteins. These results provide the basis for future mutational
studies for more extensive function characterization of the Mpl
sequence-structure relationships.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017624 
PMCID: PMC3060825
PMID: 21445265  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

