
1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2011 Jun;66 Suppl 5:v3-12. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkr119.

Overview of e-Bug: an antibiotic and hygiene educational resource for schools.

McNulty CA(1), Lecky DM, Farrell D, Kostkova P, Adriaenssens N, Koprivová
Herotová T, Holt J, Touboul P, Merakou K, Koncan R, Olczak-Pienkowska A, Avô AB, 
Campos J; e-Bug Working Group.

Collaborators: Barbouni N, Benes J, Caballero CR, Cornaglia G, Davis C, De Corte 
S, de Quincey E, Dellamonica P, Gennimata D, Goossens H, Grzesiowski P, Jawaheer 
G, Kremastinou J, Lazareck L, Noer M, Nowakowska M, Weerasinghe D, Weinberg J,
Fry C, Goossens H, Fisher I.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency Primary Care Unit, Microbiology Department,
Gloucester Royal Hospital, Great Western Road, Gloucester, Gloucestershire, GL1
3NN, UK. cliodna.mcnulty@hpa.org.uk

Antibiotic resistance is an increasing community problem and is related to
antibiotic use. If antibiotic use could be reduced, the tide of increasing
resistance could be stemmed. e-Bug is a European project involving 18 European
countries, partly funded by The Directorate-General for Health and Consumers (DG 
SANCO) of the European Commission. It aims to develop and disseminate across
Europe a junior and senior school teaching pack and web site (hosting the lesson 
plans and complementary games) that teach young people about prudent antibiotic
use, microbes, transmission of infection, hygiene and vaccines. The aim of e-Bug 
is to increase young people's understanding, through enjoyable activities, of why
it is so important to use antibiotics correctly in order to control antibiotic
resistance, and to have good hand and respiratory hygiene to help reduce the
spread of infection. Within the senior school pack the sexual transmission of
infections has also been included, as the peak age of chlamydial infection is in 
16-24 year olds. Teachers, young people and the consortium of 18 countries were
closely involved with agreeing learning outcomes and developing the resource
activities. Young people helped create the characters and microbe artwork. The
resources have been translated, adapted for and disseminated to schools across 10
countries in Europe, and endorsed by the relevant government departments of
health and education. The web site has been accessed from >200 countries. The
resources will be translated into all European Union languages, and have been
used to promote European Antibiotic Awareness Day and better hand and respiratory
hygiene during the influenza pandemic in 2009.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkr119 
PMID: 21680584  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

