
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20911. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020911. Epub 2011 Jun 23.

The cycad genotoxin MAM modulates brain cellular pathways involved in
neurodegenerative disease and cancer in a DNA damage-linked manner.

Kisby GE(1), Fry RC, Lasarev MR, Bammler TK, Beyer RP, Churchwell M, Doerge DR,
Meira LB, Palmer VS, Ramos-Crawford AL, Ren X, Sullivan RC, Kavanagh TJ, Samson
LD, Zarbl H, Spencer PS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research on Occupational and Environmental Toxicology, Oregon
Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon, United States of America.
gkisby@westernu.edu

Methylazoxymethanol (MAM), the genotoxic metabolite of the cycad azoxyglucoside
cycasin, induces genetic alterations in bacteria, yeast, plants, insects and
mammalian cells, but adult nerve cells are thought to be unaffected. We show that
the brains of adult C57BL6 wild-type mice treated with a single systemic dose of 
MAM acetate display DNA damage (O⁶-methyldeoxyguanosine lesions, O⁶-mG) that
remains constant up to 7 days post-treatment. By contrast, MAM-treated mice
lacking a functional gene encoding the DNA repair enzyme O⁶-mG DNA
methyltransferase (MGMT) showed elevated O⁶-mG DNA damage starting at 48 hours
post-treatment. The DNA damage was linked to changes in the expression of genes
in cell-signaling pathways associated with cancer, human neurodegenerative
disease, and neurodevelopmental disorders. These data are consistent with the
established developmental neurotoxic and carcinogenic properties of MAM in
rodents. They also support the hypothesis that early-life exposure to
MAM-glucoside (cycasin) has an etiological association with a declining,
prototypical neurodegenerative disease seen in Guam, Japan, and New Guinea
populations that formerly used the neurotoxic cycad plant for food or medicine,
or both. These findings suggest environmental genotoxins, specifically MAM,
target common pathways involved in neurodegeneration and cancer, the outcome
depending on whether the cell can divide (cancer) or not (neurodegeneration).
Exposure to MAM-related environmental genotoxins may have relevance to the
etiology of related tauopathies, notably, Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020911 
PMCID: PMC3121718
PMID: 21731631  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

