
1. Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Xue Bao. 2012 Feb;10(2):210-27.

Potentiated homeopathic drug Arsenicum Album 30C inhibits intracellular reactive 
oxygen species generation and up-regulates expression of arsenic resistance gene 
in arsenite-exposed bacteria Escherichia coli.

De A(1), Das D, Dutta S, Chakraborty D, Boujedaini N, Khuda-Bukhsh AR.

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetics and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Department of Zoology,
University of Kalyani, Kalyani 741235, India.

OBJECTIVE: To examine if potentiated homeopathic drug Arsenicum Album 30C (Ars
Alb 30C) can reduce sodium arsenite-induced toxicity in Escherichia coli.
METHODS: E. coli were exposed to low arsenite insult after they grew up to log
phase in standard Luria-Bertani medium. E. coli were treated with 1 or 2 mmol/L
sodium arsenite alone (control), or Ars Alb 30C was added to the medium of a
subset of sodium arsenite-treated bacteria (drug-treated), or homeopathically
agitated alcohol was added to the medium containing a subset of sodium
arsenite-treated bacteria (placebo-treated). A sub-set of untreated E. coli
served as the negative control. Glucose uptake, specific activities of
hexokinase, lipid peroxidase (LPO), superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase,
intra- and extra-cellular sodium arsenite content, cell growth, cell membrane
potential, DNA damage, intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS), adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) and free glutathione content and expressions of arsB and ptsG 
gene in normal control, sodium arsenite-treated, drug-treated and placebo-treated
E. coli were analyzed. Treatments were blinded and randomized.
RESULTS: In sodium arsenite-treated E. coli, glucose uptake, intracellular ROS,
LPO and DNA damage increased along with decrease in the specific activities of
hexokinase, SOD and catalase, intracellular ATP and free glutathione contents and
cell membrane potential and growth, and there were increases in expression levels
of arsB gene and ptsG gene. Ars Alb 30C administration reduced arsenic toxicity
in E. coli by inhibiting generation of ROS and increasing tolerance to arsenite
toxicity and cell growth.
CONCLUSION: Ars Alb 30C ameliorated arsenic toxicity and DNA damage, validating
efficacy of ultra-highly diluted remedies used in homeopathy.

DOI: 10.3736/jcim20120212 
PMID: 22313889  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

