
1. J Ethnopharmacol. 2012 Jun 14;141(3):860-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2012.03.020. Epub 
2012 Mar 23.

Ethnobotanical survey and antibacterial activity of plants used in the Altiplane 
region of Mexico for the treatment of oral cavity infections.

Rosas-Piñón Y(1), Mejía A, Díaz-Ruiz G, Aguilar MI, Sánchez-Nieto S, Rivero-Cruz 
JF.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Farmacia, Facultad de Química, Universidad Nacional Autónoma
de México, Ciudad Universitaria, 04510 México, DF, Mexico.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: The ethnobotanical survey conducted in this study
showed 47 plant species used in the Altiplane region of Mexico for the treatment 
of dental diseases such as toothache, dental caries, periodontal disease and
gingivitis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Information was collected by performing interviews. The
following data were recorded: name of the patients or herbalists with their age, 
sex; date and place of gathering information; pathology of persons interviewed;
name of the drug (vernacular name); parts used (leaves, bark, fruits, seeds,
aerial parts), mode of preparation and administration, and possible combinations.
The inhibitory effects of the aqueous and ethanolic extracts of the medicinal
plants detected during the survey the on the growth of Streptococcus mutans and
Phrophyromonas gingivalis were determined using microdilution method. The minimum
bactericidal concentrations (MBC) were determined from the wells of microplate
with no visible bacterial growth.
RESULTS: In total, tree places of the Altiplane region of Mexico were visited and
five healers and 100 patients were questioned. 47 wild and cultivated species
were recorded. The most frequent uses were to treat tooth pain, gum diseases, bad
breath and cavities. Infusions were the most frequently prepared formulation.
Other applied preparations mentioned with decreasing frequency were decocts,
syrups, tinctures, direct application of the plant material without prior
preparation and finally macerations. The ethanolic extracts of Haematoxylon
brasiletto, Punica granatum, Iostephane heterophyla, Bursera simaruba, Cedrela
odorata and Rhus standleyi (12.5-65.0 μg/mL) as well as water extracts of
Haematoxylon brasiletto, Punica granatum, Iostephane heterophyla, Amphipterygium 
adstringens, Argemone mexicana, Cedrela odorata, Eysenhardtia polystachya, Persea
americana, Syzygium aromaticum, Cinnamomun zeylanicum, Cnidoscolus multilobus and
Rhus standleyi (10.5-78.0 μg/mL) showed the highest inhibitory effect against
Streptococcus mutans and Porphyromonas gingivalis.
CONCLUSIONS: Many plants are used in the Mexican traditional medicine to treat
oral bacterial diseases by the healers or patients. Our study demonstrated that
most of the medicinal plants showed an antibacterial effect in vitro, and
justified at least in part their use in traditional medicine. These results
encourage further investigations to extract and identify the active chemical
compounds responsible for the antibacterial effect observed.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2012.03.020 
PMID: 22465591  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

