
1. Front Plant Sci. 2012 Feb 14;3:25. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2012.00025. eCollection
2012.

Conserved and diversified gene families of monovalent cation/h(+) antiporters
from algae to flowering plants.

Chanroj S(1), Wang G, Venema K, Zhang MW, Delwiche CF, Sze H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics, Maryland Agricultural
Experiment Station, University of Maryland College Park, MD, USA.

All organisms have evolved strategies to regulate ion and pH homeostasis in
response to developmental and environmental cues. One strategy is mediated by
monovalent cation-proton antiporters (CPA) that are classified in two
superfamilies. Many CPA1 genes from bacteria, fungi, metazoa, and plants have
been functionally characterized; though roles of plant CPA2 genes encoding
K(+)-efflux antiporter (KEA) and cation/H(+) exchanger (CHX) families are largely
unknown. Phylogenetic analysis showed that three clades of the CPA1 Na(+)-H(+)
exchanger (NHX) family have been conserved from single-celled algae to
Arabidopsis. These are (i) plasma membrane-bound SOS1/AtNHX7 that share ancestry 
with prokaryote NhaP, (ii) endosomal AtNHX5/6 that is part of the eukaryote
Intracellular-NHE clade, and (iii) a vacuolar NHX clade (AtNHX1-4) specific to
plants. Early diversification of KEA genes possibly from an ancestral
cyanobacterium gene is suggested by three types seen in all plants. Intriguingly,
CHX genes diversified from three to four members in one subclade of early land
plants to 28 genes in eight subclades of Arabidopsis. Homologs from Spirogyra or 
Physcomitrella share high similarity with AtCHX20, suggesting that guard
cell-specific AtCHX20 and its closest relatives are founders of the family, and
pollen-expressed CHX genes appeared later in monocots and early eudicots. AtCHX
proteins mediate K(+) transport and pH homeostasis, and have been localized to
intracellular and plasma membrane. Thus KEA genes are conserved from green algae 
to angiosperms, and their presence in red algae and secondary endosymbionts
suggest a role in plastids. In contrast, AtNHX1-4 subtype evolved in plant cells 
to handle ion homeostasis of vacuoles. The great diversity of CHX genes in land
plants compared to metazoa, fungi, or algae would imply a significant role of ion
and pH homeostasis at dynamic endomembranes in the vegetative and reproductive
success of flowering plants.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2012.00025 
PMCID: PMC3355601
PMID: 22639643 

