
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2011 Dec 9;1:15. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2011.00015.
eCollection 2011.

Burkholderia cenocepacia differential gene expression during host-pathogen
interactions and adaptation to the host environment.

O'Grady EP(1), Sokol PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Infectious Diseases, University of 
Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.

Members of the Burkholderia cepacia complex (Bcc) are important in medical,
biotechnological, and agricultural disciplines. These bacteria naturally occur in
soil and water environments and have adapted to survive in association with
plants and animals including humans. All Bcc species are opportunistic pathogens 
including Burkholderia cenocepacia that causes infections in cystic fibrosis and 
chronic granulomatous disease patients. The adaptation of B. cenocepacia to the
host environment was assessed in a rat chronic respiratory infection model and
compared to that of high cell-density in vitro grown cultures using
transcriptomics. The distribution of genes differentially expressed on
chromosomes 1, 2, and 3 was relatively proportional to the size of each genomic
element, whereas the proportion of plasmid-encoded genes differentially expressed
was much higher relative to its size and most genes were induced in vivo. The
majority of genes encoding known virulence factors, components of types II and
III secretion systems and chromosome 2-encoded type IV secretion system were
similarly expressed between in vitro and in vivo environments. Lower expression
in vivo was detected for genes encoding N-acyl-homoserine lactone synthase CepI, 
orphan LuxR homolog CepR2, zinc metalloproteases ZmpA and ZmpB, LysR-type
transcriptional regulator ShvR, nematocidal protein AidA, and genes associated
with flagellar motility, Flp type pilus formation, and type VI secretion.
Plasmid-encoded type IV secretion genes were markedly induced in vivo. Additional
genes induced in vivo included genes predicted to be involved in osmotic stress
adaptation or intracellular survival, metal ion, and nutrient transport, as well 
as those encoding outer membrane proteins. Genes identified in this study are
potentially important for virulence during host-pathogen interactions and may be 
associated with survival and adaptation to the host environment during chronic
lung infections.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2011.00015 
PMCID: PMC3417382
PMID: 22919581  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

