
1. Inorg Chem. 2013 Apr 1;52(7):3510-32. doi: 10.1021/ic301686d. Epub 2012 Nov 8.

Environmental speciation of actinides.

Maher K(1), Bargar JR, Brown GE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geological & Environmental Sciences, Stanford University,
Stanford, California 94305-2115, USA. kmaher@stanford.edu

Although minor in abundance in Earth's crust (U, 2-4 ppm; Th, 10-15 ppm) and in
seawater (U, 0.003 ppm; Th, 0.0007 ppm), light actinides (Th, Pa, U, Np, Pu, Am, 
and Cm) are important environmental contaminants associated with anthropogenic
activities such as the mining and milling of uranium ores, generation of nuclear 
energy, and storage of legacy waste resulting from the manufacturing and testing 
of nuclear weapons. In this review, we discuss the abundance, production, and
environmental sources of naturally occurring and some man-made light actinides.
As is the case with other environmental contaminants, the solubility, transport
properties, bioavailability, and toxicity of actinides are dependent on their
speciation (composition, oxidation state, molecular-level structure, and nature
of the phase in which the contaminant element or molecule occurs). We review the 
aqueous speciation of U, Np, and Pu as a function of pH and Eh, their interaction
with common inorganic and organic ligands in natural waters, and some of the
common U-containing minerals. We also discuss the interaction of U, Np, Pu, and
Am solution complexes with common Earth materials, including minerals, colloids, 
gels, natural organic matter (NOM), and microbial organisms, based on simplified 
model system studies. These surface interactions can inhibit (e.g., sorption to
mineral surfaces, formation of insoluble biominerals) or enhance (e.g.,
colloid-facilitated transport) the dispersal of light actinides in the biosphere 
and in some cases (e.g., interaction with dissimilatory metal-reducing bacteria, 
NOM, or Mn- and Fe-containing minerals) can modify the oxidation states and,
consequently, the behavior of redox-sensitive light actinides (U, Np, and Pu).
Finally, we review the speciation of U and Pu, their chemical transformations,
and cleanup histories at several U.S. Department of Energy field sites that have 
been used to mill U ores, produce fissile materials for reactors and weapons, and
store high-level nuclear waste from both civilian and defense operations,
including Hanford, WA; Rifle, CO; Oak Ridge, TN; Fernald, OH; Fry Canyon, UT; and
Rocky Flats, CO.

DOI: 10.1021/ic301686d 
PMID: 23137032 

