
1. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2013 Feb;138(7):313-6. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1332870. Epub
2013 Feb 7.

[Histoplasmosis - an unusual African souvenir].

[Article in German]

Raselli C(1), Reinhart WH, Fleisch F.

Author information: 
(1)Departement für Innere Medizin, Kantonsspital Graubünden, Chur, Schweiz.
craselli@gmx.net

HISTORY AND CLINICAL FINDINGS: A 24-year-old woman (student of biology) was part 
of a study group in Uganda. She developed fever and headache, which was
empirically treated as malaria. After she had returned to Switzerland, a chest
x-ray showed bilateral miliary nodular infiltrates. In assumption of an atypical 
pneumonia, she was treated with levofloxacin, although without success. On
admission, she was in a bad general condition and was markedly dyspneic. Rales
were heard over both lungs.
INVESTIGATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS: CRP, liver enzymes and LDH were elevated. A lung
function test revealed a marked impairment of the diffusion capacity. The chest
x-ray showed a progression of the lung infiltrates. The informal medical data
exchange among the group members by a virtual social network abbreviated our
diagnostic workup substantially, since we heard that histoplasmosis had been
assumed in another group member. It turned out that the affected persons had
visited a colony of bats living in a cave inside the trunk of a tree. Antibodies 
against Histoplasma capsulatum were positive.
TREATMENT AND COURSE: We began a treatment with itraconazole. The condition
improved gradually; chest x-ray and lung function normalized after the 8 week
treatment.
CONCLUSION: Histoplasmosis with such a severe course is rare in immunocompetent
humans, which indicates that the inoculum must have been very high. Soil
contaminated with bats guano favours the proliferation of Histoplasma capsulatum.
Our case is also an illustration of how the widespread use of electronic media
can sometimes facilitate our work.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0032-1332870 
PMID: 23393000  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

