
1. J Neurol Surg A Cent Eur Neurosurg. 2014 May;75(3):170-6. doi:
10.1055/s-0032-1329268. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

Fungal spinal infection treated with percutaneous posterolateral endoscopic
surgery.

Iwata A(1), Ito M(2), Abumi K(3), Sudo H(2), Kotani Y(1), Shono Y(4), Minami
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Hokkaido University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.
(2)Department of Advanced Medicine for Spine and Spinal Cord Disorders, Hokkaido 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.
(3)Department of Spinal Reconstruction, Hokkaido University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.
(4)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Hokkaido Social Insurance Hospital, Sapporo,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Fungal infection in the spine is rare and its treatment is
challenging. Conservative treatment with antifungal drugs often fails, with the
result that surgical intervention is required in many cases. Since the general
conditions of patients with fungal infections is bad due to their comorbid
medical problems, surgical invasiveness should be minimized. We have reported the
effectiveness of posterolateral endoscopic surgery in treating pyogenic and
tuberculous spondylodiscitis. This study reports the clinical results of
posterolateral endoscopic surgery in treating fungal spinal infection.
METHODS: Between 2001 and 2009 we used posterolateral endoscopic surgery to treat
four patients with fungal spinal infection. All were males, three in their 50s,
and one in his 70s. The levels of infection were L2/3 and L5/S1 in one patient
each, and L3/4 in two patients. As for the Griffiths classification, there was
one patient in class 1, two in class 2, and one in class 3. Postoperative
follow-up periods ranged from 26 to 92 months. Treatment history before surgery, 
species of causative fungus, selection of antifungal drugs and their duration,
blood examinations, subsidence of infection, radiographic changes of the spine,
and various complications were all investigated.
RESULTS: All patients had been treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics followed
by anti-methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus drugs for more than several
months by previous doctors. From cultures of the tissues taken during endoscopic 
surgery, Candida species were detected in three patients and Paecilomyces species
in one. After endoscopic surgery, the patients were administered antifungal drugs
for 3 months, except for one patient who had a side effect. All patients showed
successful subsidence of infection at the final follow-up.
CONCLUSION: Fungal spinal infection occurred in patients with a lengthy use of
broad-spectrum antibiotics and anti-methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
drugs. Posterolateral endoscopic debridement and irrigation surgery successfully 
treated fungal spinal infection. This procedure is effective in treatment of
fungal spinal infection with minimal invasiveness.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0032-1329268 
PMID: 23512590  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

