
1. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2013 Jul;17(1):85-9. doi: 10.1093/icvts/ivt078. 
Epub 2013 Mar 25.

Suction-irrigation drainage: an underestimated therapeutic option for surgical
treatment of deep sternal wound infections.

Deschka H(1), Erler S, El-Ayoubi L, Vogel C, Vöhringer L, Wimmer-Greinecker G.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Cardiothoracic Surgery, Heart and Vessel Centre Bad Bevensen,
Bad Bevensen, Germany. deschkaheinz@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVES: Deep sternal wound infections are significant and severe
complications following cardiac surgery and substantially influence perioperative
morbidity and mortality. We present the experience of our department using two
different surgical treatments over a three-year period.
METHODS: Between January 2009 and December 2011, a total of 3274 cardiac
procedures with complete median sternotomy were performed in our department. In
94 patients (3%), a deep sternal wound infection occurred, including sternal
instability with consecutive surgical treatment. The patients either received
wound debridement with sternum refixation and suction-irrigation drainage (SID; n
= 72) or sternum refixation only (RF; n = 22) if there was sternal instability
with limited signs of infection. SID was routinely installed for 7 days: the
irrigation solution contained neomycin. In all cases, swabs were taken and
analysed. The different methods were evaluated in respect of their clinical
outcomes.
RESULTS: The success rate-defined as single, uncomplicated procedure-of the SID
treatment was 74%, compared with 59% of the isolated sternum refixation.
Complications included continuous infection, recurrence of sternal instability
and wound necrosis. Eighty-eight percent of the swabs in the SID group were
positive, compared with 32% in the sternal refixation only group. The dominating 
pathogenic germs were coagulase-negative staphylococci and staphylococcus aureus.
Mortality was 10% for the SID group and 5% for the RF group.
CONCLUSIONS: Contrary to accepted opinion, the suction-irrigation drainage is an 
appropriate therapy for deep sternal wound infections. Nevertheless, deep sternal
wound infections after cardiac surgery remain severe complications and are
related to increased morbidity and mortality.

DOI: 10.1093/icvts/ivt078 
PMCID: PMC3686369
PMID: 23529753  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

