
1. Fungal Genet Biol. 2013 Jul;56:98-106. doi: 10.1016/j.fgb.2013.03.003. Epub 2013 
Mar 30.

Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenases with very low catalytic activity are well conserved 
across kingdoms: IDOs of Basidiomycota.

Yuasa HJ(1), Ball HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Applied Science, Faculty of Science,
National University Corporation Kochi University, Kochi 780-8520, Japan.
julie@kochi-u.ac.jp

Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) is a tryptophan-degrading enzyme and is found
in animals, fungi and bacteria. In fungi, its primary role is to supply
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD(+)) via the kynurenine pathway. A number
of organisms possess more than one IDO gene, for example, mammals have IDO1 and
IDO2 genes. We previously reported that the Pezizomycotina fungi commonly possess
three types of IDO genes, IDOα, IDOβ and IDOγ. In this study, we surveyed the
nature of IDO genes from Basidiomycota fungi, which are categorized into three
subphyla (Agaricomycotina, Pucciniomycotina and Ustilaginomycotina). The
Agaricomycotina fungi generally have three types of IDO genes (IDOa, IDOb and
IDOc), which are distinct from Pezizomycotina three isozymes. Pucciniomycotina
and Ustilaginomycotina species possess two types of IDO; one forms a monophyletic
clade with Agaricomycotina IDOs in the phylogenetic tree, these IDOs are referred
to as "typical Basidiomycota IDOs". The other is IDOγ, which showed more than 40%
identity with Pezizomycotina and ciliate IDOγ. We previously demonstrated that
IDO2 in mammals and IDOγ in Perzizomycotina fungi have much lower catalytic
efficiencies in an in vitro assay, compared with the other IDO isoforms found in 
the respective species. We have developed a functional assay to determine whether
particular IDO enzymes have sufficient enzymatic activity to rescue a yeast
strain where IDO-deletion has rendered it auxotrophic for nicotinic acid. IDOα
and IDOβ showed comparable catalytic efficiency, both of them could function in
the Pezizomycotina fungal L-Trp metabolism. The catalytic efficiency and
functional capacity of the Basidiomycota IDOa and IDOb were similar to
Pezizomycotina IDOα/IDOβ. We found that Basidiomycota IDOc could not rescue the
nicotinic acid auxotroph, similar to other IDO enzymes with low catalytic
efficiency (mammalian IDO2 and most fungal IDOγ). Our study suggests that some
fungal IDO enzymes function in tryptophan metabolism and NAD(+) supply. In
contrast, other IDO enzymes do not possess sufficient Trp-metabolising capacity
to supply NAD(+). Although the role of these low catalytic efficiency IDOs is not
clear, it is interesting to note that IDO enzymes possessing these
characteristics have evolved across different kingdoms.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fgb.2013.03.003 
PMID: 23548750  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

