
1. Lett Appl Microbiol. 2013 Oct;57(4):317-24. doi: 10.1111/lam.12114. Epub 2013 Jun
26.

Evaluation of colorimetric loop-mediated isothermal amplification assay for
visual detection of Streptococcus agalactiae and Streptococcus iniae in tilapia.

Suebsing R(1), Kampeera J, Tookdee B, Withyachumnarnkul B, Turner W,
Kiatpathomchai W.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence for Shrimp Molecular Biology and Biotechnology (CENTEX
Shrimp), Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand; National
Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), National Science and
Technology Development Agency, Pathum Thani, Thailand.

Streptococcus agalactiae and Strep. iniae are bacterial pathogens that cause
streptococcosis in many fish species. An accelerated colorimetric loop-mediated
isothermal amplification (LAMP) assay with pre-addition of calcein was
established, and the transmission and detection of Strep. agalactiae and
Strep. iniae in tilapia under natural aquatic environment were investigated. A
positive reaction was observed by a colour change from orange to green through
the naked eyes after completion at 63°C for 30 min with 10 times higher
sensitivity than that of nested PCR assays and without cross-amplification with
other fish bacterial pathogens. All sample types of Nile and red tilapia
(broodstock, fertilized egg, fry) were Strep. agalactiae- and Strep. iniae
positive by this new method, implying that they could be vertically transmitted. 
With its application for screening broodstock and fry before stocking and for
monitoring fish health in grow-out ponds, the method would become very useful in 
fish farming industry.SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: The application of
colorimetric LAMP with pre-addition of calcein offers simple, rapid and sensitive
technique with applicability for small field laboratories. This technique
explored the possible vertical transmission mode of Strep. agalactiae and
Strep. iniae under natural aquatic environment. It could be such preliminary data
provided for the screening broodstock before breeding and/or the
specific-pathogen-free production.

© 2013 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/lam.12114 
PMID: 23746201  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

