
1. World J Gastrointest Pathophysiol. 2013 Aug 15;4(3):59-62. doi:
10.4291/wjgp.v4.i3.59.

Severe hemorrhagic colitis in a patient with chronic myeloid leukemia in the
blastic phase after dasatinib use.

Kmira Z(1), Nesrine BS, Houneida Z, Wafa BF, Aida S, Yosra BY, Monia Z, Sriha B, 
Abderrahim K.

Author information: 
(1)Zahra Kmira, Ben Sayed Nesrine, Ben Fredj Wafa, Ben Youssef Yosra, Zaier
Monia, Khelif Abderrahim, Department of Clinical Hematology, University Hospital 
Farhat Hached, Sousse 4000, Tunisia.

Dasatinib is a second-line tyrosine kinase inhibitor used in patients with
imatinib resistant or intolerant chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and Philadelphia 
chromosome-positive acute leukemia. Gastrointestinal bleeding may occur in up to 
7% of patients using dasatinib, although, severe dasatinib-related acute colitis 
had rarely been reported. Here, we present the case of a 36-year-old female who
progressed to acute myeloid leukemia after fourteen months of receiving imatinib 
for CML in the chronic phase and was treated with a dasatinib-containing
chemotherapy regimen. On day 34 of treatment, the patient developed moderate
abdominal pain and bloody diarrhea with mucous. Analyses of stool specimens were 
negative for parasites, Clostridium difficile, and other pathogenic bacteria. The
cytomegalovirus pp65 antigen was negative in her blood leukocytes. A colonoscopy 
revealed acute colitis, and a mucosal biopsy showed nonspecific colitis. The
patient was treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics, bowel rest and hydration,
and dasatinib treatment was stopped. Her bloody diarrhea improved within 72 h.
After confirming cytological remission, the patient received initial course of
consolidation, and dasatinib treatment was reinstated. However, hemorrhagic
colitis recurred. After discontinuing dasatinib, herhemorrhagic colitis
drastically improved and did not recur following the administration of nilotinib.
The characteristics of our patient suggest that dasatinib treatment can lead to
hemorrhagic colitis, which typically resolves after discontinuation of the drug.

DOI: 10.4291/wjgp.v4.i3.59 
PMCID: PMC3740261
PMID: 23946889 

