
1. Transfusion. 2014 Mar;54(3 Pt 2):900-9. doi: 10.1111/trf.12513. Epub 2013 Dec 4.

Novel flow cytometric screening method for bacterial contamination of red blood
cells: a proof-of-principle evaluation.

Vollmer T(1), Knabbe C, Dreier J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Laboratoriums- und Transfusionsmedizin, Herz- und Diabeteszentrum
Nordrhein-Westfalen, Universitätsklinik der Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bad
Oeynhausen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Platelet concentrates (PCs) are the major source of
transfusion-transmitted bacterial infection but the significantly higher number
of transfused red blood cells (RBCs) has resulted in a similar occurrence of
possible transfusion-associated bacterial infections as those of recipients
transfused with platelets. The aim of this study was adaption of the BactiFlow
(BF) flow cytometric rapid PC screening method for the detection of bacterial
contamination in RBCs.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: The BF assay was used to detect and count bacteria
based on esterase activity in viable cells in RBCs. The initial sample
preparation for RBCs included the lysis of RBCs, followed by enrichment of
bacteria by centrifugation and subsequent standard PC sample preparation.
Two-hundred RBC units were analyzed by BF and the BacT/Alert automated culture
system. Furthermore, RBCs were spiked with eight different bacteria to monitor
bacterial growth kinetics.
RESULTS: The BF showed an excellent correlation to conventional plate count
results after RBC sample processing. The diagnostic sensitivity of the assay was 
determined to fewer than 500 counts/mL. Analysis of RBC units showed concordant
negative results by BF and culture. Growth kinetics of bacteria were successfully
monitored using flow cytometry, showing that Yersinia enterocolitica or Serratia 
liquefaciens had the capability to grow in RBCs to high counts.
CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrates the successful modification and application of
a rapid flow cytometric screening method for bacterial contamination in RBCs. The
BF assay represents a powerful basic tool to study bacterial contamination,
potential screening strategies of RBCs, and the clinical outcome of screened RBCs
prepared for transfusion.

© 2013 AABB.

DOI: 10.1111/trf.12513 
PMID: 24304098  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

