
1. Adv Pharm Bull. 2013;3(1):45-50. doi: 10.5681/apb.2013.008. Epub 2013 Feb 7.

Attitudinal Changes Using Peer Education Training in the Prevention of HIV/AIDS: 
A Case Study of Youths in North Central Nigeria.

Abu-Saeed MB(1), Abu-Saeed K.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Department, University of Ilorin Teaching Hospital, Ilorin.
Nigeria.

PURPOSE: HIV/AIDS is a major public health issue. Studies have shown that young
people between the ages of 15 to 24 years accounts for more than 40% of new HIV
infections. However, new infections could be prevented if the desired impact is
made on young people through interventions such as effective peer education
program to improve their knowledge, attitude and practice. Therefore, this study 
is aimed at assessing the impact of peer education vis-a-vis attitudinal changes 
and practices on issues relating to HIV/AIDS among youths in North central
Nigeria.
METHODS: This classical experimental study was carried out in three stages, that 
is: pre-intervention, intervention and post-intervention stages among students of
Government High School, Ilorin between the ages of 15 and 24 years. The sample
size was 80 students each for study and control groups. Proportional gender
distribution was ensured in the selection and the sampling technique was
multistage sampling technique. Data collection was through semi structured self
administered pre and post evaluation questionnaire. Peer education training and
forth night mentoring sessions was conducted for the study group. Impact of the
intervention was assessed after eight weeks.
RESULTS: Analysis of the result shows that out of the sixteen questions asked on 
respondents' attitude, only four showed statistical significance between the
study and control group before the intervention which shot up to eleven after
intervention. Also, the frequency of those having bad practices regarding
prevention of HIV/AIDS also reduced after intervention. This reduction was much
more in many instances when compared to the control group.
CONCLUSION: This study has revealed that peer education training among youth can 
go a long way in educating them on issues relating to HIV/AIDS prevention. It can
also bring about attitudinal changes and better practices that may help in
reducing incidence and prevalence of HIV/AIDS in our society.

DOI: 10.5681/apb.2013.008 
PMCID: PMC3846034
PMID: 24312811 

