
1. BMC Microbiol. 2013 Dec 24;13:302. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-13-302.

Comparison of the Legionella pneumophila population structure as determined by
sequence-based typing and whole genome sequencing.

Underwood AP(1), Jones G, Mentasti M, Fry NK, Harrison TG.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Unit, Microbiology Services (Colindale), Public Health England,
61 Colindale Avenue, London, NW9 5EQ, UK. anthony.underwood@phe.gov.uk.

BACKGROUND: Legionella pneumophila is an opportunistic pathogen of humans where
the source of infection is usually from contaminated man-made water systems. When
an outbreak of Legionnaires' disease caused by L. pneumophila occurs, it is
necessary to discover the source of infection. A seven allele sequence-based
typing scheme (SBT) has been very successful in providing the means to attribute 
outbreaks of L. pneumophila to a particular source or sources. Particular
sequence types described by this scheme are known to exhibit specific phenotypes.
For instance some types are seen often in clinical cases but are rarely isolated 
from the environment and vice versa. Of those causing human disease some types
are thought to be more likely to cause more severe disease. It is possible that
the genetic basis for these differences are vertically inherited and associated
with particular genetic lineages within the population. In order to provide a
framework within which to test this hypothesis and others relating to the
population biology of L. pneumophila, a set of genomes covering the known
diversity of the organism is required.
RESULTS: Firstly, this study describes a means to group L. pneumophila strains
into pragmatic clusters, using a methodology that takes into consideration the
genetic forces operating on the population. These clusters can be used as a
standardised nomenclature, so those wishing to describe a group of strains can do
so. Secondly, the clusters generated from the first part of the study were used
to select strains rationally for whole genome sequencing (WGS). The data
generated was used to compare phylogenies derived from SBT and WGS. In general
the SBT sequence type (ST) accurately reflects the whole genome-based genotype.
Where there are exceptions and recombination has resulted in the ST no longer
reflecting the genetic lineage described by the whole genome sequence, the
clustering technique employed detects these sequence types as being admixed,
indicating their mixed inheritance.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that SBT is usually a good proxy for the genetic lineage
described by the whole genome, and therefore utility of SBT is still suitable
until the technology and economics of high throughput sequencing reach the point 
where routine WGS of L. pneumophila isolates for outbreak investigation is
feasible.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-13-302 
PMCID: PMC3877988
PMID: 24364868  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

