
1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Jan;10(1):e1003805. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003805. Epub
2014 Jan 2.

iNKT cell production of GM-CSF controls Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Rothchild AC(1), Jayaraman P(2), Nunes-Alves C(3), Behar SM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Immunology, Division of Medical Sciences, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America ; Division of Rheumatology,
Immunology, and Allergy, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America ; Department of Microbiology and 
Physiological Systems, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
Massachusetts, United States of America.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Physiological Systems, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Physiological Systems, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts, United States of America 
; Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Health Sciences, 
University of Minho, Braga, Portugal ; ICVS/3B's-PT Government Associate
Laboratory, Braga, Guimarães, Portugal.

Invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells are activated during infection, but how
they limit microbial growth is unknown in most cases. We investigated how iNKT
cells suppress intracellular Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) replication. When
co-cultured with infected macrophages, iNKT cell activation, as measured by CD25 
upregulation and IFNγ production, was primarily driven by IL-12 and IL-18. In
contrast, iNKT cell control of Mtb growth was CD1d-dependent, and did not require
IL-12, IL-18, or IFNγ. This demonstrated that conventional activation markers did
not correlate with iNKT cell effector function during Mtb infection. iNKT cell
control of Mtb replication was also independent of TNF and cell-mediated
cytotoxicity. By dissociating cytokine-driven activation and CD1d-restricted
effector function, we uncovered a novel mediator of iNKT cell antimicrobial
activity: GM-CSF. iNKT cells produced GM-CSF in vitro and in vivo in a
CD1d-dependent manner during Mtb infection, and GM-CSF was both necessary and
sufficient to control Mtb growth. Here, we have identified GM-CSF production as a
novel iNKT cell antimicrobial effector function and uncovered a potential role
for GM-CSF in T cell immunity against Mtb.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003805 
PMCID: PMC3879349
PMID: 24391492  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

