
1. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 27;9(1):e85140. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085140. eCollection
2014.

Characterization of cyanobacterial hydrocarbon composition and distribution of
biosynthetic pathways.

Coates RC(1), Podell S(1), Korobeynikov A(2), Lapidus A(3), Pevzner P(4), Sherman
DH(5), Allen EE(1), Gerwick L(1), Gerwick WH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Marine Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Scripps Institution of
Oceanography, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, United
States of America.
(2)Algorithmic Biology Laboratory, St. Petersburg Academic University, Russian
Academy of Sciences, St. Petersburg, Russia ; Department of Mathematics and
Mechanics, St. Petersburg State University, St. Petersburg, Russia.
(3)Algorithmic Biology Laboratory, St. Petersburg Academic University, Russian
Academy of Sciences, St. Petersburg, Russia ; Theodosius Dobzhansky Center for
Genome Bionformatics, St. Petersburg State University, St. Petersburg, Russia.
(4)Algorithmic Biology Laboratory, St. Petersburg Academic University, Russian
Academy of Sciences, St. Petersburg, Russia ; Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, United
States of America.
(5)Life Sciences Institute and Department of Medical Chemistry, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.
(6)Center for Marine Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Scripps Institution of
Oceanography, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, United
States of America ; Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, United States of
America.

Cyanobacteria possess the unique capacity to naturally produce hydrocarbons from 
fatty acids. Hydrocarbon compositions of thirty-two strains of cyanobacteria were
characterized to reveal novel structural features and insights into hydrocarbon
biosynthesis in cyanobacteria. This investigation revealed new double bond (2-
and 3-heptadecene) and methyl group positions (3-, 4- and 5-methylheptadecane)
for a variety of strains. Additionally, results from this study and literature
reports indicate that hydrocarbon production is a universal phenomenon in
cyanobacteria. All cyanobacteria possess the capacity to produce hydrocarbons
from fatty acids yet not all accomplish this through the same metabolic pathway. 
One pathway comprises a two-step conversion of fatty acids first to fatty
aldehydes and then alkanes that involves a fatty acyl ACP reductase (FAAR) and
aldehyde deformylating oxygenase (ADO). The second involves a polyketide synthase
(PKS) pathway that first elongates the acyl chain followed by decarboxylation to 
produce a terminal alkene (olefin synthase, OLS). Sixty-one strains possessing
the FAAR/ADO pathway and twelve strains possessing the OLS pathway were newly
identified through bioinformatic analyses. Strains possessing the OLS pathway
formed a cohesive phylogenetic clade with the exception of three Moorea strains
and Leptolyngbya sp. PCC 6406 which may have acquired the OLS pathway via
horizontal gene transfer. Hydrocarbon pathways were identified in
one-hundred-forty-two strains of cyanobacteria over a broad phylogenetic range
and there were no instances where both the FAAR/ADO and the OLS pathways were
found together in the same genome, suggesting an unknown selective pressure
maintains one or the other pathway, but not both.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085140 
PMCID: PMC3903477
PMID: 24475038  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

