
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2014 Feb 26;4:19. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2014.00019.
eCollection 2014.

Characterization of serine hydroxymethyltransferase GlyA as a potential source of
D-alanine in Chlamydia pneumoniae.

De Benedetti S(1), Bühl H(1), Gaballah A(1), Klöckner A(1), Otten C(1), Schneider
T(1), Sahl HG(1), Henrichfreise B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Microbiology Section, Institute for Medical Microbiology,
Immunology and Parasitology, University of Bonn Bonn, Germany.

For intracellular Chlamydiaceae, there is no need to withstand osmotic
challenges, and a functional cell wall has not been detected in these pathogens
so far. Nevertheless, penicillin inhibits cell division in Chlamydiaceae
resulting in enlarged aberrant bodies, a phenomenon known as chlamydial anomaly. 
D-alanine is a unique and essential component in the biosynthesis of bacterial
cell walls. In free-living bacteria like Escherichia coli, penicillin-binding
proteins such as monofunctional transpeptidases PBP2 and PBP3, the putative
targets of penicillin in Chlamydiaceae, cross-link adjacent peptidoglycan strands
via meso-diaminopimelic acid and D-Ala-D-Ala moieties of pentapeptide side
chains. In the absence of genes coding for alanine racemase Alr and DadX
homologs, the source of D-Ala and thus the presence of substrates for PBP2 and
PBP3 activity in Chlamydiaceae has puzzled researchers for years. Interestingly, 
Chlamydiaceae genomes encode GlyA, a serine hydroxymethyltransferase that has
been shown to exhibit slow racemization of D- and L-alanine as a side reaction in
E. coli. We show that GlyA from Chlamydia pneumoniae can serve as a source of
D-Ala. GlyA partially reversed the D-Ala auxotrophic phenotype of an E. coli
racemase double mutant. Moreover, purified chlamydial GlyA had racemase activity 
on L-Ala in vitro and was inhibited by D-cycloserine, identifying GlyA, besides
D-Ala ligase MurC/Ddl, as an additional target of this competitive inhibitor in
Chlamydiaceae. Proof of D-Ala biosynthesis in Chlamydiaceae helps to clarify the 
structure of cell wall precursor lipid II and the role of chlamydial
penicillin-binding proteins in the development of non-dividing aberrant
chlamydial bodies and persistence in the presence of penicillin.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2014.00019 
PMCID: PMC3935232
PMID: 24616885  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

