
1. Infect Immun. 2014 May;82(5):2087-97. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01578-13. Epub 2014 Mar
18.

Helminth-induced interleukin-4 abrogates invariant natural killer T cell
activation-associated clearance of bacterial infection.

Hsieh YJ(1), Fu CL, Hsieh MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford
University, Stanford, California, USA.

Helminth infections affect 1 billion people worldwide and render these
individuals susceptible to bacterial coinfection through incompletely understood 
mechanisms. This includes urinary tract coinfection by bacteria and Schistosoma
haematobium worms, the etiologic agent of urogenital schistosomiasis. To study
the mechanisms of S. haematobium-bacterial urinary tract coinfections, we
combined the first tractable model of urogenital schistosomiasis with an
established mouse model of bacterial urinary tract infection (UTI). A single
bladder exposure to S. haematobium eggs triggers interleukin-4 (IL-4) production 
and makes BALB/c mice susceptible to bacterial UTI when they are otherwise
resistant. Ablation of IL-4 receptor alpha (IL-4Rα) signaling restored the
baseline resistance of BALB/c mice to bacterial UTI despite prior exposure to S. 
haematobium eggs. Interestingly, numbers of NKT cells were decreased in coexposed
versus bacterially monoinfected bladders. Given that schistosome-induced,
non-natural killer T (NKT) cell leukocyte infiltration may dilute NKT cell
numbers in the bladders of coexposed mice without exerting a specific functional 
effect on these cells, we next examined NKT cell biology on a per-cell basis.
Invariant NKT (iNKT) cells from coexposed mice expressed less gamma interferon
(IFN-γ) per cell than did those from mice with UTI alone. Moreover, coexposure
resulted in lower CD1d expression in bladder antigen-presenting cells (APC) than 
did bacterial UTI alone in an IL-4Rα-dependent fashion. Finally, coexposed mice
were protected from prolonged bacterial infection by administration of
α-galactosylceramide, an iNKT cell agonist. Our findings point to a previously
unappreciated role for helminth-induced IL-4 in impairment of iNKT cell-mediated 
clearance of bacterial coexposure.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01578-13 
PMCID: PMC3993428
PMID: 24643536  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

