
1. Aging Cell. 2014 Aug;13(4):690-8. doi: 10.1111/acel.12222. Epub 2014 Apr 30.

Impaired neutrophil extracellular trap formation: a novel defect in the innate
immune system of aged individuals.

Hazeldine J(1), Harris P, Chapple IL, Grant M, Greenwood H, Livesey A, Sapey E,
Lord JM.

Author information: 
(1)MRC-ARUK Centre for Musculoskeletal Ageing Research, School of Immunity and
Infection, Birmingham University Medical School, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK.

Neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) are a recently discovered addition to the
defensive armamentarium of neutrophils, assisting in the immune response against 
rapidly dividing bacteria. Although older adults are more susceptible to such
infections, no study has examined whether aging in humans influences NET
formation. We report that TNF-α-primed neutrophils generate significantly more
NETs than unprimed neutrophils and that lipopolysaccharide (LPS)- and
interleukin-8 (IL-8)-induced NET formation exhibits a significant age-related
decline. NET formation requires generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), and 
this was also reduced in neutrophils from older donors identifying a mechanism
for reduced NET formation. Expression of IL-8 receptors (CXCR1 and CXCR2) and the
LPS receptor TLR4 was similar on neutrophils from young and old subjects, and
neutrophils challenged with phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA) showed no
age-associated differences in ROS or NET production. Taken together, these data
suggest a defect in proximal signalling underlies the age-related decline in NET 
and ROS generation. TNF-α priming involves signalling through p38 MAP kinase, but
activation kinetics were comparable in neutrophils from young and old donors. In 
a clinical setting, we assessed the capacity of neutrophils from young and older 
patients with chronic periodontitis to generate NETs in response to PMA and
hypochlorous acid (HOCL). Neutrophil extracellular trap generation to HOCL, but
not PMA, was lower in older periodontitis patients but not in comparison with
age-matched controls. Impaired NET formation is thus a novel defect of innate
immunity in older adults but does not appear to contribute to the increased
incidence of periodontitis in older adults.

© 2014 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley
& Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/acel.12222 
PMCID: PMC4326942
PMID: 24779584  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

