
1. Front Microbiol. 2014 May 16;5:225. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2014.00225. eCollection
2014.

Thaumarchaeal ammonium oxidation and evidence for a nitrogen cycle in a
subsurface radioactive thermal spring in the Austrian Central Alps.

Gerbl FW(1), Weidler GW(2), Wanek W(3), Erhardt A(4), Stan-Lotter H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg Salzburg, Austria.
(2)Bioanalyticum, Institut f체r Mikrobiologie und Hygiene, Dr. Reisinger e. U.
Perg, Austria.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Ecosystem Science, University of Vienna Vienna,
Austria.
(4)Analytec, Labor f체r Lebensmitteluntersuchung und Umweltanalytik Salzburg,
Austria.

Previous studies had suggested the presence of ammonium oxidizing Thaumarchaeota 
as well as nitrite oxidizing Bacteria in the subsurface spring called Franz Josef
Quelle (FJQ), a slightly radioactive thermal mineral spring with a temperature of
43.6-47째C near the alpine village of Bad Gastein, Austria. The microbiological
consortium of the FJQ was investigated for its utilization of nitrogen compounds 
and the putative presence of a subsurface nitrogen cycle. Microcosm experiments
made with samples from the spring water, containing planktonic microorganisms, or
from biofilms, were used in this study. Three slightly different media, enriched 
with vitamins and trace elements, and two incubation temperatures (30 and 40째C,
respectively) were employed. Under aerobic conditions, high rates of conversion
of ammonium to nitrite, as well as nitrite to nitrate were measured. Under
oxygen-limited conditions nitrate was converted to gaseous compounds. Stable
isotope probing with (15)NH4Cl or ((15)NH4)2SO4as sole energy sources revealed
incorporation of (15)N into community DNA. Genomic DNA as well as RNA were
extracted from all microcosms. The following genes or fragments of genes were
successfully amplified, cloned and sequenced by standard PCR from DNA extracts:
Ammonia monooxygenase subunit A (amoA), nitrite oxidoreductase subunits A and B
(nxrA and nxrB), nitrate reductase (narG), nitrite reductase (nirS), nitric oxide
reductases (cnorB and qnorB), nitrous oxide reductase (nosZ). Reverse
transcription of extracted total RNA and real-time PCR suggested the expression
of each of those genes. Nitrogen fixation (as probed with nifH and nifD) was not 
detected. However, a geological origin of NH(+) 4 in the water of the FJQ cannot 
be excluded, considering the silicate, granite and gneiss containing environment.
The data suggested the operation of a nitrogen cycle in the subsurface
environment of the FJQ.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2014.00225 
PMCID: PMC4032944
PMID: 24904540 

