
1. Lab Med. 2014 Summer;45(3):e123-7. doi: 10.1309/LMEQ9IE7AQQPGDGDOY.

Uncontrolled pneumonia in a 49-year-old white man.

Taghizadeh F(1), Raghuwanshi M RS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, University of North Florida, Jacksonville, FL
fortaghizadeh@gmail.com.
(2)Biology Department, University of North Florida, Jacksonville, FL Pathology
Department, Flagler Hospital, St. Augustine, FL.

PATIENT: A 49-year-old white man.
CHIEF COMPLAINT: Shortness of breath, fever, and ongoing unintended weight loss.
HISTORY OF PRESENT ILLNESS: The patient had arrived at the emergency department
of a hospital in St. Augustine, Florida with coughing and progressive shortness
of breath. He reported that he had been experiencing these symptoms for the past 
6 weeks. He was examined by his primary physician, who had prescribed him a
course of antibiotics and treated him on an outpatient basis. The patient
reported no improvement in his symptoms at present, despite the antibiotics. He
mentioned that he had traveled to St. Augustine, Florida approximately 10 days
previously. Medical personnel in the emergency department subsequently performed 
a chest x-ray on the patient, as well as computed tomography (CT) scanning of his
lymphadenopathy. MEDICAL AND FAMILY HISTORY: Positive for hypertension, diabetes 
mellitus, and osteoporosis. He reported that he has chewed 2 packs of chewing
tobacco per day for the past 30 years, occasionally drinks alcohol, and is a
nonsmoker with no known allergies.
FAMILY HISTORY: Noncontributory.
SOCIAL HISTORY: Noncontributory.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION RESULTS: The patient exhibited mild respiratory distress;
however, he was awake, alert, and oriented, with a temperature of 37.3°C. He also
exhibited poor respiratory effort with diffuse expiratory rhonchi. His heart rate
and heart rhythm were regular, with no murmurs, gallops, or rubs. His bowel
sounds were positive; he exhibited no organomegaly and no cyanosis, clubbing, or 
edema of his extremities.

DOI: 10.1309/LMEQ9IE7AQQPGDGDOY 
PMID: 25217516  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

