
1. Oncotarget. 2014 Nov 15;5(21):10949-58.

An NCR1-based chimeric receptor endows T-cells with multiple anti-tumor
specificities.

Tal Y(1), Yaakobi S(2), Horovitz-Fried M(2), Safyon E(2), Rosental B(3), Porgador
A(3), Cohen CJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Immunology and Immunotherapy, The Goodman Faculty of Life 
Sciences, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan 52900 Israel.
(2)Laboratory of Tumor Immunology and Immunotherapy, The Goodman Faculty of Life 
Sciences, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan 52900, Israel.
(3)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics, and the 
National Institute for Biotechnology in the Negev, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva 84105, Israel.

The Ral (Ras-like) GTP-binding proteins (RalA and RalB), as effectors of the
proto-oncogene Natural killer (NK) cells are an important component of the
anti-tumor response. Tumor recognition by NK cells was found to be partly
triggered by molecules termed natural cytotoxic receptors (NCRs). Adoptive
transfer of genetically-engineered tumor-reactive T-lymphocytes can mediate
remarkable tumor regressions mostly in melanoma and leukemia patients. Yet, the
application of such treatments to other cancers is needed and dependent on the
isolation of receptors that could facilitate efficient recognition of these
malignancies. Herein, we aimed at combining NK tumor recognition capability with 
the genetic modification of T-cells to provide the latter with a means to
recognize several tumors in a non-MHC restricted way. Consequently, we generated 
and evaluated several chimeric receptors based on the extracellular domain of
NCR1 (NKp46) fused to multiple signaling moieties and assess their antitumor
activity when retrovirally expressed in T-cells. Following co-culture with
different tumors, primary human T-lymphocytes expressing a chimeric NCR1 molecule
recognized target cells derived from lung, cervical carcinoma, leukemia and
pancreatic cancer. In addition, this receptor mediated an upregulation of surface
activation markers and significant antitumor cytotoxicity both in vitro and in
vivo. These results have meaningful implications for the immunotherapeutic
treatment of cancer using gene-modified T-cells.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.1919 
PMCID: PMC4279421
PMID: 25431955  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

