
1. Microb Cell Fact. 2014 Dec 30;13:179. doi: 10.1186/s12934-014-0179-z.

An engineered autotransporter-based surface expression vector enables efficient
display of Affibody molecules on OmpT-negative E. coli as well as
protease-mediated secretion in OmpT-positive strains.

Fleetwood F(1), Andersson KG(2), Ståhl S(3), Löfblom J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Protein technology, School of Biotechnology, KTH Royal Institute
of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden. filippaf@kth.se.
(2)Division of Protein technology, School of Biotechnology, KTH Royal Institute
of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden. ken2@kth.se.
(3)Division of Protein technology, School of Biotechnology, KTH Royal Institute
of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden. stefans@biotech.kth.se.
(4)Division of Protein technology, School of Biotechnology, KTH Royal Institute
of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden. lofblom@kth.se.

BACKGROUND: Cell display technologies (e.g. bacterial display) are attractive in 
directed evolution as they provide the option to use flow-cytometric cell sorting
for selection from combinatorial libraries. The aim of this study was to engineer
and investigate an expression vector system with dual functionalities: i)
recombinant display of Affibody libraries on Escherichia coli for directed
evolution and ii) small scale secreted production of candidate affinity proteins,
allowing initial downstream characterizations prior to subcloning.
Autotransporters form a class of surface proteins in Gram-negative bacteria that 
have potential for efficient translocation and tethering of recombinant passenger
proteins to the outer membrane. We engineered a bacterial display vector based on
the E. coli AIDA-I autotransporter for anchoring to the bacterial surface.
Potential advantages of employing autotransporters combined with E. coli as host 
include: high surface expression level, high transformation frequency,
alternative promoter systems available, efficient translocation to the outer
membrane and tolerance for large multi-domain passenger proteins.
RESULTS: The new vector was designed to comprise an expression cassette encoding 
for an Affibody molecule, three albumin binding domains for monitoring of surface
expression levels, an Outer membrane Protease T (OmpT) recognition site for
potential protease-mediated secretion of displayed affinity proteins and a
histidine-tag for purification. A panel of vectors with different promoters were 
generated and evaluated, and suitable cultivation conditions were investigated.
The results demonstrated a high surface expression level of the different
evaluated Affibody molecules, high correlation between target binding and surface
expression level, high signal-to-background ratio, efficient secretion and
purification of binders in OmpT-positive hosts as well as tight regulation of
surface expression for the titratable promoters. Importantly, a mock selection
using FACS from a 1:100,000 background yielded around 20,000-fold enrichment in a
single round and high viability of the isolated bacteria after sorting.
CONCLUSIONS: The new expression vectors are promising for combinatorial
engineering of Affibody molecules and the strategy for small-scale production of 
soluble recombinant proteins has the potential to increase throughput of the
entire discovery process.

DOI: 10.1186/s12934-014-0179-z 
PMCID: PMC4304625
PMID: 25547008  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

