
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2015 Mar;81(6):1959-65. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02981-14. Epub
2015 Jan 9.

Arsenite oxidase also functions as an antimonite oxidase.

Wang Q(1), Warelow TP(2), Kang YS(3), Romano C(3), Osborne TH(2), Lehr CR(4),
Bothner B(5), McDermott TR(3), Santini JM(6), Wang G(7).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.
(2)Institute of Structural & Molecular Biology, University College London,
London, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Land Resources & Environmental Sciences, Montana State
University, Bozeman, Montana, USA.
(4)Chemistry & Biochemistry Department, California Polytechnic State University, 
San Luis Obispo, California, USA.
(5)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Montana State University, Bozeman,
Montana, USA.
(6)Institute of Structural & Molecular Biology, University College London,
London, United Kingdom j.santini@ucl.ac.uk gejiao@mail.hzau.edu.cn.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, People's Republic of China j.santini@ucl.ac.uk
gejiao@mail.hzau.edu.cn.

Erratum in
    Appl Environ Microbiol. 2015 May 1;81(9):3278.

Arsenic and antimony are toxic metalloids and are considered priority
environmental pollutants by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Significant
advances have been made in understanding microbe-arsenic interactions and how
they influence arsenic redox speciation in the environment. However, even the
most basic features of how and why a microorganism detects and reacts to antimony
remain poorly understood. Previous work with Agrobacterium tumefaciens strain 5A 
concluded that oxidation of antimonite [Sb(III)] and arsenite [As(III)] required 
different biochemical pathways. Here, we show with in vivo experiments that a
mutation in aioA [encoding the large subunit of As(III) oxidase] reduces the
ability to oxidize Sb(III) by approximately one-third relative to the ability of 
the wild type. Further, in vitro studies with the purified As(III) oxidase from
Rhizobium sp. strain NT-26 (AioA shares 94% amino acid sequence identity with
AioA of A. tumefaciens) provide direct evidence of Sb(III) oxidation but also
show a significantly decreased Vmax compared to that of As(III) oxidation. The
aioBA genes encoding As(III) oxidase are induced by As(III) but not by Sb(III),
whereas arsR gene expression is induced by both As(III) and Sb(III), suggesting
that detection and transcriptional responses for As(III) and Sb(III) differ.
While Sb(III) and As(III) are similar with respect to cellular extrusion (ArsB or
Acr3) and interaction with ArsR, they differ in the regulatory mechanisms that
control the expression of genes encoding the different Ars or Aio activities. In 
summary, this study documents an enzymatic basis for microbial Sb(III) oxidation,
although additional Sb(III) oxidation activity also is apparent in this
bacterium.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02981-14 
PMCID: PMC4345363
PMID: 25576601  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

