
1. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 6;10(2):e0117263. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117263.
eCollection 2015.

Global 3D imaging of Yersinia ruckeri bacterin uptake in rainbow trout fry.

Ohtani M(1), Villumsen KR(1), Koppang EO(2), Raida MK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Group of Fish Diseases and Immunology, Department of Veterinary
Disease Biology, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of
Copenhagen, Frederiksberg, Denmark.
(2)Department of Basic Science and Aquatic Medicine, Norwegian School of
Veterinary Medicine, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Oslo, Norway.

Yersinia ruckeri is the causative agent of enteric redmouth disease (ERM) in
rainbow trout, and the first commercially available fish vaccine was an immersion
vaccine against ERM consisting of Y. ruckeri bacterin. The ERM immersion vaccine 
has been successfully used in aquaculture farming of salmonids for more than 35
years. The gills and the gastrointestinal (GI) tract are believed to be the
portals of antigen uptake during waterborne vaccination against ERM; however, the
actual sites of bacterin uptake are only partly understood. In order to obtain
insight into bacterin uptake during waterborne vaccination, optical projection
tomography (OPT) together with immunohistochemistry (IHC) was applied to
visualize bacterin uptake and processing in whole rainbow trout fry.
Visualization by OPT revealed that the bacterin was initially taken up via gill
lamellae from within 30 seconds post vaccination. Later, bacterin uptake was
detected on other mucosal surfaces such as skin and olfactory bulb from 5 to 30
minutes post vaccination. The GI tract was found to be filled with a complex of
bacterin and mucus at 3 hours post vaccination and the bacterin remained in the
GI tract for at least 24 hours. Large amounts of bacterin were present in the
blood, and an accumulation of bacterin was found in filtering lymphoid organs
such as spleen and trunk kidney where the bacterin accumulates 24 hours post
vaccination as demonstrated by OPT and IHC. These results suggest that bacterin
is taken up via the gill epithelium in the earliest phases of the bath exposure
and from the GI tract in the later phase. The bacterin then enters the blood
circulatory system, after which it is filtered by spleen and trunk kidney, before
finally accumulating in lymphoid organs where adaptive immunity against ERM is
likely to develop.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117263 
PMCID: PMC4319897
PMID: 25658600  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

