
1. Herz. 2015 Apr;40(2):265-278; quiz 279-80. doi: 10.1007/s00059-015-4217-3.

[Infective endocarditis].

[Article in German]

Horstkotte D(1), Piper C.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Kardiologie, Herz- und Diabeteszentrum Nordrhein-Westfalen,
Universitätsklinik der Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Georgstr. 11, 32545, Bad
Oeynhausen, Deutschland, akleemeyer@hdz-nrw.de.

Erratum in
    Herz. 2015 Jun;40(4):637-8.

Colonization of native cardiac valves or polymer implants, e.g. valves, conduits,
rings, electrode leads and polymer-associated endocarditis (PIE), by
microorganisms, primarily gram-positive bacteria (infective endocarditis),
constitutes a severe, prognostically unfavorable disease. Fever and in the
majority of cases development of a valve regurgitant murmur are clinical landmark
findings. The white blood cell count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and
C-reactive protein (CRP) are regularly elevated. With a normal CRP level,
infective endocarditis is extremely unlikely. Irrespective of body temperature,
at least three blood cultures (aerobic and anaerobic) should be taken and if
initiation of antimicrobial therapy is urgent, 1 h apart before therapy is
initiated. Identification of the pathogen to the species level and testing
antimicrobial susceptibility to antibiotics by a quantitative hemodilution test, 
not with agar diffusion tests, are obligatory. A minimum inhibitory concentration
should be administered for antibiotics and usual combinations of antibiotics with
an expected synergistic potential. Streptococci, staphylococci and enterococci
are the most frequent causative organisms. Immediate initiation of transthoracic 
echocardiography (TTE) is mandatory followed by transesophageal echocardiography 
if imaging quality is poor, involvement of intracardiac implants is possible or
TTE is insufficient to establish the diagnosis. An insufficiently long
antimicrobial therapy promotes recurrent infections, thus a 4-week treatment is
standard, while in special cases (e.g. PIE) treatment for 6 weeks should be the
rule. If typical complications of infective endocarditis, such as uncontrolled
local infection, systemic thromboembolism, central nervous involvement,
development of a severe valve incompetence or mitral kissing vegetation in
primary aortic valve endocarditis occur, urgent surgical intervention should be
considered. If cardiac implants are involved, early surgical removal followed by 
a 6-week antimicrobial treatment is the rule. Adequate and timely diagnosis and
treatment are the key to improve the overall prognosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00059-015-4217-3 
PMID: 25822422  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

