
1. Nat Neurosci. 2015 May;18(5):647-56. doi: 10.1038/nn.3995. Epub 2015 Apr 6.

Regulation of chromatin accessibility and Zic binding at enhancers in the
developing cerebellum.

Frank CL(1), Liu F(2), Wijayatunge R(2), Song L(3), Biegler MT(2), Yang MG(2),
Vockley CM(4), Safi A(3), Gersbach CA(5), Crawford GE(6), West AE(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA. [2] Center for Genomic and Computational
Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Department of Neurobiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina, USA.
(3)Center for Genomic and Computational Biology, Duke University Medical Center, 
Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(4)1] Center for Genomic and Computational Biology, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA. [2] Department of Cell Biology, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(5)1] Center for Genomic and Computational Biology, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA. [2] Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(6)1] Center for Genomic and Computational Biology, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA. [2] Department of Pediatrics, Division of
Molecular Genetics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.

To identify chromatin mechanisms of neuronal differentiation, we characterized
chromatin accessibility and gene expression in cerebellar granule neurons (CGNs) 
of the developing mouse. We used DNase-seq to map accessibility of cis-regulatory
elements and RNA-seq to profile transcript abundance across postnatal stages of
neuronal differentiation in vivo and in culture. We observed thousands of
chromatin accessibility changes as CGNs differentiated, and verified, using
H3K27ac ChIP-seq, reporter gene assays and CRISPR-mediated activation, that many 
of these regions function as neuronal enhancers. Motif discovery in
differentially accessible chromatin regions suggested a previously unknown role
for the Zic family of transcription factors in CGN maturation. We confirmed the
association of Zic with these elements by ChIP-seq and found, using knockdown,
that Zic1 and Zic2 are required for coordinating mature neuronal gene expression 
patterns. Together, our data reveal chromatin dynamics at thousands of gene
regulatory elements that facilitate the gene expression patterns necessary for
neuronal differentiation and function.

DOI: 10.1038/nn.3995 
PMCID: PMC4414887
PMID: 25849986  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

