
1. BMC Genomics. 2015 May 30;16:422. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1608-z.

Quantitative proteomic analysis of host--pathogen interactions: a study of
Acinetobacter baumannii responses to host airways.

Méndez JA(1), Mateos J(2), Beceiro A(3), Lopez M(4), Tomás M(5), Poza M(6), Bou
G(7).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Division, INIBIC-Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de la
Coruña, A Coruña, Spain. jose.antonio.mendez.arredondo@sergas.es.
(2)Grupo de Proteomica-PBR2-ProteoRed/ISCIII-Servicio de Reumatologia, A Coruña, 
Spain. Jesus.Mateos.Martin@sergas.es.
(3)Microbiology Division, INIBIC-Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de la
Coruña, A Coruña, Spain. Alejandro.Beceiro.Casas@sergas.es.
(4)Microbiology Division, INIBIC-Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de la
Coruña, A Coruña, Spain. malopedi@gmail.com.
(5)Microbiology Division, INIBIC-Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de la
Coruña, A Coruña, Spain. MA.del.Mar.Tomas.Carmona@sergas.es.
(6)Microbiology Division, INIBIC-Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de la
Coruña, A Coruña, Spain. Margarita.Poza.Dominguez@sergas.es.
(7)Microbiology Division, INIBIC-Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de la
Coruña, A Coruña, Spain. German.Bou.Arevalo@sergas.es.

BACKGROUND: Acinetobacter baumannii is a major health problem. The most common
infection caused by A. baumannii is hospital acquired pneumonia, and the
associated mortality rate is approximately 50%. Neither in vivo nor ex vivo
expression profiling has been performed at the proteomic or transcriptomic level 
for pneumonia caused by A. baumannii. In this study, we characterized the
proteome of A. baumannii under conditions that simulate those found in the
airways, to gain some insight into how A. baumannii adapts to the host and to
improve knowledge about the pathogenesis and virulence of this bacterium. A
clinical strain of A. baumannii was grown under different conditions: in the
presence of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from infected rats, of RAW 264.7 cells
to simulate conditions in the respiratory tract and in control conditions. We
used iTRAQ labelling and LC-MALDI-TOF/TOF to investigate how A. baumannii
responds on exposure to macrophages/BALF.
RESULTS: 179 proteins showed differential expression. In both models, proteins
involved in the following processes were over-expressed: (i) pathogenesis and
virulence (OmpA, YjjK); (ii) cell wall/membrane/envelope biogenesis (MurC); (iii)
energy production and conversion (acetyl-CoA hydrolase); and (iv) translation
(50S ribosomal protein L9). Proteins involved in the following were
under-expressed: (i) lipid metabolism (short-chain dehydrogenase); (ii) amino
acid metabolism and transport (aspartate aminotransferase); (iii) unknown
function (DNA-binding protein); and (iv) inorganic ion transport and metabolism
(hydroperoxidase).
CONCLUSIONS: We observed alterations in cell wall synthesis and identified 2
upregulated virulence-associated proteins with >15 peptides/protein in both ex
vivo models (OmpA and YjjK), suggesting that these proteins are fundamental for
pathogenesis and virulence in the airways. This study is the first comprehensive 
overview of the ex vivo proteome of A. baumannii and is an important step towards
identification of diagnostic biomarkers, novel drug targets and potential vaccine
candidates in the fight against pneumonia caused by A. baumannii.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-015-1608-z 
PMCID: PMC4449591
PMID: 26025090  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

