
1. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2016 Jan;54(1):81-90. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2015-0044OC.

Facilitation of Allergic Sensitization and Allergic Airway Inflammation by
Pollen-Induced Innate Neutrophil Recruitment.

Hosoki K(1), Aguilera-Aguirre L(2), Brasier AR(1)(3), Kurosky A(3)(4), Boldogh
I(2)(3), Sur S(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Allergy and Immunology.
(2)2 Department of Microbiology and Immunology.
(3)3 Sealy Center for Molecular Medicine, and.
(4)4 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas.

Neutrophil recruitment is a hallmark of rapid innate immune responses. Exposure
of airways of naive mice to pollens rapidly induces neutrophil recruitment. The
innate mechanisms that regulate pollen-induced neutrophil recruitment and the
contribution of this neutrophilic response to subsequent induction of allergic
sensitization and inflammation need to be elucidated. Here we show that ragweed
pollen extract (RWPE) challenge in naive mice induces C-X-C motif ligand (CXCL)
chemokine synthesis, which stimulates chemokine (C-X-C motif) receptor 2
(CXCR2)-dependent recruitment of neutrophils into the airways. Deletion of
Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) abolishes CXCL chemokine secretion and neutrophil
recruitment induced by a single RWPE challenge and inhibits induction of allergic
sensitization and airway inflammation after repeated exposures to RWPE. Forced
induction of CXCL chemokine secretion and neutrophil recruitment in mice lacking 
TLR4 also reconstitutes the ability of multiple challenges of RWPE to induce
allergic airway inflammation. Blocking RWPE-induced neutrophil recruitment in
wild-type mice by administration of a CXCR2 inhibitor inhibits the ability of
repeated exposures to RWPE to stimulate allergic sensitization and airway
inflammation. Administration of neutrophils derived from naive donor mice into
the airways of Tlr4 knockout recipient mice after each repeated RWPE challenge
reconstitutes allergic sensitization and inflammation in these mice. Together
these observations indicate that pollen-induced recruitment of neutrophils is
TLR4 and CXCR2 dependent and that recruitment of neutrophils is a critical
rate-limiting event that stimulates induction of allergic sensitization and
airway inflammation. Inhibiting pollen-induced recruitment of neutrophils, such
as by administration of CXCR2 antagonists, may be a novel strategy to prevent
initiation of pollen-induced allergic airway inflammation.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2015-0044OC 
PMCID: PMC4742928
PMID: 26086549  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

