
1. Biol Pharm Bull. 2015;38(9):1430-3. doi: 10.1248/bpb.b15-00323. Epub 2015 Jul 9.

Successful Colistin Treatment of Multidrug-Resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Infection Using a Rapid Method for Determination of Colistin in Plasma:
Usefulness of Therapeutic Drug Monitoring.

Yamada T(1), Ishiguro N, Oku K, Higuchi I, Nakagawa I, Noguchi A, Yasuda S,
Fukumoto T, Iwasaki S, Akizawa K, Furugen A, Yamaguchi H, Iseki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Hokkaido University Hospital.

A 56-year-old woman with systemic lupus erythematosus had bacteremia due to
multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa (MDRP). She was initially treated with
imipenem-cilastatin, tobramycin, and aztreonam; however, MDRP was still detected 
intermittently in her plasma. Multidrug-susceptibility tests demonstrated that
MDRP was susceptible only to colistin. Therefore, in addition to these
antibiotics, the administration of intravenous colistin methanesulfonate, a
prodrug formula of colistin, was started at a daily dose of 2.5 mg/kg (as
colistin base activity). The initial dose setting was based on the patient's
renal function (baseline creatinine clearance=32.7 mL/min). After initiating
colistin, the patient's C-reactive protein levels gradually decreased. Blood
cultures showed no evidence of MDRP on days 8, 14, and 22 after colistin
initiation. However, the patient's renal function went from bad to worse owing to
septic shock induced by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)
infection. A few days later, the trough plasma levels of colistin were 7.88 mg/L,
which appeared to be higher than expected. After decreasing the colistin dose,
the patient's renal function gradually improved. On the final day of colistin
treatment, the plasma levels decreased to 0.60 mg/L. MDRP could not be detected
in blood culture after colistin treatment. Therefore, we successfully treated a
case of bloodstream infection due to MDRP by therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) of
colistin. It is suggested that the monitoring of blood colistin levels by liquid 
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry can contribute to safer, more effective
antimicrobial therapy of MDRP because TDM facilitates quick decisions on dose
adjustments.

DOI: 10.1248/bpb.b15-00323 
PMID: 26155936  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

