
1. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 17;10(9):e0138162. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138162.
eCollection 2015.

Transcriptome Analysis of Poplar during Leaf Spot Infection with Sphaerulina spp.

Foster AJ(1), Pelletier G(1), Tanguay P(1), Séguin A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Forest Service, Natural Resources Canada, Laurentian Forestry Centre,
Québec, Canada.

Diseases of poplar caused by the native fungal pathogen Sphaerulina musiva and
related species are of growing concern, particularly with the increasing interest
in intensive poplar plantations to meet growing energy demands. Sphaerulina
musiva is able to cause infection on leaves, resulting in defoliation and canker 
formation on stems. To gain a greater understanding of the different responses of
poplar species to infection caused by the naturally co-evolved Sphaerulina
species, RNA-seq was conducted on leaves of Populus deltoides, P. balsamifera and
P. tremuloides infected with S. musiva, S. populicola and a new undescribed
species, Ston1, respectively. The experiment was designed to contain the pathogen
in a laboratory environment, while replicating disease development in commercial 
plantations. Following inoculation, trees were monitored for disease symptoms,
pathogen growth and host responses. Genes involved in phenylpropanoid, terpenoid 
and flavonoid biosynthesis were generally upregulated in P. balsamifera and P.
tremuloides, while cell wall modification appears to play an important role in
the defense of P. deltoides. Poplar defensive genes were expressed early in P.
balsamifera and P. tremuloides, but their expression was delayed in P. deltoides,
which correlated with the rate of disease symptoms development. Also, severe
infection in P. balsamifera led to leaf abscission. This data gives an insight
into the large differences in timing and expression of genes between poplar
species being attacked by their associated Sphaerulina pathogen.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138162 
PMCID: PMC4575021
PMID: 26378446  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

