
1. FASEB J. 2016 Feb;30(2):884-94. doi: 10.1096/fj.15-275826. Epub 2015 Nov 2.

Cathelicidins positively regulate pancreatic β-cell functions.

Sun J(1), Xu M(2), Ortsäter H(2), Lundeberg E(2), Juntti-Berggren L(2), Chen
YQ(2), Haeggström JZ(2), Gudmundsson GH(2), Diana J(2), Agerberth B(2).

Author information: 
(1)*State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, School of Food Science
and Technology and Synergetic Innovation Center of Food Safety and Nutrition,
Jiangnan University, Wuxi, China; Biomedical Centre, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden; Diabetes Research Unit, Department of Clinical Science and Education,
Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, and The Rolf Luft Research Center for 
Diabetes and Endocrinology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Biomedical 
Center, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland; Institut National de la Santé 
et de la Recherche Médicale, Institute Necker-Enfants Malades, Centre National de
la Recherche Scientifique, Paris, France; **Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne 
Paris Cité, Paris, France; and Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of
Clinical Microbiology, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital
Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden jiasun@jiangnan.edu.cn.
(2)*State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, School of Food Science
and Technology and Synergetic Innovation Center of Food Safety and Nutrition,
Jiangnan University, Wuxi, China; Biomedical Centre, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden; Diabetes Research Unit, Department of Clinical Science and Education,
Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, and The Rolf Luft Research Center for 
Diabetes and Endocrinology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Biomedical 
Center, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland; Institut National de la Santé 
et de la Recherche Médicale, Institute Necker-Enfants Malades, Centre National de
la Recherche Scientifique, Paris, France; **Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne 
Paris Cité, Paris, France; and Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of
Clinical Microbiology, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital
Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.

Cathelicidins are pleiotropic antimicrobial peptides largely described for innate
antimicrobial defenses and, more recently, immunomodulation. They are shown to
modulate a variety of immune or nonimmune host cell responses. However, how
cathelicidins are expressed by β cells and modulate β-cell functions under
steady-state or proinflammatory conditions are unknown. We find that
cathelicidin-related antimicrobial peptide (CRAMP) is constitutively expressed by
rat insulinoma β-cell clone INS-1 832/13. CRAMP expression is inducible by
butyrate or phenylbutyric acid and its secretion triggered upon inflammatory
challenges by IL-1β or LPS. CRAMP promotes β-cell survival in vitro via the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and by modulating expression of
antiapoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins: p-Bad, Bcl-2, and Bcl-xL. Also via EGFR,
CRAMP stimulates glucose-stimulated insulin secretion ex vivo by rat islets. A
similar effect is observed in diabetes-prone nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice.
Additional investigation under inflammatory conditions reveals that CRAMP
modulates inflammatory responses and β-cell apoptosis, as measured by
prostaglandin E2 production, cyclooxygenases (COXs), and caspase activation.
Finally, CRAMP-deficient cnlp(-/-) mice exhibit defective insulin secretion, and 
administration of CRAMP to prediabetic NOD mice improves blood glucose clearance 
upon glucose challenge. Our finding suggests that cathelicidins positively
regulate β-cell functions and may be potentially used for intervening β-cell
dysfunction-associated diseases.

© FASEB.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.15-275826 
PMID: 26527065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

