
1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2015 Nov;56(12):7109-21. doi: 10.1167/iovs.15-17567.

Early Onset Ultrastructural and Functional Defects in RPE and Photoreceptors of a
Stargardt-Like Macular Dystrophy (STGD3) Transgenic Mouse Model.

Kuny S(1), Cho WJ(2), Dimopoulos IS(1), Sauvé Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada 3Department of Physiology, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

PURPOSE: We investigated the interplay between photoreceptors expressing mutant
ELOVL4 (responsible for Stargardt-like disease, STGD3) and RPE in the initial
stages of retinal degeneration.
METHODS: Using electron microscopy and electroretinogram (ERG), we assessed RPE
and photoreceptor ultrastructure and function in transgenic ELOVL4 (TG1-2 line;
TG) and wild-type (WT) littermates. Experiments were done at P30, 1 month before 
photoreceptor loss in TG and at P90, a time point with approximately 30% rod
loss. To further elucidate the mechanism underlying our ultrastructural and
functional results, we undertook Western blotting and immunohistochemistry of key
proteins involved in phagocytosis of outer segments by RPE cells.
RESULTS: Firstly, we showed that in TG mouse photoreceptors, endogenous ELOVL4
protein is not mislocalized in the presence of the mutated ELOVL4 protein.
Secondly, we found evidence of RPE toxicity at P30, preceding any photoreceptor
loss. Pathology in RPE cells was exacerbated at P90. Furthermore, higher
proportions of phagosomes remained at the apical side of RPE cells. Subretinal
lysosomal deposits were immunopositive for phagocytic proteins. Ultrastructural
analysis of photoreceptor (rod) outer segments showed disrupted surface
morphology consisting of disc spacing irregularities. Finally, rods and RPE
exhibited signs of dysfunction as measured by the ERG a-wave leading edge (P30)
and c-wave (P90), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of human mutant ELOVL4 in transgenic mouse
photoreceptors leads to early outer segment disc pathology and RPE cytotoxicity. 
Defective processing of these abnormal discs by RPE cells ultimately may be
responsible for outer segment truncation, photoreceptor death, and vision loss.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.15-17567 
PMID: 26529045  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

