
1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2016 Feb;71(2):290-5. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkv339. Epub 2015 
Nov 15.

The Innovative Medicines Initiative's New Drugs for Bad Bugs programme: European 
public-private partnerships for the development of new strategies to tackle
antibiotic resistance.

Kostyanev T(1), Bonten MJ(2), O'Brien S(3), Steel H(4), Ross S(4), François B(5),
Tacconelli E(6), Winterhalter M(7), Stavenger RA(8), Karlén A(9), Harbarth S(10),
Hackett J(11), Jafri HS(12), Vuong C(13), MacGowan A(14), Witschi A(15),
Angyalosi G(16), Elborn JS(17), deWinter R(2), Goossens H(18).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Vaccine & Infectious Disease Institute,
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(2)Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Centre 
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Infection Global Medicines Development, AstraZeneca, Macclesfield, Cheshire,
UK.
(4)Infectious Diseases Therapy Area Unit, GlaxoSmithKline, London, UK.
(5)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Dupuytren, Limoges, France.
(6)Internal Medicine 1, Infectious Diseases, DZIF-TTU-HAARBI, University Hospital
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(7)School of Engineering & Science, Jacobs University Bremen, Bremen, Germany.
(8)Antibacterial Discovery Performance Unit, GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, PA,
USA.
(9)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(10)University of Geneva and Faculty of Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland.
(11)Infection Global Medicines Development, AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.
(12)MedImmune, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.
(13)AiCuris GmbH & Co. KG, Wuppertal, Germany.
(14)Bristol Centre for Antimicrobial Research & Evaluation, Department of
Infection Sciences, North Bristol NHS Trust and Public Health England, Bristol,
UK.
(15)Basilea Pharmaceutica International Ltd, Basel, Switzerland.
(16)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(17)School of Medicine, Dentistry & Biomedical Sciences, Queen's University
Belfast, Belfast, UK.
(18)Department of Medical Microbiology, Vaccine & Infectious Disease Institute,
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium Laboratory of Medical Microbiology,
University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium herman.goossens@uza.be.

Antibiotic resistance (ABR) is a global public health threat. Despite the
emergence of highly resistant organisms and the huge medical need for new drugs, 
the development of antibacterials has slowed to an unacceptable level worldwide. 
Numerous government and non-government agencies have called for public-private
partnerships and innovative funding mechanisms to address this problem. To
respond to this public health crisis, the Innovative Medicines Initiative Joint
Undertaking programme has invested more than €660 million, with a goal of matched
contributions from the European Commission and the European Federation of
Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations, in the development of new
antibacterial strategies. The New Drugs for Bad Bugs (ND4BB) programme, an
Innovative Medicines Initiative, has the ultimate goal to boost the fight against
ABR at every level from basic science and drug discovery, through clinical
development to new business models and responsible use of antibiotics. Seven
projects have been launched within the ND4BB programme to achieve this goal. Four
of them will include clinical trials of new anti-infective compounds, as well as 
epidemiological studies on an unprecedented scale, which will increase our
knowledge of ABR and specific pathogens, and improve the designs of the clinical 
trials with new investigational drugs. The need for rapid concerted action has
driven the funding of seven topics, each of which should add significantly to
progress in the fight against ABR. ND4BB unites expertise and provides a platform
where the commitment and resources required by all parties are streamlined into a
joint public-private partnership initiative of unprecedented scale.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkv339 
PMID: 26568581  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

