
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2016 Feb;120(2):346-54. doi: 10.1111/jam.13009.

Analytical performances of food microbiology laboratories - critical analysis of 
7 years of proficiency testing results.

Abdel Massih M(1), Planchon V(2), Polet M(3), Dierick K(3), Mahillon J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Food and Environmental Microbiology, Earth and Life Institute,
Université catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.
(2)Agriculture and Natural Environment Department, Walloon Agricultural Research 
Centre (CRA-W), Gembloux, Belgium.
(3)Institute of Public Health - Scientific service Foodborne pathogens, Brussels,
Belgium.

AIM: Based on the results of 19 food microbiology proficiency testing (PT)
schemes, this study aimed to assess the laboratory performances, to highlight the
main sources of unsatisfactory analytical results and to suggest areas of
improvement.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The 2009-2015 results of REQUASUD and IPH PT, involving a
total of 48 laboratories, were analysed. On average, the laboratories failed to
detect or enumerate foodborne pathogens in 3·0% of the tests. Thanks to a close
collaboration with the PT participants, the causes of outliers could be
identified in 74% of the cases. The main causes of erroneous PT results were
either pre-analytical (handling of the samples, timing of analysis), analytical
(unsuitable methods, confusion of samples, errors in colony counting or
confirmation) or postanalytical mistakes (calculation and encoding of results).
CONCLUSIONS: PT schemes are a privileged observation post to highlight analytical
problems, which would otherwise remain unnoticed. In this perspective, this
comprehensive study of PT results provides insight into the sources of systematic
errors encountered during the analyses.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: This study draws the attention of the
laboratories to the main causes of analytical errors and suggests practical
solutions to avoid them, in an educational purpose. The observations support the 
hypothesis that regular participation to PT, when followed by feed-back and
appropriate corrective actions, can play a key role in quality improvement and
provide more confidence in the laboratory testing results.

© 2015 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/jam.13009 
PMID: 26599261  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

