
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2016 Feb;120(2):355-65. doi: 10.1111/jam.13004.

Evaluation of the oenological suitability of grapes grown using biodynamic
agriculture: the case of a bad vintage.

Guzzon R(1), Gugole S(1), Zanzotti R(1), Malacarne M(1), Larcher R(1), von
Wallbrunn C(2), Mescalchin E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Edmund Mach Foundation, San Michele all'Adige, Italy.
(2)Institute for Microbiology and Biochemistry, Hochschule Geisenheim University,
Geisenheim, Germany.

AIMS: We compare the evolution of the microbiota of grapes grown following
conventional or biodynamic protocols during the final stage of ripening and wine 
fermentation in a year characterized by adverse climatic conditions.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The observations were made in a vineyard subdivided into two
parts, cultivated using a biodynamic and traditional approach in a year which saw
a combination of adverse events in terms of weather, creating the conditions for 
extensive proliferation of vine pests. The biodynamic approach was severely
tested, as agrochemicals were not used and vine pests were counteracted with
moderate use of copper, sulphur and plant extracts and with intensive use of
agronomical practices aimed at improving the health of the vines. Agronomic,
microbiological and chemical testing showed that the response of the vineyard
cultivated using a biodynamic approach was comparable or better to that of vines 
cultivated using the conventional method.
CONCLUSIONS: The work suggests that biodynamic cultivation of the grapevine may
be sustainable even in difficult conditions, representing an interesting
alternative to traditional vine-growing approaches.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: This theme is topical and of interest to
winemakers and consumers today, but is not easy to study due to the difficulties 
in finding vineyards with homogeneous characteristics, cultivated using different
agronomical protocols. The particular climatic conditions observed in 2014 made
this year a rare model, making it possible to verify the applicability of
biodynamics to vine growing. The strict experimental plan gave results
particularly useful for understanding the features of grape microbiota in a
biodynamic context.

© 2015 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/jam.13004 
PMID: 26600207  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

