
1. Antimicrob Resist Infect Control. 2015 Nov 25;4:53. doi:
10.1186/s13756-015-0094-z. eCollection 2015.

A cross-sectional observational study about media and infection control
practices: are photographic portrayals of healthcare workers setting a bad
example?

Spierings EJ(1), Spierings PT(2), Nabuurs-Franssen M(3), Hopman J(4), Perencevich
E(5), Voss A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Radboud University of Nijmegen, Medical School, Platolaan 340, 6525 KD
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Spierings Medische Techniek B.V., Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases,
Canisius-Wilhelmina Hospital, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology, Radboud University of Nijmegen, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases and Epidemiology, University of Iowa Hospital 
and Clinics, Iowa City, IA USA.
(6)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases,
Canisius-Wilhelmina Hospital, Nijmegen, The Netherlands ; Department of Medical
Microbiology, Radboud University of Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Attempts to increase compliance with infection control practices are 
complex and are - in part - based on attempts to change behaviour. In particular,
the behaviour of significant peers (role models) has been shown to be a strong
motivator. While role models within the working environment are obviously the
most important, some experts suggest that media and public display cannot be
ignored. The aim of this present study was to examine the display of technique
recommended by current infection control guidelines including the "bare below the
elbow" principle, which is considered a basic requirement for good infection
control in many countries, in sets of professional stock photos.
FINDINGS: From 20 random photo-stock websites we selected pictures with search
terms "doctor and patient" and "nurse and patient". In all selected photos a
doctor or nurse and a patient were presented, healthcare workers (HCWs) were
wearing white coats or uniforms, and their arms were visible. Each photo was
evaluated with regard to: closure of white coat, sleeve length, personal clothing
covered, hairstyle and presence of a wristwatch, bracelet and/or ring. Overall,
1600 photos were evaluated. The most common mistakes were with regard to HCWs'
white coats/uniforms. Eighty-nine percent of the photos containing doctor's
images were considered incorrect while 28 % of nurse-containing photos were
incorrect.
CONCLUSIONS: The results seem to reflect the real world with only 40 % displaying
correct behaviour with doctors being worse than nurses. It seems that the
stereotypical image of a doctor does not agree with the current infection control
guidelines. If we aim for higher compliance rates of HCWs, we need to change the 
social image of doctors and improve production, selection and display of stock
photo images.

DOI: 10.1186/s13756-015-0094-z 
PMCID: PMC4660788
PMID: 26613018 

