
1. Am J Infect Control. 2015 Dec 1;43(12):1270-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ajic.2015.07.013.

A pilot study into locating the bad bugs in a busy intensive care unit.

Whiteley GS(1), Knight JL(2), Derry CW(3), Jensen SO(2), Vickery K(4), Gosbell
IB(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Science and Health, University of Western Sydney, Richmond, NSW
Australia; Whiteley Corporation Pty Ltd, North Sydney, NSW Australia. Electronic 
address: gsw@whiteley.com.au.
(2)School of Medicine, University of Western Sydney, Campbelltown, NSW Australia;
Ingham Institute for Applied Medical Research, Antibiotic Resistance and Mobile
Elements Group, Campbelltown, NSW Australia; Molecular Medicine Research Group,
Liverpool, NSW Australia.
(3)School of Science and Health, University of Western Sydney, Richmond, NSW
Australia.
(4)Surgical Infection Research Group, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW Australia.
(5)School of Medicine, University of Western Sydney, Campbelltown, NSW Australia;
Ingham Institute for Applied Medical Research, Antibiotic Resistance and Mobile
Elements Group, Campbelltown, NSW Australia; Molecular Medicine Research Group,
Liverpool, NSW Australia; Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases,
Sydney South West Pathology Service, Liverpool, NSW Australia.

Comment in
    Am J Infect Control. 2016 Jun 1;44(6):732-3.

BACKGROUND: The persistence of multidrug-resistant organisms (MDROs) within an
intensive care unit (ICU) possibly contained within dry surface biofilms, remains
a perplexing confounder and is a threat to patient safety. Identification of
residential locations of MDRO within the ICU is an intervention for which new
scientific approaches may assist in finding potential MDRO reservoirs.
METHOD: This study investigated a new approach to sampling using a more
aggressive environmental swabbing technique of high-touch objects (HTOs) and
surfaces, aided by 2 commercially available adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
bioluminometers.
RESULTS: A total of 13 individual MDRO locations identified in this pilot study. 
The use of ATP bioluminometers was significantly associated with the
identification of 12 of the 13 individual MDRO locations. The MDRO recovery and
readings from the 2 ATP bioluminometers were not significantly correlated with
distinct cutoffs for each ATP device, and there was no correlation between the 2 
ATP devices.
CONCLUSION: The specific MDRO locations were not limited to the immediate patient
surroundings or to any specific HTO or type of surface. The use of ATP testing
helped rapidly identify the soiled locations for MDRO sampling. The greatest
density of positive MDRO locations was around and within the clinical staff work 
station.

Copyright © 2015 Association for Professionals in Infection Control and
Epidemiology, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajic.2015.07.013 
PMID: 26654232  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

