
1. Allergol Int. 2016 Jan;65(1):3-15. doi: 10.1016/j.alit.2015.09.002. Epub 2015 Oct
23.

Mast cells and IgE in defense against venoms: Possible "good side" of allergy?

Galli SJ(1), Starkl P(2), Marichal T(3), Tsai M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and the Sean N. Parker Center for Allergy Research,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA; Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA, USA. Electronic address: sgalli@stanford.edu.
(2)CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of
Sciences, Vienna, Austria; Department of Medicine 1, Laboratory of Infection
Biology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(3)GIGA-Research and Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Liege, Liege, 
Belgium.
(4)Department of Pathology and the Sean N. Parker Center for Allergy Research,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.

Physicians think of mast cells and IgE primarily in the context of allergic
disorders, including fatal anaphylaxis. This 'bad side' of mast cells and IgE is 
so well accepted that it can be difficult to think of them in other contexts,
particularly those in which they may have beneficial functions. However, there is
evidence that mast cells and IgE, as well as basophils (circulating granulocytes 
whose functions partially overlap with those of mast cells), can contribute to
host defense as components of adaptive type 2 immune responses to helminths,
ticks and certain other parasites. Accordingly, allergies often are
conceptualized as "misdirected" type 2 immune responses, in which IgE antibodies 
are produced against any of a diverse group of apparently harmless antigens, as
well as against components of animal venoms. Indeed, certain unfortunate patients
who have become sensitized to venoms develop severe IgE-associated allergic
reactions, including fatal anaphylaxis, upon subsequent venom exposure. In this
review, we will describe evidence that mast cells can enhance innate resistance
to reptile or arthropod venoms during a first exposure to such venoms. We also
will discuss findings indicating that, in mice which survive an initial encounter
with venom, acquired type 2 immune responses, IgE antibodies, the high affinity
IgE receptor (FcɛRI), and mast cells can contribute to acquired resistance to the
lethal effects of both honeybee venom and Russell's viper venom. These findings
support the hypothesis that mast cells and IgE can help protect the host against 
venoms and perhaps other noxious substances.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.alit.2015.09.002 
PMID: 26666482  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

