
1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2016 Jun;137(6):1841-1851.e2. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2015.10.033. Epub 2015 Dec 17.

The mannose receptor negatively modulates the Toll-like receptor 4-aryl
hydrocarbon receptor-indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase axis in dendritic cells
affecting T helper cell polarization.

Salazar F(1), Hall L(1), Negm OH(2), Awuah D(1), Tighe PJ(1), Shakib F(1),
Ghaemmaghami AM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, School of Life Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom.
(2)Division of Immunology, School of Life Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom; Medical
Microbiology and Immunology Department, Mansoura University, Mansoura, Egypt.
(3)Division of Immunology, School of Life Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom. Electronic
address: amg@nottingham.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Dendritic cells (DCs) are key players in the induction and
re-elicitation of TH2 responses to allergens. We have previously shown that
different C-type lectin receptors on DCs play a major role in allergen
recognition and uptake. In particular, mannose receptor (MR), through modulation 
of Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 signaling, can regulate indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase
(IDO) activity, favoring TH2 responses. Interestingly, the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR), a ligand-dependent transcription factor with an emerging role in 
immune modulation, has been implicated in IDO activation in response to TLR
stimulation.
OBJECTIVE: Here we investigated how allergens and lectins modulate the
TLR4-AhR-IDO axis in human monocyte-derived DCs.
METHODS: Using a combination of genomics, proteomics, and immunologic studies, we
investigated the role of MR and AhR in IDO regulation and its effect on T helper 
cell differentiation.
RESULTS: We have demonstrated that LPS induces both IDO isoforms (IDO1 and IDO2) 
in DCs, with partial involvement of AhR. Additionally, we found that, like
mannan, different airborne allergens can effectively downregulate TLR4-induced
IDO1 and IDO2 expression, most likely through binding to the MR. Mannose-based
ligands were also able to downregulate IL-12p70 production by DCs, affecting T
helper cell polarization. Interestingly, AhR and some components of the
noncanonical nuclear factor κB pathway were shown to be downregulated after MR
engagement, which could explain the regulatory effects of MR on IDO expression.
CONCLUSION: Our work demonstrates a key role for MR in the modulation of the
TLR4-AhR-IDO axis, which has a significant effect on DC behavior and the
development of immune responses against allergens.

Copyright © 2015 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2015.10.033 
PMID: 26703454  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

