
1. J Indian Soc Periodontol. 2015 Nov-Dec;19(6):683-6. doi:
10.4103/0972-124X.164744.

Evaluation of oral health attitude and behavior among a group of dental students 
in Puducherry, India: A preliminary cross-sectional study.

Muthu J(1), Priyadarshini G(1), Muthanandam S(2), Ravichndran S(1), Balu P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Indira Gandhi Institute of Dental Sciences,
Puducherry, India.
(2)Department of Oral Pathology and Microbiology, Indira Gandhi Institute of
Dental Sciences, Puducherry, India.

CONTEXT: Oral behavior reflects individual perception on oral health. Behavior
and attitude of oral health providers, especially dentists, towards oral health
affect their capacity to deliver oral health care services. This attitude plays a
important role in determining the oral health condition of population.
AIM: The purpose of this study is to evaluate the oral health attitude and
behavior among a group of dental students in India and to find any gender-based
differences in terms of oral health attitude and behavior.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 282 dental students of Indira Gandhi Institute 
of Dental Sciences, SBV University, Puducherry, India participated in the study. 
A simplified English version of Hiroshima University Dental-Behavioral Inventory 
(HU-DBI) was adopted.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS USED: SSP version 2.80 software was used to analyze the
data. Chi-square test was used to find the differences in the distribution of
"yes" among students from the different academic year as well as between male and
female students. Statistical significance was set at P ≤ 0.05.
RESULTS: Statistical significance was observed for the responses between the
students from different academic years brushing frequency, careful brushing of
teeth, using brush with hard bristles, careful self-evaluation of brushing and
satisfied appearance of teeth and gums. Male students preferred to use a tooth
brush with hard bristles and regular mouth washes than female students. With
regards to worrying about bad breath, male students had more "yes" responses than
females.
CONCLUSIONS: Oral health attitude and behavior increased with the increasing
levels of dental education, and no significant differences were observed among
male and female dental students.

DOI: 10.4103/0972-124X.164744 
PMCID: PMC4753715
PMID: 26941521 

