
1. BMJ Open. 2016 Apr 20;6(4):e009956. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-009956.

Multicentre open-label randomised controlled trial to compare colistin alone with
colistin plus meropenem for the treatment of severe infections caused by
carbapenem-resistant Gram-negative infections (AIDA): a study protocol.

Dickstein Y(1), Leibovici L(2), Yahav D(3), Eliakim-Raz N(3), Daikos GL(4),
Skiada A(4), Antoniadou A(5), Carmeli Y(6), Nutman A(7), Levi I(6), Adler A(8),
Durante-Mangoni E(9), Andini R(9), Cavezza G(9), Mouton JW(10), Wijma RA(11),
Theuretzbacher U(12), Friberg LE(13), Kristoffersson AN(13), Zusman O(2), Koppel 
F(1), Dishon Benattar Y(1), Altunin S(14), Paul M(15); AIDA consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel.
(2)Department of Medicine E, Rabin Medical Center, Beilinson Hospital, Petah
Tikva, Israel Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Ramat-Aviv,
Israel.
(3)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Ramat-Aviv, Israel Unit of
Infectious Diseases, Rabin Medical Center, Beilinson Hospital, Petah Tikva,
Israel.
(4)First Department of Medicine, University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(5)Fourth Department of Medicine, University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(6)Division of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical
Centre, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(7)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Ramat-Aviv, Israel Division 
of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Centre, Tel
Aviv, Israel.
(8)Microbiology Laboratory, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Centre, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
(9)Internal Medicine, Second University of Naples, Monaldi Hospital-AORN dei
Colli, Napoli, Italy.
(10)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Erasmus MC,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands Department of Medical Microbiology, Radboudumc,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(11)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Erasmus MC,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(12)Center for Anti-Infective Agents, Vienna, Austria.
(13)Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden.
(14)Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
(15)Division of Infectious Diseases, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel
Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.

INTRODUCTION: The emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria has driven renewed
interest in older antibacterials, including colistin. Previous studies have shown
that colistin is less effective and more toxic than modern antibiotics. In vitro 
synergy studies and clinical observational studies suggest a benefit of combining
colistin with a carbapenem. A randomised controlled study is necessary for
clarification.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: This is a multicentre, investigator-initiated, open-label, 
randomised controlled superiority 1:1 study comparing colistin monotherapy with
colistin-meropenem combination therapy for infections caused by
carbapenem-resistant Gram-negative bacteria. The study is being conducted in 6
centres in 3 countries (Italy, Greece and Israel). We include patients with
hospital-associated and ventilator-associated pneumonia, bloodstream infections
and urosepsis. The primary outcome is treatment success at day 14, defined as
survival, haemodynamic stability, stable or improved respiratory status for
patients with pneumonia, microbiological cure for patients with bacteraemia and
stability or improvement of the Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score.
Secondary outcomes include 14-day and 28-day mortality as well as other clinical 
end points and safety outcomes. A sample size of 360 patients was calculated on
the basis of an absolute improvement in clinical success of 15% with combination 
therapy. Outcomes will be assessed by intention to treat. Serum colistin samples 
are obtained from all patients to obtain population pharmacokinetic models.
Microbiological sampling includes weekly surveillance samples with analysis of
resistance mechanisms and synergy. An observational trial is evaluating patients 
who met eligibility requirements but were not randomised in order to assess
generalisability of findings.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: The study was approved by ethics committees at each
centre and informed consent will be obtained for all patients. The trial is being
performed under the auspices of an independent data and safety monitoring
committee and is included in a broad dissemination strategy regarding revival of 
old antibiotics.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT01732250 and 2012-004819-31; Pre-results.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-009956 
PMCID: PMC4838684
PMID: 27098822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

