
1. J Hosp Infect. 2016 Jul;93(3):223-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jhin.2016.02.006. Epub 2016
Feb 27.

Heater-cooler units: contamination of crucial devices in cardiothoracic surgery.

Götting T(1), Klassen S(2), Jonas D(2), Benk Ch(3), Serr A(4), Wagner D(5), Ebner
W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Infection Prevention and Hospital Epidemiology, University Medical Center
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. Electronic address:
tim.goetting@uniklinik-freiburg.de.
(2)Infection Prevention and Hospital Epidemiology, University Medical Center
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(3)University Heart Center Freiburg - Bad Krozingen, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University Medical Center
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(5)Center for Infectious Diseases and Travel Medicine and Center for Chronic
Immunodeficiency, University Medical Center Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Several cases of Mycobacterium chimaera infection have recently been 
reported in cardiosurgical patients. So-called heater-cooler units (HCUs) used in
cardiosurgical procedures are suspected to be the reservoir for pathogen growth
and dissemination.
AIM: To assess the contamination status of HCUs at our facility.
METHODS: Air sampling for mycobacteria was conducted at different distances from 
the machines and in the area around the operating table. Air sampling was also
conducted for non-fermenters as a surrogate parameter for water-associated
pathogens.
FINDINGS: Mycobacterium chimaera was detected in the water tanks of the HCUs.
When the devices were operating, M. chimaera was also found in their exhaust air,
as well as in the area around the operating table. Non-fermenters were identified
at different distances from the running HCU and the area around the operating
table. Cultures remained negative when the devices were switched off.
CONCLUSIONS: Exhaust air from HCUs may be a pathway of pathogen transmission to
patients undergoing open chest heart surgery. Although, for technical reasons,
relocation of HCUs is difficult to achieve, only strict separation of the HCU
from the operating room appears to enhance patient safety. Using non-fermenters
as a surrogate parameter may be considered a viable option for a timely risk
assessment. The design of HCUs should be modified to keep susceptibility to
contamination at a minimum.

Copyright © 2016 The Healthcare Infection Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhin.2016.02.006 
PMID: 27101883  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

