
1. BMC Fam Pract. 2016 May 18;17:56. doi: 10.1186/s12875-016-0452-9.

Uncertainty in clinical practice - an interview study with Swedish GPs on
patients with sore throat.

Andre M(1)(2), Gröndal H(3), Strandberg EL(4)(5), Brorsson A(4)(6), Hedin
K(4)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Health Sciences, Family Medicine, Linköping
University, Linköping, Sweden. malin.e.andre@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences, Family Medicine and
Preventive Medicine, Box 564, 75122, Uppsala, Sweden. malin.e.andre@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Sociology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(4)Lund University, Department of Clinical Sciences, Family Medicine, Malmö,
Sweden.
(5)Blekinge Centre of Competence, Blekinge County Council, Karlskrona, Sweden.
(6)Center for Primary Health Care Research, Skåne Region, Malmö, Sweden.
(7)Department of Research and Development, Kronoberg County Council, Växjö,
Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Uncertainty is inevitable in clinical practice in primary care and
tolerance for uncertainty and concern for bad outcomes has been shown to vary
between physicians. Uncertainty is a factor for inappropriate antibiotic
prescribing. Evidence-based guidelines as well as near-patient tests are
suggested tools to decrease uncertainty in the management of patients with
respiratory tract infections. The aim of this paper was to describe strategies
for coping with uncertainty in patients with pharyngotonsillitis in relation to
guidelines.
METHODS: An interview study was conducted among a strategic sample of 25 general 
practitioners (GPs).
RESULTS: All GPs mentioned potential dangerous differential diagnoses and
complications. Four strategies for coping with uncertainty were identified, one
of which was compliant with guidelines, "Adherence to guidelines", and three were
idiosyncratic: "Clinical picture and C-reactive protein (CRP)", "Expanded
control", and "Unstructured". The residual uncertainty differed for the different
strategies: in the strategy "Adherence to guidelines" and "Clinical picture and
CRP" uncertainty was avoided, based either on adherence to guidelines or on the
clinical picture and near-patient CRP; in the strategy "Expanded control"
uncertainty was balanced based on expanded control; and in the strategy
"Unstructured" uncertainty prevailed in spite of redundant examination and
anamnesis.
CONCLUSION: The majority of the GPs avoided uncertainty and deemed they had no
problems. Their strategies either adhered to guidelines or comprised excessive
use of tests. Thus use of guidelines as well as use of more near-patient tests
seemed associated to reduced uncertainty, although the later strategy at the
expense of compliance to guidelines. A few GPs did not manage to cope with
uncertainty or had to put in excessive work to control uncertainty.

DOI: 10.1186/s12875-016-0452-9 
PMCID: PMC4870808
PMID: 27188438  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

