
1. Sci Rep. 2016 May 24;6:26490. doi: 10.1038/srep26490.

Reducing hypoxia and inflammation during invasive pulmonary aspergillosis by
targeting the Interleukin-1 receptor.

Gresnigt MS(1)(2), Rekiki A(3), Rasid O(1), Savers A(4), Jouvion G(5), Dannaoui
E(6), Parlato M(7), Fitting C(1), Brock M(4), Cavaillon JM(1), van de Veerdonk
FL(2), Ibrahim-Granet O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unité de recherche Cytokines &Inflammation, Institut Pasteur, Paris.
(2)Department of Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.
(3)PFID, Bioaster, Institut Pasteur, Paris France.
(4)Fungal Genetics and Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of
Nottingham, UK.
(5)Unité Histopathologie Humaine et Modèles Animaux, Institut Pasteur, Paris
France.
(6)Paris-Descartes University, Faculty of Medicine, APHP, European Georges
Pompidou Hospital, Parasitology-Mycology Unit, Microbiology department, Paris,
France.
(7)INSERM UMR S1163 Institut Imagine, Laboratoire d'Immunité Intestinale, Paris
France.

Hypoxia as a result of pulmonary tissue damage due to unresolved inflammation
during invasive pulmonary aspergillosis (IPA) is associated with a poor outcome. 
Aspergillus fumigatus can exploit the hypoxic microenvironment in the lung, but
the inflammatory response required for fungal clearance can become severely
disregulated as a result of hypoxia. Since severe inflammation can be detrimental
to the host, we investigated whether targeting the interleukin IL-1 pathway could
reduce inflammation and tissue hypoxia, improving the outcome of IPA. The
interplay between hypoxia and inflammation was investigated by in vivo imaging of
hypoxia and measurement of cytokines in the lungs in a model of corticosteroid
immunocompromised and in Cxcr2 deficient mice. Severe hypoxia was observed
following Aspergillus infection in both models and correlated with development of
pulmonary inflammation and expression of hypoxia specific transcripts. Treatment 
with IL-1 receptor antagonist reduced hypoxia and slightly, but significantly
reduced mortality in immunosuppressed mice, but was unable to reduce hypoxia in
Cxcr2(-/-) mice. Our data provides evidence that the inflammatory response during
invasive pulmonary aspergillosis, and in particular the IL-1 axis, drives the
development of hypoxia. Targeting the inflammatory IL-1 response could be used as
a potential immunomodulatory therapy to improve the outcome of aspergillosis.

DOI: 10.1038/srep26490 
PMCID: PMC4877709
PMID: 27215684  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

