
1. J Environ Manage. 2016 Sep 15;180:359-65. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2016.05.029.
Epub 2016 Jun 1.

Identification of arsenic resistant endophytic bacteria from Pteris vittata roots
and characterization for arsenic remediation application.

Tiwari S(1), Sarangi BK(2), Thul ST(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Environmental Engineering Research Institute, Council of Scientific
and Industrial Research, Nehru Marg, Nagpur 440020, India.
(2)National Environmental Engineering Research Institute, Council of Scientific
and Industrial Research, Nehru Marg, Nagpur 440020, India. Electronic address:
bk_sarangi@neeri.res.in.

Mitigation of arsenic (As) pollution is a topical environmental issue of high R&D
priority. The present investigation was carried out to isolate As resistant
endophytes from the roots of Indian ecotype Pteris vittata and characterize their
As transformation and tolerance ability, plant growth promoting characteristics
and their role to facilitate As uptake by the plant. A total of 8 root endophytes
were isolated from plants grown in As amended soil (25 mg As kg(-1)). These
isolates were studied for minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC), arsenite
As(III) - arsenate As(V) transformation ability, plant growth promoting (PGP)
characteristics through siderophore, indole acetic acid (IAA) production,
phosphatase, ACC deaminase activity, and presence of arsenite oxidase (aox) and
arsenite transporter (arsB) genes. On the basis of 16S rDNA sequence analysis,
these isolates belong to Proteobacteria, Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes families
under the genera Bacillus, Enterobacter, Stenotrophomonas and Rhizobium. All
isolates were found As tolerant, of which one isolates showed highest tolerance
up to 1000 mg L(-1) concentration in SLP medium. Five isolates were IAA positive 
with highest IAA production up to 60 mg/L and two isolates exhibited siderophore 
activity. Phosphatase activity was shown by only one isolate while ACC deaminase 
activity was absent in all the isolates. The As transformation study by silver
nitrate test showed that only two strains had dual characteristics of As(III)
oxidation and As (V) reduction, four strains exhibited either of the
characteristics while other two didn't confirmed any of the two characteristics. 
Presence of aox gene was detected in two strains and arsB gene in six isolates.
The strain with highest As tolerance also showed highest IAA production and
occurrence of arsB gene. Present investigation may open up further scope of
utilizing these endophytes for up gradation of phytoextraction process.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2016.05.029 
PMID: 27257820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

