
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Sep 14;6:33123. doi: 10.1038/srep33123.

Chemokine CXCL1 mediated neutrophil recruitment: Role of glycosaminoglycan
interactions.

Sawant KV(1), Poluri KM(1), Dutta AK(1), Sepuru KM(1), Troshkina A(1), Garofalo
RP(2)(3), Rajarathnam K(1)(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Texas Medical
Branch, Galveston, TX, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston,
TX, USA.
(4)Sealy Center for Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics, The University
of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA.

The chemokine CXCL1/MGSA plays a pivotal role in the host immune response by
recruiting and activating neutrophils for microbial killing at the tissue site.
CXCL1 exists reversibly as monomers and dimers, and mediates its function by
binding glycosaminoglycans (GAG) and CXCR2 receptor. We recently showed that both
monomers and dimers are potent CXCR2 agonists, the dimer is the high-affinity GAG
ligand, lysine and arginine residues located in two non-overlapping domains
mediate GAG interactions, and there is extensive overlap between GAG and
receptor-binding domains. To understand how these structural properties influence
in vivo function, we characterized peritoneal neutrophil recruitment of a trapped
monomer and trapped dimer and a panel of WT lysine/arginine to alanine mutants.
Monomers and dimers were active, but WT was more active indicating synergistic
interactions promote recruitment. Mutants from both domains showed reduced GAG
heparin binding affinities and reduced neutrophil recruitment, providing
compelling evidence that both GAG-binding domains mediate in vivo trafficking.
Further, mutant of a residue that is involved in both GAG binding and receptor
signaling showed the highest reduction in recruitment. We conclude that GAG
interactions and receptor activity of CXCL1 monomers and dimers are fine-tuned to
regulate neutrophil trafficking for successful resolution of tissue injury.

DOI: 10.1038/srep33123 
PMCID: PMC5021969
PMID: 27625115  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

