
1. Environ Monit Assess. 2016 Nov;188(11):602. Epub 2016 Oct 5.

Quantification of Vibrio species in oysters from the Gulf of Mexico with two
procedures based on MPN and PCR.

Barrera-Escorcia G(1), Wong-Chang I(2), Fernández-Rendón CL(2), Botello AV(2),
Gómez-Gil B(3), Lizárraga-Partida ML(4).

Author information: 
(1)Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana - Iztapalapa, México City, México.
gube@xanum.uam.mx.
(2)Instituto de Ciencias del Mar y Limnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, México City, México.
(3)Centro de Investigación en Alimentación y Desarrollo, A.C, Mazatlán, Sin,
México.
(4)Centro de Investigación Científica y de Educación Superior de Ensenada,
Ensenada, B.C, México.

Oysters can accumulate potentially pathogenic water bacteria. The objective of
this study was to compare two procedures to quantify Vibrio species present in
oysters to determine the most sensitive method. We analyzed oyster samples from
the Gulf of Mexico, commercialized in Mexico City. The samples were inoculated in
tubes with alkaline peptone water (APW), based on three tubes and four dilutions 
(10-1 to 10-4). From these tubes, the first quantification of Vibrio species was 
performed (most probable number (MPN) from tubes) and bacteria were inoculated by
streaking on thiosulfate-citrate-bile salts-sucrose (TCBS) petri dishes. Colonies
were isolated for a second quantification (MPN from dishes). Polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) was used to determine species with specific primers: ompW for
Vibrio cholerae, tlh for Vibrio parahaemolyticus, and VvhA for Vibrio vulnificus.
Simultaneously, the sanitary quality of oysters was determined. The
quantification of V. parahaemolyticus was significantly higher in APW tubes than 
in TCBS dishes. Regarding V. vulnificus counts, the differences among both
approaches were not significant. In contrast, the MPNs of V. cholerae obtained
from dishes were higher than from tubes. The quantification of MPNs through PCR
of V. parahaemolyticus and V. vulnificus obtained from APW was sensitive and
recommendable for the detection of both species. In contrast, to quantify V.
cholerae, it was necessary to isolate colonies on TCBS prior PCR. Culturing in
APW at 42 °C could be an alternative to avoid colony isolation. The MPNs of V.
cholerae from dishes was associated with the bad sanitary quality of the samples.

DOI: 10.1007/s10661-016-5620-9 
PMID: 27709461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

