
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Nov 8;6:36568. doi: 10.1038/srep36568.

LRBA is Essential for Allogeneic Responses in Bone Marrow Transplantation.

Park MY(1), Sudan R(1), Srivastava N(1), Neelam S(1), Youngs C(1), Wang JW(2),
Engelman RW(3)(4)(5), Kerr WG(1)(6)(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology &Immunology, SUNY Upstate Medical University,
Syracuse, NY, US.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, 
US.
(3)Department of Pathology &Cell Biology, University of South Florida, Tampa,
Florida, US.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, US.
(5)H. Lee Moffitt Comprehensive Cancer Center &Research Institute; University of 
South Florida, Tampa, FL.
(6)Department of Biochemistry &Molecular Biology, SUNY Upstate Medical
University, Syracuse, NY, US.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY, US.
(8)Chemistry Department, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13210 USA.

The PH-BEACH-WD40 (PBW) protein family members play a role in coordinating
receptor signaling and intracellular vesicle trafficking.
LPS-Responsive-Beige-like Anchor (LRBA) is a PBW protein whose immune function
remains elusive. Here we show that LRBA-null mice are viable, but exhibit
compromised rejection of allogeneic, xenogeneic and missing self bone-marrow
grafts. Further, we demonstrate that LRBA-null Natural Killer (NK) cells exhibit 
impaired signaling by the key NK activating receptors, NKp46 and NKG2D. However, 
induction of IFN-γ by cytokines remains intact, indicating LRBA selectively
facilitates signals by receptors for ligands expressed on the surface of NK
targets. Surprisingly, LRBA limits immunoregulatory cell numbers in tissues where
GvHD is primed or initiated, and consistent with this LRBA-null mice also
demonstrate resistance to lethal GvHD. These findings demonstrate that LRBA is
redundant for host longevity while being essential for both host and
donor-mediated immune responses and thus represents a unique and novel molecular 
target in transplant immunology.

DOI: 10.1038/srep36568 
PMCID: PMC5099895
PMID: 27824136  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: W.G.K. is co-inventor on an issued patent (owned 
by the Univ. of South Florida) that concerns the targeting of LRBA expression in 
cancer using RNA interference. Remaining authors declare no competing financial
interests.

