
1. J Phys Chem B. 2017 Mar 23;121(11):2407-2419. doi: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.6b11623. Epub
2017 Mar 10.

Chimeric Autofluorescent Proteins as Photophysical Model System for Multicolor
Bimolecular Fluorescence Complementation.

Peter S(1), Oven-Krockhaus SZ(1), Veerabagu M(1), Rodado VM(1), Berendzen KW(1), 
Meixner AJ(2), Harter K(1), Schleifenbaum FE(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Plant Molecular Biology, Plant Physiology, University of Tübingen ,
Auf der Morgenstelle 32, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.
(2)Institute for Physical and Theoretical Chemistry , Auf der Morgenstelle 18,
72076 Tübingen, Germany.
(3)Berthold Technologies GmbH & Co. KG , Calmbacherstr. 22, 75323 Bad Wildbad,
Germany.

The yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) is frequently used in a protein
complementation assay called bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC), and
is employed to visualize protein-protein interactions. In this analysis, two
different, nonfluorescent fragments of YFP are genetically attached to proteins
of interest. Upon interaction of these proteins, the YFP fragments are brought
into proximity close enough to reconstitute their original structure, enabling
fluorescence. BiFC allows for a straightforward readout of protein-protein
interactions and furthermore facilitates their functional investigation by in
vivo imaging. Furthermore, it has been observed that the available color range in
BiFC can be extended upon complementing fragments of different proteins that are,
like YFP, derived from the Aequorea victoria green fluorescent protein, thereby
allowing for a multiplexed investigation of protein-protein interactions. Some
spectral characteristics of "multicolor" BiFC (mcBiFC) complexes have been
reported before; however, no in-depth analysis has been performed yet. Therefore,
little is known about the photophysical characteristics of these mcBiFC complexes
because a proper characterization essentially relies on in vitro data. This is
particularly difficult for fragments of autofluorescent proteins (AFPs) because
they show a very strong tendency to form supramolecular aggregates which
precipitate ex vivo. In this study, this intrinsic difficulty is overcome by
directly fusing the coding DNA of different AFP fragments. Translation of the
genetic sequence in Escherichia coli leads to fully functional, highly soluble
fluorescent proteins with distinct properties. On the basis of their
construction, they are designated chimeric AFPs, or BiFC chimeras, here.
Comparison of their spectral characteristics with experimental in vivo BiFC data 
confirmed the utility of the chimeric proteins as a BiFC model system. In this
study, nine different chimeras were thoroughly analyzed at both the ensemble and 
the single-molecular level. The data indicates that mutations believed to be
photophysically silent significantly alter the properties of AFPs.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.6b11623 
PMID: 28240906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

