
1. PLoS One. 2017 Apr 20;12(4):e0176217. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0176217.
eCollection 2017.

Excessive dietary intake of vitamin A reduces skull bone thickness in mice.

Lind T(1), Öhman C(2), Calounova G(1), Rasmusson A(1), Andersson G(3), Pejler
G(4)(5), Melhus H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Engineering Sciences, Division of Applied Materials Science, The
Ångström Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Pathology, Karolinska
University Hospital Huddinge, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden.
(5)Department of Biomedical Science and Veterinary Public Health, Swedish
University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden.

Calvarial thinning and skull bone defects have been reported in infants with
hypervitaminosis A. These findings have also been described in humans, mice and
zebrafish with loss-of-function mutations in the enzyme CYP26B1 that degrades
retinoic acid (RA), the active metabolite of vitamin A, indicating that these
effects are indeed caused by too high levels of vitamin A and that evolutionary
conserved mechanisms are involved. To explore these mechanisms, we have fed young
mice excessive doses of vitamin A for one week and then analyzed the skull bones 
using micro computed tomography, histomorphometry, histology and
immunohistochemistry. In addition, we have examined the effect of RA on gene
expression in osteoblasts in vitro. Compared to a standard diet, a high dietary
intake of vitamin A resulted in a rapid and significant reduction in calvarial
bone density and suture diastasis. The bone formation rate was almost halved.
There was also increased staining of tartrate resistant acid phosphatase in
osteocytes and an increased perilacunar matrix area, indicating osteocytic
osteolysis. Consistent with this, RA induced genes associated with bone
degradation in osteoblasts in vitro. Moreover, and in contrast to other known
bone resorption stimulators, vitamin A induced osteoclastic bone resorption on
the endocranial surfaces.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0176217 
PMCID: PMC5398668
PMID: 28426756  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

