
1. World J Gastroenterol. 2017 May 7;23(17):3030-3042. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v23.i17.3030.

Genes, emotions and gut microbiota: The next frontier for the gastroenterologist.

Panduro A(1), Rivera-Iñiguez I(1), Sepulveda-Villegas M(1), Roman S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Arturo Panduro, Ingrid Rivera-Iñiguez, Maricruz Sepulveda-Villegas, Sonia
Roman, Department of Molecular Biology in Medicine, Civil Hospital of
Guadalajara, "Fray Antonio Alcalde", Guadalajara 44280, Jalisco, Mexico.

Most medical specialties including the field of gastroenterology are mainly aimed
at treating diseases rather than preventing them. Genomic medicine studies the
health/disease process based on the interaction of the human genes with the
environment. The gastrointestinal (GI) system is an ideal model to analyze the
interaction between our genes, emotions and the gut microbiota. Based on the
current knowledge, this mini-review aims to provide an integrated synopsis of
this interaction to achieve a better understanding of the GI disorders related to
bad eating habits and stress-related disease. Since human beings are the result
of an evolutionary process, many biological processes such as instincts, emotions
and behavior are interconnected to guarantee survival. Nourishment is a
physiological need triggered by the instinct of survival to satisfy the body's
energy demands. The brain-gut axis comprises a tightly connected
neural-neuroendocrine circuitry between the hunger-satiety center, the
dopaminergic reward system involved in the pleasure of eating and the gut
microbiota that regulates which food we eat and emotions. However, genetic
variations and the consumption of high-sugar and high-fat diets have overridden
this energy/pleasure neurocircuitry to the point of addiction of several
foodstuffs. Consequently, a gut dysbiosis generates inflammation and a negative
emotional state may lead to chronic diseases. Balancing this altered processes to
regain health may involve personalized-medicine and genome-based strategies.
Thus, an integrated approach based on the understanding of the gene-emotions-gut 
microbiota interaction is the next frontier that awaits the gastroenterologist to
prevent and treat GI disorders associated with obesity and negative emotions.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v23.i17.3030 
PMCID: PMC5423040
PMID: 28533660  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: Authors declare
no conflict of interest for this article.

