
1. Int Forum Allergy Rhinol. 2017 Aug;7(8):777-785. doi: 10.1002/alr.21955. Epub
2017 Jun 2.

Impact of tobacco smoke on upper airway dendritic cell accumulation and
regulation by sinonasal epithelial cells.

Mulligan JK(1)(2), O'Connell BP(1), Pasquini W(1), Mulligan RM(1), Smith S(1),
Soler ZM(1), Atkinson C(3)(4), Schlosser RJ(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, SC.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston,
SC.
(3)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, SC.
(4)Department of Surgery, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC.
(5)Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center, Charleston, SC.

BACKGROUND: In these studies we examined the impact of environmental tobacco
smoke (ETS) and active smoking on sinonasal dendritic cell (DC) subsets in
controls or patients with chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps (CRSwNP). In
subsequent in-vitro investigations, we examined the influence of cigarette smoke 
extract (CSE) on human sinonasal epithelial cells' (HSNECs) ability to regulate
DC functions.
METHODS: Sinonasal tissue, blood, and hair were collected from patients
undergoing sinus surgery. Smoking status and ETS exposure were determined by hair
nicotine. DC subsets were examined by flow cytometric analysis. Monocyte-derived 
dendritic cells (moDCs) were treated with conditioned medium from
non-smoked-exposed HSNECs (NS-HSNECs) or cigarette-smoke-extract-exposed HSNECs
(CSE-HSNECs) to assess the impact of CSE exposure on HSNEC regulation of moDC
functions.
RESULTS: Control subjects who were active smokers displayed increased sinonasal
moDC and myeloid dendritic 1 (mDC1) cells and reduced mDC2 cells, whereas, in
CRSwNP patients, only moDC and mDC2 cells were altered. ETS was found to increase
only moDCs in the CRSwNP patients. In vitro, CSE stimulated HSNEC secretion of
the moDC regulatory products chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 20, prostaglandin E2 , 
and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. CSE exposure also promoted 
HSNECs to stimulate monocyte and moDC migration. moDCs treated with CSE-HSNEC
media stimulated an increase in antigen uptake and expression of CD80 and CD86.
Last, CSE-HSNEC-treated moDCs secreted increased levels of interleukin-10,
interferon-γ, and thymic stromal lymphopoietin.
CONCLUSION: Active smoking, and to a lesser degree ETS, alters the sinonasal
composition of DCs. A potential mechanism to account for this is that cigarette
smoke stimulates HSNECs to induce moDC migration, maturation, and activation.

© 2017 ARS-AAOA, LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/alr.21955 
PMCID: PMC5544557
PMID: 28574651  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

