
1. J Clin Invest. 2017 Jun 30;127(7):2789-2804. doi: 10.1172/JCI92079. Epub 2017 Jun
5.

Tregs restrain dendritic cell autophagy to ameliorate autoimmunity.

Alissafi T(1), Banos A(1), Boon L(2), Sparwasser T(3), Ghigo A(4), Wing K(5),
Vassilopoulos D(6), Boumpas D(1)(7), Chavakis T(8), Cadwell K(9)(10), Verginis
P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(2)Bioceros BV, Utrecht, Netherlands.
(3)Institute of Infection Immunology, TWINCORE, Centre for Experimental and
Clinical Infection Research, Hannover, Germany.
(4)Molecular Biotechnology Center, Department of Molecular Biotechnology and
Health Sciences, University of Torino, Torino, Italy.
(5)Division of Medical Inflammation Research, Department of Medical Biochemistry 
and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Joint Rheumatology Program, Clinical Immunology-Rheumatology Unit, National
and Kapodistrian University of Athens Medical School, Hippokration General
Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(7)Joint Rheumatology Program, 4th Department of Medicine, Attikon University
Hospital, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens Medical School, Athens, 
Greece.
(8)Department of Clinical Pathobiochemistry, Institute for Clinical Chemistry and
Laboratory Medicine and Department of Internal Medicine, University of Dresden,
Dresden, Germany.
(9)Kimmel Center for Biology and Medicine at the Skirball Institute, New York,
New York, USA.
(10)Departments of Microbiology and Medicine, New York University School of
Medicine, New York, New York, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2017 Aug;13(8):452.

Design of efficacious Treg-based therapies and establishment of clinical
tolerance in autoimmune diseases have proven to be challenging. The clinical
implementation of Treg immunotherapy has been hampered by various impediments
related to the stability and isolation procedures of Tregs as well as the
specific in vivo targets of Treg modalities. Herein, we have demonstrated that
Foxp3+ Tregs potently suppress autoimmune responses in vivo through inhibition of
the autophagic machinery in DCs in a cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein
4-dependent (CTLA4-dependent) manner. Autophagy-deficient DCs exhibited reduced
immunogenic potential and failed to prime autoantigen-specific CD4+ T cells to
mediate autoimmunity. Mechanistically, CTLA4 binding promoted activation of the
PI3K/Akt/mTOR axis and FoxO1 nuclear exclusion in DCs, leading to decreased
transcription of the autophagy component microtubule-associated protein 1 light
chain 3β (Lc3b). Human DCs treated with CTLA4-Ig, a fusion protein composed of
the Fc region of IgG1 and the extracellular domain of CTLA4 (also known as
abatacept, marketed as Orencia), demonstrated reduced levels of autophagosome
formation, while DCs from CTLA4-Ig-treated rheumatoid arthritis patients
displayed diminished LC3B transcripts. Collectively, our data identify the
canonical autophagy pathway in DCs as a molecular target of Foxp3+ Treg-mediated 
suppression that leads to amelioration of autoimmune responses. These findings
may pave the way for the development of therapeutic protocols that exploit Tregs 
for the treatment of autoimmunity as well as diseases in which disturbed
tolerance is a common denominator.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI92079 
PMCID: PMC5490766
PMID: 28581446  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

