
1. Vaccine. 2017 Jul 13;35(32):3945-3950. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.06.010. Epub
2017 Jun 19.

Serious pneumococcal disease outbreak in men exposed to metal fume - detection,
response and future prevention through pneumococcal vaccination.

Ewing J(1), Patterson L(2), Irvine N(3), Doherty L(3), Loughrey A(4), Kidney
J(4), Sheppard C(5), Kapatai G(5), Fry NK(5), Ramsay M(6), Jessop L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Agency, Health Protection Service, Northern Ireland, UK.
Electronic address: judith.ewing@hscni.net.
(2)Public Health Agency, Health Protection Service, Northern Ireland, UK; UK
Field Epidemiology Training Programme, Public Health England, UK.
(3)Public Health Agency, Health Protection Service, Northern Ireland, UK.
(4)Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Northern Ireland, UK.
(5)Respiratory and Vaccine Preventable Bacteria Reference Unit, Public Health
England, London, UK.
(6)Respiratory and Vaccine Preventable Bacteria Reference Unit, Public Health
England, London, UK; Immunisation Department, Public Health England, London, UK.

Welders and those exposed to metal fume are known to be at increased risk of
pneumococcal pneumonia and invasive pneumococcal disease. Current UK guidance
recommends that vaccination against pneumococcus be considered in those at risk
of frequent or continuous occupational exposure to metal fume, taking into
account the exposure control measures in place. We report an outbreak of serious 
pneumococcal disease that occurred between April and June 2015 among a
multinational workforce exposed to metal fumes while working on the refurbishment
of an oil rig in a Belfast shipyard. Four confirmed and five probable cases were 
identified, which occurred despite the use of environmental control measures and 
the availability of respiratory protective equipment. To provide direct
protection to those at risk of pneumococcal disease and to eradicate carriage of 
pneumococcus and interrupt transmission, pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine
(PPV23) and antibiotic prophylaxis were offered to 680 individuals identified as 
potentially exposed to metal fume. Low levels of prior pneumococcal vaccination
were reported among this target group (<1%). Genomic sequencing indicated a
common strain of serotype 4 pneumococcus in two of the confirmed cases and a
distinct serotype 4 in one case. The fourth confirmed case was identified as
likely serotype 3 using a serotype-specific immunoassay on a urine specimen. Both
serotypes 3 and 4 are vaccine-preventable strains covered by the conjugate and
polysaccharide pneumococcal vaccines currently available. We propose that
consideration should be given to strengthening implementation around pneumococcal
vaccination for those exposed to metal fume through their work, even when other
control measures are in place, to reduce the risk of future cases and outbreaks
of serious pneumococcal disease.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.06.010 
PMID: 28633889  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

