
1. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2018 Feb;58(2):170-180. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2017-0214OC.

Myeloid-derived Suppressor Cells Are Necessary for Development of Pulmonary
Hypertension.

Bryant AJ(1), Shenoy V(2), Fu C(1), Marek G(1), Lorentsen KJ(1), Herzog EL(3),
Brantly ML(1), Avram D(1), Scott EW(4).

Author information: 
(1)1 Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Department of
Medicine, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida.
(2)2 Department of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Sciences, California Health
Sciences University, Clovis, California.
(3)3 Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut; and.
(4)4 Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida.

Pulmonary hypertension (PH) complicates the care of patients with chronic lung
disease, such as idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), resulting in a significant 
increase in morbidity and mortality. Disease pathogenesis is orchestrated by
unidentified myeloid-derived cells. We used murine models of PH and pulmonary
fibrosis to study the role of circulating myeloid cells in disease pathogenesis
and prevention. We administered clodronate liposomes to bleomycin-treated
wild-type mice to induce pulmonary fibrosis and PH with a resulting increase in
circulating bone marrow-derived cells. We discovered that a population of C-X-C
motif chemokine receptor (CXCR) 2+ myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs),
granulocytic subset (G-MDSC), is associated with severe PH in mice. Pulmonary
pressures worsened despite improvement in bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis.
PH was attenuated by CXCR2 inhibition, with antagonist SB 225002, through
decreasing G-MDSC recruitment to the lung. Molecular and cellular analysis of
clinical patient samples confirmed a role for elevated MDSCs in IPF and IPF with 
PH. These data show that MDSCs play a key role in PH pathogenesis and that G-MDSC
trafficking to the lung, through chemokine receptor CXCR2, increases development 
of PH in multiple murine models. Furthermore, we demonstrate pathology similar to
the preclinical models in IPF with lung and blood samples from patients with PH, 
suggesting a potential role for CXCR2 inhibitor use in this patient population.
These findings are significant, as there are currently no approved
disease-specific therapies for patients with PH complicating IPF.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2017-0214OC 
PMCID: PMC5805999
PMID: 28862882  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

