
1. Front Immunol. 2017 Aug 28;8:1036. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01036. eCollection
2017.

The Microbial Metabolite Butyrate Induces Expression of Th1-Associated Factors in
CD4+ T Cells.

Kespohl M(1), Vachharajani N(1), Luu M(1), Harb H(2), Pautz S(1), Wolff S(1),
Sillner N(3)(4), Walker A(3), Schmitt-Kopplin P(3)(4)(5), Boettger T(6), Renz
H(2), Offermanns S(7), Steinhoff U(1), Visekruna A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, Philipps University of
Marburg, Marburg, Germany.
(2)Institute of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiochemistry, Molecular Diagnostics,
Philipps University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany.
(3)Research Unit Analytical BioGeoChemistry, Department of Environmental
Sciences, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany.
(4)ZIEL - Institute for Food and Health, Technical University of Munich,
Freising, Germany.
(5)Analytical Food Chemistry, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany.
(6)Department of Cardiac Development and Remodelling, Max Planck Institute for
Heart and Lung Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany.
(7)Department of Pharmacology, Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, 
Bad Nauheim, Germany.

Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), which are generated by the bacterial
fermentation of dietary fibers, promote expansion of regulatory T cells (Tregs). 
Potential therapeutic value of SCFAs has been recently highlighted in the
experimental models of T cell-mediated autoimmunity and allergic inflammation.
These studies suggest that physiological intestinal concentrations of SCFAs
within the millimolar range are crucial for dampening inflammation-mediated
processes. Here, we describe opposing effects of SCFAs on T cell-mediated immune 
responses. In accordance with published data, lower butyrate concentrations
facilitated differentiation of Tregs in vitro and in vivo under steady-state
conditions. In contrast, higher concentrations of butyrate induced expression of 
the transcription factor T-bet in all investigated T cell subsets resulting in
IFN-γ-producing Tregs or conventional T cells. This effect was mediated by the
inhibition of histone deacetylase activity and was independent of SCFA-receptors 
FFA2 and FFA3 as well as of Na+-coupled SCFA transporter Slc5a8. Importantly,
while butyrate was not able to induce the generation of Tregs in the absence of
TGF-β1, the expression of T-bet and IFN-γ was triggered upon stimulation of CD4+ 
T cells with this SCFA alone. Moreover, the treatment of germ-free mice with
butyrate enhanced the expression of T-bet and IFN-γ during acute colitis. Our
data reveal that, depending on its concentration and immunological milieu,
butyrate may exert either beneficial or detrimental effects on the mucosal immune
system.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01036 
PMCID: PMC5581317
PMID: 28894447 

