
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2019 Feb;85:44-51. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2017.10.005. Epub
2017 Oct 7.

Efficacy and safety of a non-mineral oil adjuvanted injectable vaccine for the
protection of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L.) against Flavobacterium
psychrophilum.

Hoare R(1), Jung SJ(2), Ngo TPH(3), Bartie K(3), Bailey J(3), Thompson KD(4),
Adams A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Aquaculture, University of Stirling, Stirling, UK. Electronic
address: rowena.hoare1@stir.ac.uk.
(2)Chonnam National University, Yeosu, Republic of Korea.
(3)Institute of Aquaculture, University of Stirling, Stirling, UK.
(4)Moredun Research Institute, Pentland Science Park, Penicuik, UK.

Flavobacterium psychrophilum is the causative agent of Rainbow Trout Fry Syndrome
which has had a major impact on global salmonid aquaculture. Recent outbreaks in 
Atlantic salmon in Scotland and Chile have added to the need for a vaccine to
protect both salmon and trout. At present no licensed vaccines are available in
Europe, leaving antibiotics as the only course of action to contain disease
outbreaks. Outbreaks generally occur in fry at temperatures between 10 and 15 °C.
Recently outbreaks in larger fish have given added impetus to the development of 
a vaccine which can provide long term protection from this highly heterogeneous
pathogen. Most fish injectable vaccines are formulated with oil emulsion
adjuvants to induce strong and long lasting immunity, but which are known to
cause side effects. Alternative adjuvants are currently sought to minimise these 
adverse effects. The current study was performed to assess the efficacy of a
polyvalent, whole cell vaccine containing formalin-inactivated F. psychrophilum
to induce protective immunity in Atlantic salmon. The vaccine was formulated with
an adjuvant containing squalene and aluminium hydroxide, and was compared to a
vaccine formulated with a traditional oil adjuvant, Montanide ISA 760VG, and a
non-adjuvanted vaccine. Duplicate groups of salmon (23.5 ± 6.8 g) were vaccinated
with each of the vaccine formulations or phosphate buffered saline by
intraperitoneal injection. Fish were challenged by intramuscular injection with
F. psychrophilum six weeks post-vaccination to test the efficacy of the vaccines.
Cumulative mortality reached 70% in the control salmon, while the groups of
salmon that received vaccine had significantly lower mortality than the controls 
(p = 0.0001), with no significant difference in survival between vaccinated
groups. The squalene/alum adjuvant was safe, more readily metabolised by the fish
and induced less histopathological changes than the traditional oil adjuvant.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2017.10.005 
PMID: 29017943  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

