
1. Microb Pathog. 2017 Dec;113:124-128. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2017.10.012. Epub
2017 Oct 14.

Serum and brain purine levels in an experimental systemic infection of mice by
Cryptococcus neoformans: Purinergic immunomodulatory effects.

de Azevedo MI(1), Da Silva AS(2), Ferreiro L(3), Doleski PH(4), Tonin AA(4),
Casali EA(5), Moritz CEJ(6), Schirmbeck GH(7), Cardoso VV(8), Flores MM(9),
Fighera R(9), Santurio JM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Patologia e Clinica Animal, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande
do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil; Departamento de Microbiologia e Parasitologia, 
Universidade Federal de Santa Maria, Santa Maria, RS, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Zootecnia, Universidade do Estado de Santa Catarina, Chapecó, 
SC, Brazil. Electronic address: dasilva.aleksandro@gmail.com.
(3)Departamento de Patologia e Clinica Animal, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande
do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(4)Departamento de Microbiologia e Parasitologia, Universidade Federal de Santa
Maria, Santa Maria, RS, Brazil.
(5)Departamento de Ciências Morfológicas, Instituto de Ciências Básicas da Saúde 
(ICBS), Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Porto Alegre, RS,
Brazil; Departamento de Bioquímica, ICBS, UFRGS, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil;
Laboratório de Mutagênese e Toxicologia, Centro Universitário Metodista- IPA,
Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(6)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências do Movimento Humano, Escola de Educação 
Física, Fisioterapia e Dança, UFGRS, Brazil.
(7)Departamento de Ciências Morfológicas, Instituto de Ciências Básicas da Saúde 
(ICBS), Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Porto Alegre, RS,
Brazil.
(8)Laboratório de Mutagênese e Toxicologia, Centro Universitário Metodista- IPA, 
Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(9)Departamento de Patologia, UFSM, Santa Maria, RS, Brazil.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the purine levels in serum and brains of
mice experimentally infected by Cryptococcus neoformans. Twenty-four mice were
divided into the following groups: a control group (n = 12; Group A) and an
infection group with animals that were infected (n = 12; Group B) with a 0.3-mL
intraperitoneal injection containing 1.7 × 107C. neoformans cells. Blood and
brains were collected on days 20 (n = 6 per group) and 50 (n = 6 per group)
post-infection (PI). Histopathology and lung and brain cultures were performed to
confirm fungal infection and tissue injuries. The levels of adenosine
triphosphate (ATP), adenosine diphosphate (ADP), adenosine monophosphate (AMP),
adenosine (ADO), inosine (INO), hypoxanthine (HYPO), xanthine (XAN) and uric acid
(UA) in brains and serum were measured by high-performance liquid chromatography 
(HPLC) analysis. At both time points, histopathology analysis revealed
inflammatory infiltrates in the brains and lungs of infected mice; clinical
signs, such as piloerection and clinical respiratory distress, were also
observed. ATP levels were significantly increased on days 20 and 50 PI (P < 0.01)
in brains and serum, while brain ADO levels were increased on day 20 PI; brain
and serum ADO levels were decreased on day 50 PI. Levels of ADP and AMP did not
differ between groups (P > 0.05). Serum levels of INO of infected mice increased 
only on day 50 PI (P < 0.05). HYPO levels were reduced in the brains of infected 
animals at both experimental time points and were decreased in serum at day 50 PI
(P < 0.05). XAN levels increased in infected mice only in serum on day 50 PI
(P < 0.05). The endogenous anti-oxidant uric acid was significantly increased in 
brain (days 20 and 50 PI) and decreased in serum. It is possible that C.
neoformans infection in mice leads to a high ATP/ADO ratio that may improve the
brain pro-inflammatory response during both periods, while high ATP levels in
serum act as a systemic signal to improve the immune response. Moreover, the
anti-oxidant uric acid may increase in the brain to protect inflamed tissue from 
oxidative stress.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2017.10.012 
PMID: 29038055  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

