
1. Front Immunol. 2017 Nov 10;8:1521. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01521. eCollection
2017.

Requirement of Gamma-Carboxyglutamic Acid Modification and Phosphatidylserine
Binding for the Activation of Tyro3, Axl, and Mertk Receptors by Growth
Arrest-Specific 6.

Geng K(1), Kumar S(1), Kimani SG(1), Kholodovych V(2)(3), Kasikara C(1), Mizuno
K(4), Sandiford O(5), Rameshwar P(5), Kotenko SV(1), Birge RB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry, and Molecular Genetics, New Jersey
Medical School Cancer Center, Rutgers, State University of New Jersey, Newark,
New Jersey, United States.
(2)Office of Advanced Research Computing (OARC), Rutgers, State University of New
Jersey, Newark, New Jersey, United States.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Rutgers, State
University of New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ, United States.
(4)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku 
University, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.
(5)Department of Medicine, Rutgers, State University of New Jersey, Newark, New
Jersey, United States.

The Tyro3, Axl, and Mertk (TAM) receptors are homologous type I receptor tyrosine
kinases that have critical functions in the clearance of apoptotic cells in
multicellular organisms. TAMs are activated by their endogenous ligands, growth
arrest-specific 6 (Gas6), and protein S (Pros1), that function as bridging
molecules between externalized phosphatidylserine (PS) on apoptotic cells and the
TAM ectodomains. However, the molecular mechanisms by which Gas6/Pros1 promote
TAM activation remains elusive. Using TAM/IFNγR1 reporter cell lines to monitor
functional TAM activity, we found that Gas6 activity was exquisitely dependent on
vitamin K-mediated γ-carboxylation, whereby replacing vitamin K with
anticoagulant warfarin, or by substituting glutamic acid residues involved in PS 
binding, completely abrogated Gas6 activity as a TAM ligand. Furthermore, using
domain and point mutagenesis, Gas6 activity also required both an intact Gla
domain and intact EGF-like domains, suggesting these domains function
cooperatively in order to achieve TAM activation. Despite the requirement of
γ-carboxylation and the functional Gla domain, non-γ-carboxylated Gas6 and Gla
deletion/EGF-like domain deletion mutants still retained their ability to bind
TAMs and acted as blocking decoy ligands. Finally, we found that distinct sources
of PS-positive cells/vesicles (including apoptotic cells, calcium-induced
stressed cells, and exosomes) bound Gas6 and acted as cell-derived or
exosome-derived ligands to activate TAMs. Taken together, our findings indicate
that PS is indispensable for TAM activation by Gas6, and by inference, provides
new perspectives on how PS, regulates TAM receptors and efferocytosis.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01521 
PMCID: PMC5686386
PMID: 29176978 

