
1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2017 Dec 23;11(1). pii: E2. doi: 10.3390/ph11010002.

Roles of Heat Shock Proteins in Apoptosis, Oxidative Stress, Human Inflammatory
Diseases, and Cancer.

Ikwegbue PC(1), Masamba P(2), Oyinloye BE(3)(4), Kappo AP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology and Structural Biochemistry (BSB) Group, Department of
Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South
Africa. pikwegbue@yahoo.com.
(2)Biotechnology and Structural Biochemistry (BSB) Group, Department of
Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South
Africa. presh4u@rocketmail.com.
(3)Biotechnology and Structural Biochemistry (BSB) Group, Department of
Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South
Africa. tunji4reele@yahoo.com.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Afe Babalola University, PMB 5454, Ado-Ekiti
360001, Nigeria. tunji4reele@yahoo.com.
(5)Biotechnology and Structural Biochemistry (BSB) Group, Department of
Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South
Africa. KappoA@unizulu.ac.za.

Heat shock proteins (HSPs) play cytoprotective activities under pathological
conditions through the initiation of protein folding, repair, refolding of
misfolded peptides, and possible degradation of irreparable proteins. Excessive
apoptosis, resulting from increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) cellular levels
and subsequent amplified inflammatory reactions, is well known in the
pathogenesis and progression of several human inflammatory diseases (HIDs) and
cancer. Under normal physiological conditions, ROS levels and inflammatory
reactions are kept in check for the cellular benefits of fighting off infectious 
agents through antioxidant mechanisms; however, this balance can be disrupted
under pathological conditions, thus leading to oxidative stress and massive
cellular destruction. Therefore, it becomes apparent that the interplay between
oxidant-apoptosis-inflammation is critical in the dysfunction of the antioxidant 
system and, most importantly, in the progression of HIDs. Hence, there is a need 
to maintain careful balance between the oxidant-antioxidant inflammatory status
in the human body. HSPs are known to modulate the effects of inflammation
cascades leading to the endogenous generation of ROS and intrinsic apoptosis
through inhibition of pro-inflammatory factors, thereby playing crucial roles in 
the pathogenesis of HIDs and cancer. We propose that careful induction of HSPs in
HIDs and cancer, especially prior to inflammation, will provide good therapeutics
in the management and treatment of HIDs and cancer.

DOI: 10.3390/ph11010002 
PMCID: PMC5874698
PMID: 29295496 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

