
1. Mymensingh Med J. 2018 Apr;27(2):336-343.

Toxoplasma gondii Seropositivity and its Possible Associated Risk Factors among
Pregnant Women Attending Antenatal Clinic in a Tertiary Care Hospital of Dhaka,
Bangladesh.

Naheen CR(1), Tarafder S, Khan S.

Author information: 
(1)Dr Chowdhury Rafia Naheen, Assistant Professor, Department of Microbiology, Dr
Sirajul Islam Medical College, Dhaka, Bangladesh; E-mail: crnaheen@yahoo.com.

Toxoplasmosis is a well-documented cause of bad obstetric history (BOH) and a
major reason of congenitally acquired infection. This observational study was
conducted to detect the rate of seropositivity of toxoplasmosis in pregnant women
and observe their risk factors associated with disease transmission attending the
antenatal clinic of the Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical University, Dhaka,
Bangladesh from July 2015 to August 2016. The study subjects included 150
pregnant women of different gestational ages. A serological evaluation was
carried out to determine the presence of Toxoplasma gondii-specific IgG and IgM
antibodies by chemiluminescence. The total seropositive cases for Toxoplasma
gondii was 39(26%), of which IgG positive cases were 33(22%) and IgG-IgM positive
cases were 6(4%). The seropositive status of the patients was analyzed according 
to their gestational age, parity and with a number of sociodemographic
characteristics to assess risk of transmission. The seropositivity of
toxoplasmosis was significantly higher in the 1st trimester. Acute cases were
higher in primi patient (2%) than multigravid women (1%). IgG positive cases were
more in multigravid women with previous bad obstetric history (BOH) (14%). There 
was statistically significant association of seropositivity with socioeconomic
status of the study population, their occupation, cat ownership, frequency of
meat consumption and raw vegetable intake. These factors might play important
risk factors of Toxoplasma gondii infection. It can be concluded that Toxoplasma 
gondii infection is prevalent in our society causing a number of pregnancy
wastage each year. So it is necessary to perform routine serological test in all 
pregnant women for early diagnosis and treatment and enhance public health
awareness to prevent risk of transmission.


PMID: 29769499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

