
1. Int J Parasitol. 2018 Aug;48(9-10):679-690. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2018.03.010.
Epub 2018 Jun 6.

Discovery of a novel species, Theileria haneyi n. sp., infective to equids,
highlights exceptional genomic diversity within the genus Theileria: implications
for apicomplexan parasite surveillance.

Knowles DP(1), Kappmeyer LS(2), Haney D(3), Herndon DR(2), Fry LM(4), Munro
JB(5), Sears K(6), Ueti MW(7), Wise LN(8), Silva M(9), Schneider DA(4), Grause
J(10), White SN(4), Tretina K(11), Bishop RP(12), Odongo DO(13), Pelzel-McCluskey
AM(14), Scoles GA(2), Mealey RH(9), Silva JC(15).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Disease Research Unit, Agricultural Research Service, United States
Department of Agriculture, Pullman, WA, USA; Department of Veterinary
Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, USA; The
Paul G. Allen School for Global Animal Health, Washington State University,
Pullman, WA, USA; Department of Comparative Medicine, University of Washington
School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA. Electronic address: dknowles@wsu.edu.
(2)Animal Disease Research Unit, Agricultural Research Service, United States
Department of Agriculture, Pullman, WA, USA.
(3)Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, United States Department of
Agriculture, Eagle Pass, TX, USA.
(4)Animal Disease Research Unit, Agricultural Research Service, United States
Department of Agriculture, Pullman, WA, USA; Department of Veterinary
Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, USA.
(5)Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA. Electronic address: JMunro@som.umaryland.edu.
(6)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA, USA; Veterinary Clinical Sciences, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA, USA.
(7)Animal Disease Research Unit, Agricultural Research Service, United States
Department of Agriculture, Pullman, WA, USA; Department of Veterinary
Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, USA; The
Paul G. Allen School for Global Animal Health, Washington State University,
Pullman, WA, USA.
(8)Department of Large Animal Medicine and Surgery, Physiology and Pharmacology, 
St. George's University School of Veterinary Medicine True Blue, St. George's,
Grenada.
(9)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA, USA.
(10)Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, National Veterinary Services
Laboratories, United States Department of Agriculture, Ames, IA, USA.
(11)Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(12)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA, USA; The Paul G. Allen School for Global Animal Health, 
Washington State University, Pullman, WA, USA.
(13)Department of Zoology, Nairobi University, Nairobi, Kenya.
(14)Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Surveillance, Preparedness and
Response Services, United States Department of Agriculture, Fort Collins, CO,
USA.
(15)Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. Electronic address:
jcsilva@som.umaryland.edu.

A novel apicomplexan parasite was serendipitously discovered in horses at the
United States - Mexico border. Phylogenetic analysis based on 18S rDNA showed the
erythrocyte-infective parasite to be related to, but distinct from, Theileria
spp. in Africa, the most similar taxa being Theileria spp. from waterbuck and
mountain zebra. The degree of sequence variability observed at the 18S rDNA locus
also suggests the likely existence of additional cryptic species. Among described
species, the genome of this novel equid Theileria parasite is most similar to
that of Theileria equi, also a pathogen of horses. The estimated divergence time 
between the new Theileria sp. and T. equi, based on genomic sequence data, is
greater than 33 million years. Average protein sequence divergence between them, 
at 23%, is greater than that of Theileria parva and Theileria annulata proteins, 
which is 18%. The latter two represent highly virulent Theileria spp. of domestic
cattle, as well as of African and Asian wild buffalo, respectively, which differ 
markedly in pathology, host cell tropism, tick vector and geographical
distribution. The extent of genome-wide sequence divergence, as well as
significant morphological differences, relative to T. equi justify the
classification of Theileria sp. as a new taxon. Despite the overall genomic
divergence, the nine member equi merozoite antigen (EMA) superfamily, previously 
found as a multigene family only in T. equi, is also present in the novel
parasite. Practically, significant sequence divergence in antigenic loci resulted
in this undescribed Theileria sp. not being detectable using currently available 
diagnostic tests. Discovery of this novel species infective to equids highlights 
exceptional diversity within the genus Theileria, a finding with serious
implications for apicomplexan parasite surveillance.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2018.03.010 
PMID: 29885436  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

