
1. Front Microbiol. 2018 Jun 4;9:1044. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.01044. eCollection
2018.

Environmental Control on Microbial Turnover of Leaf Carbon in Streams -
Ecological Function of Phototrophic-Heterotrophic Interactions.

Fabian J(1), Zlatanović S(2), Mutz M(2), Grossart HP(3)(4), van Geldern R(5),
Ulrich A(6), Gleixner G(7), Premke K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department Chemical Analytics and Biogeochemistry, Leibniz-Institute of
Freshwater Ecology and Inland Fisheries, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Freshwater Conservation, Brandenburg University of Technology
Cottbus-Senftenberg, Bad Saarow, Germany.
(3)Department Experimental Limnology, Leibniz-Institute of Freshwater Ecology and
Inland Fisheries, Stechlin, Germany.
(4)Institute of Biochemistry and Biology, University of Potsdam, Potsdam,
Germany.
(5)GeoZentrum Nordbayern, Department of Geography and Geosciences,
Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany.
(6)Institute of Landscape Biogeochemistry, Leibniz Centre for Agricultural
Landscape Research, Müncheberg, Germany.
(7)Department of Biogeochemical Processes, Max Planck Institute for
Biogeochemistry, Jena, Germany.

In aquatic ecosystems, light availability can significantly influence microbial
turnover of terrestrial organic matter through associated metabolic interactions 
between phototrophic and heterotrophic communities. However, particularly in
streams, microbial functions vary significantly with the structure of the
streambed, that is the distribution and spatial arrangement of sediment grains in
the streambed. It is therefore essential to elucidate how environmental factors
synergistically define the microbial turnover of terrestrial organic matter in
order to better understand the ecological role of photo-heterotrophic
interactions in stream ecosystem processes. In outdoor experimental streams, we
examined how the structure of streambeds modifies the influence of light
availability on microbial turnover of leaf carbon (C). Furthermore, we
investigated whether the studied relationships of microbial leaf C turnover to
environmental conditions are affected by flow intermittency commonly occurring in
streams. We applied leaves enriched with a 13C-stable isotope tracer and combined
quantitative and isotope analyses. We thereby elucidated whether treatment
induced changes in C turnover were associated with altered use of leaf C within
the microbial food web. Moreover, isotope analyses were combined with
measurements of microbial community composition to determine whether changes in
community function were associated with a change in community composition. In
this study, we present evidence, that environmental factors interactively
determine how phototrophs and heterotrophs contribute to leaf C turnover. Light
availability promoted the utilization of leaf C within the microbial food web,
which was likely associated with a promoted availability of highly bioavailable
metabolites of phototrophic origin. However, our results additionally confirm
that the structure of the streambed modifies light-related changes in microbial C
turnover. From our observations, we conclude that the streambed structure
influences the strength of photo-heterotrophic interactions by defining the
spatial availability of algal metabolites in the streambed and the composition of
microbial communities. Collectively, our multifactorial approach provides
valuable insights into environmental controls on the functioning of stream
ecosystems.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.01044 
PMCID: PMC5994477
PMID: 29915564 

