
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2018 Jun 28;8:221. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2018.00221.
eCollection 2018.

Understanding the Virulence of Staphylococcus pseudintermedius: A Major Role of
Pore-Forming Toxins.

Maali Y(1), Badiou C(1), Martins-Simões P(1)(2)(3), Hodille E(1)(2), Bes M(2)(3),
Vandenesch F(1)(2)(3), Lina G(1)(2)(3), Diot A(1), Laurent F(1)(2)(3),
Trouillet-Assant S(1)(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre International de Recherche en Infectiologie, Institut National de la
Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U1111, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, UMR5308, Université de Lyon 1, École Normale Supérieure de Lyon,
Team "Pathogenesis of Staphylococcal Infections", Lyon, France.
(2)Institut des Agents Infectieux, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France.
(3)Centre National de Référence des Staphylocoques, Hospices Civils de Lyon,
Lyon, France.
(4)Laboratoire Commun de Recherche Lyon Sud, Hospices Civils de Lyon-bioMérieux, 
Pierre Bénite, France.

Staphylococcus pseudintermedius is responsible for severe and necrotizing
infections in humans and dogs. Contrary to S. aureus, the pathophysiological
mechanisms involved in this virulence are incompletely understood. We previously 
showed the intracellular cytotoxicity induced after internalization of S.
pseudintermedius. Herein, we aimed to identify the virulence factors responsible 
for this cytotoxic activity. After addition of filtered S. pseudintermedius
supernatants in culture cell media, MG63 cells, used as representative of
non-professional phagocytic cells (NPPc), released a high level of LDH,
indicating that the cytotoxicity was mainly mediated by secreted factors.
Accordingly, we focused our attention on S. pseudintermedius toxins. In silico
analysis found the presence of two PSMs (δ-toxin and PSMε) as well as Luk-I
leukotoxin, the presence of which was confirmed by PCR in all clinical strains
tested (n = 17). Recombinant Luk-I leukotoxin had no cytotoxic activity on NPPc
but the ectopic expression of the CXCR2 receptor in U937 cells conferred
cytotoxity to Luk-I. This is in agreement with the lack of Luk-I effect on NPPc
and the previous report of Luk-I cytoxic activity on immune cells. Contrary to
Luk-I, synthetic δ-toxin and PSMε had a strong cytotoxic activity on NPPc. The
secretion of δ-toxin and PSMε at cytotoxic concentrations by S. pseudintermedius 
in culture supernatant was confirmed by HPLC-MS. In addition, the supplementation
of such supernatants with human serum, known to inhibit PSM, induced a complete
abolition of cytotoxicity which indicates that PSMs are the key players in the
cytotoxic phenotype of NPPc. The results suggest that the severity of S.
pseudintermedius infections is, at least in part, explained by a combined action 
of Luk-I that specifically targets immune cells expressing the CXCR2 receptor,
and PSMs that disrupt cell membranes whatever the cell types. The present study
strengthens the key role of PSMs in virulence of the different species belonging 
to Staphylococcus genus.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2018.00221 
PMCID: PMC6032551
PMID: 30003063  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

