
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2018 Jul 23;12(7):e0006646. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0006646. eCollection 2018 Jul.

Leishmania donovani induced Unfolded Protein Response delays host cell apoptosis 
in PERK dependent manner.

Abhishek K(1), Das S(2), Kumar A(1), Kumar A(1), Kumar V(1), Saini S(3), Mandal
A(1), Verma S(1), Kumar M(1), Das P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Rajendra Memorial Research Institute of Medical
Sciences, Agamkuan, Patna, Bihar, India.
(2)Department of Microbiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
Phulwarisharif, Patna Bihar, India.
(3)National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Export Promotion 
Industrial Park, Hajipur, Vaishali, Bihar, India.

BACKGROUND: Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress generated unfolded stress response 
(UPR) is a basic survival mechanism which protects cell under unfavourable
conditions. Leishmania parasite modulates host macrophages in various ways to
ensure its survival. Modulation of PI3K-Akt pathway in delayed apoptotic
induction of host; enables parasite to stabilize the infection for further
propagation.
METHODOLOGY: Infected RAW macrophages were exposed to campothecin or thagsigargin
and phosphorylation status of PERK, Akt, BAD and Cyt-C was determined through
western blotting using phospho specific antibody. Expression at transcriptional
level for cIAP1 &2, ATF4, CHOP, ATF3, HO-1 and sXBP1 was determined using real
time PCR. For inhibition studies, RAW macrophages were pre-treated with PERK
inhibitor GSK2606414 before infection.
FINDINGS: Our studies in RAW macrophages showed that induction of host UPR
against L.donovani infection activates Akt mediated pathway which delays
apoptotic induction of the host. Moreover, Leishmania infection results in
phosphorylation and activation of host PERK enzyme and increased transcription of
genes of inhibitor of apoptosis gene family (cIAP) mRNA. In our inhibition
studies, we found that inhibition of infection induced PERK phosphorylation under
apoptotic inducers reduces the Akt phosphorylation and fails to activate further 
downstream molecules involved in protection against apoptosis. Also, inhibition
of PERK phosphorylation under oxidative exposure leads to increased Nitric Oxide 
production. Simultaneously, decreased transcription of cIAP mRNA upon PERK
phosphorylation fates the host cell towards apoptosis hence decreased infection
rate.
CONCLUSION: Overall the findings from the study suggests that Leishmania
modulated host UPR and PERK phosphorylation delays apoptotic induction in host
macrophage, hence supports parasite invasion at early stages of infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0006646 
PMCID: PMC6081962
PMID: 30036391  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

