
1. Anaesthesist. 2018 Oct;67(10):758-765. doi: 10.1007/s00101-018-0478-6. Epub 2018 
Aug 13.

[Perspectives for anesthesiologists in hospital hygiene].

[Article in German]

Bonsignore M(1), Alefelder C(2), Pausner N(3), Gastmeier P(4), Nachtigall I(5).

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Krankenhaushygiene und Infektiologie, Evangelische Kliniken
Gelsenkirchen, Munkelstr. 27, 45879, Gelsenkirchen, Deutschland.
bonsignore@evk-ge.de.
(2)Krankenhaushygiene, Helios Kliniken Region West, Wuppertal, Deutschland.
(3)Krankenhaushygiene, Helios, Klinik Duisburg, Duisburg, Deutschland.
(4)Institut für Hygiene und Umweltmedizin, Charité, Berlin, Deutschland.
(5)Krankenhaushygiene, Helios Kliniken Region Mitte Nord, Bad Saarow,
Deutschland.

Comment in
    Anaesthesist. 2018 Oct;67(10):793-796.

BACKGROUND: It is mandatory for hospitals in Germany to employ infection control 
physicians and have an external consultation. The recommended coverage has
substantially increased in the last years. Typically, infection control
physicians are specialists for hygiene and environmental medicine and/or for
microbiology. As there is already a shortage of these specialists, a curricular
educational program in infection control was developed by the German Medical
Association in 2011. This program addresses specialists of different clinical
disciplines. It covers a period of 24 months and includes 200 h of courses,
divided into 6 modules. In addition, 7 weeks of internships must be absolved in
hospital hygiene, in a microbiological laboratory and in the public health
service. During the program, the trainee must be accompanied by a qualified
supervisor, who is a specialist in hygiene. The aim of this article is to
describe the current status of this program.
METHODS: A total of 91 infection control physicians, organized in different
networks, were invited by email to take part in a survey with the online tool
Survey Monkey (San Mateo, USA). The questions in the survey aimed at the
characteristics of the participants as well as the conditions of the program.
Further information about the various general regulations and conditions of the
course was gathered through internet research, and from telephone and email
contact with the State Medical Associations.
RESULTS: Approximately 250 physicians completed the program between 2011 and
2017. The graduates were mostly anesthesiologists (45%) and 81% had a leading
position (consultant or higher) before beginning the program. Most of them also
had further education in antibiotic stewardship and/or infectious diseases. The
requirements regarding training hours, examination and certification varied
between the State Medical Associations. The supervision, a mandatory part of the 
program, is also implemented differently from state to state. Of the participants
49% felt well-qualified for the challenges ahead after finishing this program.
DISCUSSION: The program was able to increase the number of infection control
physicians in a relatively short period of time; however, to guarantee
a comparable quality of education it is necessary to standardize the requirements
on a national level. The supervision also needs to be further specified. A new
program is currently being developed by the German Medical Association, which
will hopefully lead to an improvement of the educational program. Special
strengths of the new infection control physicians are the broad clinical
experience as well as the additional qualifications in antibiotic stewardship
and/or infectious diseases. The weaknesses are the lack of practical experience
and knowledge of technical hygiene. A mandatory inclusion of antibiotic
stewardship and infectious diseases in the program would increase its impact.
Anesthesiologists are well-suited for training as infection control physicians.
For them, a new, exciting field of activity has opened up with the chance to be
the head of their own department.

DOI: 10.1007/s00101-018-0478-6 
PMID: 30105518  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

