
1. Biotechnol Biofuels. 2018 Aug 21;11:228. doi: 10.1186/s13068-018-1229-2.
eCollection 2018.

Production of alkanes from CO2 by engineered bacteria.

Lehtinen T(1), Virtanen H(1), Santala S(1), Santala V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Bioengineering, Tampere University of Technology, 
Korkeakoulunkatu 8, 33720 Tampere, Finland.

Background: Microbial biosynthesis of alkanes is considered a promising method
for the sustainable production of drop-in fuels and chemicals. Carbon dioxide
would be an ideal carbon source for these production systems, but efficient
production of long carbon chains from CO2 is difficult to achieve in a single
organism. A potential solution is to employ acetogenic bacteria for the reduction
of CO2 to acetate, and engineer a second organism to convert the acetate into
long-chain hydrocarbons.
Results: In this study, we demonstrate alkane production from CO2 by a system
combining the acetogen Acetobacterium woodii and a non-native alkane producer
Acinetobacter baylyi ADP1 engineered for alkane production. Nine synthetic
two-step alkane biosynthesis pathways consisting of different aldehyde- and
alkane-producing enzymes were combinatorically constructed and expressed in A.
baylyi. The aldehyde-producing enzymes studied were AAR from Synechococcus
elongatus, Acr1 from A. baylyi, and a putative dehydrogenase from Nevskia ramosa.
The alkane-producing enzymes were ADOs from S. elongatus and Nostoc punctiforme, 
and CER1 from Arabidopsis thaliana. The performance of the pathways was evaluated
with a twin-layer biosensor, which allowed the monitoring of both the
intermediate (fatty aldehyde), and end product (alkane) formation. The highest
alkane production, as indicated by the biosensor, was achieved with a pathway
consisting of AAR and ADO from S. elongatus. The performance of this pathway was 
further improved by balancing the relative expression levels of the enzymes to
limit the accumulation of the intermediate fatty aldehyde. Finally, the acetogen 
A. woodii was used to produce acetate from CO2 and H2, and the acetate was used
for alkane production by the engineered A. baylyi, thereby leading to the net
production of long-chain alkanes from CO2.
Conclusions: A modular system for the production of drop-in liquid fuels from CO2
was demonstrated. Among the studied synthetic pathways, the combination of ADO
and AAR from S. elongatus was found to be the most efficient in heterologous
alkane production in A. baylyi. Furthermore, limiting the accumulation of the
fatty aldehyde intermediate was found to be beneficial for the alkane production.
Nevertheless, the alkane productivity of the system remained low, representing a 
major challenge for future research.

DOI: 10.1186/s13068-018-1229-2 
PMCID: PMC6102805
PMID: 30151056 

