
1. Prostate. 2019 Feb;79(2):126-139. doi: 10.1002/pros.23717. Epub 2018 Sep 5.

A novel PSMA/GCPII-deficient mouse model shows enlarged seminal vesicles upon
aging.

Vorlová B(1)(2), Sedlák F(1)(2)(3), Kašpárek P(4)(5), Šrámková K(1), Malý M(6),
Zámečník J(7), Šácha P(1), Konvalinka J(1)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry of the Czech Academy of
Sciences, Prague 6, Czech Republic.
(2)First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague 2, Czech Republic.
(3)Faculty of Science, Department of Genetics and Microbiology, Charles
University, Prague 2, Czech Republic.
(4)Laboratory of Transgenic Models of Diseases, Institute of Molecular Genetics
of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Vestec, Czech Republic.
(5)Czech Centre for Phenogenomics, Institute of Molecular Genetics of the Czech
Academy of Sciences, Vestec, Czech Republic.
(6)National Institute of Public Health, Prague 10, Czech Republic.
(7)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Second Faculty of Medicine,
Charles University and Motol University Hospital, Prague 5, Czech Republic.
(8)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague 2, 
Czech Republic.

BACKGROUND: Prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA), also known as glutamate
carboxypeptidase II (GCPII), is an important diagnostic and therapeutic target in
prostate cancer. PSMA/GCPII is also expressed in many healthy tissues, but its
function has only been established in the brain and small intestine. Several
research groups have attempted to produce PSMA/GCPII-deficient mice to study the 
physiological role of PSMA/GCPII in detail. The outcomes of these studies differ 
dramatically, ranging from embryonic lethality to production of viable
PSMA/GCPII-deficient mice without any obvious phenotype.
METHODS: We produced PSMA/GCPII-deficient mice (hereafter also referred as
Folh1-/- mice) by TALEN-mediated mutagenesis on a C57BL/6NCrl background. Using
Western blot and an enzyme activity assay, we confirmed the absence of PSMA/GCPII
in our Folh1-/- mice. We performed anatomical and histopathological examination
of selected tissues with a focus on urogenital system. We also examined the
PSMA/GCPII expression profile within the mouse urogenital system using an enzyme 
activity assay and confirmed the presence of PSMA/GCPII in selected tissues by
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Our Folh1-/- mice are viable, breed normally, and do not show any
obvious phenotype. Nevertheless, aged Folh1-/- mice of 69-72 weeks exhibit
seminal vesicle dilation, which is caused by accumulation of luminal fluid. This 
phenotype was also observed in Folh1+/- mice; the overall difference between our 
three cohorts (Folh1-/- , Folh1+/- , and Folh1+/+ ) was highly significant
(P < 0.002). Of all studied tissues of the mouse urogenital system, only the
epididymis appeared to have a physiologically relevant level of PSMA/GCPII
expression. Additional experiments demonstrated that PSMA/GCPII is also present
in the human epididymis.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we provide the first evidence characterizing the
reproductive tissue phenotype of PSMA/GCPII-deficient mice. These findings will
help lay the groundwork for future studies to reveal PSMA/GCPII function in human
reproduction.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/pros.23717 
PMID: 30256431  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

