
1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2018 Sep 28;11(4). pii: E93. doi: 10.3390/ph11040093.

Molecular Application of Aptamers in the Diagnosis and Treatment of Cancer and
Communicable Diseases.

Molefe PF(1), Masamba P(2), Oyinloye BE(3)(4), Mbatha LS(5), Meyer M(6), Kappo
AP(7).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology and Structural Biochemistry (BSB) Group, Department of
Biochemistry and Microbiology, Faculty of Science and Agriculture, University of 
Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South Africa. philisiwefmolefe@gmail.com.
(2)Biotechnology and Structural Biochemistry (BSB) Group, Department of
Biochemistry and Microbiology, Faculty of Science and Agriculture, University of 
Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South Africa. presh4u@rocketmail.com.
(3)Biotechnology and Structural Biochemistry (BSB) Group, Department of
Biochemistry and Microbiology, Faculty of Science and Agriculture, University of 
Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South Africa. tunji4reele@yahoo.com.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, College of Sciences, Afe Babalola University, PMB 
5454, Ado-Ekiti 360001, Nigeria. tunji4reele@yahoo.com.
(5)Biotechnology and Structural Biochemistry (BSB) Group, Department of
Biochemistry and Microbiology, Faculty of Science and Agriculture, University of 
Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South Africa. mbathalondy@gmail.com.
(6)DST/Mintek Nanotechnology Innovation Centre, Biolabels Node, Department of
Biotechnology, University of the Western Cape, Bellville 7535, South Africa.
memeyer@uwc.ac.za.
(7)Biotechnology and Structural Biochemistry (BSB) Group, Department of
Biochemistry and Microbiology, Faculty of Science and Agriculture, University of 
Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South Africa. KappoA@unizulu.ac.za.

Cancer and infectious diseases such as Ebola, HIV, tuberculosis, Zika, hepatitis,
measles and human schistosomiasis are serious global health hazards. The
increasing annual morbidities and mortalities of these diseases have been blamed 
on drug resistance and the inefficacy of available diagnostic tools, particularly
those which are immunologically-based. Antibody-based tools rely solely on
antibody production for diagnosis and for this reason they are the major cause of
diagnostic delays. Unfortunately, the control of these diseases depends on early 
detection and administration of effective treatment therefore any diagnostic
delay is a huge challenge to curbing these diseases. Hence, there is a need for
alternative diagnostic tools, discovery and development of novel therapeutic
agents. Studies have demonstrated that aptamers could potentially offer one of
the best solutions to these problems. Aptamers are short sequences of either DNA 
or RNA molecules, which are identified in vitro through a SELEX process. They are
sensitive and bind specifically to target molecules. Their promising features
suggest they may serve as better diagnostic agents and can be used as drug
carriers for therapeutic purposes. In this article, we review the applications of
aptamers in the theranostics of cancer and some infectious diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/ph11040093 
PMCID: PMC6315466
PMID: 30274155 

