
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2018 Dec;99(6):1369-1377. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.18-0432.

Enteric Fever in Cambodia: Community Perceptions and Practices Concerning Disease
Transmission and Treatment.

Kuijpers LMF(1)(2), Gryseels C(3), Uk S(4), Chung P(5), Bory S(6), Sreng B(7),
Parry A(4), Jacobs J(2)(1), Peeters Grietens K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp,
Belgium.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Department of Public Health, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium.
(4)Independent Researcher, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
(5)Sihanouk Hospital Center of HOPE, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
(6)Calmette Hospital, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
(7)Department of Communicable Disease Control, Ministry of Health, Phnom Penh,
Cambodia.

Enteric fever is a systemic bacterial infection in humans that is endemic in
Cambodia and for which antibiotic resistance is increasingly reported. To guide
public health programs, this qualitative study sought to explore community
perceptions on transmission and treatment. Participant observation was carried
out in hospital settings, pharmacies, and at a community level in Phnom Penh.
In-depth interviews 39 and one focus group discussion were carried out with blood
culture-confirmed enteric fever patients and purposively selected key informants.
Informants were theoretically sampled based on initial themes identified using
abductive analysis. Nvivo 11 was used for thematic coding. An urgent need to
address health literacy concerning the transmission of enteric fever was
identified, as lay informants did not link the disease and its symptoms to
bacterial contamination of foods and drinks but rather to foods considered "bad" 
following humoral illness interpretations. As a result, lay informants considered
recurrence of enteric fever preventable with appropriate dietary restrictions and
Khmer traditional medicines. This study also reveals pluralistic
health-care-seeking behavior. For initial and mild symptoms, patients preferred
home treatment or traditional healing practices; limited household finances
delayed treatment seeking. When symptoms persisted, patients first visited drug
outlets or private practitioners, where they received a mix of nonessential
medicines and one or more antibiotics often without prescription or confirmation 
of diagnosis. Inappropriate use of antibiotics was common and was related to
diagnostic uncertainty and limited finances, factors which should be addressed
during future efforts to improve the uptake of appropriate diagnostics and
treatment of enteric fever.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.18-0432 
PMCID: PMC6283521
PMID: 30298811  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

