
1. Zoonoses Public Health. 2019 Feb;66(1):117-124. doi: 10.1111/zph.12541. Epub 2018
Nov 20.

Giardia duodenalis in small animals and their owners in Germany: A pilot study.

Rehbein S(1), Klotz C(2), Ignatius R(3)(4), Müller E(5), Aebischer A(2), Kohn
B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Small Animal Clinic, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Freie Universität Berlin,
Berlin, Germany.
(2)Unit for Mycotic and Parasitic Agents and Mycobacteria (FG16), Robert
Koch-Institute, Berlin, Germany.
(3)MVZ Labor 28, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Hygiene, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Berlin, Germany.
(5)LABOKLIN GmbH & CO. KG, Bad Kissingen, Germany.

Giardia duodenalis is a relevant gastrointestinal protozoan pathogen of humans
and animals. This species complex consists of eight genetically different
assemblages. Assemblages A and B are pathogenic to humans and pets, thus confer
zoonotic potential. The risk of zoonotic transmission has been controversially
discussed. The aim of this monocentric cross-sectional pilot study was to
investigate G. duodenalis assemblages in humans and pets living in common
households in Berlin/Brandenburg (Germany). Samples from dogs, cats and humans
sharing the same households were screened for Giardia infection by
antigen-detecting assays. All human samples were additionally analysed by a
Giardia-specific qPCR. Cyst quantification and sequences of different gene loci
(triosephosphate isomerase (tpi), glutamate dehydrogenase (gdh), β-giardin (bg)
and for dogs SSUrDNA) were analysed. A total of 38 households (31 households with
dogs and seven with cats) with 69 human individuals participated in the study.
Initial antigen-detecting assays revealed Giardia-positive results for 13 (39%)
canine, one (14%) feline and one human sample. Reanalysis of the human samples by
qPCR revealed two more positive specimens (4%). Two of these three samples were
identified as assemblage B at all tested loci. Success rate of assemblage typing 
for pet samples was generally low and comprised mainly the SSUrDNA locus only.
Overall, six of 13 Giardia-positive canine samples were typable (2× A, 1×
co-infection: A and B, 1× C; 2× D). One pair of samples (dog and human) from the 
same household had a similar but not identical assemblage B sequence at tpi
locus. Assemblage A was also detected in the dog specimen, which hampered
sequence analysis. In conclusion, although exhibiting limitations due to the
sample size, our study highlights the need for better and standardized typing
tools to distinguish G. duodenalis strains with higher resolution in order to
perform proper case-control studies for a realistic estimation of zoonotic risk.

© 2018 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/zph.12541 
PMID: 30460763  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

