
1. Foods. 2018 Dec 3;7(12). pii: E195. doi: 10.3390/foods7120195.

One Health, Fermented Foods, and Gut Microbiota.

Bell V(1), Ferrão J(2), Pimentel L(3), Pintado M(4), Fernandes T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Farmácia, Universidade de Coimbra, Azinhaga de Santa Comba,
3000-548 Coimbra, Portugal. victoriabell1103@gmail.com.
(2)Universidade Pedagógica, Rua João Carlos Raposo Beirão 135, Maputo 1000-001,
Mozambique. ljferrao@icloud.com.
(3)CBQF-Centro de Biotecnologia e Química Fina, Escola Superior de Biotecnologia,
Universidade Católica Portuguesa, Rua Arquiteto Lobão Vital, Apartado 2511,
4202-401 Porto, Portugal. lpimentel@porto.ucp.pt.
(4)CBQF-Centro de Biotecnologia e Química Fina, Escola Superior de Biotecnologia,
Universidade Católica Portuguesa, Rua Arquiteto Lobão Vital, Apartado 2511,
4202-401 Porto, Portugal. mpintado@porto.ucp.pt.
(5)Faculdade de Medicina Veterinária, Universidade de Lisboa, 1300-477 Lisboa,
Portugal. profcattitofernandes@gmail.com.

Changes in present-day society such as diets with more sugar, salt, and saturated
fat, bad habits and unhealthy lifestyles contribute to the likelihood of the
involvement of the microbiota in inflammatory diseases, which contribute to
global epidemics of obesity, depression, and mental health concerns. The
microbiota is presently one of the hottest areas of scientific and medical
research, and exerts a marked influence on the host during homeostasis and
disease. Fermented foods and beverages are generally defined as products made by 
microbial organisms and enzymatic conversions of major and minor food components.
Further to the commonly-recognized effects of nutrition on the digestive health
(e.g., dysbiosis) and well-being, there is now strong evidence for the impact of 
fermented foods and beverages (e.g., yoghurt, pickles, bread, kefir, beers,
wines, mead), produced or preserved by the action of microorganisms, on general
health, namely their significance on the gut microbiota balance and brain
functionality. Fermented products require microorganisms, i.e., Saccharomyces
yeasts and lactic acid bacteria, yielding alcohol and lactic acid. Ingestion of
vibrant probiotics, especially those contained in fermented foods, is found to
cause significant positive improvements in balancing intestinal permeability and 
barrier function. Our guts control and deal with every aspect of our health. How 
we digest our food and even the food sensitivities we have is linked with our
mood, behavior, energy, weight, food cravings, hormone balance, immunity, and
overall wellness. We highlight some impacts in this domain and debate calls for
the convergence of interdisciplinary research fields from the United Nations'
initiative. Worldwide human and animal medicine are practiced separately;
veterinary science and animal health are generally neither considered nor
inserted within national or international Health discussions. The absence of a
clear definition and subsequent vision for the future of One Health may act as a 
barrier to transdisciplinary collaboration. The point of this mini review is to
highlight the role of fermented foods and beverages on gut microbiota and debate 
if the need for confluence of transdisciplinary fields of One Health is feasible 
and achievable, since they are managed by separate sectors with limited
communication.

DOI: 10.3390/foods7120195 
PMCID: PMC6306734
PMID: 30513869 

