
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2019 Mar 6;85(6). pii: e02305-18. doi:
10.1128/AEM.02305-18. Print 2019 Mar 15.

Large-Scale Analysis of Flavobacterium psychrophilum Multilocus Sequence Typing
Genotypes Recovered from North American Salmonids Indicates that both Newly
Identified and Recurrent Clonal Complexes Are Associated with Disease.

Knupp C(1), Wiens GD(2), Faisal M(1)(3), Call DR(4), Cain KD(5), Nicolas P(6),
Van Vliet D(7), Yamashita C(8), Ferguson JA(9), Meuninck D(10), Hsu HM(11), Baker
BB(12), Shen L(13), Loch TP(14)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Fisheries and Wildlife, College of Agriculture and Natural
Resources, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA.
(2)National Center for Cool and Cold Water Aquaculture, Agricultural Research
Service, USDA, Kearneysville, West Virginia, USA.
(3)Department of Pathobiology and Diagnostic Investigation, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA.
(4)Paul G. Allen School for Global Animal Health, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Pullman, Washington, USA.
(5)Department of Fisheries and Wildlife Resources, Aquaculture Research
Institute, College of Natural Resources, University of Idaho, Moscow, Idaho, USA.
(6)MaIAGE Inra Université Paris-Saclay, Jouy-en-Josas, France.
(7)Utah Division of Wildlife Resources, Fisheries Experiment Station, Logan,
Utah, USA.
(8)Division of Fisheries Management, Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission,
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, USA.
(9)Alaska Department of Fish and Game, Commercial Fisheries Division, Fish
Pathology Laboratory, Anchorage, Alaska, USA.
(10)Division of Fish and Wildlife, Indiana Department of Natural Resources,
Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(11)Wisconsin Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(12)Division of Fish, Wildlife, and Parks-Fisheries Management, Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(13)Fish and Wildlife Division, Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, Saint 
Paul, Minnesota, USA.
(14)Department of Fisheries and Wildlife, College of Agriculture and Natural
Resources, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA
lochthom@cvm.msu.edu.

Flavobacterium psychrophilum, the etiological agent of bacterial coldwater
disease (BCWD) and rainbow trout fry syndrome (RTFS), causes significant economic
losses in salmonid aquaculture, particularly in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus
mykiss). Prior studies have used multilocus sequence typing (MLST) to examine
genetic heterogeneity within F. psychrophilum At present, however, its population
structure in North America is incompletely understood, as only 107 isolates have 
been genotyped. Herein, MLST was used to investigate the genetic diversity of an 
additional 314 North American F. psychrophilum isolates that were recovered from 
ten fish host species from 20 U.S. states and 1 Canadian province over nearly
four decades. These isolates were placed into 66 sequence types (STs), 47 of
which were novel, increasing the number of clonal complexes (CCs) in North
America from 7 to 12. Newly identified CCs were diverse in terms of host
association, distribution, and association with disease. The largest F.
psychrophilum CC identified was CC-ST10, within which 10 novel genotypes were
discovered, most of which came from O. mykiss experiencing BCWD. This discovery, 
among others, provides evidence for the hypothesis that ST10 (i.e., the founding 
ST of CC-ST10) originated in North America. Furthermore, ST275 (in CC-ST10) was
recovered from wild/feral adult steelhead and marks the first recovery of CC-ST10
from wild/feral fish in North America. Analyses also revealed that at the allele 
level, the diversification of F. psychrophilum in North America is driven three
times more frequently by recombination than random nucleic acid mutation,
possibly indicating how new phenotypes emerge within this species.IMPORTANCE
Flavobacterium psychrophilum is the causative agent of bacterial coldwater
disease (BCWD) and rainbow trout fry syndrome (RTFS), both of which cause
substantial losses in farmed fish populations worldwide. To better prevent and
control BCWD and RTFS outbreaks, we sought to characterize the genetic diversity 
of several hundred F. psychrophilum isolates that were recovered from diseased
fish across North America. Results highlighted multiple F. psychrophilum genetic 
strains that appear to play an important role in disease events in North American
aquaculture facilities and suggest that the practice of trading fish eggs has led
to the continental and transcontinental spread of this bacterium. The knowledge
generated herein will be invaluable toward guiding the development of future
disease prevention techniques.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02305-18 
PMCID: PMC6414368
PMID: 30658978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

