
1. Org Biomol Chem. 2019 Feb 6;17(6):1480-1486. doi: 10.1039/c8ob03150a.

Enzymatic radiosynthesis of a 18F-Glu-Ureido-Lys ligand for the prostate-specific
membrane antigen (PSMA).

Lowe PT(1), Dall'Angelo S, Fleming IN, Piras M, Zanda M, O'Hagan D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Biomedical Sciences Research Centre, University of St 
Andrews, North Haugh, St Andrews KY16 9ST, UK. do1@st-andrews.ac.uk.

Prostate cancer represents a major public health threat as it is one of the most 
common male cancers worldwide. The prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) is
highly over-expressed in prostatic cancer cells in a manner that correlates with 
both tumour stage and clinical outcome. As such, PSMA has been identified as an
attractive target for both imaging and treatment of prostate cancer. In recent
years the focus on urea-based peptidomimetic inhibitors of the PSMA (representing
low molecular weight/high affinity binders) has intensified as they have found
use in the clinical imaging of prostate tumours. Reported herein are the design, 
synthesis and evaluation of a new fluorinated PSMA targeting small-molecule,
FDA-PEG-GUL, which possesses the Glu-NH-CO-NH-Lys pharmacophore conjugated to a
5'-fluorodeoxy-adenosine unit. Inhibition assays were performed with FDA-PEG-GUL 
which revealed that it inhibits the PSMA in the nanomolar range. Additionally, it
has been purposely designed so that it can be produced using the fluorinase
enzyme from its chlorinated precursor, allowing for the enzymatic synthesis of
radiolabelled [18F]FDA-PEG-GUL via a nucleophilic reaction that takes place in
experimentally advantageous conditions (in water at neutral pH and at ambient
temperature). Specific binding of [18F]FDA-PEG-GUL to PSMA expressing cancer
cells was demonstrated, validating it as a promising PSMA diagnostic tool. This
work establishes a successful substrate scope expansion for the fluorinase and
demonstrates its first application towards targeting the PSMA.

DOI: 10.1039/c8ob03150a 
PMID: 30681115  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

