
1. Lett Appl Microbiol. 2019 Jun;68(6):485-496. doi: 10.1111/lam.13146. Epub 2019
Apr 25.

Possible transmission routes of Vibrio spp. in tropical cage-cultured marine
fishes.

Nurliyana M(1), Amal MNA(1)(2), Zamri-Saad M(2)(3), Ina-Salwany MY(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Universiti Putra Malaysia,
Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)Laboratory of Marine Biotechnology, Institute of Bioscience, Universiti Putra 
Malaysia, Selangor, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Veterinary Laboratory Diagnosis, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Universiti Putra Malaysia, Selangor, Malaysia.
(4)Department of Aquaculture, Faculty of Agriculture, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 
Selangor, Malaysia.

This study investigates the possible transmission routes of Vibrio spp. in a
tropical cage-cultured marine fishes. Samplings of cultured Asian seabass, red
snapper, hybrid grouper, wild fish, trash fish, fish fry, water and sediment
samples were conducted from December 2016 to August 2017. All fish were dissected
in situ and swabs were taken aseptically from the skin, eye, liver and kidney for
bacterial isolation and identification. Bacterial isolation and identification
from water, sediment and trash fish were also made. A total of 261 Vibrio spp.
isolates recovered from the cultured, wild and fry fish, as well as from the
sediment and water of the farm environment were analysed. Sequences of the pyrH
gene were used to investigate the degree of relatedness and possible transmission
routes existing between the isolated Vibrio spp. The population tree revealed the
existence of selected Vibrio spp. that possibly transmitted between the newly
introduced fish fry and wild fish into the cultured fish, while water also might 
possibly serves as natural transmission medium of certain Vibrio spp. in this
fish farm. SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: The source of transmission of
Vibrio spp. into farmed marine fish remains unclear. This study highlights the
possible transmission routes of Vibrio into cage-cultured marine fishes via newly
introduced fish fry and wild fish. Understanding the routes of transmission of
Vibrio spp. might help in controlling the disease in the near future.

© 2019 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/lam.13146 
PMID: 30834548  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

