
1. Front Immunol. 2019 Apr 29;10:897. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00897. eCollection
2019.

Molecular and Antigenic Properties of Mammalian Cell-Expressed Theileria parva
Antigen Tp9.

Bastos RG(1), Franceschi V(2), Tebaldi G(2), Connelley T(3), Morrison WI(3),
Knowles DP(1), Donofrio G(2), Fry LM(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA, United States.
(2)Department of Medical-Veterinary Science, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(3)Royal School of Veterinary Sciences, The Roslin Institute, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(4)Animal Disease Research Unit, United States Department of Agriculture,
Agricultural Research Service, Pullman, WA, United States.

East Coast Fever (ECF), caused by the tick-borne apicomplexan parasite Theileria 
parva, is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in cattle of sub-Saharan
Africa. The infection and treatment method (ITM) is currently the only vaccine
available to control T. parva. Although ITM elicits levels of protection, its
widespread adoption is limited by costs, laborious production process, and
antibiotic co-treatment requirement, necessitating the development of a more
sustainable vaccine. To this end, efforts have been concentrated in the
identification of new T. parva vaccine antigens and in the development of
suitable platforms for antigen expression. In this study, we investigated the
molecular and antigenic properties of T. parva antigen Tp9 expressed by mammalian
cells. Data indicate that Tp9 contains a signal peptide that is weakly functional
in mammalian cells. Thus, Tp9 secretion from mammalian cells increased 10-fold
after the native signal peptide was replaced with the human tissue plasminogen
activator signal peptide (tPA). Sera from all T. parva-immune cattle recognized
this recombinant, secreted Tp9. Additionally, PBMC from ITM-immunized cattle
produced significant (p < 0.05) amounts of IFNγ following ex vivo exposure to
Tp9, but this response varied between cattle of different MHC class I and class
II genotypes. In addition, depletion experiments demonstrated that IFNγ to Tp9
was primarily produced by CD4+ T cells. Molecular analysis demonstrated that Tp9 
presents a signal peptide that is weakly functional in mammalian cells,
suggesting that it remains within lymphocytes during infection. Tp9 secretion
from mammalian cells was substantially increased when the tPA secretion signal
sequence was substituted for the native secretion signal sequence. Using
full-length, recombinant Tp9 secreted from mammalian cells, we demonstrated that 
T. parva-immune cattle develop both humoral and cellular immune responses to this
antigen. Collectively, these results provide rationale for further evaluation of 
Tp9 as a component of a T. parva subunit vaccine.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00897 
PMCID: PMC6501543
PMID: 31110506  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

