
1. Microb Drug Resist. 2020 Feb;26(2):150-159. doi: 10.1089/mdr.2019.0040. Epub 2019
Aug 19.

Unusually High Prevalence of Cosecretion of Ambler Class A and B Carbapenemases
and Nonenzymatic Mechanisms in Multidrug-Resistant Clinical Isolates of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa in Lebanon.

Yaghi J(1), Fattouh N(1), Akkawi C(1), El Chamy L(1), Maroun RG(1), Khalil
G(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Campus des Sciences et Technologies, UR-EGP, Faculté des Sciences, Université 
Saint-Joseph de Beyrouth, Beirut, Lebanon.
(2)Campus des Sciences Médicales, Faculté de Médecine, Université Saint-Joseph de
Beyrouth, Beirut, Lebanon.
(3)Centre Médical Raymond et Aida Najjar Beirut, Hôpital Saint Joseph des Sœurs
de la Croix, Beirut, Lebanon.

The opportunistic pathogen, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, is a main cause of nosocomial
infections in Lebanese hospitals. This pathogen is highly threatening due to its 
ability to develop multiresistance toward a large variety of antibiotics,
including the carbapenem subgroup of β-lactams. In this study, we surveyed the
enzymatic and nonenzymatic mechanisms of carbapenem resistance in several
multidrug-resistant (MDR) strains of P. aeruginosa isolated from patients
suffering from nosocomial urinary tract infections in a Lebanese hospital. The
occurrence of β-lactamase-encoding genes notably GES, KPC, IMP, VIM, NDM, and
OXA, which are characterized by a carbapenemase activity was checked by genomic
analyses. Our results provide a first evidence of the occurrence of GES in
clinical P. aeruginosa isolates resistant to carbapenems in Lebanon. More
interestingly, we showed that almost 40% of the analyzed strains have acquired a 
dual-carbapenemase secretion of GES-6 and VIM-2 or IMP-15, this being a rare
phenomenon among this type of multidrug resistance. Moreover, LC-MS/MS analyses
revealed a high prevalence of another enzymatic mechanism of resistance; this is 
the coexistence of AmpC and Pdc-13 as well as a number of virulence proteins, for
instance pilin, lytic transglycosylase, ecotin, chitin-binding protein (Cbp), and
TolB-dependent receptor. It is to be noted that a mutation of the oprD2 gene
encoding a porin selective for carbapenems has been detected in almost 66% of our
strains. All in all, our study reveals by the use of different methods, unusual
simultaneous enzymatic (GES, IMP, VIM, pdc13, and AmpC) and nonenzymatic
mechanisms of resistance (reduction of OprD2 expression) for MDR Pseudomonas
aeruginosa.

DOI: 10.1089/mdr.2019.0040 
PMID: 31424353  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

