
1. PLoS One. 2019 Sep 6;14(9):e0221694. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0221694.
eCollection 2019.

Capability for arsenic mobilization in groundwater is distributed across broad
phylogenetic lineages.

Danczak RE(1), Johnston MD(2), Kenah C(3), Slattery M(3), Wilkins MJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, United States
of America.
(2)School of Earth Sciences, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, United States
of America.
(3)Ohio Environmental Protection Agency, Columbus, OH, United States of America.
(4)Department of Soil and Crop Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins,
CO, United States of America.

Despite the importance of microbial activity in mobilizing arsenic in groundwater
aquifers, the phylogenetic distribution of contributing microbial metabolisms is 
understudied. Groundwater samples from Ohio aquifers were analyzed using
metagenomic sequencing to identify functional potential that could drive arsenic 
cycling, and revealed mechanisms for direct (i.e., Ars system) and indirect
(i.e., iron reduction) arsenic mobilization in all samples, despite differing
geochemical conditions. Analyses of 194 metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs)
revealed widespread functionality related to arsenic mobilization throughout the 
bacterial tree of life. While arsB and arsC genes (components of an arsenic
resistance system) were found in diverse lineages with no apparent phylogenetic
bias, putative aioA genes (aerobic arsenite oxidase) were predominantly
identified in Methylocystaceae MAGs. Both previously described and undescribed
respiratory arsenate reduction potential via arrA was detected in
Betaproteobacteria, Deltaproteobacteria, and Nitrospirae MAGs, whereas sulfate
reduction potential was primarily limited to members of the Deltaproteobacteria
and Nitrospirae. Lastly, iron reduction potential was detected in the
Ignavibacteria, Deltaproteobacteria, and Nitrospirae. These results expand the
phylogenetic distribution of taxa that may play roles in arsenic mobilization in 
subsurface systems. Specifically, the Nitrospirae are a much more functionally
diverse group than previously assumed and may play key biogeochemical roles in
arsenic-contaminated ecosystems.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0221694 
PMCID: PMC6730927
PMID: 31490939  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

