
1. Int J Mycobacteriol. 2019 Jul-Sep;8(3):273-280. doi: 10.4103/ijmy.ijmy_106_19.

A multilocus sequence typing scheme for Mycobacterium abscessus complex
(MAB-multilocus sequence typing) using whole-genome sequencing data.

Wuzinski M(1), Bak AK(2), Petkau A(3), B Demczuk WH(4), Soualhine H(5), Sharma
MK(5).

Author information: 
(1)National Reference Centre for Mycobacteriology, National Microbiology
Laboratory, Public Health Agency of Canada; Department of Microbiology,
University of Manitoba, Manitoba, Canada.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Manitoba, Manitoba, Canada.
(3)Department of Bioinformatics, National Microbiology Laboratory, Public Health 
Agency of Canada, Manitoba, Canada.
(4)Streptococcus and Sexually Transmitted Diseases, National Microbiology
Laboratory, Public Health Agency of Canada, Manitoba, Canada.
(5)National Reference Centre for Mycobacteriology, National Microbiology
Laboratory, Public Health Agency of Canada; Department of Medical Microbiology,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

Background: Mycobacterium abscessus is a rapid growing nontuberculous
mycobacteria (NTM) and a clinically significant pathogen capable of causing
variable infections in humans that are difficult to treat and may require months 
of therapy/surgical interventions. Like other NTMs, M. abscessus can be
associated with outbreaks leading to complex investigations and treatment of
affected cases. Typing schemes for bacterial pathogens provide numerous
applications; including identifying chain of transmission and tracking genomic
evolution, are lacking or limited for many NTMs including M. abscessus.
Methods: We extended the existing scheme from PubMLST using whole-genome data for
M. abscessus by extracting data for 15 genetic regions within the M. abscessus
genome. A total of 168 whole genomes and 11 gene sequences were used to build
this scheme (MAB-multilocus sequence typing [MLST]).
Results: All seven genes from the PubMLST scheme, namely argH, cya, gnd, murC,
pta, purH, and rpoB, were expanded by 10, 14, 13, 10, 13, 10, and 9 alleles,
respectively. Another eight novel genes were added including hsp 65, erm(41),
arr, rrs, rrl, gyrA, gyrB, and recA with 16, 16, 25, 7, 32, 35, 29, and 15
alleles, respectively, with 85 unique sequence types identified among all
isolates.
Conclusion: MAB-MLST can provide identification of M. abscessus complex to the
subspecies level based on three genes and can provide antimicrobial resistance
susceptibility prediction based on results from seven genes. MAB-MLST generated a
total of 85 STs, resulting in subtyping of 90 additional isolates that could not 
be genotyped using PubMLST and yielding results comparable to whole-genome
sequencing (WGS). Implementation of a Galaxy-based data analysis tool, MAB-MLST, 
that simplifies the WGS data and yet maintains a high discriminatory index that
can aid in deciphering an outbreak has vast applicability for routine
diagnostics.

DOI: 10.4103/ijmy.ijmy_106_19 
PMID: 31512604  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None

