
1. Water Res. 2019 Dec 15;167:114895. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2019.114895. Epub 2019
Jul 22.

High-quality treated wastewater causes remarkable changes in natural microbial
communities and intI1 gene abundance.

Subirats J(1), Di Cesare A(2), Varela Della Giustina S(3), Fiorentino A(2),
Eckert EM(2), Rodriguez-Mozaz S(3), Borrego CM(4), Corno G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Catalan Institute for Water Research (ICRA), Scientific and Technological Park
of the University of Girona, Girona, Spain. Electronic address:
jessica.medina@canada.ca.
(2)Microbial Ecology Group, Water Research Institute, National Research Council
of Italy (CNR-IRSA), Verbania, Italy.
(3)Catalan Institute for Water Research (ICRA), Scientific and Technological Park
of the University of Girona, Girona, Spain.
(4)Catalan Institute for Water Research (ICRA), Scientific and Technological Park
of the University of Girona, Girona, Spain; Group of Molecular Microbial Ecology,
Institute of Aquatic Ecology, University of Girona, Girona, Spain.

We carry out a mesocosms experiment to assess the impact of high-quality treated 
wastewater intended for agricultural reuse (HQWR) on freshwater bacteria seldom
exposed to anthropogenic pollution. Effects were assessed by comparing the
abundance and composition of bacterial communities as well as their resistance
profile under control (source water from an unpolluted lake) and treatment
conditions (source water mixed 1:1 with HQWR, with and without 5 μg L-1 of
cefotaxime). We investigated the effect of the different conditions on the
abundance of genes encoding resistance to β-lactams and carbapenems (blaTEM,
blaCTX-M, blaOXA, and blaKPC), fluoroquinolones (qnrS), tetracyclines (tetA),
sulfonamides (sul2), macrolides (ermB), arsenic and cadmium (arsB and czcA,
respectively), and on the gene encoding the Class 1 integron integrase (intI1).
Bacterial communities exposed to HQWR showed a significant higher abundance of
tetA, arsB, czcA, and intI1 genes, whereas those exposed to Cefotaxime-amended
HQWR did not. Genes conferring resistance to carbapenems, β-lactams,
fluoroquinolones, and macrolides were below detection limit in all treatments.
Besides, the higher availability of nutrients under treatment conditions favored 
bacterial growth in comparison to those exposed to control conditions.
Particularly, Acinetobacter spp. and Pseudomonas spp. were significantly enriched
after 22 days of treatment exposure. The presence of cefotaxime (a third
generation cephalosporine) in the feeding medium caused an enrichment of
bacterial communities in sequences affiliated to Acinetobacter thus suggesting
that these resistant forms may possess resistance genes other than those studied 
here (blaCTX-M, blaOXA, and blaKPC). Although derived from a mesocosm experiment 
in continuous cultures, our results call attention to the need of refined
regulations regarding the use of reclaimed water in agriculture since even
high-quality treated wastewater may lead to undesired effects on receiving
bacterial communities in terms of composition and dissemination of antibiotic
resistance genes.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.watres.2019.114895 
PMID: 31553931  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

