
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2020 Jan 16;313:108378. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2019.108378. Epub 2019 Oct 25.

Performance of cold chains and modeled growth of Vibrio parahaemolyticus for
farmed oysters distributed in the United States and internationally.

Love DC(1), Kuehl LM(2), Lane RM(3), Fry JP(4), Harding J(5), Davis BJK(6),
Clancy K(5), Hudson B(7).

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins Center for a Livable Future, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD, United States of America; Department of Environmental Health and
Engineering, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD, United States of America. Electronic address: dlove8@jhu.edu.
(2)Johns Hopkins Center for a Livable Future, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD, United States of America; Department of Biology, Western
Washington University, Bellingham, WA, United States of America.
(3)Virginia Seafood Agricultural Research and Extension Center, Virginia Tech,
Hampton, VA, United States of America.
(4)Johns Hopkins Center for a Livable Future, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD, United States of America; Department of Environmental Health and
Engineering, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD, United States of America; Department of Health, Behavior and
Society, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
MD, United States of America.
(5)Johns Hopkins Center for a Livable Future, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD, United States of America.
(6)Department of Epidemiology, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD, United States of America.
(7)Pacific Shellfish Institute, Olympia, WA, United States of America.

Vibrio bacteria can accumulate in molluscan shellfish and cause human diseases.
The United States (U.S.) has implemented Vibrio Control Plans to mitigate risks
associated with these bacteria, which include time and temperature requirements
for post-harvest processing and maintaining an unbroken cold chain. In this
study, we tracked the performance of cold chains for U.S. farmed oysters
distributed nationally and internationally using temperature sensors. Boxes and
bags of oysters (n = 125) were shipped from farms in Washington State and the
Chesapeake Bay to 143 unique businesses in 20 U.S. states, Washington D.C., and
Hong Kong, China. Eighty-one percent of the temperature sensors were returned
with usable data. The average product temperature among all participants was
4.4 ± 2.7 °C (40 ± 5 °F), which is 5.6 °C (10 °F) cooler than the 10 °C (50 °F)
guidance criterium established by the U.S. government. There were spikes in
temperature in some shipments: 18% of shipments (16/91) experienced oyster
temperatures above 10 °C for one hour or more, and the median time spent out of
temperature control was 2.5 h. We modeled V. parahaemolyticus abundance using
temperature sensor data and 75% (68/91) of shipments had a net decrease in V.
parahaemolyticus abundance in the cold chain. There are opportunities for
improvements in cold chain performance in the shellfish industry and related
businesses. In the discussion we provide recommendations for oyster producers
related to product cooling, for businesses that handle shellfish, and for
government and industry groups to develop guidance for shipping by air, among
other issues.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2019.108378 
PMID: 31678817  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

