
1. Plant Dis. 2020 Jan;104(1):211-221. doi: 10.1094/PDIS-10-18-1906-RE. Epub 2019
Nov 25.

Is the Phenomenon of Mefenoxam-Acquired Resistance in Phytophthora infestans
Universal?

González-Tobón J(1), Childers R(2), Olave C(1), Regnier M(1), Rodríguez-Jaramillo
A(1), Fry W(3), Restrepo S(1), Danies G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá, Colombia.
(2)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA, U.S.A.
(3)School of Integrative Plant Science, Plant Pathology and Plant-Microbe Biology
Section, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, U.S.A.
(4)Department of Design, Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá, Colombia.

Phytophthora infestans is the causal agent of late blight disease of potatoes and
tomatoes. This disease causes devastating economic losses each year, and control 
is mainly achieved by the use of fungicides. Unfortunately, populations of P.
infestans resistant to fungicides have been documented. Furthermore, studies have
reported that sensitive isolates to the phenylamide fungicide, mefenoxam, become 
less sensitive in vitro after a single passage through sublethal concentrations
of fungicide-amended medium. The first objective of this study was to investigate
if isolates of P. infestans are capable of acquiring resistance to two additional
systemic fungicides, fluopicolide (benzamide) and cymoxanil
(cyanoacetamide-oxime). In contrast to the situation with mefenoxam, exposure of 
isolates to sublethal concentrations of fluopicolide and cymoxanil did not induce
reduced sensitivity to these two fungicides. The second objective was to assess
if reduced sensitivity to mefenoxam could occur in naturally sensitive isolates
of other Phytophthora species and of Phytopythium sp., another oomycete plant
pathogen. All Phytophthora spp. assessed (P. infestans, P. betacei, and P.
pseudocryptogea) as well as Phytopythium sp. acquired resistance to mefenoxam
after previous exposure through medium containing 1 µg ml-1 of mefenoxam.
Interestingly, isolate 66 of Phytopythium sp. and the isolate of P.
pseudocryptogea tested do not seem to be acquiring resistance to mefenoxam after 
exposure to medium containing 5 µg ml-1 of this fungicide. The tested isolates of
P. palmivora and P. cinnamomi were extremely sensitive to mefenoxam, and thus it 
was not possible to perform a second transfer to access acquisition of resistance
to this fungicide.

DOI: 10.1094/PDIS-10-18-1906-RE 
PMID: 31765279  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

