
1. Infect Immun. 2020 Feb 20;88(3). pii: e00798-19. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00798-19. Print
2020 Feb 20.

Evasion of Innate Lymphoid Cell-Regulated Gamma Interferon Responses by Chlamydia
muridarum To Achieve Long-Lasting Colonization in Mouse Colon.

Koprivsek JJ(1), He Y(1), Song C(1), Zhang N(1), Tumanov A(1), Zhong G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of
Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of
Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, USA
Zhongg@UTHSCSA.edu.

Revealing the mechanisms by which bacteria establish long-lasting colonization in
the gastrointestinal tract is an area of intensive investigation. The obligate
intracellular bacterium Chlamydia is known to colonize mouse colon for long
periods. A colonization-deficient mutant strain of this intracellular bacterium
is able to regain long-lasting colonization in gamma interferon (IFN-γ) knockout 
mice following intracolon inoculation. We now report that mice deficient in
conventional T lymphocytes or recombination-activating gene (Rag) failed to show 
rescue of mutant colonization. Nevertheless, antibody depletion of IFN-γ or
genetic deletion of interleukin 2 (IL-2) receptor common gamma chain in
Rag-deficient mice did rescue mutant colonization. These observations suggest
that colonic IFN-γ, responsible for inhibiting the intracellular bacterial
mutant, is produced by innate lymphoid cells (ILCs). Consistently, depletion of
NK1.1+ cells in Rag-deficient mice both prevented IFN-γ production and rescued
mutant colonization. Furthermore, mice deficient in transcriptional factor RORγt,
but not chemokine receptor CCR6, showed full rescue of the long-lasting
colonization of the mutant, indicating a role for group 3-like ILCs. However, the
inhibitory function of the responsible group 3-like ILCs was not dependent on the
natural killer cell receptor (NCR1), since NCR1-deficient mice still inhibited
mutant colonization. Consistently, mice deficient in the transcriptional factor
T-bet only delayed the clearance of the bacterial mutant without fully rescuing
the long-lasting colonization of the mutant. Thus, we have demonstrated that the 
obligate intracellular bacterium Chlamydia maintains its long-lasting
colonization in the colon by evading IFN-γ from group 3-like ILCs.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00798-19 
PMCID: PMC7035925
PMID: 31818961  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

