
1. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2020 Jan;120:101904. doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2020.101904. Epub 
2020 Jan 15.

relA is Achilles' heel for mycobacterial pathogens as demonstrated with deletion 
mutants in Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis and mycobacterium bovis
bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG).

Abdellrazeq GS(1), Mahmoud AH(2), Park KT(3), Fry LM(4), Elnaggar MM(1),
Schneider DA(4), Hulubei V(5), Davis WC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA, USA; Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Alexandria University, Egypt.
(2)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA, USA; Veterinary Quarantine of Alexandria, General
Organization for Veterinary Services, Ministry of Agriculture and Land
Reclamation, Egypt.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, Inje University, Injero 197, Kimhae-si,
Gyeongsangnam-do, South Korea.
(4)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA, USA; USDA, ARS, Animal Disease Research Unit, Pullman,
WA, USA.
(5)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA, USA.
(6)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA, USA. Electronic address: davisw@wsu.edu.

Studies with Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis (Map) in cattle revealed
deletion of relA, a global regulator gene, abrogated ability of the mutant to
establish a persistent infection, attributed to development of an immune response
that cleared infection. Analysis of the recall response demonstrated presence of 
CD8 cytotoxic T cells that kill intracellular bacteria. Replication of the
primary response demonstrated the CTL response could be elicited with the
ΔMap/relA mutant or the target of the immune response, a 35 kD membrane protein. 
Follow up comparative studies with Mycobacterium bovis bacillus Calmette-Guérin
(BCG) and a BCG relA (ΔBCG/relA) deletion mutant revealed deletion of relA
enhanced the CTL response compared to BCG. Analysis of the cytokine profile of
cells proliferating in response to stimulation with BCG or BCG/relA showed
increased expression of IFN-γ, TNF-α, and IL-17 by cells stimulated with
ΔBCG/relA in comparison with BCG. The proliferative and CTL responses were
markedly reduced in response to stimulation with heat killed BCG or ΔBCG/relA.
Intracellular bacterial killing was mediated through the perforin, granzyme B
(GnzB), and the granulysin pathway. The data indicate relA is the Achilles' heel 
for pathogenic mycobacteria and deletion may be key to improving efficacy of
attenuated vaccines for mycobacterial pathogens.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tube.2020.101904 
PMID: 32090858  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no competing interests.

