
1. Front Immunol. 2020 Apr 24;11:660. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00660. eCollection
2020.

Structural Insights Into How Proteoglycans Determine Chemokine-CXCR1/CXCR2
Interactions: Progress and Challenges.

Rajarathnam K(1)(2)(3), Desai UR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas
Medical Branch at Galveston, Galveston, TX, United States.
(2)Sealy Center for Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics, The University
of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, Galveston, TX, United States.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Texas Medical
Branch at Galveston, Galveston, TX, United States.
(4)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Institute for Structural Biology, Drug
Discovery and Development, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, United
States.

Proteoglycans (PGs), present in diverse environments, such as the cell membrane
surface, extracellular milieu, and intracellular granules, are fundamental to
life. Sulfated glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) are covalently attached to the core
protein of proteoglycans. PGs are complex structures, and are diverse in terms of
amino acid sequence, size, shape, and in the nature and number of attached GAG
chains, and this diversity is further compounded by the phenomenal diversity in
GAG structures. Chemokines play vital roles in human pathophysiology, from
combating infection and cancer to leukocyte trafficking, immune surveillance, and
neurobiology. Chemokines mediate their function by activating receptors that
belong to the GPCR class, and receptor interactions are regulated by how, when,
and where chemokines bind GAGs. GAGs fine-tune chemokine function by regulating
monomer/dimer levels and chemotactic/haptotactic gradients, which are also
coupled to how they are presented to their receptors. Despite their small size
and similar structures, chemokines show a range of GAG-binding geometries,
affinities, and specificities, indicating that chemokines have evolved to exploit
the repertoire of chemical and structural features of GAGs. In this review, we
summarize the current status of research on how GAG interactions regulate
ELR-chemokine activation of CXCR1 and CXCR2 receptors, and discuss knowledge gaps
that must be overcome to establish causal relationships governing the impact of
GAG interactions on chemokine function in human health and disease.

Copyright © 2020 Rajarathnam and Desai.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00660 
PMCID: PMC7193095
PMID: 32391006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

