
1. Neurotox Res. 2020 Jun;38(1):199-210. doi: 10.1007/s12640-020-00205-0. Epub 2020 
May 14.

Curcumin Administration Mitigates Cyclophosphamide-Induced Oxidative Damage and
Restores Alteration of Enzymes Associated with Cognitive Function in Rats' Brain.

Akomolafe SF(1), Olasehinde TA(2)(3), Oyeleye SI(4), Aluko TB(5), Adewale OO(5), 
Ijomone OM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Ekiti State University, Ado
Ekiti, Nigeria.
(2)Nutrition and Toxicology Division, Food Technology Department, Federal
Institute of Industrial Research Oshodi, Lagos, Nigeria.
tosinolasehinde26@yahoo.com.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Fort Hare, Alice,
Eastern Cape, South Africa. tosinolasehinde26@yahoo.com.
(4)Department of Biomedical Technology, Federal University of Technology Akure,
Akure, Ondo State, Nigeria.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Basic and Applied Sciences, Osun State 
University, Osogbo, Nigeria.
(6)The Neuro-Lab, Department of Human Anatomy, School of Health and Health
Technology, Federal University of Technology Akure, Akure, Ondo State, Nigeria.

The use of chemotherapeutic drugs is associated with oxidative damage, cognitive 
dysfunction, and brain damage. This study sought to investigate the
neuroprotective effect of curcumin against cognitive problems associated with
treatment with cyclophosphamide via assessment of biomolecules associated with
cognitive function in rats' brain homogenates. Rats were divided in to five
groups: Control (vehicle), CUR (curcumin [20 mg/kg]), CPA (cyclophosphamide
[150 mg/kg]), CUR1 + CPA (curcumin [20 mg/kg] and cyclophosphamide [150 mg/kg]), 
and CPA + CUR2 (cyclophosphamide [150 mg/kg] and curcumin [20 mg/kg]). After the 
treatment, cognitive behavior was assessed and enzymes [cholinesterases,
purinergic enzymes, arginase, and angiotensin I-converting enzyme] associated
with cognitive function were examined. Oxidative stress parameters [total thiol, 
non-protein thiol, malondialdehyde, and nitric oxide] including the expression of
caspase-3 were also assessed in rats' brain. Our results showed that curcumin
improved cognitive behavior, attenuated cholinergic deficit as revealed by the
inhibition of cholinesterases, and improved purinergic signaling in
cyclophosphamide-treated rats. Furthermore, curcumin reduced
angiotensin-I-converting enzyme and arginase activities before and after
treatment with cyclophosphamide. Curcumin also improved redox balance and showed 
protection against cyclophosphamide-induced oxidative damage to rats' brain via
an increase in protein and non-protein thiols and nitric oxide levels as well as 
a significant reduction in malondialdehyde levels. Curcumin also prevented
neuronal degeneration in different brain regions and reduced caspase-3
expression. Hence this study suggests that pre and post-treatment with curcumin
improved neurobehavior, modulates some biomarkers associated with cognitive
function and exhibit neuroprotection against cyclophosphamide-induced
neurotoxicity in rats.

DOI: 10.1007/s12640-020-00205-0 
PMID: 32405958  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

