
1. Bacille Calmette-Guérin Vaccination: A Review of Clinical Effectiveness and
Guidelines [Internet].

Brett K, Severn M.
Ottawa (ON): Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health; 2020 Apr.
CADTH Rapid Response Reports.

Tuberculosis (TB) is an infectious disease caused by the bacteria Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, that is transmitted between humans mainly through the air.1 TB
usually affects a person’s lungs (i.e., pulmonary TB) but can also spread to
other parts of the body (i.e., extrapulmonary TB). Initial infection with M.
tuberculosis results in a period of latency in the majority (i.e., around 95%) of
people, known as latent TB infection.2 People with latent TB do not have any
symptoms, and cannot spread the TB infection to others, however, they can develop
active TB disease.1,3 Active TB disease occurs when the TB bacteria overwhelm the
immune system and begin to multiply, resulting in TB disease,3 which can occur
soon after infection (in approximately 5% of cases) or it can develop long after 
infection, following a weakening of the immune system.1,3 Symptoms of active TB
disease include a bad cough, chest pain, fever, and weight loss.4 People with
active TB disease can spread the TB bacteria to others.3 TB is common in low and 
middle income countries, however, there are still cases of TB reported in high
income countries.5 Canada has one of the lowest rates of active TB in the world,6
but new TB cases are still reported in Canada. Canada has had similar annual
rates of active TB since the 1980s, and in 2017 the annual rate of active TB in
Canada was 4.9 per 100,000 population.6 Of the 1,796 cases of active TB reported 
in Canada in 2017, 72% of cases occurred in foreign-born individuals, and 17% of 
cases occurred in Indigenous peoples born in Canada.6 These groups with high
incidences of TB within an otherwise low TB burden country represent an
opportunity for targeted approaches for preventing TB. The Bacillus
Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine, is the only vaccine against TB in general use, and
it is one of the most widely administered vaccines.7 Nevertheless, there are
still some questions with regards to the effectiveness of the BCG vaccine,
particularly, the duration of the effect, and the ability to protect against
pulmonary TB in adults.8 A global registry updated in 2017 indicates that
numerous countries still have a universal BCG vaccine strategy (e.g., most of the
countries within South America, Africa, and Asia).9 In Canada, the universal BCG 
vaccination policy was discontinued in the 1960s and 1970s, with the exception of
specific high-risk groups (i.e., selective vaccination).9 The selective
vaccination groups for the BCG vaccine in Canada currently include infants
residing in Indigenous communities or other areas with a high annual risk of TB
infection (i.e., greater than 0.1% risk); and those working in areas with higher 
risk of exposure to TB (e.g., health care workers, prison workers, those working 
with people experiencing homelessness.9,10 Other countries that have a selective 
BCG vaccination strategy include the United States, Australia, Spain, and France.
In Greenland, the universal BCG vaccine policy was discontinued in 1990 and
reintroduced in 1996.9 Selective BCG vaccination in high-risk groups in otherwise
low TB burden countries may pose challenges such as incomplete coverage of
at-risk individuals due to difficulties identifying or reaching these
communities.11 The purpose of this report is to review and critically appraise
the evidence pertaining to the effectiveness of the BCG vaccine in populations at
risk of exposure to TB, including evidence from high and low TB burden countries.
Additionally, evidence-based guidelines with recommendations regarding the use of
the BCG vaccine will be reviewed. This information may be used to inform decision
making relating to health policy on the use of the BCG vaccine. This report is a 
component of a larger CADTH Condition Level Review on TB. A condition level
review is an assessment that incorporates all aspects of a condition, from
prevention, detection, treatment, and management. For more information on CADTH’s
Condition Level Review of TB, please visit the project page
(https://www.cadth.ca/tuberculosis).

PMID: 33074634 

