
1. Int J Syst Bacteriol. 1995 Oct;45(4):712-6.

Phylogenetic inferences and taxonomic consequences of 16S ribosomal DNA sequence 
comparison of Chromohalobacter marismortui, Volcaniella eurihalina, and Deleya
salina and reclassification of V. eurihalina as Halomonas eurihalina comb. nov.

Mellado E(1), Moore ER, Nieto JJ, Ventosa A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University
of Seville, Spain.

The phylogenetic positions of the moderately halophilic bacteria Chromohalobacter
marismortui, Volcaniella eurihalina, and Deleya salina were determined by PCR
amplification of rRNA genes and direct sequencing. The resulting data were
compared with data for other bacteria obtained from 16S rRNA sequence databases. 
C. marismortui, V. eurihalina, and D. salina clustered phylogenetically within
the gamma subclass of the Proteobacteria and are closely related to other species
on the Halomonas-Deleya branch. C. marismortui belongs in the family
Halomonadaceae and has the characteristic 16S rRNA signatures defined for this
family, including the distinctive cytosine residue at position 486 found in all
members of the Halomonadaceae. V. eurihalina is closely related to the type
species of the genus Halomonas, Halomonas elongata, and we formally propose that 
V. eurihalina should be transferred to the genus Halomonas as Halomonas
eurihalina comb. nov. The type strain of this species is strain F9-6 (= ATCC
49336). D. salina is not as closely related to other species belonging to the
Halomonas-Deleya complex, but is more closely related to Halomonas elongata than 
to Deleya aquamarina, the type species of the genus Deleya. A polyphasic approach
will be necessary to determine the natural taxonomic positions of the species
belonging to the genera Halomonas and Deleya, as well as C. marismortui, V.
eurihalina, Halovibrio variabilis, and Paracoccus halodenitrificans.

DOI: 10.1099/00207713-45-4-712 
PMID: 7547290  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

