
1. J Bacteriol. 1995 Apr;177(8):2050-6.

An Escherichia coli chromosomal ars operon homolog is functional in arsenic
detoxification and is conserved in gram-negative bacteria.

Diorio C(1), Cai J, Marmor J, Shinder R, DuBow MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, McGill University, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada.

Arsenic is a known toxic metalloid, whose trivalent and pentavalent ions can
inhibit many biochemical processes. Operons which encode arsenic resistance have 
been found in multicopy plasmids from both gram-positive and gram-negative
bacteria. The resistance mechanism is encoded from a single operon which
typically consists of an arsenite ion-inducible repressor that regulates
expression of an arsenate reductase and inner membrane-associated arsenite export
system. Using a lacZ transcriptional gene fusion library, we have identified an
Escherichia coli operon whose expression is induced by cellular exposure to
sodium arsenite at concentrations as low as 5 micrograms/liter. This chromosomal 
operon was cloned, sequenced, and found to consist of three cistrons which we
named arsR, arsB, and arsC because of their strong homology to plasmid-borne ars 
operons. Mutants in the chromosomal ars operon were found to be approximately 10-
to 100-fold more sensitive to sodium arsenate and arsenite exposure than
wild-type E. coli, while wild-type E. coli that contained the operon cloned on a 
ColE1-based plasmid was found to be at least 2- to 10-fold more resistant to
sodium arsenate and arsenite. Moreover, Southern blotting and high-stringency
hybridization of this operon with chromosomal DNAs from a number of bacterial
species showed homologous sequences among members of the family
Enterobacteriaceae, and hybridization was detectable even in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa. These results suggest that the chromosomal ars operon may be the
evolutionary precursor of the plasmid-borne operon, as a multicopy plasmid
location would allow the operon to be amplified and its products to confer
increased resistance to this toxic metalloid.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.177.8.2050-2056.1995 
PMCID: PMC176848
PMID: 7721697  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

