
1. J Clin Dent. 1994;4(4):114-9.

Relationship between volatile sulfur compounds, BANA-hydrolyzing bacteria and
gingival health in patients with and without complaints of oral malodor.

De Boever EH(1), De Uzeda M, Loesche WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological and Materials Sciences, University of Michigan School
of Dentistry, Ann Arbor.

The aim of this study was to obtain measurements of oral malodor, as measured by 
volatile sulfur compounds (VSC), in periodontally healthy individuals without any
complaints of bad breath, and to compare the results with data obtained from
patients with complaints of oral malodor. The quality of the mouth air was
assessed organoleptically and a portable sulfide monitor was used to measure the 
concentration of VSC in mouth air. The gingival health of 35 individuals (21 M,
14 F; ages 18-57 years) without any malodor complaints was evaluated according to
the Papillary Bleeding Score (PBS). Pocket depths and Bleeding upon Probing (BOP)
were also recorded in 20 patients (11 females and 9 males ranging in age from 14 
to 71 years) who complained of oral malodor. Scrapings of the dorsal surface of
the tongue and each of 6 plaque samples per patient were evaluated for the
presence of BANA-positive species, such as T. denticola, P. gingivalis, and B.
forsythus. The organoleptic ratings and VSC values were significantly higher in
the complaint group (p < 0.05). Subjects in the complaint group had a
significantly higher percentage of bleeding sites (p < 0.005) and had
significantly more plaques that tested positive for the presence of
BANA-hydrolyzing species (p < 0.05). Tongue scrapings of subjects with a high
organoleptic score consistently yielded a positive BANA reaction suggesting that 
the dorsal surface of the tongue is an important niche for BANA-positive,
VSC-producing bacteria. This study suggests that the primary sources of VSC
production are BANA-hydrolyzing bacteria in the plaque and on the dorsal surface 
of the tongue.


PMID: 8031479  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

