
1. Eur J Biochem. 1994 Aug 1;223(3):909-16.

Differentiation-induced increase in Clostridium botulinum C3 exoenzyme-catalyzed 
ADP-ribosylation of the small GTP-binding protein Rho.

Fritz G(1), Just I, Wollenberg P, Aktories K.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, Universität des Saarlandes,
Homburg, Germany.

The specific [32P]ADP-ribosylation by Clostridium botulinum exoenzyme C3 was used
to study differentiation-dependent changes in the regulation of the
low-molecular-mass GTP-binding protein Rho. Differentiation of F9 teratocarcinoma
cells to neuronal-like cells by treatment with retinoic acid and
dibutyryl-adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate [(Bt)2cAMP] increased the C3-catalyzed
ADP-ribosylation of RhoA proteins in cytosolic and membrane fractions by about
threefold and sixfold, respectively. Phenotypical differentiation of F9 cells was
not required for increase in ADP-ribosylation. Increase in ADP-ribosylation after
(Bt)2cAMP and retinoic acid treatments was blocked by cycloheximide, indicating
the requirement of protein biosynthesis. As deduced from specific rho mRNA
amounts and from Western analysis with a monoclonal RhoA antibody, the
stimulation in the [32P]ADP-ribosylation of Rho was not caused by an increased
de-novo synthesis of Rho proteins. GDP increased the ADP-ribosylation of
membrane-associated Rho from non-differentiated, but not from differentiated F9
cells. GTP[S] decreased ADP-ribosylation of membranous Rho from differentiated
and much less from non-differentiated F9 cells. Differentiation-dependent
increase in ADP-ribosylation of cytosolic Rho was reversed by protein phosphatase
type-1. Treatment with SDS (0.01%) which releases Rho from complexation with
guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor, increased ADP-ribosylation both in
differentiated and non-differentiated cells, indicating no
differentiation-specific change of such complexes. In total, our data indicate
that the induction of the differentiation process in F9 cells is accompanied by
changes in the regulation of cytosolic and membrane-associated Rho proteins.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1994.tb19068.x 
PMID: 8055968  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

