
1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1996 Feb 1;326(1):48-56.

Escherichia coli biotin synthase: an investigation into the factors required for 
its activity and its sulfur donor.

Sanyal I(1), Gibson KJ, Flint DH.

Author information: 
(1)Central Research and Development, Experimental Station, E. I. du Pont de
Nemours and Co., Wilmington, Delaware 19880-0328, USA.

Biotin synthase catalyzes the chemically difficult final step in the biotin
biosynthetic pathway and is encoded by the bioB gene in Escherichia coli. In the 
present work, we extend our characterization of this enzymatic reaction and the
extensive set of factors required by it. A defined mixture of components that
supports the biotin synthase reaction has been found. The mixture contains biotin
synthase, flavodoxin, flavodoxin reductase, NADPH, Ado-Met, Fe,
fructose-1,6-bisphosphate, cysteine, and dithiothreitol. Even though this defined
mixture supports the biotin synthase reaction, and in that regard is an important
step forward in the study of this enzyme, it is unlikely that it contains all the
physiologically significant factors involved in the biotin synthase reaction
since it supports as an upper limit the synthesis of only 2 mol of biotin per
mole of biotin synthase monomer. Progress in our efforts to identify additional
physiologically significant factors is also reported. First, we describe evidence
that the fructose 1,6-bisphosphate in the defined reaction mixture is
substituting for an unknown factor of considerably higher potency present in
crude extracts. Second, we have found that a labile low-molecular-weight product 
of the 7,8-diaminopelargonic acid aminotransferase reaction stimulates the rate
of biotin formation in the defined biotin synthase reaction mixture and can
increase the final amount of biotin formed by threefold. This product seems to be
derived from Ado-Met, which 7,8-diaminopelargonic acid aminotransferase uses as
its amino donor. However, 5'-deoxy-5'-methylthioadenosine, the postulated
breakdown product from the action of 7,8-diaminopelargonic acid aminotransferase 
on Ado-Met, cannot be the active material since it has no stimulatory effect when
added to the biotin synthase reaction mixture. Third, with a defined reaction
mixture in hand, [35S]cysteine and [35S]Ado-Met, two potential sulfur donors
present in the defined reaction mixture, were tested separately as sulfur donors.
No 35S was incorporated into newly formed biotin when either [35S]cysteine or
[35S]Ado-Met was added to the defined biotin synthase reaction mixture.

DOI: 10.1006/abbi.1996.0045 
PMID: 8579371  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

