
1. Annu Rev Microbiol. 1996;50:137-81.

Cobalamin (coenzyme B12): synthesis and biological significance.

Roth JR(1), Lawrence JG, Bobik TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City 84112, USA.

This review examines deoxyadenosylcobalamin (Ado-B12) biosynthesis, transport,
use, and uneven distribution among living forms. We describe how genetic analysis
of enteric bacteria has contributed to these issues. Two pathways for corrin ring
formation have been found-an aerobic pathway (in P. denitrificans) and an
anaerobic pathway (in P. shermanii and S. typhimurium)-that differ in the point
of cobalt insertion. Analysis of B12 transport in E. coli reveals two systems:
one (with two proteins) for the outer membrane, and one (with three proteins) for
the inner membrane. To account for the uneven distribution of B12 in living
forms, we suggest that the B12 synthetic pathway may have evolved to allow
anaerobic fermentation of small molecules in the absence of an external electron 
acceptor. Later, evolution of the pathway produced siroheme, (allowing use of
inorganic electron acceptors), chlorophyll (O2 production), and heme (aerobic
respiration). As oxygen became a larger part of the atmosphere, many organisms
lost fermentative functions and retained dependence on newer, B12 functions that 
did not involve fermentation. Paradoxically, Salmonella spp. synthesize B12 only 
anaerobically but can use B12 (for degradation of ethanolamine and propanediol)
only with oxygen. Genetic analysis of the operons for these degradative functions
indicate that anaerobic degradation is important. Recent results suggest that B12
can be synthesized and used during anaerobic respiration using tetrathionate (but
not nitrate or fumarate) as an electron acceptor. The branch of enteric taxa from
which Salmonella spp. and E. coli evolved appears to have lost the ability to
synthesize B12 and the ability to use it in propanediol and glycerol degradation.
Salmonella spp., but not E. coli, have acquired by horizontal transfer the
ability to synthesize B12 and degrade propanediol. The acquired ability to
degrade propanediol provides the selective force that maintains B12 synthesis in 
this group.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.micro.50.1.137 
PMID: 8905078  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

