
1. Structure. 1996 Nov 15;4(11):1303-15.

The crystal structure of a class II fructose-1,6-bisphosphate aldolase shows a
novel binuclear metal-binding active site embedded in a familiar fold.

Cooper SJ(1), Leonard GA, McSweeney SM, Thompson AW, Naismith JH, Qamar S, Plater
A, Berry A, Hunter WN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester,
M13 9PL, UK. wnhunter@bad.dundee.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: [corrected] Aldolases catalyze a variety of condensation and cleavage
reactions, with exquisite control on the stereochemistry. These enzymes,
therefore, are attractive catalysts for synthetic chemistry. There are two
classes of aldolase: class I aldolases utilize Schiff base formation with an
active-site lysine whilst class II enzymes require a divalent metal ion, in
particular zinc. Fructose-1,6-bisphosphate aldolase (FBP-aldolase) is used in
gluconeogenesis and glycolysis; the enzyme controls the condensation of
dihydroxyacetone phosphate with glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate to yield
fructose-1,6-bisphosphate. Structures are available for class I FBP-aldolases but
there is a paucity of detail on the class II enzymes. Characterization is sought 
to enable a dissection of structure/activity relationships which may assist the
construction of designed aldolases for use as biocatalysts in synthetic
chemistry.
RESULTS: The structure of the dimeric class II FBP-aldolase from Escherichia coli
has been determined using data to 2.5 A resolution. The asymmetric unit is one
subunit which presents a familiar fold, the (alpha/beta)8 barrel. The active
centre, at the C-terminal end of the barrel, contains a novel bimetallic-binding 
site with two metal ions 6.2 A apart. One ion, the identity of which is not
certain, is buried and may play a structural or activating role. The other metal 
ion is zinc and is positioned at the surface of the barrel to participate in
catalysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Comparison of the structure with a class II fuculose aldolase
suggests that these enzymes may share a common mechanism. Nevertheless, the class
II enzymes should be subdivided into two categories on consideration of subunit
size and fold, quaternary structure and metal-ion binding sites.

DOI: 10.1016/s0969-2126(96)00138-4 
PMID: 8939754  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

