
1. J Bacteriol. 1997 Feb;179(3):794-804.

Autodisplay: one-component system for efficient surface display and release of
soluble recombinant proteins from Escherichia coli.

Maurer J(1), Jose J, Meyer TF.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Infektionsbiologie, Max-Planck-Institut für Biologie, Tübingen,
Germany.

The immunoglobulin A protease family of secreted proteins are derived from
self-translocating polyprotein precursors which contain C-terminal domains
promoting the translocation of the N-terminally attached passenger domains across
gram-negative bacterial outer membranes. Computer predictions identified the
C-terminal domain of the Escherichia coli adhesin involved in diffuse adherence
(AIDA-I) as a member of the autotransporter family. A model of the beta-barrel
structure, proposed to be responsible for outer membrane translocation, served as
a basis for the construction of fusion proteins containing heterologous
passengers. Autotransporter-mediated surface display (autodisplay) was
investigated for the cholera toxin B subunit and the peptide antigen tag PEYFK.
Up to 5% of total cellular protein was detectable in the outer membrane as
passenger autotransporter fusion protein synthesized under control of the
constitutive P(TK) promoter. Efficient presentation of the passenger domains was 
demonstrated in the outer membrane protease T-deficient (ompT) strain E. coli
UT5600 and the ompT dsbA double mutant JK321. Surface exposure was ascertained by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, immunofluorescence microscopy, and immunogold 
electron microscopy using antisera specific for the passenger domains. In strain 
UT2300 (ompT+), the passenger domains were released from the cell surface by the 
OmpT protease at a novel specific cleavage site, R / V. Autodisplay represents a 
useful tool for future protein translocation studies with interesting
biotechnological possibilities.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.179.3.794-804.1997 
PMCID: PMC178762
PMID: 9006035  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

