
1. Clin J Sport Med. 1997 Jul;7(3):185-91.

Influence of exercise-induced plasma volume changes on the interpretation of
biochemical data following high-intensity exercise.

Kargotich S(1), Goodman C, Keast D, Fry RW, Garcia-Webb P, Crawford PM, Morton
AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Western Australia, Nedlands.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the effects that exercise-induced plasma volume changes
(PVCs) have on the interpretation of biochemical and hormonal parameters in the
blood of athletes after high-intensity exercise. It was hypothesized that two
unrelated high-intensity exercise protocols, performed by two separate subject
groups each using different exercise modes, would result in similar percentage
changes in plasma volume (% delta PV). It was further hypothesized that the %
delta PV, measured in both protocols, would comparably influence the
interpretation of biochemical variables measured following exercise.
DESIGN: An experimental before-after trial on volunteers was performed. Two
different exercise modes employing two different high-intensity acute exercise
protocols were investigated. Eight male swimmers performed an interval training
session (ITS) consisting of 15 x 100-m freestyle efforts at 95% of their maximal 
exercise intensity, and eight male runners performed a multistage discontinuous
treadmill test (MSD) to volitional exhaustion.
SETTING: The Human Performance Laboratory at the Department of Human Movement at 
the University of Western Australia.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Blood samples obtained before, immediately after, and 30, 
60, and 120 min during recovery were analyzed for plasma volume changes, urea,
uric acid, creatinine, albumin, calcium, iron, transferrin, testosterone,
cortisol, and sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG).
MAIN RESULTS: The ITS and MSD protocols produced similar and significant
alterations (p < 0.01) in plasma volume. Both protocols also elicited significant
fluctuations (p < 0.01) in the concentration of most of the parameters measured
(excluding iron). When albumin, transferrin, testosterone, and SHBG values were
adjusted for the significant % delta PV, their concentrations did not change over
the experimental period, suggesting that the changes in measured concentration of
these parameters may be, in part, due to changes in plasma volume. However, urea,
uric acid, creatinine, calcium, and cortisol, when corrected for % delta PVC,
still demonstrated significant changes (p < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: It is recommended, when sampling biochemical and hormonal parameters
in blood following an acute bout of exercise, that corrections for PVCs should be
conducted. Apparent changes in blood solutes may reflect PVCs. PVCs should be
taken into consideration when interpreting results regardless of exercise
protocol and exercise mode performed.

DOI: 10.1097/00042752-199707000-00006 
PMID: 9262885  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

