
1. J Bacteriol. 1998 Sep;180(17):4406-12.

Contribution of the Pmra promoter to expression of genes in the Escherichia coli 
mra cluster of cell envelope biosynthesis and cell division genes.

Mengin-Lecreulx D(1), Ayala J, Bouhss A, van Heijenoort J, Parquet C, Hara H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire des Enveloppes Bactériennes, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Université Paris-Sud, 91405 Orsay Cedex, France.
dominique.mengin-lecreulx@ebp.u-psud.fr

Recently, a promoter for the essential gene ftsI, which encodes
penicillin-binding protein 3 of Escherichia coli, was precisely localized 1.9 kb 
upstream from this gene, at the beginning of the mra cluster of cell division and
cell envelope biosynthesis genes (H. Hara, S. Yasuda, K. Horiuchi, and J. T.
Park, J. Bacteriol. 179:5802-5811, 1997). Disruption of this promoter (Pmra) on
the chromosome and its replacement by the lac promoter (Pmra::Plac) led to
isopropyl-beta-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG)-dependent cells that lysed in the
absence of inducer, a defect which was complemented only when the whole region
from Pmra to ftsW, the fifth gene downstream from ftsI, was provided in trans on 
a plasmid. In the present work, the levels of various proteins involved in
peptidoglycan synthesis and cell division were precisely determined in cells in
which Pmra::Plac promoter expression was repressed or fully induced. It was
confirmed that the Pmra promoter is required for expression of the first nine
genes of the mra cluster: mraZ (orfC), mraW (orfB), ftsL (mraR), ftsI, murE,
murF, mraY, murD, and ftsW. Interestingly, three- to sixfold-decreased levels of 
MurG and MurC enzymes were observed in uninduced Pmra::Plac cells. This was
correlated with an accumulation of the nucleotide precursors
UDP-N-acetylglucosamine and UDP-N-acetylmuramic acid, substrates of these
enzymes, and with a depletion of the pool of UDP-N-acetylmuramyl pentapeptide,
resulting in decreased cell wall peptidoglycan synthesis. Moreover, the
expression of ftsZ, the penultimate gene from this cluster, was significantly
reduced when Pmra expression was repressed. It was concluded that the
transcription of the genes located downstream from ftsW in the mra cluster, from 
murG to ftsZ, is also mainly (but not exclusively) dependent on the Pmra
promoter.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.180.17.4406-4412.1998 
PMCID: PMC107448
PMID: 9721276  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

