
1. J Immunol. 1998 Oct 1;161(7):3262-70.

Chemical chaperones enhance superantigen and conventional antigen presentation by
HLA-DM-deficient as well as HLA-DM-sufficient antigen-presenting cells and
enhance IgG2a production in vivo.

Ghumman B(1), Bertram EM, Watts TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Chemical chaperones, first defined in studies of mutant cystic fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator proteins, are small molecules that act as
stabilizers of proteins in their native state and have the ability in some cases 
to rescue protein-folding mutants within cells. HLA-DM is an MHC II-specific
molecular chaperone that facilitates peptide loading onto MHC II proteins and
also stabilizes empty MHC II molecules prior to their acquisition of antigenic
peptides. APC that lack HLA-DM exhibit quantitative defects in protein Ag as well
as superantigen presentation. Here we show that both the superantigen and protein
presentation defect in MHC II-transfected, HLA-DM-deficient T2 cells can be
partially overcome by treating the APC with the chemical chaperones glycerol,
DMSO, or trimethylamine oxide. These chemical chaperones also enhance
superantigen and conventional Ag presentation by wild-type APC. In vivo, glycerol
was found to act as an adjuvant and resulted in enhanced IgG2a production to
trinitrophenyl-keyhole limpet hemocyanin (TNP-KLH). In vitro, the enhancement of 
Ag presentation by chemical chaperones was found to take place at the level of
the APC and took several hours to develop. Subcellular fractionation experiments 
show that HLA-DM enhances presentation of peptides by dense endosome fractions
whereas chemical chaperones enhance presentation by light membrane fractions
(early endosome or plasma membrane). The mechanism by which these chemical
chaperones augment Ag presentation is not defined, but flow cytometric analysis
suggests that the enhancement may be due to a subtle effect on the stability of
several different proteins at the cell surface.


PMID: 9759841  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

