
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 1998 Nov;114(2):166-72.

Recognition of prostate-specific antigenic peptide determinants by human CD4 and 
CD8 T cells.

Corman JM(1), Sercarz EE, Nanda NK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Los Angeles, USA.

It is now becoming accepted that one is not tolerant to all the determinants of
self proteins: the T cell repertoire directed to some sequences in self proteins 
is intact and can be activated. When a self protein is exclusively expressed by
tumour cells, the T cell repertoire directed to the particular self antigen can
potentially be activated to attack the tumour: this would amount to induction of 
a beneficial autoimmune response. Prostate cancer offers a unique opportunity for
activation of a tumour-specific immune response owing to the exclusive synthesis 
of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) and prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSM)
by prostatic tissue and prostate tumour cells. In this study we examine the CD4
and CD8 T cell repertoires specific for peptides of PSA and PSM in normal human
male individuals, using short-term, peptide antigen-driven CD4 and CD8 T cell
lines. We show that short-term, CD4 T cell lines derived from six HLA-DR4
individuals showed strong proliferative responses to six of 10 tested peptides of
PSA, selected as to contain a DR4 binding motif. Short-term, CD8 T cell lines
from three HLA-A1 individuals showed specific cytolytic activity for autologous
targets loaded with five of five tested peptides of PSA and PSM, selected to
possess an HLA-A1 binding motif. One of the peptides chosen is termed a
'dual-motif' peptide, as it encodes determinants for both CD4 and CD8 T cells.
These results, indicating the existence of CD4 and CD8 T cells against
determinants of the self proteins, PSA and PSM, in healthy male individuals
reveal the potential of the T cell repertoire from the typical prostate cancer
patient to eradicate prostate tumours upon being appropriately activated.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2249.1998.00678.x 
PMCID: PMC1905118
PMID: 9822272  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

