
1. J Virol. 2001 Jan;75(1):408-19.

Interaction of the influenza virus nucleoprotein with the cellular CRM1-mediated 
nuclear export pathway.

Elton D(1), Simpson-Holley M, Archer K, Medcalf L, Hallam R, McCauley J, Digard
P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 1QP, United Kingdom.

Influenza virus transcription occurs in the nuclei of infected cells, where the
viral genomic RNAs are complexed with a nucleoprotein (NP) to form
ribonucleoprotein (RNP) structures. Prior to assembly into progeny virions, these
RNPs exit the nucleus and accumulate in the cytoplasm. The mechanisms responsible
for RNP export are only partially understood but have been proposed to involve
the viral M1 and NS2 polypeptides. We found that the drug leptomycin B (LMB),
which specifically inactivates the cellular CRM1 polypeptide, caused nuclear
retention of NP in virus-infected cells, indicating a role for the CRM1 nuclear
export pathway in RNP egress. However, no alteration was seen in the cellular
distribution of M1 or NS2, even in the case of a mutant virus which synthesizes
greatly reduced amounts of NS2. Furthermore, NP was distributed throughout the
nuclei of infected cells at early times postinfection but, when retained in the
nucleus at late times by LMB treatment, was redistributed to the periphery of the
nucleoplasm. No such change was seen in the nuclear distribution of M1 or NS2
after drug treatment. Similar to the behavior of NP, M1 and NS2 in infected
cells, LMB treatment of cells expressing each polypeptide in isolation caused
nuclear retention of NP but not M1 or NS2. Conversely, overexpression of CRM1
caused increased cytoplasmic accumulation of NP but had little effect on M1 or
NS2 distribution. Consistent with this, NP bound CRM1 in vitro. Overall, these
data raise the possibility that RNP export is mediated by a direct interaction
between NP and the cellular CRM1 export pathway.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.1.408-419.2001 
PMCID: PMC113933
PMID: 11119609  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

