
1. Virology. 2001 Feb 1;280(1):7-18.

Glycoprotein D homologs in herpes simplex virus type 1, pseudorabies virus, and
bovine herpes virus type 1 bind directly to human HveC(nectin-1) with different
affinities.

Connolly SA(1), Whitbeck JJ, Rux AH, Krummenacher C, van Drunen Littel-van den
Hurk S, Cohen GH, Eisenberg RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Dental Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104, USA. sconnoll@mail.med.upenn.edu

Distinct subsets of human receptors for alphaherpesviruses mediate the entry of
herpes simplex virus (HSV), pseudorabies virus (PrV), or bovine herpes virus type
1 (BHV-1) into cells. Glycoprotein D (gD) is essential for receptor-mediated
entry of all three viruses into cells. However, the gD homologs of these viruses 
share only 22-33% amino acid identity. Several entry receptors for HSV have been 
identified. Two of these, HveA (HVEM) and HveC (nectin-1), mediate entry of most 
HSV-1 and HSV-2 strains and are bound directly by HSV gD. A third receptor, HveB 
(nectin-2), mediates entry of HSV-2 and only a limited number of HSV-1 strains.
HveB and HveC can also serve as entry receptors for PrV, whereas only HveC can
serve this function for BHV-1. We show here that gD from PrV and BHV-1 binds
directly to the human receptors that mediate PrV and BHV-1 entry. We expressed
soluble forms of PrV gD and BHV-1 gD using recombinant baculoviruses and purified
each protein. Using ELISA, we detected direct binding of PrV gD to HveB and HveC 
and direct binding of BHV-1 gD to HveC. Biosensor analysis revealed that PrV gD
had a 10-fold higher affinity than HSV-1 gD for human HveC. In contrast, the
binding of BHV-1 gD to HveC was weak. PrV gD and HSV-1 gD competed for binding to
the V domain of HveC and both inhibited entry of the homologous and heterologous 
viruses. These data suggest that the two forms of gD bind to a common region on
human HveC despite their low amino acid similarity. Based on affinities for human
HveC, we predict a porcine HveC homolog may be important for PrV infection in its
natural host, whereas a BHV-1 infection in its natural host may be mediated by a 
receptor other than a bovine HveC homolog.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.2000.0747 
PMID: 11162814  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

