
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Nov;21(22):7721-30.

Mitochondrially associated hepatitis B virus X protein constitutively activates
transcription factors STAT-3 and NF-kappa B via oxidative stress.

Waris G(1), Huh KW, Siddiqui A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Program in Molecular Biology, University of
Colorado, Denver, 80262, USA.

The hepatitis B virus X protein (HBx) plays essential roles in viral replication 
and the generation of hepatocellular carcinoma. In spite of a large number of
suggestive cellular targets and functions, a clear picture of its mechanism(s) of
action has remained elusive. In this report, we continue to characterize its
recently described mitochondrial association and further examine its impact on
mitochondrial functions. HBx was previously shown to bind to a voltage-dependent 
anion channel (VDAC3) and alter the mitochondrial transmembrane potential (Delta 
Psi(m)). Here we show that, as a consequence of association with mitochondria,
HBx constitutively induces activation of transcription factors, which include
STAT-3 and NF-kappa B. This induction of activation was sensitive to the
antioxidants N-acetyl L-cysteine and pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate, as well as to
overexpression of Mn-superoxide dismutase. These results therefore implicate a
potential role of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in a process that ultimately
leads to the activation of STAT-3 and NF-kappa B. Evidence is also presented for 
the HBx-induced generation of ROS. The ability of HBx to induce the activation of
STAT-3 and NF-kappa B was demonstrated by mobility shift and reporter gene
expression assays with lysates from HBx-transfected HepG2 cells. A C-terminal HBx
deletion mutant, HBx Delta 99, failed to bind VDAC3 and activate STAT-3 and
NF-kappa B. These studies shed new light on the physiological significance of
HBx's mitochondrial association and its role in inducing oxidative stress which
can contribute to the liver disease pathogenesis associated with the hepatitis B 
virus infection.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.21.22.7721-7730.2001 
PMCID: PMC99943
PMID: 11604508  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

