
1. Virology. 2002 Jan 20;292(2):198-210.

Hepatitis C virus NS5A colocalizes with the core protein on lipid droplets and
interacts with apolipoproteins.

Shi ST(1), Polyak SJ, Tu H, Taylor DR, Gretch DR, Lai MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, University of Southern
California, Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90033, USA.

The nonstructural protein 5A (NS5A) of the hepatitis C virus (HCV) has been shown
to interact with a variety of cellular proteins and implicated in the regulation 
of cell growth, interferon resistance, and other cellular signaling pathways, but
the role of NS5A in HCV pathogenesis has not been firmly established. To further 
characterize this multifunctional protein, we instigated the studies of the
subcellular localization of NS5A in a hepatoma cell line. NS5A was localized to
the perinuclear membrane structures, including the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and
the Golgi apparatus, by immunofluorescence staining and confocal microscopy. In
addition, it was also associated with the surface of cytoplasmic globular
structures when expressed alone or as a part of the NS3-5B polyprotein. Oil red O
staining revealed that these globular structures were lipid droplets, where the
HCV core protein was also localized. The association of NS5A with intracellular
membrane was further confirmed by membrane flotation analysis. To determine
whether NS5A interacts with any cellular lipid-binding protein, we performed
yeast two-hybrid screening in both HepG2 and human liver cDNA libraries.
Apolipoprotein A1 (apoA1), one of the protein components of high-density
lipoprotein (HDL) particles, was identified by two independent screening
processes. The interaction between NS5A and apoA1 was confirmed by both in vitro 
pull-down and in vivo coimmunoprecipitation experiments. Immunofluorescence
staining revealed a significant colocalization of NS5A and apoA1 in the Golgi
apparatus. Our results established an association of NS5A with lipid droplets and
apoA1, suggesting that NS5A, together with the core protein, may play a role in
the pathogenesis of the derangement of lipid metabolism, contributing to liver
steatosis commonly observed in hepatitis C.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.2001.1225 
PMID: 11878923  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

