
1. J Virol. 2002 Apr;76(8):3828-38.

Functional interaction between JC virus late regulatory agnoprotein and cellular 
Y-box binding transcription factor, YB-1.

Safak M(1), Sadowska B, Barrucco R, Khalili K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neurovirology, Center for Neurovirology and Cancer
Biology, College of Science and Technology, Temple University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19122, USA.

Human polyomavirus JC virus (JCV) is a causative agent of progressive multifocal 
leukoencephalopathy which results from lytic infection of glial cells. Although
significant progress has been made in understanding the regulation of JCV gene
transcription, the mechanism(s) underlying the viral lytic cycle remains largely 
unknown. We recently reported that the JCV late auxiliary Agnoprotein may have a 
regulatory role in JCV gene transcription and replication. Here, we investigated 
its regulatory function in viral gene transcription through its physical and
functional interaction with YB-1, a cellular transcription factor which
contributes to JCV gene expression in glial cells. Time course studies revealed
that Agnoprotein is first detected at day 3 postinfection and that its level
increased during the late stage of the infection cycle. Agnoprotein is mainly
localized to the cytoplasmic compartment of the infected cell, with high
concentrations found in the perinuclear region. While the position of Agnoprotein
throughout the infection cycle remained relatively unaltered, the subcellular
distribution of YB-1 between the cytoplasm and nucleus changed. Results from
coimmunoprecipitation and glutathione S-transferase pull-down experiments
revealed that Agnoprotein physically interacts with YB-1 and that the
amino-terminal region of Agnoprotein, between residues 1 and 36, is critical for 
this association. Further investigation of this interaction by functional assays 
demonstrated that Agnoprotein negatively regulates YB-1-mediated gene
transcription and that the region corresponding to residues 1 to 36 of
Agnoprotein is important for the observed regulatory event. Taken together, these
data demonstrate that the interaction of the viral late regulatory Agnoprotein
and cellular Y-box binding factor YB-1 modulates transcriptional activity of JCV 
promoters.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.76.8.3828-3838.2002 
PMCID: PMC136065
PMID: 11907223  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

