
1. J Mol Biol. 2002 Apr 19;318(1):149-59.

Functional interactions of nucleocapsid protein of feline immunodeficiency virus 
and cellular prion protein with the viral RNA.

Moscardini M(1), Pistello M, Bendinelli M, Ficheux D, Miller JT, Gabus C, Le
Grice SF, Surewicz WK, Darlix JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, University of Pisa, I-56127 Pisa, Italy.

All lentiviruses and oncoretroviruses examined so far encode a major nucleic-acid
binding protein (nucleocapsid or NC* protein), approximately 2500 molecules of
which coat the dimeric RNA genome. Studies on HIV-1 and MoMuLV using in vitro
model systems and in vivo have shown that NC protein is required to chaperone
viral RNA dimerization and packaging during virus assembly, and proviral DNA
synthesis by reverse transcriptase (RT) during infection. The human cellular
prion protein (PrP), thought to be the major component of the agent causing
transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSE), was recently found to possess a 
strong affinity for nucleic acids and to exhibit chaperone properties very
similar to HIV-1 NC protein in the HIV-1 context in vitro. Tight binding of PrP
to nucleic acids is proposed to participate directly in the prion disease
process. To extend our understanding of lentiviruses and of the unexpected
nucleic acid chaperone properties of the human prion protein, we set up an in
vitro system to investigate replication of the feline immunodeficiency virus
(FIV), which is functionally and phylogenetically distant from HIV-1. The results
show that in the FIV model system, NC protein chaperones viral RNA dimerization, 
primer tRNA(Lys,3) annealing to the genomic primer-binding site (PBS) and minus
strand DNA synthesis by the homologous FIV RT. FIV NC protein is able to trigger 
specific viral DNA synthesis by inhibiting self-priming of reverse transcription.
The human prion protein was found to mimic the properties of FIV NC with respect 
to primer tRNA annealing to the viral RNA and chaperoning minus strand DNA
synthesis.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/S0022-2836(02)00092-X 
PMID: 12054775  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

