
1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 6;277(36):33058-67. Epub 2002 Jun 11.

The double-stranded RNA-activated kinase, PKR, can phosphorylate hepatitis D
virus small delta antigen at functional serine and threonine residues.

Chen CW(1), Tsay YG, Wu HL, Lee CH, Chen DS, Chen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Microbiology and Graduate Institute of Clinical
Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Hepatitis D virus (HDV) encodes two proteins, the 24-kDa small delta antigen
(S-HDAg) and 27-kDa large delta antigen (L-HDAg) in its single open reading
frame. Both of them had been identified as nuclear phosphoproteins. Moreover, the
phosphorylated form of S-HDAg was shown to be important for HDV replication.
However, the kinase responsible for S-HDAg phosphorylation remains unknown.
Therefore, we employed an in-gel kinase assay to search candidate kinases and
indeed identified a kinase with a molecular mass of about 68 kDa. Much evidence
demonstrated this kinase to be the double-stranded RNA-activated kinase, PKR. The
immunoprecipitated endogenous PKR was sufficient to catalyze S-HDAg
phosphorylation, and the kinase activity disappeared in the PKR-depleted cell
lysate. The S-HDAg and PKR could be co-immunoprecipitated together, and both of
them co-located in the nucleolus. The LC/MS/MS analysis revealed that the serine 
177, serine 180, and threonine 182 of S-HDAg were phosphorylated by PKR in vitro.
This result was consistent with previous phosphoamino acid analysis indicating
that serine and threonine were phosphorylation targets in S-HDAg. Furthermore,
serine 177 was also shown to be the predominant phosphorylation site for S-HDAg
purified the from cell line. In dominant negative PKR-transfected cells, the
level of phosphorylated S-HDAg was suppressed, but replication of HDV was
enhanced. Other than human immunodeficiency virus type 1 trans-activating protein
(Tat), S-HDAg is another viral protein phosphorylated by PKR that may regulates
HDV replication and viral response to interferon therapy.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M200613200 
PMID: 12060652  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

