
1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 6;277(49):47854-60. Epub 2002 Sep 16.

Carboxyl terminus of hVIP/mov34 is critical for HIV-1-Vpr interaction and
glucocorticoid-mediated signaling.

Ramanathan MP(1), Curley E 3rd, Su M, Chambers JA, Weiner DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Human immunodeficiency virus, type 1 (HIV-1) vpr is a highly conserved gene among
lentiviruses. The diverse functions of Vpr support interactions of this HIV
accessory protein with host cell partners of important pathways. hVIP/mov34
(human Vpr Interacting Protein) is one of these identified Vpr ligands. hVIP is a
34-kDa member of the eIF3 family that is vital for early embryonic development in
transgenic mice and important in cell cycle regulation. Its interaction with Vpr,
however, is not yet clearly defined. Therefore, we constructed a panel of
deletion mutants of this cytoplasmic cellular ligand to map the protein domain
that mediates its interaction with Vpr. We observed that the carboxyl-terminal
region of hVIP is critical for its interaction with Vpr. In the absence of Vpr or
HIV infection, full-length hVIP is expressed in the cytoplasm. The cytoplasmic
localization pattern of full-length hVIP protein, however, is shifted to a clear 
nuclear localization pattern in cells expressing both hVIP and Vpr. In contrast, 
Vpr did not alter the localization pattern of hVIP mutants, which have their
carboxyl-terminal domain deleted. The movement of hVIP supported prior work that 
suggested that Vpr triggers activation of the GR receptor complex. In fact, we
also observed that dexamethasone moves hVIP into the nucleus and that
glucocorticoid antagonists inhibit this effect. Interestingly, the expression of 
an hVIP carboxyl-terminal mutant, which is not responsive to Vpr, is also not
responsive to dexamethasone. These data illustrate that the carboxyl-terminal
domain of hVIP is critical for mediating hVIP-Vpr interaction as well as for its 
glucocorticoid response. These results support the view that hVIP is a member of 
the complex array of nucleocytoplasmic shuttling proteins that are regulated by
HIV infection and glucocorticoids.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M203905200 
PMID: 12237292  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

