
1. Virology. 2002 Nov 10;303(1):69-78.

Interaction of human papillomavirus type 16 L2 with cellular proteins:
identification of novel nuclear body-associated proteins.

Görnemann J(1), Hofmann TG, Will H, Müller M.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungsschwerpunkt Angewandte Tumorvirologie, Deutsches
Krebsforschungszentrum, Im Neuenheimer Feld 242, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.

Two structural proteins form the Papillomavirus (PV) capsids. While the functions
of the major structural protein L1 are well established, the exact functions for 
the minor structural protein L2 are much less well defined, except for some
information on a role in viral entry and maturation of infectious virions. To
gain more insight in the function of L2 we used the yeast two hybrid system with 
the Human Papillomavirus (HPV) 11 L2 and HPV16 L2 as bait proteins to isolate
putative cellular interaction partners. We identified four proteins interacting
with L2 proteins of at least two different HPV types and this interaction was
confirmed in vitro by pull-down assays. Further evidence for this interaction was
obtained by in vivo localization studies. Two of the proteins, the previously
described PATZ and a novel protein, designated PLINP, were localized in discrete 
nuclear domains and colocalized with L2. The third protein, designated PMSP, is a
newly identified cytoplasmic protein which was recruited to nuclear dots when
coexpressed with L2. The fourth protein interacting with HPV16, 11 and 1 L2, the 
tubular-nephritis antigen related protein (TIN-Ag-RP), shows a cytoplasmic as
well as a membrane bound subcellular distribution. Taken together, our data
indicate that L2 of HPVs with different phenotypes interacts with several
cellular host proteins, recruits one of them to the nucleus, and is complexed
with at least three cellular proteins in specific nuclear domains. These findings
suggest an HPV type-independent modulatory function of L2 on host-cell functions 
that involves discrete nuclear domains and alteration of the subcellular
distribution of cellular proteins. The interacting cellular proteins identified
may play a role in the viral life cycle and establishment of viral persistence.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.2002.1670 
PMID: 12482659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

