
1. J Virol. 2003 Mar;77(5):2936-45.

N-linked glycosylation and sequence changes in a critical negative control region
of the ASCT1 and ASCT2 neutral amino acid transporters determine their retroviral
receptor functions.

Marin M(1), Lavillette D, Kelly SM, Kabat D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon 97201-3098, USA.

A widely dispersed interference group of retroviruses that includes the feline
endogenous virus (RD114), baboon endogenous virus (BaEV), human endogenous virus 
type W (HERV-W), and type D primate retroviruses uses the human Na(+)-dependent
neutral amino acid transporter type 2 (hASCT2; gene name, SLC1A5) as a common
cell surface receptor. Although hamster cells are fully resistant to these
viruses and murine cells are susceptible only to BaEV and HERV-W pseudotype
viruses, these rodent cells both become highly susceptible to all of the viruses 
after treatment with tunicamycin, an inhibitor of protein N-linked glycosylation.
A partial explanation for these results was recently provided by findings that
the orthologous murine transporter mASCT2 is inactive as a viral receptor, that a
related (ca. 55% identity) murine paralog (mASCT1; gene name, SLC1A4) mediates
infections specifically of BaEV and HERV-W, and that N-deglycosylation of mASCT1 
activates it as a receptor for all viruses of this interference group. Because
the only two N-linked oligosaccharides in mASCT1 occur in the carboxyl-terminal
region of extracellular loop 2 (ECL2), it was inferred that this region
contributes in an inhibitory manner to infections by RD114 and type D primate
viruses. To directly and more thoroughly investigate the receptor active sites,
we constructed and analyzed a series of hASCT2/mASCT2 chimeras and site-directed 
mutants. Our results suggest that a hypervariable sequence of 21 amino acids in
the carboxyl-terminal portion of ECL2 plays a critical role in determining the
receptor properties of ASCT2 proteins for all viruses in this interference group.
In addition, we analyzed the tunicamycin-dependent viral susceptibility of
hamster cells. In contrast to mASCT1, which contains two N-linked
oligosaccharides that partially restrict viral infections, hamster ASCT1 contains
an additional N-linked oligosaccharide clustered close to the others in the
carboxyl-terminal region of ECL2. Removal of this N-linked oligosaccharide by
mutagenesis enabled hamster ASCT1 to function as a receptor for all viruses of
this interference group. These results strongly suggest that combinations of
amino acid sequence changes and N-linked oligosaccharides in a critical
carboxyl-terminal region of ECL2 control retroviral utilization of both the ASCT1
and ASCT2 receptors.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.77.5.2936-2945.2003 
PMCID: PMC149750
PMID: 12584318  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

