
1. BMC Microbiol. 2003 May 9;3:9.

Profilin is required for viral morphogenesis, syncytium formation, and
cell-specific stress fiber induction by respiratory syncytial virus.

Bitko V(1), Oldenburg A, Garmon NE, Barik S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of South Alabama,
College of Medicine, 307 University Blvd, Mobile 36688-0002, USA.
virabitko@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Actin is required for the gene expression and morphogenesis of
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), a clinically important Pneumovirus of the
Paramyxoviridae family. In HEp-2 cells, RSV infection also induces actin stress
fibers, which may be important in the immunopathology of the RSV disease.
Profilin, a major regulator of actin polymerization, stimulates viral
transcription in vitro. Thus, we tested the role of profilin in RSV growth and
RSV-actin interactions in cultured cells (ex vivo).
RESULTS: We tested three cell lines: HEp-2 (human), A549 (human), and L2 (rat).
In all three, RSV grew well and produced fused cells (syncytium), and two RSV
proteins, namely, the phosphoprotein P and the nucleocapsid protein N, associated
with profilin. In contrast, induction of actin stress fibers by RSV occurred in
HEp-2 and L2 cells, but not in A549. Knockdown of profilin by RNA interference
had a small effect on viral macromolecule synthesis but strongly inhibited
maturation of progeny virions, cell fusion, and induction of stress fibers.
CONCLUSIONS: Profilin plays a cardinal role in RSV-mediated cell fusion and viral
maturation. In contrast, interaction of profilin with the viral transcriptional
proteins P and N may only nominally activate viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. 
Stress fiber formation is a cell-specific response to infection, requiring
profilin and perhaps other signaling molecules that are absent in certain cell
lines. Stress fibers per se play no role in RSV replication in cell culture.
Clearly, the cellular architecture controls multiple steps of host-RSV
interaction, some of which are regulated by profilin.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-3-9 
PMCID: PMC156654
PMID: 12740026  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

