
1. Int J Cancer. 2003 Oct 20;107(1):65-73.

Hepatitis C virus NS5A as a potential viral Bcl-2 homologue interacts with Bax
and inhibits apoptosis in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Chung YL(1), Sheu ML, Yen SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Koo Foundation Sun Yat-Sen Cancer Center,
Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China. ylchung@mail.kfcc.org.tw

Treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells with butyrate can induce
apoptosis irrespective of hepatitis B virus integration. No information is
available, however, regarding the effect of butyrate on HCC in the presence of
hepatitis C virus (HCV) because some HCV proteins can regulate cell survival. By 
gene transfer, we found that HCV core enhances but HCV NS5A antagonizes sodium
phenylbutyrate (NaPB)-induced apoptosis in HCC cells, which is independent of
p53. We then chose the p53-negative Hep3B HCC cell to investigate the mechanism
of anti-apoptosis mediated by NS5A. In the NaPB-treated Hep3B cells without NS5A 
expression, induction of apoptosis was associated with Bax redistribution from
the cytosol to the nucleus interior and subsequently, to a nuclear membrane-bound
form. In the NS5A expressing Hep3B cells, NaPB treatment also triggered
relocalization of both Bax and NS5A from the cytosol to the nucleus interior but 
Bax retained inside the nucleus and did not finally move to the nuclear membrane.
Using double immunofluorescence and coimmunoprecipitation, we demonstrated that
NS5A co-localizes and interacts with Bax in the nucleus. The HCV NS5A protein was
further found to contain Bcl-2 homology domains (BH3, BH1 and BH2). Additional
studies using deleted NS5A constructs were carried out to determine whether the
BH2 domain or nuclear localization signal (NLS) in NS5A is required for
interaction with Bax in the nucleus or inhibition of apoptosis. NS5A with
deletion of both BH2 domain and NLS localized in the cytoplasm, dissociated with 
Bax, and lost anti-apoptosis activity during NaPB treatment. In contrast, NS5A
with intact BH domains except NLS still bound directly to Bax in the perinuclear 
region or the nucleus, but showed less association with Bax in the nucleus and
lower effect in apoptosis inhibition than full-length NS5A. These results suggest
that HCV NS5A as a Bcl-2 homologue interacts with Bax to protect p53-negative HCC
cells from NaPB-induced apoptosis.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.11303 
PMID: 12925958  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

