
1. J Virol. 1992 Aug;66(8):4992-5001.

High-affinity laminin receptor is a receptor for Sindbis virus in mammalian
cells.

Wang KS(1), Kuhn RJ, Strauss EG, Ou S, Strauss JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena 91125.

Sindbis virus is an alphavirus with a very wide host range, being able to infect 
many birds and mammals as well as mosquitoes. We have isolated a monoclonal
antibody that largely blocks virus binding to mammalian cells. This antibody was 
found to be directed against the C-terminal domain of the high-affinity laminin
receptor, a 67-kDa protein present on the cell surface that binds with high
affinity to basement membrane laminin and that is known to be important in
development and in tumor invasion. This receptor is believed to be formed from a 
295-amino-acid polypeptide that is modified in some unknown way after
translation. The primary sequence of this 295-amino-acid protein is highly
conserved among mammals. We found the hamster amino acid sequence to be identical
to a mouse sequence and to differ at only two amino acids from a human sequence
and at two amino acids from a bovine sequence. To verify the importance of the
laminin receptor for infection by Sindbis virus, hamster cells were stably
transfected with the gene encoding the 295-amino-acid protein under the control
of a high-efficiency promoter. Such transfected hamster cells overexpressed the
laminin receptor at the cell surface, bound severalfold more Sindbis virions than
did the parental cells, and became infected by Sindbis virus with a higher
efficiency. In contrast, cells transfected with the antisense gene expressed less
laminin receptor on the surface and were less susceptible to the virus. Binding
of the virus varied linearly with the amount of laminin receptor on the cell
surface, whereas infectivity measured with a plaque assay varied with the 1.4
power of the receptor concentration, suggesting that interaction with more than
one receptor aids virus penetration. By these criteria, the laminin receptor
functions as the major receptor for Sindbis virus entry into mammalian cells. We 
also found that the anti-laminin receptor antibody partially blocked Sindbis
virus binding to mosquito cells, suggesting that the laminin receptor is
conserved in mosquitoes and functions as a Sindbis virus receptor in this host.
The wide distribution of this highly conserved receptor may be in part
responsible for the broad host range exhibited by the virus, which infects a wide
range of mammals and birds as well as its mosquito vector and can infect many
different tissues within these hosts.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.66.8.4992-5001.1992 
PMCID: PMC241351
PMID: 1385835  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

