
1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2003 Dec 17;95(24):1846-59.

Interaction of retroviral Tax oncoproteins with tristetraprolin and regulation of
tumor necrosis factor-alpha expression.

Twizere JC(1), Kruys V, Lefèbvre L, Vanderplasschen A, Collete D, Debacq C, Lai
WS, Jauniaux JC, Bernstein LR, Semmes OJ, Burny A, Blackshear PJ, Kettmann R,
Willems L.

Author information: 
(1)Biologie cellulaire et moléculaire, Faculté Universitaire des Sciences
Agronomiques, Gembloux, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: The Tax oncoproteins are transcriptional regulators of viral
expression involved in pathogenesis induced by complex leukemogenic retroviruses 
(or delta-retroviruses, i.e., primate T-cell leukemia viruses and bovine leukemia
virus). To better understand the molecular pathways leading to cell
transformation, we aimed to identify cellular proteins interacting with Tax.
METHODS: We used a yeast two-hybrid system to identify interacting cellular
proteins. Interactions between Tax and candidate interacting cellular proteins
were confirmed by glutathione S-transferase (GST) pulldown assays,
co-immunoprecipitation, and confocal microscopy. Functional interactions between 
Tax and one interacting protein, tristetraprolin (TTP), were assessed by
analyzing the expression of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), which is
regulated by TTP, in mammalian cells (HeLa, D17, HEK 293, and RAW 264.7)
transiently transfected with combinations of intact and mutant Tax and TTP.
RESULTS: We obtained seven interacting cellular proteins, of which one, TTP, was 
further characterized. Tax and TTP were found to interact specifically through
their respective carboxyl-terminal domains. The proteins colocalized in the
cytoplasm in a region surrounding the nucleus of HeLa cells. Furthermore,
coexpression of Tax was associated with nuclear accumulation of TTP. TTP is an
immediate-early protein that inhibits expression of TNF-alpha at the
post-transcriptional level. Expression of Tax reverted this inhibition, both in
transient transfection experiments and in stably transfected macrophage cell
lines.
CONCLUSION: Tax, through its interactions with the TTP repressor, indirectly
increases TNF-alpha expression. This observation is of importance for the cell
transformation process induced by leukemogenic retroviruses, because TNF-alpha
overexpression plays a central role in pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1093/jnci/djg118 
PMID: 14679154  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

