
1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 27;279(35):36570-8. Epub 2004 Jun 23.

Poxvirus protein N1L targets the I-kappaB kinase complex, inhibits signaling to
NF-kappaB by the tumor necrosis factor superfamily of receptors, and inhibits
NF-kappaB and IRF3 signaling by toll-like receptors.

DiPerna G(1), Stack J, Bowie AG, Boyd A, Kotwal G, Zhang Z, Arvikar S, Latz E,
Fitzgerald KA, Marshall WL.

Author information: 
(1)Viral Immune Evasion Group, Department of Biochemistry, Trinity College,
Dublin 2, Ireland.

Poxviruses encode proteins that suppress host immune responses, including
secreted decoy receptors for pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-1
(IL-1) and the vaccinia virus proteins A46R and A52R that inhibit intracellular
signaling by members of the IL-1 receptor (IL-1R) and Toll-like receptor (TLR)
family. In vivo, the TLRs mediate the innate immune response by serving as
pathogen recognition receptors, whose oligomerized intracellular Toll/IL-1
receptor (TIR) domains can initiate innate immune signaling. A family of TIR
domain-containing adapter molecules transduces signals from engaged receptors
that ultimately activate NF-kappaB and/or interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)
to induce pro-inflammatory cytokines. Data base searches detected a significant
similarity between the N1L protein of vaccinia virus and A52R, a poxvirus
inhibitor of TIR signaling. Compared with other poxvirus virulence factors, the
poxvirus N1L protein strongly affects virulence in vivo; however, the precise
target of N1L was previously unknown. Here we show that N1L suppresses NF-kappaB 
activation following engagement of Toll/IL-1 receptors, tumor necrosis factor
receptors, and lymphotoxin receptors. N1L inhibited receptor-, adapter-, TRAF-,
and IKK-alpha and IKK-beta-dependent signaling to NF-kappaB. N1L associated with 
several components of the multisubunit I-kappaB kinase complex, most strongly
associating with the kinase, TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1). Together these
findings are consistent with the hypothesis that N1L disrupts signaling to
NF-kappaB by Toll/IL-1Rs and TNF superfamily receptors by targeting the IKK
complex for inhibition. Furthermore, N1L inhibited IRF3 signaling, which is also 
regulated by TBK1. These studies define a role for N1L as an immunomodulator of
innate immunity by targeting components of NF-kappaB and IRF3 signaling pathways.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M400567200 
PMID: 15215253  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

