
1. J Cell Sci. 2004 Aug 1;117(Pt 17):3983-93.

Human Dlg protein binds to the envelope glycoproteins of human T-cell leukemia
virus type 1 and regulates envelope mediated cell-cell fusion in T lymphocytes.

Blot V(1), Delamarre L, Perugi F, Pham D, Bénichou S, Benarous R, Hanada T,
Chishti AH, Dokhélar MC, Pique C.

Author information: 
(1)Département Biologie Cellulaire, CNRS UMR 8104 and INSERM U567, Institut
Cochin, 22 rue Méchain, 75014 Paris, France. vblot@cochin.inserm.fr

Human homologue of the Drosophila Dlg tumor suppressor (hDlg) is a widely
expressed scaffold protein implicated in the organization of multi-protein
complexes at cell adhesion sites such as the neuronal synapse. hDlg contains
three PDZ domains that mediate its binding to the consensus motifs present at the
C-termini of various cell surface proteins, thus inducing their clustering and/or
stabilization at the plasma membrane. Using a yeast two-hybrid screen, we
identified hDlg as a cellular binding partner of a viral membrane integral
protein, the envelope glycoprotein (Env) of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1
(HTLV-1). HTLV-1 is a human retrovirus that infects CD4+ T lymphocytes and is
preferentially transmitted via direct contacts between infected and target cells,
through a structure referred to as the virological synapse. Here, we demonstrate 
that hDlg interacts with a classical PDZ domain-binding motif present at the
C-terminus of the cytoplasmic domain of HTLV-1 Env and conserved in the related
HTLV-2 virus. We further document that, in HTLV-1 infected primary T cells, hDlg 
and Env are concentrated in restricted areas of the plasma membrane, enriched in 
molecules involved in T-cell contacts. The presence of Gag proteins responsible
for viral assembly and budding in these areas indicated that they constitute
platforms for viral assembly and transmission. Finally, a mutant virus unable to 
bind hDlg exhibited a decreased ability to trigger Env mediated cell fusion
between T lymphocytes. We thus propose that hDlg stabilizes HTLV-1 envelope
glycoproteins at the virological synapse formed between infected and target
cells, hence assisting the cell-to-cell transmission of the virus.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.01266 
PMID: 15286176  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

