
1. Virol J. 2005 Feb 28;2:17.

Phosphorylation of HIV Tat by PKR increases interaction with TAR RNA and enhances
transcription.

Endo-Munoz L(1), Warby T, Harrich D, McMillan NA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Immunology and Cancer Research, University of Queensland, Princess 
Alexandra Hospital, Brisbane, Australia. lmunoz@cicr.uq.edu.au

BACKGROUND: The interferon (IFN)-induced, dsRNA-dependent serine/threonine
protein kinase, PKR, plays a key regulatory role in the IFN-mediated anti-viral
response by blocking translation in the infected cell by phosphorylating the
alpha subunit of elongation factor 2 (eIF2). The human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 (HIV-1) evades the anti-viral IFN response through the binding of one of
its major transcriptional regulatory proteins, Tat, to PKR. HIV-1 Tat acts as a
substrate homologue for the enzyme, competing with eIF2alpha, and inhibiting the 
translational block. It has been shown that during the interaction with PKR, Tat 
becomes phosphorylated at three residues: serine 62, threonine 64 and serine 68. 
We have investigated the effect of this phosphorylation on the function of Tat in
viral transcription. HIV-1 Tat activates transcription elongation by first
binding to TAR RNA, a stem-loop structure found at the 5' end of all viral
transcripts. Our results showed faster, greater and stronger binding of Tat to
TAR RNA after phosphorylation by PKR.
RESULTS: We have investigated the effect of phosphorylation on Tat-mediated
transactivation. Our results showed faster, greater and stronger binding of Tat
to TAR RNA after phosphorylation by PKR. In vitro phosphorylation experiments
with a series of bacterial expression constructs carrying the wild-type tat gene 
or mutants of the gene with alanine substitutions at one, two, or all three of
the serine/threonine PKR phosphorylation sites, showed that these were subject to
different levels of phosphorylation by PKR and displayed distinct kinetic
behaviour. These results also suggested a cooperative role for the
phosphorylation of S68 in conjunction with S62 and T64. We examined the effect of
phosphorylation on Tat-mediated transactivation of the HIV-1 LTR in vivo with a
series of analogous mammalian expression constructs. Co-transfection experiments 
showed a gradual reduction in transactivation as the number of mutated
phosphorylation sites increased, and a 4-fold decrease in LTR transactivation
with the Tat triple mutant that could not be phosphorylated by PKR. Furthermore, 
the transfection data also suggested that the presence of S68 is necessary for
optimal Tat-mediated transactivation.
CONCLUSION: These results support the hypothesis that phosphorylation of Tat may 
be important for its function in HIV-1 LTR transactivation.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-2-17 
PMCID: PMC556014
PMID: 15737233  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

