
1. Retrovirology. 2005 Sep 15;2:54.

The HTLV-1 Tax protein binding domain of cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4)
includes the regulatory PSTAIRE helix.

Fraedrich K(1), M체ller B, Grassmann R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut f체r Klinische und Molekulare Virologie, Universit채t
Erlangen-N체rnberg, Schlossgarten 4, D-91054 Erlangen, Germany.
kirsten.fraedrich@viro.med.uni-erlangen.de

BACKGROUND: The Tax oncoprotein of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is
leukemogenic in transgenic mice and induces permanent T-cell growth in vitro. It 
is found in active CDK holoenzyme complexes from adult T-cell leukemia-derived
cultures and stimulates the G1- to-S phase transition by activating the
cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) CDK4. The Tax protein directly and specifically
interacts with CDK4 and cyclin D2 and binding is required for enhanced CDK4
kinase activity. The protein-protein contact between Tax and the components of
the cyclin D/CDK complexes increases the association of CDK4 and its positive
regulatory subunit cyclin D and renders the complex resistant to p21CIP
inhibition. Tax mutants affecting the N-terminus cannot bind cyclin D and CDK4.
RESULTS: To analyze, whether the N-terminus of Tax is capable of CDK4-binding, in
vitro binding -, pull down -, and mammalian two-hybrid analyses were performed.
These experiments revealed that a segment of 40 amino acids is sufficient to
interact with CDK4 and cyclin D2. To define a Tax-binding domain and analyze how 
Tax influences the kinase activity, a series of CDK4 deletion mutants was tested.
Different assays revealed two regions which upon deletion consistently result in 
reduced binding activity. These were isolated and subjected to mammalian
two-hybrid analysis to test their potential to interact with the Tax N-terminus. 
These experiments concurrently revealed binding at the N- and C-terminus of CDK4.
The N-terminal segment contains the PSTAIRE helix, which is known to control the 
access of substrate to the active cleft of CDK4 and thus the kinase activity.
CONCLUSION: Since the N- and C-terminus of CDK4 are neighboring in the predicted 
three-dimensional protein structure, it is conceivable that they comprise a
single binding domain, which interacts with the Tax N-terminus.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4690-2-54 
PMCID: PMC1253534
PMID: 16164752  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

