
1. Virology. 2006 May 25;349(1):13-21. Epub 2006 Feb 8.

Binding of the influenza A virus NS1 protein to PKR mediates the inhibition of
its activation by either PACT or double-stranded RNA.

Li S(1), Min JY, Krug RM, Sen GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic 
Foundation, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

A major component of the cellular antiviral system is the latent protein kinase
PKR, which is activated by binding to either double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) or the
cellular PACT protein. Activated PKR phosphorylates the translation initiation
factor eIF2, thereby inhibiting viral and cellular protein synthesis and virus
replication. To evade the antiviral effects of PKR, many viruses, including
influenza A virus, have evolved multiple mechanisms. For influenza A virus, the
non-structural (NS1A) protein plays a major role in blocking activation of PKR
during virus infection. The mechanism by which the NS1A protein inhibits PKR
activation in infected cells has not been established. In the present study, we
first carried out a series of in vitro experiments to determine whether the NS1A 
protein could utilize a common mechanism to inhibit PKR activation by both PACT
and dsRNA, despite their different modes of activation. We demonstrated that the 
direct binding of the NS1A protein to the N-terminal 230 amino acid region of PKR
can serve as such a common mechanism and that this binding does not require the
RNA-binding activity of the NS1A protein. The lack of requirement for NS1A
RNA-binding activity for the inhibition of PKR activation in vivo was established
by two approaches. First, we showed that an NS1A protein lacking RNA-binding
activity, like the wild-type (wt) protein, blocked PKR activation by PACT in
vivo, as well as the downstream effects of PKR activation in cells, namely, eIF2 
phosphorylation and apoptosis. In addition, we demonstrated that PKR activation
is inhibited in cells infected with a recombinant influenza A virus expressing
NS1A mutant protein that cannot bind RNA, as is the case in cells infected with
wild-type influenza A virus.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2006.01.005 
PMID: 16466763  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

