
1. J Virol. 2007 Jan;81(2):514-24. Epub 2006 Nov 1.

Inhibition of retinoic acid-inducible gene I-mediated induction of beta
interferon by the NS1 protein of influenza A virus.

Mibayashi M(1), Martínez-Sobrido L, Loo YM, Cárdenas WB, Gale M Jr, García-Sastre
A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 1 Gustave L. Levy 
Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

The retinoic acid-inducible gene I product (RIG-I) has been identified as a
cellular sensor of RNA virus infection resulting in beta interferon (IFN-beta)
induction. However, many viruses are known to encode viral products that inhibit 
IFN-beta production. In the case of influenza A virus, the viral nonstructural
protein 1 (NS1) prevents the induction of the IFN-beta promoter by inhibiting the
activation of transcription factors, including IRF-3, involved in IFN-beta
transcriptional activation. The inhibitory properties of NS1 appear to be due at 
least in part to its binding to double-stranded RNA (dsRNA), resulting in the
sequestration of this viral mediator of RIG-I activation. However, the precise
effects of NS1 on the RIG-I-mediated induction of IFN-beta have not been
characterized. We now report that the NS1 of influenza A virus interacts with
RIG-I and inhibits the RIG-I-mediated induction of IFN-beta. This inhibition was 
apparent even when a mutant RIG-I that is constitutively activated (in the
absence of dsRNA) was used to trigger IFN-beta production. Coexpression of RIG-I,
its downstream signaling partner, IPS-1, and NS1 resulted in increased levels of 
RIG-I and NS1 within an IPS-1-rich, solubilization-resistant fraction after cell 
lysis. These results suggest that RIG-I, IPS-1, and NS1 become part of the same
complex. Consistent with this idea, NS1 was also found to inhibit IFN-beta
promoter activation by IPS-1 overexpression. Our results indicate that, in
addition to sequestering dsRNA, the NS1 of influenza A virus binds to RIG-I and
inhibits downstream activation of IRF-3, preventing the transcriptional induction
of IFN-beta.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01265-06 
PMCID: PMC1797471
PMID: 17079289  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

