
1. Oncogene. 2007 Nov 22;26(53):7467-79. Epub 2007 Jun 4.

C-terminal-binding protein interacting protein binds directly to adenovirus early
region 1A through its N-terminal region and conserved region 3.

Bruton RK(1), Rasti M, Mapp KL, Young N, Carter RZ, Abramowicz IA, Sedgwick GG,
Onion DF, Shuen M, Mymryk JS, Turnell AS, Grand RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Institute for Cancer Studies, The Medical School,
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.

C-terminal-binding protein interacting protein (CtIP) was first isolated as a
binding partner of C-terminal-binding protein (CtBP). It is considered to
contribute to the transcriptional repression and cell cycle regulatory properties
of the retinoblastoma (Rb) family of proteins and to have a role in the cellular 
response to DNA damage. Here, we have shown that CtIP is a novel target for the
adenovirus oncoprotein early region 1A (AdE1A). AdE1A associates with CtIP in
both Ad5E1-transformed cells and Ad5-infected cells and binds directly in
glutathione-S-transferase pull-down assays. Two binding sites have been mapped on
Ad5E1A - the N-terminal alpha-helical region (residues 1-30) and conserved region
3 (CR3) - the transcriptional activation domain. CtIP can bind AdE1A and CtBP
independently, raising the possibility that ternary complexes exist in
Ad-transformed and -infected cells. Significantly, reduction of CtIP expression
with small interfering RNAs results in reduction of the ability of a Gal4
DNA-binding domain-CR3 construct to transactivate a Gal 4-responsive luciferase
reporter and this effect is reversed by reduction of CtBP expression. Therefore, 
in this model, CtIP acts as a transcriptional co-activator of AdE1A when
dissociated from CtBP, through the action of AdE1A. These data are consistent
with observations that CtIP expression is induced by AdE1A during viral infection
and that reduction of CtIP expression with RNA interference can retard virus
replication. In addition, AdE1A causes disruption of the CtIP/Rb complex during
viral infection by its interaction with CtIP, possibly contributing to
transcriptional derepression.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1210551 
PMID: 17546052  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

