
1. PLoS Genet. 2008 Jan;4(1):e21. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.0040021.

Positive selection and increased antiviral activity associated with the
PARP-containing isoform of human zinc-finger antiviral protein.

Kerns JA(1), Emerman M, Malik HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington, United States of America.

Intrinsic immunity relies on specific recognition of viral epitopes to mount a
cell-autonomous defense against viral infections. Viral recognition determinants 
in intrinsic immunity genes are expected to evolve rapidly as host genes adapt to
changing viruses, resulting in a signature of adaptive evolution. Zinc-finger
antiviral protein (ZAP) from rats was discovered to be an intrinsic immunity gene
that can restrict murine leukemia virus, and certain alphaviruses and
filoviruses. Here, we used an approach combining molecular evolution and cellular
infectivity assays to address whether ZAP also acts as a restriction factor in
primates, and to pinpoint which protein domains may directly interact with the
virus. We find that ZAP has evolved under positive selection throughout primate
evolution. Recurrent positive selection is only found in the poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase (PARP)-like domain present in a longer human ZAP isoform. This
PARP-like domain was not present in the previously identified and tested rat ZAP 
gene. Using infectivity assays, we found that the longer isoform of ZAP that
contains the PARP-like domain is a stronger suppressor of murine leukemia virus
expression and Semliki forest virus infection. Our study thus finds that human
ZAP encodes a potent antiviral activity against alphaviruses. The striking
congruence between our evolutionary predictions and cellular infectivity assays
strongly validates such a combined approach to study intrinsic immunity genes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.0040021 
PMCID: PMC2213710
PMID: 18225958  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests. The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.

