
1. Virol J. 2008 Feb 27;5:32. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-5-32.

Mapping of immunogenic and protein-interacting regions at the surface of the
seven-bladed beta-propeller domain of the HIV-1 cellular interactor EED.

Rakotobe D(1), Violot S, Hong SS, Gouet P, Boulanger P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Virologie & Pathologie Humaine, Université Lyon I & CNRS
FRE-3011, Faculté de Médecine Laennec, 7 rue Guillaume Paradin, 69372 Lyon Cedex 
08, France. dinaraktb@yahoo.fr

BACKGROUND: The human EED protein, a member of the superfamily of Polycomb group 
proteins, is involved in multiple cellular protein complexes. Its C-terminal
domain, which is common to the four EED isoforms, contains seven repeats of a
canonical WD-40 motif. EED is an interactor of three HIV-1 proteins, matrix (MA),
integrase (IN) and Nef. An antiviral activity has been found to be associated
with isoforms EED3 and EED4 at the late stage of HIV-1 replication, due to a
negative effect on virus assembly and genomic RNA packaging. The aim of the
present study was to determine the regions of the EED C-terminal core domain
which were accessible and available to protein interactions, using
three-dimensional (3D) protein homology modelling with a WD-40 protein of known
structure, and epitope mapping of anti-EED antibodies.
RESULTS: Our data suggested that the C-terminal domain of EED was folded as a
seven-bladed beta-propeller protein. During the completion of our work,
crystallographic data of EED became available from co-crystals of the EED
C-terminal core with the N-terminal domain of its cellular partner EZH2. Our
3D-model was in good congruence with the refined structural model determined from
crystallographic data, except for a unique alpha-helix in the fourth beta-blade. 
More importantly, the position of flexible loops and accessible beta-strands on
the beta-propeller was consistent with our mapping of immunogenic epitopes and
sites of interaction with HIV-1 MA and IN. Certain immunoreactive regions were
found to overlap with the EZH2, MA and IN binding sites, confirming their
accessibility and reactivity at the surface of EED. Crystal structure of EED
showed that the two discrete regions of interaction with MA and IN did not
overlap with each other, nor with the EZH2 binding pocket, but were contiguous,
and formed a continuous binding groove running along the lateral face of the
beta-propeller.
CONCLUSION: Identification of antibody-, MA-, IN- and EZH2-binding sites at the
surface of the EED isoform 3 provided a global picture of the immunogenic and
protein-protein interacting regions in the EED C-terminal domain, organized as a 
seven-bladed beta-propeller protein. Mapping of the HIV-1 MA and IN binding sites
on the 3D-model of EED core predicted that EED-bound MA and IN ligands would be
in close vicinity at the surface of the beta-propeller, and that the occurrence
of a ternary complex MA-EED-IN would be possible.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-5-32 
PMCID: PMC2292171
PMID: 18302803  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

