
1. Hepatology. 2010 May;51(5):1505-13. doi: 10.1002/hep.23502.

Hepatitis C virus core protein interacts with fibrinogen-beta and attenuates
cytokine stimulated acute-phase response.

Ait-Goughoulte M(1), Banerjee A, Meyer K, Mazumdar B, Saito K, Ray RB, Ray R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Saint Louis University, St Louis, MO 63104,
USA.

Fibrinogen-beta (FBG-beta), an important acute-phase protein (APP), is generated 
by the liver as a target for inflammatory mediators. Here we identified FBG-beta 
as a hepatitis C virus (HCV) core interacting protein by screening a human liver 
complementary DNA (cDNA) library using mammalian two-hybrid analysis. An
association between FBG-beta and HCV core protein was verified by confocal
microscopy and coimmunoprecipitation from the transfected human hepatocyte
(Huh-7) cell line. HCV core or genomic RNA transfected Huh-7 cells modestly
increased FBG-beta protein expression when compared to the basal level in control
hepatocytes. Transfection of HCV core or full-length (FL) gene into Huh-7 cells
up-regulated basal FBG-beta promoter activity. Exogenous addition of IL-6
stimulates FBG-beta promoter activity in hepatocytes. However, ectopic expression
of HCV core or FL in hepatocytes inhibited IL-6-stimulated FBG-beta promoter
activation. Inhibition of endogenous FBG-beta expression following introduction
of small interfering RNA (siRNA) into cells displayed a gain of function of
promoter regulation by HCV core protein. Further studies suggested that HCV core 
gene expression in stable transfectants of Huh-7 cells resulted in a basal
up-regulation of FBG-beta and other APPs. However, treatment with cytokines,
interleukin-6 (IL-6), or tumor necrosis factor-alpha repressed FBG-beta and other
acute-phase response (APR) genes.CONCLUSION: Our results reveal that the
core/FBG-beta interaction may act as a regulatory feedback, allowing repression
of IL-6-stimulated APR genes. Together, these data suggested a network of
interactions between HCV core and the hepatic APR genes, and may contribute to
impaired innate immunity for viral persistence.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.23502 
PMCID: PMC5837823
PMID: 20162731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

