
1. J Virol. 2010 Oct;84(19):9718-32. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00713-10. Epub 2010 Jul 21.

Bub1 and CENP-F can contribute to Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus genome 
persistence by targeting LANA to kinetochores.

Xiao B(1), Verma SC, Cai Q, Kaul R, Lu J, Saha A, Robertson ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Tumor Virology Program of the Abramson
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA) encoded by Kaposi's
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is critical for segregation of viral
episomes to progeny nuclei and allows for maintenance of the viral genome in
newly divided daughter cells. LANA binds to KSHV terminal repeat (TR) DNA and
simultaneously associates with chromatin-bound cellular proteins. This process
tethers the viral episomes to host chromosomes. However, the mechanism of
tethering is complex and involves multiple protein-protein interactions. Our
previous proteomics studies which showed the association of LANA with centromeric
protein F (CENP-F) prompted us to further study whether LANA targets centromeric 
proteins for persistence of KSHV episomes during cell division. Here we show that
LANA colocalized with CENP-F as speckles, some of which are paired at centromeric
regions of a subset of chromosomes in KSHV-infected JSC-1 cells. We also confirm 
that both the amino and carboxy termini of LANA can bind to CENP-F. Moreover,
LANA associated with another kinetochore protein, Bub1 (budding uninhibited by
benzimidazole 1), which is known to form a complex with CENP-F. Importantly, we
demonstrated the dynamic association of LANA and Bub1/CENP-F and the
colocalization between Bub1, LANA, and the KSHV episome tethered to the host
chromosome using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Knockdown of Bub1
expression by lentivirus-delivered short hairpin RNA (shRNA) dramatically reduced
the number of KSHV genome copies, whereas no dramatic effect was seen with CENP-F
knockdown. Therefore, the interaction between LANA and the kinetochore proteins
CENP-F and Bub1 is important for KSHV genome tethering and its segregation to new
daughter cells, with Bub1 potentially playing a more critical role in the
long-term persistence of the viral genome in the infected cell.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00713-10 
PMCID: PMC2937805
PMID: 20660191  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

