
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e22625. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022625. Epub 2011 Aug 24.

Cyclophilin E functions as a negative regulator to influenza virus replication by
impairing the formation of the viral ribonucleoprotein complex.

Wang Z(1), Liu X, Zhao Z, Xu C, Zhang K, Chen C, Sun L, Gao GF, Ye X, Liu W.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Key Laboratory of
Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: The nucleoprotein (NP) of influenza A virus is a multifunctional
protein that plays a critical role in the replication and transcription of the
viral genome. Therefore, examining host factors that interact with NP may shed
light on the mechanism of host restriction barriers and the tissue tropism of
influenza A virus. Here, Cyclophilin E (CypE), a member of the peptidyl-propyl
cis-trans isomerase (PPIase) family, was found to bind to NP and inhibit viral
replication and transcription.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In the present study, CypE was found to interact 
with NP but not with the other components of the viral ribonucleoprotein complex 
(VRNP): PB1, PB2, and PA. Mutagenesis data revealed that the CypE domain
comprised of residues 137-186 is responsible for its binding to NP. Functional
analysis results indicated that CypE is a negative regulator in the influenza
virus life cycle. Furthermore, knock-down of CypE resulted in increased levels of
three types of viral RNA, suggesting that CypE negatively affects viral
replication and transcription. Moreover, up-regulation of CypE inhibited the
activity of influenza viral polymerase. We determined that the molecular
mechanism by which CypE negatively regulates influenza virus replication and
transcription is by interfering with NP self-association and the NP-PB1 and
NP-PB2 interactions.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: CypE is a host restriction factor that inhibits the
functions of NP, as well as viral replication and transcription, by impairing the
formation of the vRNP. The data presented here will help us to better understand 
the molecular mechanisms of host restriction barriers, host adaptation, and
tissue tropism of influenza A virus.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022625 
PMCID: PMC3160840
PMID: 21887220  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

