
1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Nov;7(11):e1002365. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002365. Epub
2011 Nov 3.

Single molecule analysis of replicated DNA reveals the usage of multiple KSHV
genome regions for latent replication.

Verma SC(1), Lu J, Cai Q, Kosiyatrakul S, McDowell ME, Schildkraut CL, Robertson 
ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, University of Nevada, Reno, Nevada,
United States of America. scverma@medicine.nevada.edu

Kaposi's sarcoma associated herpesvirus (KSHV), an etiologic agent of Kaposi's
sarcoma, Body Cavity Based Lymphoma and Multicentric Castleman's Disease,
establishes lifelong latency in infected cells. The KSHV genome tethers to the
host chromosome with the help of a latency associated nuclear antigen (LANA).
Additionally, LANA supports replication of the latent origins within the terminal
repeats by recruiting cellular factors. Our previous studies identified and
characterized another latent origin, which supported the replication of plasmids 
ex-vivo without LANA expression in trans. Therefore identification of an
additional origin site prompted us to analyze the entire KSHV genome for
replication initiation sites using single molecule analysis of replicated DNA
(SMARD). Our results showed that replication of DNA can initiate throughout the
KSHV genome and the usage of these regions is not conserved in two different KSHV
strains investigated. SMARD also showed that the utilization of multiple
replication initiation sites occurs across large regions of the genome rather
than a specified sequence. The replication origin of the terminal repeats showed 
only a slight preference for their usage indicating that LANA dependent origin at
the terminal repeats (TR) plays only a limited role in genome duplication.
Furthermore, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation for ORC2 and MCM3, which 
are part of the pre-replication initiation complex to determine the genomic sites
where these proteins accumulate, to provide further characterization of potential
replication initiation sites on the KSHV genome. The ChIP data confirmed
accumulation of these pre-RC proteins at multiple genomic sites in a cell cycle
dependent manner. Our data also show that both the frequency and the sites of
replication initiation vary within the two KSHV genomes studied here, suggesting 
that initiation of replication is likely to be affected by the genomic context
rather than the DNA sequences.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002365 
PMCID: PMC3207954
PMID: 22072974  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

