
1. J Virol. 2012 Mar;86(6):3264-75. doi: 10.1128/JVI.06369-11. Epub 2011 Dec 28.

Stimulation of BK virus DNA replication by NFI family transcription factors.

Liang B(1), Tikhanovich I, Nasheuer HP, Folk WR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics Area Program, University of
Missouri—Columbia, Columbia, Missouri, USA.

BK polyomavirus (BKV) establishes persistent, low-level, and asymptomatic
infections in most humans and causes polyomavirus-associated nephropathy (PVAN)
and other pathologies in some individuals. The activation of BKV replication
following kidney transplantation, leading to viruria, viremia, and, ultimately,
PVAN, is associated with immune suppression as well as inflammation and stress
from ischemia-reperfusion injury of the allograft, but the stimuli and molecular 
mechanisms leading to these pathologies are not well defined. The replication of 
BKV DNA in cell cultures is regulated by the viral noncoding control region
(NCCR) comprising the core origin and flanking sequences, to which BKV T antigen 
(Tag), cellular proteins, and small regulatory RNAs bind. Six nuclear factor I
(NFI) binding sites occur in sequences flanking the late side of the core origin 
(the enhancer) of the archetype virus, and their mutation, either individually or
in toto, reduces BKV DNA replication when placed in competition with templates
containing intact BKV NCCRs. NFI family members interacted with the helicase
domain of BKV Tag in pulldown assays, suggesting that NFI helps recruit Tag to
the viral core origin and may modulate its function. However, Tag may not be the 
sole target of the replication-modulatory activities of NFI: the NFIC/CTF1
isotype stimulates BKV template replication in vitro at low concentrations of DNA
polymerase-α primase (Pol-primase), and the p58 subunit of Pol-primase associates
with NFIC/CTF1, suggesting that NFI also recruits Pol-primase to the NCCR. These 
results suggest that NFI proteins (and the signaling pathways that target them)
activate BKV replication and contribute to the consequent pathologies caused by
acute infection.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.06369-11 
PMCID: PMC3302295
PMID: 22205750  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

