
1. Sci Signal. 2012 Aug 14;5(237):ra58. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2002941.

Interference with the PTEN-MAST2 interaction by a viral protein leads to cellular
relocalization of PTEN.

Terrien E(1), Chaffotte A, Lafage M, Khan Z, Préhaud C, Cordier F, Simenel C,
Delepierre M, Buc H, Lafon M, Wolff N.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Unité de Résonance Magnétique Nucléaire des Biomolécules,
Département de Biologie Structurale et Chimie, F-75015 Paris, France.

PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10) and MAST2
(microtubule-associated serine and threonine kinase 2) interact with each other
through the PDZ domain of MAST2 (MAST2-PDZ) and the carboxyl-terminal
(C-terminal) PDZ domain-binding site (PDZ-BS) of PTEN. These two proteins
function as negative regulators of cell survival pathways, and silencing of
either one promotes neuronal survival. In human neuroblastoma cells infected with
rabies virus (RABV), the C-terminal PDZ domain of the viral glycoprotein (G
protein) can target MAST2-PDZ, and RABV infection triggers neuronal survival in a
PDZ-BS-dependent fashion. These findings suggest that the PTEN-MAST2 complex
inhibits neuronal survival and that viral G protein disrupts this complex through
competition with PTEN for binding to MAST2-PDZ. We showed that the C-terminal
sequences of PTEN and the viral G protein bound to MAST2-PDZ with similar
affinities. Nuclear magnetic resonance structures of these complexes exhibited
similar large interaction surfaces, providing a structural basis for their
binding specificities. Additionally, the viral G protein promoted the nuclear
exclusion of PTEN in infected neuroblastoma cells in a PDZ-BS-dependent manner
without altering total PTEN abundance. These findings suggest that formation of
the PTEN-MAST2 complex is specifically affected by the viral G protein and
emphasize how disruption of a critical protein-protein interaction regulates
intracellular PTEN trafficking. In turn, the data show how the viral protein
might be used to decipher the underlying molecular mechanisms and to clarify how 
the subcellular localization of PTEN regulates neuronal survival.

DOI: 10.1126/scisignal.2002941 
PMID: 22894835  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

