
1. Virol J. 2013 Jun 22;10:205. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-10-205.

The eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 subunit L protein interacts with
Flavivirus NS5 and may modulate yellow fever virus replication.

Morais ATs(1), Terzian AC, Duarte DV, Bronzoni RV, Madrid MC, Gavioli AF, Gil LH,
Oliveira AG, Zanelli CF, Valentini SR, Rahal P, Nogueira ML.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Pesquisas em Virologia, Departamento de Doenças Dermatológicas,
Infecciosas e Parasitárias, Faculdade de Medicina de São José do Rio
Preto-FAMERP, Av. Brigadeiro Faria Lima 5416, São José do Rio Preto, SP
15090-000, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Yellow fever virus (YFV) belongs to the Flavivirus genus and causes
an important disease. An alarming resurgence of viral circulation and the
expansion of YFV-endemic zones have been detected in Africa and South America in 
recent years. NS5 is a viral protein that contains methyltransferase and
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) domains, which are essential for viral
replication, and the interactions between NS5 and cellular proteins have been
studied to better understand viral replication. The aim of this study was to
characterize the interaction of the NS5 protein with eukaryotic translation
initiation factor 3 subunit L (eIF3L) and to evaluate the role of eIF3L in yellow
fever replication.
METHODS: To identify interactions of YFV NS5 with cellular proteins, we performed
a two-hybrid screen using the YFV NS5 RdRp domain as bait with a human cDNA
library, and RNApol deletion mutants were generated and analyzed using the
two-hybrid system for mapping the interactions. The RNApol region involved was
segmented into three fragments and analyzed using an eIF3L-expressing yeast
strain. To map the NS5 residues that are critical for the interactions, we
performed site-direct mutagenesis in segment 3 of the interaction domain (ID) and
confirmed the interaction using in vitro assays and in vivo
coimmunoprecipitation. The significance of eIF3L for YFV replication was
investigated using eIF3L overexpression and RNA interference.
RESULTS: In this work, we describe and characterize the interaction of NS5 with
the translation factor eIF3L. The interaction between NS5 and eIF3L was confirmed
using in vitro binding and in vivo coimmunoprecipitation assays. This interaction
occurs at a region (the interaction domain of the RNApol domain) that is
conserved in several flaviviruses and that is, therefore, likely to be relevant
to the genus. eIF3L overexpression and plaque reduction assays showed a slight
effect on YFV replication, indicating that the interaction of eIF3L with YFV NS5 
may play a role in YFV replication.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the precise function of eIF3L on interactions with viral
proteins is not entirely understood, these results indicate an interaction of
eIF3L with YF NS5 and that eIF3L overexpression facilitates translation, which
has potential implications for virus replication.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-10-205 
PMCID: PMC3698205
PMID: 23800076  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

