
1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 20;9(3):e92545. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092545. eCollection
2014.

Activation of 2' 5'-oligoadenylate synthetase by stem loops at the 5'-end of the 
West Nile virus genome.

Deo S(1), Patel TR(1), Dzananovic E(1), Booy EP(1), Zeid K(1), McEleney K(2),
Harding SE(3), McKenna SA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada;
Manitoba Institute for Materials, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada.
(3)National Centre for Macromolecular Hydrodynamics, University of Nottingham,
Sutton Bonington, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Chemistry, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada;
Department of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

West Nile virus (WNV) has a positive sense RNA genome with conserved structural
elements in the 5' and 3' -untranslated regions required for polyprotein
production. Antiviral immunity to WNV is partially mediated through the
production of a cluster of proteins known as the interferon stimulated genes
(ISGs). The 2' 5'-oligoadenylate synthetases (OAS) are key ISGs that help to
amplify the innate immune response. Upon interaction with viral double stranded
RNA, OAS enzymes become activated and enable the host cell to restrict viral
propagation. Studies have linked mutations in the OAS1 gene to increased
susceptibility to WNV infection, highlighting the importance of OAS1 enzyme. Here
we report that the region at the 5'-end of the WNV genome comprising both the
5'-UTR and initial coding region is capable of OAS1 activation in vitro. This
region contains three RNA stem loops (SLI, SLII, and SLIII), whose relative
contribution to OAS1 binding affinity and activation were investigated using
electrophoretic mobility shift assays and enzyme kinetics experiments. Stem loop 
I, comprising nucleotides 1-73, is dispensable for maximum OAS1 activation, as a 
construct containing only SLII and SLIII was capable of enzymatic activation.
Mutations to the RNA binding site of OAS1 confirmed the specificity of the
interaction. The purity, monodispersity and homogeneity of the 5'-end
(SLI/II/III) and OAS1 were evaluated using dynamic light scattering and
analytical ultra-centrifugation. Solution conformations of both the 5'-end RNA of
WNV and OAS1 were then elucidated using small-angle x-ray scattering. In the
context of purified components in vitro, these data demonstrate the recognition
of conserved secondary structural elements of the WNV genome by a member of the
interferon-mediated innate immune response.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092545 
PMCID: PMC3961380
PMID: 24651762  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

