
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Aug 8;450(4):1485-91. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.07.016. Epub 2014 Jul 11.

Dengue virus disrupts Daxx and NF-κB interaction to induce CD137-mediated
apoptosis.

Netsawang J(1), Panaampon J(2), Khunchai S(3), Kooptiwut S(4), Nagila A(3),
Puttikhunt C(5), Yenchitsomanus PT(3), Limjindaporn T(6).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medical Technology, Rangsit University, Phathum Thani, Thailand.
(2)Division of Molecular Medicine, Department of Research and Development,
Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand;
Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, 
Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Division of Molecular Medicine, Department of Research and Development,
Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(5)Medical Biotechnology Unit, National Center for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, National Science and Technology Development Agency, Thailand.
(6)Division of Molecular Medicine, Department of Research and Development,
Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand;
Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, 
Bangkok, Thailand. Electronic address: thawornchai.lim@mahidol.ac.th.

Dengue virus (DENV) is a positive-strand RNA virus of the Flavivirus family with 
4 different serotypes. Clinical manifestations of DENV infection include dengue
fever, dengue hemorrhagic fever, and dengue shock syndrome. Following DENV
infection, apoptosis of hepatic cells is observed both in vitro and in vivo.
However, the molecular mechanisms revealing how viral components affect cellular 
apoptosis remain unclear. In the present study, the role of death
domain-associated protein 6 (Daxx) in DENV-mediated apoptosis was characterized
by RNA interference and overexpression studies, and the anti-apoptotic function
of Daxx during DENV infection was identified. Furthermore, the viral component,
DENV capsid protein (DENV C), interacted with Daxx to disrupt interaction between
Daxx and NF-κB. The liberated NF-κB activated the promoter of CD137, which is a
member of the TNF family, and is previously shown to induce apoptosis during DENV
infection. In summary, DENV C disrupts Daxx and NF-κB interaction to induce
CD137-mediated apoptosis during DENV infection.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.07.016 
PMID: 25019989  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

