
1. J Virol. 2015 Jan;89(1):230-40. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02307-14. Epub 2014 Oct 15.

G2/M cell cycle arrest correlates with primate lentiviral Vpr interaction with
the SLX4 complex.

Berger G(1), Lawrence M(1), Hué S(2), Neil SJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine,
King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)MRC Centre for Medical Molecular Virology, University College London, London, 
United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine,
King's College London, London, United Kingdom stuart.neil@kcl.ac.uk.

The accessory gene vpr, common to all primate lentiviruses, induces potent G2/M
arrest in cycling cells. A recent study showed that human immunodeficiency virus 
type 1 (HIV-1) viral protein R (Vpr) mediates this through activation of the
SLX4/MUS81/EME1 exonuclease complex that forms part of the Fanconi anemia DNA
repair pathway. To confirm these observations, we have examined the G2/M arrest
phenotypes of a panel of simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) Vpr proteins. We
show that SIV Vpr proteins differ in their ability to promote cell cycle arrest
in human cells. While this is dependent on the DCAF1/DDB1/CUL4 ubiquitin ligase
complex, interaction with human DCAF1 does not predict G2/M arrest activity of
SIV Vpr in human cells. In all cases, SIV Vpr-mediated cell cycle arrest in human
cells correlated with interaction with human SLX4 (huSLX4) and could be abolished
by small interfering RNA (siRNA) depletion of any member of the SLX4 complex. In 
contrast, all but one of the HIV/SIV Vpr proteins tested, including those that
lacked activity in human cells, were competent for G2/M arrest in grivet cells.
Correspondingly, here cell cycle arrest correlated with interaction with the
grivet orthologues of the SLX4 complex, suggesting a level of host adaptation in 
these interactions. Phylogenetic analyses strongly suggest that G2/M arrest/SLX4 
interactions are ancestral activities of primate lentiviral Vpr proteins and that
the ability to dysregulate the Fanconi anemia DNA repair pathway is an essential 
function of Vpr in vivo.IMPORTANCE: The Vpr protein of HIV-1 and related viruses 
is essential for the virus in vivo. The ability of Vpr to block the cell cycle at
mitotic entry is well known, but the importance of this function for viral
replication is unclear. Recent data have shown that HIV-1 Vpr targets the Fanconi
anemia DNA repair pathway by interacting with and activating an endonuclease
complex, SLX4/MUS81/EME1, that processes interstrand DNA cross-links. Here we
show that the ability of a panel of SIV Vpr proteins to mediate cell cycle arrest
correlates with species-specific interactions with the SLX4 complex in human and 
primate cells. The results of these studies suggest that the SLX4 complex is a
conserved target of primate lentiviral Vpr proteins and that the ability to
dysregulate members of the Fanconi anemia DNA repair pathway is essential for
HIV/SIV replication in vivo.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02307-14 
PMCID: PMC4301105
PMID: 25320300  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

