
1. mBio. 2014 Nov 4;5(6):e02011. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02011-14.

Deep sequencing identifies noncanonical editing of Ebola and Marburg virus RNAs
in infected cells.

Shabman RS, Jabado OJ(1), Mire CE(2), Stockwell TB(3), Edwards M(4), Mahajan
M(1), Geisbert TW(2), Basler CF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genomics and Multiscale Biology, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Galveston National Laboratory,
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA.
(3)Virology Group, J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York, USA chris.basler@mssm.edu.

Deep sequencing of RNAs produced by Zaire ebolavirus (EBOV) or the Angola strain 
of Marburgvirus (MARV-Ang) identified novel viral and cellular mechanisms that
diversify the coding and noncoding sequences of viral mRNAs and genomic RNAs. We 
identified previously undescribed sites within the EBOV and MARV-Ang mRNAs where 
apparent cotranscriptional editing has resulted in the addition of
non-template-encoded residues within the EBOV glycoprotein (GP) mRNA, the
MARV-Ang nucleoprotein (NP) mRNA, and the MARV-Ang polymerase (L) mRNA, such that
novel viral translation products could be produced. Further, we found that the
well-characterized EBOV GP mRNA editing site is modified at a high frequency
during viral genome RNA replication. Additionally, editing hot spots representing
sites of apparent adenosine deaminase activity were found in the MARV-Ang NP
3'-untranslated region. These studies identify novel filovirus-host interactions 
and reveal production of a greater diversity of filoviral gene products than was 
previously appreciated.IMPORTANCE: This study identifies novel mechanisms that
alter the protein coding capacities of Ebola and Marburg virus mRNAs. Therefore, 
filovirus gene expression is more complex and diverse than previously recognized.
These observations suggest new directions in understanding the regulation of
filovirus gene expression.

Copyright © 2014 Shabman et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02011-14 
PMCID: PMC4222107
PMID: 25370495  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

