
1. Oncogene. 2016 Feb 11;35(6):715-26. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.122. Epub 2015 Apr 20.

Hepatitis B virus X protein induces EpCAM expression via active DNA demethylation
directed by RelA in complex with EZH2 and TET2.

Fan H(1)(2), Zhang H(1)(2), Pascuzzi PE(3), Andrisani O(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN,
USA.
(2)Department of Purdue Center for Cancer Research, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN, USA.
(3)Purdue University Libraries, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA.

Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a major risk factor for developing
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and HBV X protein (HBx) acts as cofactor in
hepatocarcinogenesis. In liver tumors from animals modeling HBx- and HBV-mediated
hepatocarcinogenesis, downregulation of chromatin regulating proteins SUZ12 and
ZNF198 induces expression of several genes, including epithelial cell adhesion
molecule (EpCAM). EpCAM upregulation occurs in HBV-mediated HCCs and hepatic
cancer stem cells, by a mechanism not understood. Herein we demonstrate HBx
induces EpCAM expression via active DNA demethylation. In hepatocytes, EpCAM is
silenced by polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and ZNF198/LSD1/Co-REST/HDAC1
chromatin-modifying complexes. Cells with stable knockdown of SUZ12, an essential
PRC2 subunit, upon HBx expression demethylate a CpG dinucleotide located adjacent
to NF-κB/RelA half-site. This NF-κB/RelA site is in a CpG island downstream from 
EpCAM transcriptional start site (TSS). Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
assays demonstrate HBx-dependent RelA occupancy of NF-κB half-site, whereas RelA 
knockdown suppresses CpG demethylation and EpCAM expression. Tumor necrosis
factor-α activates RelA, propagating demethylation to nearby CpG sites, shown by 
sodium bisulfite sequencing. RelA-dependent demethylation occurring upon HBx
expression requires methyltrasferase EZH2, TET2 a key factor in cytosine
demethylation and inactive DNMT3L, shown by knockdown assays and sodium bisulfite
sequencing. Co-immunoprecipitations and sequential ChIP assays demonstrate that
RelA in the presence of HBx forms a complex with EZH2, TET2 and DNMT3L, although 
the role of DNMT3L remains to be understood. Interestingly, the human EpCAM gene 
also has a CpG island downstream from its TSS, and a NF-κB-binding site flanked
by CpGs. HepG2 cells derived from human HCC exhibit demethylation of these
NF-κB-flanking CpG sites, and HBV replication propagates demethylation to nearby 
CpG sites. DLK1, another PRC2 target gene, also upregulated in HBV-mediated HCCs,
is demethylated in liver tumors at CpG dinucleotides flanking the NF-κB-binding
sequence, supporting that this active DNA demethylation mechanism functions
during oncogenic transformation.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2015.122 
PMCID: PMC4615262
PMID: 25893293  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

