
1. J Virol. 1996 Feb;70(2):1163-72.

SR protein splicing factors interact with the Rous sarcoma virus negative
regulator of splicing element.

McNally LM(1), McNally MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee 53226,
USA.

Retroviral replication requires that a portion of the primary transcripts
generated from proviral DNA be spliced to serve as mRNA for the envelope protein 
and in Rous sarcoma virus as src mRNA. However, a substantial amount of
full-length RNA must be maintained in an unspliced form, as the unspliced RNA
serves both as mRNA for structural proteins and virion-associated enzymatic
proteins and as genomic RNA for progeny virions. The extent of viral RNA splicing
must be finely controlled, since only a narrow range in the ratio of unspliced
RNA to spliced RNA is tolerated for optimal replication. A number of cis-acting
sequences within the RNA of Rous sarcoma virus play a role in preserving a large 
pool of unspliced RNA. One such sequence, the negative regulator of splicing
(NRS), is of interest because it blocks splicing but is not located near any of
the splice junctions. To better understand how this novel element blocks splicing
at a distance, we set out to identify host cell factors that interact
specifically with this inhibitory sequence. In this study, proteins from nuclear 
extracts with molecular masses of 26, 36, 44, and 55 kDa were shown by UV
cross-linking assays to bind the NRS preferentially. One of them, p55, was also
detected in a specific complex with SR protein electrophoretic mobility shift
assay. All but p55 have biochemical properties consistent with SR protein
splicing factors, and some, but not all, of the total SR proteins purified from
HeLa cells cross-link specifically to the NRS. The strongest cross-linking SR
protein is SRp30a/b, which is composed of the splicing factors SF2/ASF and SC35. 
The NRS specifically binds bacterially expressed SF2/ASF, whereas nonfunctional
mutants do not. Data indicating that the 36-kDa protein which cross-links in
nuclear extracts is SF2/ASF are presented. The data indicate that factors
normally required for RNA splicing may be exploited by retroviruses to block
splicing.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.70.2.1163-1172.1996 
PMCID: PMC189925
PMID: 8551577  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

