
1. J Virol. 1998 Sep;72(9):7181-90.

The neural cell adhesion molecule is a receptor for rabies virus.

Thoulouze MI(1), Lafage M, Schachner M, Hartmann U, Cremer H, Lafon M.

Author information: 
(1)Departement de Virologie, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Previous reports strongly suggest that, in addition to the nicotinic
acetylcholine receptor, rabies virus can use other, as-yet-unidentified
receptors. We found that laboratory cell lines susceptible to rabies virus
infection express the neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM) (CD56) on their
surface, whereas resistant cells do not, supporting the idea that NCAM could be a
rabies virus receptor. We observed that (i) incubation with rabies virus
decreases the surface expression of NCAM; (ii) treatment of susceptible cells
with heparan sulfate, a ligand for NCAM, or with NCAM antibodies significantly
reduces the rabies virus infection; and (iii) preincubation of rabies virus
inoculum with soluble NCAM protein as a receptor decoy drastically neutralizes
the capacity of rabies virus to infect susceptible cells. Moreover, we
demonstrated that transfection of resistant L fibroblasts with the NCAM-encoding 
gene induces rabies virus susceptibility whereas absence of NCAM in the primary
cortical cell cultures prepared from NCAM-deficient mice reduces the rabies virus
infection and virus production. This provides evidence that NCAM is an in vitro
receptor for the rabies virus. Moreover, the in vivo relevance for the use of
NCAM as a receptor was demonstrated by the infection of NCAM-deficient mice, in
which rabies mortality was delayed and brain invasion by rabies virus was
drastically restricted. Our results showed that NCAM, which is expressed mainly
in the adult nervous system, plays an important role in rabies infection.
However, it cannot be excluded that receptors other than NCAM are utilized. Thus,
the description of NCAM as a new rabies virus receptor would be another example
of the use by viruses of more than one receptor to gain entry into the host.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.72.9.7181-7190.1998 
PMCID: PMC109940
PMID: 9696812  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

