
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Dec 1;26(23):5327-32.

Evolution of antiviral activity in the ribonuclease A gene superfamily: evidence 
for a specific interaction between eosinophil-derived neurotoxin (EDN/RNase 2)
and respiratory syncytial virus.

Domachowske JB(1), Bonville CA, Dyer KD, Rosenberg HF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Infectious Diseases, State University of
New York Health Science Center at Syracuse, Syracuse, NY 13210, USA.

We have demonstrated that the human eosinophil-derived neurotoxin (EDN, RNase 2),
a rapidly evolving secretory protein derived from eosinophilic leukocytes,
mediates the ribonucleolytic destruction of extracellular virions of the
single-stranded RNA virus respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). While RNase activity
is crucial to antiviral activity, it is clearly not sufficient, as our results
suggest that EDN has unique structural features apart from RNase activity that
are necessary to promote antiviral activity. We demonstrate here that the
interaction between EDN and extracellular virions of RSV is both saturatable and 
specific. Increasing concentrations of the antivirally inactivated,
ribonucleolytically inactivated point mutant form of recombinant human EDN,
rhEDNdK38, inhibits rhEDN's antiviral activity, while increasing concentrations
of the related RNase, recombinant human RNase k6, have no effect whatsoever.
Interestingly, acquisition of antiviral activity parallels the evolutionary
development of the primate EDN lineage, having emerged some time after the
divergence of the Old World from the New World monkeys. Using this information,
we created ribonucleolytically active chimeras of human and New World monkey
orthologs of EDN and, by evaluating their antiviral activity, we have identified 
an N-terminal segment of human EDN that contains one or more of the sequence
elements that mediate its specific interaction with RSV.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/26.23.5327 
PMCID: PMC147995
PMID: 9826755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

