
1. Cardiology. 1998;90(4):263-8.

Prior cytomegalovirus infection does not predict clinical outcome after
percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty.

Tiran A(1), Tio RA, Oostenveld E, Harmsen MC, Tiran B, den Heijer P, Monnink SH, 
Wilders-Truschnig MM, The TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology, University of Groningen, The
Netherlands.andreas.tiran@kfunigraz.ac.at

BACKGROUND: A direct association between human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection
and the development of restenosis after coronary angioplasty has been suggested. 
The aim of this prospective study was to evaluate the value of HCMV serology in
predicting the clinical outcome after percutaneous transluminal coronary
angioplasty (PTCA).
METHODS AND RESULTS: 112 patients undergoing elective PTCA were included in the
study. HCMV antibody levels were measured by ELISA. Cardiac events within a
follow-up period of 6 months after PTCA were defined as (1) progression or
recurrence of anginal complaints and/or a positive exercise test; (2) restenosis 
that required repeat revascularization. 73% of PTCA patients were seropositive
for HCMV. Successful PTCA was achieved in a total of 94 patients, who were
followed for 6 months. In 31/94 patients (33%) cardiac events occurred and in
15/94 (16%), this could be related to restenosis. We found no statistically
significant difference between seropositive and negative patients with respect to
anginal complaints or the need for revascularization. There was no evidence of
acute reactivation, since titers of anti-HCMV antibodies did not increase after
PTCA.
CONCLUSION: This study shows that the clinical outcome after PTCA is not related 
to the HCMV serostatus of the patient. Therefore, our data do not support the
hypothesis that serological markers of HCMV infection are of clinical importance 
for the assessment of a patient's individual risk after PTCA. This does not
preclude a role for local reactivation of HCMV at the site of angioplasty.

DOI: 10.1159/000006856 
PMID: 10085487  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

