
1. Med Klin (Munich). 1999 Jan 15;94(1):39-44.

[Acute hantavirus infection caused by a genetically newly identified viral
strain. Severe and complicated course of hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome
(nephropathia epidemica)].

[Article in German]

Lauer B(1), Wiemer M, Kramer A, Pilaski J, Heering P, Horstkotte D, Schultheiss
HP, Strauer BE.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Innere Medizin/Kardiologie, Universität Leipzig.

HISTORY AND CLINICAL FINDINGS: A 49-year-old patient, a hobby hunter, fell ill
acutely with joint and limb pain, abdominal pain, nausea and subfebrile
temperatures. At hospitalization, the patient was in bad general condition,
showing ascites and lid edema, and acute renal failure was diagnosed.
INVESTIGATIONS: Laboratory tests revealed marked thrombocytopenia (15,000/ml),
leucocytosis, elevated levels of creatinine, blood urea nitrogen and liver
enzymes, respectively. Blood gas analysis showed metabolic acidosis. Chest X-ray 
showed an interstitial fluid accumulation, abdominal ultrasound disclosed ascites
and enlarged kidneys as in acute renal failure. Immunologic tests verified the
diagnosis of an acute hantavirus infection, by use of specific molecular biology 
techniques a previously unknown virus strain was identified.
TREATMENT AND COURSE: Hantavirus infections in western Europe usually show a
benign course. However, in the present case, acute progressive pulmonary failure 
developed despite effective dialysis so that mechanical ventilation was necessary
for several weeks. Dialysis had to be carried out for 17 days. As a complication 
a severe ulcero-destructive tracheobronchitis developed, caused by Aspergillus
fumigatus. After several weeks, both renal and pulmonary function had returned to
normal.
CONCLUSION: Hantavirus infections may lead to severe and complicated courses also
in western Europe. By use of new immunologic and molecular biology techniques a
specific diagnosis is possible.

DOI: 10.1007/BF03044693 
PMID: 10081288  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

