
1. Acta Neuropathol. 1999 Mar;97(3):279-87.

Oligodendroglial degeneration in distemper: apoptosis or necrosis?

Schobesberger M(1), Zurbriggen A, Summerfield A, Vandevelde M, Griot C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Neurology, University of Berne, Switzerland.

Canine distemper virus (CDV) causes a multifocal demyelinating disease in dogs.
It was previously shown that the initial demyelinating lesions are directly virus
induced since a correlation between the occurrence of demyelination and CDV
replication in white matter cells was observed. During the course of infection
oligodendrocytes undergo distinct morphological alterations, partly due to a
restricted CDV infection of these cells, and eventually disappear from the
lesions. This phenomenon has been described in vivo as well as in vitro. However,
the reason for the morphological alterations and the following oligodendroglial
depletion remained unclear. Since virus infection can induce cell death, it was
investigated whether apoptosis or necrosis plays a role in the pathogenesis of
demyelination in canine distemper. In brain tissue sections from dogs with acute 
distemper apoptotic cells were not detected within the demyelinating lesions
using morphological and biochemical cell death criteria. In chronic distemper,
apoptotic cells - presumably inflammatory cells - were seen within the
perivascular cuffs. These in vivo findings were correlated to the in vitro
situation using CDV-infected primary dog brain cell cultures as well as Vero
cells. Infection with culture-adapted CDV lead to massive necrosis but not to
apoptosis. After infection with virulent CDV neither apoptosis nor necrosis was a
predominant feature in either culture system. These findings suggest that
virus-induced demyelination in canine distemper is not the direct consequence of 
apoptosis or necrosis. It is speculated that another mechanism must be
responsible for the observed morphological alterations of oligodendrocytes,
ultimately leading to demyelination.

DOI: 10.1007/s004010050986 
PMID: 10090676  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

