
1. J Virol. 1999 May;73(5):3661-71.

Shared usage of the chemokine receptor CXCR4 by primary and laboratory-adapted
strains of feline immunodeficiency virus.

Richardson J(1), Pancino G, Merat R, Leste-Lasserre T, Moraillon A,
Schneider-Mergener J, Alizon M, Sonigo P, Heveker N.

Author information: 
(1)Génétique des Virus (ICGM-CNRS UPR 0415), and Génétique Moléculaire Génétique 
Virale (INRA), Ecole Nationale Vétérinaire d'Alfort, 94704 Maisons-Alfort,
France.

Strains of the feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) presently under investigation 
exhibit distinct patterns of in vitro tropism. In particular, the adaptation of
FIV for propagation in Crandell feline kidney (CrFK) cells results in the
selection of strains capable of forming syncytia with cell lines of diverse
species origin. The infection of CrFK cells by CrFK-adapted strains appears to
require the chemokine receptor CXCR4 and is inhibited by its natural ligand,
stromal cell-derived factor 1alpha (SDF-1alpha). Here we found that inhibitors of
CXCR4-mediated infection by human immunodeficiency virus type I (HIV-1), such as 
the bicyclam AMD3100 and short peptides derived from the amino-terminal region of
SDF-1alpha, also blocked infection of CrFK by FIV. Nevertheless, we observed
differences in the ranking order of the peptides as inhibitors of FIV and HIV-1
and showed that such differences are related to the species origin of CXCR4 and
not that of the viral envelope. These results suggest that, although the envelope
glycoproteins of FIV and HIV-1 are substantially divergent, FIV and HIV-1
interact with CXCR4 in a highly similar manner. We have also addressed the role
of CXCR4 in the life cycle of primary isolates of FIV. Various CXCR4 ligands
inhibited infection of feline peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) by
primary FIV isolates in a concentration-dependent manner. These ligands also
blocked the viral transduction of feline PBMC by pseudotyped viral particles when
infection was mediated by the envelope glycoprotein of a primary FIV isolate but 
not by the G protein of vesicular stomatitis virus, indicating that they act at
an envelope-mediated step and presumably at viral entry. These findings strongly 
suggest that primary and CrFK-adapted strains of FIV, despite disparate in vitro 
tropisms, share usage of CXCR4.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.73.5.3661-3671.1999 
PMCID: PMC104141
PMID: 10196258  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

