
1. Hepatology. 1999 Aug;30(2):562-6.

Chronic hepatitis C virus patients with breakthroughs during interferon treatment
can successfully be retreated with consensus interferon. The Consensus Interferon
Study Group.

Heathcote EJ(1), James S, Mullen KD, Hauser SC, Rosenblate H, Albert DG Jr.

Author information: 
(1)University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. jheathcote@msn.com

Patients with chronic hepatitis C who have not had a sustained hepatitis C virus 
(HCV)-RNA response or serum alanine transaminase (ALT) response to a 6-month
course of interferon (IFN) may respond to higher dose retreatment with consensus 
interferon (CIFN). Some nonresponders to initial IFN treatment have a transient
response defined as undetectable HCV RNA or normalization of ALT during
treatment, but subsequently have a "breakthrough" while still on treatment. The
aim of this study was to determine if nonresponders who had breakthroughs
responded differently to CIFN retreatment than nonresponders without
breakthroughs using data from a large, multicenter trial. ALT and HCV RNA were
monitored frequently during initial IFN therapy (either 9 mcg CIFN or 3 MU
IFN-alpha2b 3 times per week). HCV-RNA breakthroughs were observed in 86 of 467
(18%) of all treated patients, and ALT breakthroughs were observed in 90 of 467
(19%) of all treated patients. There was no association between breakthroughs and
the presence of either binding or neutralizing anti-IFN antibodies. When the
patients who were nonresponders to initial IFN treatment were retreated with CIFN
(15 mcg) for 12 months, 27% of those with viral breakthroughs had a sustained
viral response compared with 8% in prior nonresponders without breakthroughs (P
=.102). Sustained ALT responses were observed in 39% with breakthroughs compared 
with 10% in those without breakthroughs (P =.014). The data suggest that prior
nonresponders with breakthroughs have a greater chance of responding to
retreatment than do nonresponders without breakthroughs. However, most
breakthrough patients would be missed unless repeated HCV-RNA testing were
conducted during therapy.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.510300202 
PMID: 10421669  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

