
1. Am Heart J. 1999 Nov;138(5 Pt 2):S479-83.

Enteroviruses and myocardial infarction.

Roivainen M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Enterovirus Laboratory, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Several lines of evidence suggest that some microbial infections are 
involved in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. The aim of the studies referred 
to here was to evaluate the possible role of enteroviral infections as potential 
risk factors for cardiac events.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The association of enterovirus-specific antibodies and
cardiac events was analyzed in 3 large, prospective population studies with the
nested case-control design. Stored sera collected at the study baseline were
tested for enterovirus group-specific immunoglobulin G antibodies. The study
samples from the North Karelia Project, the Helsinki Heart Study, and the Mobile 
Clinic Health Service were composed of 183, 241, and 276 men with myocardial
infarction, respectively, and their matched control patients. In 2 of the 3
studies, male cases without evidence of heart disease at the baseline had
significantly higher levels of antibodies to enteroviruses than their matched
control patients. High enterovirus antibody level was found to be a definite
independent risk factor for future cardiac events. In the North Karelia study the
risk was high in men aged 25 to 49 years, whereas in the Mobile Clinic Health
Service study the risk was particularly strong in those with low levels of serum 
cholesterol. No association with high levels of enterovirus antibodies and
cardiac events was seen in the Helsinki Heart Study, which consisted of
hypercholesteremic men.
CONCLUSIONS: If a high level of enterovirus group-specific antibodies can be
considered as a sign of frequent enterovirus infections in the past, these
studies suggest that enterovirus infections increase the risk of myocardial
infarction at least in normocholesteremic men.

DOI: 10.1016/s0002-8703(99)70280-2 
PMID: 10539853  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

