
1. J Immunol. 2000 Jan 1;164(1):208-16.

Activated and memory CD8+ T cells can be distinguished by their cytokine profiles
and phenotypic markers.

Slifka MK(1), Whitton JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropharmacology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 
92037, USA. mslifka@scripps.edu

Dissecting the mechanisms of T cell-mediated immunity requires the identification
of functional characteristics and surface markers that distinguish between
activated and memory T lymphocytes. In this study, we compared the rates of
cytokine production by virus-specific primary and memory CD8+ T cells directly ex
vivo. Ag-specific IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha production by both primary and
long-term memory T cells was observed in </=60 min after peptide stimulation.
Although the on-rate kinetics of cytokine production were nearly identical,
activated T cells produced more IFN-gamma, but less TNF-alpha, than memory T
cells. Ag-specific cytokine synthesis was not a constitutive process and
terminated immediately following disruption of contact with peptide-coated cells,
demonstrating that continuous antigenic stimulation was required by both T cell
populations to maintain steady-state cytokine production. Upon re-exposure to Ag,
activated T cells resumed cytokine production whereas only a subpopulation of
memory T cells reinitiated cytokine synthesis. Analysis of cytokine profiles and 
levels of CD8, LFA-1, and CTLA-4 together revealed a pattern of expression that
clearly distinguished in vivo-activated T cells from memory T cells.
Surprisingly, CTLA-4 expression was highest at the early stages of the immune
response but fell to background levels soon after viral clearance. This study is 
the first to show that memory T cells have the same Ag-specific on/off regulation
of cytokine production as activated T cells and demonstrates that memory T cells 
can be clearly discriminated from activated T cells directly ex vivo by their
cytokine profiles and the differential expression of three well-characterized T
cell markers.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.164.1.208 
PMID: 10605013  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

