
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2000 Jan;38(1):110-9.

In vitro and in vivo evaluations of sodium lauryl sulfate and dextran sulfate as 
microbicides against herpes simplex and human immunodeficiency viruses.

Piret J(1), Lamontagne J, Bestman-Smith J, Roy S, Gourde P, Désormeaux A, Omar
RF, Juhász J, Bergeron MG.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Infectiologie, Université Laval, Ste-Foy, Québec,
Canada G1V 4G2.

The efficacy of sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS), a sulfated anionic chaotropic
surfactant, and dextran sulfate (DS), a polysulfated carbohydrate, against herpes
simplex virus (HSV) and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infections was
evaluated in cultured cells and in different murine models of HSV infection.
Results showed that both SLS and DS were potent inhibitors of the infectivities
of various HSV-1 and HSV-2 strains. Pretreatment of HIV-1 (strain NL4-3) with SLS
also reduced its infectivity to 1G5 cells. DS prevented the binding of HSV to
cell surface receptors and therefore its entry into cells. Pretreatment of HSV-1 
(strain F) with 50 microM SLS resulted in a complete loss of virus infectivity to
Vero cells. However, viruses were able to enter into cells and to produce in the 
nuclei capsid shells devoid of a DNA core. The amount of the glycoprotein D gene 
produced in these cells remained unchanged compared to controls, suggesting that 
SLS could interfere with the maturation of the virus. At a higher SLS
concentration (100 microM), HSV was highly damaged by SLS pretreatment and only a
few viral particles could enter into cells to produce abnormal capsids. Although 
DS was a more potent inhibitor of HSV infectivity in vitro, it was unable to
provide any protection in murine models of HSV infection. However, SLS conferred 
a complete protection of animals infected cutaneously with pretreated viruses. In
addition, skin pretreatment of mice with a polymer formulation containing SLS
completely prevented the development of cutaneous lesions. More interestingly,
intravaginal pretreatment of mice with SLS in a buffered solution also completely
protected against lethal HSV-2 infection. Taken together, our results suggest
that SLS could thus represent a candidate of choice as a microbicide to prevent
the sexual transmission of HIV, HSV, and possibly other pathogens that cause
sexually transmitted diseases.


PMCID: PMC86033
PMID: 10618073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

