
1. J Hepatol. 1999;31 Suppl 1:168-73.

Treatment of naive patients with chronic hepatitis C.

Weiland O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Microbiology, Pathology, and Infectious Diseases,
Karolinska Institute at Huddinge Hospital, Sweden. ola.weiland@impi.ki.se

Treatment of chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection in naive patients with
interferon alpha alone or in combination with ribavirin is reviewed. Two
placebo-controlled randomised studies including 150 patients have shown that
ribavirin as single therapy at standard dosage (15 mg/kg bodyweight in two
divided doses daily) only reduces ALT levels transiently during therapy, whereas 
HCV RNA levels are not substantially reduced. Interferon alpha (IFN) alone at
standard dosage (3 MU t.i.w.) given for 12 months results in sustained
virological response (SR) rates of some 15-25% depending on the genotype and
baseline HCV RNA levels. Ribavirin in combination with alpha interferon, in
standard doses for 6-12 months significantly improves the sustained biochemical
and virological response rates 2-3 times compared with IFN alone for 12 months.
In the future, combination therapy will become standard therapy for most naive
patients, at least those with unfavourable viral parameters such as a high
baseline viral load (>2-3 million gE/ml serum) and genotype 1a+1b. In patients
with favourable baseline viral characteristics (genotypes 2 and 3, irrespective
of viral load) 6 months of combination therapy is likely to be sufficient,
whereas those with unfavourable viral baseline characteristics will need longer
combination treatment. Both genotype and baseline viral load need to be assessed 
to optimise the choice of therapy. Many questions must still be answered, such as
the optimal dose of ribavirin and IFN in combination regimens, and the optimal
treatment length. Furthermore, should induction treatment be used in combination 
regimens? What regimen should be used for patients with more advanced disease
such as those with cirrhosis and decompensation?

DOI: 10.1016/s0168-8278(99)80395-x 
PMID: 10622581  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

