
1. Virology. 2000 May 10;270(2):299-309.

Human interleukin-6 facilitates hepatitis B virus infection in vitro and in vivo.

Galun E(1), Nahor O, Eid A, Jurim O, Rose-John S, Blum HE, Nussbaum O, Ilan E,
Daudi N, Shouval D, Reisner Y, Dagan S.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Unit, Goldyne Savad Institute of Gene Therapy, Hadassah University
Hospital, Ein-Kerem, Jerusalem, 91120, Israel. galun@md2.huji.ac.il

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Research on hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection in vivo has
been limited due to the absence of a suitable animal model. We have developed a
human-mouse radiation chimera in which normal mice, preconditioned by lethal
total body irradiation and radioprotected with SCID mouse bone marrow cells, are 
permissive for engraftment of human hematopoietic cells and solid tissues. This
resulting human-mouse model, which comprises three genetically disparate sources 
of tissue, is therefore termed Trimera. This study was aimed at assessing the
effect of human IL-6 on HBV infection in vivo in Trimera mice.
METHODS: Trimera mice were transplanted with human liver tissue fragments or with
HepG2-derived cell lines, which had been previously infected ex vivo with HBV in 
the presence or absence of human interleukin-6 (hIL-6) and in the presence of
anti-IL-6-neutralizing antibodies.
RESULTS: HBV sequences appeared in the sera of animals in which the liver tissue 
was incubated with both HBV and hIL-6 prior to transplantation. A similar result 
was obtained when a human hepatoblastoma cell line (HepG2), expressing the hIL-6 
receptor, was infected ex vivo with HBV in the presence of hIL-6 prior to their
injection into spleens of Trimera mice. However, when liver fragments were
infected ex vivo and simultaneously treated with neutralizing antibodies against 
hIL-6 or were incubated with HBV prior to transplantation without hIL-6, the rate
of mice positive for HBV DNA in their sera was lower. Human mononuclear cells are
also permissive for HBV infection in vitro: in the presence of hIL-6 the
infection of these cells is enhanced; and this infection is suppressed by the
chimeric protein named Hyper-IL-6, generated by the fusion of hIL-6 to the
soluble hIL-6 receptor (sIL-6Ralpha, gp80).
CONCLUSION: hIL-6 facilitates HBV infection in vitro and in vivo.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.2000.0210 
PMID: 10792989  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

