
1. J Surg Res. 2000 Jun 1;91(1):15-25.

Amino acid uptake and regulation in multicellular hepatoma spheroids.

Pawlik TM(1), Souba WW, Sweeney TJ, Bode BP.

Author information: 
(1)Surgical Oncology Research Laboratories, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts 02114-2696, USA.

BACKGROUND: Cancer cells maintained in monolayer tissue culture are frequently
used to study tumor biology and nutrient uptake, but there is a concern that this
system may not fully reflect clinical tumor physiology. Because cells grown in a 
3-D configuration more closely resemble an in vivo environment, a model was
developed and characterized for the growth of SK-Hep human hepatoma cells in
suspension as multicellular tumor spheroids (MTS). The measurement of nutrient
uptake in such a system has never been established.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: SK-Hep cultures were initiated as single cell suspensions 
and grown as MTS in siliconized spinner flasks. The transport of several
individual amino acids (arginine, glutamate, leucine,
alpha-(N-methylamino)isobutyric acid (MeAIB), and glutamine (GLN)) was measured
in SK-Hep single cell suspensions and MTS (0. 50-0.60 mm diameter) by a
radiotracer/rapid filtration technique, as was the regulation of glutamine uptake
by phorbol esters. l-[(3)H]GLN uptake was also measured in larger spheroids
(0.85-1.5 mm diameter). MTS cellularity was evaluated by histological
examination, and single cell integrity after the transport assay was confirmed by
scanning electron microscopy (SEM).
RESULTS: SK-Hep MTS displayed gradients of cellular morphology and staining, with
central necrosis visible at diameters >0.8 mm. Single cell suspensions endured
the rapid filtration technique based on functional Na(+)-dependent uptake rates
and SEM analysis. Of all amino acids tested, only GLN transport rates were
visibly affected by growth format. In small MTS, Na(+)-dependent GLN uptake was
diminished by 40%, but was 40-53% higher in MTS >1 mm displaying central
necrosis, when compared to single cell suspensions. Likewise, slight parallel
changes in glutamine transporter ATB(0) mRNA levels were observed in Northern
blot analysis. Finally, phorbol ester-dependent GLN transport down-regulation (by
40-50%), previously established in SK-Hep monolayers, remained operative in all
cell formats tested.
CONCLUSIONS: The data suggest that the tumor microenvironment differentially
impacts the uptake of specific nutrients despite the conservation of key
regulatory pathways. This MTS technique may prove useful for further studies on
the role of nutrient transport in nascent tumor growth.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jsre.2000.5888 
PMID: 10816344  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

