
1. Alcohol Alcohol. 2000 May-Jun;35(3):286-95.

Effect of alcohol consumption on the progression of hepatitis C virus infection
and risk of hepatocellular carcinoma in Japanese patients.

Khan KN(1), Yatsuhashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Research, Nagasaki Chuo National Hospital, WHO
Collaborating Center for Reference and Research on Viral Hepatitis, Omura City,
Nagasaki, Japan.

Chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is associated with a spectrum of liver 
diseases and a proportion of chronic cases progress through cirrhosis to
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The viral and host factors that are important in 
the clinical and histological progression of HCV infection are unclear. We
investigated the effect of moderate (<80 g/day) and heavy (>80 g/day) alcohol
intake on the histological and clinical progression of HCV infection and their
associated risk of hepatic cancer in a group of Japanese patients. A number of
other variables were assessed to evaluate their impact on disease progression. We
recruited 120 patients with HCV infection and categorized them into four groups, 
based on alcohol consumption pattern. All clinical and biochemical profiles were 
collected from recorded files. Liver biopsies were analysed for the degree of
fibrosis, presence of cirrhosis and histological activity of necroinflammation.
Hepatic tumours were detected by the follow-up imaging analysis. There was no
difference in the age, length of exposure to HCV infection and HCV RNA serum
levels in the alcohol and alcohol-free groups. The histological grading of
necroinflammation, serum levels of alanine aminotransferase and HCV RNA did not
have any correlation with each other in the alcohol and alcohol-free group. There
was a 1.5-2. 5-fold greater risk of liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma 
in the alcohol intake group compared to the alcohol-free group. Kruskal-Wallis
analysis among four groups demonstrated a significant transition to fibrosis (P <
0.05) for alcoholics with HCV infection. The increased risk of liver cancer in
the alcohol group is independent of size and growth of tumours. The clinical
manifestations of gastro-oesophageal variceal bleeding, ascites, and
encephalopathy were also higher in the alcohol intake group. Alcohol consumption 
is an important risk factor in the histological and clinical progression of HCV
infection and has no relation with HCV replication. Chronic HCV carriers should
avoid excessive alcohol intake to reduce the acceleration of liver disease and
risk of liver cancer.

DOI: 10.1093/alcalc/35.3.286 
PMID: 10869250  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

