
1. Virology. 2000 Aug 1;273(2):276-85.

Nuclear localization of turnip crinkle virus movement protein p8.

Cohen Y(1), Qu F, Gisel A, Morris TJ, Zambryski PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, California 94720, USA.

Turnip crinkle virus (TCV) is a single-stranded positive-sense RNA virus of the
Carmovirus genus. Two of its five open reading frames (ORFs), encoding proteins
of 8 and 9 kDa, are required for cell-to-cell movement of the virus. These
movement proteins (MPs) were fused to green fluorescent protein (GFP) to
determine their cellular localization. In protoplasts, p9-GFP, like GFP itself,
is found throughout the cytoplasm, as well as in cell nuclei. In contrast, p8-GFP
was confined to the cell nucleus. Similar localization patterns were observed
when specific small peptide epitopes were fused to p8 and p9 proteins instead of 
GFP. The cytoplasmic localization of p9-GFP and nuclear localization of p8-GFP
were also detected in leaves after particle bombardment of DNA encoding these
fusion proteins or after overexpression of p8-GFP in transgenic Arabidopsis
seedlings. The expression of the GFP fusion proteins by recombinant TCV viruses
in infected protoplasts or on inoculated Arabidopsis leaves produced similar
patterns. Unlike TMV-MP and other MPs studied to date, no obvious punctuate
expression in the cell wall or association with the cytoskeleton was detected.
The sequence analysis of p8 revealed two unique nuclear localization signals
(NLSs), which were not conserved within p8 homologues of other viruses in the
genus Carmovirus. Mutation in either of these NLSs did not disrupt the nuclear
localization of p8-GFP. However, when both NLSs were mutated, p8-GFP expression
was no longer restricted to cell nuclei. The NLSs are not required for
cell-to-cell movement; TCV recombinant viruses mutated in one or both NLSs could 
still facilitate cell-to-cell movement of the virus. The nuclear localization of 
p8 suggests a novel function for this protein in the cell nucleus.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.2000.0440 
PMID: 10915598  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

