
1. J Virol. 2000 Sep;74(17):8038-47.

Membrane interface-interacting sequences within the ectodomain of the human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 envelope glycoprotein: putative role during viral
fusion.

Suárez T(1), Gallaher WR, Agirre A, Goñi FM, Nieva JL.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Biofísica (CSIC-UPV/EHU) and Departamento de Bioquímica, Universidad
del País Vasco, 48080 Bilbao, Spain.

We have identified a region within the ectodomain of the fusogenic human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) gp41, different from the fusion peptide,
that interacts strongly with membranes. This conserved sequence, which
immediately precedes the transmembrane anchor, is not highly hydrophobic
according to the Kyte-Doolittle hydropathy prediction algorithm, yet it shows a
high tendency to partition into the membrane interface, as revealed by the
Wimley-White interfacial hydrophobicity scale. We have investigated here the
membrane effects induced by NH(2)-DKWASLWNWFNITNWLWYIK-CONH(2) (HIV(c)), the
membrane interface-partitioning region at the C terminus of the gp41 ectodomain, 
in comparison to those caused by NH(2)-AVGIGALFLGFLGAAGSTMGARS-CONH(2) (HIV(n)), 
the fusion peptide at the N terminus of the subunit. Both HIV(c) and HIV(n) were 
seen to induce membrane fusion and permeabilization, although lower doses of
HIV(c) were required for comparable effects to be detected. Experiments in which 
equimolar mixtures of HIV(c) and HIV(n) were used indicated that both peptides
may act in a cooperative way. Peptide-membrane and peptide-peptide interactions
underlying those effects were further confirmed by analyzing the changes in
fluorescence of peptide Trp residues. Replacement of the first three Trp residues
by Ala, known to render a defective gp41 phenotype unable to mediate both
cell-cell fusion and virus entry, also abrogated the HIV(c) ability to induce
membrane fusion or form complexes with HIV(n) but not its ability to associate
with vesicles. Hydropathy analysis indicated that the presence of two
membrane-partitioning stretches separated by a collapsible intervening sequence
is a common structural motif among other viral envelope proteins. Moreover,
sequences with membrane surface-residing residues preceding the transmembrane
anchor appeared to be a common feature in viral fusion proteins of several virus 
families. According to our experimental results, such a feature might be related 
to their fusogenic function.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.74.17.8038-8047.2000 
PMCID: PMC112336
PMID: 10933713  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

