
1. Ann Oncol. 2000 Jun;11(6):749-52.

Metastatic extragonadal seminoma associated with cardiac transplantation.

de Bono JS(1), Fraser JA, Lee F, Simpson A, Lim C, Naik S, Soukop M, Dunlop DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Deparment of Medical Oncology, Beatson Oncology Centre, Western Infirmary,
Glasgow, UK. gpmv08@udcf.gla.ac.uk

A 37-year-old man who had successfully undergone cardiac transplantation for
dilated cardiomyopathy presented with a history of severe pain over his left
shoulder, rib cage and thoracic spine. Clinical examination revealed the presence
of bony tenderness over these sites, but there was no other clinical evidence of 
malignancy. Further investigations suggested the presence of multiple bony
metastases. Bone biopsy revealed extensive bone marrow infiltration by large
undifferentiated cells showing pronounced cytoplasmic vacuolation with a striking
granulomatous reaction. Immunocytochemistry revealed these anaplastic cells to be
cytokeratin and placenta-like alkaline phosphatase positive but S100, CD30 and
lymphoid marker negative. Analyses by in situ hybridisation of these cells
revealed no evidence of Epstein-Barr virus infection. Overall the pathology
suggested a diagnosis of metastatic seminoma. Confirmation of this diagnosis was 
obtained by the analysis of serum human chorionic gonadotrophin which was
elevated at 90 IU/l. In the absence of testicular or retroperitoneal disease, it 
is very likely that this unusual case of metastatic seminoma was related to the
patient's immunosuppressive therapy, which at diagnosis included cyclosporin and 
prednisolone. The patient was successfully treated with cisplatin based
chemotherapy and decreased immunosuppression and remains in complete remission
one year after completion of chemotherapy. Seminoma is an uncommon complication
of prolonged immunosuppression with very few cases being described in the
literature post-organ transplantation. This case shows that the clinical
presentation of this treatable tumour in this patient population can be unusual
and difficult to diagnose.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1008351517626 
PMID: 10942066  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

