
1. J Virol Methods. 2000 Oct;90(1):15-23.

HCV RNA levels in hepatocellular carcinomas and adjacent non-tumorous livers.

Dash S(1), Saxena R, Myung J, Rege T, Tsuji H, Gaglio P, Garry RF, Thung SN,
Gerber MA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Tulane University School of 
Medicine, 1430 Tulane Avenue, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA.
sdash@mailhost.tcs.tulane.edu

To determine the antiviral effects of drugs targeted to hepatitis C virus (HCV)
in chronic hepatitis patients, an accurate quantitative method with high
sensitivity is needed. Reverse transcription nested polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) is the most sensitive method for the detection of HCV sequences in
clinical specimens. However, this method is not quantitative. For this purpose, a
quantitative competitive assay was developed that combines RT and PCR followed by
image analysis to quantify HCV RNA. This assay targets the highly conserved 5'
non-coding region of HCV and is based on the co-amplification of wild type HCV
RNA with known amounts of mutant synthetic RNA. The mutant internal control used 
in these experiments differs from the wild type RNA by two nucleotide
substitutions, which introduces an internal restriction enzyme site. In this
report, this method was used to determine the levels of positive strand RNA in 11
HCV positive hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC) and compared these with adjacent
non-tumorous liver tissue. To confirm that the difference in viral titers is not 
related to variations in the amount of RNA used in the assay, glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) mRNA was also assessed by competitive RT-PCR in
all tissue extracts. Using this competitive assay it was determined that HCV RNA 
levels in the liver and tumor samples ranged from 10(3) to 10(6) molecules per
microg of total RNA which is similar to previous reports. Interestingly, the
amount of HCV in all the non-tumorous liver specimens were found to be
significantly higher (P<0.05) than the surrounding tumors, while the GAPDH mRNA
levels were found to be similar in both liver and tumor. Competitive RT-PCR is a 
sensitive, accurate and reliable method to determine HCV titers in clinical
specimens. Using this method it was determined that malignant tumor cells harbor 
less HCV as compared with the surrounding non-tumorous liver cells.

DOI: 10.1016/s0166-0934(00)00199-3 
PMID: 11011077  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

