
1. Protein Eng. 2000 Sep;13(9):611-5.

Functional EGFP-dystrophin fusion proteins for gene therapy vector development.

Chapdelaine P(1), Moisset PA, Campeau P, Asselin I, Vilquin JT, Tremblay JP.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherche en Génétique Humaine, Centre Hospitalier de l'Université
Laval, CHUQ, Faculté de Médecine, Université Laval, Sainte-Foy, Québec, G1V 4G2, 
Canada.

Transfection and transduction studies involving the use of the full-length
dystrophin (11 kb) or the truncated mini-gene (6 kb) cDNAs are hampered by the
large size of the resulting viral or non-viral expression vectors. This usually
results in very low yields of transgene-expressing cells. Moreover, the detection
of the few transgene-expressing cells is often tedious and costly. For these
reasons, expression vectors containing the enhanced green fluorescent protein
(EGFP) fused with the N-termini of mini- and full-length human dystrophin were
constructed. These constructs were tested by transfection of Phoenix cells with
Effectene, resulting after 48 h in a green fluorescent signal in 20% of cells.
Analysis of the cell extracts by immunoblotting with the use of a monoclonal
antibody specific to the dystrophin C-terminus confirmed the expression of
EGFP-mini- (240 kDa) and EGFP-full-length human dystrophin (450 kDa) fusion
proteins. Moreover, following the in vivo electroporation of the plasmids
containing the EGFP-mini- and full-length dystrophin in mouse muscles, both
fluorescent proteins were observed in cryostat sections in their normal location 
under the plasma membrane. This indicates that the fusion of EGFP to dystrophin
or mini-dystrophin did not interfere with the normal localization of the protein.
In conclusion, the fusion of EGFP provides a good tool for the search of the best
methods to introduce mini- or full-length dystrophin cDNA in the cells (in vitro)
or muscle fibers (in vivo) for the establishment of a treatment by gene therapy
of Duchenne muscular dystrophy patients.

DOI: 10.1093/protein/13.9.611 
PMID: 11054455  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

