
1. Mol Vis. 2000 Nov 6;6:222-31.

Subcellular localization of the expressed 18 kDa FGF-2 isoform in corneal
endothelial cells.

Choi J(1), Ko MK, Kay EP.

Author information: 
(1)Doheny Eye Institute, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

PURPOSE: To determine the subcellular localization of 18 kDa FGF-2 after
synthesis and before secretion into the extracellular matrix.
METHODS: Corneal endothelial cells (CEC) were transfected with an expression
vector coding for green fluorescent protein (GFP) and 18 kDa FGF-2. Expression of
the fusion protein was determined by immunoblot analysis and the subcellular
localization of the fusion protein was examined by immunocytochemical analysis.
RESULTS: When the expression of the fusion protein was determined by immunoblot
analysis, the expressed fusion protein had a molecular weight of 45 kDa,
resulting from the 27 kDa GFP and 18 kDa FGF-2. Following a 90 min exposure of
cells to the vector, the expressed 18 kDa FGF-2 was completely translocated to
the nucleus within a 24 h incubation. When cells were further incubated for
another 24 h, one-half of the fusion protein was retro-transported from the
nucleus to the cytoplasm, largely to the membrane and focal adhesion site, while 
the other half remained in the nucleus. During a 72 h incubation, the fusion
protein was completely translocated to the cytoplasm, where it was diffusely
distributed and its staining potential was greatly lost. Transfected cells showed
both a slight increase in cell proliferation and a down-regulation in the
expression of the high affinity receptors of FGF.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that the 18 kDa FGF-2 is directly
translocated from its synthetic site to the nucleus. The nuclear 18 kDa FGF-2 is 
then retro-transported to membrane/focal adhesion sites, after which the molecule
may be secreted. When 18 kDa FGF-2 remains in the nucleus, there is a slight
stimulatory activity of cell proliferation and a down-regulation of its receptor.
These data suggest an intracellular action of 18 kDa FGF-2 through mechanisms
independent of the receptor-mediated signaling pathways.


PMID: 11073556  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

