
1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2001 Feb;33(2):295-305.

Efficient expression of the vascular endothelial growth factor gene in vitro and 
in vivo, using an adeno-associated virus vector.

Byun J(1), Heard JM, Huh JE, Park SJ, Jung EA, Jeong JO, Gwon HC, Kim DK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Clinical Research, Samsung Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul,
135-230, Korea.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) has proven to be one of the most
effective growth factors for therapeutic angiogenesis. The biological efficacy of
the adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector has recently been demonstrated in muscle 
tissues, including the heart. Apart from these promising insights into VEGF and
the AAV vector, studies on VEGF gene transfer using the AAV vector have been
limited. Here, we evaluate AAV-mediated VEGF gene transfer, both in vitro and in 
vivo, using the AAV-mVEGF vector that contains cDNA for murine VEGF(120) within
an HCMV-driven expression cassette. Transient transfection of AAV-mVEGF plasmid
significantly increased mVEGF expression in 293T cells. The secreted VEGF in the 
conditioned medium had strong biological activity, as confirmed by the Miles'
vascular permeability assay. Transduction of 293T and HeLa cells with AAV-mVEGF
stock of high titer, that is essentially adenovirus-free, showed significantly
increased mVEGF expression above that of AAV-eGFP-transduced cells. When human
umbilical vein endothelial cells were transduced, a higher level of mVEGF
expression, together with higher cell counts, was observed compared to
AAV-eGFP-transduced cells. In vivo transduction of mouse tibialis anterior muscle
resulted in an increased level of mVEGF expression, and higher
capillary-to-myofibre ratio, 8 weeks post-transduction. In a rat hindlimb
ischemia model, regional blood flow, as well as the capillary-to-myofibre ratio, 
was significantly increased at 4 weeks post-transduction. These findings
demonstrate the efficient delivery of the VEGF gene using an AAV vector, which
has implications for angiogenic gene therapy in ischemic diseases.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jmcc.2000.1301 
PMID: 11162134  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

