
1. Hepatology. 2001 Jun;33(6):1479-87.

Protective immune response to hepatitis C virus in chimpanzees rechallenged
following clearance of primary infection.

Bassett SE(1), Guerra B, Brasky K, Miskovsky E, Houghton M, Klimpel GR, Lanford
RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch 
at Galveston, USA.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infections were evaluated in chimpanzees that had
previously cleared HCV and were rechallenged. Animals that had previously cleared
HCV infection rapidly cleared homologous and heterologous virus upon rechallenge,
indicative of a strong protective immunity. In one animal, sterilizing immunity
was observed with regard to viremia, although viral RNA was transiently detected 
in the liver. Accelerated viral clearance following rechallenge with HCV was
observed in animals that had not been exposed to HCV for over 16 years,
suggesting that long-lasting protective immunity may be possible. The ability of 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) to recognize HCV proteins was evaluated
during the course of the rechallenge experiments. A very early and strong in
vitro recall response to HCV nonstructural proteins appeared to be associated
with viral clearance. In contrast, proliferative responses to HCV proteins were
not observed in 4 persistently infected chimpanzees, and a weak proliferative
response was observed in 1 of 2 animals during acute resolving infection. The
results suggest that a strong T-cell proliferative response is induced upon
rechallenge of chimpanzees with HCV and that this response is associated with
rapid viral clearance. The antibody response to HCV proteins increased by over
1,000-fold in all animals following rechallenge as well. A more complete
understanding of the role of the cellular immune response in the clearance of HCV
and the nature of the protective immune response following viral clearance may
aid in the generation of therapies and vaccines.

DOI: 10.1053/jhep.2001.24371 
PMID: 11391537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

