
1. Gene Ther. 2001 May;8(10):789-94.

A modified adenovirus can transfect cochlear hair cells in vivo without
compromising cochlear function.

Luebke AE(1), Steiger JD, Hodges BL, Amalfitano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Miami School of Medicine, Miami,
FL, USA.

The loss of cochlear hair cells, or the loss of their capacity to transduce
acoustic signals, is believed to be the underlying mechanism in many forms of
hearing loss. To develop viral vectors that allow for the introduction of genes
directly into the cochleae of adult animals, replication-deficient (E1(-), E3(-))
and replication-defective (E1(-), E3(-), pol(-)) adenovirus vectors were used to 
transduce the bacterial beta-galactosidase gene into the hair cells of the guinea
pig cochlea in vivo. Distortion product otoacoustic emissions, which monitor the 
functional status of outer hair cells, were measured throughout the viral
infection periods to identify hair cell ototoxicity. The results demonstrated
that the use of the (E1(-), E3(-)) adenovirus vectors containing CMV-driven LacZ,
compromised cochlear function when gradually introduced into scala tympani via an
osmotic pump. However, when (E1(-), E3(-), pol(-)) adenoviral vectors containing 
CMV-driven LacZ were used to transduce cochlear hair cells, there was no loss of 
cochlear function over the frequency regions tested, and beta-galactosidase
(beta-gal) was detected in over 80% of all hair cells. Development of a viral
vector that infects cochlear hair cells without virus-induced ototoxic effects is
crucial for gene replacement strategies to treat certain forms of inherited
deafness and for otoprotective strategies to prevent hair cell losses to treat
progressive hearing disorders. Moreover, in vivo (E1(-), E3(-), pol(-))
adenovirus mediated gene-transfer techniques applied to adult guinea pig cochleae
may be useful in testing several hypotheses concerning what roles specific genes 
play in normal cochlear function.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.gt.3301445 
PMID: 11420643  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

