
1. Liver Transpl. 2001 Oct;7(10):863-9.

Recurrent hepatitis C after liver transplantation: a nonrandomized trial of
interferon alfa alone versus interferon alfa and ribavirin.

Ahmad J(1), Dodson SF, Demetris AJ, Fung JJ, Shakil AO.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Thomas E. Starzl Transplantation Institute,
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Liver transplant recipients with recurrent hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection
often have histological hepatitis, and in some patients, graft failure develops. 
The aim of this nonrandomized study is to determine the efficacy and tolerability
of interferon alfa (IFN alfa) alone and IFN alfa and ribavirin combination
therapy in such patients. Forty transplant recipients with recurrent hepatitis
were initiated on therapy with IFN alfa-2b at 3 million units (MU) three times
weekly for 1 month followed by 5 MU three times weekly for 5 months. Twenty
patients were administered IFN alfa-2b, 3 MU three times weekly for 1 month
followed by 5 MU three times weekly for 11 months, and ribavirin, 600 mg, twice
daily orally for 12 months concurrently. The primary end point was sustained
clearance of serum HCV RNA, and secondary end points were serum alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) level normalization and histological improvement. Thirty
patients completed 6 months of IFN-alfa monotherapy and 15 patients completed 12 
months of IFN alfa and ribavirin combination therapy. End-of-treatment
biochemical responses were similar in the two groups (IFN alfa, 20% v combination
therapy, 25%); however, viral clearance was greater in the combination-therapy
group (40% v 15%; P = .04). Six months after the completion of therapy, only 1
patient (2.5%) in the IFN-alfa group and 4 patients (20%) in the
combination-therapy group were HCV RNA negative (P = .03). Serum ALT and HCV RNA 
levels declined significantly in both groups during therapy. There was no
improvement in inflammatory grade, and fibrosis score was worse in both groups.
Ten patients (25%) in the IFN-alfa group and 5 patients (20%) in the
combination-therapy group withdrew because of adverse effects. We conclude that
in liver allograft recipients with recurrent hepatitis C, combination therapy
with IFN alfa and ribavirin is more efficacious than treatment with IFN alfa
alone. However, the efficacy is limited by tolerability.

DOI: 10.1053/jlts.2001.27869 
PMID: 11679984  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

