
1. Am J Kidney Dis. 2001 Nov;38(5):919-34.

Hepatitis C virus infection and renal transplantation.

Fabrizi F(1), Martin P, Ponticelli C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology and Dialysis, Maggiore Hospital, IRCCS, Milano, Italy.

With the success of organ transplantation, liver disease has emerged as an
important cause of morbidity and mortality of renal transplant (RT) recipients.
Numerous studies performed during the 1990s have shown that hepatitis C virus
(HCV) infection is the leading cause of chronic liver disease among RT
recipients. The transmission of HCV by renal transplantation of a kidney from an 
HCV-infected organ donor has been shown unequivocally. Liver biopsy is essential 
in the evaluation of liver disease of RT recipients, and histological studies
have shown that HCV-related liver disease after renal transplantation is
progressive. The outcome of HCV-related liver disease is probably more aggressive
in RT recipients than immunocompetent individuals. Various factors can affect the
progression of HCV in the RT population: coinfection with hepatitis B virus, time
of HCV acquisition, type of immunosuppressive treatment, and concomitant alcohol 
abuse. The role of virological features of HCV remains unclear. The natural
history of HCV infection after renal transplantation is under evaluation;
however, recent surveys with long follow-ups have documented adverse effects of
HCV infection on patient and graft survival in RT recipients. Use of renal grafts
from HCV-infected donors in recipients with HCV infection does not appear to
result in a greater burden of liver disease, at least for a short period. The
association between HCV and de novo or recurrent glomerulonephritis after RT has 
been hypothesized and is an area of avid research. Reported studies do not
support interferon (IFN) treatment for RT recipients with chronic hepatitis C
because of the frequent occurrence of graft failure, and information on the use
of other types of IFN or combined therapy (IFN plus ribavirin or amantadine) is
not yet available in the RT population.

DOI: 10.1053/ajkd.2001.28576 
PMID: 11684543  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

