
1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2002 Feb;13(2):370-8.

Cellular injury associated with renal thrombotic microangiopathy in human
immunodeficiency virus-infected macaques.

Segerer S(1), Eitner F, Cui Y, Hudkins KL, Alpers CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, 
USA.

Pigtailed macaques infected with a virulent human immunodeficiency virus-2
(HIV-2) strain develop renal thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA), which
morphologically resembles aspects of human HIV-associated TMA. Apoptotic cell
death of microvascular endothelial cells might be a pathogenetic clue to this
disease. For defining further the pattern of cellular injury in this model,
serial kidney sections of 58 macaques infected with HIV-2 and 7 uninfected
controls were studied by routine microscopy, terminal
deoxynucleotidyl-transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL),
4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole staining, and immunohistochemistry for
single-stranded DNA, p53, the Wilms' tumor suppressor gene-1 peptide product,
caspase-3, and the proliferation marker Ki67. Selected cases were further
evaluated by in situ end labeling and transmission electron microscopy. Kidneys
of 13 HIV-2-infected animals contained a pattern of cellular injury, which was
characterized by (1) nuclear swelling with an ultrastructural morphology
different from apoptotic nuclei, (2) sharply demarcated areas of renal cells with
chromatin nicks (TUNEL positive) and single-stranded DNA, (3) absence of an
inflammatory or proliferative response, (4) upregulation of p53 and loss of at
least one cellular differentiation marker (Wilms' tumor suppressor gene-1), (5) a
tight correlation with the diagnosis of renal TMA, and (6) a contrast between
profound changes in the renal cellular morphology and the apparently unaffected
clinical condition of the host. This pattern of injury, which shares some
features of both apoptotic and oncotic necrosis, might be involved in the
pathogenesis of HIV-associated renal TMA in this model.


PMID: 11805164  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

