
1. Cancer Res. 2002 Feb 1;62(3):773-80.

Intratumoral 5-fluorouracil produced by cytosine deaminase/5-fluorocytosine gene 
therapy is effective for experimental human glioblastomas.

Miller CR(1), Williams CR, Buchsbaum DJ, Gillespie GY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Division of Radiation Biology, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) is a potent antimetabolite used for chemotherapy of
gastrointestinal (GI), breast, and head and neck malignancies. Although clinical 
trials have been conducted, the poor therapeutic index of 5-FU has precluded its 
clinical use for a number of other tumor types. It is unclear whether this lack
of utility is due to problems with drug delivery or inherent insensitivity.
Adenovirus (Ad) vector-mediated cytosine deaminase (CD)/5-fluorocytosine (5-FC)
gene therapy has the potential to overcome pharmacokinetic issues associated with
systemic 5-FU and is particularly well suited to use with tumors in which local
control is paramount, such as recurrent, localized prostate cancer and malignant 
gliomas. In this study, the in vitro response by a panel of human tumor cell
lines derived from both GI (colon, pancreas) and non-GI (prostate, glioma) tumors
to 5-FU and to AdCMVCD (an Ad encoding Escherichia coli CD)/5-FC was examined.
Whereas the sensitivity (IC(50)) of individual cell lines to these agents varied,
no significant difference in median IC(50) for either 5-FU or AdCMVCD/5-FC was
evident for the four tumor types tested (P > 0.1). The relevant contributions of 
Ad gene transfer efficiency and inherent 5-FU sensitivity in determining response
to AdCMVCD/5-FC were then assessed. Multiple linear regression analysis revealed 
that whereas both factors significantly contribute to the response, inherent 5-FU
sensitivity was substantially more important (beta= 0.78 versus 0.48; P < 0.001).
Finally, the therapeutic efficacy of a single intratumoral injection of AdCMVCD
followed by systemic 5-FC was assessed in three intracranial C.B17 severe
combined immunodeficient mouse models of human glioma. AdCMVCD/5-FC efficacy was 
specific, virus dose-dependent, and closely paralleled in vitro 5-FU and CD/5-FC 
sensitivity in two of three models tested. These results reveal that glioma cells
are as sensitive as GI tumor cells to the antineoplastic effects of 5-FU,
identify inherent 5-FU sensitivity as an important factor in determining CD/5-FC 
efficacy, and confirm previous findings in rat models that demonstrate the
potential clinical utility of AdCMVCD/5-FC gene therapy for gliomas.


PMID: 11830532  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

