
1. N Engl J Med. 2002 Apr 18;346(16):1185-93.

Sustained correction of X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency by ex vivo gene
therapy.

Hacein-Bey-Abina S(1), Le Deist F, Carlier F, Bouneaud C, Hue C, De Villartay JP,
Thrasher AJ, Wulffraat N, Sorensen R, Dupuis-Girod S, Fischer A, Davies EG, Kuis 
W, Leiva L, Cavazzana-Calvo M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire INSERM, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2002 Apr 18;346(16):1241-3.
    N Engl J Med. 2002 Aug 22;347(8):613-4; author reply 613-4.

BACKGROUND: X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency due to a mutation in the
gene encoding the common gamma (gamma(c)) chain is a lethal condition that can be
cured by allogeneic stem-cell transplantation. We investigated whether infusion
of autologous hematopoietic stem cells that had been transduced in vitro with the
gamma(c) gene can restore the immune system in patients with severe combined
immunodeficiency.
METHODS: CD34+ bone marrow cells from five boys with X-linked severe combined
immunodeficiency were transduced ex vivo with the use of a defective retroviral
vector. Integration and expression of the gamma(c) transgene and development of
lymphocyte subgroups and their functions were sequentially analyzed over a period
of up to 2.5 years after gene transfer.
RESULTS: No adverse effects resulted from the procedure. Transduced T cells and
natural killer cells appeared in the blood of four of the five patients within
four months. The numbers and phenotypes of T cells, the repertoire of T-cell
receptors, and the in vitro proliferative responses of T cells to several
antigens after immunization were nearly normal up to two years after treatment.
Thymopoiesis was documented by the presence of naive T cells and T-cell
antigen-receptor episomes and the development of a normal-sized thymus gland. The
frequency of transduced B cells was low, but serum immunoglobulin levels and
antibody production after immunization were sufficient to avoid the need for
intravenous immunoglobulin. Correction of the immunodeficiency eradicated
established infections and allowed patients to have a normal life.
CONCLUSIONS: Ex vivo gene therapy with gamma(c) can safely correct the immune
deficiency of patients with X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa012616 
PMID: 11961146  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

