
1. J Virol. 2002 Aug;76(16):8040-9.

Survey of transcript expression in rainbow trout leukocytes reveals a major
contribution of interferon-responsive genes in the early response to a
rhabdovirus infection.

O'Farrell C(1), Vaghefi N, Cantonnet M, Buteau B, Boudinot P, Benmansour A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Virologie et Immunologie Moléculaires, Institut National de la
Recherche Agronomique, 78352 Jouy-en-Josas Cedex, France.

Virus infections induce changes in the expression of host cell genes. A global
knowledge of these modifications should help to better understand the virus/host 
cell interactions. To obtain a more comprehensive view of the rainbow trout
response to a viral infection, we used the subtractive suppressive hybridization 
methodology in the viral hemorrhagic septicemia model of infection. We infected
rainbow trout leukocytes with viral hemorrhagic septicemia virus (VHSV), and
total RNA from infected and mock-infected cells was compared at 40 h
postinfection. Twenty-four virus-induced genes were ultimately retrieved from the
subtracted cDNA library, and their differential expression was further confirmed 
by semiquantitative reverse transcription-PCR and Northern blot analysis. Among
these sequences, three were already described as VHSV-induced genes. Eight
sequences with known homologs were extended to full-length cDNA using 5' and 3'
rapid amplification of cDNA ends, and they were subsequently divided into three
functional subsets. Four genes were homologous to mammalian interferon responsive
genes, three were similar to chemo-attractant molecules (CXC chemokine,
galectin), and two had nucleic acid binding domains. All of the virus-induced
genes were also induced by rainbow trout interferon, indicating that the
interferon pathway is the predominant component of the anti-VHSV response. They
were also expressed in vivo in experimentally infected fish, indicating their
biological relevance in natural infection.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.76.16.8040-8049.2002 
PMCID: PMC155135
PMID: 12134009  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

