
1. AIDS Anal Afr. 1995 Jun;5(3):10-1.

Senegal: where "card-carrying" sex workers are legal.

[No authors listed]

PIP: An estimated 1.5% of Senegal's 5 million adult population is
HIV-seropositive, with 3000 people having already died of AIDS-related illnesses.
Although 75% of those with AIDS are men, women comprise the majority of people
infected with HIV. This latter phenomenon is most likely the result of men having
become infected before women because of the former's greater degree of travel
relative to women. Infection with HIV-2 accounts for 70% of those with HIV, but
for only 30% of AIDS cases. HIV-1 is, however, becoming a growing problem since
it seems to be transmitted more easily and develop into AIDS more quickly. 15% of
prostitutes in Senegal are HIV-seropositive compared to more than 50% of
comparable subgroups in most African countries. Experts cannot say for sure why
Senegal has a comparatively low rate of HIV, but several factors have been
posited as explanations. The comparatively low rate of infection could be related
to the long distance between Senegal and the HIV-1 epicenters of east and central
Africa, the ability of HIV-2 infection to help the body fight off HIV-1, the
strong Islamic influence which has made male circumcision universal thus reducing
the risk of contracting HIV, the provision of AIDS awareness and prevention early
in the epidemic, and the government's permissive approach to commercial sex. This
latter factor is probably the most important related to the current status of
HIV/AIDS in Senegal. It has been legal since 1966 to sell sex as long as the sex 
worker is registered, over 21 years old, has a regular medical check-up, and can 
present an up-to-date medical report card to the police upon request. This
approach was established by then-president Senghor to reduce the incidence and
prevalence of sexually transmitted diseases (STD). Registered sex workers since
1986 have been tested for HIV, advised on how to avoid infection, and given free 
condoms. In anonymous questionnaires, 70-75% of all Dakar's official sex workers 
reported always using condoms, 20-25% used condoms except in personal
relationships, and 5% admitted that they would have unprotected sex if offered
more money. Of the 2000 sex workers registered in Dakar, however, only 850 show
up for their routine examinations, medical checks have had to be cut from every
two weeks to once per month, and the incidence of STDs is not declining. All
prostitutes need to register and comply with the rules, but there are currently
twice as many clandestine prostitutes as there are registered prostitutes, with
many of those unregistered being under age 21. Prostitutes may also be highly
mobile, going where single male workers and tourists are to be found, and thereby
failing to stay within the officially sanctioned system of commercial sex. Much
has been accomplished to prevent the spread of HIV in Senegal, but more remains
to be done.

PMID: 12289033  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

