
1. Methods. 2003 Mar;29(3):236-47.

Use of combinatorial peptide libraries for T-cell epitope mapping.

Sospedra M(1), Pinilla C, Martin R.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroimmunology Branch, NINDS, National Institutes of Health, 10 Center Drive,
MSC 1400, Bethesda, MD 20892-1400, USA.

T lymphocytes play important roles not only in infectious diseases and
autoimmunity, but also in immune responses against tumors. For many of these
disorders, the relevant target antigens are not known. Designing effective
methods that allow the search for T-cell epitopes is therefore an important goal 
in the areas of infectious diseases, oncology, vaccine development, and numerous 
other biomedical specialties. So far, the strategies used to examine T-cell
recognition have been based largely on mapping T-cell epitopes with overlapping
peptides from known proteins or with entire proteins, e.g., from a specific
virus, bacterium, or human tissue. These approaches are tedious and have a number
of limitations. It is, for example, almost impossible to isolate T cells that
infiltrate an organ or infectious site and identify their specificity unless one 
already has a concept as to which antigens may be relevant. During recent years, 
a number of laboratories have developed less biased approaches that employ either
the selection of putative T-cell epitopes based on the prediction of binding to
certain major histocompatibilty complex (MHC) molecules and peptide or protein
libraries that have been generated in expression systems, e.g. phage, or rely on 
combinatorial peptide chemistry. The latter technique has been refined by a
number of laboratories including ours. Bead-bound or, preferably, positional
scanning synthetic and soluble combinatorial peptide libraries allow the
identification of T-cell epitopes within complex mixtures of proteins even for T 
cells that have been expanded from an organ infiltrate with a polyclonal
stimulus. The practical steps that are involved in the latter method are
described in this article.

DOI: 10.1016/s1046-2023(02)00346-8 
PMID: 12725789  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

