
1. J Virol Methods. 1992 Dec 1;40(3):287-96.

A comparison between one first generation and three second generation anti-HCV
ELISAs: an investigation in high- and low-risk subjects in correlation with
recombinant immunoblot assay and polymerase chain reaction.

Bååth L(1), Widell A, Nordenfelt E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Lund University, Malmö General Hospital,
Sweden.

One first generation assay (manufactured by Ortho, test I) and 3 second
generation anti-HCV ELISAs (manufactured by Ortho, Abbott, and UBI, tests II-IV) 
were compared. Sera from 4 different sources were used: (1) intravenous
drug-users (IVDUs, n = 50), (2) blood donors (n = 1055), (3) all clinical samples
from one day of routine anti-HCV testing (n = 89), (4) hemodialysis patients
previously found negative by test I but clinically suspected to have a HCV
infection (n = 11). Confirmatory anti-HCV tests were carried out with a second
generation recombinant immunoblot assay (RIBA II). In sera positive exclusively
by test IV, one antibody consumption test (UBI HCV Neutralization EIA) and one
further immunoblot assay (INNO-LIA HCV Ab) were used. PCR for HCV RNA was carried
out on all hemodialysis patient sera and in the RIBA II positive blood donor
sera. The second generation ELISAs discriminated 11 more positive samples than
the first generation test (2 IVDUs, 5 blood donors, 4 clinical samples). The 9
sera from blood donors and clinical samples were all RIBA II positive or
indeterminate. The second generation tests thus showed increased sensitivity. The
second generation tests also showed increased specificity in that 4 samples that 
were positive by test I but negative by the second generation tests, were also
negative by RIBA II. With few exceptions, all RIBA II-positive and most of the
indeterminate samples were positive by the second generation ELISAs. With few
exceptions, all the RIBA II-negative samples were negative by the second
generation ELISAs. Eleven blood donor sera were positive by test IV exclusively
where RIBA II and other supplementary assays were negative. The recently
introduced second generation anti-HCV ELISAs were found to have a higher
sensitivity than the first generation test. The tests also showed a good
concordance with the exception of test IV in the group of blood donor sera.

DOI: 10.1016/0166-0934(92)90087-t 
PMID: 1282130  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

