
1. World J Gastroenterol. 2003 Jul;9(7):1496-500.

Acute hepatitis C in a chronically HIV-infected patient: evolution of different
viral genomic regions.

Flichman D(1), Kott V, Sookoian S, Campos R.

Author information: 
(1)Catedra de Virologia, Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquimica, Universidad de Buenos
Aires, Argentina.

AIM: To analyze the molecular evolution of different viral genomic regions of HCV
in an acute HCV infected patient chronically infected with HIV through a 42-month
follow-up.
METHODS: Serum samples of a chronically HIV infected patient that seroconverted
to anti HCV antibodies were sequenced, from the event of superinfection through a
period of 17 months and in a late sample (42nd month). Hypervariable genomic
regions of HIV (V3 loop of the gp120) and HCV (HVR-1 on the E2 glycoprotein gene)
were studied. In order to analyze genomic regions involved in different
biological functions and with the cellular immune response, HCV core and NS5A
were also chosen to be sequenced. Amplification of the different regions was done
by RT-PCR and directly sequenced. Confirmation of sequences was done on
reamplified material. Nucleotide sequences of the different time points were
aligned with CLUSTAL W 1.5, and the corresponding amino acid ones were deduced.
RESULTS: Hypervariable genomic regions of both viruses (HVR1 and gp120 V3 loop)
presented several nonsynonymous changes but, while in the gp120 V3 loop mutations
were detected in the sample obtained right after HCV superinfection and
maintained throughout, they occurred following a sequential and cumulative
pattern in the HVR1. In the NS5A region of HCV, two amino acid changes were
detected during the follow-up period, whereas the core region presented several
amino acid replacements, once the HCV chronic infection had been established.
CONCLUSION: During the HIV-HCV superinfection, each genomic region analyzed shows
a different evolutionary pattern. Most of the nucleotide substitutions observed
are non-synonymous and clustered in previously described epitopes, thus
suggesting an immune-driven evolutionary process.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v9.i7.1496 
PMCID: PMC4615490
PMID: 12854149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

