
1. Antiviral Res. 2003 Jul;59(2):111-9.

Murine cytomegalovirus retinitis during retrovirus-induced immunodeficiency
(MAIDS) in mice: interleukin-2 immunotherapy correlates with increased
intraocular levels of perforin mRNA.

Dix RD(1), Podack ER, Cousins SW.

Author information: 
(1)Harvery and Bernice Jones Eye Institute, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA. dixrichardd@uams.edu

Mice with a retrovirus-induced immunosuppression (MAIDS) are susceptible to
experimental murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV) retinitis, but can be rendered
resistant to retinitis by systemic interleukin-2 (IL-2) immunotherapy.
Experiments were performed to explore the mechanism by which IL-2 treatment
during MAIDS might restore resistance to MCMV retinitis. Whereas 80% of untreated
MAIDS mice were susceptible to MCMV retinitis, none (0%) of IL-2-treated MAIDS
mice developed necrotizing retinitis. In comparison, 100% of both untreated and
IL-2-treated perforin knockout mice (PKO mice) were susceptible to MCMV
retinitis, and severity of retinitis and amounts of infectious intraocular MCMV
in IL-2-treated PKO mice were equivalent to that in untreated PKO mice. A
competitive quantitative RT-PCR assay was used to measure the levels of perforin 
mRNA within MCMV-infected eyes of immunologically normal mice, untreated MAIDS
mice, and IL-2-treated MAIDS mice. Although the level of perforin mRNA within
MCMV-infected eyes of untreated MAIDS mice susceptible to retinitis was
significantly reduced when compared to the high level found within MCMV-infected 
eyes of normal mice resistant to retinitis, systemic treatment of MAIDS mice with
IL-2 increased perforin mRNA within MCMV-infected eyes to levels found in normal 
mice. The ability of IL-2 treatment to increase intraocular levels of perforin
mRNA diminished with the progression of MAIDS. Our findings support the
hypothesis that systemic IL-2 immunotherapy during MAIDS provides protection
against MCMV retinitis by upregulation of perforin-mediated cytotoxicity used by 
cytotoxic lymphocytes to kill virus-infected cells.

DOI: 10.1016/s0166-3542(03)00066-4 
PMID: 12895694  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

