
1. J Virol. 2003 Sep;77(17):9439-50.

The Moloney murine leukemia virus repressor binding site represses expression in 
murine and human hematopoietic stem cells.

Haas DL(1), Lutzko C, Logan AC, Cho GJ, Skelton D, Jin Yu X, Pepper KA, Kohn DB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Research Immunology/BMT, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California 90027, USA.

The Moloney murine leukemia virus (MLV) repressor binding site (RBS) is a major
determinant of restricted expression of MLV in undifferentiated mouse embryonic
stem (ES) cells and mouse embryonal carcinoma (EC) lines. We show here that the
RBS repressed expression when placed outside of its normal MLV genome context in 
a self-inactivating (SIN) lentiviral vector. In the lentiviral vector genome
context, the RBS repressed expression of a modified MLV long terminal repeat
(MNDU3) promoter, a simian virus 40 promoter, and three cellular promoters:
ubiquitin C, mPGK, and hEF-1a. In addition to repressing expression in
undifferentiated ES and EC cell lines, we show that the RBS substantially
repressed expression in primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts, primary mouse bone
marrow stromal cells, whole mouse bone marrow and its differentiated progeny
after bone marrow transplant, and several mouse hematopoietic cell lines. Using
an electrophoretic mobility shift assay, we show that binding factor A, the
trans-acting factor proposed to convey repression by its interaction with the
RBS, is present in the nuclear extracts of all mouse cells we analyzed where
expression was repressed by the RBS. In addition, we show that the RBS partially 
repressed expression in the human hematopoietic cell line DU.528 and primary
human CD34(+) CD38(-) hematopoietic cells isolated from umbilical cord blood.
These findings suggest that retroviral vectors carrying the RBS are subjected to 
high rates of repression in murine and human cells and that MLV vectors with
primer binding site substitutions that remove the RBS may yield more-effective
gene expression.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.77.17.9439-9450.2003 
PMCID: PMC187403
PMID: 12915559  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

