
1. J Biol Chem. 1992 Aug 5;267(22):15984-92.

Covalent and noncovalent DNA binding by mutants of vaccinia DNA topoisomerase I.

Morham SG(1), Shuman S.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Biology, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York.

Analysis of vaccinia topoisomerase mutants that are impaired in DNA relaxation
has allowed the identification of amino acid residues required for the
transesterification step of catalysis. Missense mutations of wild-type residues
Gly-132----Asp and Arg-223----Gln rendered the protein inert in formation of the 
covalent enzyme-DNA complex and hence completely inactive in DNA relaxation.
Mutations of Thr-147----Ile and Gly-132----Ser caused severe defects in covalent 
adduct formation that correlated with the extent of inhibition of relaxation.
None of these point mutations had an effect on noncovalent DNA binding sufficient
to account for the defect in relaxation. Deletion of amino- or carboxyl-terminal 
portions of the polypeptide abrogated noncovalent DNA binding. Two distinct
topoisomerase-DNA complexes were resolved by native gel electrophoresis. One
complex, which was unique to those proteins competent in covalent adduct
formation, contained topoisomerase bound to the 5'-portion of the incised DNA
strand. The 3'-segment of the cleaved strand had dissociated spontaneously. This 
complex was isolated and shown to catalyze transfer of the covalently bound DNA
to a heterologous acceptor oligonucleotide, thereby proving that the covalent
adduct between protein and duplex DNA is a true intermediate in strand breakage
and reunion. The role of the active site region of eukaryotic topoisomerase in
determining sensitivity or resistance to camptothecin was examined by converting 
the active site region of the resistant vaccinia enzyme (SKRAY274) to that of the
drug-sensitive yeast enzyme (SKINY). The SKINY mutation did not alter the
resistance of the vaccinia enzyme to the cleavage-enhancing effects of
camptothecin.


PMID: 1322412  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

