
1. J Gen Physiol. 1955 Jul 20;38(6):853-65.

Decay of incorporated radioactive phosphorus during reproduction of bacteriophage
T2.

STENT GS.

The multiplication of vegetative T2 bacteriophage in B/r bacteria has been
followed by studying the lethal effects of decay of incorporated radiophosphorus 
P(32) at various stages of the eclipse period. Experiment I. Non-radioactive B/r 
bacteria were infected with highly radioactive (i.e. P(32)-unstable) T2 and
infection allowed to proceed at 37 degrees C. for various numbers of minutes
before freezing the infected cells and storing them in liquid nitrogen. The
longer development had been allowed to proceed at 37 degrees C. before freezing, 
the slower the inactivation of the frozen infective centers by P(32) decay.
Samples which were frozen after incubation for 9 minutes were completely stable. 
Experiment II. Radioactive B/r bacteria in radioactive growth medium were
infected with non-radioactive (i.e. stable) T2 and incubated for various lengths 
of time before being frozen and stored in liquid nitrogen, like those of
Experiment I. In this case, the infective centers were stable to P(32) decay as
long as they were frozen before the end of the eclipse period. The T2 progeny
phages issuing from the infected bacteria were P(32)-unstable. Experiment III.
Radioactive B/r bacteria in radioactive medium were infected with radioactive
(i.e. P(32)-unstable) T2 and otherwise incubated and frozen like those of the
first two experiments. In this case, the same progressive stabilization, of the
infective centers towards inactivation by P(32) decay was observed as that found 
in Experiment I. The ability to yield infective progeny of infected bacteria
incubated for 10 minutes at 37 degrees C. before freezing could no longer be
destroyed by P(32) decay. The progeny issuing from the infected cells were as
unstable as the parental phage. These results could be explained by one of three 
general hypotheses. As vegetative phage begins to multiply, it is possible that: 
(a) there is a high probability that any part of the vegetative phage already
duplicated can be saved after its destruction by P(32) decay through a process
analogous to multiplicity reactivation or, (b) there occurs a change in state of 
the deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) preliminary to or in the course of its
replication that renders it refractory to destruction by P(32) decay, or, finally
(c) there occurs a transfer of the genetic factors from the DNA of the infecting 
phage to another substance not sensitive to destruction by P(32) decay.

DOI: 10.1085/jgp.38.6.853 
PMCID: PMC2147515
PMID: 13242767  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

