
1. Hepatogastroenterology. 2003 Sep-Oct;50(53):1301-4.

Peripheral blood mononuclear cells are possible extrahepatic replication sites
for hepatitis C virus.

Nishiguchi S(1), Fukuda K, Shiomi S, Takeda T, Kuroki T, Ogami M, Morimoto H,
Otani S, Sakurai M, Matsuhisa A.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Osaka City University Medical School,
1-4-3 Asahi-machi, Abeno-ku, Osaka 545-8585, Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Hepatitis C virus is a major causative agent of chronic liver
disease and hepatocellular carcinoma and is considered to be a hepatotropic
virus. It remains controversial whether hepatitis C virus exists in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells and replicates there. In order to resolve this issue, we 
performed nested RT-PCR (reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction) and
RT-PCR in situ hybridization in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of patients
with chronic hepatitis C.
METHODOLOGY: We collected peripheral blood mononuclear cells from patients with
chronic hepatitis C, extracted total RNA from the samples, and performed nested
RT-PCR to detect hepatitis C virus RNA in the peripheral blood mononuclear cells 
lysates. We also fixed peripheral blood mononuclear cells of the patients in 4%
paraformaldehyde and performed RT-PCR in situ hybridization with a
digoxigenin-labeled RNA probe to detect hepatitis C virus RNA in the cells.
RESULTS: Using these methods, we detected both positive- and negative-stranded
hepatitis C virus RNA in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of hepatitis C
patients. To determine in which cell population of peripheral blood mononuclear
cells hepatitis C virus is present, we performed PCR in situ hybridization after 
incubation with fluorescent latex microbeads which could be phagocytozed by
monocytes. We obtained positive signals of the replicative hepatitis C virus
genome not only in lymphocytes but also in monocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: RT-PCR in situ hybridization with a nonradioactive probe was found
to be useful for in situ detection of hepatitis C virus RNA. Our findings suggest
that peripheral blood mononuclear cells may be extrahepatic replication sites for
hepatitis C virus.


PMID: 14571723  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

