
1. J Virol. 2003 Nov;77(22):11952-63.

Induction of caspase-dependent apoptosis in cultured rat oligodendrocytes by
murine coronavirus is mediated during cell entry and does not require virus
replication.

Liu Y(1), Cai Y, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas 72205, USA.

Murine coronavirus mouse hepatitis virus (MHV) causes demyelination of the
central nervous system (CNS) in rats and mice. Apoptotic oligodendrocytes have
been detected in the vicinity of the CNS demyelinating lesions in these animals. 
However, whether MHV can directly induce oligodendrocyte apoptosis has not been
documented. Here, we established a rat oligodendrocyte culture that is
morphologically and phenotypically indistinguishable from the primary rat
oligodendrocytes. Using this culture, we showed that mature rat oligodendrocytes 
were permissive to MHV infection but did not support productive virus
replication. Significantly, oligodendrocytes infected with both live and
ultraviolet light-inactivated viruses underwent apoptosis to a similar extent,
which was readily detectable at 24 h postinfection as revealed by apoptotic
bodies and DNA fragmentation, indicating that MHV-induced apoptosis is mediated
during the early stages of the virus life cycle and does not require virus
replication. Prior treatment of cells with the lysosomotropic agents NH(4)Cl and 
chloroquine as well as the vacuolar proton pump-ATPase inhibitor bafilomycin A1, 
all of which block the acidification of the endosome, prevented oligodendrocytes 
from succumbing to apoptosis induced by MHV mutant OBLV60, which enters cells via
endocytosis, indicating that fusion between the viral envelope and cell membranes
triggers the apoptotic cascade. Treatment with the pan-caspase inhibitor
Z-VAD-fmk blocked MHV-induced apoptosis, suggesting an involvement of the
caspase-dependent pathway. Our results, thus, for the first time provide
unequivocal evidence that infection of oligodendrocytes with MHV directly results
in apoptosis. This finding provides an explanation for the destruction of
oligodendrocytes and the damage of myelin sheath in MHV-infected CNS and suggests
that oligodendrocyte apoptosis may be one of the underlying mechanisms for the
pathogenesis of MHV-induced demyelinating diseases in animals.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.77.22.11952-11963.2003 
PMCID: PMC254259
PMID: 14581532  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

