
1. Ann Surg. 2003 Dec;238(6):815-24; discussion 825-6.

A genetically retargeted adenoviral vector enhances viral transduction in
esophageal carcinoma cell lines and primary cultured esophageal resection
specimens.

Buskens CJ(1), Marsman WA, Wesseling JG, Offerhaus GJ, Yamamoto M, Curiel DT,
Bosma PJ, van Lanschot JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Medical Center, Deptartment of Surgery, Suite G4-130, Meibergdreef 9,
1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands. C.J.Buskens@AMC.UVA.NL

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate if an integrin-retargeted adenoviral vector could
establish a more efficient and tumor-specific gene transfer in esophageal
carcinoma cells.
SUMMARY BACKGROUND DATA: Although preclinical data indicated that adenoviral gene
therapy could be a promising novel treatment modality for various malignancies,
clinical results are often disappointing. An important problem is the decreased
tumoral expression of the Coxsackie and adenovirus receptor (CAR), which mediates
adenoviral entry. Retargeting the adenoviral vector to other cellular receptors, 
by inserting an arginine-glycine-aspartate (RGD) tripeptide in the fiber knob,
might overcome this problem.
METHODS: Four esophageal carcinoma cell lines and 10 fresh surgical resection
specimens were cultured. All were infected with the native adenovirus (Ad) and
the retargeted adenovirus (AdRGD), encoding for the reporter genes luciferase or 
Green Fluorescent Protein to analyze gene transfer efficiency.
RESULTS: In all cell lines, an increase in viral expression per cell and an
increase in the percentage of transduced cells were seen with the retargeted
adenovirus. Also, in the primary cultures of carcinoma cells, a more efficient
gene transfer was seen when the retargeted vector was used. This phenomenon was
less pronounced in normal cells, indicating that the RGD virus transduces tumor
cells more efficiently than normal cells.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that an RGD retargeted adenovirus infects
human esophageal carcinoma cells with enhanced efficiency, while in normal
esophageal cells this effect is less pronounced. Therefore, this retargeted
vector is expected to have a better performance in vivo, when compared with
nonretargeted vectors used for cancer gene therapy so far.

DOI: 10.1097/01.sla.0000098622.47909.c0 
PMCID: PMC1356163
PMID: 14631218  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

