
1. Br J Cancer. 2003 Dec 1;89(11):2140-6.

A comparative study between catalase gene therapy and the cardioprotector
monohydroxyethylrutoside (MonoHER) in protecting against doxorubicin-induced
cardiotoxicity in vitro.

Abou-El-Hassan MA(1), Rabelink MJ, van der Vijgh WJ, Bast A, Hoeben RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Free University Medical Center, PO Box 7057,
1007 MB Amsterdam, The Netherlands. m.abdulhassan@vumc.nl

Cardiotoxicity is the main dose-limiting side effect of doxorubicin in the
clinic. Being a free radical producer, doxorubicin affects the heart specifically
because of its low antioxidant capacity. Among those antioxidants, catalase is
present in very low levels in the heart compared to other organs. Since catalase 
is an essential enzyme in detoxifying hydrogen peroxide, the aim of the present
study was to investigate the protective effect of catalase as delivered by an
adenovirus vector against doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity in cultured neonatal
rat cardiac myocytes (NeRCaMs). 7-Monohydroxyethylrutoside (MonoHER), a potent
cardioprotector currently under clinical investigations, was included in the
study as a reference. Neonatal rat cardiac myocytes were infected with different 
multiplicity of infections (MOIs) of adenovirus encoding catalase (AdCat). A
control infection with an adenovirus vector encoding a nonrelated protein was
included. The activity and content of catalase in infected cells were determined 
during 3 days postinfection. One group of NeRCaMs was infected with AdCat before 
treatment with doxorubicin (0-50 microM). The second and third group were treated
with doxorubicin (0-50 microM) with and without 1 mM monohydroxyethylrutoside
(monoHER), respectively. The LDH release and viability of treated cells were
measured 24 and 48 h after doxorubicin treatment. The beating rate was followed
in three other groups of cells receiving the same treatments within 3 days after 
doxorubicin (0-100 microM) treatment. Catalase activity increased in
AdCat-infected cells, with different MOIs, starting from the second day after
infection as compared to the mock-infected cells (P<0.03). At the third day of
infection, an MOI of more than 50 caused cytopathic effects, which hampered the
use of higher viral titres. With an MOI of 50, catalase activity increased
3.5-fold in AdCat-infected cells 3 days postinfection (P=0.021) compared to
mock-infected cells. The beating rate and survival of NeRCaMs decreased in a
concentration and time-dependent manner after doxorubicin treatment (P<0.0005).
This cytotoxicity was associated with an increase in the LDH release from the
treated cells (P<0.0005). The cells stopped beating 24 h after treatment with >50
microM doxorubicin. A 3.5-fold increase in the activity of catalase did not
protect NeRCaMs against any of the cytotoxic effects of doxorubicin on NeRCaMs.
In contrast, monoHER (1 mM) significantly protected NeRCaMs against the lethal
effects of doxorubicin on the survival, LDH release and the beating rate of
NeRCaMs (P<0.004) during 48 h after doxorubicin treatment. This protection
resulted in a prolongation of the beating of doxorubicin-treated cells after the 
end of the experiment (i.e. >72 h). The present study (1) illustrates that the
cytotoxicity of high MOI of AdCat (>50) limited the possibility to increase
catalase activity more than 3.5-fold, which was not enough to protect infected
NeRCaMs against doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity and (2) confirms the efficacy 
of monoHER as a cardioprotector. Thus, the use of monoHER proves more suitable
for the prevention of doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity than catalase gene
transfer employing adenovirus vectors.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6601430 
PMCID: PMC2376857
PMID: 14647150  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

