
1. Virus Res. 2004 Mar;100(1):83-8.

Activity of aphids associated with lettuce and broccoli in Spain and their
efficiency as vectors of Lettuce mosaic virus.

Nebreda M(1), Moreno A, Pérez N, Palacios I, Seco-Fernández V, Fereres A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Protección Vegetal, Centro de Ciencias Medioambientales
(CSIC), c/Serrano 115 Dpdo, Madrid 28006, Spain.

This research sought to identify the aphid virus vector species associated with
lettuce and broccoli crops in Spain, and to determine their population dynamics
and ability to transmit Lettuce mosaic virus (LMV). Green tile traps and Moericke
yellow water-pan traps were used to monitor aphid flights during the spring and
autumn growing seasons of 2001. Aphid species feeding on lettuce were counted
weekly. The transmission efficiencies of LMV were determined for the aphid
species caught most frequently. The Moericke traps generally caught more aphid
species than the tile trap, but the latter was the most suitable to estimate
flight activity of species involved in virus spread. Spring aphid catches
indicated that the main aphid species landing on lettuce in the regions of Madrid
and Murcia was Hyperomyzus lactucae, but Brachycaudus helichrysi was also
abundant in both regions. In broccoli in the Navarra region, the most abundant
species in spring were Aphis fabae, B. helichrysi and H. lactucae. In autumn-sown
crops, the main species landing on lettuce in the Madrid region were Hyadaphis
coriandri and Aphis spiraecola. In Murcia, A. spiraecola and Myzus persicae were 
the most abundant, while in Navarra, Therioaphis trifolii, and various Aphis spp.
were the most numerous landing on broccoli. The main aphid species colonising
lettuce was Nasonovia ribisnigri, but other less abundant colonising species were
Aulacorthum solani and Macrosiphum euphorbiae. The most efficient vectors of LMV 
were M. persicae, Aphis gossypii and M. euphorbiae, while A. fabae and H.
lactucae transmitted with low efficiency, and Rhopalosiphum padi and N.
ribisnigri did not transmit. Occurrence of LMV epidemics in central Spain in
relation to aphid flights and the role of weeds as virus reservoirs is discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2003.12.016 
PMID: 15036838  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

