
1. J Virol. 2004 Jun;78(12):6585-94.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus-encoded latency-associated nuclear
antigen inhibits lytic replication by targeting Rta: a potential mechanism for
virus-mediated control of latency.

Lan K(1), Kuppers DA, Verma SC, Robertson ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and the Abramson Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of Pennsylvania Medical School, 201E Johnson Pavilion, 3610 Hamilton
Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Like other herpesviruses, Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV, also
designated human herpesvirus 8) can establish a latent infection in the infected 
host. During latency a small number of genes are expressed. One of those genes
encodes latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA), which is constitutively
expressed in cells during latent as well as lytic infection. LANA has previously 
been shown to be important for the establishment of latent episome maintenance
through tethering of the viral genome to the host chromosomes. Under specific
conditions, KSHV can undergo lytic replication, with the production of viral
progeny. The immediate-early Rta, encoded by open reading frame 50 of KSHV, has
been shown to play a critical role in switching from viral latent replication to 
lytic replication. Overexpression of Rta from a heterologous promoter is
sufficient for driving KSHV lytic replication and the production of viral
progeny. In the present study, we show that LANA down-modulates Rta's promoter
activity in transient reporter assays, thus repressing Rta-mediated
transactivation. This results in a decrease in the production of KSHV progeny
virions. We also found that LANA interacts physically with Rta both in vivo and
in vitro. Taken together, our results demonstrate that LANA can inhibit viral
lytic replication by inhibiting expression as well as antagonizing the function
of Rta. This suggests that LANA may play a critical role in maintaining latency
by controlling the switch between viral latency and lytic replication.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.78.12.6585-6594.2004 
PMCID: PMC416549
PMID: 15163750  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

