
1. J Clin Oncol. 2004 Jun 1;22(11):2122-32.

Phase II randomized study of vaccine treatment of advanced prostate cancer
(E7897): a trial of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group.

Kaufman HL(1), Wang W, Manola J, DiPaola RS, Ko YJ, Sweeney C, Whiteside TL,
Schlom J, Wilding G, Weiner LM.

Author information: 
(1)Columbia University Medical Center, 177 Fort Washington Avenue, New York, NY
10032, USA. hlk2003@columbia.edu

PURPOSE: A phase II clinical trial was conducted to evaluate the feasibility and 
tolerability of a prime/boost vaccine strategy using vaccinia virus and fowlpox
virus expressing human prostate-specific antigen (PSA) in patients with
biochemical progression after local therapy for prostate cancer. The induction of
PSA-specific immunity was also evaluated.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A randomized clinical trial was conducted by the Eastern
Cooperative Oncology group and 64 eligible patients were randomly assigned to
receive four vaccinations with fowlpox-PSA (rF-PSA), three rF-PSA vaccines
followed by one vaccinia-PSA (rV-PSA) vaccine, or one rV-PSA vaccine followed by 
three rF-PSA vaccines. The major end point was PSA response at 6 months, and
immune monitoring included measurements of anti-PSA and anti-vaccinia antibody
titers and PSA-specific T-cell responses.
RESULTS: The prime/boost schedule was well tolerated with few adverse events. Of 
the eligible patients, 45.3% of men remained free of PSA progression at 19.1
months and 78.1% demonstrated clinical progression-free survival. There was a
trend favoring the treatment group that received a priming dose of rV-PSA.
Although no significant increases in anti-PSA antibody titers were detected, 46% 
of patients demonstrated an increase in PSA-reactive T-cells.
CONCLUSION: Therapy with poxviruses expressing PSA and delivered in a prime/boost
regimen was feasible and associated with minimal toxicity in the cooperative
group setting. A significant proportion of men remained free of PSA and clinical 
progression after 19 months follow-up, and nearly half demonstrated an increase
in PSA-specific T-cell responses. Phase III studies are needed to define the role
of vaccination in men with prostate cancer or those who are at risk for the
disease.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2004.08.083 
PMID: 15169798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

