
1. J Gene Med. 2004 Jun;6(6):603-15.

Enhancer-deleted retroviral vectors restore high levels of superoxide generation 
in a mouse model of CGD.

Schwickerath O(1), Brouns G, Thrasher A, Kinnon C, Roes J, Casimir C.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology Unit, Institute of Child Health, Guilford Street, London 
WC1E 6JJ, UK.

BACKGROUND: Retroviral vectors possess many advantages for use in gene therapy
protocols, especially within the haematopoietic system. A number of attendant
problems, however, still limit their safety in clinical application. The effects 
of the enhancer present in the retroviral long terminal repeat (LTR) are a major 
concern for the clinical usage of such vectors, as they can exert a powerful
regulatory influence on the genes that surround them.
METHODS: To improve the safety and widen the applicability of retroviral vectors 
for use in gene therapy we have developed an enhancer-deleted (Delta-LTR)
retroviral vector that retained high titre and demonstrated transcriptional
activity in myeloid cells.
RESULTS: When used to correct a mouse model of autosomal recessive chronic
granulomatous disease, the Delta-LTR vectors gave acceptable levels of gene
transfer to mouse bone marrow cells. Evidence for a slight preferential
expression in myeloid cells was obtained with all the vectors studied. Nitroblue 
tetrazolium assay of superoxide generation in mouse bone marrow derived
haematopoietic colonies revealed that transduction with Delta-LTR vectors could
restore functional NADPH oxidase to cells from these animals. Superoxide assay of
peripheral blood confirmed that, although relatively low numbers of cells were
transduced, the Delta-LTR vector was capable of reconstituting very high levels
of oxidase activity, comparable to that obtained from normal cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The Delta-LTR vector described here could provide the basis for a
new generation of retroviral vectors with improved safety.

Copyright 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/jgm.557 
PMID: 15170731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

