
1. Vaccine. 2004 Sep 3;22(25-26):3427-34.

Protection of weaned pigs by vaccination with human adenovirus 5 recombinant
viruses expressing the hemagglutinin and the nucleoprotein of H3N2 swine
influenza virus.

Wesley RD(1), Tang M, Lager KM.

Author information: 
(1)Virus and Prion Diseases of Livestock Research Unit, National Animal Disease
Center, USDA, Agricultural Research Service, P.O. Box 70, Ames, IA, 50010, USA.
rwesley@nadc.ars.usda.gov

Swine influenza virus (SIV), subtype H3N2, is a recent reassortant virus that
emerged in 1998 in North American swine causing severe respiratory and
reproductive disease. In this study, two replication-defective adenovirus
recombinants were developed as potential vaccines against H3N2 influenza viruses.
Three groups of 3-week-old pigs (10 pigs per group) were vaccinated
intramuscularly (IM) with the recombinants; one group was vaccinated with the
recombinant adenovirus expressing the influenza virus H3 hemagglutinin (HA)
protein, one group was vaccinated with the recombinant adenovirus expressing the 
nucleoprotein (NP), and one group was vaccinated with both recombinants in a
mixture. Two additional control groups (10 pigs per group) were included in the
animal trial. One control group was challenged with a virulent H3N2 field strain 
and one control group remained unchallenged. The results showed that pigs in the 
groups given the recombinant adenovirus expressing HA alone and HA plus NP
developed high levels of virus-specific hemagglutination-inhibition (HI) antibody
by 4 weeks post vaccination. Pigs in the group vaccinated with both recombinant
viruses in a mixture were completely protected. Complete protection was shown by 
the lack of nasal shedding of virus following challenge and by the lack of lung
lesions at 1 week following the challenge infection. Thus,
replication-incompetent adenovirus vaccines given simultaneously to pigs are
efficacious for SIV and have the additional advantage over commercial vaccines
that suckling piglets have no pre-existing maternally-derived antibody to block
early life vaccination.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2004.02.040 
PMID: 15308368  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

