
1. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2004 Dec;12(4):387-91.

Primary meningeal Epstein-Barr virus-related leiomyosarcoma in a man infected
with human immunodeficiency virus: review of literature, emphasizing the
differential diagnosis and pathogenesis.

Zevallos-Giampietri EA(1), Yañes HH, Orrego Puelles J, Barrionuevo C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Neoplásicas, Lima,
Peru.

We describe the clinical, radiologic, surgical, and pathologic findings of a
29-year-old Peruvian human immunodeficiency virus-infected man with a primary
parasellar meningeal leiomyosarcoma involving the left lesser esphenoidal wing
and the cavernous sinus. Over a period of 13 months, he developed headache,
vomiting, insomnia, and diplopia. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a left
parasellar extra-axial mass that was isointense in T1, hypointense in T2, and
gadolinium-enhanced. The patient underwent subtotal resection of the tumor. The
neoplasm was composed of spindle cells with smooth-muscle features. It showed
moderate atypia, inconspicuous nucleoli, and scanty mitosis. No tumor necrosis
was detected. The immunohistochemistry revealed strong positivity for vimentin,
desmin, and smooth-muscle alpha-actin. A low-grade leiomyosarcoma was diagnosed. 
The in situ hybridization showed positive nuclear reactivity for Epstein-Barr
virus-encoded RNA. The immunohistochemistry was negative for Epstein-Barr virus
latent membrane protein 1. The main differential diagnosis of primary meningeal
smooth-muscle tumors includes meningioma and peripheral nerve sheath tumors.
Epstein-Barr virus has been demonstrated in most smooth-muscle tumors associated 
with acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). Primary meningeal smooth-muscle 
tumors, exceedingly rare neoplasms, remarkably affect young adults with AIDS.
Comparatively, most AIDS-related visceral (nonmeningeal) smooth-muscle tumors
have been reported in children. The permissiveness and tumorigenesis associated
with Epstein-Barr virus may depend on the age of human immunodeficiency virus
infection.

DOI: 10.1097/00129039-200412000-00018 
PMID: 15536343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

