
1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 18;280(7):5281-9. Epub 2004 Nov 12.

Mechanism of chaperone function in small heat shock proteins: dissociation of the
HSP27 oligomer is required for recognition and binding of destabilized T4
lysozyme.

Shashidharamurthy R(1), Koteiche HA, Dong J, McHaourab HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University, 741 
Light Hall, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Mammalian small heat shock proteins (sHSP) form polydisperse and dynamic
oligomers that undergo equilibrium subunit exchange. Current models of their
chaperone activity hypothesize that recognition and binding of protein non-native
states involve changes in the oligomeric state. The equivalent thermodynamic
representation is a set of three coupled equilibria that includes the sHSP
oligomeric equilibrium, the substrate folding equilibrium, and the equilibrium
binding between the sHSP and the substrate non-native states. To test this
hypothesis and define the binding-competent oligomeric state of human Hsp27, we
have perturbed the two former equilibria and quantitatively determined the
consequences on binding. The substrate is a set of T4 lysozyme (T4L) mutants that
bind under conditions that favor the folded state over the unfolded state by
10(2)-10(4)-fold. The concentration-dependent oligomer equilibrium of Hsp27 was
perturbed by mutations that alter the relative stability of two major oligomeric 
states including phosphorylation-mimicking mutations that result in the
dissociation to a small multimer over a wide range of concentrations. Correlation
of binding isotherms with size exclusion chromatography analysis of the Hsp27
oligomer equilibrium demonstrates that the multimer is the binding-competent
state. Binding occurs through two modes, each characterized by different affinity
and number of binding sites, and results in T4L.Hsp27 complexes of different
hydrodynamic properties. Mutants of the Hsp27 phosphorylation mimic that reverse 
the reduction in oligomer size also reduce the extent of T4L binding. Taken
together, these results suggest a central role for the oligomeric equilibrium in 
regulating the chaperone activity of sHSP. The mutants identify sequence features
important for modulating this equilibrium.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M407236200 
PMID: 15542604  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

