
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2005;98(1):24-32.

A natural variant of Bacillus licheniformis alpha-amylase isolated from flour
mill wastewaters sheds light on the origin of high thermostability.

Shahhoseini M(1), Ziaee AA, Pourbabai AA, Ghaemi N, Declerck N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Faculty of Sciences, University of
Tehran, Tehran, I.R. Iran. hoseini@ibb.ut.ac.ir

AIMS: Understanding the origin of high thermostability exhibited by the
alpha-amylase produced by a natural strain of Bacillus licheniformis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The MSH320 alpha-amylase gene has been cloned from a native 
strain of B. licheniformis isolated from flour mill wastewaters in Kashan,
central Iran, and its nucleotide sequence was determined (GenBank Accession
Number AF438149). Whereas previously cloned B. licheniformisalpha-amylase (BLA)
genes are nearly identical, the MSH320 gene coding sequence presents only 93%
identity with the reference 'wild-type' BLA gene, most of the nucleotide changes 
leading to silent mutations. Amino acid substitutions occurred at 19 of the 483
residues of the matured protein, distributed all along the protein sequence.
Nevertheless, the natural BLA variant presents thermoinactivation kinetics
similar to that of the reference BLA. Protein modelling and structural
predictions at the substitution sites suggest that half of the mutations may have
a significant stabilizing or destabilizing effect on the protein structure.
Compensatory mutations thus occurred in the natural variant in order to maintain 
thermostability to the level of the reference enzyme.
CONCLUSIONS: The exceptional high thermostability of BLA, although produced by a 
nonthermophilic organism, is not fortuitous but subject to a selective pressure
still at work in natural environments.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: BLA thermal performances are not naturally 
maximized and can be substantially improved by protein engineering.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2672.2004.02407.x 
PMID: 15610414  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

