
1. J Clin Invest. 2005 Jan;115(1):128-37.

IL-7 is a potent and proviral strain-specific inducer of latent HIV-1 cellular
reservoirs of infected individuals on virally suppressive HAART.

Wang FX(1), Xu Y, Sullivan J, Souder E, Argyris EG, Acheampong EA, Fisher J,
Sierra M, Thomson MM, Najera R, Frank I, Kulkosky J, Pomerantz RJ, Nunnari G.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Virology and Biodefense, Division of Infectious Diseases and 
Environmental Medicine, Department of Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

The persistence of HIV-1 in virally suppressed infected individuals on highly
active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) remains a major therapeutic problem. The
use of cytokines has been envisioned as an additional therapeutic strategy to
stimulate latent proviruses in these individuals. Immune activation therapy using
IL-2 has shown some promise. In the present study, we found that IL-7 was
significantly more effective at enhancing HIV-1 proviral reactivation than either
IL-2 alone or IL-2 combined with phytohemagglutinin (PHA) in CD8-depleted PBMCs. 
IL-7 also showed a positive trend for inducing proviral reactivation from resting
CD4(+) T lymphocytes from HIV-1-infected patients on suppressive HAART. Moreover,
the phylogenetic analyses of viral envelope gp120 genes from induced viruses
indicated that distinct proviral quasispecies had been activated by IL-7, as
compared with those activated by the PHA/IL-2 treatment. These studies thus
demonstrate that different activators of proviral latency may perturb and
potentially deplete only selected, specific portions of the proviral archive in
virally suppressed individuals. The known immunomodulatory effects of IL-7 could 
be combined with its ability to stimulate HIV-1 replication from resting CD4(+) T
lymphocytes, in addition to other moieties, to potentially deplete HIV-1
reservoirs and lead to the rational design of immune-antiretroviral approaches.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI22574 
PMCID: PMC539197
PMID: 15630452  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

