
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2005 Feb;71(2):706-12.

Accumulation and fate of microorganisms and microspheres in biofilms formed in a 
pilot-scale water distribution system.

Långmark J(1), Storey MV, Ashbolt NJ, Stenström TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Mycology and Water Microbiology, Swedish Institute
for Infectious Disease Control, SE-171 82 Solna, Sweden. jlk@smi.ki.se

The accumulation and fate of model microbial "pathogens" within a drinking-water 
distribution system was investigated in naturally grown biofilms formed in a
novel pilot-scale water distribution system provided with chlorinated and
UV-treated water. Biofilms were exposed to 1-mum hydrophilic and hydrophobic
microspheres, Salmonella bacteriophages 28B, and Legionella pneumophila bacteria,
and their fate was monitored over a 38-day period. The accumulation of model
pathogens was generally independent of the biofilm cell density and was shown to 
be dependent on particle surface properties, where hydrophilic spheres
accumulated to a larger extent than hydrophobic ones. A higher accumulation of
culturable legionellae was measured in the chlorinated system compared to the
UV-treated system with increasing residence time. The fate of spheres and
fluorescence in situ hybridization-positive legionellae was similar and
independent of the primary disinfectant applied and water residence time. The
more rapid loss of culturable legionellae compared to the fluorescence in situ
hybridization-positive legionellae was attributed to a loss in culturability
rather than physical desorption. Loss of bacteriophage 28B plaque-forming ability
together with erosion may have affected their fate within biofilms in the
pilot-scale distribution system. The current study has demonstrated that
desorption was one of the primary mechanisms affecting the loss of microspheres, 
legionellae, and bacteriophage from biofilms within a pilot-scale distribution
system as well as disinfection and biological grazing. In general, two primary
disinfection regimens (chlorination and UV treatment) were not shown to have a
measurable impact on the accumulation and fate of model microbial pathogens
within a water distribution system.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.71.2.706-712.2005 
PMCID: PMC546826
PMID: 15691920  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

