
1. J Clin Virol. 2006 Feb;35(2):135-40. Epub 2005 Jul 18.

Stability of lyophilised specimens for the molecular detection of viral DNA/RNA.

Vaughan H(1), Chalker VJ, Mee Z, Rossouw A, James V.

Author information: 
(1)UK NEQAS for Microbiology, Quality Assurance Laboratory, Health Protection
Agency Centre for Infections, 61 Colindale Avenue, London NW9 5HT, UK.
helen.vaughan@hpa.org.uk

BACKGROUND: The range of nucleic acid-based technologies for the molecular
detection of pathogens has grown rapidly in recent years. The influx of new
testing methods into the clinical laboratory, demands for evaluation and
standardisation of methods, interpretation of results and evaluation of
laboratory performance have highlighted the need for internal and External
Quality Assessment (EQA) systems more than ever before. External Quality
Assessment panels demand reproducible, stable specimens of consistent form,
suitable for transportation.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the stability of freeze-dried viral specimens in terms
of molecular detection.
STUDY DESIGN: When EQA specimens are prepared, they undergo long-term storage and
testing as part of the quality control (QC) process. The frequency and nature of 
testing is dependent on the resources and methodologies available at the time. A 
range of virus preparations used for EQA was monitored over a period of months to
years in a retrospective study; the available quality monitoring data for the
five viruses, including storage temperature and method of detection were
analysed.
RESULTS: The nucleic acid (DNA or RNA) of the freeze-dried viruses included in
the study was readily detectable over a long period of time. Quantitative
analysis indicated that detectable concentrations of nucleic acid post-freeze
drying were similarly maintained. Storage temperature was an important factor in 
the stability of HCV, but other viruses were unaffected by storage at different
temperatures.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, the molecular detection of nucleic acid (DNA or RNA) in 
freeze-dried specimens of HSV1, HSV2, HBV, HCV and HIV is possible even after
prolonged storage, in some cases at a range of temperatures. Freeze drying allows
large-scale production of viral specimens of high quality for EQA, which are
stable in varying storage and shipment conditions. Furthermore, detection of each
virus was possible with a range of commonly used molecular diagnostic methods.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2005.06.001 
PMID: 16024290  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

