
1. Avian Pathol. 2005 Aug;34(4):324-31.

Development and validation of a PCR-RFLP assay to evaluate TVB haplotypes coding 
receptors for subgroup B and subgroup E avian leukosis viruses in White Leghorns.

Zhang HM(1), Bacon LD, Cheng HH, Hunt HD.

Author information: 
(1)US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Avian Disease and
Oncology Laboratory, 3606 East Mount Hope Road, East Lansing, MI 48823, USA.
hmzhang@msu.edu

The cellular receptor of subgroup B avian leukosis virus (ALVB) is encoded by a
gene at the tumour virus B (TVB) locus. TVB alleles encode specific receptors
permitting infection by exogenous ALVB or avian leukosis virus subgroup D (ALVD) 
as well as endogenous avian leukosis virus subgroup E (ALVE), and thus
susceptibility is dominant to resistance. Two single nucleotide polymorphisms at 
the TVB locus have been reported distinguishing three TVB alleles (TVB*S1, TVB*S3
and TVB*R). We have developed a polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment
length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) assay using the two single nucleotide
polymorphisms to define three observed allelic haplotypes and to identify the six
possible TVB genotypes consisting of the three haplotypes in defined laboratory
strains of chickens. One additional potential allelic haplotype and four
genotypes were also briefly discussed. Chickens from parents heterozygous for
different TVB alleles were challenged with Rous sarcoma viruses of subgroup ALVB 
and ALVE to induce wing-web tumours. Tumour incidences were evaluated between
chickens of the genotypes determined with this newly developed PCR-RFLP assay.
Importantly, chickens typed with this assay as TVB*S3/*S3 were resistant to
infection by ALVE only, and those TVB*R/*R were resistant to both ALVE and ALVB. 
Furthermore, a vast majority of chickens with the susceptible TVB*S1/- genotypes 
developed a tumour. This PCR-RFLP assay enables a relatively rapid assessment of 
all six anticipated TVB genotypes in experimental strains of chickens undergoing 
segregation for TVB*S1, TVB*S3, and TVB*R alleles. This non-infectious assay
should be further evaluated for the capacity to select and breed commercial
chickens for genetic resistance to infections by ALVB, ALVD and ALVE.

DOI: 10.1080/03079450500179491 
PMID: 16147569  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

