
1. J Neurosurg. 2005 Aug;103(2):311-9.

Surface properties, more than size, limiting convective distribution of
virus-sized particles and viruses in the central nervous system.

Chen MY(1), Hoffer A, Morrison PF, Hamilton JF, Hughes J, Schlageter KS, Lee J,
Kelly BR, Oldfield EH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bioengineering and Physical Science, ORS National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

OBJECT: Achieving distribution of gene-carrying vectors is a major barrier to the
clinical application of gene therapy. Because of the blood-brain barrier, the
distribution of genetic vectors to the central nervous system (CNS) is even more 
challenging than delivery to other tissues. Direct intraparenchymal
microinfusion, a minimally invasive technique, uses bulk flow (convection) to
distribute suspensions of macromolecules widely through the extracellular space
(convection-enhanced delivery [CED]). Although acute injection into solid tissue 
is often used for delivery of oligonucleotides, viruses, and liposomes, and there
is preliminary evidence that certain of these large particles can spread through 
the interstitial space of the brain by the use of convection, the use of CED for 
distribution of viruses in the brain has not been systematically examined. That
is the goal of this study.
METHODS: Investigators used a rodent model to examine the influence of size,
osmolarity of buffering solutions, and surface coating on the volumetric
distribution of virus-sized nanoparticles and viruses (adeno-associated viruses
and adenoviruses) in the gray matter of the brain. The results demonstrate that
channels in the extracellular space of gray matter in the brain are large enough 
to accommodate virus-sized particles and that the surface characteristics are
critical determinants for distribution of viruses in the brain by convection.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that convective distribution can be used to
distribute therapeutic viral vectors in the CNS.

DOI: 10.3171/jns.2005.103.2.0311 
PMID: 16175862  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

