
1. Environ Sci Technol. 2005 Aug 15;39(16):5940-53.

Coastal water quality impact of stormwater runoff from an urban watershed in
southern California.

Ahn JH(1), Grant SB, Surbeck CQ, DiGiacomo PM, Nezlin NP, Jiang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Henry Samueli School
of Engineering, University of California, Irvine, California 92697, USA.

Comment in
    Environ Sci Technol. 2006 May 15;40(10):3440; author reply 3441-2.

Field studies were conducted to assess the coastal water quality impact of
stormwater runoff from the Santa Ana River, which drains a large urban watershed 
located in southern California. Stormwater runoff from the river leads to very
poor surf zone water quality, with fecal indicator bacteria concentrations
exceeding California ocean bathing water standards by up to 500%. However,
cross-shore currents (e.g., rip cells) dilute contaminated surf zone water with
cleaner water from offshore, such that surf zone contamination is generally
confined to < 5 km around the river outlet. Offshore of the surf zone, stormwater
runoff ejected from the mouth of the river spreads out over a very large area, in
some cases exceeding 100 km2 on the basis of satellite observations. Fecal
indicator bacteria concentrations in these large stormwater plumes generally do
not exceed California ocean bathing water standards, even in cases where offshore
samples test positive for human pathogenic viruses (human adenoviruses and
enteroviruses) and fecal indicator viruses (F+ coliphage). Multiple lines of
evidence indicate that bacteria and viruses in the offshore stormwater plumes are
either associated with relatively small particles (< 53 microm) or not
particle-associated. Collectively, these results demonstrate that stormwater
runoff from the Santa Ana River negatively impacts coastal water quality, both in
the surf zone and offshore. However, the extent of this impact, and its human
health significance, is influenced by numerous factors, including prevailing
ocean currents, within-plume processing of particles and pathogens, and the
timing, magnitude, and nature of runoff discharged from river outlets over the
course of a storm.

DOI: 10.1021/es0501464 
PMID: 16173550  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

