
1. Curr HIV Res. 2005 Oct;3(4):345-59.

Standing in the way of eradication: HIV-1 infection and treatment in the male
genital tract.

Shehu-Xhilaga M(1), de Kretser D, Dejucq-Rainsford N, Hedger M.

Author information: 
(1)Monash Institute of Medical Research, Monash University, Clayton, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia.

As a result of the introduction of the Highly Active Antiretroviral Therapy
(HAART) many HIV-1 infected individuals are able to live an improved and extended
life style that can include the prospect of having children. Problematically, the
male reproductive organs may contribute infected cells and free viral particles
to semen in these individuals, increasing the risk of infection from the HIV-1
positive male to the mother and ultimately to the offspring. Though autopsies of 
AIDS infected individuals have taught us a great deal about specific cell loss
and the deterioration of male organs in this setting, it is not clear whether the
damage is due to specific targeting of these cells and tissues by HIV-1 or an
indirect consequence of viral dissemination in the later stages of infection. Due
to lack of access to these organs in the early stages of the disease, little is
known about the progression and pathogenesis of the infection within them,
particularly during the asymptomatic stage. The molecular and cellular aspects of
transmission of this virus remain unclear. Although assisted reproductive
techniques have been successfully used to achieve pregnancies in discordant
couples in the developed world, investigating the mechanism of the spread of
HIV-1 in the cells and tissues of the male reproductive tract remains a critical 
task, not only to improve our understanding, but also to enable the design of
suitable treatment for the eradication of the infection from this potential
sanctuary site. In this review, we discuss possible mechanisms by which infection
of the male genital tract (MGT) may occur in the context of the anatomy and
immunology of the tissues of the male reproductive organs. We revisit the
methodology used to evaluate the spread and transmission of HIV-1 from these
tissues and pinpoint future directions for study that may provide a better
understanding of the underlying mechanisms of HIV-1 transmission by this route.

DOI: 10.2174/157016205774370375 
PMID: 16250881  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

