
1. J Adv Nurs. 2005 Dec;52(6):620-30.

Dynamics of hope in adults living with HIV/AIDS: a substantive theory.

Kylma J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing Science, University of Kuopio, Kuopio, Finland.
jari.kylma@uku.fi

AIM: The aim of this paper was to discuss a substantive theory on the dynamics of
hope in adults living with the human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune
deficiency syndrome.
BACKGROUND: Existing literature describes how the dynamics of hope have profound 
connections with human essence and life, wellbeing and health, suffering and
illness, and nursing care, in general as well as in the context of human
immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune deficiency syndrome.
METHOD: The data consisted of five original articles describing the dynamics of
hope in people living with human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune
deficiency syndrome and their significant others in Finland. Meta-synthesis was
adapted to synthesize the original studies into a substantive theory.
FINDINGS: The core category that emerged was the dynamically alternating balance 
between interconnected hope, despair and hopelessness based on folding (closing
down of) and unfolding (opening up of) possibilities with regard to the dynamics 
of hope in dealing with the changing self and life with human immunodeficiency
virus/acquired immune deficiency syndrome. The dynamics of hope include the
subprocesses of hope, despair and hopelessness.
CONCLUSION: The dynamics of hope in adults living with human immunodeficiency
virus/acquired immune deficiency syndrome is an important phenomenon in nursing
practice and nursing science. In taking care of people living with acquired
immune deficiency syndrome, factors contributing to folding possibilities should 
be minimized, if possible, and factors contributing to unfolding possibilities
should be nourished. The present study adds to the knowledge-base of nursing
science about the dynamics of hope in people living with acquired immune
deficiency syndrome. Future research should focus on testing this theory in
people living with acquired immune deficiency syndrome.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2648.2005.03633.x 
PMID: 16313375  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

