
1. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2006 Mar;86(2):125-33. Epub 2005 Dec 19.

Characterization of the immunological features of tuberculous pericardial
effusions in HIV positive and HIV negative patients in contrast with
non-tuberculous effusions.

Reuter H(1), Burgess LJ, Carstens ME, Doubell AF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Unit/TREAD Research, P.O. Box 19174, Tygerberg 7505, South Africa.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the immunopathogenesis of pericardial tuberculosis (TB)
and the influence of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) on the anti-tuberculous
immune response.
DESIGN: Consecutive patients presenting with large pericardial effusions were
subjected to a full clinical examination and pericardiocentesis. Aspirated fluid 
was sent for biochemistry, differential leukocyte count, flow cytometric analysis
and determination of cytokine levels. Pericardial tissue was sent for TB culture 
and histopathological evaluation. Diagnoses were made according to pre-determined
criteria.
RESULTS: Fifty-six patients were included and divided into HIV positive TB (n =
22), HIV negative TB (n = 21) and non-tuberculous effusions (n = 13). Peripheral 
blood neutrophil, lymphocyte and monocyte counts were significantly lower in HIV 
positive TB patients. Lymphocytes were the dominant cell type in tuberculous
pericardial effusions. CD4+ cells dominated in HIV negative tuberculous
effusions, whereas CD8+ cells dominated in HIV positive TB. The difference in the
concentration of IFN-gamma levels in the tuberculous and non-tuberculous
pericardial effusions was statistically significant. Despite significant
differences in pericardial CD4+ cell counts, IFN-gamma levels were similarly
elevated in HIV negative and HIV positive tuberculous effusions. Highest levels
of pericardial IL-10 were observed in samples associated with least tissue
necrosis, suggesting the possibility of a tissue protective immunoregulatory role
for IL-10.
CONCLUSIONS: Tuberculous pericardial effusions result from a T helper1
(Th1)-dominant immune response. IFN-gamma producing CD4+ lymphocytes dominate in 
HIV negative patients, whereas CD8+ seem to play a more important role in HIV
positive patients. Infection with HIV leads to the depletion of immunocompetent
cells such as monocytes, NK cells and neutrophils.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tube.2005.08.018 
PMID: 16360340  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

