
1. Genetics. 1991 Sep;129(1):7-18.

Heteroduplex DNA formation is associated with replication and recombination in
poxvirus-infected cells.

Fisher C(1), Parks RJ, Lauzon ML, Evans DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, University of Guelph, Ontario,
Canada.

Poxviruses are large DNA viruses that replicate in the cytoplasm of infected
cells and recombine at high frequencies. Calcium phosphate precipitates were used
to cotransfect Shope fibroma virus-infected cells with different DNA substrates
and the recombinant products assayed by genetic and biochemical methods. We have 
shown previously that bacteriophage lambda DNAs can be used as substrates in
these experiments and recombinants assayed on Escherichia coli following DNA
recovery and in vitro packaging. Using this assay it was observed that 2-3% of
the phage recovered from crosses between point mutants retained heteroduplex at
at least one of the mutant sites. The reliability of this genetic analysis was
confirmed using DNA substrates that permitted the direct detection of
heteroduplex molecules by denaturant gel electrophoresis and Southern blotting.
It was further noted that heteroduplex formation coincided with the onset of both
replication and recombination suggesting that poxviruses, like certain
bacteriophage, make no clear biochemical distinction between these three
processes. The fraction of heteroduplex molecules peaked about 12-hr
postinfection then declined later in the infection. This decline was probably due
to DNA replication rather than mismatch repair because, while high levels of
induced DNA polymerase persisted beyond the time of maximal heteroduplex
recovery, we were unable to detect any type of mismatch repair activity in
cytoplasmic extracts. These results suggest that, although heteroduplex molecules
are formed during the progress of poxviral infection, gene conversion through
mismatch repair probably does not produce most of the recombinants. The
significance of these observations are discussed considering some of the unique
properties of poxviral biology.


PMCID: PMC1204583
PMID: 1657705  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

