
1. J Immunol. 2006 Sep 15;177(6):3960-71.

Human cytomegalovirus alters localization of MHC class II and dendrite morphology
in mature Langerhans cells.

Lee AW(1), Hertel L, Louie RK, Burster T, Lacaille V, Pashine A, Abate DA,
Mocarski ES, Mellins ED.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Infectious Diseases, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Hemopoietic stem cell-derived mature Langerhans-type dendritic cells (LC) are
susceptible to productive infection by human CMV (HCMV). To investigate the
impact of infection on this cell type, we examined HLA-DR biosynthesis and
trafficking in mature LC cultures exposed to HCMV. We found decreased surface
HLA-DR levels in viral Ag-positive as well as in Ag-negative mature LC.
Inhibition of HLA-DR was independent of expression of unique short US2-US11
region gene products by HCMV. Indeed, exposure to UV-inactivated virus, but not
to conditioned medium from infected cells, was sufficient to reduce HLA-DR on
mature LC, implicating particle binding/penetration in this effect. Reduced
surface levels reflected an altered distribution of HLA-DR because total cellular
HLA-DR was not diminished. Accumulation of HLA-DR was not explained by altered
cathepsin S activity. Mature, peptide-loaded HLA-DR molecules were retained
within cells, as assessed by the proportion of SDS-stable HLA-DR dimers. A block 
in egress was implicated, as endocytosis of surface HLA-DR was not increased.
Immunofluorescence microscopy corroborated the intracellular retention of HLA-DR 
and revealed markedly fewer HLA-DR-positive dendritic projections in infected
mature LC. Unexpectedly, light microscopic analyses showed a dramatic loss of the
dendrites themselves and immunofluorescence revealed that cytoskeletal elements
crucial for the formation and maintenance of dendrites are disrupted in viral
Ag-positive cells. Consistent with these dendrite effects, HCMV-infected mature
LC exhibit markedly reduced chemotaxis in response to lymphoid chemokines. Thus, 
HCMV impedes MHC class II molecule trafficking, dendritic projections, and
migration of mature LC. These changes likely contribute to the reduced activation
of CD4+ T cells by HCMV-infected mature LC.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.177.6.3960 
PMID: 16951359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

