
1. J Immunol. 2006 Oct 1;177(7):4897-906.

Functional reversion of antigen-specific CD8+ T cells from patients with Hodgkin 
lymphoma following in vitro stimulation with recombinant polyepitope.

Smith C(1), Cooper L, Burgess M, Rist M, Webb N, Lambley E, Tellam J, Marlton P, 
Seymour JF, Gandhi M, Khanna R.

Author information: 
(1)Tumour Immunology Laboratory, Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, 
Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Bancroft Centre, 300 Herston Road,
Brisbane, Australia 4029.

Recent studies on Hodgkin's lymphoma (HL) have indicated that patients with
active disease display functional impairment of Ag-specific CD8+ T cells due to
expansion of regulatory T cells at sites of disease and in the peripheral blood. 
Adoptive cellular immunotherapy based on EBV-specific CD8+ T cells has been
explored with limited success to date. It has been proposed that improved
targeting of these CD8+ T cells toward viral Ags that are expressed in HL may
enhance future therapeutic vaccine strategies. In this study, we have developed a
novel replication-deficient adenoviral Ag presentation system that is designed to
encode glycine alanine repeat-deleted EBV nuclear Ag 1 covalently linked to
multiple CD8+ T cell epitopes from latent membrane proteins 1 and 2. A single
stimulation of CD8+ T cells from healthy virus carriers, and patients with HL
with this adenoviral construct in combination with IL-2, was sufficient to
reverse the functional T cell impairment and restored both IFN-gamma production
and cytolytic function. More importantly, these activated CD8+ T cells responded 
to tumor cells expressing membrane proteins and recognized novel EBNA1 epitopes. 
Flow cytometric analysis revealed that a large proportion of T cells expanded
from patients with HL were CD62L(high) and CD27(high), and CCR7(low), consistent 
with early to mid effector T cells. These findings provide an important platform 
for translation of Ag-specific adoptive immunotherapy for the treatment of
EBV-associated malignancies such as HL and nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.177.7.4897 
PMID: 16982932  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

