
1. Viral Immunol. 2006 Summer;19(3):546-57.

Reovirus strain-dependent inflammatory cytokine responses and replication
patterns in a human monocyte cell line.

Farone AL(1), O'Donnell SM, Brooks CS, Young KM, Pierce JM, Wetzel JD, Dermody
TS, Farone MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Middle Tennessee State University, Murfreesboro,
Tennessee 37132, USA. afarone@mtsu.edu

Mammalian Orthoreoviruses are important models for studies of viral pathogenesis.
In the rat lung, Reovirus strain type 3 Dearing (T3D) induces substantially more 
inflammation than does strain type 1 Lang (T1L). To better understand mechanisms 
underlying differences in the host inflammatory response elicited by T1L and T3D,
we characterized cytokine expression patterns induced by those strains after
infection of THP-1 monocyte cells. THP-1 cells were adsorbed with either viable
or ultraviolet- inactivated T1L and T3D and assayed for mRNA and protein
production of growth-regulated oncogene-alpha (GRO-alpha), interleukin-8 (IL-8), 
or tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha). T3D stimulated mRNA and protein
production of all three cytokines, whereas T1L stimulated mRNA and protein
production of IL-8 and TNF-alpha but not GRO-alpha. In each case, T3D induced
greater cytokine mRNA and protein expression than did T1L. Nonviable virus did
not stimulate detectable cytokine secretion, suggesting a requirement for viral
RNA synthesis in cytokine induction by THP-1 cells. A greater percentage of THP-1
cells was infected with T1L than T3D as assessed by infectious center assay, and 
T1L achieved higher yields of infectious progeny than did T3D in infected THP-1
cells as determined by plaque assay. These strain-dependent differences in
cytokine responses and corresponding replication patterns in monocyte cells
parallel findings made in studies of rat models of pneumonia and provide clues
about how Reovirus interfaces with the host innate immune response to produce
pulmonary disease.

DOI: 10.1089/vim.2006.19.546 
PMID: 16987072  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

