
1. Med Hypotheses. 2007;68(4):822-5. Epub 2006 Oct 20.

Alzheimer's neuroborreliosis with trans-synaptic spread of infection and
neurofibrillary tangles derived from intraneuronal spirochetes.

MacDonald AB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, St Catherine of Siena Medical Center, 50 Rte 25 A,
Smithtown, NY 11787, United States. inmacdonald@yahoo.com <inmacdonald@yahoo.com>

In the realm of dementia, it is astonishing to note that neurofibrillary tangles 
(NFT) are microscopically identical in a childhood illness (SSPE) and in a
dementia of late adult life (Alzheimer's disease). The words "Alzheimer-type" NFT
in peer reviewed scientific articles written by acknowledged experts underscore
the striking similarities in "tangles" in two different diseases. Subacute
Sclerosing Panencephalitis (SSPE) is caused by infection with atypical measles
virus. Alzheimer's disease has no known cause. There is little controversy in
suggesting that all of the Tangles in SSPE infected neurons are produced by slow 
viral type variant of Measles infection. But the mere suggestion that infection
might be a cause of Alzheimer's disease confounds the establishment. If a good
case is to be made for infection in Alzheimer's disease, an excellent nerve cell 
infection model is needed. Monkeys have provided a very reasonable model.
Recently, a primate neuroborreliosis brain infection model demonstrated that
Borrelia injected into the skin of monkeys resulted in the appearance of Borrelia
transcriptomes in brain neurons. If Borrelia can travel from skin to brain in the
monkey, then why not look at human Alzheimer's tissues to see if the DNA of
Borrelia is present in the human brain? The molecular detection tools perfected
in animal neuroborreliosis studies have been applied to human Alzheimer's disease
brain tissues. Seven of ten cases of Alzheimer's disease from McLean Hospital
Brain Bank of Harvard University yielded positive signals for infectious DNA in a
small pilot study. Alzheimer's diseased neurons analyzed with DNA probes,
produced little "dots" of positive staining. Granulovacuolar bodies in
Alzheimer's diseased neurons (little dots in a bubble), are one of the expected
microscopic profiles of Alzheimer's disease. "Little dots" inside nerve cells are
also signatures of viral infectious agents inside of nerve cells. So with the
assistance of the microscope and the tools of molecular biology, a new model of
infection emerges as a cause of "Alzheimer's-type" neurofibrillary tangles. Here 
I hypothesize that it is chronic infection of human neurons in Alzheimer's
disease that produces neurofibrillary tangles by a pathway similar to the chronic
SSPE infection tangle pathway. In addition, transmission of infection from nerve 
to nerve is proposed to explain the evolution of Alzheimer's disease. Herein is
offered a new view for the origins and for the progression of diseased nerves
with tangle formations in Alzheimer's disease based on infection.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2006.08.043 
PMID: 17055667  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

