
1. PLoS Biol. 2006 Oct;4(11):e365.

Human immunodeficiency virus impairs reverse cholesterol transport from
macrophages.

Mujawar Z(1), Rose H, Morrow MP, Pushkarsky T, Dubrovsky L, Mukhamedova N, Fu Y, 
Dart A, Orenstein JM, Bobryshev YV, Bukrinsky M, Sviridov D.

Author information: 
(1)The George Washington University, Washington, District of Columbia, USA.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2006 Nov;4(11):e400.

Several steps of HIV-1 replication critically depend on cholesterol. HIV
infection is associated with profound changes in lipid and lipoprotein metabolism
and an increased risk of coronary artery disease. Whereas numerous studies have
investigated the role of anti-HIV drugs in lipodystrophy and dyslipidemia, the
effects of HIV infection on cellular cholesterol metabolism remain
uncharacterized. Here, we demonstrate that HIV-1 impairs ATP-binding cassette
transporter A1 (ABCA1)-dependent cholesterol efflux from human macrophages, a
condition previously shown to be highly atherogenic. In HIV-1-infected cells,
this effect was mediated by Nef. Transfection of murine macrophages with Nef
impaired cholesterol efflux from these cells. At least two mechanisms were found 
to be responsible for this phenomenon: first, HIV infection and transfection with
Nef induced post-transcriptional down-regulation of ABCA1; and second, Nef caused
redistribution of ABCA1 to the plasma membrane and inhibited internalization of
apolipoprotein A-I. Binding of Nef to ABCA1 was required for down-regulation and 
redistribution of ABCA1. HIV-infected and Nef-transfected macrophages accumulated
substantial amounts of lipids, thus resembling foam cells. The contribution of
HIV-infected macrophages to the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis was supported by 
the presence of HIV-positive foam cells in atherosclerotic plaques of
HIV-infected patients. Stimulation of cholesterol efflux from macrophages
significantly reduced infectivity of the virions produced by these cells, and
this effect correlated with a decreased amount of virion-associated cholesterol, 
suggesting that impairment of cholesterol efflux is essential to ensure proper
cholesterol content in nascent HIV particles. These results reveal a previously
unrecognized dysregulation of intracellular lipid metabolism in HIV-infected
macrophages and identify Nef and ABCA1 as the key players responsible for this
effect. Our findings have implications for pathogenesis of both HIV disease and
atherosclerosis, because they reveal the role of cholesterol efflux impairment in
HIV infectivity and suggest a possible mechanism by which HIV infection of
macrophages may contribute to increased risk of atherosclerosis in HIV-infected
patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0040365 
PMCID: PMC1629034
PMID: 17076584  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests. The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.

