
1. J Immunol. 2006 Dec 15;177(12):8432-9.

Innate cytokine responses in porcine macrophage populations: evidence for
differential recognition of double-stranded RNA.

Loving CL(1), Brockmeier SL, Ma W, Richt JA, Sacco RE.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Graduate Program, Department of Veterinary Diagnostic and
Production Animal Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State
University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.

Pulmonary airways are vulnerable to infection because of exposure to Ag during
respiration. The innate, antiviral response must be activated rapidly after
pathogen recognition, and alveolar macrophages (AMphi) play a role in this
response. TLR3 and protein kinase R (PKR) recognize dsRNA, a replication
intermediate of RNA viruses, and initiate transcription of IFN-alphabeta. In this
study, synthetic dsRNA poly(I:C) was used to investigate innate responses of
porcine AMphi compared with responses of peritoneal macrophages (PMphi).
Poly(I:C) triggered IFN-alphabeta in AMphi and PMphi, but levels in AMphi were
higher. In contrast, mRNA levels of IFN-stimulated genes, Mx and PKR, were
greater in PMphi than AMphi. Low levels of Mx and PKR transcription in AMphi were
not due to deficient type I IFN receptor signaling, as exogenous IFN-alpha
induced nuclear translocation of phosphorylated STAT1. To investigate the
differential mechanism by which IFN-alphabeta transcription is activated in AMphi
and PMphi, 2-aminopurine (2-AP) was used to block dsRNA-mediated activation of
PKR. IFN-alphabeta, Mx, and PKR mRNA levels in AMphi after poly(I:C) treatment
were unaffected by 2-AP; conversely, transcription of IFN-alphabeta, Mx, or PKR
remained at baseline levels in PMphi. Phosphorylated PKR was detected in PMphi,
but not AMphi, after poly(I:C) treatment. In addition to IFN-alphabeta gene
induction, mRNA levels of TNF-alpha and RANTES were higher in AMphi than PMphi
after poly(I:C) stimulation. In summary, differential dsRNA-induced cytokine
expression patterns between AMphi and PMphi provide evidence that dsRNA
recognition and subsequent signaling is likely mediated via TLR3 in AMphi and PKR
in PMphi.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.177.12.8432 
PMID: 17142740  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

