
1. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2007 Jan-Feb;38(1):57-65. Epub 2006 Dec 11.

Short, discontinuous exposure to butyrate effectively sensitizes latently
EBV-infected lymphoma cells to nucleoside analogue antiviral agents.

Ghosh SK(1), Forman LW, Akinsheye I, Perrine SP, Faller DV.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Center, Boston University School of Medicine, 715 Albany
Street, K701, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Antiviral drugs alone have been unsuccessful in the treatment of Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV)-associated malignancies because the virus maintains a latent state of
replication in these tumors. In recent years, novel therapeutic approaches are
being investigated wherein lytic replication of the virus is induced prior to the
use of cytotoxic antiviral drugs. The choice of suitable agents to induce lytic
replication has been a critical step in this novel approach. We have previously
demonstrated that butyrate derivatives induce a lytic pattern of EBV gene
expression in patient-derived EBV-positive lymphoblastoid cell lines and,
together with nucleoside analogue ganciclovir, effectively reduce or eliminate
tumor growth in humans. Butyrate has drawbacks as a therapeutic agent, however,
as constant intravenous infusion is required to achieve detectable plasma levels 
of this drug. In this study, we investigated whether discontinuous exposure to
butyrate is capable of initiating lytic phase gene expression and thymidine
kinase induction, and sensitizing EBV-positive lymphoma cells to
ganciclovir-mediated cell growth arrest and apoptosis. We demonstrate that
multiple daily 6-h exposures of the EBV-positive Burkitt's lymphoma cell line
P3HR1 to butyrate induced sustained expression of the EBV lytic phase protein
BMRF. Viral thymidine kinase was also induced by intermittent exposure, although 
to a lower level than with continuous exposure treatment. However, discontinuous 
exposure to butyrate in combination with ganciclovir induced a similar level of
tumor cell growth inhibition as did continuous treatment, as measured by serial
enumeration of viable cells, MTT cell proliferation assays and measurement of
cellular DNA content. We further demonstrated that those cells which survived
initial exposure to butyrate plus ganciclovir remained susceptible to further
cycles of combination treatment. These findings suggests that continuous infusion
of butyrate may not be necessary for maintaining viral thymidine kinase gene
expression and sensitization to antiviral agents in EBV-associated tumors, and
that therapeutic regimens which employ more convenient, discontinuous exposure to
butyrate may also be effective clinically.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2006.10.008 
PMCID: PMC1829174
PMID: 17161633  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

