
1. Swiss Med Wkly. 2007 Jan 27;137(3-4):57-81.

Norovirus outbreak in a district general hospital--new strain identified.

Leuenberger S(1), Widdowson MA, Feilchenfeldt J, Egger R, Streuli RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, SRO-Hospital, CH-4901 Langenthal, Switzerland.

INTRODUCTION: Media reports about Norovirus outbreaks, especially in hospitals
and nursing homes, have accumulated in the past years. The reasons for this
increasing problem are manifold: resistance against common disinfectants, a high 
level of contagion (a dose of less than 100 particles may be infective);
variability of the virus-genome documented by polymerase chain reaction-studies, 
as well as further factors concerning modern life-style. The following study
describes and analyses a Norovirus outbreak in the SRO-Hospital Langenthal from
November 25, 2003, to December 31, 2003.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The case definition included sudden vomiting and diarrhoea,
abdominal cramps, fever below 38.5 degrees C and recovery after 48 hours. Stool
cultures were taken and tested for bacteria (Campylobacter jejuni, salmonella and
shigella species) and rotaviruses. Stool and vomit specimens were then tested
using Real Time Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) for noroviruses using
different primer sets. Epidemiological data were gained such as transmission
modus from person-to-person or food-borne.
RESULTS: A total of 77 persons were affected by the viral disease. Two
incidence-peaks of gastroenteritis were noted. The first peak happened in the
geriatric ward and the second in the geographically distinct department of
internal medicine. The existence of a new norovirus strain of genogroup II/4 has 
been confirmed by the CDC Enteric Viruses Branch in Atlanta, GA. The measures to 
be taken are pointed out.
CONCLUSIONS: A norovirus gastroenteritis outbreak of such intensity and extent as
described had not thus far occurred in the hospital's history. The strains newly 
found by sequencing are associated with genogroup II/4. This genogroup caused a
striking increase of gastroenteritis outbreaks in Europe in the year 2002
including atypical spring and summer peaks. This new variant is supposed to be
more virulent and environmentally more stable than previous strains [21].
Preventive measures that are in agreement with the published guidelines were
taken before the viral pathogen was identified by RT-PCR. The obvious emerging
problem of norovirus infections in our society and the economic data analysing
the costs caused by lost bed days and staff absence make epidemiological
investigation of outbreaks and application of molecular tests more important.
They are the basis for determining transmission routes and characterising the
different strains in order to improve preventive strategies.

DOI: 2007/03/smw-11485 
PMID: 17299671  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

