
1. Hepatobiliary Pancreat Dis Int. 2007 Apr;6(2):161-5.

Clinicopathological characteristics of 15 patients with combined hepatocellular
carcinoma and cholangiocarcinoma.

Zuo HQ(1), Yan LN, Zeng Y, Yang JY, Luo HZ, Liu JW, Zhou LX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, China.

Comment in
    Liver Transpl. 2007 Oct;13(10):1465-6.

BACKGROUND: Combined hepatocellular carcinoma and cholangiocarcinoma (cHCC-CC) is
a rare subtype of primary liver cancer, and clinicopathological features of
cHCC-CC have seldom been reported in detail. This study was undertaken to explore
the diagnosis and clinicopathological characteristics of cHCC-CC in comparison
with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and cholangiocarcinoma (CC), respectively.
METHODS: The clinical data from 15 patients with cHCC-CC, 132 patients with HCC
and 44 patients with CC who had undergone hepatic resection were analyzed
retrospectively. Clinicopathological characteristics of cHCC-CC, HCC and CC such 
as hepatitis B viral infection, serum hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibody, serum
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level, cirrhosis, vascular invasion, lymph node
metastasis, surgical procedure and adjuvant treatment were also analyzed. Follow 
up was carried out in the patients, and their 1-, 3-, and 5-year survival rates
were calculated.
RESULTS: Two patients with cHCC-CC were correctly diagnosed by enhanced CT before
operation, the other 13 patients were diagnosed by histology and
immunohistochemistry after operation. Radical (8/15) and conservative hepatectomy
(7/15) for cHCC-CC was similar to that for HCC and CC (P>0.05). Pathologically
cHCC-CC showed more significantly vascular invasion and lymph node metastasis
than HCC (P<0.05), and a similarity to CC (P>0.05). Hepatitis B viral infection, 
serum HCV antibody, cirrhosis, and serum AFP level of cHCC-CC patients were
similar to those of HCC patients (P>0.05) but different from CC patients
(P<0.05). The cumulative 1-, 3-, and 5-year survival rates in patients with
cHCC-CC were poorer than in patients with HCC or CC (P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with cHCC-CC are seldom diagnosed before operation. The
progression of cHCC-CC is more rapid than that of HCC or CC. Survival rate of
patients with cHCC-CC after hepatic resection is poorer than that of patients
with HCC or CC.


PMID: 17374575  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

