
1. J Virol. 2007 Jul;81(14):7732-41. Epub 2007 May 9.

Analysis of ribavirin mutagenicity in human hepatitis C virus infection.

Chevaliez S(1), Brillet R, Lázaro E, Hézode C, Pawlotsky JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Université Paris 12, Créteil,
France.

The addition of ribavirin to alpha interferon therapy significantly increases
response rates for patients with chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, but
ribavirin's antiviral mechanisms are unknown. Ribavirin has been suggested to
have mutagenic potential in vitro that would lead to "error catastrophe," i.e.,
the generation of nonviable viral quasispecies due to the increment in the number
of mutant genomes, which prevents the transmission of meaningful genetic
information. We used extensive sequence-based analysis of two independent genomic
regions in order to test in vivo the hypothesis that ribavirin administration
accelerates the accumulation of mutations in the viral genome and that this
acceleration occurs only when HCV replication is profoundly inhibited by
coadministered alpha interferon. The rate of variation of the consensus sequence,
the frequency of mutation, the error generation rate, and the between-sample
genetic distance were measured for patients receiving ribavirin monotherapy, a
combination of alpha interferon three times per week plus ribavirin, or a
combination of alpha interferon daily plus ribavirin. Ribavirin monotherapy did
not increase the rate of variation of the consensus sequence, the mutation
frequency, the error generation rate, or the between-sample genetic distance. The
accumulation of nucleotide substitutions did not accelerate, relative to the
pretreatment period, during combination therapy with ribavirin and alpha
interferon, even when viral replication was profoundly inhibited by alpha
interferon. This study strongly undermines the hypothesis whereby ribavirin acts 
as an HCV mutagen in vivo.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00382-07 
PMCID: PMC1933365
PMID: 17494069  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

