
1. PLoS One. 2007 Jul 11;2(7):e628.

Optimization of energy-consuming pathways towards rapid growth in HPV-transformed
cells.

Mizrachy-Schwartz S(1), Kravchenko-Balasha N, Ben-Bassat H, Klein S, Levitzki A.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Cellular Signaling, Department of Biological Chemistry, Alexander
Silberman Institute of Life Sciences, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 
Israel.

Cancer is a complex, multi-step process characterized by misregulated signal
transduction and altered metabolism. Cancer cells divide faster than normal cells
and their growth rates have been reported to correlate with increased metabolic
flux during cell transformation. Here we report on progressive changes in
essential elements of the biochemical network, in an in vitro model of
transformation, consisting of primary human keratinocytes, human keratinocytes
immortalized by human papillomavirus 16 (HPV16) and passaged repeatedly in vitro,
and the extensively-passaged cells subsequently treated with the carcinogen
benzo[a]pyrene. We monitored changes in cell growth, cell size and energy
metabolism. The more transformed cells were smaller and divided faster, but the
cellular energy flux was unchanged. During cell transformation the protein
synthesis network contracted, as shown by the reduction in key cap-dependent
translation factors. Moreover, there was a progressive shift towards internal
ribosome entry site (IRES)-dependent translation. The switch from cap to
IRES-dependent translation correlated with progressive activation of c-Src, an
activator of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), which controls energy-consuming
processes, including protein translation. As cellular protein synthesis is a
major energy-consuming process, we propose that the reduction in cell size and
protein amount provide energy required for cell survival and proliferation. The
cap to IRES-dependent switch seems to be part of a gradual optimization of
energy-consuming mechanisms that redirects cellular processes to enhance cell
growth, in the course of transformation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0000628 
PMCID: PMC1913554
PMID: 17622357  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

