
1. Clin Exp Allergy. 2007 Aug;37(8):1250-8.

Intranasal delivery of whole influenza vaccine prevents subsequent
allergen-induced sensitization and airway hyper-reactivity in mice.

Minne A(1), Jaworska J, Gerhold K, Ahrens B, Avagyan A, Vanbever R, Matricardi
PM, Schmidt AC, Hamelmann E.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Pediatric Pneumology and Immunology, Charité University
Medicine, Berlin, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Infection with influenza virus has been associated with seemingly
opposing effects on the development of asthma. However, there are no data about
the effects of mucosal vaccination with inactivated influenza on the inception of
allergic asthma.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the immunological effects of inhaled inactivated influenza
vaccine, using two different types of flu vaccines, on the inception of allergic 
sensitization and allergen-mediated airway disease in a mouse model.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were intranasally or intratracheally vaccinated with whole
or split influenza virus vaccine (days -1 or -1, 27) before systemic
sensitization with ovalbumin (OVA) (days 1, 14) and repeated airway allergen
challenges (days 28-30). Allergen sensitization (IgE serum levels), airway
inflammation (differential cells in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid) and airway
hyper-reactivity (AHR) (in vivo lung function) were analysed.
RESULTS: The intranasal instillation of whole influenza vaccine before allergen
sensitization significantly reduced the serum levels of total and OVA-specific
IgE as well as allergen-induced AHR. Prevention was due to an allergen-specific
shift from a predominant T helper (Th)2- towards a Th1-immune response.
Application of split influenza vaccine did not show the same preventive effect.
CONCLUSION: Intranasal administration of inactivated whole influenza vaccine
reduced subsequent allergen sensitization and prevented allergen-induced AHR. Our
results show that the composition of the influenza vaccine has a major influence 
on subsequent development of allergen-induced sensitization and AHR, and suggest 
that mucosal inactivated whole influenza vaccination may represent a step towards
the development of a preventive strategy for atopic asthma.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2007.02767.x 
PMID: 17651156  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

