
1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Oct 26;282(43):31250-6. Epub 2007 Aug 29.

Towards covalent vaccination: improved polyclonal HIV neutralizing antibody
response induced by an electrophilic gp120 V3 peptide analog.

Nishiyama Y(1), Mitsuda Y, Taguchi H, Planque S, Salas M, Hanson CV, Paul S.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Immunology Research Center, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, University of Texas--Houston Medical School, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
Yasuhiro.Nishiyama@uth.tmc.edu

Rare monoclonal antibodies (Abs) can form irreversible complexes with antigens by
enzyme-like covalent nucleophile-electrophile pairing. To determine the
feasibility of applying irreversible antigen inactivation by Abs as the basis of 
vaccination against microbes, we studied the polyclonal nucleophilic Ab response 
induced by the electrophilic analog of a synthetic peptide corresponding to the
principal neutralizing determinant (PND) of human immunodeficiency virus type-1
(HIV) gp120 located in the V3 domain. Abs from mice immunized with the PND analog
containing electrophilic phosphonates (E-PND) neutralized a homologous HIV strain
(MN) approximately 50-fold more potently than control Abs from mice immunized
with PND. The IgG fractions displayed binding to intact HIV particles. HIV
complexes formed by anti-E-PND IgG dissociated noticeably more slowly than the
complexes formed by anti-PND IgG. The slower dissociation kinetics are predicted 
to maintain long-lasting blockade of host cell receptor recognition by gp120.
Pretreatment of the anti-PND IgG with a haptenic electrophilic phosphonate
compound resulted in more rapid dissociation of the HIV-IgG complexes, consistent
with the hypothesis that enhanced Ab nucleophilic reactivity induced by
electrophilic immunization imparts irreversible character to the complexes. These
results suggest that electrophilic immunization induces a sufficiently robust
nucleophilic Ab response to enhance the anti-microbial efficacy of candidate
polypeptide vaccines.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M706471200 
PMID: 17728243  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

