
1. Gynecol Obstet Invest. 2008;65(2):128-32. Epub 2007 Oct 22.

Trace elements and cytokine profile in cytomegalovirus-infected pregnancies: a
controlled study.

Zhang JP(1), Li F, Yu XW, Sheng Q, Shi XW, Zhang XW.

Author information: 
(1)Maternal and Child Health Center, First Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: Qinba Mountain area of Shanxi Province, China, is one of the poorest, 
culturally backward regions in China with a high incidence of mental retardation.
To investigate whether cytomegalovirus (CMV) plays a role in the high incidence
of mental retardation in this region, we studied the incidence of CMV infection
during pregnancy and possible risk factors associated with CMV infection.
METHODS: 386 consecutive pregnant women in Qinba Mountain area were monitored for
the level of a CMV-specific IgM antibody. Polymerase chain reaction was used to
detect CMV in breast milk obtained within 2 weeks postpartum and urine samples of
newborn infants born to actively CMV-infected mothers. Serum levels of TNF-alpha,
IL-6, zinc, copper, iron and selenium were analyzed in CMV-infected pregnant
women.
RESULTS: The incidence of CMV-active infection during pregnancy, intrauterine
transmission and excretion in breast milk were 15.03, 33.33, and 39.58%,
respectively. Active CMV infection during pregnancy was correlated with maternal 
age, education and economic status, parity, and history of obstetric
complications. Those women who had active CMV infection, intrauterine
transmission, or CMV excretion in milk showed higher values of TNF-alpha and
IL-6, lower values of zinc as compared with health age-matched controls (p <
0.05). No differences were identified between studied cases and controls in the
level of copper, iron, and selenium (p > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: The incidence of CMV-active infection during pregnancy was high in
Qinba Mountain area of Shanxi Province. Zinc deficiency may be a risk factor for 
the development of CMV infection. TNF-alpha and IL-6 may be involved in the
pathophysiologic process.

(c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000110013 
PMID: 17957100  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

