
1. Am J Vet Res. 2007 Nov;68(11):1220-5.

Determination of proviral load in bovine leukemia virus-infected cattle with and 
without lymphocytosis.

Juliarena MA(1), Gutierrez SE, Ceriani C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Virologia, Departamento de Sanidad Animal y Medicina
Preventiva, Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad Nacional del Centro de la
Provincia de Buenos Aires, Pinto 399, Tandil, Argentina.

OBJECTIVE: To determine proviral load in bovine leukemia virus (BLV)-infected
cattle with and without persistent lymphocytosis to assess the potential of
transmitting the virus.
ANIMALS: Cattle in 6 dairy herds.
PROCEDURES: Blood samples from infected cows were evaluated 3 times at 6-month
intervals for determination of proviral load via PCR assay, serologic results via
ELISA, and hematologic status via differential cell counts.
RESULTS: Infected cattle were classified into lymphocytotic and nonlymphocytotic 
groups. Lymphocytotic cattle consistently had > 100,000 copies of integrated
provirus/mug of DNA (ie, high proviral load) in peripheral blood leukocytes.
Titers of antibodies against BLVgp51 and BLVp24 indicated a strong immune
response. Nonlymphocytotic cattle comprised 2 subgroups: a group with high
proviral load and strong immune response, and a group with a weaker immune
response, mostly against BLVp24, and a proviral load of < 100 copies/microg of
DNA (ie, low proviral load).
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Results emphasized the importance of
characterizing nonlymphocytotic BLV-infected cattle during eradication programs. 
The risk of transmitting BLV infection from nonlymphocytotic cattle may differ
depending on the proviral load. Nonlymphocytotic cattle with high proviral load
could be efficient transmitters (as efficient as lymphocytotic cattle), whereas
nonlymphocytotic cattle with low proviral load could be inefficient transmitters 
under standard husbandry conditions. Because most cattle with low proviral load
do not develop anti-BLVp24 antibodies, it appears that lack of an anti-BLVp24
antibody response may be a good marker of this condition.

DOI: 10.2460/ajvr.68.11.1220 
PMID: 17975977  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

