
1. Eur J Cancer. 1991;27 Suppl 4:S2-6.

alpha Interferon: the potential drug of adjuvant therapy: past achievements and
future challenges.

Bonnem EM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Schering-Plough Research, Kenilworth, NJ 07033.

This paper aims to summarize current experience with alpha interferon and provide
direction for future study. There are four areas in which alpha interferon has
proven or potential activity: antiviral, premalignant, adjuvant and advanced
disease settings. The three main viral diseases in which interferon alfa-2b has
been shown to have activity are chronic viral hepatitis, acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome, and human papilloma virus infections. In vitro studies
suggest that alpha interferon may inhibit transformation of some premalignant
conditions into malignant disease; e.g., vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia. In
the adjuvant setting, it is possible that a biological response modifier, such as
alpha interferon, may have a role in helping the immune system to destroy
residual tumour cells following tumour bulk reduction with radiation or
chemotherapy. A higher response rate has been seen in patients with small tumour 
bulk compared to those with large tumour bulk (e.g., malignant melanoma, ovarian 
carcinoma), and in patients with early, rather than late, disease (e.g., chronic 
myelogenous leukaemia, hairy cell leukaemia, multiple myeloma, non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma). This may be due to efficacy in a small tumour bulk setting or due to
an immunoadjuvant role. In advanced disease, the question is how best to exploit 
the possible synergistic effects between alpha interferon and other therapeutic
modalities. The optimum dose, schedule and patient populations for combined
treatment have yet to be determined. The major objective of this paper is to
determine how best to capitalize upon the current state of knowledge to build for
future trials of alpha interferon, and to determine whether the existing data
suggest an adjuvant role for interferon after initial tumour regression.

DOI: 10.1016/0277-5379(91)90555-r 
PMID: 1799468  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

