
1. JAMA. 2007 Nov 14;298(18):2171-81.

Evaluation and treatment of chagas disease in the United States: a systematic
review.

Bern C(1), Montgomery SP, Herwaldt BL, Rassi A Jr, Marin-Neto JA, Dantas RO,
Maguire JH, Acquatella H, Morillo C, Kirchhoff LV, Gilman RH, Reyes PA,
Salvatella R, Moore AC.

Author information: 
(1)Parasitic Diseases Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases, National Center for
Zoonotic, Vector-Borne and Enteric Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia 30341, USA. cbern@cdc.gov

Comment in
    JAMA. 2008 Mar 12;299(10):1134; author reply 1134-5.

CONTEXT: Because of population migration from endemic areas and newly instituted 
blood bank screening, US clinicians are likely to see an increasing number of
patients with suspected or confirmed chronic Trypanosoma cruzi infection (Chagas 
disease).
OBJECTIVE: To examine the evidence base and provide practical recommendations for
evaluation, counseling, and etiologic treatment of patients with chronic T cruzi 
infection. Evidence Acquisition Literature review conducted based on a systematic
MEDLINE search for all available years through 2007; review of additional
articles, reports, and book chapters; and input from experts in the field.
EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS: The patient newly diagnosed with Chagas disease should
undergo a medical history, physical examination, and resting 12-lead
electrocardiogram (ECG) with a 30-second lead II rhythm strip. If this evaluation
is normal, no further testing is indicated; history, physical examination, and
ECG should be repeated annually. If findings suggest Chagas heart disease, a
comprehensive cardiac evaluation, including 24-hour ambulatory ECG monitoring,
echocardiography, and exercise testing, is recommended. If gastrointestinal tract
symptoms are present, barium contrast studies should be performed.
Antitrypanosomal treatment is recommended for all cases of acute and congenital
Chagas disease, reactivated infection, and chronic T cruzi infection in
individuals 18 years or younger. In adults aged 19 to 50 years without advanced
heart disease, etiologic treatment may slow development and progression of
cardiomyopathy and should generally be offered; treatment is considered optional 
for those older than 50 years. Individualized treatment decisions for adults
should balance the potential benefit, prolonged course, and frequent adverse
effects of the drugs. Strong consideration should be given to treatment of
previously untreated patients with human immunodeficiency virus infection or
those expecting to undergo organ transplantation.
CONCLUSIONS: Chagas disease presents an increasing challenge for clinicians in
the United States. Despite gaps in the evidence base, current knowledge is
sufficient to make practical recommendations to guide appropriate evaluation,
management, and etiologic treatment of Chagas disease.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.298.18.2171 
PMID: 18000201  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

