
1. Cent Afr J Med. 1991 Nov;37(11):387-8.

Rhabdomyolysis associated with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection.

Neves O(1), Stein CM, Thornton C, Gangaidzo I, Thomas JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Zimbabwe, Avondale, Harare.

PIP: A case study is given of a 25-year old woman with rhabdomyolysis associated 
with HIV infection. The presenting symptoms were a 1-week history of backache,
gross swelling of both hands and feet, and weakness and marked pain in most
muscle groups; 3 days before admission the urine was black and she was unable to 
walk. Multiple, firm 1-2 cm lymph nodes were revealed during examination. White
blood cell count (WBC) was 22,000/microliter with 12 pc lymphocytes, 7.3 pc
monocytes, and 80.5 pc polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Hemoglobin concentration was
15.8 g/deciliter; platelet count was 124,000/microliter with a Westergren ESR of 
109 mm/h. An antinuclear antibody test was negative. Serum concentration of urea 
was 3.8 mmol/liter, creatinine 42 microliter/liter, sodium 128 mmol/liter, and
potassium 5.9 mmol/liter. Microscopic examination of urine revealed WBC 100/HPF, 
red blood cells 20/HBF, and granular casts. The dipstick test showed blood land
protein in the urine. Electromyography showed inflammatory myopathy. Creatine
Kinase (CK) concentration was 2359 IU/liter and lactate dehydrogenase
concentration 1000 IU/liter. Hemolysis was present from clinical or laboratory
signs. The patient tested HIV positive by ELISA (Abbott) and Western blot
(Dupont). Treatment consisted of administration of 60 mg/day of prednisolone
orally. Over 2 weeks, swelling of limbs was reduced and CK concentration was
reduced to 931 IU/liter. The patient was discharged and did not keep a follow-up 
appointment. The patient did not have a history of other predisposing conditions,
only HIV infection and persistent muscle weakness and inflammatory myopathy.
There is evidence from other patient studies of myopathy associated with HIV
infection and polymyositislike illness. In this case study, the patient may have 
had a acute form of polymyositis, or acute viral myositis such as occurs with
echo, influenza, coxsackie, and other viral infections. A detailed viral
investigation was not performed. HIV infection may have directly infected
myocytes or immunosuppression predisposing to acute myositis by other pathogens. 
HIV-related muscle disease should include rhabdomyolysis.

PMID: 1806250  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

