
1. Antiviral Res. 2008 Dec;80(3):324-31. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2008.07.004. Epub 
2008 Aug 5.

Inhibition of Henipavirus infection by RNA interference.

Mungall BA(1), Schopman NC, Lambeth LS, Doran TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Australian Animal Health Laboratory, CSIRO Livestock Industries, Geelong,
Australia. Bruce.Mungall@csiro.au

Nipah virus (NiV) and Hendra virus (HeV) are recently emerged zoonotic
paramyxoviruses exclusively grouped within a new genus, Henipavirus. These
viruses cause fatal disease in a wide range of species, including humans. Both
NiV and HeV have continued to re-emerge sporadically in Bangladesh and Australia,
respectively. There are currently no therapeutics or vaccines available to treat 
Henipavirus infection and both are classified as BSL4 pathogens. RNA interference
(RNAi) is a process by which double-stranded RNA directs sequence-specific
degradation of messenger RNA in animal and plant cells. Small interfering RNAs
(siRNAs) mediate RNAi by inhibiting gene expression of homologous mRNA and our
preliminary studies suggest RNAi may be a useful approach to developing novel
therapies for these highly lethal pathogens. Eight NiV siRNA molecules (four L
and four N gene specific), two HeV N gene specific, and two non-specific control 
siRNA molecules were designed and tested for their ability to inhibit a
henipavirus minigenome replication system (which does not require the use of live
virus) in addition to live virus infections in vitro. In the minigenome assay
three out of the four siRNAs that targeted the L gene of NiV effectively
inhibited replication. In contrast, only NiV N gene siRNAs were effective in
reducing live NiV replication, suggesting inhibition of early, abundantly
expressed gene transcripts may be more effective than later, less abundant
transcripts. Additionally, some of the siRNAs effective against NiV infection
were only partially effective inhibitors of HeV infection. An inverse correlation
between the number of nucleotide mismatches and the efficacy of siRNA inhibition 
was observed. The demonstration that RNAi effectively inhibits henipavirus
replication in vitro, is a novel approach and may provide an effective therapy
for these highly lethal, zoonotic pathogens.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2008.07.004 
PMCID: PMC7125758
PMID: 18687361  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

