
1. Immunol Rev. 2008 Oct;225:314-31. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-065X.2008.00668.x.

Strategies and challenges for eliciting immunity against avian influenza virus in
birds.

Swayne DE(1), Kapczynski D.

Author information: 
(1)US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Exotic and
Emerging Avian Viral Diseases Research Unit, Athens, GA, USA.
David.Swayne@ars.usda.gov

SUMMARY: Vaccines and vaccination have emerged during the past two decades as
essential tools in avian influenza (AI) control for poultry, because they
increase resistance to infection, prevent illness and death, reduce virus
replication and shed from respiratory and alimentary tracts, and reduce virus
transmission to birds and mammals, including humans. Such protection in birds is 
primarily mediated by homosubtypic humoral immunity against the hemagglutinin
protein, but cell-mediated and innate immunity contribute to protection in some
bird species. The immune response to the neuraminidase protein can contribute to 
protection, but immunity to the viral internal proteins is generally not
protective. Although, some preliminary studies with M2e protein in chickens
suggest partial protection may be achievable. Historically, the H5 subtype AI
vaccines have demonstrated broad homosubtypic protection, primarily against H5
high-pathogenicity (HP) AI viruses isolated in the early stages of outbreaks.
However, as H5 viruses have become endemic and outbreaks prolonged, some drift
variants with resistance to earlier H5 AI vaccines have emerged in Central
America, China, Egypt, and Indonesia. How widespread such drift variants are will
remain unknown until more detailed genetic and antigenic analyses are conducted
on field isolates. Future vaccines will utilize biotechnology to produce new AI
vaccine seed strains using HA genes more closely matching circulating field
viruses. In addition, newer technologies for AI vaccines will improve vaccine
coverage by using mass application technologies for example by drinking water, by
spray, or via injection in ovo or at the hatchery.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-065X.2008.00668.x 
PMID: 18837791  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

