
1. J Gene Med. 2008 Dec;10(12):1303-14. doi: 10.1002/jgm.1262.

Reductive amination as a strategy to reduce adenovirus vector promiscuity by
chemical capsid modification with large polysaccharides.

Espenlaub S(1), Wortmann A, Engler T, Corjon S, Kochanek S, Kreppel F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Therapy, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Chemical capsid modification of adenovirus vectors with synthetic
polymers has been shown to aid in overcoming typical barriers for adenovirus
vector-mediated gene transfer. Carbohydrate-based polymers for covalent
modification of adenovirus vectors have been largely neglected so far. We
utilized a reductive amination strategy to generate a novel class of
adenovirus-based glycovectors with a mannan derivative.
METHODS: Reductive amination to covalently couple polysaccharides to the capsid
surface of adenovirus serotype 5-based vectors was investigated utilizing an
oxidized derivative of mannan. After biochemical and physical characterization of
mannanylated vectors, their performance was analysed in vitro in cell lines and
primary human cells, and in vivo in mice after local and systemic vector
injection.
RESULTS: We describe the successful modification of adenovirus vectors with large
polysaccharides by reductive amination. The particles were efficiently modified, 
physically intact and, importantly, detargeted from the natural Coxsackie and
adenovirus receptor/integrin pathway in vitro. In addition, they exhibited
significantly decreased transduction of muscle after local delivery and of liver 
after systemic delivery in mice. However, despite the modification of 60% of
capsid surface amino groups, mannanylated particles were unable to evade
neutralizing anti-Ad5 antibodies.
CONCLUSIONS: Mannanylated vectors are a paradigm for a novel class of
glycoviruses modified with large polysaccharides. Vector promiscuity as one of
the important hurdles for Ad-mediated gene transfer could be significantly
decreased in vivo, whereas mannanylated vectors were unable to escape from
anti-adenovirus antibodies. Our studies provide a detailed analysis of
mannan-modified Ad vectors and suggest further improvements for this novel class 
of glycovectors.

Copyright (c) 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/jgm.1262 
PMID: 18837065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

