
1. Biotechnol Prog. 2009 Mar-Apr;25(2):476-82. doi: 10.1002/btpr.157.

The effect of low intensity ultraviolet-C light on monoclonal antibodies.

Lorenz CM(1), Wolk BM, Quan CP, Alcala EW, Eng M, McDonald DJ, Matthews TC.

Author information: 
(1)Process Research & Development Engineering Dept., Genentech, Inc., South San
Francisco, CA 94080, USA. clorenz@gene.com

As part of an investigation to identify potential new viral reduction strategies,
ultraviolet-C (UV-C) light was examined. Although this technology has been known 
for decades to possess excellent virus inactivation capabilities, UV-C light can 
also introduce significant unwanted damage to proteins. To study the effect on
monoclonal antibodies, three different antibodies were subjected to varying
levels of UV-C light using a novel dosing device from Bayer Technology Services
GmbH. The range of fluencies (or doses) covered was between 0 and 300 J/m(2) at a
wavelength of 254 nm. Product quality data generated from the processed pools
showed only minimal damage done to the antibodies. Aggregate formation was low
for two of the three antibodies tested. Acidic and basic variants increased for
all three antibodies, with the basic species increasing more than the acidic
species. Peptide maps made for the three sets of pools showed no damage to two of
the three antibody backbones, whereas the third antibody had very low levels of
methionine oxidation evident. Samples held at 2-8 degrees C for 33 days showed no
increase in aggregates or charge variants, indicating that the proteins did not
degrade and were not damaged further by reactive or catalytic species that may
have been created on exposure to UV-C light. Overall, UV-C light was shown to
induce very little damage to monoclonal antibodies at lower fluencies and appears
to be a viable option for viral inactivation in biotechnology applications.

(c) 2009 American Institute of Chemical Engineers Biotechnol.

DOI: 10.1002/btpr.157 
PMID: 19340891  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

