
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1977 May;74(5):1918-22.

Sendai virus-induced hemolysis: reduction in heterogeneity of erythrocyte lipid
bilayer fluidity.

Lyles DS, Landsberger FR.

Hemolysis of human or chicken erythrocytes by Sendai virus causes a change in the
structure of the erythrocyte membrane lipid bilayer that can be detected by spin 
label electron spin resonance. In the intact erythrocyte, the phosphatidylcholine
derivative spin label exists in a more rigid environment than the corresponding
phosphatidylethanolamine label. Virus-induced hemolysis tends to abolish this
difference in fluidity, i.e., the region of the phosphatidylcholine spin label
becomes more fluid and that of the phosphatidylethanolamine spin label becomes
more rigid. Fatty acid derivative spin labels, which may detect some "average"
environment, show no change in fluidity. The fluidity change is detected at
several different positions in the fatty acyl chain of the phosphatidylcholine
spin label. Sendai virions grown in Madin-Darby bovine kidney (MDBK) cells or
grown in eggs and harvested early, which lack hemolytic activity, cause no
significant change in bilayer structure. Hemolytic activity and the ability to
alter erythrocyte bilayer fluidity can be activated in MDBK-grown Sendai virions 
by trypsin treatment in vitro and in early-harvest egg-grown Sendai virions by
freezing and thawing. Erythrocyte ghosts prepared by osmotic hemolysis and
resealed by treatment with Mg2+ or elevated ionic strength exhibit a difference
in fluidity between phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylethanolamine spin labels,
although less than that observed in whole cells. Incubation of resealed ghosts
with Sendai virus abolishes the difference in fluidity. Unsealed ghosts that have
been extensively washed show no heterogeneity in membrane bilayer fluidity, and
incubation with Sendai virus causes no further fluidity change. Virus-induced
hemolysis as measured by hemoglobin release is more sensitive to inhibition by
Ca2+ than is the associated fluidity change in the bilayer.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.74.5.1918 
PMCID: PMC431043
PMID: 194242  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

