
1. Pain. 2009 Jul;144(1-2):200-8. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2009.04.015. Epub 2009 May 15.

Changes in brain function and morphology in patients with recurring herpes
simplex virus infections and chronic pain.

Vartiainen N(1), Kallio-Laine K, Hlushchuk Y, Kirveskari E, Seppänen M, Autti H, 
Jousmäki V, Forss N, Kalso E, Hari R.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Research Unit, Low Temperature Laboratory, Helsinki University of
Technology, FI-02015 TKK, Espoo, Finland. nuutti@neuro.hut.fi

A recent study described for the first time a patient group that suffered from
spontaneous chronic pain and from recurrent herpes simplex virus (HSV)
infections. The patients had pain in widespread areas on one side of the body and
were--due to subtle immunological abnormalities--susceptible to HSV infections.
Although the clinical features of the pain suggested involvement of the central
nervous system, supporting evidence for this was lacking. The objective of this
study was to search for changes in the central nervous system that could account 
for the chronic pain in these patients. We monitored the central processing of
pain and touch in eight patients and 11 healthy control subjects, who received
painful heat and innocuous tactile stimuli to the hands during functional
magnetic resonance imaging. Possible changes in the gray matter density of the
brain were assessed with voxel-based morphometry. We found functional changes in 
the patients' central pain circuitry: activation to heat pain was weaker than in 
control subjects in the insular cortices, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), and
thalamus, while the activations to innocuous tactile stimuli were similar in both
groups. Gray matter density was decreased in the patients' frontal and prefrontal
cortices and in the ACC. The observed functional and structural changes in the
central pain circuitry, together with the clinical features of the chronic pain
support the hypothesis for central involvement in the development of chronic pain
in these patients.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pain.2009.04.015 
PMID: 19446957  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

