
1. J Gen Virol. 2009 Nov;90(Pt 11):2713-2723. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.014001-0. Epub 2009
Aug 5.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus modifies innate immunity and 
alters disease outcome in pigs subsequently infected with porcine respiratory
coronavirus: implications for respiratory viral co-infections.

Jung K(1), Renukaradhya GJ(1), Alekseev KP(1), Fang Y(2), Tang Y(1), Saif LJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Food Animal Health Research Program, Ohio Agricultural Research and
Development Center, Department of Veterinary Preventive Medicine, The Ohio State 
University, Wooster, OH 44691, USA.
(2)Veterinary Science Department, South Dakota State University, Brookings, SD,
USA.

The innate immune response is critical for host defence against respiratory
coronaviruses (CoVs). This study demonstrated that an ongoing respiratory virus
infection compromises innate immune responses and affects the pathogenesis of a
respiratory CoV co-infection. An innate immunosuppressive respiratory virus
infection was established by infecting weaned pigs with porcine reproductive and 
respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV); 10 days later, the pigs were exposed to
porcine respiratory coronavirus (PRCV). The PRRSV/PRCV dual-infected pigs had
reduced weight gains, a higher incidence of fever and more severe pneumonia
compared with either single infection. Significant suppression of innate immune
responses [reduced alpha interferon (IFN-alpha) levels in the lungs and reduced
blood natural killer cell cytotoxicity] by the ongoing PRRSV infection was
observed in dual-infected pigs, which coincided with exacerbated pneumonia during
early PRCV infection. The subsequent PRCV infection led to enhanced PRRSV
replication in the lungs and a trend towards increased serum T-helper type 1
(Th1) (IFN-gamma) but decreased Th2 [interleukin (IL)-4] responses, further
exacerbating PRRSV pneumonia. Following PRCV infection, more severe PRRSV-related
pulmonary alveolar macrophage (PAM) apoptosis occurred, as determined by an in
situ terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labelling
assay, suggesting increased PRRSV replication in PAMs. Collectively, these
observations suggest interactive effects between PRCV and PRRSV via early innate 
(IFN-alpha) and later adaptive Th1 (IFN-gamma) and Th2 (IL-4) immune responses.
These findings imply that an existing immunomodulating respiratory viral
co-infection may be a contributing factor to more severe pneumonia in respiratory
CoV disease. This study provides new insights into host-pathogen interactions
related to co-infection by CoVs and other respiratory viruses.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.014001-0 
PMCID: PMC2862479
PMID: 19656969  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

