
1. Liver Int. 2010 Mar;30(3):388-95. doi: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2009.02174.x. Epub
2009 Nov 24.

Identification and characterization of a novel peptide interacting with
cAMP-responsive elements binding and cAMP-responsive elements modulator in mouse 
liver.

Brunacci C(1), Piobbico D, Bartoli D, Castelli M, Pieroni S, Bellet MM,
Viola-Magni M, Della Fazia MA, Servillo G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Sperimentale, Facoltà di Medicina e
Chirurgia, Università degli Studi di Perugia, Perugia, Italy.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Transcription factors coupled to cyclic adenosine mono phosphate
(cAMP) signalling in the cAMP-responsive elements binding (CREB)/ATF family
constitute a family of activators or repressors that bind to cAMP-responsive
promoter elements (CREs) in the regulatory regions of cAMP-inducible genes. A
role for CREB/ATF family has been advocated in the control of hepatocellular
carcinoma progression. CREB appears to be activated by the X protein of hepatitis
B virus, which links to the unphosphorylated form of CREB and activates
transcription, thus obviating an otherwise indispensable Ser-133 phosphorylation.
Identification of factors capable of triggering transcription via cAMP-responsive
elements modulator (CREM)/CREB signalling in the absence of Ser phosphorylation
will improve our knowledge of the molecular mechanism of liver cell
proliferation.
METHODS: To isolate and study proteins binding and activating CREB and/or CREM in
the liver, we performed the screening of a mouse liver cDNA library using the
Two-Hybrid System.
RESULTS: We report the identification and characterization of a novel peptide,
VTIP-peptide (VTIP-P), which binds and enhances the activation of CREM/CREB,
obviating the need for transcription factor phosphorylation. We demonstrated that
VTIP-P physically interacts with the activation domain (AD) of the transcription 
factors CREB/CREM and activates transcription by modifying their phosphorylation 
pattern in hepatoma cells. The data allowed the conclusion that VTIP-P binds the 
AD of CREB and CREM by stabilizing their phosphorylation.
CONCLUSION: The characterization of molecules capable of interfering in the liver
with an important pathway such as CREB could be significant in designing and/or
developing new therapeutic approaches to the control of liver cell proliferation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2009.02174.x 
PMID: 19968777  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

