
1. Biomedica. 2009 Jun;29(2):218-31.

[Clonal expansion and genomic characterization of the human T-cell lymphotropic
virus type I during the integration process in adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma].

[Article in Spanish]

Salcedo-Cifuentes M(1), Cabrera J, Cuesta-Astroz Y, Carrasca E, Eizuru Y,
Domínguez MC, Sánchez A, García-Vallejo F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Biología Molecular y Patogénesis, Departamento de Ciencias
Fisiológicas, Facultad de Salud, Universidad del Valle, Cali, Colombia.

INTRODUCTION: Although the integration of human T-cell lymphotropic virus type I 
into the T-cells is not a random process, the mechanistic details are not
understood.
OBJECTIVES: The characteristics of the flanking host chromatin were evaluated at 
the integration sites in adult T-cell leukaemia/lymphoma (ATLL) patients infected
with the virus.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: From seven leukemic Colombian patients positive for the
human T-cell lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I), lymphocyte DNA samples were
extracted and amplified by inverse polymerase chain reaction (IPCR). Clonal
expansion and human genome nucleotide composition in an extension of 50 bp was
determined. To establish the characteristics of the human genome flanking
provirus, 61 IPCR sequences from Colombian and Japanese ATLL patients, were
analyzed in silico to obtain insights about the genomic structure, functions and 
nature of associated chromatin.
RESULTS: The clonal expansion of cell clones was predominantly oligoclonal. From 
61 IPCR sequences, 155 alignments with homology higher than 95% (e-value < 0.05) 
were screened. Seventy-five percent of those sequences corresponded to non coding
elements that include repetitive and non-repetitive DNA. Fifty percent of the
proviral integrations were associated with chromosomes of A and B groups. Viral
DNA integration tended to favor exons of genes that replicated early, controlled 
the cell cycle, or were involved in signal transduction.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicated that HTLV-I integration was preferentially
directed towards genomic environments with high C:G content, and toward genes
that replicate early, regulate cell cycle or involved with signal transduction.


PMID: 20128347  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

