
1. Virus Res. 2010 May;149(2):224-33. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2010.02.003. Epub 2010
Feb 10.

Genomic diversity of sweet potato geminiviruses in a Brazilian germplasm bank.

Paprotka T(1), Boiteux LS, Fonseca ME, Resende RO, Jeske H, Faria JC, Ribeiro SG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology, Department of Molecular Biology and Plant Virology,
University of Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 57, 70550 Stuttgart, Germany.

Begomoviruses cause major diseases of sweet potato worldwide impairing
considerably the yields of this important food staple. Since sweet potato plants 
are vegetatively propagated and globally transported, they are prone to
accumulate and disseminate geminiviruses. Effective diagnostic tools are,
therefore, desirable. We studied the genomic diversity of geminiviruses present
in naturally-infected sweet potato accessions belonging to a Brazilian germplasm 
bank collection. Fifty-five samples from different sweet potato accessions
displaying geminivirus-like symptoms were analyzed by combining rolling circle
amplification (RCA) with restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) and
sequencing. The restriction enzyme MspI (HpaII) revealed diverse band patterns in
55 samples and digestion with BamHI, SstI or PstI resulted in full-length sweet
potato geminivirus DNAs of about 3 kb in 46 samples. In addition, smaller
fragments were identified as either viral "Defective DNAs" (D-DNAs) or
mitochondrial plasmid DNAs. The diversity of sweet potato-associated
geminiviruses was found to be very high under Brazilian conditions.
Representative viral full-length DNAs have been cloned and sequenced yielding two
new tentative species, three strains and several variants of previously described
sweet potato geminiviruses. Sequence comparisons identified footprints of
recombination in their genomes underscoring the risk of generating new
geminiviruses in vegetatively propagated germplasm bank material. The sites of
recombination were found in conjunction with predicted hairpin structures. We
propose diagnostic routines to screen germplasm bank material for geminiviruses
by the rapid and reliable RCA/RFLP as the technique of choice.

(c) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2010.02.003 
PMID: 20152869  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

