
1. J Virol. 1991 May;65(5):2191-9.

Role of biased hypermutation in evolution of subacute sclerosing panencephalitis 
virus from progenitor acute measles virus.

Wong TC(1), Ayata M, Ueda S, Hirano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle 98195.

We identified an acute measles virus (Nagahata strain) closely related to a
defective virus (Biken strain) isolated from a patient with subacute sclerosing
panencephalitis (SSPE). The proteins of Nagahata strain measles virus are
antigenically and electrophoretically similar to the proteins of Edmonston strain
measles virus. However, the nucleotide sequence of the Nagahata matrix (M) gene
is significantly different from the M genes of all the acute measles virus
strains studied to date. The Nagahata M gene is strikingly similar to the M gene 
of Biken strain SSPE virus isolated several years later in the same locale.
Eighty percent of the nucleotide differences between the Nagahata and Biken M
genes are uridine-to-cytosine transitions known as biased hypermutation, which
has been postulated to be caused by a cellular RNA-modifying activity. These
biased mutations account for all but one of the numerous missense genetic changes
predicted to cause amino acid substitutions. As a result, the Biken virus M
protein loses conformation-specific epitopes that are conserved in the M proteins
of Nagahata and Edmonston strain acute measles viruses. These
conformation-specific epitopes are also absent in the cryptic M proteins encoded 
by the hypermutated M genes of two other defective SSPE viruses (Niigata and
Yamagata strains). Nagahata-like sequences are found in the M genes of at least
five other SSPE viruses isolated from three continents. These data indicate that 
Biken strain SSPE virus is derived from a progenitor closely resembling Nagahata 
strain acute measles virus and that biased hypermutation is largely responsible
for the structural defects in the Biken virus M protein.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.65.5.2191-2199.1991 
PMCID: PMC240566
PMID: 2016756  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

