
1. Mol Cancer. 2010 Apr 9;9:74. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-74.

Gene expression in nontumoral liver tissue and recurrence-free survival in
hepatitis C virus-positive hepatocellular carcinoma.

Tsuchiya M(1), Parker JS, Kono H, Matsuda M, Fujii H, Rusyn I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Sciences and Engineering, Gillings School of
Global Public Health, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

BACKGROUND: The goal of this study was to understand gene expression signatures
of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) recurrence in subjects with hepatitis C virus
(HCV) infection. Recurrence-free survival (RFS) following curative resection of
HCC in subjects with HCV is highly variable. Traditional clinico-pathological
endpoints are recognized as weak predictors of RFS. It has been suggested that
gene expression profiling of HCC and nontumoral liver tissue may improve
prediction of RFS, aid in understanding of the underlying liver disease, and
guide individualized patient management. Frozen samples of the tumors and
nontumoral liver were obtained from 47 subjects with HCV-associated HCC.
Additional nontumoral liver samples were obtained from HCV-free subjects with
metastatic liver tumors. Gene expression profiling data was used to determine the
molecular signature of HCV-associated HCC and to develop a predictor of RFS.
RESULTS: The molecular profile of the HCV-associated HCC confirmed central roles 
for MYC and TGFbeta1 in liver tumor development. Gene expression in tumors was
found to have poor predictive power with regards to RFS, but analysis of
nontumoral tissues yielded a strong predictor for RFS in late-recurring (>1 year)
subjects. Importantly, nontumoral tissue-derived gene expression predictor of RFS
was highly significant in both univariable and multivariable Cox proportional
hazard model analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: Microarray analysis of the nontumoral tissues from subjects with
HCV-associated HCC delivers novel molecular signatures of RFS, especially among
the late-recurrence subjects. The gene expression predictor may hold important
insights into the pathobiology of HCC recurrence and de novo tumor formation in
cirrhotic patients.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-74 
PMCID: PMC2856554
PMID: 20380719  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

