
1. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2010 Oct 15;107(3):550-60. doi: 10.1002/bit.22821.

Modeling the competition between aggregation and self-assembly during virus-like 
particle processing.

Ding Y(1), Chuan YP, He L, Middelberg AP.

Author information: 
(1)Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University of 
Queensland, Centre for Biomolecular Engineering, St Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia.

Understanding and controlling aggregation is an essential aspect in the
development of pharmaceutical proteins to improve product yield, potency and
quality consistency. Even a minute quantity of aggregates may be reactogenic and 
can render the final product unusable. Self-assembly processing of virus-like
particles (VLPs) is an efficient method to quicken the delivery of safe and
efficacious vaccines to the market at low cost. VLP production, as with the
manufacture of many biotherapeutics, is susceptible to aggregation, which may be 
minimized through the use of accurate and practical mathematical models. However,
existing models for virus assembly are idealized, and do not predict the
non-native aggregation behavior of self-assembling viral subunits in a tractable 
nor useful way. Here we present a mechanistic mathematical model describing VLP
self-assembly that accounts for partitioning of reactive subunits between the
correct and aggregation pathways. Our results show that unproductive aggregation 
causes up to 38% product loss by competing favorably with the productive
nucleation of self-assembling subunits, therefore limiting the availability of
nuclei for subsequent capsid growth. The protein subunit aggregation reaction
exhibits an apparent second-order concentration dependence, suggesting a
dimerization-controlled agglomeration pathway. Despite the plethora of possible
assembly intermediates and aggregation pathways, protein aggregation behavior may
be predicted by a relatively simple yet realistic model. More importantly, we
have shown that our bioengineering model is amenable to different reactor
formats, thus opening the way to rational scale-up strategies for products that
comprise biomolecular assemblies.

Copyright 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bit.22821 
PMID: 20521301  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

