
1. Crit Care Med. 2011 Apr;39(4):860-7. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e318206d6d5.

Critical care in resource-poor settings: lessons learned and future directions.

Riviello ED(1), Letchford S, Achieng L, Newton MW.

Author information: 
(1)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Department of Internal Medicine, Boston, MA,
USA. beth_riviello@post.harvard.edu

Comment in
    Crit Care Med. 2011 Apr;39(4):916-7.
    Crit Care Med. 2011 Oct;39(10):2385; author reply 2385-6.

CONTEXT: Critical care faces the same challenges as other aspects of healthcare
in the developing world. However, critical care faces an additional challenge in 
that it has often been deemed too costly or complicated for resource-poor
settings. This lack of prioritization is not justified. Hospital care for the
sickest patients affects overall mortality, and public health interventions
depend on community confidence in healthcare to ensure participation and
adherence. Some of the most effective critical care interventions, including
rapid fluid resuscitation, early antibiotics, and patient monitoring, are
relatively inexpensive. Although cost-effectiveness studies on critical care in
resource-poor settings have not been done, evidence from the surgical literature 
suggests that even resource-intensive interventions can be cost effective in
comparison to immunizations and human immunodeficiency virus care. In the
developing world, where many critically ill patients are younger and have fewer
comorbidities, critical care presents a remarkable opportunity to provide
significant incremental benefit, arguably much more so than in the developed
world.
ESSENTIAL CONSIDERATIONS: Key areas of consideration in developing critical care 
in resource-poor settings include: Personnel and training, equipment and support 
services, ethics, and research. Strategies for training and retaining skilled
labor include tying education to service commitment and developing protocols for 
even complex processes. Equipment and support services need to focus on
technologies that are affordable and sustainable. Ethical decision making must be
based on data when possible and on transparent articulated policies always.
Research should be performed in resource-poor settings and focus on needs
assessment, prognostication, and cost effectiveness.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS: The development of critical care in resource-poor settings
will rely on the stepwise introduction of service improvements, leveraging human 
resources through training, a focus on sustainable technology, ongoing analysis
of cost effectiveness, and the sharing of context-specific best practices.
Although prevention, public health, and disease-specific agendas dominate many
current conversations in global health, this is nonetheless a time ripe for the
development of critical care. Leaders in global health funding hope to improve
quality and length of life. Critical care is an integral part of the continuum of
care necessary to make that possible.

DOI: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e318206d6d5 
PMID: 21297458  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

