
1. Genome Med. 2011 Jan 27;3(1):5. doi: 10.1186/gm219.

Tackling Ebola: new insights into prophylactic and therapeutic intervention
strategies.

de Wit E(1), Feldmann H, Munster VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Hamilton, 903
South 4th Street, MT 59840, USA. vincent.munster@nih.gov.

Since its discovery in 1976, Ebolavirus has caused periodic outbreaks of viral
hemorrhagic fever associated with severe and often fatal disease. Ebolavirus is
endemic in Central Africa and the Philippines. Although there is currently no
approved treatment available, the past 10 years has seen remarkable progress in
our understanding of the pathogenicity of Ebolavirus and the development of
prophylactic and post-exposure therapies against it. In vitro and in vivo
experiments have shown that Ebolavirus pathogenicity is multifactorial, including
viral and host determinants. Besides their function in the virus replication
cycle, the viral glycoprotein, nucleoprotein, minor matrix protein and polymerase
cofactor are viral determinants of pathogenicity, with evasion of the host innate
and adaptive immune responses as the main mechanism. Although no licensed
Ebolavirus vaccines are currently available, vaccine research in non-human
primates, the 'gold standard' animal model for Ebolavirus, has produced several
promising candidates. A combination of DNA vaccination and a recombinant
adenovirus serotype 5 boost resulted in cross-protective immunity in non-human
primates. A recombinant vesicular stomatitis vaccine vector protected non-human
primates in pre- and post-exposure challenge studies. Several antiviral therapies
are currently under investigation, but only a few of these have been tested in
non-human primate models. Antisense therapies, in which oligonucleotides inhibit 
viral replication, have shown promising results in non-human primates following
post-exposure treatment. In light of the severity of Ebolavirus disease and the
observed increase in Ebolavirus outbreaks over the past decade, the expedited
translation of potential candidate therapeutics and vaccines from bench to
bedside is currently the most challenging task for the field. Here, we review the
current state of Ebolavirus research, with emphasis on prophylactic and
therapeutic intervention strategies.

DOI: 10.1186/gm219 
PMCID: PMC3092090
PMID: 21349211 

