
1. J Gen Virol. 1990 Feb;71 ( Pt 2):343-54.

Molecular cloning and characterization of a defective recombinant feline
leukaemia virus associated with myeloid leukaemia.

Tzavaras T(1), Stewart M, McDougall A, Fulton R, Testa N, Onions DE, Neil JC.

Author information: 
(1)Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, Bearsden, Glasgow, U.K.

The GM1 strain of feline leukaemia virus (FeLV) was isolated from a naturally
occurring case of myeloid leukaemia and induces severe haematopoietic
abnormalities, including myeloblastic leukaemia, on inoculation into cats.
Molecular clones of FeLV-GM1 proviruses were obtained and studied by restriction 
enzyme mapping, blot hybridization and partial DNA sequence analysis. Two types
of clone were isolated; the first was a replication-competent FeLV of subgroup A,
resembling other low or minimally pathogenic FeLV-A isolates; the second was
replication-defective with extensive deletions and mutations in gag and pol,
although it has an intact env gene of subgroup B phenotype. Large segments of the
defective proviruses, from the 5' leader sequence upstream of the gag gene to the
5' half of the env gene, show structural hallmarks of endogenous FeLV-related
proviruses. Infectious FeLV-GM1 viruses recovered after transfection were tested 
for their leukaemogenic potential in newborn cats. Early polyclonal
myeloproliferative changes were observed in cats inoculated with FeLV-A/GM1
alone, although these were more pronounced in animals receiving the full
FeLV-AB/GM1 complex reconstituted by cotransfection of the defective virus FeLV-B
with its FeLV-A helper. Analysis of viruses in the bone marrow showed that
replication of the subgroup B component is delayed and restricted to a proportion
of cats. Most of the infected cats developed persistent abnormalities of
haematopoiesis and one progressed to disseminated myeloid leukaemia. The
defective recombinant FeLV-B/GM1 appears to play an indirect but important role
in myeloid leukaemogenesis.

DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-71-2-343 
PMID: 2155287  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

