
1. J Vis Exp. 2011 Jun 17;(52). pii: 2599. doi: 10.3791/2599.

Neuromodulation and mitochondrial transport: live imaging in hippocampal neurons 
over long durations.

Edelman DB(1), Owens GC, Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Neurobiology, The Neurosciences Institute.
david_edelman@nsi.edu

To understand the relationship between mitochondrial transport and neuronal
function, it is critical to observe mitochondrial behavior in live cultured
neurons for extended durations(1-3). This is now possible through the use of
vital dyes and fluorescent proteins with which cytoskeletal components,
organelles, and other structures in living cells can be labeled and then
visualized via dynamic fluorescence microscopy. For example, in embryonic chicken
sympathetic neurons, mitochondrial movement was characterized using the vital dye
rhodamine 123(4). In another study, mitochondria were visualized in rat forebrain
neurons by transfection of mitochondrially targeted eYFP(5). However, imaging of 
primary neurons over minutes, hours, or even days presents a number of issues.
Foremost among these are: 1) maintenance of culture conditions such as
temperature, humidity, and pH during long imaging sessions; 2) a strong, stable
fluorescent signal to assure both the quality of acquired images and accurate
measurement of signal intensity during image analysis; and 3) limiting exposure
times during image acquisition to minimize photobleaching and avoid
phototoxicity. Here, we describe a protocol that permits the observation,
visualization, and analysis of mitochondrial movement in cultured hippocampal
neurons with high temporal resolution and under optimal life support conditions. 
We have constructed an affordable stage-top incubator that provides good
temperature regulation and atmospheric gas flow, and also limits the degree of
media evaporation, assuring stable pH and osmolarity. This incubator is
connected, via inlet and outlet hoses, to a standard tissue culture incubator,
which provides constant humidity levels and an atmosphere of 5-10% CO(2;)/air.
This design offers a cost-effective alternative to significantly more expensive
microscope incubators that don't necessarily assure the viability of cells over
many hours or even days. To visualize mitochondria, we infect cells with a
lentivirus encoding a red fluorescent protein that is targeted to the
mitochondrion. This assures a strong and persistent signal, which, in conjunction
with the use of a stable xenon light source, allows us to limit exposure times
during image acquisition and all but precludes photobleaching and phototoxicity. 
Two injection ports on the top of the stage-top incubator allow the acute
administration of neurotransmitters and other reagents intended to modulate
mitochondrial movement. In sum, lentivirus-mediated expression of an
organelle-targeted red fluorescent protein and the combination of our stage-top
incubator, a conventional inverted fluorescence microscope, CCD camera, and xenon
light source allow us to acquire time-lapse images of mitochondrial transport in 
living neurons over longer durations than those possible in studies deploying
conventional vital dyes and off-the-shelf life support systems.

DOI: 10.3791/2599 
PMCID: PMC3197030
PMID: 21712797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

