
1. J Vis Exp. 2011 Aug 2;(54). pii: 2829. doi: 10.3791/2829.

Rapid diagnosis of avian influenza virus in wild birds: use of a portable rRT-PCR
and freeze-dried reagents in the field.

Takekawa JY(1), Hill NJ, Schultz AK, Iverson SA, Cardona CJ, Boyce WM, Dudley JP.

Author information: 
(1)USGS Western Ecological Research Center, USA. john_takekawa@usgs.gov

Wild birds have been implicated in the spread of highly pathogenic avian
influenza (HPAI) of the H5N1 subtype, prompting surveillance along migratory
flyways. Sampling of wild birds for avian influenza virus (AIV) is often
conducted in remote regions, but results are often delayed because of the need to
transport samples to a laboratory equipped for molecular testing. Real-time
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) is a molecular
technique that offers one of the most accurate and sensitive methods for
diagnosis of AIV. The previously strict lab protocols needed for rRT-PCR are now 
being adapted for the field. Development of freeze-dried (lyophilized) reagents
that do not require cold chain, with sensitivity at the level of wet reagents has
brought on-site remote testing to a practical goal. Here we present a method for 
the rapid diagnosis of AIV in wild birds using an rRT-PCR unit (Ruggedized
Advanced Pathogen Identification Device or RAPID, Idaho Technologies, Salt Lake
City, UT) that employs lyophilized reagents (Influenza A Target 1 Taqman;
ASAY-ASY-0109, Idaho Technologies). The reagents contain all of the necessary
components for testing at appropriate concentrations in a single tube: primers,
probes, enzymes, buffers and internal positive controls, eliminating errors
associated with improper storage or handling of wet reagents. The portable unit
performs a screen for Influenza A by targeting the matrix gene and yields results
in 2-3 hours. Genetic subtyping is also possible with H5 and H7 primer sets that 
target the hemagglutinin gene. The system is suitable for use on cloacal and
oropharyngeal samples collected from wild birds, as demonstrated here on the
migratory shorebird species, the western sandpiper (Calidrus mauri) captured in
Northern California. Animal handling followed protocols approved by the Animal
Care and Use Committee of the U.S. Geological Survey Western Ecological Research 
Center and permits of the U.S. Geological Survey Bird Banding Laboratory. The
primary advantage of this technique is to expedite diagnosis of wild birds,
increasing the chances of containing an outbreak in a remote location. On-site
diagnosis would also prove useful for identifying and studying infected
individuals in wild populations. The opportunity to collect information on host
biology (immunological and physiological response to infection) and spatial
ecology (migratory performance of infected birds) will provide insights into the 
extent to which wild birds can act as vectors for AIV over long distances.

DOI: 10.3791/2829 
PMCID: PMC3217620
PMID: 21847073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

