
1. Mol Neurodegener. 2011 Nov 17;6:78. doi: 10.1186/1750-1326-6-78.

Fractalkine/CX3CL1 protects striatal neurons from synergistic morphine and HIV-1 
Tat-induced dendritic losses and death.

Suzuki M(1), El-Hage N, Zou S, Hahn YK, Sorrell ME, Sturgill JL, Conrad DH, Knapp
PE, Hauser KF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Virginia Commonwealth University
School of Medicine, Richmond, VA 23298-0613, USA.

BACKGROUND: Fractalkine/CX3CL1 and its cognate receptor CX3CR1 are abundantly
expressed in the CNS. Fractalkine is an unusual C-X3-C motif chemokine that is
important in neuron-microglial communication, a co-receptor for HIV infection,
and can be neuroprotective. To assess the effects of fractalkine on opiate-HIV
interactive neurotoxicity, wild-type murine striatal neurons were co-cultured
with mixed glia from the striata of wild-type or Cx3cr1 knockout mice ± HIV-1 Tat
and/or morphine. Time-lapse digital images were continuously recorded at 20 min
intervals for up to 72 h using computer-aided microscopy to track the same cells 
repeatedly.
RESULTS: Co-exposure to Tat and morphine caused synergistic increases in neuron
death, dendritic pruning, and microglial motility as previously reported.
Exogenous fractalkine prevented synergistic Tat and morphine-induced dendritic
losses and neuron death even though the inflammatory mediator TNF-α remained
significantly elevated. Antibody blockade of CX3CR1 mimicked the toxic effects of
morphine plus Tat, but did not add to their toxicity; while fractalkine failed to
protect wild-type neurons co-cultured with Cx3cr1-/--null glia against morphine
and Tat toxicity. Exogenous fractalkine also normalized microglial motility,
which is elevated by Tat and morphine co-exposure, presumably limiting microglial
surveillance that may lead to toxic effects on neurons. Fractalkine
immunofluorescence was expressed in neurons and to a lesser extent by other cell 
types, whereas CX3CR1 immunoreactivity or GFP fluorescence in cells cultured from
the striatum of Cx3cr1-/- (Cx3cr1GFP/GFP) mice were associated with microglia.
Immunoblotting shows that fractalkine levels were unchanged following Tat and/or 
morphine exposure and there was no increase in released fractalkine as determined
by ELISA. By contrast, CX3CR1 protein levels were markedly downregulated.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that deficits in fractalkine-CX3CR1 signaling
contribute to the synergistic neurotoxic effects of opioids and Tat. Importantly,
exogenous fractalkine can selectively protect neurons from the injurious effects 
of chronic opioid-HIV-1 Tat co-exposure, and this suggests a potential
therapeutic course for neuroAIDS. Although the cellular mechanisms underlying
neuroprotection are not certain, findings that exogenous fractalkine reduces
microglial motility and fails to protect neurons co-cultured with Cx3cr1-/- mixed
glia suggest that fractalkine may act by interfering with toxic microglial-neuron
interactions.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1326-6-78 
PMCID: PMC3287119
PMID: 22093090  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

