
1. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2012;158(2):196-205. doi: 10.1159/000330647. Epub 2012 
Jan 26.

Susceptibility to vaccinia virus infection and spread in mice is determined by
age at infection, allergen sensitization and mast cell status.

Domenico J(1), Lucas JJ, Fujita M, Gelfand EW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Department of Pediatrics, National Jewish Health,
Denver, CO 80206, USA.

BACKGROUND: Patients, especially young children, with atopic dermatitis are at an
increased risk of developing eczema vaccinatum, a severe reaction to the smallpox
vaccine, either through direct vaccination or indirect contact with a person
recently vaccinated.
METHODS: Using a mouse model of infection, the severity of vaccinia-induced
lesions was assessed from their appearance and viral DNA content. The response to
vaccinia inoculation was assessed in young and adult mice, allergen-sensitized
mice, and in mast cell-deficient mice.
RESULTS: Young age, sensitization to an allergen prior to infection, and a mast
cell deficit, accomplished by using mast cell-deficient mice, resulted in more
severe viral lesions at the site of inoculation, according to lesion appearance
and viral DNA content. All three factors combined demonstrated maximal
susceptibility, characterized by the severity of primary lesions and the
development of secondary (satellite) lesions, as occurs in eczema vaccinatum in
humans. Resistance to the appearance of satellite lesions could be restored by
adoptive transfer of bone marrow-derived mast cells from either wild-type or
cathelicidin-related antimicrobial peptide-deficient mice. Primary lesions were
more severe following the latter transfer, indicating that cathelicidin-related
antimicrobial peptide does contribute to the protective activity of mast cells
against infection.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of young age, allergen sensitization and a mast cell
deficit resulted in the most severe lesions, including satellite lesions.
Understanding the factors determining the relative resistance/sensitivity to
vaccinia virus will aid in the development of strategies for preventing and
treating adverse reactions which can occur after smallpox vaccination.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000330647 
PMCID: PMC3291886
PMID: 22286752  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

