
1. Monaldi Arch Chest Dis. 2012 Mar;77(1):29-31.

Sarcoidosis and multiple sclerosis: systemic toxicity associated with the use of 
interferon-beta therapy.

Carbonelli C(1), Montepietra S, Caruso A, Cavazza A, Feo C, Menzella F, Motti L, 
Zucchi L.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonology Unit, Department of Cardiology, Thoracic and Vascular Surgery and 
Critical Care Medicine, Azienda Ospedaliera ASMN, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a
Carattere Scientifico, Reggio Emilia, Italy. cristiano.carbonelli@asmn.re.it

Sarcoidosis is a multi-systemic inflammatory disease of unknown origin
characterized by the presence of noncaseating epitheloid cell granulomas in
multiple organs. Diagnosis is made on the basis of a compatible
clinical-radiological scenario and the histological demonstration of the typical 
granulomas in the affected tissues. Interferons are immuno-modulators that have
been used in a wide range of diseases, including hepatitis C virus infection,
multiple sclerosis, and multiple myeloma and other types of tumours, including
leukemia, lymphomas, Kaposi's sarcoma, and melanoma. Interferon-alpha-induced
sarcoidosis has been reported repeatedly and there are two reports in the
literature of cases of pulmonary sarcoidosis treated with interferon-1b therapy: 
one for advanced renal cell carcinoma and the other for multiple myeloma. A
35-year-old man on chronic immune-modulant Interferon-1b-based therapy for
multiple sclerosis presented to the Neurology Unit with mild dyspnoea, dry cough,
and transient pain to right upper abdomen. Lungs, spleen, liver, and almost all
lymphnode stations of abdomen and mediastinum were clearly involved on ultrasound
examination, chest X-ray, and computed tomography. A transbronchial biopsy showed
non-caseating granuloma on histopathologic evaluation of the lungs. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first report of a chronic multisystemic sarcoidosis
that was associated with interferon-beta treatment.

DOI: 10.4081/monaldi.2012.165 
PMID: 22662644  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

