
1. Hepatology. 2012 Nov;56(5):1706-18. doi: 10.1002/hep.25879. Epub 2012 Aug 27.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells induce efficient stimulation of antiviral immunity
in the context of chronic hepatitis B virus infection.

Martinet J(1), Leroy V, Dufeu-Duchesne T, Larrat S, Richard MJ, Zoulim F, Plumas 
J, Aspord C.

Author information: 
(1)EFS Rhone-Alpes, R&D Laboratory, La Tronche, France.

The immune control of hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is essential for viral
clearance. Therefore, restoring functional anti-HBV immunity is a promising
immunotherapeutic approach to treatment of chronic infection. Plasmacytoid
dendritic cells (pDCs) play a crucial role in triggering antiviral immunity
through their ability to capture and process viral antigens and subsequently
induce adaptive immune responses. We investigated the potential of pDCs to
trigger antiviral cellular immunity against HBV. We used a human leukocyte
antigen A (HLA-A)*0201(+) pDC line loaded with HLA-A*0201-restricted peptides
derived from hepatitis B core/hepatitis B surface (HBc/HBs) antigens to amplify
specific CD8 T cells ex vivo from chronic HBV patients and established a
Hepato-HuPBL mouse model to address the therapeutic potential of the strategy in 
vivo. Stimulation of PBMCs or liver-infiltrating lymphocytes from HLA-A*0201(+)
chronic HBV patients by HBc peptide-loaded pDCs elicited up to 23.1% and 76.1%
HBV-specific CD8 T cells in 45.8% of cases. The specific T cells from the
"responder" group secreted interferon-γ, expressed CD107 upon restimulation, and 
efficiently lysed HBV antigen-expressing hepatocytes. Circulating hepatitis B e
antigen (HBeAg) was found to distinguish the group of patients not responding to 
the pDC stimulation. The therapeutic efficacy of the pDC vaccine was evaluated in
immunodeficient NOD-SCID β(2) m(-/-) mice reconstituted with HBV patients' PBMCs 
and xenotransplanted with human HBV-transfected hepatocytes. Vaccination of
Hepato-HuPBL mice with the HBc/HBs peptide-loaded pDCs elicited HBV-specific T
cells able to specifically lyse the transfected hepatocytes and reduce the
systemic viral load.CONCLUSION: pDCs loaded with HBV-derived peptides can elicit 
functional virus-specific T cells. HBeAg appears to be critical in determining
the outcome of immunotherapies in chronic HBV patients. A pDC-based
immunotherapeutic approach could be of interest in attempts to restore functional
antiviral immunity, which is critical for the control of the virus in chronic HBV
patients.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.25879 
PMID: 22707082  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

