
1. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2013 Jan;110(1):229-39. doi: 10.1002/bit.24600. Epub 2012 Aug 
6.

Impact of virus preparation quality on parvovirus filter performance.

Slocum A(1), Burnham M, Genest P, Venkiteshwaran A, Chen D, Hughes J.

Author information: 
(1)EMD Millipore Corporation, Billerica, Massachusetts 01821, USA.

Virus-removal filtration technology is commonly used in the manufacturing process
for biologics to remove potential viral contaminants. Virus-removal filters
designed for retaining parvovirus, one of the smallest mammalian viruses, are
considered an industry standard as they can effectively remove broad ranges of
viruses. It has long been observed that the performance of virus filters can be
influenced by virus preparations used in the laboratory scale studies (PDA,
2010). However, it remains unclear exactly what quality attributes of virus
preparations are critical or indicative of virus filter performance as measured
by effectiveness of virus removal and filter capacity consistency. In an attempt 
to better understand the relationship between virus preparation and virus filter 
performance, we have systematically prepared and analyzed different grades of
parvovirus with different purity levels and compared their performance profiles
on Viresolve® Pro parvovirus filters using four different molecules. Virus
preparations used in the studies were characterized using various methods to
measure DNA and protein content as well as the hydrodynamic diameter of virus
particles. Our results indicate that the performance of Viresolve® Pro filters
can be significantly impacted depending on the purity of the virus preparations
used in the spike and recovery studies. More importantly, we have demonstrated
that the purity of virus preparations is directly correlated to the measurable
biochemical and biophysical properties of the virus preparations such as DNA and 
protein content and monodispersal status, thus making it possible to
significantly improve the consistency and predictability of the virus filter
performance during process step validations.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bit.24600 
PMID: 22766979  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

