
1. Biochem Mol Biol Educ. 2012 Jul;40(4):277-83. doi: 10.1002/bmb.20615. Epub 2012
Jun 18.

Teaching the fluctuation test in silico by using mutate: a program to distinguish
between the adaptive and spontaneous mutation hypotheses.

Carvajal-Rodríguez A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Genética e Inmunología, Facultad de Biología,
Universidad de Vigo, Vigo 36310, Spain. acraaj@uvigo.es

Mutate is a program developed for teaching purposes to impart a virtual
laboratory class for undergraduate students of Genetics in Biology. The program
emulates the so-called fluctuation test whose aim is to distinguish between
spontaneous and adaptive mutation hypotheses in bacteria. The plan is to train
students in certain key multidisciplinary aspects of current genetics such as
sequence databases, DNA mutations, and hypothesis testing, while introducing the 
fluctuation test. This seminal experiment was originally performed studying
Escherichia coli resistance to the infection by bacteriophage T1. The fluctuation
test initiated the modern bacterial genetics that 25 years later ushered in the
era of the recombinant DNA. Nowadays we know that some deletions in fhuA, the
gene responsible for E. coli membrane receptor of T1, could cause the E. coli
resistance to this phage. For the sake of simplicity, we will introduce the
assumption that a single mutation generates the resistance to T1. During the
practical, the students use the program to download some fhuA gene sequences,
manually introduce some stop codon mutations, and design a fluctuation test to
obtain data for distinguishing between preadaptative (spontaneous) and induced
(adaptive) mutation hypotheses. The program can be launched from a browser or, if
preferred, its executable file can be downloaded from
http://webs.uvigo.es/acraaj/MutateWeb/Mutate.html. It requires the Java 5.0 (or
higher) Runtime Environment (freely available at http://www.java.com).

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bmb.20615 
PMID: 22807434  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

