
1. J Virol. 2013 Jan;87(2):746-55. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01634-12. Epub 2012 Oct 31.

AMP-activated protein kinase is required for the macropinocytic internalization
of ebolavirus.

Kondratowicz AS(1), Hunt CL, Davey RA, Cherry S, Maury WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.

Identification of host factors that are needed for Zaire Ebolavirus (EBOV) entry 
provides insights into the mechanism(s) of filovirus uptake, and these factors
may serve as potential antiviral targets. In order to identify novel host genes
and pathways involved in EBOV entry, gene array findings in the National Cancer
Institute's NCI-60 panel of human tumor cell lines were correlated with
permissivity for EBOV glycoprotein (GP)-mediated entry. We found that the gene
encoding the γ2 subunit of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) strongly
correlated with EBOV transduction in the tumor panel. The AMPK inhibitor compound
C inhibited infectious EBOV replication in Vero cells and diminished EBOV
GP-dependent, but not Lassa fever virus GPC-dependent, entry into a variety of
cell lines in a dose-dependent manner. Compound C also prevented EBOV GP-mediated
infection of primary human macrophages, a major target of filoviral replication
in vivo. Consistent with a role for AMPK in filovirus entry, time-of-addition
studies demonstrated that compound C abrogated infection when it was added at
early time points but became progressively less effective when added later.
Compound C prevented EBOV pseudovirion internalization at 37°C as cell-bound
particles remained susceptible to trypsin digestion in the presence of the
inhibitor but not in its absence. Mouse embryonic fibroblasts lacking the AMPKα1 
and AMPKα2 catalytic subunits were significantly less permissive to EBOV
GP-mediated infection than their wild-type counterparts, likely due to decreased 
macropinocytic uptake. In total, these findings implicate AMPK in macropinocytic 
events needed for EBOV GP-dependent entry and identify a novel cellular target
for new filoviral antivirals.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01634-12 
PMCID: PMC3554099
PMID: 23115293  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

