
1. Immunology. 2013 Feb;138(2):116-23. doi: 10.1111/imm.12016.

Specific antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity responses associated with slow 
progression of HIV infection.

Wren LH(1), Chung AW, Isitman G, Kelleher AD, Parsons MS, Amin J, Cooper DA; ADCC
study collaboration investigators, Stratov I, Navis M, Kent SJ.

Collaborators: Read T, Chen M, Fairley C, Schmidt T, Bradshaw C, Moore R, Fethers
K, Silvers J, Kent H, McFarlane R, Baker D, McMurchie M, Pett S, Carr A,
Finlayson R, Smith D, Soo TM, Kelly M, Patten J, Anderson B, Marlton S, Smith D, 
Bloch M, Doong N, Roth N, Shaik A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia.

Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) is potentially an effective
adaptive immune response to HIV infection. However, little is understood about
the role of ADCC in controlling chronic infection in the small number of
long-term slow-progressors (LTSP) who maintain a relatively normal immunological 
state for prolonged periods of time. We analysed HIV-specific ADCC responses in
sera from 139 HIV(+) subjects not on antiretroviral therapy. Sixty-five subjects 
were LTSP, who maintained a CD4 T-cell count > 500/μl for over 8 years after
infection without antiretroviral therapy and 74 were non-LTSP individuals. The
ADCC responses were measured using an natural killer cell activation assay to
overlapping HIV peptides that allowed us to map ADCC epitopes. We found that
although the magnitude of ADCC responses in the LTSP cohort were not higher and
did not correlate with CD4 T-cell depletion rates, the LTSP cohort had
significantly broader ADCC responses compared with the non-LTSP cohort.
Specifically, regulatory/accessory HIV-1 proteins were targeted more frequently
by LTSP. Indeed, three particular ADCC epitopes within the Vpu protein of HIV
were recognized only by LTSP individuals. Our study provides evidence that
broader ADCC responses may play a role in long-term control of HIV progression
and suggests novel vaccine targets.

© 2012 The Authors. Immunology © 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/imm.12016 
PMCID: PMC3575764
PMID: 23173935  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

