
1. J Virol. 2013 Feb;87(4):2278-86. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02326-12. Epub 2012 Dec 12.

No evidence of xenotropic murine leukemia virus-related virus transmission by
blood transfusion from infected rhesus macaques.

Williams DK(1), Galvin TA, Gao Y, O'Neill C, Glasner D, Khan AS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Retroviruses, Division of Viral Products, Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, Maryland,
USA.

The discovery of xenotropic murine leukemia virus-related virus (XMRV) in human
tissue samples has been shown to be due to virus contamination with a recombinant
murine retrovirus. However, due to the unknown pathogenicity of this novel
retrovirus and its broad host range, including human cell lines, it is important 
to understand the modes of virus transmission and develop mitigation and
management strategies to reduce the risk of human exposure and infection. XMRV
transmission was evaluated by whole-blood transfusion in rhesus macaques. Monkeys
were infected with XMRV to serve as donor monkeys for blood transfers at weeks 1,
2, and 3 into naïve animals. The donor and recipient monkeys were evaluated for
XMRV infection by nested PCR assays with nucleotide sequence confirmation,
Western blot assays for development of virus-specific antibodies, and coculture
of monkey peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) with a sensitive target cell
line for virus isolation. XMRV infection was demonstrated in the virus-injected
donor monkeys, but there was no evidence of virus transmission by whole-blood
transfusion to naïve monkeys based upon PCR analysis of PBMCs using XMRV-specific
gag and env primers, Western blot analysis of monkey plasma up to 31 to 32 weeks 
after transfusion, and coculture studies using monkey PBMCs from various times
after transfusion. The study demonstrates the lack of XMRV transmission by
whole-blood transfusion during the acute phase of infection. Furthermore,
analysis of PBMC viral DNA showed extensive APOBEC-mediated G-to-A hypermutation 
in a donor animal at week 9, corroborating previous results using macaques and
supporting the possible restriction of XMRV replication in humans by a similar
mechanism.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02326-12 
PMCID: PMC3571456
PMID: 23236064  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

