
1. Genome Biol. 2013 Feb 1;14(2):R11. doi: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-2-r11.

Genome of Acanthamoeba castellanii highlights extensive lateral gene transfer and
early evolution of tyrosine kinase signaling.

Clarke M, Lohan AJ, Liu B, Lagkouvardos I, Roy S, Zafar N, Bertelli C, Schilde C,
Kianianmomeni A, Bürglin TR, Frech C, Turcotte B, Kopec KO, Synnott JM, Choo C,
Paponov I, Finkler A, Heng Tan CS, Hutchins AP, Weinmeier T, Rattei T, Chu JS,
Gimenez G, Irimia M, Rigden DJ, Fitzpatrick DA, Lorenzo-Morales J, Bateman A,
Chiu CH, Tang P, Hegemann P, Fromm H, Raoult D, Greub G, Miranda-Saavedra D, Chen
N, Nash P, Ginger ML, Horn M, Schaap P, Caler L, Loftus BJ.

BACKGROUND: The Amoebozoa constitute one of the primary divisions of eukaryotes, 
encompassing taxa of both biomedical and evolutionary importance, yet its genomic
diversity remains largely unsampled. Here we present an analysis of a whole
genome assembly of Acanthamoeba castellanii (Ac) the first representative from a 
solitary free-living amoebozoan.
RESULTS: Ac encodes 15,455 compact intron-rich genes, a significant number of
which are predicted to have arisen through inter-kingdom lateral gene transfer
(LGT). A majority of the LGT candidates have undergone a substantial degree of
intronization and Ac appears to have incorporated them into established
transcriptional programs. Ac manifests a complex signaling and cell communication
repertoire, including a complete tyrosine kinase signaling toolkit and a
comparable diversity of predicted extracellular receptors to that found in the
facultatively multicellular dictyostelids. An important environmental host of a
diverse range of bacteria and viruses, Ac utilizes a diverse repertoire of
predicted pattern recognition receptors, many with predicted orthologous
functions in the innate immune systems of higher organisms.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analysis highlights the important role of LGT in the biology of 
Ac and in the diversification of microbial eukaryotes. The early evolution of a
key signaling facility implicated in the evolution of metazoan multicellularity
strongly argues for its emergence early in the Unikont lineage. Overall, the
availability of an Ac genome should aid in deciphering the biology of the
Amoebozoa and facilitate functional genomic studies in this important model
organism and environmental host.

DOI: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-2-r11 
PMCID: PMC4053784
PMID: 23375108  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

