
1. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2013 Jul;25(7):806-13. doi:
10.1097/MEG.0b013e32835eb9b9.

Expression of the full-length HCV core subgenome from HCV gentoype-1a and
genotype-3a and evaluation of the antigenicity of translational products.

Ansari MA(1), Irshad M, Agarwal SK, Chosdol K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Clinical Biochemistry Division, All India
Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.

BACKGROUND: Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is a major public health problem in
India. Detection of HCV and its genotypes by simple and economic assays is a
prime requirement in the planning of antiviral treatments for patients infected
with this virus. Although commercial assays are available for the detection of
both HCV RNA and genotypes, efforts aimed at the development of simple and
economical systems for these measurements are still going on.
AIM: The present study was designed to clone and express the HCV CORE gene from
HCV genotype-1a and genotype-3a and use the peptides to develop immunoassays for 
the detection of genotype-specific antibodies in sera samples.
METHODS: One hundred and thirty-five serum samples from patients with liver and
renal diseases were screened for HCV RNA by real-time PCR, followed by HCV
genotyping in RNA-positive sera by restriction fragment length polymorphism,
sequencing, and phylogenetic analysis. The HCV CORE gene was amplified from sera 
carrying HCV genotype-1a and genotype-3a and cloned and expressed in the pET19b
vector. The translational products were used to develop a western blot assay for 
the detection of genotype-specific anti-HCV antibodies.
RESULTS: The HCV CORE gene, from both genotypes, was cloned and expressed
successfully, with production of a 26 kDa recombinant protein in either case.
Using peptides in a western blot assay, 101 sera samples were tested for the
anti-HCV CORE antibody. Each peptide showed a reaction with anti-HCV total
antibody without showing any genotype-specific binding. This indicates that
individual peptides obtained from different genotypes do not have a
genotype-specific epitope to bind with antibodies.
CONCLUSION: Cloning and expression of the HCV CORE gene from genotype-1a and
genotype-3a was successful. However, the peptides formed did not show
genotype-specific binding with anti-HCV.

DOI: 10.1097/MEG.0b013e32835eb9b9 
PMID: 23442416  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

