
1. J Dairy Sci. 2013 Jun;96(6):3488-97. doi: 10.3168/jds.2012-6122. Epub 2013 Mar
30.

Milk fat globule membrane isolated from buttermilk or whey cream and their lipid 
components inhibit infectivity of rotavirus in vitro.

Fuller KL(1), Kuhlenschmidt TB, Kuhlenschmidt MS, Jiménez-Flores R, Donovan SM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, 905 S. Goodwin Avenue, University of
Illinois, Urbana 61801, USA.

Milk fat is encapsulated in a milk fat globule membrane (MFGM) that contains
bioactive glycoproteins and glycolipids. The MFGM inhibits infectivity of
rotavirus (RV), activity that has been attributed to its glycoprotein and
carbohydrate components. However, previous studies of proteins and
oligosaccharides in the MGFM have not accounted for all the bioactivity
associated with the complete MFGM. The lipid fraction of the MFGM accounts for
half of its composition by weight, and we postulate that this fraction should be 
tested by itself to determine if it plays a role in antiviral activity. Herein,
the anti-RV activity of an organic extract of MFGM was tested. Natural and whey
buttermilk powders containing bovine MFGM enriched in polar lipids were prepared 
by microfiltration and supercritical fluid extraction treatment to reduce the
triglyceride content of the powders. Lipid fractions were then extracted from the
MFGM using both single- and dual-phase extraction methods. Whole MFGM and organic
extracts were screened in MA-104 cells for anti-infective activity against a
neuraminidase-sensitive rotavirus using a focus-forming unit assay.
Dose-dependent inhibition was observed for whole buttermilk and cheese whey MFGM 
against the rotavirus. In general, buttermilk MFGM exhibited greater RV
percentage inhibition than cheese whey MFGM. Organic-soluble anti-RV compounds
were identified in bovine MFGM. The most active fraction, isolated by dual-phase 
extraction and iatrobead chromatography, was free of proteins and highly
nonpolar. Further separation of this fraction in a less polar solvent (30:1
chloroform:methanol) resolved at least 5 lipid-containing compounds, which likely
contribute to the anti-RV activity associated with bovine MFGM. In summary, lipid
components associated with MFGM appear to contribute in large part to the anti-RV
activity associated with the bovine MFGM.

Copyright © 2013 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.3168/jds.2012-6122 
PMID: 23548280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

