
1. PLoS One. 2013 May 20;8(5):e64200. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064200. Print 2013.

A herpes simplex virus-derived replicative vector expressing LIF limits
experimental demyelinating disease and modulates autoimmunity.

Nygårdas M(1), Paavilainen H, Müther N, Nagel CH, Röyttä M, Sodeik B, Hukkanen V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
michaela.nygardas@utu.fi

Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) has properties that can be exploited for the 
development of gene therapy vectors. The neurotropism of HSV enables delivery of 
therapeutic genes to the nervous system. Using a bacterial artificial chromosome 
(BAC), we constructed an HSV-1(17(+))-based replicative vector deleted of the
neurovirulence gene γ134.5, and expressing leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) as a 
transgene for treatment of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). EAE
is an inducible T-cell mediated autoimmune disease of the central nervous system 
(CNS) and is used as an animal model for multiple sclerosis. Demyelination and
inflammation are hallmarks of both diseases. LIF is a cytokine that has the
potential to limit demyelination and oligodendrocyte loss in CNS autoimmune
diseases and to affect the T-cell mediated autoimmune response. In this study
SJL/J mice, induced for EAE, were treated with a HSV-LIF vector intracranially
and the subsequent changes in disease parameters and immune responses during the 
acute disease were investigated. Replicating HSV-LIF and its DNA were detected in
the CNS during the acute infection, and the vector spread to the spinal cord but 
was non-virulent. The HSV-LIF significantly ameliorated the EAE and contributed
to a higher number of oligodendrocytes in the brains when compared to untreated
mice. The HSV-LIF therapy also induced favorable changes in the expression of
immunoregulatory cytokines and T-cell population markers in the CNS during the
acute disease. These data suggest that BAC-derived HSV vectors are suitable for
gene therapy of CNS disease and can be used to test the therapeutic potential of 
immunomodulatory factors for treatment of EAE.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064200 
PMCID: PMC3659099
PMID: 23700462  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

