
1. PLoS One. 2013 May 27;8(5):e63381. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063381. Print 2013.

VIPhyb, an antagonist of vasoactive intestinal peptide receptor, enhances
cellular antiviral immunity in murine cytomegalovirus infected mice.

Li JM(1), Darlak KA, Southerland L, Hossain MS, Jaye DL, Josephson CD, Rosenthal 
H, Waller EK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University,
Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America.

Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) is a neuropeptide hormone that suppresses
Th1-mediated cellular immunity. We previously reported that VIP-knockout (VIP-KO)
mice have enhanced cellular immune responses and increased survival following
murine cytomegalovirus (mCMV) infection in C57BL/6 mice. In this study, we tested
whether treatment with a VIP receptor antagonistic peptide protects C57BL/6 and
BALB/c mice from mCMV-infection. One week of daily subcutaneous injections of
VIPhyb was non-toxic and did not alter frequencies of immune cell subsets in
non-infected mice. VIPhyb administration to mCMV-infected C57BL/6 and BALB/c mice
markedly enhanced survival, viral clearance, and reduced liver and lung pathology
compared with saline-treated controls. The numbers of effector/memory CD8+
T-cells and mature NK cells were increased in VIPhyb-treated mice compared with
PBS-treated groups. Pharmacological blockade of VIP-receptor binding or genetic
blockade of VIP-signaling prevented the up-regulation of PD-L1 and PD-1
expression on DC and activated CD8+ T-cells, respectively, in mCMV-infected mice,
and enhanced CD80, CD86, and MHC-II expression on conventional and plasmacytoid
DC. VIPhyb-treatment increased type-I IFN synthesis, numbers of IFN-γ- and
TNF-α-expressing NK cells and T-cells, and the numbers of mCMV-M45
epitope-peptide-MHC-I tetramer CD8+ T-cells following mCMV infection.
VIP-treatment lowered the percentage of Treg cells in spleens compared with
PBS-treated WT mice following mCMV infection, while significantly decreasing
levels of serum VEGF induced by mCMV-infection. The mice in all treated groups
exhibited similar levels of anti-mCMV antibody titers. Short-term administration 
of a VIP-receptor antagonist represents a novel approach to enhance innate and
adaptive cellular immunity in a murine model of CMV infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063381 
PMCID: PMC3664580
PMID: 23723978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

