
1. J Res Med Sci. 2012 Oct;17(10):967-74.

Standard and pegylated interferon therapy of HDV infection: A systematic review
and meta- analysis.

Alavian SM(1), Tabatabaei SV, Behnava B, Rizzetto M.

Author information: 
(1)Baqiyatallah University of Medical Sciences, Baqiyatallah Research Center for 
Gastroenterology and Liver Disease, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Hepatitis D virus (HDV) infection is characterized by rapidly
progressive liver disease with adverse prognosis in most patients. Although
interferon is the only approved anti-HDV therapy, evidence regarding the efficacy
and safety of its various regimens is either old or scattered.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We searched systematically Medline, EMBASE, Scopus, the
Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, and ISI. The studies that
evaluated treatment of chronic HDV infection with standard or pegylated
interferon for at least 48 weeks were identified. Our inclusion criteria were
positive anti-HDV antibody for 6 months and positive HDV-PCR at the start of
study. We performed a meta-analysis for proportions using the arcsine
transformation in random effects model. Sustained virological response (SVR) rate
(negative Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 6 months after cessation of therapy)
was the end point of interest.
RESULTS: Data were abstracted from 14 studies containing 227 chronic HDV-infected
patients who received standard or pegylated interferon alpha-2a or -2b.
Twenty-one and 30 patients of 71 and 156 who received standard or peginterferon, 
respectively, beyond 48 weeks achieved SVR. Pooled SVR rates were 29% [95%
confidence interval (CI) 19; 41] and 19% (95% CI 10; 29), respectively. The rates
of treatment withdrawal were similar.
CONCLUSION: Our systematic review indicates that the literature lacks sufficient 
evidence to establish precise recommendations for treatment of HDV infection.
Meta-analysis of these studies shows that standard dose of peginterferon is more 
effective than high dose of standard interferon as anti-HDV therapy.


PMCID: PMC3698658
PMID: 23825999 

