
1. J Invertebr Pathol. 2013 Nov;114(3):298-308. doi: 10.1016/j.jip.2013.09.003. Epub
2013 Sep 14.

Molecular immune response of the American lobster (Homarus americanus) to the
White Spot Syndrome Virus.

Clark KF(1), Greenwood SJ, Acorn AR, Byrne PJ.

Author information: 
(1)AVC Lobster Science Centre, Atlantic Veterinary College, University of Prince 
Edward Island, 550 University Avenue, Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island C1A
4P3, Canada; Department of Pathology and Microbiology, Atlantic Veterinary
College, University of Prince Edward Island, 550 University Avenue,
Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island C1A 4P3, Canada. Electronic address:
fclark@upei.ca.

The adult American lobster (Homarus americanus) is susceptible to few naturally
occurring pathogens, and no viral pathogen is known to exist. Despite this,
relatively little is known about the H. americanus immune system and nothing is
known about its potential viral immune response. Hundreds of rural communities in
Atlantic Canada rely on the lobster fishery for their economic sustainability and
could be devastated by large-scale pathogen-mediated mortality events. The White 
Spot Syndrome Virus is the most economically devastating viral pathogen to global
shrimp aquaculture production and has been proposed to be capable of infecting
all decapod crustaceans including the European Lobster. An in vivo WSSV injection
challenge was conducted in H. americanus and WSSV was found to be capable of
infecting and replicating within lobsters held at 20°C. The in vivo WSSV
challenge also generated the first viral disease model of H. americanus and
allowed for the high-throughput examination of transcriptomic changes that occur 
during viral infection. Microarray analysis found 136 differentially expressed
genes and the expression of a subset of these genes was verified using RT-qPCR.
Anti-lipopolysaccharide isoforms and acute phase serum amyloid protein A
expression did not change during WSSV infection, contrary to previous findings
during bacterial and parasitic infection of H. americanus. This, along with the
differential gene expression of thioredoxin and trypsin isoforms, provides
compelling evidence that H. americanus is capable of mounting an immune response 
specific to infection by different pathogen classes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jip.2013.09.003 
PMID: 24045127  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

