
1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 6;8(11):e78928. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078928. eCollection
2013.

Organization of multisynaptic inputs to the dorsal and ventral dentate gyrus:
retrograde trans-synaptic tracing with rabies virus vector in the rat.

Ohara S(1), Sato S, Tsutsui K, Witter MP, Iijima T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Systems Neuroscience, Tohoku University Graduate School of Life
Sciences, Sendai, Japan.

Behavioral, anatomical, and gene expression studies have shown functional
dissociations between the dorsal and ventral hippocampus with regard to their
involvement in spatial cognition, emotion, and stress. In this study we examined 
the difference of the multisynaptic inputs to the dorsal and ventral dentate
gyrus (DG) in the rat by using retrograde trans-synaptic tracing of recombinant
rabies virus vectors. Three days after the vectors were injected into the dorsal 
or ventral DG, monosynaptic neuronal labeling was present in the entorhinal
cortex, medial septum, diagonal band, and supramammillary nucleus, each of which 
is known to project to the DG directly. As in previous tracing studies,
topographical patterns related to the dorsal and ventral DG were seen in these
regions. Five days after infection, more of the neurons in these regions were
labeled and labeled neurons were also seen in cortical and subcortical regions,
including the piriform and medial prefrontal cortices, the endopiriform nucleus, 
the claustrum, the cortical amygdala, the medial raphe nucleus, the medial
habenular nucleus, the interpeduncular nucleus, and the lateral septum. As in the
monosynaptically labeled regions, a topographical distribution of labeled neurons
was evident in most of these disynaptically labeled regions. These data indicate 
that the cortical and subcortical inputs to the dorsal and ventral DG are
conveyed through parallel disynaptic pathways. This second-order input difference
in the dorsal and ventral DG is likely to contribute to the functional
differentiation of the hippocampus along the dorsoventral axis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078928 
PMCID: PMC3819259
PMID: 24223172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

