
1. Glycobiology. 2014 Mar;24(3):325-40. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwt161. Epub 2013 Dec
20.

A novel baculovirus vector for the production of nonfucosylated recombinant
glycoproteins in insect cells.

Mabashi-Asazuma H(1), Kuo CW, Khoo KH, Jarvis DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY 82071,
USA.

Glycosylation is an important attribute of baculovirus-insect cell expression
systems, but some insect cell lines produce core α1,3-fucosylated N-glycans,
which are highly immunogenic and render recombinant glycoproteins unsuitable for 
human use. To address this problem, we exploited a bacterial enzyme,
guanosine-5'-diphospho (GDP)-4-dehydro-6-deoxy-d-mannose reductase (Rmd), which
consumes the GDP-l-fucose precursor. We expected this enzyme to block
glycoprotein fucosylation by blocking the production of GDP-l-fucose, the donor
substrate required for this process. Initially, we engineered two different
insect cell lines to constitutively express Rmd and isolated subclones with
fucosylation-negative phenotypes. However, we found the fucosylation-negative
phenotypes induced by Rmd expression were unstable, indicating that this host
cell engineering approach is ineffective in insect systems. Thus, we constructed 
a baculovirus vector designed to express Rmd immediately after infection and
facilitate the insertion of genes encoding any glycoprotein of interest for
expression later after infection. We used this vector to produce a daughter
encoding rituximab and found, in contrast to an Rmd-negative control, that insect
cells infected with this virus produced a nonfucosylated form of this therapeutic
antibody. These results indicate that our Rmd(+) baculoviral vector can be used
to solve the immunogenic core α1,3-fucosylation problem associated with the
baculovirus-insect cell system. In conjunction with existing glycoengineered
insect cell lines, this vector extends the utility of the baculovirus-insect cell
system to include therapeutic glycoprotein production. This new vector also
extends the utility of the baculovirus-insect cell system to include the
production of recombinant antibodies with enhanced effector functions, due to its
ability to block core α1,6-fucosylation.

DOI: 10.1093/glycob/cwt161 
PMCID: PMC3919471
PMID: 24362443  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

