
1. BMC Genomics. 2014 Feb 14;15:133. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-133.

Virus-independent and common transcriptome responses of leafhopper vectors
feeding on maize infected with semi-persistently and persistent propagatively
transmitted viruses.

Cassone BJ, Wijeratne S, Michel AP, Stewart LR, Chen Y, Yan P, Redinbaugh MG(1).

Author information: 
(1)USDA, ARS Corn, Soybean and Wheat Quality Research Unit, Wooster, OH 44691,
USA. peg.redinbaugh@ars.usda.gov.

BACKGROUND: Insects are the most important epidemiological factors for plant
virus disease spread, with >75% of viruses being dependent on insects for
transmission to new hosts. The black-faced leafhopper (Graminella nigrifrons
Forbes) transmits two viruses that use different strategies for transmission:
Maize chlorotic dwarf virus (MCDV) which is semi-persistently transmitted and
Maize fine streak virus (MFSV) which is persistently and propagatively
transmitted. To date, little is known regarding the molecular and cellular
mechanisms in insects that regulate the process and efficiency of transmission,
or how these mechanisms differ based on virus transmission strategy.
RESULTS: RNA-Seq was used to examine transcript changes in leafhoppers after
feeding on MCDV-infected, MFSV-infected and healthy maize for 4 h and 7 d. After 
sequencing cDNA libraries constructed from whole individuals using Illumina next 
generation sequencing, the Rnnotator pipeline in Galaxy was used to reassemble
the G. nigrifrons transcriptome. Using differential expression analyses, we
identified significant changes in transcript abundance in G. nigrifrons. In
particular, transcripts implicated in the innate immune response and energy
production were more highly expressed in insects fed on virus-infected maize.
Leafhoppers fed on MFSV-infected maize also showed an induction of transcripts
involved in hemocoel and cell-membrane linked immune responses within four hours 
of feeding. Patterns of transcript expression were validated for a subset of
transcripts by quantitative real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction using RNA samples collected from insects fed on healthy or
virus-infected maize for between a 4 h and seven week period.
CONCLUSIONS: We expected, and found, changes in transcript expression in G.
nigrifrons feeding of maize infected with a virus (MFSV) that also infects the
leafhopper, including induction of immune responses in the hemocoel and at the
cell membrane. The significant induction of the innate immune system in G.
nigrifrons fed on a foregut-borne virus (MCDV) that does not infect leafhoppers
was less expected. The changes in transcript accumulation that occur independent 
of the mode of pathogen transmission could be key for identifying insect factors 
that disrupt vector-mediated plant virus transmission.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-133 
PMCID: PMC3929756
PMID: 24524215  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

