
1. mBio. 2014 Feb 18;5(1). pii: e01088-13. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01088-13.

An innate immunity-regulating virulence determinant is uniquely encoded by the
Andes virus nucleocapsid protein.

Cimica V(1), Dalrymple NA, Roth E, Nasonov A, Mackow ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, New York, USA.

Andes virus (ANDV) is the only hantavirus known to spread from person to person
and shown to cause highly lethal hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS) in patients 
and Syrian hamsters. Hantaviruses replicate in human endothelial cells and
accomplish this by restricting the early induction of beta interferon (IFN-β)-
and IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs). Our studies reveal that the ANDV nucleocapsid
(N) protein uniquely inhibits IFN signaling responses directed by cytoplasmic
double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) sensors RIG-I and MDA5. In contrast, N proteins from 
Sin Nombre, New York-1, and Prospect Hill hantaviruses had no effect on
RIG-I/MDA5-directed transcriptional responses from IFN-β-, IFN-stimulated
response element (ISRE)-, or κB-containing promoters. Ablating a potential
S-segment nonstructural open reading frame (ORF) (NSs) within the ANDV plasmid
expressing N protein failed to alter IFN regulation by ANDV N protein. Further
analysis demonstrated that expressing the ANDV N protein inhibited downstream IFN
pathway activation directed by MAVS, TBK1, and IκB kinase ε (IKKε) but failed to 
inhibit transcriptional responses directed by constitutive expression of active
interferon regulatory factor IRF3-5D or after stimulation by alpha interferon
(IFN-α) or tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α). Consistent with IFN
pathway-specific regulation, the ANDV N protein inhibited TBK1-directed IRF3
phosphorylation (phosphorylation of serine 396 [pS396]) and TBK1
autophosphorylation (pS172). Collectively, these findings indicate that the ANDV 
N inhibits IFN signaling responses by interfering with TBK1 activation, upstream 
of IRF3 phosphorylation and NF-κB activation. Moreover, our findings reveal that 
ANDV uniquely carries a gene encoding a virulence determinant within its N
protein that is capable of restricting ISG and IFN-β induction and provide a
rationale for the novel pathogenesis and spread of ANDV.IMPORTANCE: Andes virus
(ANDV) is distinguished from other hantaviruses by its unique ability to spread
from person to person and cause lethal hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS)-like
disease in Syrian hamsters. However, virulence determinants that distinguish ANDV
from other pathogenic hantaviruses have yet to be defined. Here we reveal that
ANDV uniquely contains a virulence determinant within its nucleocapsid (N)
protein that potently inhibits innate cellular signaling pathways. This novel
function of the N protein provides a new mechanism for hantaviruses to regulate
interferon (IFN) and IFN-stimulated gene (ISG) induction that is likely to
contribute to the enhanced ability of ANDV to replicate, spread, and cause
disease. These findings differentiate ANDV from other HPS-causing hantaviruses
and provide a potential target for viral attenuation that needs to be considered 
in vaccine development.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01088-13 
PMCID: PMC3944819
PMID: 24549848  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

