
1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Feb 20;10(2):e1003944. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003944.
eCollection 2014 Feb.

Inactivation of the host lipin gene accelerates RNA virus replication through
viral exploitation of the expanded endoplasmic reticulum membrane.

Chuang C(1), Barajas D(1), Qin J(1), Nagy PD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky,
United States of America.

RNA viruses take advantage of cellular resources, such as membranes and lipids,
to assemble viral replicase complexes (VRCs) that drive viral replication. The
host lipins (phosphatidate phosphatases) are particularly interesting because
these proteins play key roles in cellular decisions about membrane biogenesis
versus lipid storage. Therefore, we examined the relationship between host lipins
and tombusviruses, based on yeast model host. We show that deletion of PAH1
(phosphatidic acid phosphohydrolase), which is the single yeast homolog of the
lipin gene family of phosphatidate phosphatases, whose inactivation is
responsible for proliferation and expansion of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
membrane, facilitates robust RNA virus replication in yeast. We document
increased tombusvirus replicase activity in pah1Δ yeast due to the efficient
assembly of VRCs. We show that the ER membranes generated in pah1Δ yeast is
efficiently subverted by this RNA virus, thus emphasizing the connection between 
host lipins and RNA viruses. Thus, instead of utilizing the peroxisomal membranes
as observed in wt yeast and plants, TBSV readily switches to the vastly expanded 
ER membranes in lipin-deficient cells to build VRCs and support increased level
of viral replication. Over-expression of the Arabidopsis Pah2p in Nicotiana
benthamiana decreased tombusvirus accumulation, validating that our findings are 
also relevant in a plant host. Over-expression of AtPah2p also inhibited the
ER-based replication of another plant RNA virus, suggesting that the role of
lipins in RNA virus replication might include several more eukaryotic viruses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003944 
PMCID: PMC3930575
PMID: 24586157  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

