
1. FASEB J. 2014 Jul;28(7):2828-39. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-246876. Epub 2014 Mar 18.

HIV protein Nef causes dyslipidemia and formation of foam cells in mouse models
of atherosclerosis.

Cui HL(1), Ditiatkovski M(1), Kesani R(1), Bobryshev YV(2), Liu Y(1), Geyer M(3),
Mukhamedova N(1), Bukrinsky M(4), Sviridov D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia;
(2)School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of New South
Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia;
(3)Center for Advanced European Studies and Research (CAESAR), Bonn, Germany;
and.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Tropical Medicine, George
Washington University, Washington, District of Columbia, USA.
(5)Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia;
dmitri.sviridov@bakeridi.edu.au.

Patients with HIV are at an increased risk of cardiovascular disease. In this
study we investigated the effect of Nef, a secreted HIV protein responsible for
the impairment of cholesterol efflux, on the development of atherosclerosis in
two animal models. ApoE(-/-) mice fed a high-fat diet and C57BL/6 mice fed a
high-fat, high-cholesterol diet were injected with recombinant Nef (40
ng/injection) or vehicle, and the effects of Nef on development of
atherosclerosis, inflammation, and dyslipidemia were assessed. In apoE(-/-) mice,
Nef significantly increased the size of atherosclerotic lesions and caused vessel
remodeling. Nef caused elevation of total cholesterol and triglyceride levels in 
the plasma while reducing high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels. These
changes were accompanied by a reduction of ABCA1 abundance in the liver, but not 
in the vessels. In C57BL/6 mice, Nef caused a significant number of lipid-laden
macrophages presented in adventitia of the vessels; these cells were absent from 
the vessels of control mice. Nef caused sharp elevations of plasma triglyceride
levels and body weight. Taken together, our findings suggest that Nef causes
dyslipidemia and accumulation of cholesterol in macrophages within the vessel
wall, supporting the role of Nef in pathogenesis of atherosclerosis in
HIV-infected patients.-Cui, H. L., Ditiatkovski, M., Kesani, R., Bobryshev, Y.
V., Liu, Y., Geyer, M., Mukhamedova, N., Bukrinsky, M., Sviridov, D. HIV protein 
Nef causes dyslipidemia and formation of foam cells in mouse models of
atherosclerosis.

© FASEB.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.13-246876 
PMCID: PMC4062825
PMID: 24642731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

