
1. J Med Case Rep. 2014 Apr 3;8:116. doi: 10.1186/1752-1947-8-116.

Acute appendicitis complicated by mass formation occurring simultaneously with
serologically proven dengue fever: a case report.

Senanayake MP(1), Samarasinghe M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Colombo, Kynsey
Road, Colombo, Sri Lanka. manouri.senanayake@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: Acute abdomen and acute appendicitis are unusual clinical
presentations that occur in dengue infection-caused illness. Lymphoid hyperplasia
and mesenteric adenitis are possible explanations, although vasculitis in the
pathology of dengue infection has not been reported. Authors of previous case
reports have described mimicking of acute appendicitis discovered upon surgical
treatment. Dengue virus has not been proven to cause acute appendicitis.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report a case of an 8-year-old Sinhalese boy who developed 
acute appendicitis during the acute phase of serologically confirmed dengue
fever. Although abdominal pain, vomiting and right-sided tenderness were present 
at the time of admission, a diagnosis of acute appendicitis was considered only
18 hours later, when abdominal guarding and a well-defined mass in the right
iliac fossa were detected clinically and ultrasonographically. Conservative
management with intravenous antibiotics was successful.
CONCLUSION: In areas where dengue is endemic, awareness of dengue viral infection
as a non-surgical cause of acute abdomen, as well as its ability to mimic acute
appendicitis, is important because unnecessary surgery-related morbidity can be
decreased. However, delaying or missing the diagnosis of acute appendicitis can
result in serious complications. This message is particularly relevant to
clinicians, especially pediatricians and surgeons, who encounter large numbers of
patients during dengue epidemics and run the risk of missing the diagnosis of
acute appendicitis. Likewise, delaying or missing the diagnosis of dengue
hemorrhagic fever can lead to dengue shock syndrome and even death. This case
highlights the need for careful evaluation of each patient who presents with
acute abdomen and dengue infection.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-1947-8-116 
PMCID: PMC4234973
PMID: 24708584 

