
1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2015;33(4):749-69. doi: 10.1080/07391102.2014.909744. Epub
2014 Apr 22.

How good are ensembles in improving QSAR models? The case with eCoRIA.

Khedkar VM(1), Joseph J, Pissurlenkar R, Saran A, Coutinho EC.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry , Bombay College of Pharmacy ,
Kalina, Santacruz (E), Mumbai 400098 , India.

A conceptually new idea in quantitative structure-activity relationships (QSAR)
which makes use of ensembles from molecular dynamics (MD) trajectories and
information retrieved from enzyme-inhibitor binding thermodynamics is presented
in this study. This new methodology, termed ensemble comparative residue
interaction analysis (eCoRIA), attempts to overcome the current one chemical-one 
structure-one parameter value dogma in computational chemistry by modeling the
biological activity as a function of molecular descriptors derived from an
ensemble of conformers of enzyme-inhibitor complexes. The approach is distinctly 
different from the standard QSAR methodology which uses a single low-energy
conformation or the properties averaged over a set of conformers to correlate
with the activity. Each conformational ensemble derived from MD simulations is
analyzed for the distribution of the non-bonded interaction energies (steric,
electrostatic, and hydrophobic) along with solvation, strain, and entropic energy
of the inhibitors with the individual amino acid residues in the receptor and
these are correlated to the activity through a QSAR model. The scope of the new
method is demonstrated with three diverse enzyme-inhibitor data-sets - glycogen
phosphorylase b, human immunodeficiency virus-1 protease and cyclin-dependent
kinase 2. The QSAR equations derived from the methodology have revealed all the
structure activity relationships previously reported for these classes of
molecules as well as uncovered some features that were hitherto unknown and may
have a hidden role in driving the ligand-receptor-binding process. Impressive
improvements in the predictions of affinity have been achieved compared to other 
QSAR formalisms namely CoMFA, CoMSIA (receptor-independent QSAR techniques), and 
CoRIA (a receptor-dependent QSAR technique). eCoRIA could provide an
understanding of the thermodynamic properties influencing the ligand-receptor
binding over a time scale as sampled by the MD simulation. The advantage of
analyzing enzyme-inhibitor interaction energies in a statistical domain is that
the noise due to inaccuracies in the potential energy functions can be reduced
and mechanistically important interaction terms related to protein-ligand binding
specificity can be identified which can assist the medicinal chemists in
designing new molecules and biologists in studying the influence of
position-specific mutations in the receptor on ligand binding.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2014.909744 
PMID: 24754910  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

