
1. Gut. 2015 Feb;64(2):292-302. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2014-306977. Epub 2014 Apr 24.

Higher proportion of viral basal core promoter mutant increases the risk of liver
cirrhosis in hepatitis B carriers.

Tseng TC(1), Liu CJ(2), Yang HC(3), Chen CL(4), Yang WT(5), Tsai CS(6), Kuo
SF(7), Verbree FC(8), Su TH(2), Wang CC(6), Liu CH(2), Chen PJ(2), Chen DS(9),
Kao JH(10).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Taipei Tzuchi
Hospital, The Buddhist Tzuchi Medical Foundation, Taipei, Taiwan School of
Medicine, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine,
National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Department of Microbiology, National Taiwan
University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Taiwan University College of
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Hepatitis Research Center, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan
Master of Public Health Degree Program, National Taiwan University, Taipei,
Taiwan.
(6)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Taipei Tzuchi
Hospital, The Buddhist Tzuchi Medical Foundation, Taipei, Taiwan.
(7)St Vincent's Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(8)Medisch centrum haaglanden, The Hague, The Netherlands.
(9)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine,
National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan Hepatitis Research
Center, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Genomics Research
Center, Academia Sinica, Taiwan.
(10)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, National
Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Graduate Institute of Clinical
Medicine, National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan
Hepatitis Research Center, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan
Department of Medical Research, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan.

Comment in
    Gut. 2015 Feb;64(2):191-3.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Precore (PC) variant (G1896A) and basal core promoter
(BCP) variant (A1762T/G1764A) of HBV are associated with risk of hepatocellular
carcinoma in HBV carriers. However, little is known about their impact on the
adverse outcomes of hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg)-negative hepatitis and liver
cirrhosis.
METHODS: 251 spontaneous HBeAg seroconverters who had genotype B or C infection
and received a long-term follow-up were enrolled. PC and BCP mutants were
determined qualitatively and quantitatively to correlate with these adverse
outcomes. The findings were validated by an independent case-control study, which
included 184 patients with biopsy-proven liver fibrosis stages.
RESULTS: In the longitudinal cohort study, BCP mutant and possibly PC wild type
were associated with cirrhosis development, but not HBeAg-negative hepatitis.
Multivariable analysis showed that only BCP mutant was an independent risk factor
for cirrhosis development. Using quantitative analysis of BCP mutant, a higher
proportion of BCP mutant, defined as a continuous variable, a dichotomous
variable or an ordinal variable, was associated with a higher risk of cirrhosis. 
If we chose 45% of BCP mutant as the cut-off, the risk of cirrhosis was higher in
patients with BCP mutant ≥45% compared to <45% in the longitudinal cohort; this
finding was validated by the case-control study (adjusted OR: 2.81, 95% CI 1.40
to 5.67).
CONCLUSIONS: A higher proportion of BCP mutant increases the risk of liver
cirrhosis development in HBV carriers with genotype B or C infection.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/gutjnl-2014-306977 
PMID: 24763132  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

