
1. PLoS One. 2014 May 19;9(5):e97698. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097698. eCollection
2014.

Tobacco smoking increases immune activation and impairs T-cell function in HIV
infected patients on antiretrovirals: a cross-sectional pilot study.

Valiathan R(1), Miguez MJ(2), Patel B(3), Arheart KL(4), Asthana D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Miami-Miller School of Medicine, Miami,
Florida, United States of America; Laboratory for Clinical and Biological
Studies, University of Miami-Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, United
States of America.
(2)School of Integrated Science and Humanities, Florida International University,
Miami, Florida, United States of America.
(3)Laboratory for Clinical and Biological Studies, University of Miami-Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, United States of America.
(4)Department of Public Health Sciences, Division of Biostatistics, University of
Miami-Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, United States of America.
(5)Department of Pathology, University of Miami-Miller School of Medicine, Miami,
Florida, United States of America; Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral
Science, University of Miami-Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, United
States of America; Laboratory for Clinical and Biological Studies, University of 
Miami-Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The influence of tobacco smoking on the immune system of HIV infected
individuals is largely unknown. We investigated the impact of tobacco smoking on 
immune activation, microbial translocation, immune exhaustion and T-cell function
in HIV infected individuals.
METHOD: HIV infected smokers and non-smokers (n = 25 each) with documented viral 
suppression on combination antiretroviral therapy and HIV uninfected smokers and 
non-smokers (n = 15 each) were enrolled. Markers of immune activation (CD38 and
HLA-DR) and immune exhaustion (PD1, Tim3 and CTLA4) were analyzed in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) by flow cytometry. Plasma markers of microbial
translocation (soluble-CD14 - sCD14 and lipopolysaccharide - LPS) were measured. 
Antigen specific functions of CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells were measured, by flow
cytometry, in PBMCs after 6 hours stimulation with Cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr 
virus and Influenza Virus (CEF) peptide pool.
RESULTS: Compared to non-smokers, smokers of HIV infected and uninfected groups
showed significantly higher CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell activation with increased
frequencies of CD38+HLA-DR+ cells with a higher magnitude in HIV infected
smokers. Expressions of immune exhaustion markers (PD1, Tim3 and CTLA4) either
alone or in combinations were significantly higher in smokers, especially on CD4+
T-cells. Compared to HIV uninfected non-smokers, microbial translocation (sCD14
and LPS) was higher in smokers of both groups and directly correlated with CD4+
and CD8+ T-cell activation. Antigen specific T-cell function showed significantly
lower cytokine response of CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells to CEF peptide-pool stimulation 
in smokers of both HIV infected and uninfected groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that smoking and HIV infection independently
influence T-cell immune activation and function and together they present the
worst immune profile. Since smoking is widespread among HIV infected individuals,
studies are warranted to further evaluate the cumulative effect of smoking on
impairment of the immune system and accelerated disease progression.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097698 
PMCID: PMC4026405
PMID: 24842313  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

