
1. Front Pediatr. 2014 Aug 19;2:85. doi: 10.3389/fped.2014.00085. eCollection 2014.

Rethinking Molecular Mimicry in Rheumatic Heart Disease and Autoimmune
Myocarditis: Laminin, Collagen IV, CAR, and B1AR as Initial Targets of Disease.

Root-Bernstein R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Michigan State University , East Lansing, MI , USA.

RATIONALE: Molecular mimicry theory (MMT) suggests that epitope mimicry between
pathogens and human proteins can activate autoimmune disease. Group A
streptococci (GAS) mimics human cardiac myosin in rheumatic heart disease (RHD)
and coxsackie viruses (CX) mimic actin in autoimmune myocarditis (AM). But myosin
and actin are immunologically inaccessible and unlikely initial targets.
Extracellular cardiac proteins that mimic GAS and CX would be more likely.
OBJECTIVES: To determine whether extracellular cardiac proteins such as coxsackie
and adenovirus receptor (CAR), beta 1 adrenergic receptor (B1AR), CD55/DAF,
laminin, and collagen IV mimic GAS, CX, and/or cardiac myosin or actin.
METHODS: BLAST 2.0 and LALIGN searches of the UniProt protein database were
employed to identify potential molecular mimics. Quantitative enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay was used to measure antibody cross-reactivity.
MEASUREMENTS: Similarities were considered to be significant if a sequence
contained at least 5 identical amino acids in 10. Antibodies were considered to
be cross-reactive if the binding constant had a K d less than 10(-9) M.
MAIN RESULTS: Group A streptococci mimics laminin, CAR, and myosin. CX mimics
actin and collagen IV and B1AR. The similarity search results are mirrored by
antibody cross-reactivities. Additionally, antibodies against laminin recognize
antibodies against collagen IV; antibodies against actin recognize antibodies
against myosin, and antibodies against GAS recognize antibodies against CX. Thus,
there is both mimicry of extracellular proteins and antigenic complementarity
between GAS-CX in RHD/AM.
CONCLUSION: Rheumatic heart disease/AM may be due to combined infections of GAS
with CX localized at cardiomyocytes that may produce a synergistic,
hyperinflammatory response that cross-reacts with laminin, collagen IV, CAR,
and/or B1AR. Epitope drift shifts the immune response to myosin and actin after
cardiomyocytes become damaged.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2014.00085 
PMCID: PMC4137453
PMID: 25191648 

