
1. Chin J Cancer. 2014 Nov;33(11):549-55. doi: 10.5732/cjc.014.10169. Epub 2014 Sep 
16.

Epstein-Barr virus infection and persistence in nasopharyngeal epithelial cells.

Tsang CM(1), Deng W, Yip YL, Zeng MS, Lo KW, Tsao SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China. gswtsao@hku.hk.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection is closely associated with undifferentiated
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), strongly implicating a role for EBV in NPC
pathogenesis; conversely, EBV infection is rarely detected in normal
nasopharyngeal epithelial tissues. In general, EBV does not show a strong tropism
for infecting human epithelial cells, and EBV infection in oropharyngeal
epithelial cells is believed to be lytic in nature. To establish life-long
infection in humans, EBV has evolved efficient strategies to infect B cells and
hijack their cellular machinery for latent infection. Lytic EBV infection in
oropharyngeal epithelial cells, though an infrequent event, is believed to be a
major source of infectious EBV particles for salivary transmission. The
biological events associated with nasopharyngeal epithelial cells are only
beginning to be understood with the advancement of EBV infection methods and the 
availability of nasopharyngeal epithelial cell models for EBV infection studies. 
EBV infection in human epithelial cells is a highly inefficient process compared 
to that in B cells, which express the complement receptor type 2 (CR2) to mediate
EBV infection. Although receptor(s) on the epithelial cell surface for EBV
infection remain(s) to be identified, EBV infection in epithelial cells could be 
achieved via the interaction of glycoproteins on the viral envelope with surface 
integrins on epithelial cells, which might trigger membrane fusion to internalize
EBV in cells. Normal nasopharyngeal epithelial cells are not permissive for
latent EBV infection, and EBV infection in normal nasopharyngeal epithelial cells
usually results in growth arrest. However, genetic alterations in premalignant
nasopharyngeal epithelial cells, including p16 deletion and cyclin D1
overexpression, could override the growth inhibitory effect of EBV infection to
support stable and latent EBV infection in nasopharyngeal epithelial cells. The
EBV episome in NPC is clonal in nature, suggesting that NPC develops from a
single EBV-infected nasopharyngeal epithelial cell, and the establishment of
persistent and latent EBV infection in premalignant nasopharyngeal epithelium may
represent an early and critical event for NPC development.

DOI: 10.5732/cjc.014.10169 
PMCID: PMC4244318
PMID: 25223910  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

