
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Apr 30;43(8):e50. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv031. Epub 2015 Jan 
21.

Ad 2.0: a novel recombineering platform for high-throughput generation of
tailored adenoviruses.

Mück-Häusl M(1), Solanki M(2), Zhang W(2), Ruzsics Z(3), Ehrhardt A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Max von Pettenkofer-Institute, Department of Virology,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany.
(2)Institute of Virology and Microbiology, Center for Biomedical Education and
Research (ZBAF), Department of Human Medicine, Faculty of Health, University of
Witten/Herdecke, Witten, Germany.
(3)Max von Pettenkofer-Institute, Department of Virology,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany Institute of Virology,
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Max von Pettenkofer-Institute, Department of Virology,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany Institute of Virology and
Microbiology, Center for Biomedical Education and Research (ZBAF), Department of 
Human Medicine, Faculty of Health, University of Witten/Herdecke, Witten, Germany
anja.ehrhardt@uni-wh.de.

Recombinant adenoviruses containing a double-stranded DNA genome of 26-45 kb were
broadly explored in basic virology, for vaccination purposes, for treatment of
tumors based on oncolytic virotherapy, or simply as a tool for efficient gene
transfer. However, the majority of recombinant adenoviral vectors (AdVs) is based
on a small fraction of adenovirus types and their genetic modification.
Recombineering techniques provide powerful tools for arbitrary engineering of
recombinant DNA. Here, we adopted a seamless recombineering technology for
high-throughput and arbitrary genetic engineering of recombinant adenoviral DNA
molecules. Our cloning platform which also includes a novel recombination
pipeline is based on bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs). It enables
generation of novel recombinant adenoviruses from different sources and switching
between commonly used early generation AdVs and the last generation high-capacity
AdVs lacking all viral coding sequences making them attractive candidates for
clinical use. In combination with a novel recombination pipeline allowing cloning
of AdVs containing large and complex transgenes and the possibility to generate
arbitrary chimeric capsid-modified adenoviruses, these techniques allow
generation of tailored AdVs with distinct features. Our technologies will pave
the way toward broader applications of AdVs in molecular medicine including gene 
therapy and vaccination studies.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkv031 
PMCID: PMC4417142
PMID: 25609697  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

