
1. Viral Immunol. 2015 May;28(4):229-35. doi: 10.1089/vim.2014.0138. Epub 2015 Feb
12.

Pathological evaluation of reproductive system of porcine reproductive and
respiratory syndrome virus-vaccinated and nonvaccinated anestrus sows and gilts.

Papatsiros V(1), Psalla D, Papaioannou D, Tassis P, Tzika E, Papaioannou N.

Author information: 
(1)1 Clinic of Medicine, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Thessaly ,
Karditsa, Greece .

The purpose of the study was to evaluate pathologically the reproductive system
of nonvaccinated and porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus
(PRRSV)-vaccinated sows/gilts, as well as the assessment of vaccination impact on
their endometrium/myometrium and ovaries. In a farrow-to-finish farm, all sows
and gilts were systematically vaccinated with a PRRSV-inactivated vaccine for a
period of 18 months. During the last semester before the beginning of the trial, 
the genital organs (uterus and ovaries) from 50 females (nonvaccinated
primiparous and multiparous sows that did not exhibit signs of estrus until 10
days post-weaning) were collected at the slaughterhouse for gross and microscopic
examination (parity 1 to >6). Respectively, during the following three semesters 
after the implementation of the experimental PRRSV vaccination scheme, the
genital organs from 75 vaccinated sows-25 samples taken along the period of each 
semester-were also collected. Gross examinations included measurements of uterine
horn (thickness and diameter) and ovaries (diameter). Microscopic examination
focused on histopathological examination of ovarian cysts or other cystic
formations and evaluation of the endometrium and myometrium. Measurements of
uterine horn's thickness/diameter and ovaries' diameter were at normal levels,
and no significant differences were found on gross examination between vaccinated
and nonvaccinated females. The results of histopathological examinations did not 
show lesions of endometritis or myometritis, but revealed ovarian cystic
formations with a diameter of >2 cm that were luteinizing cysts. The presence of 
these luteinizing cysts was significantly lower in PRRSV-vaccinated animals,
compared to nonvaccinated, three semesters (p=0.017) after the start of
vaccinations and for the total trial period (p=0.009).

DOI: 10.1089/vim.2014.0138 
PMID: 25675140  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

