
1. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2015 Feb 21;69:252-63. doi:
10.5604/17322693.1141100.

[HCMV infections after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation--diagnostic
methods and importance of viral DNA level monitoring].

[Article in Polish]

Bocian J(1), Januszkiewicz-Lewandowska D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Zakład Diagnostyki Medycznej w Poznaniu.
(2)Zakład Diagnostyki Medycznej w Poznaniu; Instytut Genetyki Człowieka PAN w
Poznaniu; Uniwersytet Medyczny im. K. Marcinkowskiego Klinika Onkologii
Hematologii i Transplantologii Pediatrycznej w Poznaniu.

HCMV infection is very common. The virus infects 30-90% of population. In
immunocompromised patients effective elimination of the virus by immune system is
limited by immunosuppressive therapy. Active hCMV infection after HSCT can lead
to severe posttransplant complications, graft failure or even death. In addition 
to direct effects of hCMV infection the virus can cause indirect effects in
transplant recipients such as increased immunosuppression or GvHD
development/progression. Laboratory diagnostic of hCMV infections after HSCT is
now routinely used. Fast and sensitive molecular methods that detect hCMV genetic
material are found particularly useful. Quantitative methods, such as R-T PCR,
enable identification of patients at high risk of developing hCMV disease and
fast employment of appropriate prophylaxis or treatment. Moreover it allows
precise monitoring of treatment efficiency and facilitates therapy - related
decisions. In last years pre-emptive therapy, which depends on viral load
molecular monitoring, significantly reduced morbidity and mortality of active
hCMV infections in HSCT recipients. Selective prophylaxis approach enables
reduction of patients treated with toxic antiviral therapy which is associated
with delayed restoration of virus - specific immune response. Occurrence of
symptomatic hCMV disease is still associated with high mortality among HSCT
recipients. HCMV infection diagnosis requires further development. Quantitative
methods should be unified and optimized.

DOI: 10.5604/17322693.1141100 
PMID: 25720612  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

