
1. Biologicals. 2015 Jul;43(4):238-41. doi: 10.1016/j.biologicals.2015.05.004. Epub 
2015 Jun 3.

Sewage as a rich source of phage study against Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO.

Azizian R(1), Nasser A(1), Askari H(1), Taheri Kalani M(2), Sadeghifard N(2),
Pakzad I(2), Amini R(3), Mozaffari Nejad AS(3), Azizi Jalilian F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Ilam University of
Medical Sciences, Ilam, Iran; Student Research Committee, Ilam University of
Medical Sciences, Ilam, Iran.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Ilam University of
Medical Sciences, Ilam, Iran; Clinical Microbiology Research Center, Ilam
University of Medical Sciences, Ilam, Iran.
(3)Research Center for Molecular Medicine, Department of Microbiology, School of 
Medicine, Hamadan University of Medical Sciences, Hamadan, Iran.
(4)Research Center for Molecular Medicine, Department of Microbiology, School of 
Medicine, Hamadan University of Medical Sciences, Hamadan, Iran. Electronic
address: azizijalilian@yahoo.com.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a ubiquitous organism which has emerged as a major
public health threat in hospital environments. Overuse of antibiotics has
significantly exacerbated the emergence of multi-drug resistant bacteria such as 
P. aeruginosa. Phages are currently being utilized successfully for aquaculture, 
agriculture and veterinary applications. The aim of this study was to isolate and
characterize of lytic P. aeruginosa phage from sewage of Ilam, Iran. Phage was
isolated from sewage that was added to the enrichment along with the host and
subsequently filtered. Plaque assay was done by using an overlay method (also
called the double agar layer method). Purified plaques were then amplified for
characterization. Finally, RAPD-PCR method was conducted for genotyping and
Transition electron micrograph (TEM) recruited to determine the morphology and
phage family. The phage had high concentration and tremendous effects against a
variety of clinical and general laboratory strains (ATCC15693) of P. aeruginosa. 
Among a set of primers in RAPD panel, only P2 and RAPD5 primers, were useful in
differentiating the phages. TEM images revealed that the isolated phages were
members of the Siphoviridae family. The phage effectiveness and specificity
towards target bacteria and potential to control biofilm formations will be
investigate in our further studies.

Copyright © 2015 The International Alliance for Biological Standardization.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biologicals.2015.05.004 
PMID: 26049814  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

