
1. J Environ Manage. 2015 Aug 15;159:58-67. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2015.05.019. Epub
2015 Jun 2.

Evidence of viral dissemination and seasonality in a Mediterranean river
catchment: Implications for water pollution management.

Rusiñol M(1), Fernandez-Cassi X(1), Timoneda N(2), Carratalà A(1), Abril JF(3),
Silvera C(4), Figueras MJ(4), Gelati E(5), Rodó X(5), Kay D(6), Wyn-Jones P(6),
Bofill-Mas S(1), Girones R(7).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virus Contaminants of Water and Food, Department of
Microbiology, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(2)Laboratory of Virus Contaminants of Water and Food, Department of
Microbiology, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain; Institute of 
Biomedicine of the University of Barcelona (IBUB), University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(3)Institute of Biomedicine of the University of Barcelona (IBUB), University of 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain; Computational Genomics Laboratory,
Department of Genetics, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(4)Microbiology Unit, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, IISPV, University 
Rovira and Virgili, Reus, Catalonia, Spain.
(5)Catalan Institute of Climate Sciences (IC3), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(6)Institute of Geography and Earth Sciences (IGES), Aberystwyth University,
Aberystwyth, United Kingdom.
(7)Laboratory of Virus Contaminants of Water and Food, Department of
Microbiology, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain. Electronic
address: rgirones@ub.edu.

Erratum in
    J Environ Manage. 2018 Oct 1;223:1100.

Conventional wastewater treatment does not completely remove and/or inactive
viruses; consequently, viruses excreted by the population can be detected in the 
environment. This study was undertaken to investigate the distribution and
seasonality of human viruses and faecal indicator bacteria (FIB) in a river
catchment located in a typical Mediterranean climate region and to discuss future
trends in relation to climate change. Sample matrices included river water,
untreated and treated wastewater from a wastewater treatment plant within the
catchment area, and seawater from potentially impacted bathing water. Five
viruses were analysed in the study. Human adenovirus (HAdV) and JC polyomavirus
(JCPyV) were analysed as indicators of human faecal contamination of human
pathogens; both were reported in urban wastewater (mean values of 10(6) and 10(5)
GC/L, respectively), river water (10(3) and 10(2) GC/L) and seawater (10(2) and
10(1) GC/L). Human Merkel Cell polyomavirus (MCPyV), which is associated with
Merkel Cell carcinoma, was detected in 75% of the raw wastewater samples (31/37) 
and quantified by a newly developed quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR)
assay with mean concentrations of 10(4) GC/L. This virus is related to skin
cancer in susceptible individuals and was found in 29% and 18% of river water and
seawater samples, respectively. Seasonality was only observed for norovirus
genogroup II (NoV GGII), which was more abundant in cold months with levels up to
10(4) GC/L in river water. Human hepatitis E virus (HEV) was detected in 13.5% of
the wastewater samples when analysed by nested PCR (nPCR). Secondary biological
treatment (i.e., activated sludge) and tertiary sewage disinfection including
chlorination, flocculation and UV radiation removed between 2.22 and 4.52 log10
of the viral concentrations. Climate projections for the Mediterranean climate
areas and the selected river catchment estimate general warming and changes in
precipitation distribution. Persistent decreases in precipitation during summer
can lead to a higher presence of human viruses because river and sea water
present the highest viral concentrations during warmer months. In a global
context, wastewater management will be the key to preventing environmental
dispersion of human faecal pathogens in future climate change scenarios.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2015.05.019 
PMID: 26046988  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

