
1. J Clin Immunol. 2015 Jul;35(5):435-8. doi: 10.1007/s10875-015-0171-3. Epub 2015
Jun 7.

Disseminated Mycobacterium kansasii disease in complete DiGeorge syndrome.

Yin SM(1), Ferdman RM, Wang L, Markert ML, Tam JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Pediatrics, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, University 
of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90027, USA, syin@chla.usc.edu.

PURPOSE: Complete DiGeorge syndrome (cDGS) describes a subset of patients with
DiGeorge syndrome that have thymic aplasia, and thus are at risk for severe
opportunistic infections. Patients with cDGS and mycobacterial infection have not
previously been described. We present this case to illustrate that patients with 
cDGS are at risk for nontuberculous mycobacterial infections and to discuss
further antimicrobial prophylaxis prior to thymic transplantation.
METHODS: A 13-month old male was identified as T cell deficient by the T cell
receptor excision circle (TREC) assay on newborn screening, and was subsequently 
confirmed to have cDGS. He presented with fever and cough, and was treated for
chronic aspiration pneumonia as well as Pneumocystis jirovecii infection without 
significant improvement. It was only after biopsy of mediastinal lymph nodes seen
on CT that the diagnosis of disseminated Mycobacterium kansasii was made. We
reviewed the literature regarding atypical mycobacterial infections and
prophylaxis used in other immunocompromised patients, as well as the current data
regarding cDGS detection through TREC newborn screening.
RESULTS: Multiple cases of cDGS have been diagnosed via TREC newborn screening,
however this is the first patient with cDGS and disseminated mycobacterial
infection to be reported in literature. Thymic transplantation is the definitive 
treatment of choice for cDGS. Prophylaxis with either clarithromycin or
azithromycin has been shown to reduce mycobacterial infections in children with
advanced human immunodeficiency virus infection.
CONCLUSIONS: Children with cDGS should receive thymic transplantion as soon as
possible, but prior to this are at risk for nontuberculous mycobacterial
infections. Severe, opportunistic infections may require invasive testing for
diagnosis in patients with cDGS. Antimicrobial prophylaxis should be considered
to prevent disseminated mycobacterial infection in these patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-015-0171-3 
PMID: 26048260  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

