
1. Commun Dis Intell Q Rep. 2015 Mar 31;39(1):E34-41.

Norovirus genotype diversity associated with gastroenteritis outbreaks in
Victoria in 2013.

Bruggink LD(1), Dunbar NL(2), Catton MG(3), Marshall JA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Senior Scientist, Gastroenteritis Section, Victorian Infectious Diseases
Reference Laboratory, Melbourne, Victoria.
(2)Scientist, Gastroenteritis Section, Victorian Infectious Diseases Reference
Laboratory, Melbourne, Victoria.
(3)Director, Victorian Infectious Diseases Reference Laboratory, Melbourne,
Victoria.
(4)Head, Viral Gastroenteritis Section, Victorian Infectious Diseases Reference
Laboratory, Melbourne, Victoria.

The noroviruses are now considered a leading cause of outbreaks of non-bacterial 
gastroenteritis worldwide. Vaccine strategies against norovirus are currently
under consideration but depend on a detailed knowledge of the capsid genotypes.
This study examined the incidence of norovirus outbreaks in Victoria over 1 year 
(2013) and documented the genotypes occurring in the different outbreak settings 
(healthcare and non-healthcare) and age groups. It was found that 63.1% of
gastroenteritis outbreaks were associated with norovirus, thereby showing
norovirus to be the major viral cause of illness in gastroenteritis outbreaks.
Sixteen capsid genotypes were identified and included GI.2, GI.3, GI.4, GI.6,
GI.7, GI.8, GI.9, GII.1, GII.2, GII.3, GII.4, GII.5, GII.6, GII.7, GII.13 and an 
as yet unclassified GII genotype. All genotypes found in the study, with the
exception of GI.9, were detected in the elderly, indicating prior exposure to a
norovirus genotype did not appear to confer long term immunity in many cases. The
incidence of genotypes GII.1, GII.4 and GII.7 was linked with setting and age. As
setting and age were correlated it was not possible to determine which variable
was critical with the exception of GII.7, which appeared to be linked to age. The
findings indicate that norovirus vaccine strategies should encompass a broad
range of genotypes and, as setting or age may be important in determining
genotype incidence, this should be taken into account as well.

This work is copyright. You may download, display, print and reproduce the whole 
or part of this work in unaltered form for your own personal use or, if you are
part of an organisation, for internal use within your organisation, but only if
you or your organisation do not use the reproduction for any commercial purpose
and retain this copyright notice and all disclaimer notices as part of that
reproduction. Apart from rights to use as permitted by the Copyright Act 1968 or 
allowed by this copyright notice, all other rights are reserved and you are not
allowed to reproduce the whole or any part of this work in any way (electronic or
otherwise) without first being given the specific written permission from the
Commonwealth to do so. Requests and inquiries concerning reproduction and rights 
are to be sent to the Online, Services and External Relations Branch, Department 
of Health, GPO Box 9848, Canberra ACT 2601, or by email to
copyright@health.gov.au.


PMID: 26063096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

