
1. Oncol Rep. 2015 Aug;34(2):633-8. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4058. Epub 2015 Jun 12.

Combinatorial anti-angiogenic gene therapy in a human malignant mesothelioma
model.

Kubo S(1), Takagi-Kimura M(1), Kasahara N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya, Hyogo, Japan.
(2)Departments of Cell Biology and Pathology, University of Miami, Miami, FL,
USA.

Anti-angiogenic gene therapy represents a promising strategy for cancer; however,
it has rarely been tested in malignant mesothelioma, a highly aggressive tumor
associated with asbestos with poor prognosis. In the present study, we
investigated whether anti-angiogenic factors such as angiostatin, endostatin and 
the soluble form of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (sFlk1) were
able to inhibit endothelial cell proliferation via lentivirus-mediated gene
transfer into malignant mesothelioma cells in culture. We also assessed whether a
dual-agent strategy had greater therapeutic benefit. Human malignant pleural
mesothelioma MSTO-211H cells were transduced using lentiviral vectors that
individually expressed angiostatin, endostatin and sFlk1 and linked to enhanced
green fluorescent protein (EGFP) marker gene expression via an internal ribosome 
entry site. The lentivirus expressing EGFP alone was used as a control. The
resultant cells designated as MSTO-A, MSTO-E, MSTO-F and MSTO-C were confirmed by
western blot analysis and fluorescence microscopy to stably express the
corresponding proteins. No differences were observed in the in vitro growth rates
between any of these cells. However, co-culture of MSTO-A, MSTO-E and MSTO-F
showed significant suppression of human umbilical endothelial cell growth in
vitro compared with that of MSTO-C. Furthermore, a combination of any two among
MSTO-A, MSTO-E and MSTO-F significantly enhanced efficacy. These results suggest 
that combinatorial anti-angiogenic gene therapy targeting different pathways of
endothelial growth factor signaling has the potential for greater therapeutic
efficacy than that of a single-agent regimen.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2015.4058 
PMID: 26082103  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

