
1. Oncogene. 2016 Apr 7;35(14):1797-810. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.245. Epub 2015 Jun
29.

Immunomodulatory drugs target IKZF1-IRF4-MYC axis in primary effusion lymphoma in
a cereblon-dependent manner and display synergistic cytotoxicity with BRD4
inhibitors.

Gopalakrishnan R(1), Matta H(1), Tolani B(1), Triche T Jr(1), Chaudhary PM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Jane Anne Nohl Division of Hematology and Center for the Study of Blood
Diseases, Department of Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of
Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Primary effusion lymphoma (PEL) is an aggressive type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma
localized predominantly in body cavities. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpes
virus (KSHV) is the causative agent of PEL. PEL is an incurable malignancy and
has extremely poor prognosis when treated with conventional chemotherapy.
Immunomodulatory drugs (IMiDs) lenalidomide and pomalidomide are Food and Drug
Administration-approved drugs for the treatment of various ailments. IMiDs
display pronounced antiproliferative effect against majority of PEL cell lines
within their clinically achievable concentrations, by arresting cells at G0/G1
phase of cell cycle and without any induction of KSHV lytic cycle reactivation.
Although microarray examination of PEL cells treated with lenalidomide revealed
activation of interferon (IFN) signaling, blocking the IFN pathway did not block 
the anti-PEL activity of IMiDs. The anti-PEL effects of IMiDs involved
cereblon-dependent suppression of IRF4 and rapid degradation of IKZF1, but not
IKZF3. Small hairpin RNA-mediated knockdown of MYC enhanced the cytotoxicity of
IMiDs. Bromodomain (BRD) and extra-terminal domain (BET) proteins are epigenetic 
readers, which perform a vital role in chromatin remodeling and transcriptional
regulation. BRD4, a widely expressed transcriptional coactivator, belongs to the 
BET family of proteins, which has been shown to co-occupy the super enhancers
associated with MYC. Specific BRD4 inhibitors were developed, which suppress MYC 
transcriptionally. Lenalidomide displayed synergistic cytotoxicity with several
structurally distinct BRD4 inhibitors (JQ-1, IBET151 and PFI-1). Furthermore,
combined administration of lenalidomide and BRD4 inhibitor JQ-1 significantly
increased the survival of PEL bearing NOD-SCID mice in an orthotopic xenograft
model as compared with either agent alone. These results provide compelling
evidence for clinical testing of IMiDs alone and in combination with BRD4
inhibitors for PEL.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2015.245 
PMCID: PMC4486341
PMID: 26119939  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

