
1. World J Hepatol. 2015 Jun 28;7(12):1718-22. doi: 10.4254/wjh.v7.i12.1718.

Severe immune thrombocytopenia after peg-interferon-alpha2a, ribavirin and
telaprevir treatment completion: A case report and systematic review of
literature.

Arena R(1), Cecinato P(1), Lisotti A(1), Buonfiglioli F(1), Calvanese C(1),
Grande G(1), Montagnani M(1), Azzaroli F(1), Mazzella G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Rosario Arena, Paolo Cecinato, Andrea Lisotti, Federica Buonfiglioli, Claudio 
Calvanese, Giuseppe Grande, Marco Montagnani, Francesco Azzaroli, Giuseppe
Mazzella, Department of Medical and Surgical Science - DIMEC, University of
Bologna, S.Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, 40138 Bologna, Italy.

Mild to moderate autoimmune thrombocytopenia (AITP) is a common finding in
patients receiving interferon-based antiviral treatment, due to bone marrow
suppression. Here we report the case of a patient with chronic genotype 1b
hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection treated with pegylated-interferon alpha-2a,
ribavirin and telaprevir for 24 wk; the patient developed severe AITP three weeks
after treatment withdrawal. We performed a systematic literature search in order 
to review all published cases of AITP related to HCV antiviral treatment. To our 
knowledge, this is the second case of AITP observed after antiviral treatment
withdrawal. In most published cases AITP occurred during treatment; in fact,
among 24 cases of AITP related to interferon-based antiviral treatment, only one 
occurred after discontinuation. Early diagnosis of AITP is a key factor in order 
to achieve an early interferon discontinuation; in the era of new direct
antiviral agents those patients have to be considered for interferon-free
treatment regimens. Prompt prescription of immuno-suppressant treatment (i.e.,
corticosteroids, immunoglobulin infusion and even rituximab for unresponsive
cases) leads to favourable prognosis in most of cases. Physicians using
interferon-based treatments should be aware that AITP can occur both during and
after treatment, specially in the new era of interferon-free antiviral treatment.
Finally, in the case of suspected AITP, presence of anti-platelet antibodies
should be checked not only during treatment but also after discontinuation.

DOI: 10.4254/wjh.v7.i12.1718 
PMCID: PMC4483554
PMID: 26140092 

