
1. Rev Med Virol. 2015 Sep;25(5):300-19. doi: 10.1002/rmv.1848. Epub 2015 Jul 23.

Innate immune response during herpes simplex virus encephalitis and development
of immunomodulatory strategies.

Piret J(1), Boivin G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center in Infectious Diseases, CHU de Québec and Laval University,
Quebec City, Quebec, Canada.

Herpes simplex viruses are large double-stranded DNA viruses. These viruses have 
the ability to establish a lifelong latency in sensory ganglia and to invade and 
replicate in the CNS. Apart from relatively benign mucosal infections, HSV is
responsible for severe illnesses including HSV encephalitis (HSE). HSE is the
most common cause of sporadic, potentially fatal viral encephalitis in Western
countries. If left untreated, the mortality rate associated with HSE is
approximately 70%. Despite antiviral therapy, the mortality is still higher than 
30%, and almost 60% of surviving individuals develop neurological sequelae. It is
suggested that direct virus-related and indirect immune-mediated mechanisms
contribute to the damages occurring in the CNS during HSE. In this manuscript, we
describe the innate immune response to HSV, the development of HSE in mice
knock-out for proteins of the innate immune system as well as inherited
deficiencies in key components of the signaling pathways involved in the
production of type I interferon that could predispose individuals to develop HSE.
Finally, we review several immunomodulatory strategies aimed at modulating the
innate immune response at a critical time after infection that were evaluated in 
mouse models and could be combined with antiviral therapy to improve the
prognosis of HSE. In conclusion, the cerebral innate immune response that
develops during HSE is a "double-edged sword" as it is critical to control viral 
replication in the brain early after infection, but, if left uncontrolled, may
also result in an exaggerated inflammatory response that could be detrimental to 
the host.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/rmv.1848 
PMID: 26205506  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

