
1. World J Virol. 2015 Aug 12;4(3):209-18. doi: 10.5501/wjv.v4.i3.209.

Non-AIDS definings malignancies among human immunodeficiency virus-positive
subjects: Epidemiology and outcome after two decades of HAART era.

Brugnaro P(1), Morelli E(1), Cattelan F(1), Petrucci A(1), Panese S(1), Eseme
F(1), Cavinato F(1), Barelli A(1), Raise E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pierluigi Brugnaro, Erika Morelli, Francesca Cattelan, Andrea Petrucci, Sandro
Panese, Franklyn Eseme, Francesca Cavinato, Andrea Barelli, Enzo Raise,
Infectious Diseases Department, Civil Hospital "SS.Giovanni e Paolo", 6776-30122 
Venice, Italy.

Highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) for human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) infection has been widely available in industrialized countries since 1996;
its widespread use determined a dramatic decline in acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS)-related mortality, and consequently, a significant decrease of
AIDS-defining cancers. However the increased mean age of HIV-infected patients,
prolonged exposure to environmental and lifestyle cancer risk factors, and
coinfection with oncogenic viruses contributed to the emergence of other
malignancies that are considered non-AIDS-defining cancers (NADCs) as a relevant 
fraction of morbidity and mortality among HIV-infected people twenty years after 
HAART introduction. The role of immunosuppression in the pathogenesis of NADCs is
not well defined, and future researches should investigate the etiology of NADCs.
In the last years there is a growing evidence that intensive chemotherapy
regimens and radiotherapy could be safely administrated to HIV-positive patients 
while continuing HAART. This requires a multidisciplinary approach and a close
co-operation of oncologists and HIV-physicians in order to best manage compliance
of patients to treatment and to face drug-related side effects. Here we review
the main epidemiological features, risk factors and clinical behavior of the more
common NADCs, such as lung cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma, colorectal cancer
and anal cancer, Hodgkin's lymphoma and some cutaneous malignancies, focusing
also on the current therapeutic approaches and preventive screening strategies.

DOI: 10.5501/wjv.v4.i3.209 
PMCID: PMC4534813
PMID: 26279983 

