
1. Int J Equity Health. 2015 Oct 5;14:88. doi: 10.1186/s12939-015-0223-6.

Influence of social experiences in shaping perceptions of the Ebola virus among
African residents of Hong Kong during the 2014 outbreak: a qualitative study.

Siu JY(1).

Author information: 
(1)David C. Lam Institute for East-West Studies (Environment, Health, and
Sustainability working group), Hong Kong Baptist University, Kowloon Tong, Hong
Kong. judysiu@hkbu.edu.hk.

INTRODUCTION: The outbreak of Ebola virus disease (EVD) in Africa in 2014
attracted worldwide attention. Because of the high mortality rate, marginalised
social groups are vulnerable to disease-associated stigmatisation and
discrimination, according to the literature. In Hong Kong, ethnic minorities such
as Africans are often disadvantaged groups because of their low position in the
social hierarchy. In 2011, approximately 1700 Africans were residing in Hong
Kong. Their overseas experiences during the EVD outbreak were not well
documented. Therefore, this study investigated the EVD-associated stigmatisation 
experiences of African residents of Hong Kong with chronic illnesses, and how
these experiences shaped their perceptions of EVD.
METHODS: A qualitative design with 30 in-depth semistructured interviews was
conducted with chronically ill African residents of Hong Kong.
RESULTS: The interview data showed that the sampled Africans often experienced
stigmatisation in their workplaces and in the community during the EVD outbreak. 
Their experiences of EVD-associated stigma were correlated to the embedded social
and cultural values regarding ethnic minorities in Hong Kong. These experiences
of being stigmatised shaped the perceptions of the Africans of EVD, leading them 
to view EVD as shameful and horrifying. They also perceived EVD as retribution
and was introduced by Westerners. The participants' perceptions of EVD influenced
their responses to and behaviour towards EVD, which may have posed potential
threats to Hong Kong's public health.
CONCLUSIONS: The EVD outbreak was not the only cause of the participants'
stigmatisation; rather, their EVD-associated experiences were a continuation and 
manifestation of the embedded social and cultural values regarding ethnic
minorities in Hong Kong. The experiences of being stigmatised shaped the
participants' perceptions of EVD. Because of their marginalised social position
and isolation from the main community, the participants had extremely limited
access to reliable information about EVD. As a result, they used their own
cultural beliefs to understand EVD, which might have ultimately influenced their 
health behaviours. The experiences of the participants showed that ethnic
minorities in Hong Kong were in need of more culturally responsive social and
health care support to obtain reliable information about the nature of and
preventive measures against EVD.

DOI: 10.1186/s12939-015-0223-6 
PMCID: PMC4595049
PMID: 26437961  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

