
1. Curr Protein Pept Sci. 2016;17(2):183-90.

Characterization of a Bacteriophage-Derived Murein Peptidase for Elimination of
Antibiotic-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus.

Keary R, Sanz-Gaitero M, van Raaij MJ, O'Mahony J, Fenton M, McAuliffe O, Hill C,
Ross RP, Coffey A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Research in Advanced Therapeutic Engineering, Cork Institute of
Technology, Bishopstown, Cork, Ireland. aidan.coffey@cit.ie.

Staphylococcus aureus is a major cause of infection in humans and animals,
causing a wide variety of diseases, from local inflammations to fatal sepsis. The
bacterium is commonly multi-drug resistant and thus many front-line antibiotics
have been rendered ineffective for treating such infections. Research on
murein/peptidoglycan hydrolases, derived from bacterial viruses (bacteriophages),
has demonstrated that such proteins are attractive candidates for development as 
novel antibacterial agents for combatting Gram-positive pathogens. Here we review
the research produced to-date on the bacteriophage-derived CHAPK murein
peptidase. Initially, we sequenced and annotated the genome of
anti-staphylococcal bacteriophage K and cloned the gene for the bacteriophage
endolysin, a murein hydrolase which plays a role in cell killing during the
bacteriophage life cycle. An highly active domain of the enzyme, a cysteine,
histidine-dependent amido hydrolase/peptidase (CHAPK), was cloned, overexpressed 
in E. coli and purified. This CHAPK enzyme was demonstrated to rapidly lyse
several strains of methicillin resistant S. aureus and both disrupted and
prevented the formation of a staphylococcal biofilm. The staphylolytic activity
of the peptidase was demonstrated in vivo using a mouse model, without adverse
effects on the animals. The crystal structure of the enzyme was elucidated,
revealing a calcium ion close to the active site. Site-directed mutagenesis
indicated that this calcium ion is involved in the catalytic mechanism of the
enzyme. The crystal structure of this enzyme is a valuable source of information 
for efficient engineering of this and similar CHAP-domain-containing proteins.
Overall, the data collected to date on CHAPK has demonstrated its strong
potential as a novel therapeutic candidate for treatment of staphylococcal
infections and has provided us with insight into the fundamental enzymatic
mechanisms of CHAP domain-containing peptidoglycan hydrolases.

DOI: 10.2174/1389203716666151102105515 
PMID: 26521950  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

