
1. Prog Clin Biol Res. 1989;288:203-13.

Host endocrine responses during tumor growth.

Besedovsky H(1), del Rey A, Normann SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Schweizerisches Forschungsinstitut, Medizinische Abteilung, Davos,
Switzerland.

Transplantation of the EL-4 lymphoma to syngeneic recipients caused significant
endocrine changes which occurred very early as well as late after
transplantation. Among the hormonal changes induced were a biphasic increase in
the level of serum corticosterone, a biphasic decrease in serum insulin levels,
an early decrease in prolactin and a terminal severe deficiency in thyroxine. The
mechanism by which corticosterone levels are increased immediately following
tumor transplantation appears to involve post-thymic T cells. In addition, the
corticosterone response after tumor transplantation seems to be restricted to
syngeneic recipients and does not seem to occur with allogeneic tumor
transplantation. Further, the phenomenon may require an immunogenic tumor since
the relatively nonimmunogenic mammary tumor virus (MTV) induced adenocarcinoma
did not increase corticosterone in syngeneic C3H/He mice. Such data are
consistent with the proposition that recognition of tumor antigen by mature T
cells occurs within hours of tumor transplantation. This recognition appears to
be MHC restricted. Whereas mitogen stimulation of T cells produces a
glucocorticoid increasing factor designated GIF (Besedovsky et al., 1985b), it is
reasonable to suggest that GIF is produced in vivo as part of the T cell response
to tumor antigen. GIF in turn stimulates hypophyseal release of ACTH with a
subsequent release of corticosterone from the adrenal gland. The biological
relevance of this physiological increase in serum levels of corticosterone was
examined with respect to the anti-inflammatory phenomenon often observed after
tumor transplantation. First, a concordance was noted following tumor
transplantation between elevated corticosterone levels and anti-inflammation.
Similarly, transplantation of the MTV induced mammary adenocarcinoma which failed
to increase serum levels of corticosterone did not exhibit anti-inflammation.
Consistent with the concept that corticosterone levels increase following T cell 
recognition of tumor antigens, it is known that anti-inflammation does not occur 
with weakly immunogenic tumors but does follow transplantation of moderately
immunogenic tumors (Normann, 1985b; Normann et al., 1985a). Second, adrenalectomy
prevented the corticosterone response to tumor transplantation and eliminated
tumor associated anti-inflammation. Additional studies are necessary to determine
if the increase in serum levels of corticosterone alters other parameters of the 
host response to tumors. Anti-inflammation was shown to occur following tumor
transplantation via a corticosterone dependent pathway.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400
WORDS)


PMID: 2654951  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

