
1. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Dec 3;11(12):e1005270. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005270.
eCollection 2015 Dec.

PD-L1 Blockade Differentially Impacts Regulatory T Cells from HIV-Infected
Individuals Depending on Plasma Viremia.

Peligero C(1), Argilaguet J(1), Güerri-Fernandez R(2), Torres B(3), Ligero C(3), 
Colomer P(2), Plana M(4), Knobel H(2), García F(3), Meyerhans A(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Infection Biology Laboratory, Department of Experimental and Health Sciences, 
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Infectious Diseases Unit, Hospital del Mar, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Infectious Diseases Unit, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Retrovirology and Viral Immunopathology Laboratory, AIDS Research Group,
IDIBAPS, Hospital Clínic, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain.

Blocking the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway has emerged as a potential therapy to restore
impaired immune responses in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected
individuals. Most reports have studied the impact of the PD-L1 blockade on
effector cells and neglected possible effects on regulatory T cells (Treg cells),
which play an essential role in balancing immunopathology and antiviral effector 
responses. The aim of this study was to define the consequences of ex vivo PD-L1 
blockade on Treg cells from HIV-infected individuals. We observed that HIV
infection led to an increase in PD-1+ and PD-L1+ Treg cells. This upregulation
correlated with disease progression and decreased under antiretroviral treatment.
Treg cells from viremic individuals had a particularly high PD-1 expression and
impaired proliferative capacity in comparison with Treg cells from individuals
under antiretroviral treatment. PD-L1 blockade restored the proliferative
capacity of Treg cells from viremic individuals but had no effect on its
suppressive capacity. Moreover, it increased the viral production in cell
cultures from viremic individuals. This increase in viral production correlated
with an increase in Treg cell percentage and a reduction in the CD4/Treg and
CD8/Treg cell ratios. In contrast to the effect of the PD-L1 blockade on Treg
cells from viremic individuals, we did not observe a significant effect on the
proliferative capacity of Treg cells from individuals in whom viremia was
controlled (either spontaneously or by antiretroviral treatment). However, PD-L1 
blockade resulted in an increased proliferative capacity of HIV-specific-CD8 T
cells in all subjects. Taken together, our findings suggest that manipulating
PD-L1 in vivo can be expected to influence the net gain of effector function
depending on the subject's plasma viremia.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005270 
PMCID: PMC4669187
PMID: 26633181  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

