
1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2016 Apr 1;595:88-93. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2015.11.029.

Thiol redox barrier; local and systemic surveillance against stress and
inflammatory diseases.

Yodoi J(1), Tian H(2), Masutani H(3), Nakamura H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Response, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan; Japan Biostress Research Promotion Alliance (JBPA),
Japan. Electronic address: yodoi@skyblue.ocn.ne.jp.
(2)Japan Biostress Research Promotion Alliance (JBPA), Japan.
(3)Department of Biological Response, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan.

A 12-kDa protein with redox-active dithiol in the active site -Cys-Gly-Pro-Cys-, 
human thioredoxin 1 (TRX) has demonstrated an excellent anti-inflammatory effect 
in various animal models. TRX is induced by various oxidative stress factors,
including ultraviolet rays, radiation, oxidation, viral infections, ischemia
reperfusion and anticancer agents, and are involved in the pathogenesis and
progression of various diseases. We have demonstrated that systemic
administration and transgenic overexpression of TRX is effective in a wide
variety of in vivo inflammatory disease models, such as viral pneumonia, acute
lung injury, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, indomethacin-induced gastric 
injury, and dermatitis. Our recent studies indicate that topically applied TRX
prevents skin inflammation via the inhibition of local formation of inflammatory 
cytokines and chemokines. These indicate that the activation of inflammasome in
skin and mucosa may be regulated by TRX. These suggest that application of TRX
may be useful for the treatment of various skin and mucosal inflammatory
disorders. Based on these results, we are conducting clinical studies to develop 
human recombinant thioredoxin 1 (rhTRX) pharmaceuticals. We have also developed
substances that increase the expression of TRX in the body (TRX-inducing
substances) in vegetables and other plant ingredients, and we are also developing
skin-care products and functional foods that take advantage of the
anti-inflammation and anti-allergic action of TRX.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.abb.2015.11.029 
PMID: 27095222  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

