
1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Jun 9;7:822. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00822. eCollection
2016.

HoloVir: A Workflow for Investigating the Diversity and Function of Viruses in
Invertebrate Holobionts.

Laffy PW(1), Wood-Charlson EM(2), Turaev D(3), Weynberg KD(1), Botté ES(1), van
Oppen MJ(4), Webster NS(1), Rattei T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Australian Institute of Marine Science Townsville, QLD, Australia.
(2)Center for Microbial Oceanography: Research and Education, University of
Hawai'i at Mānoa Honolulu, HI, USA.
(3)Division of Computational Systems Biology, Department of Microbiology and
Ecosystem Science, University of Vienna Vienna, Austria.
(4)Australian Institute of Marine ScienceTownsville, QLD, Australia; School of
Biosciences, University of MelbourneMelbourne, VIC, Australia.

Abundant bioinformatics resources are available for the study of complex
microbial metagenomes, however their utility in viral metagenomics is limited.
HoloVir is a robust and flexible data analysis pipeline that provides an
optimized and validated workflow for taxonomic and functional characterization of
viral metagenomes derived from invertebrate holobionts. Simulated viral
metagenomes comprising varying levels of viral diversity and abundance were used 
to determine the optimal assembly and gene prediction strategy, and multiple
sequence assembly methods and gene prediction tools were tested in order to
optimize our analysis workflow. HoloVir performs pairwise comparisons of single
read and predicted gene datasets against the viral RefSeq database to assign
taxonomy and additional comparison to phage-specific and cellular markers is
undertaken to support the taxonomic assignments and identify potential cellular
contamination. Broad functional classification of the predicted genes is provided
by assignment of COG microbial functional category classifications using EggNOG
and higher resolution functional analysis is achieved by searching for enrichment
of specific Swiss-Prot keywords within the viral metagenome. Application of
HoloVir to viral metagenomes from the coral Pocillopora damicornis and the sponge
Rhopaloeides odorabile demonstrated that HoloVir provides a valuable tool to
characterize holobiont viral communities across species, environments, or
experiments.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00822 
PMCID: PMC4899465
PMID: 27375564 

