
1. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2016 Jul 14;4(3):e82. doi: 10.2196/mhealth.5168.

YTH StreetConnect: Development and Usability of a Mobile App for Homeless and
Unstably Housed Youth.

Sheoran B(1), Silva CL, Lykens JE, Gamedze L, Williams S, Ford JV, Habel MA.

Author information: 
(1)YTH, Oakland, CA, United States. sheoran@yth.org.

BACKGROUND: Homeless and unstably housed (H/UH) youth are disproportionately
affected by sexual health issues, including human immunodeficiency virus/sexually
transmitted diseases, teen pregnancy, and dating violence, and are at a higher
risk for poor mental health and underutilization of services. Research suggests
that linking health care to H/UH adolescents might help improve their continuity 
of care, with most preferring to access health care information via the Internet.
YTH StreetConnect is a dual-purpose mobile app that helps H/UH youth access
health and vital services in Santa Clara County, CA, USA. We developed YTH
StreetConnect PRO in parallel with the youth app as a companion tablet app for
providers who serve H/UH youth.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of our study was to develop a mobile app to support H/UH
youth and their providers in accessing health and vital resources, and to conduct
usability and feasibility testing of the app among H/UH youth and technical
consultants with local expertise in serving H/UH youth.
METHODS: Formative research included a literature review on H/UH youths' mobile
phone and Internet usage. In January 2015, we conducted interviews with medical
and service providers of H/UH youth. Usability and feasibility testing were done 
with target audiences. Additionally, we conducted focus groups with youth
regarding the app's youth friendliness, accessibility, and usefulness.
RESULTS: H/UH youth and their providers noted the app's functionality, youth
friendliness, and resources. Usability testing proposed improvements to the app, 
including visual updates to the user interface, map icons, new underrepresented
resource categories, and the addition of a peer rating system. Limitations
included a small sample size among H/UH youth and providers and a single site for
the study (Santa Clara County, CA), making the findings ungeneralizable to the US
population.
CONCLUSIONS: YTH StreetConnect is a promising way to increase service
utilization, provide referral access, and share resources among H/UH youth and
providers. Input from H/UH youth and providers offers insights on how to improve 
future models of YTH StreetConnect and similar programs that assist H/UH youth.

DOI: 10.2196/mhealth.5168 
PMCID: PMC4965613
PMID: 27417882 

