
1. AIDS. 2017 Jan 2;31(1):49-59.

Safety and immunogenicity of a live attenuated pentavalent rotavirus vaccine in
HIV-exposed infants with or without HIV infection in Africa.

Levin MJ(1), Lindsey JC, Kaplan SS, Schimana W, Lawrence J, McNeal MM,
Bwakura-Dangarembizi M, Ogwu A, Mpabalwani EM, Sato P, Siberry G, Nelson M, Hille
D, Weinberg GA, Weinberg A.

Author information: 
(1)aSection of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Departments of Pediatrics and
Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado
bCenter for Biostatistics in AIDS Research, Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, Massachusetts cMerck & Co, Inc., Kenilworth, New Jersey, USA dSection of 
Health Promotion, Department of Health and Environment, Municipality of Munich,
Munich, Germany ePfizer Inc., Collegeville, Pennsylvania fDivision of Infectious 
Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA gDepartment of Paediatrics and Child Health,
University of Zimbabwe College of Health Sciences, Harare, Zimbabwe hFormerly
Harvard AIDS Institute, Gaborone, Botswana; currently Trinity Medical Centre,
Port Adelaide, South Australia, Australia iDepartment of Pediatrics and Child
Health, University Teaching Hospital, Lusaka, Zambia jFormerly Maternal
Adolescent and Pediatric Research Branch, NIAID, NIH, Rockville; currently Office
of AIDS Research, NIH kMaternal and Pediatric Infectious Disease Branch, Eunice
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, NIH,
Bethesda, Maryland lDepartment of Pediatrics, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York mSection of Pediatric Infectious
Diseases, Departments of Pediatrics, Medicine, and Pathology, University of
Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Although many HIV-infected (HIV+) and HIV-exposed but uninfected (HEU)
infants have received live rotavirus vaccines since the WHO recommended universal
administration of these vaccines to infants, there has been limited prospective
information on their safety and immunogenicity in either group of infants.
DESIGN/METHODS: We performed a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled
trial of the safety and immunogenicity of oral pentavalent rotavirus vaccine
(RV5) administered to HIV+ and HEU infants in four African countries.
Ninety-three percent of HIV+ infants were receiving antiretroviral therapy prior 
to vaccination. Participants were followed for safety. Immune responses were
measured 14 days after three doses of RV5, including serum antirotavirus
neutralizing and IgA antibodies, IgA antibody in stool, and antirotavirus memory 
B and T-cell FluoroSpot. Shedding of RV5 in stool was monitored.
RESULTS: A total of 76 HIV+ and 126 HEU infants were enrolled from 2009 to 2013. 
No significant differences were found in adverse event rates, including grade 3
events, between RV5 and placebo recipients, for either HIV+ or HEU infants. The
proportion of antirotavirus IgA responders (at least three-fold increase from
baseline) after RV5 administration was 81% in both HIV+ and HEU infants, which
was approximately 2.5-fold higher than in placebo recipients (P < 0.001).
Neutralizing antibody responses to three of five serotypes were significantly
higher after RV5 regardless of HIV status, and those of HIV+ infants were equal
or greater than responses of HEU infants to all five serotypes. Only one HIV+ RV5
recipient had RV5 isolated from stool.
CONCLUSION: RV5 was immunogenic in both HIV+ and HEU infants and no safety
signals were observed.

DOI: 10.1097/QAD.0000000000001258 
PMCID: PMC5287361
PMID: 27662551  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

