
1. Indian J Gastroenterol. 2016 Nov;35(6):405-418. Epub 2016 Oct 31.

Hepatic porphyria: A narrative review.

Arora S(1), Young S(1), Kodali S(1)(2), Singal AK(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, UAB University of Alabama in Birmingham,
Birmingham, AL, USA.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, UAB University of Alabama in
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, UAB University of Alabama in Birmingham,
Birmingham, AL, USA. ashwanisingal.com@gmail.com.
(4)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, UAB University of Alabama in
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA. ashwanisingal.com@gmail.com.

Porphyrias are a group of metabolic disorders, which result from a specific
abnormality in one of the eight enzymes of the heme biosynthetic pathway. These
have been subdivided based on the predominant site of enzyme defect into hepatic 
and erythropoietic types and based on clinical presentation into acute
neurovisceral and cutaneous blistering porphyrias. This review focuses on hepatic
porphyrias, which include acute intermittent porphyria (AIP), variegate porphyria
(VP), hereditary coproporphyria (HCP), aminolevulinic acid dehydratase deficiency
porphyria (ADP), and porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT). Of these, AIP and ADP are
classified as acute porphyria, PCT as cutaneous, while VP and HCP present with
both acute and cutaneous clinical manifestations. Porphobilinogen levels in a
spot urine sample is the initial screening test for the diagnosis of acute
hepatic porphyria, and plasma with spot urine porphyrin levels is the initial
screening test to approach patients suspected of cutaneous porphyria. Specific
biochemical porphyrin profile for each porphyria helps in determining the
specific diagnosis. Pain relief and elimination of triggering agents are the
initial steps in managing a patient presenting with an acute attack. Intravenous 
glucose administration terminates the mild episode of acute porphyria, with
intravenous hemin needed for management of moderate to severe episodes. Liver
transplantation is curative and may be needed for patients with a
life-threatening acute porphyria attack or for patients with recurrent acute
attacks refractory to prophylactic treatment. Of the cutaneous porphyrias, PCT is
the most common and is frequently associated with a combination of multiple
susceptibility factors such as alcohol use, smoking, hepatitis C virus infection,
HIV infection, estrogen use, and mutations of the hemochromatosis gene. Regular
phlebotomy schedule and low-dose hydroxychloroquine are effective and safe
treatment options for management of PCT.

DOI: 10.1007/s12664-016-0698-0 
PMID: 27796941  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

