
1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Dec 22;7:2077. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.02077. eCollection
2016.

CRISPR-Cas Defense System and Potential Prophages in Cyanobacteria Associated
with the Coral Black Band Disease.

Buerger P(1), Wood-Charlson EM(2), Weynberg KD(3), Willis BL(4), van Oppen MJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Australian Institute of Marine Science (AIMS), TownsvilleQLD, Australia;
Australian Institute of Marine Science, James Cook University (AIMS@JCU),
TownsvilleQLD, Australia; College of Science and Engineering, James Cook
University (JCU), TownsvilleQLD, Australia.
(2)Center for Microbial Oceanography: Research and Education, University of
Hawaii, Honolulu HI, USA.
(3)Australian Institute of Marine Science (AIMS), Townsville QLD, Australia.
(4)College of Science and Engineering, James Cook University (JCU),
TownsvilleQLD, Australia; Australian Research Council (ARC) Centre of Excellence 
for Coral Reef Studies, College of Science and Engineering, TownsvilleQLD,
Australia.
(5)Australian Institute of Marine Science (AIMS), TownsvilleQLD, Australia;
School of BioSciences, University of Melbourne, MelbourneVIC, Australia.

Understanding how pathogens maintain their virulence is critical to developing
tools to mitigate disease in animal populations. We sequenced and assembled the
first draft genome of Roseofilum reptotaenium AO1, the dominant cyanobacterium
underlying pathogenicity of the virulent coral black band disease (BBD), and
analyzed parts of the BBD-associated Geitlerinema sp. BBD_1991 genome in silico. 
Both cyanobacteria are equipped with an adaptive, heritable clustered regularly
interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)-Cas defense system type I-D and
have potential virulence genes located within several prophage regions. The
defense system helps to prevent infection by viruses and mobile genetic elements 
via identification of short fingerprints of the intruding DNA, which are stored
as templates in the bacterial genome, in so-called "CRISPRs." Analysis of CRISPR 
target sequences (protospacers) revealed an unusually high number of
self-targeting spacers in R. reptotaenium AO1 and extraordinary long CRIPSR
arrays of up to 260 spacers in Geitlerinema sp. BBD_1991. The self-targeting
spacers are unlikely to be a form of autoimmunity; instead these target an
incomplete lysogenic bacteriophage. Lysogenic virus induction experiments with
mitomycin C and UV light did not reveal an actively replicating virus population 
in R. reptotaenium AO1 cultures, suggesting that phage functionality is
compromised or excision could be blocked by the CRISPR-Cas system. Potential
prophages were identified in three regions of R. reptotaenium AO1 and five
regions of Geitlerinema sp. BBD_1991, containing putative BBD relevant virulence 
genes, such as an NAD-dependent epimerase/dehydratase (a homolog in terms of
functionality to the third and fourth most expressed gene in BBD),
lysozyme/metalloendopeptidases and other lipopolysaccharide modification genes.
To date, viruses have not been considered to be a component of the BBD consortium
or a contributor to the virulence of R. reptotaenium AO1 and Geitlerinema sp.
BBD_1991. We suggest that the presence of virulence genes in potential prophage
regions, and the CRISPR-Cas defense systems are evidence of an arms race between 
the respective cyanobacteria and their bacteriophage predators. The presence of
such a defense system likely reduces the number of successful bacteriophage
infections and mortality in the cyanobacteria, facilitating the progress of BBD.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.02077 
PMCID: PMC5177637
PMID: 28066391 

