
1. J Wildl Dis. 1989 Oct;25(4):555-67.

Proposed field evaluation of a rabies recombinant vaccine for raccoons (Procyon
lotor): site selection, target species characteristics, and placebo baiting
trials.

Hanlon CL(1), Hayes DE, Hamir AN, Snyder DE, Jenkins S, Hable CP, Rupprecht CE.

Author information: 
(1)Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104.

Prior to a limited field application of an orally-administered vaccinia-rabies
glycoprotein (V-RG) recombinant virus vaccine for wildlife, background data were 
obtained for the proposed site on Parramore Island, Virginia (USA). Mammalian
target and nontarget species, potentially at risk for exposure to vaccine were
inventoried. Placebo baiting trials with a fishmeal polymer bait resulted in high
bait disturbance (88 to 100%), primarily by raccoons (Procyon lotor), with
infrequent visitation and no evidence of bait consumption by deer (Odocoileus
virginianus), small mammals or avian species. Definitive bait acceptance rates by
raccoons (indicative of bait ingestion) were difficult to accurately determine
based exclusively on premolar and vibrissae samples collected antemortem from
live-trapped raccoons for tetracycline and rhodamine B biomarker analyses,
respectively. Bait acceptance rate was more accurately determined during a pilot 
baiting trial conducted on North Island, South Carolina, when mandibles
(postmortem samples) were examined for tetracycline incorporation. Parasitologic 
findings in raccoons on Parramore Island included Hepatozoan procyonis, Phagicola
angrense and Physaloptera rara and a variety of incidental microscopic lesions,
and provided baseline pathological data for comparison subsequent to V-RG vaccine
application. A population density estimate of one raccoon/2.7 ha was calculated
using mark-recapture data for comparison after vaccine deployment. Limited
reproductive data, including estimates of pregnancy rates by palpation, the
number of live kits/litter live-trapped with previously pregnant raccoons or
observed in the dens of radio-collared raccoons, was gathered to assess the
effect of proposed oral vaccination with V-RG vaccine. Home ranges were assessed 
by radio-telemetry of 15 raccoons; all radio-collared raccoons currently reside
on Parramore Island.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.7589/0090-3558-25.4.555 
PMID: 2810556  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

