
1. Methods Enzymol. 2017;588:109-131. doi: 10.1016/bs.mie.2016.09.077. Epub 2016 Nov
29.

A Molecular Reporter for Monitoring Autophagic Flux in Nervous System In Vivo.

Castillo K(1), Valenzuela V(2), Oñate M(2), Hetz C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centro Interdisciplinario de Neurociencia de Valparaíso, Facultad de Ciencias,
Universidad de Valparaíso, Valparaíso, Chile. Electronic address:
karen.castillo@cinv.cl.
(2)Biomedical Neuroscience Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile,
Santiago, Chile; Center for Geroscience, Brain Health and Metabolism, Santiago,
Chile; Program of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences, Center for Molecular Studies of the Cell, University of Chile,
Santiago, Chile.
(3)Biomedical Neuroscience Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile,
Santiago, Chile; Center for Geroscience, Brain Health and Metabolism, Santiago,
Chile; Program of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences, Center for Molecular Studies of the Cell, University of Chile,
Santiago, Chile; Buck Institute for Research on Aging, Novato, CA, United States;
Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, United States. Electronic address:
chetz@med.uchile.cl.

The relevance of autophagy in neuronal health has been extensively reported in a 
plethora of conditions affecting the nervous system, such as neurodegenerative
diseases, cancer, diabetes, and tissue injury, where altered autophagic activity 
may contribute to the pathological process. Autophagy is a dynamic pathway
involving the formation of a membrane surrounding and enclosing cargoes that are 
delivered to lysosomal compartments for degradation. Cargoes can include large
protein aggregates, organelles, or even pathogens. Traditionally, autophagy
assessment relies on the measurement of LC3-II protein levels or the
visualization of LC3-positive puncta. However, these approaches represent a
static measurement of autophagy markers, making difficult the dissection of the
actual changes in the autophagy process (activation, inhibition, or no effects), 
due to the dynamic regulation of LC3 viral levels. To circumvent this limitation,
we previously developed an adeno-associated vector (AAV) to deliver a molecular
autophagy sensor to the neuronal compartment in vivo. Here, we describe the
detailed design and methods to use an engineered AAV harboring the monomeric
tandem mCherry-GFP-LC3 to determine autophagic fluxes in the nervous system. Key 
methodological details to succeed in the use of this reporter are provided.

© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.mie.2016.09.077 
PMID: 28237096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

