
1. mBio. 2017 Mar 7;8(2). pii: e02014-16. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02014-16.

A Reverse Genetics Platform That Spans the Zika Virus Family Tree.

Widman DG(1), Young E(1), Yount BL(1), Plante KS(2), Gallichotte EN(3), Carbaugh 
DL(3), Peck KM(4), Plante J(1), Swanstrom J(1), Heise MT(3)(2), Lazear HM(3),
Baric RS(5)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(4)Department of Biology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina, USA.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA
rbaric@email.unc.edu.

Zika virus (ZIKV), a mosquito-borne flavivirus discovered in 1947, has only
recently caused large outbreaks and emerged as a significant human pathogen. In
2015, ZIKV was detected in Brazil, and the resulting epidemic has spread
throughout the Western Hemisphere. Severe complications from ZIKV infection
include neurological disorders such as Guillain-Barré syndrome in adults and a
variety of fetal abnormalities, including microcephaly, blindness, placental
insufficiency, and fetal demise. There is an urgent need for tools and reagents
to study the pathogenesis of epidemic ZIKV and for testing vaccines and
antivirals. Using a reverse genetics platform, we generated six ZIKV infectious
clones and derivative viruses representing diverse temporal and geographic
origins. These include three versions of MR766, the prototype 1947 strain (with
and without a glycosylation site in the envelope protein), and H/PF/2013, a 2013 
human isolate from French Polynesia representative of the virus introduced to
Brazil. In the course of synthesizing a clone of a circulating Brazilian strain, 
phylogenetic studies identified two distinct ZIKV clades in Brazil. We
reconstructed viable clones of strains SPH2015 and BeH819015, representing
ancestral members of each clade. We assessed recombinant virus replication,
binding to monoclonal antibodies, and virulence in mice. This panel of molecular 
clones and recombinant virus isolates will enable targeted studies of viral
determinants of pathogenesis, adaptation, and evolution, as well as the rational 
attenuation of contemporary outbreak strains to facilitate the design of vaccines
and therapeutics.IMPORTANCE Viral emergence is a poorly understood process as
evidenced by the sudden emergence of Zika virus in Latin America and the
Caribbean. Malleable reagents that both predate and span an expanding epidemic
are key to understanding the virologic determinants that regulate pathogenesis
and transmission. We have generated representative cDNA molecular clones and
recombinant viruses that span the known ZIKV family tree, including early
Brazilian isolates. Recombinant viruses replicated efficiently in cell culture
and were pathogenic in immunodeficient mice, providing a genetic platform for
rational vaccine and therapeutic design.

Copyright © 2017 Widman et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02014-16 
PMCID: PMC5340872
PMID: 28270583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

