
1. Phys Rev E. 2017 Feb;95(2-1):022403. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.95.022403. Epub 2017
Feb 13.

Cable equation for general geometry.

López-Sánchez EJ(1), Romero JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Posgrado en Ciencias Naturales e Ingeniería, Universidad Autónoma
Metropolitana, Cuajimalpa and Vasco de Quiroga 4871, Santa Fe Cuajimalpa, Ciudad 
de México 05300, México.
(2)Departamento de Matemáticas Aplicadas y Sistemas, Universidad Autónoma
Metropolitana-Cuajimalpa, Vasco de Quiroga 4871, Santa Fe Cuajimalpa, Ciudad de
México 05300, México.

The cable equation describes the voltage in a straight cylindrical cable, and
this model has been employed to model electrical potential in dendrites and
axons. However, sometimes this equation might give incorrect predictions for some
realistic geometries, in particular when the radius of the cable changes
significantly. Cables with a nonconstant radius are important for some phenomena,
for example, discrete swellings along the axons appear in neurodegenerative
diseases such as Alzheimers, Parkinsons, human immunodeficiency virus associated 
dementia, and multiple sclerosis. In this paper, using the Frenet-Serret frame,
we propose a generalized cable equation for a general cable geometry. This
generalized equation depends on geometric quantities such as the curvature and
torsion of the cable. We show that when the cable has a constant circular cross
section, the first fundamental form of the cable can be simplified and the
generalized cable equation depends on neither the curvature nor the torsion of
the cable. Additionally, we find an exact solution for an ideal cable which has a
particular variable circular cross section and zero curvature. For this case we
show that when the cross section of the cable increases the voltage decreases.
Inspired by this ideal case, we rewrite the generalized cable equation as a
diffusion equation with a source term generated by the cable geometry. This
source term depends on the cable cross-sectional area and its derivates. In
addition, we study different cables with swelling and provide their numerical
solutions. The numerical solutions show that when the cross section of the cable 
has abrupt changes, its voltage is smaller than the voltage in the cylindrical
cable. Furthermore, these numerical solutions show that the voltage can be
affected by geometrical inhomogeneities on the cable.

DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevE.95.022403 
PMID: 28297844 

