
1. J Virol. 2017 May 26;91(12). pii: e00393-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00393-17. Print
2017 Jun 15.

Cbl E3 Ligase Mediates the Removal of Nectin-1 from the Surface of Herpes Simplex
Virus 1-Infected Cells.

Deschamps T(1), Dogrammatzis C(1), Mullick R(2), Kalamvoki M(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Kansas Medical Center, Department of Microbiology, Molecular
Genetics and Immunology, Kansas City, Kansas, USA.
(2)Indian Institute of Science, Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology,
Bangalore, India.
(3)University of Kansas Medical Center, Department of Microbiology, Molecular
Genetics and Immunology, Kansas City, Kansas, USA mkalamvoki@kumc.edu.

The Cbl E3 ligase has been linked to the down-modulation of surface signaling
responses by inducing internalization of surface receptors. The adaptor protein
CIN85 is a partner of Cbl that augments many of these interactions. Previously,
an interaction was demonstrated between ICP0 and CIN85, which results in the
removal of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) from the surface of the
infected cells with a concomitant attenuation of EGFR signaling. Here, we
examined whether Cbl mediates the removal of the herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1)
entry receptor Nectin-1 from the surface of infected cells. We found the
following: (i) that Cbl, Nectin-1, and the viral glycoprotein D (gD) form a
complex in infected cells; (ii) that during infection Nectin-1 is removed from
the surface of the infected cells but is retained on the surface of cells that
have been depleted of Cbl; and (iii) that in cells infected with a ΔICP0 mutant
virus, Nectin-1 remained on the cell surface. Thus, Cbl is necessary but not
sufficient for the removal of Nectin-1 from the cell surface. In addition, we
observed that in Cbl-depleted cells there was enhanced entry after infection.
These cells were susceptible to secondary infections by HSV-1. Viral entry in
CIN85-depleted cells was only moderately enhanced compared to that in the
Cbl-depleted cells, suggesting that the Cbl-Nectin-1 interaction is likely the
key to the downregulation of surface Nectin-1. The removal of the HSV-1 entry
receptor Nectin-1 from the surface of the infected cells may be part of the
strategy of the virus to efficiently spread to uninfected cells.IMPORTANCE The
Cbl E3 ligase suppresses surface signaling responses by inducing internalization 
of surface components. The targets of Cbl include such components as immune
system receptors, growth factor receptors, adhesion, and cell-to-cell contact
molecules. The immediate early protein ICP0 of herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1)
interacts with CIN85, an adaptor protein that augments Cbl functions. The
consequence of this interaction is the removal of the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) from the surface of the infected cells with concomitant
suppression of the EGF ligand signaling. The viral entry receptor Nectin-1 is
also internalized during HSV-1 infection in a Cbl-dependent mechanism, and that
increases the opportunity of the virus to spread to uninfected cells. The
diversion of the Cbl/CIN85 endocytic machinery may be a strategy utilized by the 
virus to alter the cell surface pattern to prevent detrimental host responses.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00393-17 
PMCID: PMC5446655
PMID: 28381567  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

