
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2017 Nov;76:83-92. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2017.05.020. Epub 2017
May 28.

Identification, characterization, and function analysis of the NF-κB repressing
factor (NKRF) gene from Litopenaeus vannamei.

Qiu W(1), He JH(2), Zuo H(3), Niu S(2), Li C(4), Zhang S(2), Weng S(2), He J(5), 
Xu X(6).

Author information: 
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Aquatic Product Safety/State Key Laboratory of
Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, PR China;
School of Marine Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, PR China; School of
Biology and Engineering, Guizhou Medical University, Guiyang 550025, China.
(2)MOE Key Laboratory of Aquatic Product Safety/State Key Laboratory of
Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, PR China;
Institute of Aquatic Economic Animals and Guangdong Province Key Laboratory for
Aquatic Economic Animals, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, PR China.
(3)MOE Key Laboratory of Aquatic Product Safety/State Key Laboratory of
Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, PR China;
Institute of Aquatic Economic Animals and Guangdong Province Key Laboratory for
Aquatic Economic Animals, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, PR China; School of 
Marine Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, PR China; South China Sea
Resource Exploitation and Protection Collaborative Innovation Center (SCS-REPIC),
Guangzhou, PR China.
(4)MOE Key Laboratory of Aquatic Product Safety/State Key Laboratory of
Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, PR China;
Institute of Aquatic Economic Animals and Guangdong Province Key Laboratory for
Aquatic Economic Animals, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, PR China; School of 
Marine Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, PR China.
(5)MOE Key Laboratory of Aquatic Product Safety/State Key Laboratory of
Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, PR China;
Institute of Aquatic Economic Animals and Guangdong Province Key Laboratory for
Aquatic Economic Animals, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, PR China; School of 
Marine Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, PR China; South China Sea
Resource Exploitation and Protection Collaborative Innovation Center (SCS-REPIC),
Guangzhou, PR China. Electronic address: lsshjg@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(6)MOE Key Laboratory of Aquatic Product Safety/State Key Laboratory of
Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, PR China;
Institute of Aquatic Economic Animals and Guangdong Province Key Laboratory for
Aquatic Economic Animals, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, PR China; South
China Sea Resource Exploitation and Protection Collaborative Innovation Center
(SCS-REPIC), Guangzhou, PR China. Electronic address: xuxpeng@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

The NF-κB family transcription factors regulate a wide spectrum of biological
processes, in particular immune responses. The studies in human suggest that the 
NF-κB repressing factor (NKRF) negatively regulates the activity of NF-κB through
a direct protein-protein interaction. However, the function of NKRF has not been 
studied outside mammals up to now. The current study identified a NKRF gene
(LvNKRF) from the Pacific white shrimp, Litopenaeus vannamei, which showed
homology with NKRFs from insects, fishes and mammals. LvNKRF was high expressed
in intestine, stomach and muscle tissues and was localized in the nucleus. LvNKRF
could interact with both Dorsal and Relish, the two members of the shrimp NF-κB
family. Interestingly, although sharing a similar protein structure with that of 
human NKRF, LvNKRF showed no inhibitory but instead enhancing effects on
activities of Dorsal and Relish, which was contrary to those of mammalian NKRFs. 
The expression of LvNKRF could not be induced by Gram-positive and -negative
bacteria and immunostimulants lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and poly (I:C) but was
significantly up-regulated after white spot syndrome virus (WSSV) infection.
Silencing of LvNKRF significantly decreased the mortalities of shrimp caused by
WSSV infection and down-regulated the WSSV copies and the expression of WSSV
structural gene in tissues. These suggested that LvNKRF could facilitate the
infection of shrimp by WSSV, which may be an additional strategy for WSSV to
hijack the host NF-κB pathway to favor its own replication. The current study
could provide a valuable context for further investigating the evolutionary
derivation of NKRFs and facilitate the study of regulatory mechanisms of
invertebrate NF-κB pathways.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2017.05.020 
PMID: 28564581  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

