
1. J Vis Exp. 2017 May 28;(123). doi: 10.3791/55919.

Retroviral Scanning: Mapping MLV Integration Sites to Define Cell-specific
Regulatory Regions.

Romano O(1), Cifola I(2), Poletti V(3), Severgnini M(2), Peano C(2), De Bellis
G(2), Mavilio F(4), Miccio A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genome Research, Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena 
and Reggio Emilia; Laboratory of Chromatin and Gene Regulation During
Development, Imagine Institute.
(2)Institute for Biomedical Technologies, CNR.
(3)Généthon.
(4)Center for Genome Research, Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena 
and Reggio Emilia; Généthon.
(5)Center for Genome Research, Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena 
and Reggio Emilia; Laboratory of Chromatin and Gene Regulation During
Development, Imagine Institute; Généthon; Sorbonne Paris Cité - Université Paris 
Descartes; annarita.miccio@institutimagine.org.

Moloney murine leukemia (MLV) virus-based retroviral vectors integrate
predominantly in acetylated enhancers and promoters. For this reason, mLV
integration sites can be used as functional markers of active regulatory
elements. Here, we present a retroviral scanning tool, which allows the
genome-wide identification of cell-specific enhancers and promoters. Briefly, the
target cell population is transduced with an mLV-derived vector and genomic DNA
is digested with a frequently cutting restriction enzyme. After ligation of
genomic fragments with a compatible DNA linker, linker-mediated polymerase chain 
reaction (LM-PCR) allows the amplification of the virus-host genome junctions.
Massive sequencing of the amplicons is used to define the mLV integration profile
genome-wide. Finally, clusters of recurrent integrations are defined to identify 
cell-specific regulatory regions, responsible for the activation of cell-type
specific transcriptional programs. The retroviral scanning tool allows the
genome-wide identification of cell-specific promoters and enhancers in
prospectively isolated target cell populations. Notably, retroviral scanning
represents an instrumental technique for the retrospective identification of rare
populations (e.g. somatic stem cells) that lack robust markers for prospective
isolation.

DOI: 10.3791/55919 
PMCID: PMC5608156
PMID: 28605390  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

