
1. Front Microbiol. 2017 Jun 15;8:1083. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01083. eCollection
2017.

HIV Progression Depends on Codon and Amino Acid Usage Profile of Envelope Protein
and Associated Host-Genetic Influence.

Roy A(1), Banerjee R(2), Basak S(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany, Bioinformatics Facility, University of North
BengalSiliguri, India.
(2)Structural Biology and Bio-Informatics Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of
Chemical BiologyKolkata, India.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology and Bioinformatics, Tripura
UniversityAgartala, India.
(4)Bioinformatics Centre, Tripura UniversityAgartala, India.

Acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) is a spectrum of conditions caused by 
infection with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Two types of HIV have been
characterized: HIV-1 and HIV-2. The present study investigated whether
evolutionary selection pressure differs between rapid progressor (RP), slow
progressor (SP), and long-term non-progressor (LTNP) of HIV-I infected
individuals. An unexpected association between the evolutionary rate of
substitution in envelope (env) gene and disease progression is observed. Our
present study suggests that env genes of LTNP are subject to unusually strong
functional constraint with respect to RP. We also observed that the three
categories of env genes i.e., RP, SP, and LTNP, had their own characteristic
pattern of amino acid usage and SP and LTNP sequences shared similar patterns of 
amino acid usage different from RP sequences and evolutionary rate significantly 
influenced the amino acid usage pattern of the three different types of env gene 
sequences. It was also noted that the evolutionary rate for the glycosylation
sites of LTNP and SP sequences were even significantly less than the RP
sequences. Comparative analysis on the influence of human host on the three
categories of env genes are well correlated with the rates of disease progression
suggesting the adaptive strategies of the viruses for successful residence and
infection. Host associated selective constraints appeared most relaxed on the RP 
sequences and strongest in LTNP sequences. The present study clearly portrays how
evolutionary selection pressure differs between three categories of env genes
i.e., RP, SP, and LTNP. The env genes, coding for the env glycoproteins,
experience severe selection constraints from the host due to their constant
exposure to the host immune system. In this perspective it might be suggested
that env gene evolution occurs mainly by negative selection with the occurrence
of mutation that might not reach fixation in the viral population. This work also
confers a deeper insight into the crucial effects of host factors that govern the
overall progression of HIV infection.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01083 
PMCID: PMC5471322
PMID: 28663742 

