
1. J Clin Invest. 2017 Aug 1;127(8):3177-3188. doi: 10.1172/JCI93024. Epub 2017 Jul 
24.

Lymphocytes transiently expressing virus-specific T cell receptors reduce
hepatitis B virus infection.

Kah J(1), Koh S(2)(3), Volz T(1), Ceccarello E(2)(4), Allweiss L(1), Lütgehetmann
M(5), Bertoletti A(2)(4), Dandri M(1)(6).

Author information: 
(1)I. Medical Department, Center for Internal Medicine, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Singapore Institute for Clinical Sciences, Agency for Science Technology and
Research, Singapore.
(3)Lion TCR Pte. Ltd., Singapore.
(4)Emerging Infectious Diseases Programme, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore.
(5)Institute of Microbiology, Virology and Hygiene, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(6)German Center for Infection Research, Hamburg-Lübeck-Borstel Partner Site,
Hamburg, Germany.

Adoptive transfer of T cells engineered to express a hepatitis B virus-specific
(HBV-specific) T cell receptor (TCR) may supplement HBV-specific immune responses
in chronic HBV patients and facilitate HBV control. However, the risk of
triggering unrestrained proliferation of permanently engineered T cells raises
safety concerns that have hampered testing of this approach in patients. The aim 
of the present study was to generate T cells that transiently express
HBV-specific TCRs using mRNA electroporation and to assess their antiviral and
pathogenetic activity in vitro and in HBV-infected human liver chimeric mice. We 
assessed virological and gene-expression changes using quantitative
reverse-transcriptase PCR (qRT-PCR), immunofluorescence, and Luminex technology. 
HBV-specific T cells lysed HBV-producing hepatoma cells in vitro. In vivo, 3
injections of HBV-specific T cells caused progressive viremia reduction within 12
days of treatment in animals reconstituted with haplotype-matched hepatocytes,
whereas viremia remained stable in mice receiving irrelevant T cells redirected
toward hepatitis C virus-specific TCRs. Notably, increases in alanine
aminotransferase levels, apoptotic markers, and human inflammatory cytokines
returned to pretreatment levels within 9 days after the last injection. T cell
transfer did not trigger inflammation in uninfected mice. These data support the 
feasibility of using mRNA electroporation to engineer HBV TCR-redirected T cells 
in patients with chronic HBV infection.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI93024 
PMCID: PMC5531408
PMID: 28737510  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

