
1. J Virol. 2018 Jan 17;92(3). pii: e01413-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01413-17. Print 2018
Feb 1.

The Epstein-Barr Virus Episome Maneuvers between Nuclear Chromatin Compartments
during Reactivation.

Moquin SA(1)(2), Thomas S(3), Whalen S(3)(4)(5), Warburton A(6), Fernandez SG(2),
McBride AA(6), Pollard KS(3)(4)(5), Miranda JL(7)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California,
San Francisco, California, USA.
(2)Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology, San Francisco, California,
USA.
(3)Gladstone Institutes, San Francisco, California, USA.
(4)Division of Biostatistics, Institute for Human Genetics, University of
California, San Francisco, California, USA.
(5)Institute for Computational Health Sciences, University of California, San
Francisco, California, USA.
(6)Laboratory of Viral Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(7)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California,
San Francisco, California, USA jj.miranda@ucsf.edu.

The human genome is structurally organized in three-dimensional space to
facilitate functional partitioning of transcription. We learned that the latent
episome of the human Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) preferentially associates with
gene-poor chromosomes and avoids gene-rich chromosomes. Kaposi's
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus behaves similarly, but human papillomavirus does
not. Contacts on the EBV side localize to OriP, the latent origin of replication.
This genetic element and the EBNA1 protein that binds there are sufficient to
reconstitute chromosome association preferences of the entire episome. Contacts
on the human side localize to gene-poor and AT-rich regions of chromatin distant 
from transcription start sites. Upon reactivation from latency, however, the
episome moves away from repressive heterochromatin and toward active euchromatin.
Our work adds three-dimensional relocalization to the molecular events that occur
during reactivation. Involvement of myriad interchromosomal associations also
suggests a role for this type of long-range association in gene
regulation.IMPORTANCE The human genome is structurally organized in
three-dimensional space, and this structure functionally affects transcriptional 
activity. We set out to investigate whether a double-stranded DNA virus,
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), uses mechanisms similar to those of the human genome to
regulate transcription. We found that the EBV genome associates with repressive
compartments of the nucleus during latency and with active compartments during
reactivation. This study advances our knowledge of the EBV life cycle, adding
three-dimensional relocalization as a novel component to the molecular events
that occur during reactivation. Furthermore, the data add to our understanding of
nuclear compartments, showing that disperse interchromosomal interactions may be 
important for regulating transcription.

Copyright © 2018 Moquin et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01413-17 
PMCID: PMC5774889
PMID: 29142137  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

