
1. Front Immunol. 2017 Nov 28;8:1655. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01655. eCollection
2017.

Increasing the Clinical Potential and Applications of Anti-HIV Antibodies.

Hua CK(1), Ackerman ME(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Geisel School of Medicine, Lebanon,
NH, United States.
(2)Thayer School of Engineering, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, United States.

Preclinical and early human clinical studies of broadly neutralizing antibodies
(bNAbs) to prevent and treat HIV infection support the clinical utility and
potential of bNAbs for prevention, postexposure prophylaxis, and treatment of
acute and chronic infection. Observed and potential limitations of bNAbs from
these recent studies include the selection of resistant viral populations,
immunogenicity resulting in the development of antidrug (Ab) responses, and the
potentially toxic elimination of reservoir cells in regeneration-limited tissues.
Here, we review opportunities to improve the clinical utility of HIV Abs to
address these challenges and further accomplish functional targets for anti-HIV
Ab therapy at various stages of exposure/infection. Before exposure, bNAbs'
ability to serve as prophylaxis by neutralization may be improved by increasing
serum half-life to necessitate less frequent administration, delivering genes for
durable in vivo expression, and targeting bNAbs to sites of exposure. After
exposure and/or in the setting of acute infection, bNAb use to prevent/reduce
viral reservoir establishment and spread may be enhanced by increasing the
potency with which autologous adaptive immune responses are stimulated, clearing 
acutely infected cells, and preventing cell-cell transmission of virus. In the
setting of chronic infection, bNAbs may better mediate viral remission or "cure" 
in combination with antiretroviral therapy and/or latency reversing agents, by
targeting additional markers of tissue reservoirs or infected cell types, or by
serving as targeting moieties in engineered cell therapy. While the clinical use 
of HIV Abs has never been closer, remaining studies to precisely define, model,
and understand the complex roles and dynamics of HIV Abs and viral evolution in
the context of the human immune system and anatomical compartmentalization will
be critical to both optimize their clinical use in combination with existing
agents and define further strategies with which to enhance their clinical safety 
and efficacy.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01655 
PMCID: PMC5712301
PMID: 29234320 

