
1. Int J Infect Dis. 2018 Mar;68:1-3. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2017.12.022. Epub 2017 Dec
29.

Multiple spotty lesions of the spinal cord in a Chinese patient with human
T-lymphotropic virus type 1-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis.

Gao H(1), Ye X(2), Cai R(3), Xu Q(2), Liang L(4), Izumo S(5), Xing HQ(6), Kubota 
R(7).

Author information: 
(1)Neurosurgery Department, 2nd Affiliated Hospital of Fujian Medical University,
Quanzhou, Fujian, China; Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine and
Central Laboratory of the 2nd Affiliated Hospital of Fujian Medical University,
Quanzhou, Fujian, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Neurodegenerative
Disease and Aging Research, Institute of Neuroscience, Basic Medicine, Medical
College, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China.
(3)Neurologic Medicine Department, 2nd Affiliated Hospital of Fujian Medical
University, Quanzhou, Fujian, China.
(4)PET/CT Center, The 180th Hospital of People's Liberation Army, Quanzhou,
Fujian, China.
(5)Division of Molecular Pathology, Center for Chronic Viral Diseases, Kagoshima 
University, Kagoshima, Japan.
(6)Department of Pathology, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Neurodegenerative
Disease and Aging Research, Institute of Neuroscience, Basic Medicine, Medical
College, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China. Electronic address:
xinghq@xmu.edu.cn.
(7)Division of Molecular Pathology, Center for Chronic Viral Diseases, Kagoshima 
University, Kagoshima, Japan. Electronic address:
kubotar@m2.kufm.kagoshima-u.ac.jp.

The case of a Chinese patient with human T-lymphotropic virus type 1
(HTLV-1)-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP), who showed
typical neurological symptoms of the disease, is reported here. Since the
presence of anti-HTLV-1 antibody was not investigated, this patient's diagnosis
of HAM/TSP was delayed for 4 years. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed multiple 
spotty lesions in the cervical spinal cord, probably reflecting pathological
changes known as perivascular lymphocytic infiltrations of the spinal cord. As
this is the first case report of a HAM/TSP patient in China, it is suggested that
serological testing for HTLV-1 should be considered in patients with spastic
paraparesis even in areas that are non-endemic for HTLV-1.

Copyright © 2017 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2017.12.022 
PMID: 29292042  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

