
1. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2018 Jul;24(7):1341-1349. doi:
10.1016/j.bbmt.2018.02.026. Epub 2018 Mar 9.

Epstein-Barr Virus-Related Post-Transplantation Lymphoproliferative Disorders
After Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation.

Liu L(1), Zhang X(2), Feng S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology and Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Tianjin, China.
(2)Affiliated Bao'an Hospital of Southern Medical University, Shenzhen,
Guangdong, China.
(3)Institute of Hematology and Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Tianjin, China. Electronic
address: szfeng@ihcams.ac.cn.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-related post-transplantation lymphoproliferative
disorders (EBV-PTLDs) are rare but potentially fatal complications of allogeneic 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allo-HSCT), characterized by
uncontrolled proliferation of EBV-infected lymphocytes. The most common risk
factors include T cell depletion of graft, HLA mismatch, severe graft-versus-host
disease (GVHD), and EBV seromismatch (recipient-negative/donor-positive), among
others. EBV-PTLDs commonly manifest as fever and lymphadenopathy and may rapidly 
progress to multiorgan failure and even death. Histopathological evidence is
indispensable for the diagnosis, and positive findings of EBV-DNA (EBV-DNAemia)
and imaging are also very helpful. Active prophylaxis, such as optimization of
the donor choice, conditioning regimen, and GVHD prevention, or passive
prophylaxis, such as low dose of rituximab, unselected donor lymphocyte infusion 
(DLI), and EBV-specific cytotoxic T lymphocyte (EBV-CTLs) infusion, can decrease 
the incidence of EBV-DNAemia. Rituximab- based preemptive treatment can prevent
EBV-DNAemia from developing into EBV-PTLDs, particularly benefiting recipients
with higher loads of EBV-DNA, although the long-term outcome has not been
significantly improved. To date, there is no consensus as to whether and when to 
initiate prophylactic or preemptive treatment. The current treatment strategies
for probable and proven EBV-PTLDs include reduction of immunosuppression (RI),
rituximab, adoptive cell therapy (DLI or EBV-CTLs), chemotherapy, radiotherapy,
and surgery, among which rituximab plus RI is the mainstay. However, the
mortality of EBV-PTLDs remains considerably high, and novel strategies merit
exploration.

Copyright © 2018 The American Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbmt.2018.02.026 
PMID: 29530767  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

