
1. mBio. 2018 Mar 13;9(2). pii: e02233-17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02233-17.

Interactions between the Hepatitis C Virus Nonstructural 2 Protein and Host
Adaptor Proteins 1 and 4 Orchestrate Virus Release.

Xiao F(1), Wang S(1), Barouch-Bentov R(1), Neveu G(1), Pu S(1), Beer M(1), Schor 
S(1), Kumar S(1), Nicolaescu V(2), Lindenbach BD(3), Randall G(#)(2), Einav
S(#)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Geographic Medicine, Department of
Medicine, and Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, the University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(3)Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases and Geographic Medicine, Department of
Medicine, and Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA seinav@stanford.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) spreads via secreted cell-free particles or direct
cell-to-cell transmission. Yet, virus-host determinants governing differential
intracellular trafficking of cell-free- and cell-to-cell-transmitted virus remain
unknown. The host adaptor proteins (APs) AP-1A, AP-1B, and AP-4 traffic in
post-Golgi compartments, and the latter two are implicated in basolateral
sorting. We reported that AP-1A mediates HCV trafficking during release, whereas 
the endocytic adaptor AP-2 mediates entry and assembly. We demonstrated that the 
host kinases AAK1 and GAK regulate HCV infection by controlling these
clathrin-associated APs. Here, we sought to define the roles of AP-4, a
clathrin-independent adaptor; AP-1A; and AP-1B in HCV infection. We screened for 
interactions between HCV proteins and the μ subunits of AP-1A, AP-1B, and AP-4 by
mammalian cell-based protein fragment complementation assays. The nonstructural 2
(NS2) protein emerged as an interactor of these adaptors in this screening and by
coimmunoprecipitations in HCV-infected cells. Two previously unrecognized
dileucine-based motifs in the NS2 C terminus mediated AP binding and HCV release.
Infectivity and coculture assays demonstrated that while all three adaptors
mediate HCV release and cell-free spread, AP-1B and AP-4, but not AP-1A, mediate 
cell-to-cell spread. Live-cell imaging revealed HCV cotrafficking with AP-1A,
AP-1B, and AP-4 and that AP-4 mediates HCV trafficking in a post-Golgi
compartment. Lastly, HCV cell-to-cell spread was regulated by AAK1 and GAK and
thus susceptible to treatment with AAK1 and GAK inhibitors. These data provide a 
mechanistic understanding of HCV trafficking in distinct release pathways and
reveal a requirement for APs in cell-to-cell viral spread.IMPORTANCE HCV spreads 
via cell-free infection or cell-to-cell contact that shields it from antibody
neutralization, thereby facilitating viral persistence. Yet, factors governing
this differential sorting remain unknown. By integrating proteomic, RNA
interference, genetic, live-cell imaging, and pharmacological approaches, we
uncover differential coopting of host adaptor proteins (APs) to mediate HCV
traffic at distinct late steps of the viral life cycle. We reported that AP-1A
and AP-2 mediate HCV trafficking during release and assembly, respectively. Here,
we demonstrate that dileucine motifs in the NS2 protein mediate AP-1A, AP-1B, and
AP-4 binding and cell-free virus release. Moreover, we reveal that AP-4, an
adaptor not previously implicated in viral infections, mediates cell-to-cell
spread and HCV trafficking. Lastly, we demonstrate cell-to-cell spread regulation
by AAK1 and GAK, host kinases controlling APs, and susceptibility to their
inhibitors. This study provides mechanistic insights into virus-host determinants
that facilitate HCV trafficking, with potential implications for pathogenesis and
antiviral agent design.

Copyright © 2018 Xiao et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02233-17 
PMCID: PMC5850324
PMID: 29535204  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

