
1. Front Neurol. 2018 Mar 19;9:145. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2018.00145. eCollection 2018.

Microbiome-Mediated Upregulation of MicroRNA-146a in Sporadic Alzheimer's
Disease.

Zhao Y(1)(2), Lukiw WJ(1)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)LSU Neuroscience Center, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center New
Orleans, New Orleans, LA, United States.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA, United States.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center
New Orleans, New Orleans, LA, United States.
(4)Department of Neurology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center New
Orleans, New Orleans, LA, United States.

The first indication of a potential mechanistic link between the pathobiology of 
the human gastrointestinal (GI)-tract microbiome and its contribution to the
pathogenetic mechanisms of sporadic Alzheimer's disease (AD) came a scant 4 years
ago (1). Ongoing research continues to strengthen the hypothesis that neurotoxic 
microbial-derived components of the GI tract microbiome can cross aging GI tract 
and blood-brain barriers and contribute to progressive proinflammatory
neurodegeneration, as exemplified by the AD-process. Of central interest in these
recent investigations are the pathological roles played by human GI tract
resident Gram-negative anaerobic bacteria and neurotropic viruses-two prominent
divisions of GI tract microbiome-derived microbiota-which harbor considerable
pathogenic potential. It is noteworthy that the first two well-studied
microbiota-the GI tract abundant Gram-negative bacteria Bacteroides fragilis and 
the neurotropic herpes simplex virus-1 both share a final common pathway of NF-κB
(p50/p65) activation and microRNA-146a induction with ensuing pathogenic
stimulation of innate-immune and neuroinflammatory pathways. These appear to
strongly contribute to the inflammation-mediated amyloidogenic neuropathology of 
AD. This communication: (i) will review recent research contributions that have
expanded our understanding of the nature of the translocation of
microbiome-derived neurotoxins-across biophysiological barriers; (ii) will assess
multiple-recent investigations of the induction of the proinflammatory pathogenic
microRNA-146a by these two prominent classes of human microbiota; and (iii) will 
discuss the role of molecular neurobiology and mechanistic contribution of
polymicrobial infections to AD-type neuropathological change.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2018.00145 
PMCID: PMC5867462
PMID: 29615954 

