
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2018 Sep 24;62(10). pii: e00725-18. doi:
10.1128/AAC.00725-18. Print 2018 Oct.

Development and Validation of a Phenotypic High-Content Imaging Assay for
Assessing the Antiviral Activity of Small-Molecule Inhibitors Targeting Zika
Virus.

Bernatchez JA(1)(2), Yang Z(3), Coste M(4), Li J(3), Beck S(1), Liu Y(3), Clark
AE(1)(5), Zhu Z(6)(7), Luna LA(4), Sohl CD(4), Purse BW(4), Li R(8),
Siqueira-Neto JL(9)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.
(2)Center for Discovery and Innovation in Parasitic Diseases, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 
Omaha, Nebraska, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, San Diego State University, San
Diego, California, USA.
(5)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.
(6)Sanford Consortium for Regenerative Medicine, La Jolla, California, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine, Division of Regenerative Medicine, School of Medicine,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.
(8)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 
Omaha, Nebraska, USA rongshi.li@unmc.edu jairlage@ucsd.edu.
(9)Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA rongshi.li@unmc.edu
jairlage@ucsd.edu.

Zika virus (ZIKV) has been linked to the development of microcephaly in newborns,
as well as Guillain-Barré syndrome. There are currently no drugs available to
treat ZIKV infection, and accordingly, there is an unmet medical need for the
discovery of new therapies. High-throughput drug screening efforts focusing on
indirect readouts of cell viability are prone to a higher frequency of false
positives in cases where the virus is viable in the cell but the cytopathic
effect (CPE) is reduced or delayed. Here, we describe a fast and label-free
phenotypic high-content imaging assay to detect cells affected by the
virus-induced CPE using automated imaging and analysis. Protection from the CPE
correlates with a decrease in viral antigen production, as observed by
immunofluorescence. We trained our assay using a collection of nucleoside
analogues with activity against ZIKV; the previously reported antiviral
activities of 2'-C-methylribonucleosides and ribavirin against the Zika virus in 
Vero cells were confirmed using our developed method. To validate the ability of 
our assay to reveal new anti-ZIKV compounds, we profiled a novel library of 24
natural product derivatives and found compound 1 to be an inhibitor of the
ZIKV-induced cytopathic effect; the activity of the compound was confirmed in
human fetal neural stem cells (NSCs). The described technique can be easily
leveraged as a primary screening assay for profiling of the activities of large
compound libraries against ZIKV and can be expanded to other ZIKV strains and
other cell lines displaying morphological changes upon ZIKV infection.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00725-18 
PMCID: PMC6153842
PMID: 30061280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

