
1. Antiviral Res. 2018 Oct;158:45-51. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2018.07.024. Epub
2018 Aug 3.

Evolutionary pathways to NS5A inhibitor resistance in genotype 1 hepatitis C
virus.

Zhou S(1), Williford SE(2), McGivern DR(2), Burch CL(3), Hu F(4), Benzine T(5),
Ingravallo P(6), Asante-Appiah E(6), Howe AYM(6), Swanstrom R(7), Lemon SM(8).

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. Electronic address: shuntaiz@email.unc.edu.
(2)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of
Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC, USA.
(4)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of
Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA;
Guangzhou Eighth People's Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou,
China.
(5)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(6)Infectious Diseases, Merck Research Laboratory, Kenilworth, NJ, USA.
(7)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(8)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of
Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
Electronic address: smlemon@med.unc.edu.

Direct-acting antivirals (DAAs) targeting NS5A are broadly effective against
hepatitis C virus (HCV) infections, but sustained virological response rates are 
generally lower in patients infected with genotype (gt)-1a than gt-1b viruses.
The explanation for this remains uncertain. Here, we adopted a highly accurate,
ultra-deep primer ID sequencing approach to intensively study serial changes in
the NS5A-coding region of HCV in gt-1a- and gt-1b-infected subjects receiving a
short course of monotherapy with the NS5A inhibitor, elbasvir. Low or
undetectable levels of viremia precluded on-treatment analysis in gt-1b-infected 
subjects, but variants with the resistance-associated substitution (RAS) Y93H in 
NS5A dominated rebounding virus populations following cessation of treatment.
These variants persisted until the end of the study, two months later. In
contrast, while Y93H emerged in multiple lineages and became dominant in subjects
with gt-1a virus, these haplotypes rapidly decreased in frequency off therapy.
Substitutions at Q30 and L31 emerged in distinctly independent lineages at later 
time points, ultimately coming to dominate the virus population off therapy.
Consistent with this, cell culture studies with gt-1a and gt-1b reporter viruses 
and replicons demonstrated that Y93H confers a much greater loss of replicative
fitness in gt-1a than gt-1b virus, and that L31M/V both compensates for the loss 
of fitness associated with Q30R (but not Y93H) and also boosts drug resistance.
These observations show how differences in the impact of RASs on drug resistance 
and replicative fitness influence the evolution of gt-1a and gt-1b viruses during
monotherapy with an antiviral targeting NS5A.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2018.07.024 
PMCID: PMC6146077
PMID: 30081054  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

