
1. PLoS Pathog. 2018 Aug 24;14(8):e1007277. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007277.
eCollection 2018 Aug.

Exploitation of nuclear functions by human rhinovirus, a cytoplasmic RNA virus.

Flather D(1)(2), Nguyen JHC(1)(2), Semler BL(1)(2), Gershon PD(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine,
University of California, Irvine, California, United States of America.
(2)Center for Virus Research, University of California, Irvine, California,
United States of America.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California,
Irvine, California, United States of America.

Protein production, genomic RNA replication, and virion assembly during infection
by picornaviruses like human rhinovirus and poliovirus take place in the
cytoplasm of infected human cells, making them the quintessential cytoplasmic
pathogens. However, a growing body of evidence suggests that picornavirus
replication is promoted by a number of host proteins localized normally within
the host cell nucleus. To systematically identify such nuclear proteins, we
focused on those that appear to re-equilibrate from the nucleus to the cytoplasm 
during infection of HeLa cells with human rhinovirus via quantitative protein
mass spectrometry. Our analysis revealed a highly selective re-equilibration of
proteins with known mRNA splicing and transport-related functions over nuclear
proteins of all other functional classes. The multifunctional splicing factor
proline and glutamine rich (SFPQ) was identified as one such protein. We found
that SFPQ is targeted for proteolysis within the nucleus by viral proteinase
3CD/3C, and a fragment of SFPQ was shown to migrate to the cytoplasm at
mid-to-late times of infection. Cells knocked down for SFPQ expression showed
significantly reduced rhinovirus titers, viral protein production, and viral RNA 
accumulation, consistent with SFPQ being a pro-viral factor. The SFPQ fragment
that moved into the cytoplasm was able to bind rhinovirus RNA either directly or 
indirectly. We propose that the truncated form of SFPQ promotes viral RNA
stability or replication, or virion morphogenesis. More broadly, our findings
reveal dramatic changes in protein compartmentalization during human rhinovirus
infection, allowing the virus to systematically hijack the functions of proteins 
not normally found at its cytoplasmic site of replication.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007277 
PMCID: PMC6126879
PMID: 30142213  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

