
1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2019 Apr;143(4):1496-1512.e11. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2018.07.046. Epub 2018 Sep 19.

Transmaternal Helicobacter pylori exposure reduces allergic airway inflammation
in offspring through regulatory T cells.

Kyburz A(1), Fallegger A(1), Zhang X(1), Altobelli A(1), Artola-Boran M(1),
Borbet T(2), Urban S(1), Paul P(3), Münz C(3), Floess S(4), Huehn J(4), Cover
TL(5), Blaser MJ(2), Taube C(6), Müller A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Cancer Research, University of Zürich, Zurich,
Switzerland.
(2)Human Microbiome Program, New York University Langone Medical Center, New
York, NY.
(3)Institute of Experimental Immunology, University of Zürich, Zurich,
Switzerland.
(4)Department Experimental Immunology, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research,
Braunschweig, Germany.
(5)Vanderbilt University Medical Center and Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley
Healthcare System, Nashville, Tenn.
(6)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, University Hospital Essen-Ruhrlandklinik,
Essen, Germany.
(7)Institute of Molecular Cancer Research, University of Zürich, Zurich,
Switzerland. Electronic address: mueller@imcr.uzh.ch.

BACKGROUND: Transmaternal exposure to tobacco, microbes, nutrients, and other
environmental factors shapes the fetal immune system through epigenetic
processes. The gastric microbe Helicobacter pylori represents an ancestral
constituent of the human microbiota that causes gastric disorders on the one hand
and is inversely associated with allergies and chronic inflammatory conditions on
the other.
OBJECTIVE: Here we investigate the consequences of transmaternal exposure to H
pylori in utero and/or during lactation for susceptibility to viral and bacterial
infection, predisposition to allergic airway inflammation, and development of
immune cell populations in the lungs and lymphoid organs.
METHODS: We use experimental models of house dust mite- or ovalbumin-induced
airway inflammation and influenza A virus or Citrobacter rodentium infection
along with metagenomics analyses, multicolor flow cytometry, and bisulfite
pyrosequencing, to study the effects of H pylori on allergy severity and
immunologic and microbiome correlates thereof.
RESULTS: Perinatal exposure to H pylori extract or its immunomodulator
vacuolating cytotoxin confers robust protective effects against allergic airway
inflammation not only in first- but also second-generation offspring but does not
increase susceptibility to viral or bacterial infection. Immune correlates of
allergy protection include skewing of regulatory over effector T cells, expansion
of regulatory T-cell subsets expressing CXCR3 or retinoic acid-related orphan
receptor γt, and demethylation of the forkhead box P3 (FOXP3) locus. The
composition and diversity of the gastrointestinal microbiota is measurably
affected by perinatal H pylori exposure.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that exposure to H pylori has consequences not only for
the carrier but also for subsequent generations that can be exploited for
interventional purposes.

Copyright © 2018 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2018.07.046 
PMCID: PMC6592617
PMID: 30240703  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

