
1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2018;1087:17-33. doi: 10.1007/978-981-13-1426-1_2.

RNA sequencing and Prediction Tools for Circular RNAs Analysis.

López-Jiménez E(1), Rojas AM(2), Andrés-León E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Imperial College London, London, UK.
(2)Computational Biology and Bioinformatics Group, Institute of Biomedicine of
Seville, Seville, Spain.
(3)Bioinformatics Unit, Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina "López-Neyra",
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (IPBLN-CSIC), Granada, Spain.
eandres@ipb.csic.es.

Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are noncoding and single-stranded RNA transcripts able
to form covalently circular-closed structures. They are generated through
alternative splicing events and widely expressed from human to viruses. CircRNAs 
have been appointed as potential regulators of microRNAs (miRNAs), RNA-binding
proteins (RPBs), and lineal protein-coding transcripts. Although their mechanism 
of action remains unclear, the deregulation of circular RNAs has been confirmed
in different diseases such as Alzheimer or cancer.The introduction of
high-throughput next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology provides millions of 
short RNA sequences at single-nucleotide level, allowing an accurate and
proficient method to measure circular RNAs. Novel protocols based on
non-polyadenylated RNAs, rRNA-depleted, and RNA exonuclease-based enrichment
approaches (RNase R) have taken even further the possibility of detecting
circRNAs.Besides, the identification of circRNAs presence requires the
development of specific bioinformatics tools to detect junction-spanning
sequences from transcriptome deep-sequencing samples. Thus, recently established 
bioinformatics' approaches have permitted the discovery of an elevated number of 
different circRNAs in diverse organisms. In that sense, recent studies have
compared different methods and advocate the simultaneous use of more than one
prediction tool. For that reason, we want to highlight pipelines such as
miARma-Seq that is able to execute various circular RNA identification algorithms
in an easy way, without the tedious installation of third-party prerequisites.

DOI: 10.1007/978-981-13-1426-1_2 
PMID: 30259354  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

