
1. Biochemistry. 1986 Nov 18;25(23):7344-54.

Energetics of cooperative protein-DNA interactions: comparison between
quantitative deoxyribonuclease footprint titration and filter binding.

Senear DF, Brenowitz M, Shea MA, Ackers GK.

Using the binding of cI repressor protein to the lambda right and left operators 
as a model system, we have analyzed the two common experimental techniques for
studying the interactions of genome regulatory proteins with multiple, specific
sites on DNA. These are the quantitative DNase footprint titration technique
[Brenowitz, M., Senear, D. F., Shea, M. A., & Ackers, G. K. (1986) Methods
Enzymol. 130, 132-181] and the nitrocellulose filter binding assay [Riggs, A.,
Suzuki, H., & Bourgeois, S. (1970) J. Mol. Biol. 48, 67-83]. The footprint
titration technique provides binding curves that separately represent the
fractional saturation for each site. In principle, such data contain the
information necessary to determine the thermodynamic constants for local site
binding and cooperativity. We show that in practice, this is not possible for all
values of the constants in multisite systems, such as the lambda operators. We
show how these constants can nevertheless be uniquely determined by using
additional binding data from a small number of mutant operators in which the
number of binding sites has been reduced. The filter binding technique does not
distinguish binding to the individual sites and yields only macroscopic binding
parameters which are composite averages of the various local site and
cooperativity constants. Moreover, the resolution of even macroscopic constants
from filter binding data for multisite systems requires ad hoc assumptions as to 
a relationship between the number of ligands bound and the filter retention of
the complex. Our results indicate that no such relationship exists. Hence, the
technique does not permit determination of thermodynamically valid interaction
constants (even macroscopic) in multisite systems.

DOI: 10.1021/bi00371a016 
PMID: 3026451  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

