
1. Plant Physiol Biochem. 2018 Nov;132:603-611. doi: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2018.10.007.
Epub 2018 Oct 9.

Mulberry (Morus alba) MmSK gene enhances tolerance to drought stress in
transgenic mulberry.

Li R(1), Liu L(2), Dominic K(2), Wang T(3), Fan T(3), Hu F(4), Wang Y(3), Zhang
L(2), Li L(2), Zhao W(5).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Silkworm and Mulberry Genetic Improvement, Ministry of
Agriculture, School of Biology and Technology, Jiangsu University of Science and 
Technology, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, China; Sericultural Research Institute, Anhui
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hefei, Anhui, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Silkworm and Mulberry Genetic Improvement, Ministry of
Agriculture, School of Biology and Technology, Jiangsu University of Science and 
Technology, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, China.
(3)Sericultural Research Institute, Anhui Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Hefei, Anhui, China.
(4)Plant Protection and Agro-products Safety Institute, Anhui Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Hefei, Anhui, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Silkworm and Mulberry Genetic Improvement, Ministry of
Agriculture, School of Biology and Technology, Jiangsu University of Science and 
Technology, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, China. Electronic address: wgzsri@126.com.

Shaggy-like protein kinase (SK) plays important roles in the plant growth
development, signal transduction, abiotic stress and biotic stress and substance 
metabolism regulation. However, the exact function of the response to drought
stress in mulberry with SK remains unclear. In this study, a new SK gene that was
designated as MmSK (GenBank accession NO: KY348867) was isolated and cloned from 
mulberry (Morus alba). MmSK contains two SK conservation domains of ATP domain
and Serine/Threonine protein kinases active-site signature, and belonged to
GSK3/shaggy protein kinase family. The expression of MmSK in mulberry was
up-regulated under various abiotic stress treatments. Meanwhile, we observed
higher expression levels in the phloem contrasted with other tissues. Mulberry
MmSK gene was successfully silenced by virus induced gene silencing (VIGS), and
after MmSK was silenced, the expression of MmSK in pTRV2-MmSK-VIGS plant
(transgenic mulberry) dropped to 34.02% compared with the negative control
inoculated with empty vector pTRV2-00 (CK). Under drought stress, the soluble
protein content, proline content, superoxide dismutase (SOD) and peroxidase (POD)
activities in transgenic mulberry decreased in different degree compared with the
CK. In contrast, the accumulation of malondialdehyde (MDA) increased
significantly in transgenic mulberry. With the extension of drought stress
treatment time, the soluble protein content, proline content and MDA content
gradually increased. The SOD activity and POD activity under drought stress
gradually rose to the maximum on the fifth day and then decreased, which
consistent with the change trend of MmSK gene expression. These results suggested
that MmSK gene could function as a positive regulator of drought stress in
mulberry.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2018.10.007 
PMID: 30336380  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

