
1. J Viral Hepat. 2019 Mar;26(3):323-328. doi: 10.1111/jvh.13034. Epub 2018 Dec 3.

Characterization of changes in intrahepatic immune cell populations during HCV
treatment with sofosbuvir and ribavirin.

Orr C(1), Aartun J(2), Masur H(3), Kottilil S(4), Meissner EG(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, South Carolina.
(2)Department of Oral Health Sciences, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, South Carolina.
(3)Critical Care Medicine Department, NIH Clinical Center, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(4)Division of Clinical Care and Research, Institute of Human Virology,
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina.

Treatment of chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection with direct-acting
antivirals (DAAs) results in a sustained virologic response (SVR) in most
patients. While highly efficacious, ~3%-5% of patients do not achieve SVR despite
having virus that appears susceptible. It is unclear whether host factors
contribute to treatment failures, although innate and adaptive immunity may play 
a role. Previous studies showed that after DAA treatment, the composition of
intrahepatic immune cells does not normalize relative to healthy volunteers, even
in cases where SVR is achieved. We used paired pre- and post-treatment liver
biopsies from 13 patients treated with sofosbuvir and ribavirin, 4 of whom
relapsed, to analyse intracellular immune changes during DAA treatment and
explore correlations with inflammation and treatment outcome. We performed single
marker immunohistochemistry followed by electronic image capture, manual
annotation of parenchymal and non-parenchymal regions, and quantitative image
analysis. The predominant cellular change during treatment was a decrease in CD8+
cellular density in both parenchymal and non-parenchymal regions. CD68+ Kupffer
cell density correlated with hepatic inflammation (AST, ALT) pre-treatment, but
did not change during treatment. CD4+ cellular density decreased in
non-parenchymal regions and, intriguingly, was lower pre-treatment in subjects
who eventually relapsed. Other cellular markers (CD56, CD20), as well as markers 
of apoptosis (TIA-1) and activated stellate cells, did not change significantly
during treatment or differ by treatment outcome. The predominant intrahepatic
cellular change during DAA treatment of chronic HCV infection is a reduction in
CD8+ cellular density, but this did not correlate with treatment outcome.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jvh.13034 
PMCID: PMC6379130
PMID: 30383918  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

