
1. Dis Aquat Organ. 2018 Dec 11;132(1):23-35. doi: 10.3354/dao03300.

Co-exposure to multiple ranavirus types enhances viral infectivity and
replication in a larval amphibian system.

Mihaljevic JR(1), Hoverman JT, Johnson PTJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Colorado,
Boulder, CO 80309, USA.

Multiple pathogens commonly co-occur in animal populations, yet few studies
demonstrate how co-exposure of individual hosts scales up to affect transmission.
Although viruses in the genus Ranavirus are globally widespread, and multiple
virus species or strains likely co-occur in nature, no studies have examined how 
co-exposure affects infection dynamics in larval amphibians. We exposed
individual northern red-legged frog Rana aurora larvae to 2 species of ranavirus,
namely Ambystoma tigrinum virus (ATV), frog virus 3 (FV3), or an FV3-like strain 
isolated from a frog-culturing facility in Georgia, USA (RCV-Z2). We compared
single-virus to pairwise co-exposures while experimentally accounting for dosage.
Co-exposure to ATV and FV3-like strains resulted in almost twice as many infected
individuals compared to single-virus exposures, suggesting an effect of
co-exposure on viral infectivity. The viral load in infected individuals exposed 
to ATV and FV3 was also higher than the single-dose FV3 treatment, suggesting an 
effect of co-exposure on viral replication. In a follow-up experiment, we
examined how the co-occurrence of ATV and FV3 affected epizootics in mesocosm
populations of larval western chorus frogs Pseudacris triseriata. Although ATV
did not generally establish within host populations (<4% prevalence), when ATV
and FV3 were both present, this co-exposure resulted in a larger epizootic of
FV3. Our results emphasize the importance of multi-pathogen interactions in
epizootic dynamics and have management implications for natural and commercial
amphibian populations.

DOI: 10.3354/dao03300 
PMID: 30530928  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

