
1. AIDS Res Ther. 2018 Dec 21;15(1):28. doi: 10.1186/s12981-018-0216-9.

Looking at the positives: proactive management of STIs in people with HIV.

Khaw C(1)(2), Richardson D(3)(4), Matthews G(5), Read T(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Adelaide Sexual Health Centre (Clinic 275), Infectious Diseases Unit, Royal
Adelaide Hospital, 275 North Terrace, Adelaide, SA, 5000, Australia.
carole.khaw@sa.gov.au.
(2)School of Medicine, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
carole.khaw@sa.gov.au.
(3)Department of Sexual Health and HIV Medicine, Brighton and Sussex Medical
School, Brighton, UK.
(4)Department of Sexual Health and HIV Medicine, Brighton and Sussex University
NHS Trust, Brighton, UK.
(5)The Kirby Institute, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(6)Melbourne Sexual Health Centre, Alfred Health, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(7)Central Clinical School, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

Patients who are HIV-positive and co-infected with other sexually transmitted
infections (STIs) are at risk of increased morbidity and mortality. This is of
clinical significance. There has been a dramatic increase in the incidence of
STIs, particularly syphilis, gonorrhoea, Mycoplasma genitalium and hepatitis C
virus (HCV) in HIV-positive patients. The reasons for this are multifactorial,
but contributing factors may include effective treatment for HIV, increased STI
testing, use of HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis and use of social media to meet
sexual partners. The rate of syphilis-HIV co-infection is increasing, with a
corresponding increase in its incidence in the wider community. HIV-positive
patients infected with syphilis are more likely to have neurological invasion,
causing syndromes of neurosyphilis and ocular syphilis. HIV infection accelerates
HCV disease progression in co-infected patients, and liver disease is a leading
cause of non-AIDS-related mortality among patients who are HIV-positive. Since
several direct-acting antivirals have become subsidised in Australia, there has
been an increase in treatment uptake and a decrease in HCV viraemia in
HIV-positive patients. The incidence of other sexually transmitted bacterial
infections such as Neisseria gonorrhoeae and M. genitalium is increasing in HIV
patients, causing urethritis, proctitis and other syndromes. Increasing
antimicrobial resistance has also become a major concern, making treatment of
these infections challenging. Increased appropriate testing and vigilant
management of these STIs with data acquisition on antimicrobial sensitivities and
antimicrobial stewardship are essential to prevent ongoing epidemics and
emergence of resistance. Although efforts to prevent, treat and reduce epidemics 
of STIs in patients living with HIV are underway, further advances are needed to 
reduce the significant morbidity associated with co-infection in this patient
setting.

DOI: 10.1186/s12981-018-0216-9 
PMCID: PMC6302453
PMID: 30577866  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

