
1. Sci Rep. 2019 Feb 20;9(1):2388. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-38090-5.

A Haemophilus sp. dominates the microbiota of sputum from UK adults with
non-severe community acquired pneumonia and chronic lung disease.

Wootton DG(1)(2), Cox MJ(3), Gloor GB(4), Litt D(5), Hoschler K(6), German E(7), 
Court J(7), Eneje O(7), Keogan L(8), Macfarlane L(7), Wilks S(7), Diggle PJ(9),
Woodhead M(10)(11), Moffatt MF(3), Cookson WOC(3), Gordon SB(7)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, 
UK. dwootton@liverpool.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Respiratory Research, Aintree University Hospital NHS Foundation
Trust, Liverpool, UK. dwootton@liverpool.ac.uk.
(3)Section of Genomic Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial
College London, London, UK.
(4)Departments of Biochemistry and Applied Mathematics, University of Western
Ontario, Ontario, ON, Canada.
(5)Respiratory and Vaccine Preventable Bacteria Reference Unit, National
Infection Service, Public Health England, London, UK.
(6)Virus Reference Department, National Infection Service, Public Health England,
London, UK.
(7)Department of Clinical Sciences, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine,
Liverpool, UK.
(8)Department of Respiratory Research, Aintree University Hospital NHS Foundation
Trust, Liverpool, UK.
(9)CHICAS, Lancaster University Medical School, Lancaster University, Lancaster, 
UK.
(10)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Central Manchester University Hospitals
NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(11)Manchester Academic Health Science Centre and Faculty of Medical and Human
Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(12)The Malawi Liverpool Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Programme, Blantyre,
Malawi.

The demographics and comorbidities of patients with community acquired pneumonia 
(CAP) vary enormously but stratified treatment is difficult because aetiological 
studies have failed to comprehensively identify the pathogens. Our aim was to
describe the bacterial microbiota of CAP and relate these to clinical
characteristics in order to inform future trials of treatment stratified by
co-morbidity. CAP patients were prospectively recruited at two UK hospitals. We
used 16S rRNA gene sequencing to identify the dominant bacteria in sputum and
compositional data analysis to determine associations with patient
characteristics. We analysed sputum samples from 77 patients and found a
Streptococcus sp. and a Haemophilus sp. were the most relatively abundant
pathogens. The Haemophilus sp. was more likely to be dominant in patients with
pre-existing lung disease, and its relative abundance was associated with qPCR
levels of Haemophilus influenzae. The most abundant Streptococcus sp. was
associated with qPCR levels of Streptococcus pneumoniae but dominance could not
be predicted from clinical characteristics. These data suggest chronic lung
disease influences the microbiota of sputum in patients with CAP. This finding
could inform a trial of stratifying empirical CAP antibiotics to target
Haemophilus spp. in addition to Streptococcus spp. in those with chronic lung
disease.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-38090-5 
PMCID: PMC6382935
PMID: 30787368  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

