
1. J Hum Lact. 2019 Nov;35(4):737-741. doi: 10.1177/0890334419830994. Epub 2019 Mar 
6.

Maintaining Breastfeeding During Severe Infant and Maternal HSV-1 Infection: A
Case Report.

D'Andrea MA(1), Spatz DL(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Professor of Perinatal Nursing & Helen M. Shearer Professor of Nutrition,
University of Pennsylvania School of Nursing, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Nurse Researcher & Manager of Lactation Program, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia.

Erratum in
    J Hum Lact. 2019 May;35(2):386.

INTRODUCTION: Childbearing women with primary or secondary Herpes Simplex Virus
type 1 infection are at risk of transmitting neonatal herpes infection to their
infants; a medical emergency that is associated with high mortality and
morbidity. Neonatal herpes infection has been commonly associated with Herpes
Simplex Virus type 2, or genital herpes, but can be caused by either subtype and 
the presentations are indistinguishable. This case describes the course of
diagnosis, treatment, and recovery for a mother and infant during a severe
maternal and neonatal herpes infection, and how lactation was maintained and
breastfeeding re-established. Our children's hospital coordinated its efforts to 
assist and monitor this breastfeeding family, and they were able to resume
breastfeeding soon after discharge. It is our opinion that it is imperative that 
mothers receive evidence-based lactation care to maintain their breastfeeding
relationship during extended hospital stays.
MAIN ISSUE: An acutely ill infant was admitted to our urban children's hospital
with severe neonatal herpes infection for a total of 3 weeks. His mother was
severely affected on her breasts and she required a brief hospitalization. The
mother's breasts were covered with draining herpetic lesions that required daily 
dressing changes. However, her lesions were slow to heal, and a wound care
consultation was facilitated and her treatment plan was adjusted. We were
surprised that she experienced minimal discomfort with pumping and dressing
changes. The mother maintained a positive outlook, complied with the plan to
express frequently to maintain milk production, and was able to breastfeed again 
when they both recovered.
MANAGEMENT: This mother received immediate support and appropriate pumping
equipment from our hospital personnel and was subsequently able to establish and 
maintain her milk supply. The difficulty in this case was the management of the
mother's extensive herpetic wounds that were slow to heal. A certified wound care
specialist was required. Both mother and child recovered from their infections
and were able to restart breastfeeding; eventually reaching their goal of
breastfeeding for 2 years.
CONCLUSIONS: Neonatal herpes infection is a potentially fatal disease and
maternal child health professionals should have a high suspicion for any
ill-appearing newborn with or without a rash. When a breastfeeding infant and
mother become infected with Herpes Simplex Virus type 1, it is the responsibility
of the healthcare institution to support lactation and the return to
breastfeeding rather than recommend cessation of lactation, which is rarely
necessary. A multi-disciplinary evidence-based approach to lactation care is
essential to preserve lactation during infant hospitalization.

DOI: 10.1177/0890334419830994 
PMID: 30840531  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

