
1. J Mol Cell Biol. 2019 Aug 19;11(8):665-677. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mjz025.

Dynamic edge-based biomarker non-invasively predicts hepatocellular carcinoma
with hepatitis B virus infection for individual patients based on blood testing.

Lu Y(1), Fang Z(2), Li M(2)(3), Chen Q(1), Zeng T(2), Lu L(2), Chen Q(1), Zhang
H(1), Zhou Q(1), Sun Y(4), Xue X(4), Hu Y(5), Chen L(2)(6)(7)(8), Su S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Interdisciplinary Integrative Medicine Research, Shanghai
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Systems Biology, Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell
Science, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institute of
Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(3)Minhang Branch, Zhongshan Hospital/Institute of Fudan-Minhang Academic Health 
System, Minhang Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Qidong Liver Cancer Institute, Qidong People's Hospital, Qidong, China.
(5)Institute of Liver Disease, Shuguang Hospital, Shanghai University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(6)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Kunming, China.
(7)School of Life Science and Technology, Shanghai Tech University, Shanghai,
China.
(8)Research Center for Brain Science and Brain-Inspired Intelligence, Shanghai,
China.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV)-induced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a major cause
of cancer-related deaths in Asia and Africa. Developing effective and
non-invasive biomarkers of HCC for individual patients remains an urgent task for
early diagnosis and convenient monitoring. Analyzing the transcriptomic profiles 
of peripheral blood mononuclear cells from both healthy donors and patients with 
chronic HBV infection in different states (i.e. HBV carrier, chronic hepatitis B,
cirrhosis, and HCC), we identified a set of 19 candidate genes according to our
algorithm of dynamic network biomarkers. These genes can both characterize
different stages during HCC progression and identify cirrhosis as the critical
transition stage before carcinogenesis. The interaction effects (i.e.
co-expressions) of candidate genes were used to build an accurate prediction
model: the so-called edge-based biomarker. Considering the convenience and
robustness of biomarkers in clinical applications, we performed functional
analysis, validated candidate genes in other independent samples of our collected
cohort, and finally selected COL5A1, HLA-DQB1, MMP2, and CDK4 to build edge panel
as prediction models. We demonstrated that the edge panel had great performance
in both diagnosis and prognosis in terms of precision and specificity for HCC,
especially for patients with alpha-fetoprotein-negative HCC. Our study not only
provides a novel edge-based biomarker for non-invasive and effective diagnosis of
HBV-associated HCC to each individual patient but also introduces a new way to
integrate the interaction terms of individual molecules for clinical diagnosis
and prognosis from the network and dynamics perspectives.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Journal
of Molecular Cell Biology, IBCB, SIBS, CAS.

DOI: 10.1093/jmcb/mjz025 
PMCID: PMC6788726
PMID: 30925583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

