
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2019 May 24;63(6). pii: e00342-19. doi:
10.1128/AAC.00342-19. Print 2019 Jun.

Lysocins: Bioengineered Antimicrobials That Deliver Lysins across the Outer
Membrane of Gram-Negative Bacteria.

Heselpoth RD(1), Euler CW(2)(3)(4), Schuch R(5), Fischetti VA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Bacterial Pathogenesis and Immunology, The Rockefeller
University, New York, New York, USA rheselpoth@rockefeller.edu.
(2)Laboratory of Bacterial Pathogenesis and Immunology, The Rockefeller
University, New York, New York, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences, Hunter College, CUNY, New York, New
York, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New 
York, New York, USA.
(5)ContraFect Corporation, Yonkers, New York, USA.

The prevalence of multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa has stimulated
development of alternative therapeutics. Bacteriophage peptidoglycan hydrolases, 
termed lysins, represent an emerging antimicrobial option for targeting
Gram-positive bacteria. However, lysins against Gram-negatives are generally
deterred by the outer membrane and their inability to work in serum. One solution
involves exploiting evolved delivery systems used by colicin-like bacteriocins
(e.g., S-type pyocins of P. aeruginosa) to translocate through the outer
membrane. Following surface receptor binding, colicin-like bacteriocins form Tol-
or TonB-dependent translocons to actively import bactericidal domains through
outer membrane protein channels. With this understanding, we developed lysocins, 
which are bioengineered lysin-bacteriocin fusion molecules capable of periplasmic
import. In our proof-of-concept studies, components from the P. aeruginosa
bacteriocin pyocin S2 (PyS2) responsible for surface receptor binding and outer
membrane translocation were fused to the GN4 lysin to generate the PyS2-GN4
lysocin. PyS2-GN4 delivered the GN4 lysin to the periplasm to induce
peptidoglycan cleavage and log-fold killing of P. aeruginosa with minimal
endotoxin release. While displaying narrow-spectrum antipseudomonal activity in
human serum, PyS2-GN4 also efficiently disrupted biofilms, outperformed
standard-of-care antibiotics, exhibited no cytotoxicity toward eukaryotic cells, 
and protected mice from P. aeruginosa challenge in a bacteremia model. In
addition to targeting P. aeruginosa, lysocins can be constructed to target other 
prominent Gram-negative bacterial pathogens.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00342-19 
PMCID: PMC6535517
PMID: 30962344  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

