
1. No Shinkei Geka. 2019 May;47(5):559-563. doi: 10.11477/mf.1436203981.

[A Case of Metastatic Peripheral T-cell Lymphoma of the Central Nervous System
During the Perinatal Period].

[Article in Japanese]

Eda H(1), Miyazaki T, Oonishi C, Mitaki S, Nakagawa F, Hagiwara S, Nagai H,
Akiyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Shimane University Faculty of Medicine.

The diagnosis of malignant tumors during pregnancy is not uncommon; the incidence
is one per six thousand pregnancies. However, the diagnosis of malignant
lymphoma-especially T-cell lymphoma-during pregnancy is extremely rare. Thus, the
early detection and management of T-cell lymphoma necessitates difficult
decision-making. A 30-year-old woman developed consciousness disturbance on
postpartum day three. Because brain MRI showed multiple edematous lesions in both
hemispheres, vasculitis or encephalitis was initially suspected, and diagnostic
therapy was initiated with the administration of steroids. One month later, the
patient suddenly developed a subarachnoid hemorrhage followed by acute
hydrocephalus. Emergent ventricular drainage and lesion biopsy were
simultaneously performed. Based on the findings, the patient was diagnosed with
peripheral T-cell lymphoma not otherwise specified(PTCL-NOS). Laboratory findings
indicated Epstein-Barr virus(EBV)infection. Moreover, the same diagnosis was
supported by breast and bone marrow biopsies. Thus, the brain lesions were
presumed to be metastatic in nature. The prognosis of PTCL-NOS is severely poor
in pregnant women as diagnosis is delayed owing to limitations of radiological
examinations and because symptoms can be confused with those of other diseases or
hyperemesis gravidarum. Additionally, the alteration of immunotolerance in
association with pregnancy and EBV infection might have influenced the aggressive
features of this case. When a pregnant woman presents with neurological symptoms,
malignant lymphoma should be considered when making a differential diagnosis.

DOI: 10.11477/mf.1436203981 
PMID: 31105080  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

