
1. J Virol. 2019 Aug 28;93(18). pii: e00827-19. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00827-19. Print
2019 Sep 15.

Blockade of PD-1 and LAG-3 Immune Checkpoints Combined with Vaccination Restores 
the Function of Antiviral Tissue-Resident CD8+ TRM Cells and Reduces Ocular
Herpes Simplex Infection and Disease in HLA Transgenic Rabbits.

Roy S(1), Coulon PG(1), Prakash S(1), Srivastava R(1), Geertsema R(2),
Dhanushkodi N(1), Lam C(1), Nguyen V(1), Gorospe E(1), Nguyen AM(1), Salazar
S(1), Alomari NI(1), Warsi WR(1), BenMohamed L(3)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Immunology, Gavin Herbert Eye Institute, 
School of Medicine, University of California-Irvine, Irvine, California, USA.
(2)University Laboratory Animal Resources, University of California-Irvine,
Irvine, California, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Immunology, Gavin Herbert Eye Institute, 
School of Medicine, University of California-Irvine, Irvine, California, USA
Lbenmoha@uci.edu.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, School of Medicine,
University of California-Irvine, Irvine, California, USA.
(5)Institute for Immunology, School of Medicine, University of California-Irvine,
Irvine, California, USA.

Chronic viruses such as herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) evade the hosts' immune
system by inducing the exhaustion of antiviral T cells. In the present study, we 
found that exhausted HSV-specific CD8+ T cells, with elevated expression of
programmed death ligand-1 (PD-1) and lymphocyte activation gene-3 (LAG-3)
receptors were frequent in symptomatic patients, with a history of numerous
episodes of recurrent corneal herpetic disease, compared to asymptomatic patients
who never had corneal herpetic disease. Subsequently, using a rabbit model of
recurrent ocular herpes, we found that the combined blockade of PD-1 and LAG-3
pathways with antagonist antibodies significantly restored the function of
tissue-resident antiviral CD8+ TRM cells in both the cornea and the trigeminal
ganglia (TG). An increased number of functional tissue-resident HSV-specific CD8+
TRM cells in latently infected rabbits was associated with protection against
recurrent herpes infection and disease. Compared to the PD-1 or LAG-3 blockade
alone, the combined blockade of PD-1 and LAG-3 appeared to have a synergistic
effect in generating frequent polyfunctional Ki-67+, IFN-γ+, CD107+, and CD8+ T
cells. Moreover, using the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) transgenic rabbit model,
we found that dual blockade of PD-1 and LAG-3 reinforced the effect of a
multiepitope vaccine in boosting the frequency of HSV-1-specific CD8+ TRM cells
and reducing disease severity. Thus, both the PD-1 and the LAG-3 exhaustion
pathways play a fundamental role in ocular herpes T cell immunopathology and
provide important immune checkpoint targets to combat ocular herpes.IMPORTANCE
HSV-specific tissue-resident memory CD8+ TRM cells play a critical role in
preventing virus reactivation from latently infected TG and subsequent virus
shedding in tears that trigger the recurrent corneal herpetic disease. In this
report, we determined how the dual blockade of PD-1 and LAG-3 immune checkpoints,
combined with vaccination, improved the function of CD8+ TRM cells associated
with a significant reduction in recurrent ocular herpes in HLA transgenic (Tg)
rabbit model. The combined blockade of PD-1 and LAG-3 appeared to have a
synergistic effect in generating frequent polyfunctional CD8+ TRM cells that
infiltrated both the cornea and the TG. The preclinical findings using the
established HLA Tg rabbit model of recurrent herpes highlight that blocking
immune checkpoints combined with a T cell-based vaccine would provide an
important strategy to combat recurrent ocular herpes in the clinic.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00827-19 
PMCID: PMC6714801
PMID: 31217250  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

