
1. Arch Mal Coeur Vaiss. 1988 Feb;81(2):207-11.

[Pericarditis and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome].

[Article in French]

Malu K(1), Longo-Mbenza B, Lurhuma Z, Odio W.

Author information: 
(1)Cliniques universitaires du Mont-Amba, service de cardiologie, Zaïre.

In order to evaluate the frequency and clinical features of pericarditis caused
by the HIV virus, 17 patients (mean age 28 years) presenting with pericarditis
were investigated at the University Clinics of Mont-Amba (Zaïre), between
January, 1985 and December, 1986. The clinical diagnosis of AIDS had been made on
the basis of the WHO criteria. An ELISA test, a tuberculin test and a
T4-lymphocyte count were performed in all patients. Cardiovascular explorations
were limited to electrocardiography, radiography of the chest, echocardiography
and pericardial needle aspiration. HIV pericarditis accounted for 50 p. 100 of
all cases of pericarditis. It was either dry or effusive with little fluid, and
its clinical signs at the early stage of AIDS were retrosternal pain and
pericardial friction rub. A search for anti-HIV antibodies may be negative at
that stage. Diagnostic errors can be avoided if the tuberculin test is negative
and if an ELISA test is performed repeatedly at 3 weeks' intervals. Pericarditis 
should be counted among the minor signs of AIDS.

PIP: Cardiac manifestations have not attracted the attention of AIDS researchers 
as much as pulmonary, digestive tract, and nervous system effects. Recent
autopsies on AIDS patients, however, have revealed cardiac lesions of several
types, including pericarditis. To evaluate the frequency and clinical aspects of 
pericarditis due to HIV infection, 17 subjects with AIDS-associated pericarditis 
were studied at the University Clinics in Mont-Amba, Kinshasa, Zaire, between
January 1985-December 1986. Subjects ranged in age from 20-50 years and averaged 
28 years. 11 women were prostitutes and 6 men reported having at least 5 sexual
partners. The clinical diagnosis of AIDS was based on World Health Organization
criteria. An ELISA test, a tuberculin test, and a T-4 lymphocyte count were
prepared for each patient. All 17 had an electrocardiogram, a radiography of the 
chest, and echocardiography, and 12 had pericardial needle aspiration. HIV
pericarditis accounted for 50% of cases of pericarditis in the service. It was
either dry or effusive with little fluid. Its clinical signs at the early stages 
of AIDS were retrosternal pain and pericardial friction rub. A search for
anti-HIV antibodies may be negative at the early stages, but diagnostic errors
can be avoided if the tuberculin test is negative a if an ELISA test is repeated 
at 3 week intervals. Pericarditis can be considered 1 of the minor signs of AIDS.

PMID: 3130820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

