
1. PLoS One. 2019 Oct 10;14(10):e0223438. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0223438.
eCollection 2019.

Comparison of transcriptomes of an orthotospovirus vector and non-vector thrips
species.

Shrestha A(1), Champagne DE(2), Culbreath AK(3), Abney MR(4), Srinivasan R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, University of Georgia, Griffin, GA, United States of
America.
(2)Department of Entomology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, United States of 
America.
(3)Department of Plant Pathology, University of Georgia, Tifton, GA, United
States of America.
(4)Department of Entomology, University of Georgia, Tifton, GA, United States of 
America.

Thrips transmit one of the most devastating plant viruses worldwide-tomato
spotted wilt tospovirus (TSWV). Tomato spotted wilt tospovirus is a type species 
in the genus Orthotospovirus and family Tospoviridae. Although there are more
than 7,000 thrips species, only nine thrips species are known to transmit TSWV.
In this study, we investigated the molecular factors that could affect thrips
ability to transmit TSWV. We assembled transcriptomes of a vector, Frankliniella 
fusca [Hinds], and a non-vector, Frankliniella tritici [Fitch], and performed
qualitative comparisons of contigs associated with virus reception, virus
infection, and innate immunity. Annotations of F. fusca and F. tritici contigs
revealed slight differences across biological process and molecular functional
groups. Comparison of virus cell surface receptors revealed that homologs of
integrin were present in both species. However, homologs of another receptor,
heperan sulfate, were present in F. fusca alone. Contigs associated with virus
replication were identified in both species, but a contig involved in inhibition 
of virus replication (radical s-adenosylmethionine) was only present in the
non-vector, F. tritici. Additionally, some differences in immune signaling
pathways were identified between vector and non-vector thrips. Detailed
investigations are necessary to functionally characterize these differences
between vector and non-vector thrips and assess their relevance in
orthotospovirus transmission.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0223438 
PMCID: PMC6786753
PMID: 31600262  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

