
1. J Travel Med. 2019 Dec 23;26(8). pii: taz077. doi: 10.1093/jtm/taz077.

Dengue, Zika and chikungunya during pregnancy: pre- and post-travel advice and
clinical management.

Vouga M(1), Chiu YC(1), Pomar L(1), de Meyer SV(1), Masmejan S(1), Genton B(2),
Musso D(3), Baud D(1), Stojanov M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Materno-fetal and Obstetrics Research Unit, Department Woman-Mother-Child,
Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland.
(2)Travel Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Aix Marseille University, IRD, AP-HM, SSA, VITROME, IHU-Méditerranée
Infection, Marseille, France.

RATIONALE FOR REVIEW: Young adults of childbearing age and pregnant women are
travelling more frequently to tropical areas, exposing them to specific arboviral
infections such as dengue, zika and chikungunya viruses, which may impact ongoing
and future pregnancies. In this narrative review, we analyse their potential
consequences on pregnancy outcomes and discuss current travel recommendations.
MAIN FINDINGS: Dengue virus may be associated with severe maternal complications,
particularly post-partum haemorrhage. Its association with adverse fetal outcomes
remains unclear, but prematurity, growth retardation and stillbirths may occur,
particularly in cases of severe maternal infection. Zika virus is a teratogenic
infectious agent associated with severe brain lesions, with similar risks to
other well-known TORCH pathogens. Implications of chikungunya virus in pregnancy 
are mostly related to intrapartum transmission that may be associated with severe
neonatal infections and long-term morbidity.
TRAVEL RECOMMENDATIONS: Few agencies provide specific travel recommendations for 
travelling pregnant patients or couples trying to conceive and discrepancies
exist, particularly regarding Zika virus prevention. The risks significantly
depend on epidemiological factors that may be difficult to predict. Prevention
relies principally on mosquito control measures. Couples trying to conceive and
pregnant women should receive adequate information about the potential risks. It 
seems reasonable to advise pregnant women to avoid unnecessary travel to Aedes
spp. endemic regions. The current rationale to avoid travel and delay conception 
is debatable in the absence of any epidemic. Post-travel laboratory testing
should be reserved for symptomatic patients.

© International Society of Travel Medicine 2019. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jtm/taz077 
PMCID: PMC6927317
PMID: 31616923  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

