
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1986 Sep;83(18):6677-81.

RNA polymerase specificity of mRNA production and enhancer action.

Lopata MA, Cleveland DW, Sollner-Webb B.

To examine the RNA polymerase (EC 2.7.7.6) specificity of RNA
maturation/utilization and transcriptional enhancement, we constructed a chimeric
plasmid (pPolI-CAT) in which a promoter for mouse rRNA gene transcription was
placed adjacent the coding sequences for chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT; 
EC 2.3.1.28). A number of other constructs, including plasmids also containing a 
murine sarcoma virus enhancer or lacking any natural eukaryotic promoter
sequences, were also prepared. In apparent agreement with earlier conclusions
that an RNA polymerase I transcript can act as a messenger RNA, transient
transfection of mouse L cells with pPolI-CAT yielded both high levels of
transcription from the RNA polymerase I promoter and enzymatically active CAT
protein. However, further examination revealed that CAT protein is not translated
from RNA that begins at the normal rRNA transcription initiation site. Polysomal 
RNA is devoid of such RNA and instead consists of CAT-encoding transcripts that
begin elsewhere in the mouse ribosomal DNA (rDNA) region. Since transcription of 
these aberrant RNAs is stimulated by the addition of a murine sarcoma virus
enhancer segment, they are probably transcribed by RNA polymerase II. Transcripts
that map to the authentic rRNA start site are not similarly enhanced. Moreover,
unlike the RNAs deriving from the rRNA initiation site, these aberrant RNAs are
more stable and the level of translatable CAT transcripts is suppressed by
inclusion of larger segments of the rDNA promoter regions. Fortuitously initiated
mRNAs are also formed in the absence of any natural eukaryotic promoter sequence.
From these data we conclude that there is no evidence that normal RNA polymerase 
I transcription yields functional mRNA and that transcriptional enhancement
appears to be RNA polymerase specific.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.83.18.6677 
PMCID: PMC386572
PMID: 3462718  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

