
1. Med J Aust. 1986 Feb 17;144(4):185-90.

Cancer risks and the contraceptive pill. What is the evidence after nearly 25
years of use?

Khoo SK.

PIP: The question of whether the steroidal components in oral contraceptives
(OCs) may have an initiating or promotional influence on the development of
cancer continues to be raised as a public health issue. It is estimated that
since the introduction of OCs nearly 25 years ago, more than 150 million women
have used 1 or more types of the formulation and nearly 1 billion woman-years of 
exposure to the steroids have accumulated. Contraceptive practice in Australia
would indicate that about 25% of women of reproductive age are using OCs. The
debate about the OC's carcinogenic potential has recently been reopened with 2
reports in "The Lancet" of an association between the incidence of breast and
cervical cancer and OC usage. Biologically the relationship between the
contraceptive steroids and cancer must continue to be regarded as the most
important concern with the longterm use of OCs. The demonstration of receptors to
these steriods in these organs, in both normal and malignant tissues, further
increases the speculation that the steroid hormones have a biological role in
carcinogenesis in these target organs. Theoretical reasons exist for the concern 
about carcinogenesis and contraceptive steroids. This paper reviews the available
evicence. Data can be derived only from large-scale epidemiological research, by 
means of case-control or cohort studies. No clear evidence exists that OCs cause 
or increase the chance of developing any cancer in the female genital tract and
the breast. In fact, OC offers a significant protection against the development
of endometrial and ovarian cancer, especially to those women who have taken OCs
for a long time. The association between the risk of breast cancer and OC use is 
less certain, but factors such as the history of benign breast disease, a close
relationship with breast cancer, or nulliparity -- previously considered to be
important -- do not appear to contribute significantly to the risk. The weight of
evidence indicates that no increased risk of breast cancer exists, even in those 
younger women aged less than 25 years who decide to use OCs before their 1st
full-term pregnancy. There is some evidence that suggests that the risk of
cervical neoplasia -- dysplasia, carcinoma-in-situ and invasive carcinoma -- may 
increase slightly in OC users but the actual part played by the patient's sexual 
history under these circumstances remains to be defined. There is now strong
evidence to implicate multiplicity of sexual partners and wart virus infection in
carcinogenesis of the uterine cervix. There does not appear to be an overall
relationship between OCs and malignant melanoma. Overall, the evidence is
reassuring. The low-dose combined OC can be considered safe, not only in terms of
cardiovascular and thromboembolic risks, but also in relation to carcinogenesis.

PMID: 3511357  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

