
1. Acta Pathol Microbiol Immunol Scand B. 1983 Aug;91(4):267-71.

Rapid diagnosis of respiratory syncytial virus and influenza A virus infections
by immunofluorescence: experience with a simplified procedure for the preparation
of cell smears from nasopharyngeal secretions.

Anestad G, Breivik N, Thoresen T.

A simplified procedure for preparing direct smears of exfoliated cells from
nasopharyngeal secretions is presented. The specimens were examined by the
indirect immunofluorescence (IF) technique for the presence of respiratory
syncytial (RS) virus and influenza A virus antigens. Specimens from 457 children 
hospitalised at twelve different hospital departments in Norway were examined
during the winter season 1980-81. RS virus was identified in samples from 139
children and influenza A virus from 28. Results of IF examinations for RS virus
were copositive with serology in 19 of 23 cases (83%) and with probably no false 
positive results. Samples from 29 children were also prepared by the conventional
washing technique. RS virus was identified in 18 of these specimens. Seventeen of
these were also found positive by the simplified method. This comparison was done
blind. Compared to results of virus isolation and serology the IF examinations
for influenza A virus were somewhat less sensitive with copositivity in 12 of 17 
cases (71%) and in one instance the IF finding was probably false positive.
However, also for influenza A virus our IF findings were fully comparable with
figures obtained by others who performed the conventional washing technique for
preparation of exfoliated cells from nasopharyngeal secretions. General
practitioners submitted samples from 65 patients, and RS virus and influenza A
virus were identified in eleven and four cases respectively. The simplicity of
preparation of cell smears from nasopharyngeal secretions with our simplified
method opens up the possibility of the application of rapid respiratory virus
diagnostic service to an increasing number of hospital departments and also for
general practitioners. We feel that this method is a suitable tool for
surveillance of certain respiratory virus infections.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1699-0463.1983.tb00045.x 
PMID: 6353858  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

