
1. Mol Endocrinol. 1995 Aug;9(8):1005-16.

Targeted ablation of pituitary pre-proopiomelanocortin cells by herpes simplex
virus-1 thymidine kinase differentially regulates mRNAs encoding the
adrenocorticotropin receptor and aldosterone synthase in the mouse adrenal gland.

Allen RG(1), Carey C, Parker JD, Mortrud MT, Mellon SH, Low MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research on Occupational and Environmental Toxicology, Vollum
Institute, Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland 97201, USA.

We have produced and characterized lines of transgenic mice expressing a fusion
gene composed of the pituitary expression-specific promoter region of the POMC
gene, driving the herpes simplex viral-1 thymidine kinase. Adult mice were
treated with the antiherpes agent ganciclovir at 70 mg/kg body weight (ip, twice 
daily for 10-12 days). Approximately 98% of the pituitary intermediate lobe
melanotropes and anterior lobe corticotropes were ablated as determined by
immunocytochemistry and RIA specific for the POMC-derived peptides, ACTH,
beta-endorophin, and alpha-MSH. The number of lactotropes, somatotropes,
thyrotropes, and gonadotropes was not altered compared with controls, indicating 
that in the adult pituitary, POMC products are not required to maintain the
distribution of cell types. As expected, plasma corticosterone levels were
substantially decreased after POMC cell ablation. In situ hybridization studies
showed that the mouse ACTH receptor was expressed uniformly throughout the
adrenal cortex, and RNase protection assays revealed that the ACTH receptor mRNA 
decreased after pituitary POMC cell ablation. Additionally, RNase protection
assays showed that pituitary POMC cell ablation resulted in the decrease of
adrenal p450c11 beta transcripts while p450c11AS (aldosterone synthase) mRNA
levels remained constant. These data demonstrate differential regulation of
steroid pathway-specific enzymes by POMC products. Our results also suggest that 
the thymidine kinase cell obliteration technique may not be dependent on cell
division as a prerequisite for cytotoxicity, thus supporting the idea that
targeted molecular ablation using cell- and tissue-specific promoter sequences to
drive viral thymidine kinase expression can be refined further to study other
nonmitotic cells.

DOI: 10.1210/mend.9.8.7476975 
PMID: 7476975  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

