
1. Blood. 1994 Oct 15;84(8):2604-11.

Expression of recombinant transmembrane CD59 in paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria B cells confers resistance to human complement.

Rother RP(1), Rollins SA, Mennone J, Chodera A, Fidel SA, Bessler M, Hillmen P,
Squinto SP.

Author information: 
(1)Alexion Pharmaceuticals Inc, New Haven, CT.

Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) is an acquired hematopoietic disorder
characterized by complement-mediated hemolytic anemia, pancytopenia, and venous
thrombosis. These clinical manifestations arise from an underlying molecular
defect of bone marrow stem cells. Specifically, somatic mutations in the
phosphatidylinositol glycan class A gene result in the ability of blood cells to 
anchor complement-regulatory proteins (CD59 and DAF) to the cell surface via
glycosyl phosphatidylinositol (GPI). In an attempt to circumvent the functional
defect in PNH cells, a recombinant transmembrane form of CD59 (CD59-TM) was
analyzed for the ability to regulate complement activity. Balb/3T3 stable
transfectants expressing similar levels of either CD59-TM or native CD59
(CD59-GPI) were equally protected against human complement-mediated membrane
damage. Treatment of these cells with phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase
C failed to release CD59-TM from the cell surface. Retroviral transduction of
GPI-anchoring deficient mouse L cells with CD59-TM resulted in surface expression
of the protein and rendered these cells resistant to human complement-mediated
membrane damage. Conversely, L cells transduced with CD59-GPI failed to express
this protein on the cell surface. A GPI-anchoring deficient complement-sensitive 
B-cell line derived from a PNH patient was successfully transduced with CD59-TM, 
resulting in surface expression of the protein. The PNH B cells expressing
CD59-TM were protected against classical complement-mediated membrane damage by
human serum. Taken together, these data establish that a functional recombinant
transmembrane form of CD59 can be expressed on the surface of GPI-anchoring
deficient PNH cells and suggest that retroviral gene therapy with this molecule
could provide a treatment for PNH patients.


PMID: 7522635  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

