
1. J Mol Neurosci. 1994-1995;5(4):241-58.

NF-kappa B site-mediated negative regulation of the HIV-1 promoter by
CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins in brain-derived cells.

Mondal D(1), Alam J, Prakash O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Alton Ochsner Medical Foundation, New
Orleans, LA 70121, USA.

Several transcription regulatory elements that interact with cellular DNA-binding
proteins have been identified in the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR). We have
identified two sequence motifs in the U3 region of the LTR that are similar to
the consensus 9-bp DNA-binding element of the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein
(C/EBP) family of transcription factors. One of the sequences (promoter-proximal)
mapped immediately upstream of the NF-kappa B element, whereas the other
(promoter-distal) completely overlapped the upstream stimulatory factor (USF)
binding site. In this study, we investigated the role of the enhancer-proximal
consensus C/EBP binding sequence in the expression of the HIV-1 LTR. In
cotransfection assays we found that although this sequence is a functional
C/EBP-responsive element, the regulation of the HIV promoter by C/EBP is very
complex. C/EBP isoforms inhibited the phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate
(PMA)-stimulated HIV-1 promoter activity in human glioblastoma U138MG and
neuroblastoma SHSY5Y cells, but not in HeLa epithelial cells, and this inhibition
required the NF-kappa B element. C/EBP also downregulated the HIV NF-kappa B
element-containing SV40 early promoter activity, regardless of the presence of
the flanking C/EBP-binding sequences, in the two brain-derived cells. In
electrophoretic mobility shift assays with nuclear extracts from HeLa and U138MG 
cells, purified C/EBP markedly increased the complex formation between endogenous
proteins and the NF-kappa B DNA probe without detectable association with the
complex. However, with extracts from U138MG cells but not from HeLa cells, a slow
migrating complex was observed. Our data suggest that the C/EBP family of
transcription factors can downregulate the HIV-1 promoter activity in CNS-derived
cells through the NF-kappa B binding elements.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02736725 
PMID: 7577367  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

