
1. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol. 1995 May;2(3):302-6.

Lymphocytic 2',5'-oligoadenylate synthetase activity increases prior to the
appearance of neutralizing antibodies and immunoglobulin M and immunoglobulin G
antibodies after primary and secondary immunization with yellow fever vaccine.

Bonnevie-Nielsen V(1), Heron I, Monath TP, Calisher CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Odense University, Denmark.

Primary and secondary immunizations with live, attenuated yellow fever virus
vaccine (17D strain) were performed in order to study the course of appearance of
virus-neutralizing antibodies and immunoglobulin M (IgM) and IgG antibodies
directed against the virus and the interferon-dependent enzyme
2',5'-oligoadenylate synthetase (2',5'AS) activity, determined in homogenates of 
peripheral B and T lymphocytes. From cellular ATP, this enzyme generates
2',5'-oligoadenylates which mediate degradation of viral mRNA by stimulation of a
latent RNase. By day 4 after the first immunization, the earliest and highest
2',5'AS activity was present in the T-lymphocyte fraction. By day 7, the enzyme
activity was highest in the B-lymphocyte fraction. Virus-neutralizing antibodies 
appeared on day 7, and IgM antibodies were present on day 12. After the second
immunization, performed 2 years +/- 2 months later, the only significant increase
in 2',5'AS activity was observed in the T-lymphocyte fraction. Virus-neutralizing
antibodies were present from day 1, whereas no IgM antibodies were detected. By
day 12, 80% of the vaccines were IgG positive. In the primary and secondary
(memory) immune responses, 2',5'AS activity is expressed in the T-lymphocyte
fraction prior to the appearance of antibodies directed against the virus and may
serve as an early and sensitive marker of an ongoing virus infection which is
otherwise difficult to detect. No change in conventional laboratory analysis
parameters, such as in differential blood cell counts or total IgA, IgG, and IgM,
disclosed the immune activity in either the primary or the secondary
immunization.


PMCID: PMC170150
PMID: 7664176  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

