
1. Ann Surg. 1995 Sep;222(3):229-39; discussion 239-42.

Gene transfer to the thymus. A means of abrogating the immune response to
recombinant adenovirus.

DeMatteo RP(1), Raper SE, Ahn M, Fisher KJ, Burke C, Radu A, Widera G, Claytor
BR, Barker CF, Markmann JF.

Author information: 
(1)Harrison Department of Surgical Research, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The authors investigated whether adenoviral gene transfer to the
thymus could be accomplished in vivo and whether immunologic unresponsiveness to 
recombinant adenovirus could be induced by intrathymic inoculation.
SUMMARY BACKGROUND DATA: A major barrier to the clinical application of
adenovirus-mediated gene therapy for diseases requiring long-lasting gene
expression is the immunogenicity of adenoviral vectors, which limits the duration
of its effects. In other experimental models, intrathymic inoculation of foreign 
proteins or cells has proven to be an effective means to induce immunologic
tolerance.
METHODS: The efficiency of gene transfer to the mouse thymus after direct
inoculation of recombinant adenovirus was compared with that of several other
vectors. Animals inoculated with adenovirus-infected pancreatic islets into the
thymus were tested for unresponsiveness to the virus with a subsequent challenge 
of adenovirus administered into the liver by intravenous injection.
RESULTS: Adenovirus accomplished highly efficient gene transfer to the thymus,
unlike plasmid DNA, DNA-liposome complexes, retrovirus, and adeno-associated
virus. Adenoviral transgene expression was transient in the thymus of
immunocompetent mice but persistent in CD8+ T-cell-deficient and severe combined 
immunodeficiency (SCID) mice, implicating the role of cytotoxic T lymphocytes in 
viral clearance. Intrathymic transplantation of syngeneic pancreatic islet cells 
infected with adenovirus impaired the normal antiviral cytotoxic T-lymphocyte
response and prolonged hepatic transgene expression after an intravenous
challenge with adenovirus.
CONCLUSIONS: Recombinant adenovirus accomplishes highly efficient gene transfer
to the thymus in vivo. Intrathymic inoculation of adenovirus-infected islets can 
be used to induce immunologic unresponsiveness to the adenoviral vector and,
potentially, to other proteins that it might be engineered to encode.

DOI: 10.1097/00000658-199509000-00002 
PMCID: PMC1234797
PMID: 7677454  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

