
1. J Biol Chem. 1993 May 15;268(14):9980-5.

Monoclonal antibody-mediated inhibition of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase polymerase
activity. Interaction with a possible deoxynucleoside triphosphate binding
domain.

Wu J(1), Amandoron E, Li X, Wainberg MA, Parniak MA.

Author information: 
(1)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Sir Mortimer B. Davis-Jewish
General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

A series of monoclonal antibodies against p51/p66 human immunodeficiency virus-1 
(HIV-1) reverse transcriptase (RT) were prepared by immunizing mice with the
native enzyme immobilized on nitrocellulose. One of these antibodies, designated 
1E8, was found to inhibit both RNA-dependent and DNA-dependent polymerase
activities of RT but had no effect on the RNase H activity of the enzyme. This
inhibition was noncompetitive with respect to primer/template and competitive
with respect to deoxynucleoside triphosphate (dNTP). The extent of 1E8 inhibition
of RT polymerase activity decreased with increasing concentrations of dNTP in the
incubation but was not affected by changes in primer/template concentration. 1E8 
bound equally well in solution to both free RT and to the RT-primer/template
complex. However, binding to the latter was significantly reduced by the addition
of increasing concentrations of dNTP. The ability of dNTP to inhibit the
interaction of 1E8 with the RT-primer/template complex was dependent on the
identity of the homopolymeric primer/template used; only that dNTP complementary 
to the template was effective in this respect. 1E8 bound to the p51/p66 reverse
transcriptase heterodimer in solution and reacted with both p51 and p66 subunits 
of reverse transcriptase on Western blots. The antibody is therefore presumed to 
recognize a linear surface epitope on the enzyme. 1E8 was found to specifically
recognize a peptide with the sequence KKDSTKWRK. This sequence corresponds to
residues 65-73 of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase, a region identified as highly
antigenic by several computer algorithms. Two mutations within this sequence have
been identified with resistance to 3'-azido,3'-deoxythymidine. We conclude that
residues 65-73 of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase may be at or near the polymerase
active site of the enzyme, and may form part of the deoxynucleoside triphosphate 
binding domain of the enzyme.


PMID: 7683687  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

