
1. Biochemistry. 1995 Jun 27;34(25):8061-75.

Characterization of gastrin-releasing peptide receptor expressed in Sf9 insect
cells by baculovirus.

Kusui T(1), Hellmich MR, Wang LH, Evans RL, Benya RV, Battey JF, Jensen RT.

Author information: 
(1)Digestive Diseases Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1804,
USA.

Whereas baculovirus expression systems have been extensively used for high-level 
expression of steroid receptors and receptors coupled to adenylate cyclase, there
are few studies on peptide receptors coupled to phospholipase C (PLC). In the
present study we have expressed the murine gastrin-releasing peptide receptor
(mGRP-R) in Sf9 cells using a recombinant baculovirus and characterized it
structurally and functionally. mGRP-R was detectible 12 h post infection with
recombinant baculovirus carrying mGRP-R cDNA and became maximal at 60 h post
infection (Bmax = 6 pmol/mg protein), which is a 4-60-fold greater density than
is found in native tissues. The mGRP-R in Sf9 cells assessed by affinity labeling
or immunoblotting was smaller than that in native tissues (M(r) = 51 kD vs 82
kD), and the difference was due to the extent of glycosylation. In Sf9 cells the 
mGRP-R had at least two of the four potential extracellular glycosylation sites
glycosylated, whereas in the native receptor all four were approximately equally 
glycosylated. In Sf9 cells the glycosylation was entirely biantennary complex, in
contrast to the native mGRP-R, where it was entirely tri- and tetraantennary
complex N-linked oligosaccharides. Affinity labeling studies revealed a band with
an apparent molecular mass about 40 kDa higher than the 51-kDa mGRP-R band. The
intensity of this band correlated with the extent of functional G protein
coupling, suggesting that it may represent an mGRP-R-G protein complex. In
binding studies the affinity of the mGRP-r in Sf9 cells for the agonists bombesin
(Bn), GRP, and neuromedin B (NMB) varied differently with infection time: with Bn
the affinity decreased 3-fold with longer infection times, with GRP it remained
unchanged, and with NMB it decreased 10-fold. GPP(NH)p inhibited binding of
either [125I]Tyr4Bn or [125I]GRP at 24 h post infection, but not at 96 h post
infection. Agonists activated PLC, increasing both [3H]IP and [Ca2+]i; however,
the efficacy of each agonist decreased with infection time. These results
demonstrate that by the use of recombinant baculovirus infected Sf9 cells the
PLC-linked receptor mGRP-R can be expressed in amounts significantly greater than
those in native tissues. The mGRP-R expressed in these Sf9 cells is incompletely 
glycosylated and has less complex N-linked oligosaccharide chains, yet it is
fully coupled to G proteins and activates phospholipase C, similar to the native 
receptor, if short infection times are used.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1021/bi00025a012 
PMID: 7794919  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

