
1. Biologicals. 1994 Sep;22(3):205-13.

Susceptibility of the Sf9 insect cell line to infection with adventitious
viruses.

Zhang PF(1), Klutch M, Muller J, Marcus-Sekura CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Viral Products, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, Food
and Drug Administration, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Sf9, the insect cell line commonly used for gene expression by recombinant
baculovirus (BV), can be infected by St. Louis encephalitis (SLE) virus, a
flavivirus, resulting in a persistent, productive, and cytopathic infection,
while retaining the ability to be infected with a recombinant baculovirus (rBV). 
We now demonstrate using double immunofluorescence that single cells are dually
infected with SLE virus and rBV. Fourteen additional viruses including additional
flaviviruses, other arbovirus classes, vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), and
herpes simplex virus, type 1 (HSV-1) failed to produce a cytopathic effect (CPE) 
in Sf9 cells. Plaque assays indicated infectious virus was present for several
weeks post-inoculation for Yellow fever (YF), Dengue types 1 and 2 (DEN-1 and
DEN-2), Gumbo limbo (GL), Eastern equine encephalomyelitis virus (EEE), Western
equine encephalomyelitis virus (WEE), HSV-1, and VSV viruses. For HSV-1, GL, EEE,
WEE and VSV, but not for YF, DEN-1 or DEN-2 viruses, this could be attributed
solely to survival in the Sf9 cell culture media. Of the 14 viruses tested, only 
HSV-1 could be detected after 2 weeks in serum-free media. The data indicate that
several viruses which are pathogenic for humans are stable for long periods of
time at 27 degrees C in the serum-containing media used for cultivation of Sf9
cells. YF, DEN-1 and DEN-2 viruses may replicate in Sf9 cells at extremely low
levels. This suggests that adventitious agents which do not produce obvious CPE
or interfere with rBV infection or recombinant protein expression could
contaminate Sf9 cell cultures or media.

DOI: 10.1006/biol.1994.1030 
PMID: 7811453  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

