
1. EMBO J. 1994 Dec 15;13(24):6152-61.

Chromosome end formation in phage lambda, catalyzed by terminase, is controlled
by two DNA elements of cos, cosN and R3, and by ATP.

Higgins RR(1), Becker A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, University of Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.

The terminase enzyme of phage lambda is a site-specific endonuclease that nicks
DNA concatemers to regenerate the 12 nucleotide cohesive ends of the mature
chromosome. The enzyme's DNA target, cos, consists of a nicking domain, cosN, and
a binding domain, cosB. cosB, situated to the right of cosN, comprises three 16
bp repeat sequences, R1, R2 and R3. A similar sequence, R4, is present to the
left of cosN. It is shown here that terminase has an intrinsic specificity for
cosN which is independent of the R sites. The interaction with cosN is mediated
by binding to target sites that include 12 bp on the 5', and 2-7 bp on the 3'
side of the nick. Of the four R sites, only R3 is required for the proper
formation of ends. When R3 is present, an ATP-charged terminase system correctly 
catalyzes the production of staggered nicks in cosN, at sites N1 and N2 on the
bottom and top strands, respectively. When ATP is omitted, the bottom strand is
nicked incorrectly, at the site Nx, 8 bp to the left of N1. If R3 is removed or
disabled by a point mutation, nicking in cosN becomes dependent upon ATP but,
even in the presence of ATP, bottom strand nicking is divided between sites N1,
the correct site, and Nx, the incorrect one. Thus, R3 is an important regulatory 
element and must reside in cis in respect to cosN. Furthermore, cosN substrates
bearing point mutations at N1 and N2 are nicked at sites Nx and Ny, 8 bp to the
left of N1 and N2, respectively. When R3 is present and ATP is added, nicking is 
redirected to the N1 and N2 positions despite the mutations present. Thus,
terminase binding to R3, on one side of cosN, regulates the rotationally
symmetric nicking reactions on the bottom and top strands within cosN.


PMCID: PMC395595
PMID: 7813452  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

