
1. AIDS. 1994 Oct;8(10):1397-404.

Staphylococcal superantigens activate HIV-1 replication in naturally infected
monocytes.

Goujard C(1), Wallon C, Rudent A, Boué F, Barre-Sinoussi F, Delfraissy JF.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U131, Department of Medicine, Antoine Béclère Hospital, Clamart,
France.

OBJECTIVES: To study the effects of microbial superantigens, Staphylococcal
exotoxins (SE), on HIV replication in monocytes following binding to and
signalling through major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II molecules.
METHODS: We investigated the effects of SE on HIV replication and monokine
production in three different in vitro models of monocyte culture: chronically
infected monocytic cell line U1, acute infection of normal monocytes by different
HIV-1 strains, and naturally-infected monocytes from seropositive patients. p24
antigen, interleukin (IL)-6 and tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha production was
measured by specific enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
RESULTS: Staphylococcal enterotoxin B and toxic shock syndrome toxin-1 (1-1000
ng/ml) are powerful inducers of HIV-1 expression in U1 cells pretreated with
granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor. SE induce viral replication in 
short-term cultures (days 6-21) of monocytes infected in vitro by HIVBa-L,
HIVLAI, or naturally infected in vivo. Induction of HIV expression requires
direct interactions of SE with MHC class II molecules but not T-cell receptor
binding and T-cell-monocyte contact. Anti-TNF-alpha and anti-IL-6 neutralizing
monoclonal antibodies inhibit by over 61% SE-induced HIV replication.
CONCLUSIONS: Using SE we have linked two important pathways for the regulation of
HIV replication in monocytes, namely signalling through MHC class II molecules
and monokine production potentially mediated by induction of the pleiotropic
cellular transcription factor NF-kappa B. In HIV-infected patients bacterial
infections are common and could be an important cofactor in the
immunopathogenesis of AIDS by inducing HIV replication in latently infected
monocytes. Their prevention might emerge as beneficial in these patients.

DOI: 10.1097/00002030-199410000-00005 
PMID: 7818810  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

