
1. Virus Res. 1994 Oct;34(1):49-61.

Fine mechanisms of ectromelia virus thymidine kinase-negative mutants avirulence.

Kochneva GV(1), Urmanov IH, Ryabchikova EI, Streltsov VV, Serpinsky OI.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, NPO Vector, Koltsovo, Novosibirsk Region,
Russia.

Three independently selected spontaneous thymidine kinase-negative mutants
(TK-phenotype) and a recombinant with Escherichia coli beta-galactosidase gene
(LacZ+ phenotype) inserted in the viral thymidine kinase gene (tk) were derived
from a plaque-cloned isolate of K-1 ectromelia virus strain (TK+ phenotype).
Dramatically decreased virulence of TK- variants was observed for all routes of
mouse inoculation. The kinetics of TK+ and TK- variants in various target organs 
indicated a significant decrease of production and dissemination of TK- mutants
and recombinant in the organs of mice. In the spleen and liver of intranasally or
intracerebrally infected mice TK- virus was not detected during the entire period
of observation. Analysis of organs homogenates of mice intranasally infected by a
mixture of recombinant with TK-LacZ+ phenotype and parental isolate with TK+LacZ-
phenotype on the monolayers of TK- cells indicated that only white plaques
(LacZ-) with the TK+ phenotype appeared from liver and spleen homogenates. Thus, 
the mouse acts as a live filter much more efficiently than any other selective
systems. Ultrastructural studies showed that viral damage in animals infected by 
TK- variants was far less than that observed in mice, infected with wild type of 
ectromelia virus and pathological lessions were slight and reversible.
Replication of ectromelia virus TK- variants was blocked at the viroplasma stage 
in cells with a high level of differentiation in contrast to TK+ variants. Most
likely, such restriction of target cells assortment is the general reason of
reduced virulence in the case of tk-gene inactivation.

DOI: 10.1016/0168-1702(94)90118-x 
PMID: 7831964  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

