
1. J Clin Invest. 1995 Feb;95(2):477-85.

Focal expression of interleukin-2 does not break unresponsiveness to "self"
(viral) antigen expressed in beta cells but enhances development of autoimmune
disease (diabetes) after initiation of an anti-self immune response.

von Herrath MG(1), Allison J, Miller JF, Oldstone MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropharmacology, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
California 92037.

The participation of IL-2 in insulin-dependent (type 1) diabetes (IDDM) was
analyzed in transgenic (tg) mice expressing the nucleoprotein (NP) of lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus and IL-2 under control of the rat insulin promoter focally
in beta cells of the islets of Langerhans. Insertion and expression of the viral 
(self) gene or of the IL-2 gene alone did not lead to IDDM. Infiltration
primarily of CD4 and B lymphocytes and increased expression of MHC class I and II
molecules occurred in islets where IL-2 was expressed. By contrast, neither
cellular infiltrates nor expression of MHC class I or II glycoproteins above base
levels was noted in tgs expressing the viral protein alone. Double tg mice
expressing both the viral protein and IL-2 in their islets displayed a modest
increase in incidence of spontaneous diabetes compared with that of single
transgenic mice expressing IL-2 alone. Breaking of immunological unresponsiveness
or sensitization to self antigens did not occur. Neither cytotoxic T lymphocytes 
(CTL) nor antibodies directed against the viral tg (NP) were generated. However, 
after challenge with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus, double tg mice developed
anti-self (viral) CTL and IDDM (incidence > 95%) within 2 mo. The generation of
virus ("self")-specific MHC-restricted CTL was dependent on CD4+ help. In
contrast, viral inoculum to single tg mice expressing either the viral protein or
IL-2 failed to enhance the incidence of IDDM over 30% for viral protein or 10%
for IL-2 after an 8-mo observation period. Hence, in this autoimmune model in
situ expression of IL-2 did not break unresponsiveness but markedly enhanced
ongoing disease.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI117688 
PMCID: PMC295493
PMID: 7860729  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

