
1. Lab Invest. 1994 Sep;71(3):350-8.

Early region 3-replacement adenovirus recombinants are less pathogenic in cotton 
rats and mice than early region 3-deleted viruses.

Berencsi K(1), Uri A, Valyi-Nagy T, Valyi-Nagy I, Meignier B, Peretz FV, Rando
RF, Plotkin SA, Gönczöl E.

Author information: 
(1)Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

BACKGROUND: Adenovirus type-5 (Ad5) recombinant viruses with replacement of the
1.9 kb XbaI fragment in the early region 3 (E3) by foreign genes have been
constructed with the ultimate goal of inducing immune responses to the product of
the inserted gene against a variety of virus infections. The pathogenicity of
these recombinants, however, has not been studied.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Histopathologic changes induced in cotton rat and mouse lung
by E3-replacement-Ad5 recombinant or wild-type Ad (Wt-Ad) or E3-deleted mutant
(Ad5-delta E3) viruses were compared. Expression of viral mRNA and replication of
these viruses in cotton rat and mouse lungs, as well as in human tissue culture
cells, were assayed. Expression of class I major histocompatibility complex
antigens and the E3-14.7 kilodalton protein in virus-infected cells were also
analyzed.
RESULTS: An Ad5 recombinant, Ad-human cytomegalovirus glycoprotein B
(Ad-HCMV.gB), in which the E3 region is replaced by the full-length gB gene of
HCMV and with a genome size exceeding that of Wt-Ad, induced mild histopathologic
responses in cotton rat and mouse lungs, comparable with those of Wt-Ad, but less
severe than those of Ad5-delta E3. Analysis indicated that neither class I major 
histocompatibility complex expression on the cell surface nor differential
expression of the protective E3-14.7 kilodalton protein underlies the pathologic 
differences observed in cells infected with Ad5-delta E3 or the Ad-HCMV.gB
recombinant. In the mouse lung, another Ad-E3 replacement recombinant, Ad-herpes 
simplex glycoprotein B (HSV.gB), containing the complete HSV.gB gene and with a
genome size larger than that of Wt-Ad, also induced a very mild inflammatory
response. However, two recombinants with truncated forms of the HCMV.gB
(Ad-HCMV.gB.155) or HSV.gB genes (Ad-HSV.gB.147) produced more severe
histopathologic changes than the Wt-Ad or the recombinants with the full
complement of HCMV.gB or HSV.gB genes. Ad5 and some of the recombinants
replicated in mouse and cotton rat lung, and the extent of replication was
inversely proportional to genome size, both in the lung and in human tissue
culture cells. Infectious virus titers were, however, higher in cotton rat than
in mouse lung. In situ hybridization analysis of cotton rat and mouse lung
infected with Wt-Ad, Ad5-delta E3, or Ad-HCMV.gB virus revealed expression of Ad 
early/late mRNA predominantly in bronchial epithelial cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These data not only confirm that E3-deleted viruses induce more
severe pathologic changes in cotton rat lungs than Wt-Ad viruses (Ginsberg et
al., Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989;86:3823-7) but led to the observation that some 
E3 replacement recombinants also lacking the expression of the 19 and 14.7
kilodalton proteins are significantly less pathogenic in cotton rats and mice
than an E3-deleted virus. Pathogenicity and replication of the recombinant
viruses inversely correlate with the genomic size.


PMID: 7933985  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

