
1. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1994 May;170(5 Pt 2):1569-75.

Noncontraceptive effects of hormonal contraceptives: bone mass, sexually
transmitted disease and pelvic inflammatory disease, cardiovascular disease,
menstrual function, and future fertility.

Burkman RT Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology-Obstetrics, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI 48202.

Noncontraceptive actions of oral contraceptives (OCs) include hormonal effects on
bone mass, sexually transmitted disease, pelvic inflammatory disease, the
cardiovascular system, menstrual function, and future fertility. Information
about the effects of OCs on bone mass is limited and contradictory. Two recent
studies failed to show a positive effect of OC use on bone mass or density
compared with the three cross-sectional studies and one longitudinal study that
showed favorable effects. A recently completed study of 156 healthy females
indicated a significant correlation between OC use and the rate of change in
total body bone-mineral content. One study involving depot medroxyprogesterone
acetate suggests bone density decreases with long-term use of the drug. The use
of OCs does not reduce the risk of gonococcal or chlamydial infection of the
lower tract and in fact may enhance spread of lower tract infection. However, OCs
may exert a protective effect against some types of pelvic inflammatory disease. 
Regarding transmission of human immunodeficiency virus, the results of recent
studies are conflicting. Research related to newer OC formulations containing 35 
micrograms or less of ethinyl estradiol suggests that the risk of a negative
cardiovascular effect is substantially reduced. All forms of hormonal
contraception alter menstrual function to some degree, but most patterns improve 
with duration of use. No evidence exists that hormonal contraception permanently 
affects fertility, although fertility restoration may be delayed with some
agents.

DOI: 10.1016/s0002-9378(12)91817-7 
PMID: 8178908  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

