
1. J Gen Virol. 1993 Apr;74 ( Pt 4):613-22.

Two groups of human herpesvirus 6 identified by sequence analyses of laboratory
strains and variants from Hodgkin's lymphoma and bone marrow transplant patients.

Gompels UA(1), Carrigan DR, Carss AL, Arno J.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge Department of Medicine, Addenbrooke's Hospital, U.K.

Fifteen human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6) strain variants were analysed by PCR
amplifications, restriction enzyme site polymorphism and sequence analyses. Three
DNA regions were chosen for study: a fragment of a variable glycoprotein gene
(210 bp), the conserved glycoprotein H (gH) gene complete with intergenic
sequences (2381 bp) and the 5' intergenic region with the N-terminal coding
sequence of gH up to a polymorphic BamHI site (427 bp). Infected cell DNA from
five laboratory reference strains including GS, U1102, AJ, Z29 and KF were
examined together with DNA from peripheral blood lymphocytes infected with HHV-6 
reactivated from blood and/or marrow from five bone marrow transplant (BMT)
patients. Separate blood and marrow isolates were obtained from four BMT
patients. In addition, HHV-6 sequences were examined directly from one of six
Hodgkin's lymphomas and six B cell proliferations which contained HHV-6 DNA as
detected by PCR amplification. The results show two groups of very closely
related but heterogeneous strains which correlate with previous groupings by
antigenic and restriction site differences. These are variant A strains
(including laboratory strains GS, U1102 and AJ) and variant B strains (including 
laboratory strains Z29 and KF, the Hodgkin's lymphoma strain, and the nine BMT
patient isolates). Variations between the groups were 4 to 6% in nucleotide
sequence and 5 to 8.5% in amino acid sequence. Within each group maximum
heterogeneity was observed in different genes. Variant A strains differed by 2.0%
in the variable glycoprotein gene sequence whereas variant B strains were
identical in this region; conversely, variant B strains differed by 2 to 3% in
the gH N-terminal and intergenic sequences whereas variant A strains differed
there by less than 0.2%. There was evidence for sequence drift independent of
selection: relationships between the groups were shown by analyses of amino acid 
sequence, coding nucleotide sequence as well as intergenic sequence, and the B
variant-specific BamHI site in the gH gene was due to a non-coding nucleotide
substitution. There was little evidence for in vivo or in vitro variation: the gH
nucleotide sequence from the uncultured lymphoma strain (first variant B gH gene 
identified) was almost identical to the gH sequence from four BMT isolates, and
matched BMT isolates from blood and marrow were identical or with a single
nucleotide substitution.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-74-4-613 
PMID: 8385692  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

