
1. J Biol Chem. 1996 May 3;271(18):10953-62.

Wortmannin-sensitive trafficking pathways in Chinese hamster ovary cells.
Differential effects on endocytosis and lysosomal sorting.

Martys JL(1), Wjasow C, Gangi DM, Kielian MC, McGraw TE, Backer JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

Phosphatidylinositol (PI) 3'-kinases are a family of lipid kinases implicated in 
the regulation of cell growth by oncogene products and tyrosine kinase growth
factor receptors. The catalytic subunit of the p85/p110 PI 3'-kinase is
homologous to VPS-34, a phosphatidylinositol-specific lipid kinase involved in
the sorting of newly synthesized hydrolases to the yeast vacuole. This suggests
that PI 3'-kinases may play analogous roles in mammalian cells. We have measured 
a number of secretory and endocytic trafficking events in Chinese hamster ovary
cells in the presence of wortmannin, a potent inhibitor of PI 3'-kinase.
Wortmannin caused a 40-50% down-regulation of surface transferrin receptors, with
a dose dependence identical to that required for maximal inhibition of the
p85/p110 PI 3'-kinase in intact cells. The redistribution of transferrin
receptors reflected a 60% increase in the internalization rate and a 35% decrease
in the recycling rate. Experiments with fluorescent transferrin showed that entry
of transferrin receptors into the recycling compartment and efflux of receptors
out of the compartment were slowed by wortmannin. Wortmannin altered the
morphology of the recycling compartment, which was more vesiculated than in
untreated cells. Using Semliki Forest virus as a probe, we also found that
delivery of the endocytosed virus to its lysosomal site of degradation was slowed
by wortmannin, whereas endosomal acidification was unaffected. In contrast to
these effects on endocytosis and recycling, wortmannin did not affect
intracellular processing of newly synthesized viral spike proteins. Wortmannin
did induce missorting of the lysosomal enzyme cathepsin D to the secretory
pathway, but only at a dose 20-fold greater than that required to inhibit
p85/p110 PI 3'-kinase activity or to redistribute transferrin receptors. Our data
demonstrate the presence of wortmannin-sensitive enzymes at three distinct steps 
of the endocytic cycle in Chinese hamster ovary cells: internalization, transit
from early endosomes to the recycling and degradative compartments, and transit
from the recycling compartment back to the cell surface. The wortmannin-sensitive
enzymes critical for endocytosis and recycling are distinct from those involved
in sorting newly synthesized lysosomal enzymes.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.18.10953 
PMID: 8631914  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

