
1. Am J Ophthalmol. 1996 Jun;121(6):650-8.

Serologic and polymerase chain reaction analysis of intraocular fluids in the
diagnosis of infectious uveitis.

de Boer JH(1), Verhagen C, Bruinenberg M, Rothova A, de Jong PT, Baarsma GS, Van 
der Lelij A, Ooyman FM, Bollemeijer JG, Derhaag PJ, Kijlstra A.

Author information: 
(1)The Netherlands Ophthalmic Research Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

PURPOSE: Infectious uveitis entities are usually rapidly progressive blinding
diseases that can be prevented by prompt administration of specific antimicrobial
therapy. With the aim of improving early diagnosis in patients with infectious
uveitis, intraocular fluid samples from patients with sight-threatening posterior
uveitis were investigated to determine the causative agent.
METHODS: Thirty-eight patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and
retinitis, eight immunosuppressed patients with retinitis, 16 immunocompetent
patients with acute retinal necrosis, and 22 immunocompetent patients with
toxoplasmic retinochoroiditis were analyzed by polymerase chain reaction for the 
presence of herpesviruses and Toxoplasma gondii DNA and for local antibody
production against these microorganisms.
RESULTS: In patients with AIDS and retinitis, polymerase chain reaction was
positive for cytomegalovirus DNA in 21 (91%) of the 23 ocular fluid samples
obtained during active cytomegalovirus retinitis, whereas local antibody
production analysis was negative in all cases. In acute retinal necrosis,
varicella-zoster virus or herpes simplex virus could be established as the
inciting agent in 81% of the cases, using the combination of both techniques.
Polymerase chain reaction was positive in all samples obtained within two weeks
after the onset of disease. Toxoplasma gondii DNA was detected in 4 of 13 samples
(31%) from immuno-competent patients with active toxoplasmic retinochoroiditis;
in each case, local antibody production was also detected. In contrast, no local 
antibody production was observed in two of three samples from transplant
recipients that were positive for T. gondii DNA. All the control samples tested
were negative for the above-mentioned tests.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with AIDS, polymerase chain reaction analysis is
preferable above local antibody production in detecting the inciting agent of
retinitis. In other cases, the combination of both techniques can make a valuable
contribution to the diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1016/s0002-9394(14)70631-2 
PMID: 8644808  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

