
1. Minerva Med. 1977 May 19;68(25):1685-708.

[Fanconi-Zinsser disease].

[Article in Italian]

Lovisetto P, Mairano S, Biarese V.

Fanconi-Zinsser's disease is a serious involutive myelopathy responsible for
pancytopenia, hyperpigmentation, oralplakia and onychodystrophy, together with
lesser dysmorphisms in many cases. The marrow blood picture is reminiscent of the
better-known Fanconi's disease, while the skin and mucosa picture is similar to
that of congenital dyskeratosis - hence the combined name. A typical case, but
complicated by Lewandowsky's disease for the first time in the literature, is
presented. Papova-virus was noted in the typical verrucae. The modern "pathology 
due to genome instability" is examined. Lewandowsky's disease is regarded as a
familial form and precancerous, owing to its possible Bowenoid transformation.
The association is seen as particularly significant in stressing the disorder of 
the immunocompetent syste, this being most evident from the finding of serum
anti-red-cell auto-antibodies and a deficiency of T lymphocytes.
Fanconi-Zinsser's disease has only been reported 21 times in the literature,
mostly in males. Incomplete forms are, however, noted in relatives, suggesting
that it originates in a genetic disorder whose transmission modality is not
clear, though incomplete dominance is suspected. Genome instability is probably
responsible behind the onset of the disease and its neoplastic complications -
these being also feature of other forms provoked by such instability, such as
Bloom's syndrome and ataxia telengiectasia. Fanconi's disease also has marked
neoplastic tendencies. Clinically, Fanconi-Zinsser's disease can be classified as
distinct, since it has signs and an evolutive modality that distinguish it from
Franconi's disease, Estren-Damesheck's syndrome and amegakaryocytic
thrombocytopenia. Genetically, it can be seen that all these diseases are
referable to "pathology due to genome instability".


PMID: 865709  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

