
1. Placenta. 1996 Jan;17(1):57-68.

Long-term dual perfusion of isolated human placental lobules with improved
oxygenation for infectious diseases research.

Polliotti BM(1), Holmes R, Cornish JD, Hulsey M, Keesling S, Schwartz D,
Abramowsky CR, Huddleston J, Panigel M, Nahmias AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia, USA.

Erratum in
    Placenta 1996 May;17(4):267-8.

An improved method for long-term perfusion of the isolated human term placental
lobule has been developed to investigate the maternofetal transfer of infectious 
agents, in particular the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). The purpose of this
paper is to describe those modifications that allow for substantially prolonged
perfusions in in a biohazard environment. The method described has been adapted
from previous models. The perfusion apparatus has been modified for use within a 
biohazard hood, and, intravenous bags contain the medium for circulation of
perfusates in closed circuits. A Mera Silox-S 0.3 membrane oxygenator delivers
more oxygen to the tissue, and, Electromedic Cardioplegia heat exchangers warm
the perfusate prior to oxygenation. Viability criteria (glucose consumption,
lactate production, de novo production of human placental lactogen (hPL), volume 
loss, flow, temperature, pressure, oxygen transfer, carbon dioxide production,
absence of IgM transfer and light and electron microscopy) demonstrate that the
placental tissue remains in a functional state throughout the perfusion. Oxygen
and glucose consumption are both stable over time; lactate levels remain
constant; and hPL continues to be produced. These significant modifications of
the perfusion system have permitted the investigators to increase the duration of
perfusion to 48 h while preserving normal metabolic function of ultrastructurally
intact tissue as demonstrated by ultra structural observations. This perfusion
model device provides biohazard precautions and may be applied to other studies
of placental physiology.

DOI: 10.1016/s0143-4004(05)80644-7 
PMID: 8710814  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

