
1. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 1996 May;22(4):359-63.

Iron deficiency and intestinal malabsorption in HIV disease.

Castaldo A(1), Tarallo L, Palomba E, Albano F, Russo S, Zuin G, Buffardi F,
Guarino A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University Federico II, Naples, Italy.

Children with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection have a higher
prevalence of intestinal malabsorption. Anemia is also a common feature in these 
children. The aims of this work were (a) to establish the prevalence of iron
deficiency in HIV-infected children, (b) to test the hypothesis that iron
deficiency is related to intestinal malabsorption, (c) to see whether it may
contribute to anemia, and (d) to evaluate the sensitivity of oral iron load in
the investigation of intestinal function. To accomplish these goals, 71
HIV-infected symptomatic children were enrolled. Iron serum values were
determined before and after oral load with ferrous sulfate. The correlation
between basal and post-load iron levels was evaluated by linear regression.
Xylose level after oral load, fecal fat, and fecal alpha 1-antitrypsin
concentration were also determined. Iron deficiency was detected in 48% of
patients, and it was significantly associated with intestinal iron malabsorption.
Sugar malabsorption, steatorrhea, and fecal protein loss were detected in 26, 36,
and 17% of patients, respectively. Low hemoglobin levels were detected in 66% of 
patients. The majority of children with iron deficiency also had anemia.
Preliminary data showed that oral iron administration was sufficient for raising 
hemoglobin in children with normal iron absorption, whereas parenteral
administration was required in those with iron malabsorption. We conclude that
(a) iron deficiency is a major feature of pediatric HIV infection, (b) it is
related to intestinal malabsorption, and (c) it contributes to anemia. Finally,
oral iron load is a sensitive test for investigating intestinal function.

DOI: 10.1097/00005176-199605000-00004 
PMID: 8732898  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

