
1. Curr Opin Oncol. 1996 May;8(3):252-8.

Testicular cancer.

Oliver RT(1).

Author information: 
(1)St. Bartholomew's Hospital, Department of Medical Oncology, Colston, West
Smithfield, London, England.

The rising rate of germ cell cancer of the testis over the past decade has been
demonstrated to be occurring predominantly in the younger age group (15 to 19
years) in association with earlier onset of puberty and earlier onset of regular 
sexual activity. Chemicals and viruses, with their atrophogenic effect, remain
the main candidates for inducing the final common pathway of tumor development
and clonal evolution, ie, gonadotropin-driven mitosis in spermatogonia. The
possibility of different genetic mechanisms regulating susceptibility and
resistance to these two extreme causes of gonadal atrophy in families is raised
by the failure of a genome screen in a series of sibling pairs with testicular
cancer to identify a single significant linkage group. Studies demonstrating high
levels of non-mutated p53 protein and rapid induction of apoptosis by
chemotherapy provide a new insight into the cause of the exquisite
chemosensitivity of these tumors. Durable responses to paclitaxel and in vitro
activity in response to temezolamide provide further evidence of the plethora of 
agents that work against these tumors, although no new first-line therapeutic
approaches have been reported recently. The most important clinical trial studied
good-risk patients and demonstrated that to gain the benefit of reducing
treatment time from 12 to 9 weeks it is essential to retain bleomycin in the BEP 
(bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin) regimen. The final new idea to emerge
recently comes from a series of papers on management of primary tumors in
patients with a solitary testis and the possible use of organ-conserving surgery 
plus postoperative radiation. Another study did suggest it might be possible to
use preoperative chemotherapy in those wishing to retain spermatogenesis.

DOI: 10.1097/00001622-199605000-00015 
PMID: 8804810  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

