
1. J Virol. 1996 Nov;70(11):7517-26.

DNA encapsidation by viruslike particles assembled in insect cells from the major
capsid protein VP1 of B-lymphotropic papovavirus.

Pawlita M(1), Müller M, Oppenländer M, Zentgraf H, Herrmann M.

Author information: 
(1)Angewandte Tumorvirologie, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg,
Germany. M.Pawlita@dkfz-heidelberg.de.

Capsids of polyomaviruses--small, nonenveloped DNA viruses--consist of the major 
structural protein VP1 and the minor structural proteins VP2 and VP3. The
contributions of the individual capsid proteins to functions of the viral
particle, such as DNA encapsidation, cell receptor attachment, entry, and
uncoating, are still not clear. Here we show that viruslike particles assembled
in nuclei of insect cells from VP1 of the monkey B-lymphotropic papovavirus (LPV)
are sufficient to unspecifically encapsidate DNA. LPV VP1 expressed in large
amounts in insect cells by a baculovirus vector assembled spontaneously in the
nuclei to form viruslike particles. After metrizamide equilibrium density
gradient purification and nuclease digestion, a fraction of these particles was
shown to contain VP1-associated linear, double-stranded DNA with a predominant
size of 4.5 kb. The fraction of DNA-containing VP1 particles increased with time 
and dose of baculovirus vector infection. The DNA-containing particles, further
purified by sucrose gradient centrifugation, appeared as "full" particles in
negative-staining electron microscopy. As shown by DNA hybridization, the
encapsidated DNA consisted of insect cell and baculoviral sequences with no
apparent strong homology to LPV sequences. Three non-LPV VP1-derived host
proteins with apparent molecular masses of approximately 14, 15, and 16 kDa
copurified with the DNA-containing particles and may represent insect cell
histones encapsidated together with the DNA. A similar species of host DNA was
also found in purified LPV wild-type virions. These data suggest that LPV VP1
alone can be sufficient to encapsidate linear DNA in a sequence-independent
manner.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.70.11.7517-7526.1996 
PMCID: PMC190819
PMID: 8892870  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

