
1. Infect Immun. 1996 Dec;64(12):5199-204.

Tumor necrosis factor-inducing activities of Cryptococcus neoformans components.

Delfino D(1), Cianci L, Migliardo M, Mancuso G, Cusumano V, Corradini C, Teti G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Microbiologia, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia, Università degli
Studi di Messina, Italy.

Erratum in
    Infect Immun 1997 May;65(5):1991.

Cryptococcus neoformans-induced tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha)
production may lead to increased human immunodeficiency virus replication in
patients with AIDS. In order to identify cryptococcal components that are
predominantly responsible for stimulating TNF production, various concentrations 
of glucuronoxylomannan (GXM), galactoxylomannan (GalXM), mannoproteins (MP), and 
alpha(1-3) [corrected] glucan were added to whole-blood cultures. All of the
cryptococcal components tested, as well as whole heat-killed cryptococci, were
capable of inducing TNF-alpha release in a dose-dependent manner. MP were
significantly more potent than any of the other cryptococcal components tested or
heat-killed cryptococci in stimulating TNF-alpha production (P < 0.05). GXM, in
contrast, was significantly less potent in this activity than either GalXM or MP 
(P < 0.05). As little as 0.5 microg of MP per ml was sufficient to produce
moderate but significant elevations of TNF-alpha release. Maximal MP-induced
TNF-alpha levels were similar to those induced by Salmonella enteritidis
lipopolysaccharide, our positive control. Further experiments using isolated
leukocytes suggested that monocytes were the cell population mainly responsible
for TNF-alpha production, although the participation of other cell types could
not be excluded. The presence of complement-sufficient plasma was a necessary
requirement for TNF-alpha induction by GXM, GalXM, and low doses of MP. High MP
concentrations (100 microg/ml) were also capable of stimulating TNF-alpha
production in the absence of plasma. These data indicate that soluble products
released by C. neoformans are capable of inducing TNF-alpha secretion in human
leukocytes. This may be clinically relevant, since high concentrations of such
products are frequently found in the body fluids of AIDS patients infected with
C. neoformans.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.64.12.5199-5204.1996 
PMCID: PMC174508
PMID: 8945566  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

