
1. APMIS. 1996 Oct;104(10):689-97.

Virus-induced autoimmune disease: transgenic approach to mimic insulin-dependent 
diabetes mellitus and other autoimmune diseases.

Oldstone MB(1), von Herrath M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropharmacology, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

The technology of cloning viral genes and expressing them in vivo under
cell-specific promoters allows to dissect the role of viruses, host self
proteins, host genetics and immune responses in the complex etiology of
autoimmune disease. Expression of a viral transgene, that is really a marker for 
a host "self" protein per se in beta cells of the islets of Langerhans, need not 
cause disease. In our model, expression of a viral gene was not associated with
disease over the lifetime of the animal. However, when the host becomes infected 
with a virus encoding the same gene as the transgene or one closely related to
it, a resultant immune response directed against the virus also recognizes the
transgene leading to progressive T-cell-mediated response and destruction of the 
tissue expressing the viral ("self") gene, leading to autoimmune disease. This
multifactorial process is influenced by whether the viral transgene is expressed 
in the thymus as well as in the disease-related cell or target tissue. Thymic
expression influences negative selection of responder lymphocytes and thus delays
the onset of the autoimmune disorder. Further, the MHC haplotype or other
background genes of an individual undergoing autoimmune dysfunction play a role
in the affinity of binding of the transgene products to the MHC molecule and
influence the degree of negative selection that occurs, thereby influencing the
vigor of the resulting immune response. The current ability to express host or
viral genes in unique cell populations, and to make double- or triple-tg mice in 
which various cytokine genes or lymphocyte activation genes can be expressed
along with the viral gene, offers a unique possibility for molecular dissection
of autoimmunity. With the information on hand, approaches to the prevention and
treatment of human autoimmune disease are likely to be uncovered. Finally, animal
models are available in which the onset, progression and control of molecular
mimicry can be evaluated. Future studies should define roles played by cytokines,
bystander and immune-specific cross-reactivity to viruses and other microbes in
several autoimmune diseases.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1699-0463.1996.tb04930.x 
PMID: 8980618  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

