
1. Blood. 1997 Aug 1;90(3):1309-14.

Outbreak of hepatitis C virus infection in patients with hematologic disorders
treated with intravenous immunoglobulins: different prognosis according to the
immune status.

Rossi G(1), Tucci A, Cariani E, Ravaggi A, Rossini A, Radaeli E.

Author information: 
(1)III Divisione Medicina Generale, Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy.

The influence of immunodeficiency on the course of hepatitis C virus (HCV)
infection is still debated, although a worsening effect has been suggested. We
compared the characteristics of hepatitis C in two groups of hematologic patients
with different levels of immunocompetence who acquired the same virus strain
after treatment with contaminated intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG). Indications
for IVIG therapy were idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) in six patients
and hypogammaglobulinemia in 7 patients with various hematologic disorders, who
were defined immunodeficient (ID). Infection rate was 100%. Five ID patients
never developed HCV antibodies despite serum HCV-RNA positivity. The same HCV
genotype was shown in 10 patients tested. Moreover, E1-E2 gene partial nucleotide
sequencing, performed in four patients, showed identical or closely related amino
acid sequences, thus strongly supporting the hypothesis of a common source of
infection. Clinical acute infection did not differ significantly between the two 
groups, but subsequent liver failure developed in five of the seven ID patients
and in none of the ITP patients (P = .04). Liver biopsy, performed in three
cases, documented HCV as the only cause of liver damage. Six ID patients died,
with liver disease being the primary cause of death in four cases and a
contributory cause in two cases. Their median survival after IVIG was 12 months, 
significantly worse than that of ITP patients (P = .0028). We conclude that
immunodeficiency markedly worsens the course of IVIG-acquired HCV infection in
hematologic patients.


PMID: 9242566  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

