
1. Oncogene. 1997 Oct;15(18):2133-44.

Wnt-10b directs hypermorphic development and transformation in mammary glands of 
male and female mice.

Lane TF(1), Leder P.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Wnt-10b is expressed during the formation of the mammary rudiment in mouse
embryos and its expression continues through puberty when the mammary ductal
pattern is established under control of ovarian steroids. Recently, viral
activation of the Wnt-10b locus has linked its overexpression to mammary tumor
formation, suggesting a role for Wnt-10b in patterning and growth-regulation of
the mammary gland. To test this notion, we created lines of transgenic mice that 
express elevated levels of Wnt-10b under the control of the MMTV
promoter/enhancer. Overexpression of this gene resulted in profound developmental
alterations in the mammary gland, including expanded glandular development and
the precocious appearance of alveoli in virgin females. Moreover, transgenic male
mice also exhibited dramatic mammary development involving highly branched
mammary ducts and gynecomastia. Aberrant expression of Wnt-10b in the mammary
rudiments of males evidently bypasses the normal requirement for ovarian hormonal
control in stimulating mammary ductal growth and the repressive effects of
androgens. In addition to these developmental effects, transgenic mice of both
sexes were highly susceptible to the development of mammary adenocarcinomas. Such
tumors arose in a solitary manner indicating that Wnt-10b is a proto-oncogene
which provides a necessary, but insufficient signal for oncogenesis. Relevant to 
this, there was no evidence of amplified expression of FGF mRNAs in these tumors 
though the Fgf's are a class of genes often implicated as collaborators in
Wnt-mediated tumor formation. Indeed, co-expression of MMTV-Wnt-10b and
MMTV-FGF-3/int-2 resulted in sterile offspring with highly disorganized mammary
epithelium, demonstrating a potent interaction between their respective
developmental pathways. These results suggest that Wnt-10b, or other Wnt genes
expressed early in mammary development, play a role in regulating sexual
dimorphism and show potent transforming activity when overexpressed.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1201593 
PMID: 9393971  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

