
1. Med Clin (Barc). 1997 Oct 11;109(12):452-6.

[Chronic enteropathy of unknown etiology in patients with AIDS. An analysis of 40
cases].

[Article in Spanish]

Moreno Camacho A(1), Moreno Martínez A, Valls ME, Bordas JM, Piqué JM, Bombí JA, 
Miró JM, Mallolas J, Gatell JM, Soriano E.

Author information: 
(1)Servicios de Enfermedades infecciosas, Hospital Clínic i Provincial, Facultad 
de Medicina, Universidad de Barcelona.

BACKGROUND: Data about the etiology of chronic enteropathy in AIDS patients are
scarce and are very dependent upon the geographical area. The aim of this study
was to detect microorganisms potentially associated with chronic enteropathy in
AIDS patients with diarrhoea for more than one month, and initial negative
routine stool bacterial cultures and examinations for ova and parasites. The
degrees of associated intestinal malabsorption and immunodeficiency were also
analysed.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Forty consecutive patients were recruited from January 1993
to December 1994. The following studies were performed: Intestinal absorption
tests (d-xylose and 14C-triolein), CD4/CD8 cell counts, microbiological studies
(standard stool cultures for detection of bacteria and examinations for ova and
parasites including the detection of Enterocitozoon bieneusi spores by the
Weber's stain), upper gastrointestinal endoscopy or colonoscopy with intestinal
biopsies and blood cultures for CMV and mycobacteria.
RESULTS: The median duration of diarrhoea was 4 months and the mean weight loss
was 8.4 kg. Ninety percent of patients had less than 0.1 x 10(9) CD4+ cells/l,
with a mean CD4+ cell count of 0.035 x 10(9)/l. Malabsorption was found in 84% of
patients. An etiological diagnosis of chronic enteropathy was reached in 60% of
the patients. The yield of pathological examination was 37% and the
microbiological test using samples of faeces and blood were positive in 45% and
20% of cases respectively. The most frequently identified microorganisms were CMV
(10 cases), E. bieneusi (9), enterobacteria (8), Cryptosporidium parvum (5),
Leishmania donovani (2). Patients with enteropathy caused by E. bieneusi had
lower count of CD4 cells (p = 0.005) and with higher serum levels of alkaline
phosphatase (p = 0.02) than patients with CMV enteropathy.
CONCLUSIONS: Stool Weber's stain and CMV and mycobacterial blood cultures should 
be added to the standard work-up diagnosis in patients with chronic diarrhoea and
a CD4+cells count below 0.1 x 10(9) l. Upper and/or lower gastrointestinal
endoscopies with intestinal biopsies should be performed only in patients with
persistent diarrhea without microbiological diagnosis or a lack of response to
treatment.


PMID: 9441179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

