
1. J Virol. 1998 Feb;72(2):1324-33.

The application of a homologous recombination assay revealed amino acid residues 
in an LTR-retrotransposon that were critical for integration.

Atwood A(1), Choi J, Levin HL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Eukaryotic Gene Regulation, National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA.

Retroviruses and their relatives, the LTR-retrotransposons, possess an integrase 
protein (IN) that is required for the insertion of reverse transcripts into the
genome of host cells. Schizosaccharomyces pombe is the host of Tf1, an
LTR-retrotransposon with integration activity that can be studied by using
techniques of yeast genetics. In this study, we sought to identify amino acid
substitutions in Tf1 that specifically affected the integration step of
transposition. In addition to seeking amino acid substitutions in IN, we also
explored the possibility that other Tf1 proteins contributed to integration. By
comparing the results of genetic assays that monitored both transposition and
reverse transcription, we were able to seek point mutations throughout Tf1 that
blocked transposition but not the synthesis of reverse transcripts. These mutant 
versions of Tf1 were candidates of elements that possessed defects in the
integration step of transposition. Five mutations in Tf1 that resulted in low
levels of integration were found to be located in the IN protein: two
substitutions in the N-terminal Zn domain, two in the catalytic core, and one in 
the C-terminal domain. These results suggested that each of the three IN domains 
was required for Tf1 transposition. The potential role of these five amino acid
residues in the function of IN is discussed. Two of the mutations that reduced
integration mapped to the RNase H (RH) domain of Tf1 reverse transcriptase. The
Tf1 elements with the RH mutations produced high levels of reverse transcripts,
as determined by recombination and DNA blot analysis. These results indicated
that the RH of Tf1 possesses a function critical for transposition that is
independent of the accumulation of reverse transcripts.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.72.2.1324-1333.1998 
PMCID: PMC124611
PMID: 9445033  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

