
1. Arch Sex Behav. 1998 Feb;27(1):77-90.

Predictors of unprotected sexual contacts in HIV-infected persons in Switzerland.

Eich-Höchli D(1), Niklowitz MW, Clement U, Lüthy R, Opravil M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland.

Predictors of sexual risk behavior with regular and casual partners among
HIV-infected heterosexual and gay persons were addressed. Sociodemographic data
as well as self- and interviewer-reported data on sexual behavior were obtained
from 117 asymptomatic HIV-infected persons enrolled in the Zurich part of the
Swiss HIV Cohort Study (SHCS). Participants who reported sexual intercourse at
least once (vaginal and/or anal) without condom use in the 6 months prior to
interview were considered to have risk behavior. Sexual risk behavior was
analyzed separately in contacts with regular and casual partners. In the 6-month 
preinterview period, 92% (108 of 117) of the HIV-infected study population
reported sexual contacts, and 30/117 (26%) had at least one unprotected vaginal
and/or anal contact. Among 93 persons using condoms, 25% of the heterosexual and 
10% of the homosexual participants reported breakage of the condom. The main
predictor for unprotected sexual behavior with regular partners was an elevated
number of contacts. Predictors for sexual risk behavior with casual partners were
the combination of alcohol and sexual encounters and the change of sexual
behavior since the epidemic of AIDS. These findings did not differ between
persons with hetero- and homosexual behavior. Considering that these contacts may
have passed the virus on to the seronegative population, that the probability of 
unsafe sex increased with the growing number of contacts, and that the number of 
condom breakages was remarkable, it is imperative that this group be educated and
motivated to take the active role in insisting on safer sex practices in each
encounter.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1018609909138 
PMID: 9494690  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

