
1. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 1998 Apr 10;14(6):521-31.

Herpesvirus saimiri transformation of HIV type 1 suppressive CD8+ lymphocytes
from an HIV type 1-infected asymptomatic individual.

Lacey SF(1), Weinhold KJ, Chen CH, McDanal C, Oei C, Greenberg ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 
27710, USA.

CD8+ T lymphocytes from HIV+ individuals can potently suppress HIV-1 replication 
in a noncytolytic manner. This suppression appears to be multifactorial and the
molecules contributing have not been fully elucidated. As an approach to this
question we used herpesvirus saimiri (HVS) to transform CD8+ T lymphocytes from
an HIV+ asymptomatic donor to a continuously growing, activation-independent,
IL-2-dependent phenotype. The transformed cell population, termed CD8(HVS), had
an activated phenotype, contained HVS sequences, did not shed infectious HVS
virus, and was polyclonal. The CD8(HVS) cells, despite the absence of detectable 
CTL activity, potently suppressed HIV-1 production by both autologous and
heterologous CD4+ cells from infected donors. The CD8(HVS) cells in coculture
also suppressed virus production from PBMCs acutely infected with
syncytium-inducing (SI) strains or NSI primary isolates of HIV-1. The
supernatants from the CD8(HVS) cells and their concentrates derived from these
supernatants were suppressive to NSI primary isolates of HIV-1 but not to SI
strains. Fractionation of these concentrates showed that the suppressive activity
was associated with low molecular mass (6500- to 19,300-Da) protein species.
Western blotting and ELISA indicated that the CC chemokines MIP-1alpha,
MIP-1beta, and RANTES were present in these fractions. Antibody-blocking studies 
with antibodies to the CC chemokines indicated that a significant portion of the 
soluble HIV-suppressive activity was due to these molecules. However, these
experiments also suggested the inhibitory activity of the CD8(HVS) cells in
coculture is not due exclusively to the CC chemokines. The HVS-transformed cells 
provide a useful tool for the study of noncytolytic CD8+ T lymphocyte-mediated
suppression of HIV-1.

DOI: 10.1089/aid.1998.14.521 
PMID: 9566555  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

