
1. Clin Ter. 1998 Jan-Feb;149(921):37-41.

[Correlation between HIV-inhibiting drug activity in human macrophages and
clinical outcome].

[Article in Italian]

Aquaro S(1), Balestra E, Panti S, Cenci A, Serra F, Francesconi M, Abdelahad D,
Caliò R, Perno CF.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Scienze Biochimiche, Università Tor
Vergata, Roma, Italia.

PURPOSE: To assess the comparative efficacy of drugs inhibitors of human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in human macrophages and lymphocytes, and to
correlate the results with the clinical outcome.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Human primary macrophages and lymphocytes were infected
with HIV in the presence of the following HIV inhibitors, all currently in
clinical use: zidovudine, stavudine, zalcitabine, didanosine, lamivudine, PMEA,
PMPA (all inhibitors of HIV reverse transcriptase), saquinavir and U-75875
(inhibitors of HIV protease).
RESULTS: All reverse transcriptase inhibitors tested showed a markedly higher
antiviral activity in macrophages than in lymphocytes. Also protease inhibitors
have a substantial anti-HIV activity in macrophages, yet their efficacy is
markedly diminished if the drugs are added to macrophage culture after HIV, that 
is when the virus has established a chronical infection. Under these experimental
conditions, however, only protease inhibitors among all HIV-inhibitors in
clinical use are able to decrease virus replication in chronically-infected
macrophages.
CONCLUSIONS: The results have strong clinical implications, due to the important 
role of macrophages in the pathogenesis of HIV infection. Macrophages are the
major source of HIV at extralymphoid tissue levels, particularly in the central
nervous system, where the blood-brain barrier strongly limits the penetration of 
antiviral drugs. For these reasons, only drugs, like stavudine and zidovudine,
provided with good anti-HIV activity in macrophages, and reasonable barrier
penetration have substantial chances to be effective in the central nervous
system, and thus affect virus replication in a sanctuary where HIV hides and
replicates out of the control of the immune system.


PMID: 9621487  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

