
1. Oncogene. 1998 May 28;16(21):2711-21.

Expression of dominant negative Jun inhibits elevated AP-1 and NF-kappaB
transactivation and suppresses anchorage independent growth of HPV immortalized
human keratinocytes.

Li JJ(1), Rhim JS, Schlegel R, Vousden KH, Colburn NH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemical Physiology, National Cancer Institute, FCRDC,
Frederick, Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

AP-1 transactivation appears to be required for mouse JB6 cell neoplastic
transformation induced by the tumor promoter TPA or epidermal growth factor
(EGF). Exposure to AP-1 transrepressing retinoids and glucocorticoids and
expression of a dominant negative c-jun (TAM67) blocked tumor promoter-induced
AP-1 transactivation and neoplastic transformation. The aim of the present study 
was to extend the inquiry of the role of AP-1 and other transcription factors to 
human neoplastic progression. Expression of human papillomavirus (HPV) 16 or 18
E6 and E7 immortalizes human keratinocytes and inhibits serum/calcium-stimulated 
differentiation. Further transformation by v-fos co-expression renders these
keratinocytes tumorigenic in nude mice. We have analysed two series of E6/E7
immortalized human keratinocyte cell lines that show progressing phenotypes
ranging from differentiation sensitive to anchorage-independent to tumorigenic in
nude mice. We analysed the activities of AP-1 and NF-kappaB which may
'cross-talk'. Both DNA binding and transactivation of AP-1 and NF-kappaB
transcription factors showed elevation in the anchorage-independent (16RH) and
tumorigenic (18 v-fos) keratinocyte lines compared to the less progressed but
immortalized cell lines. HPV E7 was expressed at a constant level shown by
quantitative RT-PCR in both the more and the less progressed lines, indicating
that E7 is not the factor limiting this progression. Blocked shift/supershift
analysis indicates that Fos family member proteins especially Fra-1 and Fra-2 are
related to progression and no changes found in the Jun family member proteins
although they are present in the AP-1/DNA binding complex. When a dominant
negative mutant c-jun driven by a human keratin 14 promoter was co-transfected
with AP-1 or NF-kappaB reporters, both AP-1 and NF-kappaB activities were
suppressed in the more progressed cell lines 16RH and 18 v-fos but not in the
less progressed 16RL or 18 cell lines. Overexpression of the same dominant
negative c-jun did not inhibit p53 dependent reporter transactivation, indicating
the specificity of inhibition of AP-1 and NF-kappaB transactivation in the
HPV-immortalized cells. Stable transfectants of this mutant c-jun in the two more
progressed cell lines 16RH and 18 v-fos showed reduced AP-1 and NF-kappaB
activation and reduced anchorage-independent growth. Together, these results
indicate that activation of AP-1, NF-kappaB or both may contribute to neoplastic 
progression in HPV immortalized human keratinocytes and that specific targeting
of the elevated levels seen in benign or malignant tumors might be effective for 
prevention or treatment of human cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1201798 
PMID: 9652737  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

