
1. J Virol. 1998 Sep;72(9):7302-9.

Adenovirus-mediated persistent cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance
regulator expression in mouse airway epithelium.

Scaria A(1), St George JA, Jiang C, Kaplan JM, Wadsworth SC, Gregory RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genzyme Corporation, Framingham, Massachusetts 01701, USA. ascaria@genzyme.com

Replication-defective adenovirus (Ad) vectors have been used for gene transfer to
the respiratory epithelium of experimental animals and individuals with cystic
fibrosis. Studies from several laboratories have suggested that administration of
first-generation Ad vectors results only in transient gene expression in the
lung, due at least in part to destruction of vector-transduced cells by host
cellular immune responses directed against viral proteins and/or immunogenic
transgene products. We have constructed new Ad2-based, E1-deleted vectors
encoding a weakly immunogenic transgene, the human cystic fibrosis transmembrane 
conductance regulator (hCFTR) under the control of the cytomegalovirus
enhancer-promoter. These vectors contain wild-type E2 and E4 regions. These new
Ad/CFTR vectors were instilled into the lungs of immunocompetent C57BL/6, BALB/c,
and C3H mice. In vitro cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) analysis indicated the
presence of Ad-specific CTLs in treated mice. However, we were not able to
demonstrate a CTL response specific for hCFTR. Reverse transcriptase PCR analysis
demonstrated that hCFTR mRNA expression continued in all three strains of mice
for at least 70 days, the last time point analyzed. The E3 region did not play a 
significant role in persistence of the Ad/CFTR vectors in the mouse lung.
Functional hCFTR expression was also observed in the nasal epithelia of CF mutant
mice. These results suggest that long-term expression of hCFTR is possible in the
airway epithelia of immunocompetent mice without radical modification of Ad
vector and in spite of the presence of CTLs.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.72.9.7302-7309.1998 
PMCID: PMC109954
PMID: 9696826  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

