
1. Br J Dermatol. 1998 Jul;139(1):33-9.

Dermatological findings correlated with CD4 lymphocyte counts in a prospective 3 
year study of 1161 patients with human immunodeficiency virus disease
predominantly acquired through intravenous drug abuse.

Muñoz-Pérez MA(1), Rodriguez-Pichardo A, Camacho F, Colmenero MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Virgen Macarena Hospital, School of Medicine of
Seville, Spain.

Several prospective studies on dermatological findings in human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV) type 1 infected patients have been published, mostly in populations
in which the predominant risk factor for HIV infection is homosexuality. We
attempted to identify cutaneous diseases associated with HIV-1 infection and to
assess disease progression in a cohort of Spanish patients in whom the
predominant cause of HIV infection was intravenous drug abuse. We prospectively
examined 1161 HIV-1-positive patients for 38 months. Seventy-four per cent of
patients were intravenous drug abusers, whereas heterosexual contact was the only
risk factor in 14% and homosexuality in 9%. Centers for Disease Control stage II 
disease predominated (51%), whereas stage IV disease was less frequent (39%). The
mean CD4 count was 353/mm3. We took patients' past and present medical history
and performed a complete physical examination as well as taking photographs and
carrying out the necessary diagnostic procedures. CD4 counts/mm3 were measured at
each visit. A diagnosis of cutaneous disease was made in 799 patients (69%). Oral
candidiasis and seborrhoeic dermatitis were the most common skin disorders,
followed by xerosis, drug eruptions, dermatophytosis and the papular eruption of 
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Condyloma acuminatum, herpes zoster and
herpes simplex were the most frequent viral infections. Conditions that have a
statistically significant association with advanced stage and low CD4 levels
include drug eruptions, xerosis, light reactions, diffuse alopecia, herpes
simplex, oral candidiasis, psoriasis, oral hairy leucoplakia, molluscum
contagiosum, Kaposi's sarcoma, furuncles, candidal intertrigo, folliculitis and
ungual infection, as well as onychomycosis and tinea pedis or manuum. Dermatoses 
commonly associated with homosexuality, such as Kaposi's sarcoma and oral hairy
leucoplakia, were rare in our patients.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2133.1998.02310.x 
PMID: 9764146  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

