
1. J Virol. 1999 Jan;73(1):709-17.

Cleavage of Poly(A)-binding protein by coxsackievirus 2A protease in vitro and in
vivo: another mechanism for host protein synthesis shutoff?

Kerekatte V(1), Keiper BD, Badorff C, Cai A, Knowlton KU, Rhoads RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Louisiana State University
Medical Center, Shreveport, Louisiana 71130, USA.

Infection of cells by picornaviruses of the rhinovirus, aphthovirus, and
enterovirus groups results in the shutoff of host protein synthesis but allows
viral protein synthesis to proceed. Although considerable evidence suggests that 
this shutoff is mediated by the cleavage of eukaryotic translation initiation
factor eIF4G by sequence-specific viral proteases (2A protease in the case of
coxsackievirus), several experimental observations are at variance with this
view. Thus, the cleavage of other cellular proteins could contribute to the
shutoff of host protein synthesis and stimulation of viral protein synthesis.
Recent evidence indicates that the highly conserved 70-kDa cytoplasmic
poly(A)-binding protein (PABP) participates directly in translation initiation.
We have now found that PABP is also proteolytically cleaved during coxsackievirus
infection of HeLa cells. The cleavage of PABP correlated better over time with
the host translational shutoff and onset of viral protein synthesis than did the 
cleavage of eIF4G. In vitro experiments with purified rabbit PABP and recombinant
human PABP as well as in vivo experiments with Xenopus oocytes and recombinant
Xenopus PABP demonstrate that the cleavage is catalyzed by 2A protease directly. 
N- and C-terminal sequencing indicates that cleavage occurs uniquely in human
PABP at 482VANTSTQTM downward arrowGPRPAAAAAA500, separating the four N-terminal 
RNA recognition motifs (80%) from the C-terminal homodimerization domain (20%).
The N-terminal cleavage product of PABP is less efficient than full-length PABP
in restoring translation to a PABP-dependent rabbit reticulocyte lysate
translation system. These results suggest that the cleavage of PABP may be
another mechanism by which picornaviruses alter the rate and spectrum of protein 
synthesis.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.73.1.709-717.1999 
PMCID: PMC103878
PMID: 9847377  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

