
1. Virology. 1998 Dec 5;252(1):106-14.

Localization and fine mapping of antigenic sites on the nucleocapsid protein N of
porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus with monoclonal antibodies.

Meulenberg JJ(1), van Nieuwstadt AP, van Essen-Zandbergen A, Bos-de Ruijter JN,
Langeveld JP, Meloen RH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Science and Health, Lelystad, The Netherlands.
J.J.M.Meulenberg@id.dlo.nl

The purpose of this study was to analyze the antigenic structure of the
nucleocapsid protein N of the Lelystad virus isolate of porcine reproductive and 
respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) and to identify antigenic differences between 
this prototype European isolate and other North American isolates. To do this, we
generated a panel of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) directed against the N protein 
of Lelystad virus and tested them in competition assays with other N-specific
mAbs described previously (Drew et al., 1995; Nelson et al., 1993; van Nieuwstadt
et al., 1996). Four different competition groups of mAbs were identified. Pepscan
analysis with solid-phase dodecapeptides was used to identify specific antigenic 
regions in the N protein that were bound by the mAbs. In this pepscan analysis,
we found that the mAb of the first competition group reacted with linear peptides
whose core sequences consisted of amino acids 2-12 (site A), the mAbs of the
second group reacted with peptides whose core sequences consisted of amino acids 
25-30 (site B), and the mAb of the third group reacted with peptides whose core
sequences consisted of amino acids 40-46 (site C). However, the fourth group of
mAbs binding to an antigenic region, provisionally designated as domain D,
reacted very weakly or did not react at all with solid-phase dodecapeptides. To
further characterize the structure of the epitopes in domain D, we produced
chimeric constructs composed of the N protein sequences of Lelystad virus and
another arterivirus lactate dehydrogenase-elevating virus, which was used because
its N protein has similarity in amino acid sequence and hydropathicity profile
but does not react with our mAbs. When the mAbs specific to domain D were tested 
for binding to the chimeric N proteins expressed by Semliki Forest virus, we
found that the regions between amino acids 51-67 and amino acids 80-90 are
involved in the formation or are part of the epitopes in domain D. Therefore, we 
conclude that the N protein contains four distinct antigenic regions. The
epitopes mapped to sites A-C are linear, whereas the epitopes mapped to domain D 
are more conformation dependent or discontinuous. Sites A and C contain epitopes 
that are conserved in European but not in North American isolates; site B
contains epitopes that are conserved in European and North American isolates; and
site D contains epitopes that are either conserved or not conserved in European
and North American isolates. The antigenic regions identified here might be
important for the development of diagnostic test for PRRSV in particular tests
that discriminate between different antigenic types of PRRSV.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1998.9436 
PMID: 9875321  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

