
1. J Gastroenterol. 1999 Oct;34(5):560-70.

The vast majority of gastric T cells are polarized to produce T helper 1 type
cytokines upon antigenic stimulation despite the absence of Helicobacter pylori
infection.

Itoh T(1), Wakatsuki Y, Yoshida M, Usui T, Matsunaga Y, Kaneko S, Chiba T, Kita
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Bio-regulatory Science, Kyoto University Graduate
School of Medicine, Japan.

Comment in
    J Gastroenterol. 1999 Oct;34(5):651-2.

Helicobacter pylori infection is associated with chronic infiltration by various 
cell types, including T cells, whose cytokine production may regulate the
inflammatory reaction as well as local immune response to the bacterium. We
prospectively analyzed the constituents of the cellular infiltrates and the
cytokines produced by T cells in antral biopsies obtained from 73 subjects with
and without H. pylori infection, before and after eradication therapy, and
compared them with a histological grade of gastritis. We found that T cells
predominated in cell number, followed by granulocytes/monocytes and plasma cells 
in both H. pylori-infected and H. pylori-uninfected subjects. Despite the absence
of H. pylori infection, more than 70% of gastric CD4-positive T cells obtained
from uninfected tissue produced interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) in the cytosol. Upon
receptor cross-linking of a CD3 and a CD28 molecule, T cells in both infected and
uninfected tissue continuously secreted a far greater amount of IFN-gamma than
those in peripheral blood mononuclear cell controls for a period of cell culture,
whereas the increase in interleukin-4 (IL-4) was very small, and no increase in
IL-2 secretion was seen. In H. pylori-infected patients, IFN-gamma secretion was 
correlated with the grade of mononuclear cell infiltration and decreased to an
uninfected control level after eradication therapy. We did not see the effect of 
eradication on IL-4 secretion. Anti-H. pylori antibody of the IgG2 subclass was
remarkably increased in H. pylori-infected subjects. These results together
suggest that gastric T cells are already differentiated to produce a large amount
of IFN-gamma by a mechanism unrelated to H. pylori infection. H. pylori infection
appeared to activate T cells to secrete even more IFN-gamma, which may contribute
to maintaining a perpetual inflammation in H. pylori-infected stomach.

DOI: 10.1007/s005350050373 
PMID: 10535482  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

