
1. J Immunol. 1999 Dec 15;163(12):6718-24.

Expression and regulation of the human beta-defensins hBD-1 and hBD-2 in
intestinal epithelium.

O'Neil DA(1), Porter EM, Elewaut D, Anderson GM, Eckmann L, Ganz T, Kagnoff MF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mucosal Immunology, Department of Medicine, University of
California at San Diego, La Jolla 92093, USA.

The intestinal epithelium forms a physical barrier to limit access of enteric
microbes to the host and contributes to innate host defense by producing effector
molecules against luminal microbes. To further define the role of the intestinal 
epithelium in antimicrobial host defense, we analyzed the expression, regulation,
and production of two antimicrobial peptides, human defensins hBD-1 and hBD-2, by
human intestinal epithelial cells in vitro and in vivo. The human colon
epithelial cell lines HT-29 and Caco-2 constitutively express hBD-1 mRNA and
protein but not hBD-2. However, hBD-2 expression is rapidly induced by IL-1alpha 
stimulation or infection of those cells with enteroinvasive bacteria. Moreover,
hBD-2 functions as a NF-kappaB target gene in the intestinal epithelium as
blocking NF-kappaB activation inhibits the up-regulated expression of hBD-2 in
response to IL-1alpha stimulation or bacterial infection. Caco-2 cells produce
two hBD-1 isoforms and a hBD-2 peptide larger in size than previously described
hBD-2 isoforms. Paralleling the in vitro findings, human fetal intestinal
xenografts constitutively express hBD-1, but not hBD-2, and hBD-2 expression, but
not hBD-1, is up-regulated in xenografts infected intraluminally with Salmonella.
hBD-1 is expressed by the epithelium of normal human colon and small intestine,
with a similar pattern of expression in inflamed colon. In contrast, there is
little hBD-2 expression by the epithelium of normal colon, but abundant hBD-2
expression by the epithelium of inflamed colon. hBD-1 and hBD-2 may be integral
components of epithelial innate immunity in the intestine, with each occupying a 
distinct functional niche in intestinal mucosal defense.


PMID: 10586069  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

