
1. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2000 Apr;14 Suppl 1:44-9.

The effect of NSAIDs and a COX-2 specific inhibitor on Helicobacter
pylori-induced PGE2 and HGF in human gastric fibroblasts.

Takahashi M(1), Katayama Y, Takada H, Kuwayama H, Terano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital at
Koshigaya, Dokkyo University School of Medicine, Saitama, Japan.
mtak@dokkyomed.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: There is compelling evidence for the pivotal role of Helicobacter
pylori in the pathogenesis of gastrointestinal ulcer disease. However, despite
the bacterium's toxicity, the majority of H. pylori infections are not
accompanied by gastric ulcers. This implies the existence of a host mechanism
offsetting H. pylori toxicity.
AIMS: To evaluate gastric fibroblasts' expression of hepatocyte growth factor
(HGF), which is known to facilitate gastric ulcer healing, in the presence of H. 
pylori; to compare the effect on H. pylori-induced HGF expression of a COX-2
selective inhibitor with that of nonselective nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs
METHODS: Human gastric fibroblasts were cultured from human gastric mucosa
obtained at surgery. Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and HGF were measured by EIA. The
expression of COX-2 mRNA was assessed by the TaqMan quantitative RT-PCR system.
RESULTS: H. pylori increased PGE2 release in gastric fibroblasts. H. pylori
induced expression of COX-2 mRNA, which indicates that PG induction by H. pylori 
is through COX-2. Sulindac sulphide, etodolac and NS 398 all inhibited H.
pylori-induced PGE2 release to the same extent. These agents also inhibited H.
pylori-induced HGF release.
CONCLUSION: Gastric fibroblasts produce PG and HGF in response to the presence of
H. pylori, which may be considered part of the human body's defensive reaction to
H. pylori toxicity. This defensive mechanism is inhibited not only by COX-2
nonselective NSAIDs but also by a COX-2 selective inhibitor. These findings
indicate the importance of COX-2 in chronic H. pylori infection.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2036.2000.014s1044.x 
PMID: 10807402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

