
1. Infect Immun. 2000 Jul;68(7):4289-96.

CXC chemokine receptor CXCR2 is essential for protective innate host response in 
murine Pseudomonas aeruginosa pneumonia.

Tsai WC(1), Strieter RM, Mehrad B, Newstead MW, Zeng X, Standiford TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine,
The University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0360, USA.
wctsai@umich.edu

Pulmonary infection due to Pseudomonas aeruginosa has emerged as a leading cause 
of mortality. A vigorous host response is required to effectively clear the
organisms from the lungs. This host defense is dependent on the recruitment and
activation of neutrophils and macrophages. A family of chemotactic cytokines
(chemokines) has been shown to participate in this protective response. In this
study, we assessed the role of the ELR(+) (glutamic acid-leucine-arginine motif
positive) CXC chemokines and their CXC chemokine receptor (CXCR2) in lung
antibacterial host defense. The intratracheal administration of Pseudomonas to
mice resulted in the time-dependent influx of neutrophils to the lung, peaking at
12 to 24 h after inoculation. The influx of neutrophils was associated with a
similar time-dependent expression of the ELR(+) CXC chemokines, KC, macrophage
inflammatory protein 2 (MIP-2), and lipopolysaccharide-induced CXC chemokine
(LIX). Selective neutralization of MIP-2 or KC resulted in modest changes in
neutrophil influx but no change in bacterial clearance or survival. However,
neutralization of CXCR2 resulted in a striking increase in mortality, which was
associated with a marked decrease in neutrophil recruitment and bacterial
clearance. Conversely, the site-specific transgenic expression of KC resulted in 
enhanced clearance of bacteria after Pseudomonas challenge. This study indicates 
that ELR(+) CXC chemokines are critical mediators of neutrophil-mediated host
defense in Pseudomonas pneumonia.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.68.7.4289-4296.2000 
PMCID: PMC101748
PMID: 10858247  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

