
1. J Immunol. 2002 Jan 1;168(1):316-24.

Regulation of human beta-defensin-2 in gingival epithelial cells: the involvement
of mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways, but not the NF-kappaB transcription
factor family.

Krisanaprakornkit S(1), Kimball JR, Dale BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, School of Dentistry, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Stratified epithelia of the oral cavity are continually exposed to bacterial
challenge that is initially resisted by neutrophils and epithelial factors,
including antimicrobial peptides of the beta-defensin family. Previous work has
shown that multiple signaling pathways are involved in human beta-defensin
(hBD)-2 mRNA regulation in human gingival epithelial cells stimulated with a
periodontal bacterium, Fusobacterium nucleatum, and other stimulants. The goal of
this study was to further characterize these pathways. The role of NF-kappaB in
hBD-2 regulation was investigated initially due to its importance in inflammation
and infection. Nuclear translocation of p65 and NF-kappaB activation was seen in 
human gingival epithelial cells stimulated with F. nucleatum cell wall extract,
indicating possible involvement of NF-kappaB in hBD-2 regulation. However, hBD-2 
induction by F. nucleatum was not blocked by pretreatment with two NF-kappaB
inhibitors, pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate and the proteasome inhibitor, MG132. To
investigate alternative modes of hBD-2 regulation, we explored involvement of
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways. F. nucleatum activated p38 and c-Jun
NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK) pathways, whereas it had little effect on p44/42.
Furthermore, inhibition of p38 and JNK partially blocked hBD-2 mRNA induction by 
F. nucleatum, and the combination of two inhibitors completely blocked
expression. Our results suggest that NF-kappaB is neither essential nor
sufficient for hBD-2 induction, and that hBD-2 regulation by F. nucleatum is via 
p38 and JNK, while phorbol ester induces hBD-2 via the p44/42 extracellular
signal-regulated kinase pathway. Studies of hBD-2 regulation provide insight into
how its expression may be enhanced to control infection locally within the mucosa
and thereby reduce microbial invasion into the underlying tissue.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.168.1.316 
PMID: 11751976  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

