
1. J Invest Dermatol. 2002 Apr;118(4):652-7.

Infection of human oral epithelia with Candida species induces cytokine
expression correlated to the degree of virulence.

Schaller M(1), Mailhammer R, Grassl G, Sander CA, Hube B, Korting HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University
Munich, Germany. Martin.Schaller@lrz.uni-muenchen.de

A defined and balanced immunomodulatory response is crucial for the protection of
mucosal surfaces being in contact with pathogenic microorganisms. This study
examined the local host response mechanisms of epithelial cells in experimental
Candida albicans, C. tropicalis, and C. glabrata infections by measuring the
expression of cytokines at the mRNA and protein level. During the course of
infection with active but not with heat-killed C. albicans stimulation of the
gene expression levels for interleukin-1alpha, interleukin-1beta, tumor necrosis 
factor, Exodus-2, P-selectin ligand, granulocyte-monocyte colony-stimulating
factor, and interleukin-8 was observed by standard and quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. This cytokine pattern may favor a
chemotactic and a T helper 1 response. Initial moderate or weak upregulation of
these cytokine genes by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction was also 
observed in epithelial infection with the less virulent species C. tropicalis and
C. glabrata. Heat-killed C. albicans failed to induce an epithelial immune
response. At the protein level, expression of interleukin-8 protein was strongly 
enhanced during the course of C. albicans infection, whereas lower levels were
seen with C. tropicalis and C. glabrata. The different expression patterns of
cytokines were associated with differences in virulence of the Candida strains.
This study's data, therefore, show a correlation between the virulence potential 
of pathogenic fungi, possibly mediated by specific virulence factors (such as
proteinases), and the secretion of epithelial cytokines and chemokines, which may
initiate in vivo a protective T helper 1 immunologic response and contribute to
the recruitment of activated leukocytes and lymphocytes to the site of mucosal
infection.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1523-1747.2002.01699.x 
PMID: 11918712  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

