
1. Inflammation. 2003 Dec;27(6):341-9.

Syntheses of prostaglandin E2 and E-cadherin and gene expression of
beta-defensin-2 by human gingival epithelial cells in response to Actinobacillus 
actinomycetemcomitans.

Noguchi T(1), Shiba H, Komatsuzawa H, Mizuno N, Uchida Y, Ouhara K, Asakawa R,
Kudo S, Kawaguchi H, Sugai M, Kurihara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontal Medicine, Division of Frontier Medical Science,
Hiroshima University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima, Japan.

The interaction between epithelial cells and microorganisms is the most important
step in bacterial infections. Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans was suggested 
to play a significant role in the initiation of periodontitis because of its
bacteriological characteristics. Prostaglandins (PG) mediate the inflammatory
response. Human beta-defensin-2 (hBD-2) is an antimicrobial peptide and
contributes to innate immunity. E-cadherin is responsible for an epithelial
intercellular junction. In this study, we investigated the syntheses of PGE2 and 
E-cadherin and the expression of hBD-2 in human gingival epithelial cells (HGEC) 
following exposure to A. actinomycetemcomitans. The levels of PGE2 and
cyclooxygenase-2, which are responsible for an increase in PGE2, were increased
depending on bacteria exposure time. hBD-2 mRNA was induced by A.
actinomycetemcomitans, while HGEC exposed to A. actinomycetemcomitans showed a
decrease in E-cadherin levels. Etodolac, a selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor
reinforced the increase in hBD-2 mRNA levels by A. actinomycetemcomitans.
Furthermore, the etodolac suppressed the decrease in E-cadherin levels. Thus,
endogenous PGE2 is involved in the hBD-2 and E-cadherin responses of HGEC to A.
actinomycetemcomitans. These findings suggest that the inflammatory and
antimicrobial response of gingival epithelial cells to A. actinomycetemcomitans
is involved in the initiation of periodontal inflammation. A.
actinomycetemcomitans may destroy the mechanical epithelial barrier by destroying
E-cadherin.

DOI: 10.1023/b:ifla.0000006702.27906.e9 
PMID: 14760942  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

