
1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Mar 9;282(10):7368-75. Epub 2007 Jan 10.

CD1d degradation in Chlamydia trachomatis-infected epithelial cells is the result
of both cellular and chlamydial proteasomal activity.

Kawana K(1), Quayle AJ, Ficarra M, Ibana JA, Shen L, Kawana Y, Yang H, Marrero L,
Yavagal S, Greene SJ, Zhang YX, Pyles RB, Blumberg RS, Schust DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Boston Medical Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02118.

Chlamydia trachomatis is an obligate intracellular pathogen that can persist in
the urogenital tract. Mechanisms by which C. trachomatis evades clearance by host
innate immune responses are poorly described. CD1d is MHC-like, is expressed by
epithelial cells, and can signal innate immune responses by NK and NKT cells.
Here we demonstrate that C. trachomatis infection down-regulates
surface-expressed CD1d in human penile urethral epithelial cells through
proteasomal degradation. A chlamydial proteasome-like activity factor (CPAF)
interacts with the CD1d heavy chain, and CPAF-associated CD1d heavy chain is then
ubiquitinated and directed along two distinct proteolytic pathways. The
degradation of immature glycosylated CD1d was blocked by the proteasome inhibitor
lactacystin but not by MG132, indicating that degradation was not via the
conventional proteasome. In contrast, the degradation of non-glycosylated CD1d
was blocked by lactacystin and MG132, consistent with conventional cellular
cytosolic degradation of N-linked glycoproteins. Immunofluorescent microscopy
confirmed the interruption of CD1d trafficking to the cell surface, and the
dislocation of CD1d heavy chains into both the cellular cytosol and the
chlamydial inclusion along with cytosolic CPAF. C. trachomatis targeted CD1d
toward two distinct proteolytic pathways. Decreased CD1d surface expression may
help C. trachomatis evade detection by innate immune cells and may promote C.
trachomatis persistence.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M610754200 
PMID: 17215251  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

