
1. Front Immunol. 2019 May 7;10:890. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00890. eCollection
2019.

Genetic Polymorphisms Affecting IDO1 or IDO2 Activity Differently Associate With 
Aspergillosis in Humans.

Napolioni V(1), Pariano M(2), Borghi M(2), Oikonomou V(2), Galosi C(2), De Luca
A(2), Stincardini C(2), Vacca C(2), Renga G(2), Lucidi V(3), Colombo C(4),
Fiscarelli E(5), Lass-Flörl C(6), Carotti A(7), D'Amico L(7), Majo F(3), Russo
MC(4), Ellemunter H(8), Spolzino A(9), Mosci P(10), Brancorsini S(2), Aversa
F(9), Velardi A(7), Romani L(2), Costantini C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, School of Medicine,
Stanford University Stanford, CA, United States.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(3)Unit of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome,
Italy.
(4)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, University of
Milan, Milan, Italy.
(5)Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(6)Division of Hygiene and Medical Microbiology, Innsbruck Medical University,
Innsbruck, Austria.
(7)Institute of Hematology-Centro di Ricerche Emato-Oncologiche, University of
Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(8)CF Centre, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(9)Division of Hematology, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Parma, Parma,
Italy.
(10)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.

Aspergillus is the causative agent of human diseases ranging from asthma to
invasive infection. Genetic and environmental factors are crucial in regulating
the interaction between the host and Aspergillus. The role played by the enzyme
indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1), which catalyzes the first and rate-limiting
step of tryptophan catabolism along the kynurenine pathway, is increasingly being
recognized, but whether and how genetic variation of IDO1 influences the risk of 
aspergillosis in susceptible patients is incompletely understood. In addition,
whether the closely related protein IDO2 plays a similar role remains unexplored.
In the present study, we performed genetic association studies in two different
cohorts of susceptible patients [cystic fibrosis (CF) patients and recipients of 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT)], and identified IDO1
polymorphisms that associate with the risk of infection in both cohorts. By using
human bronchial epithelial cells and PBMC from CF and HSCT patients,
respectively, we could show that the IDO1 polymorphisms appeared to down-modulate
IDO1 expression and function in response to IFNγ or Aspergillus conidia, and to
associate with an increased inflammatory response. In contrast, IDO2
polymorphisms, including variants known to profoundly affect protein expression
and function, were differently associated with the risk of aspergillosis in the
two cohorts of patients as no association was found in CF patients as opposed to 
recipients of HSCT. By resorting to a murine model of bone marrow
transplantation, we could show that the absence of IDO2 more severely affected
fungal burden and lung pathology upon infection with Aspergillus as compared to
IDO1, and this effect appeared to be linked to a deficit in the antifungal
effector phagocytic activity. Thus, our study confirms and extends the role of
IDO1 in the response to Aspergillus, and shed light on the possible involvement
of IDO2 in specific clinical settings.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00890 
PMCID: PMC6514051
PMID: 31134053  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

