
1. Infect Immun. 1999 Mar;67(3):1432-8.

Effect of transforming growth factor beta on experimental Salmonella typhimurium 
infection in mice.

Galdiero M(1), Marcatili A, Cipollaro de l'Ero G, Nuzzo I, Bentivoglio C,
Galdiero M, Romano Carratelli C.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Pathologia e Sanitá Animale, Sezione Malattie Infettive,
Facoltà di Veterinaria, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Naples,
Italy.

We have investigated the effect of the in vivo administration of recombinant
transforming growth factor beta (rTGF-beta) on the pathogenic mechanisms involved
in Salmonella typhimurium experimental infection in mice. The protective response
elicited by macrophages was induced by rTGF-beta1 by 2 days after experimental
infection, as demonstrated by an increased NO production, while the humoral
protective effect began with cytokine mRNA expression 2 days after the challenge 
and continued after 5 days with cytokine release and lymphocyte activation. We
demonstrated that all mice who received rTGF-beta1 survived 7 days after
infection. The number of bacteria recovered in the spleens and in the livers of
rTGF-beta1-treated mice 2 and 5 days after infection was significantly smaller
than that found in the same organs after phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)
inoculation. Furthermore, 2 and 5 days after infection, splenic macrophages from 
rTGF-beta1-treated mice showed a greater NO production than did those from
PBS-treated mice. The effect of rTGF-beta1 on S. typhimurium infection in mice
was correlated with the expression of cell costimulatory CD28 molecules. Five
days after S. typhimurium infection, the percentage of CD28(+)-expressing T cells
in splenic lymphocytes from rTGF-beta1-treated mice increased with respect to
that from control mice. Gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) mRNA was present in a
greater amount in spleen cells from rTGF-beta1-treated mice after 2 days,
although the intensity of the band decreased 5 days after the challenge. A
similar pattern was obtained with the mRNAs for interleukin-1alpha (IL-1alpha),
IL-6, TGF-beta, and inducible nitric oxide synthase, which showed greater
expression in cells obtained from rTGF-beta1-treated and S. typhimurium-infected 
mice 2 days after challenge. The treatment with rTGF-beta1 induced an increase in
IL-1alpha and IFN-gamma release in the supernatant of splenocyte cultures 5 days 
after the experimental infection with S. typhimurium. Moreover, we demonstrated
that 5 days after infection, the IFN-gamma titer was significantly greater in the
sera of rTGF-beta-treated mice than in those of PBS-treated mice. Also, hsp60
showed greater expression 2 days after the challenge in splenocytes from
rTGF-beta1-treated mice. The role played by proinflammatory and immunoregulatory 
cytokines and by CD28 is discussed.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.67.3.1432-1438.1999 
PMCID: PMC96477
PMID: 10024591  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

