
1. Infect Immun. 1999 Mar;67(3):1220-6.

Treponema denticola outer membrane enhances the phagocytosis of collagen-coated
beads by gingival fibroblasts.

Battikhi T(1), Lee W, McCulloch CA, Ellen RP.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Dentistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1G6.

Human gingival fibroblasts (HGFs) degrade collagen fibrils in physiological
processes by phagocytosis. Since Treponema denticola outer membrane (OM) extract 
perturbs actin filaments, important structures in phagocytosis, we determined
whether the OM affects collagen phagocytosis in vitro by HGFs. Phagocytosis was
measured by flow cytometric assessment of internalized collagen-coated
fluorescent latex beads. Confluent HGFs pretreated with T. denticola ATCC 35405
OM exhibited an increase in the percentage of collagen phagocytic cells
(phagocytosis index [PI]) and in the number of beads per phagocytosing cell
(phagocytic capacity [PC]) compared with untreated controls. The enhancement was 
swift (within 15 min) and was still evident after 1 day. PI and PC of HGFs for
bovine serum albumin (BSA)-coated beads were also increased, indicating a global 
increase in phagocytic processes. These results contrasted those for control OM
from Veillonella atypica ATCC 17744, which decreased phagocytosis. The T.
denticola OM-induced increase in bead uptake was eliminated by heating the OM and
by depolymerization of actin filaments by cytochalasin D treatment of HGFs.
Fluid-phase accumulation of lucifer yellow was enhanced in a saturable,
concentration-dependent, transient manner by the T. denticola OM. Our findings
were not due to HGF detachment or cytotoxicity in response to the T. denticola OM
treatment since the HGFs exhibited minimal detachment from the substratum; they
did not take up propidium iodide; and there was no change in their size,
granularity, or content of sub-G1 DNA. We conclude that a heat-sensitive
component(s) in T. denticola OM extract stimulates collagen phagocytosis and
other endocytic processes such as nonspecific phagocytosis and pinocytosis by
HGFs.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.67.3.1220-1226.1999 
PMCID: PMC96450
PMID: 10024564  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

