
1. Infect Immun. 1999 Apr;67(4):1837-43.

Targeted disruption of fibronectin-integrin interactions in human gingival
fibroblasts by the RI protease of Porphyromonas gingivalis W50.

Scragg MA(1), Cannon SJ, Rangarajan M, Williams DM, Curtis MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, Department of Oral Microbiology, St.
Bartholomew's and Royal London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London E1 2AD,
United Kingdom. m.a.scragg@mds.qmw.ac.uk

Cell surface integrins mediate interactions between cells and their extracellular
matrix and are frequently exploited by a range of bacterial pathogens to
facilitate adherence and/or invasion. In this study we examined the effects of
Porphyromonas gingivalis proteases on human gingival fibroblast (HGF) integrins
and their fibronectin matrix. Culture supernatant from the virulent strain W50
caused considerably greater loss of the beta1 integrin subunit from HGF in vitro 
than did that of the beige-pigmented strain W50/BE1. Prior treatment of the W50
culture supernatant with the protease inhibitor Nalpha-p-tosyl-L-lysine
chloromethyl ketone (TLCK) blocked its effects on cultured cells, indicating that
this process is proteolytically mediated. Purified arginine-specific proteases
from P. gingivalis W50 were able to mimic the effects of the whole-culture
supernatant on loss of beta1 integrin expression. However purified RI, an
alpha/beta heterodimer in which the catalytic chain is associated with an adhesin
chain, was 12 times more active than RIA, the catalytic monomer, in causing loss 
of the alpha5beta1 integrin (fibronectin receptor) from HGF. No effect was
observed on the alphaVbeta3 integrin (vitronectin receptor). The sites of action 
of RI and RIA were investigated in cells exposed to proteases pretreated with
TLCK to inactivate the catalytic component. Use of both monoclonal antibody 1A1, 
which recognizes only the adhesin chain of RI, and a rabbit antibody against P.
gingivalis whole cells indicated localization of RI on the fibroblasts in a
clear, linear pattern typical of that seen with fibronectin and alpha5beta1
integrin. Exact colocalization of RI with fibronectin and its alpha5beta1
receptor was confirmed by double labeling and multiple-exposure photomicroscopy. 
In contrast, RIA bound to fibroblasts in a weak, patchy manner, showing only fine
linear or granular staining. It is concluded that the adhesin component of RI
targets the P. gingivalis arginine-protease to sites of fibronectin deposition on
HGF, contributing to the rapid loss of both fibronectin and its main alpha5beta1 
integrin receptor. Given the importance of integrin-ligand interactions in
fibroblast function, their targeted disruption by RI may represent a novel
mechanism of damage in periodontal disease.


PMCID: PMC96535
PMID: 10085025  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

