
1. Biotechnol Bioeng. 1998 Feb 20;57(4):462-70.

Development of microbial mercury detoxification processes using
mercury-hyperresistant strain of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PU21.

Chang JS(1), Law WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Feng Chia University, Taichung, Taiwan,
Republic of China. changjs@fcu.edu.tw

A mercury-hyperresistant strain of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PU21 harboring plasmid 
Rip64 was utilized to develop bioprocesses able to detoxify and recover soluble
mercuric ions in aquatic systems. The kinetics of mercury detoxification was
investigated to determine the parameters needed for the design of the
bioprocesses. Batch, fed-batch, and continuous bioreactors were utilized to
evaluate the efficiency and feasibility of each mode of operation. The results
showed that the specific mercury detoxification rate was dependent on cell growth
phases, as well as the initial mercury concentrations. Cells at the lag growth
phase exhibited the best specific detoxification rate of approximately 1.1 x
10(-6) microg Hg/cell/h, and the rate was optimal at an initial mercury
concentration of 8 mg/L. In batch operations with initial mercuric ions ranging
from 2 to 10 mg/L, the mercuric ions added were rapidly volatilized from the
media in less than 2-3 h. With periodic feeding of 3 or 5 mg Hg/L at fixed time
intervals, the fed-batch processes had mercury removal efficiencies of 2.9 and
3.3 mg Hg/h/L, respectively. For continuous operations, the effluent cell
concentration (Xe) was essentially invariant at 527 and 523 mg/L with the
dilution rates (D) of 0.18 and 0.325 h-1, respectively. The increase in mercury
feeding concentrations (Hgf) from 1.0 to 6.15 mg Hg2+/L did not affect the
steady-state cell concentration (Xe) but forced the effluent mercury
concentration (Hge) to increase. The decrease in the dilution rate, however,
resulted in lower Hge values. It was also found that sequential mercury vapor
absorption columns recovered over 80% of the Hg degrees released from the
bioreactor while the residual mercury vapor was subsequently immobilized by an
activated carbon trap in the down stream of the absorption column.

Copyright 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.


PMID: 10099223  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

