
1. Blood. 1999 Apr 1;93(7):2173-85.

Metalloproteinases are involved in lipopolysaccharide- and tumor necrosis
factor-alpha-mediated regulation of CXCR1 and CXCR2 chemokine receptor
expression.

Khandaker MH(1), Mitchell G, Xu L, Andrews JD, Singh R, Leung H, Madrenas J,
Ferguson SS, Feldman RD, Kelvin DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Western Ontario
and the London Health Sciences Centre, Canada.

The neutrophil-specific G-protein-coupled chemokine receptors, CXCR1 and CXCR2,
bind with high affinity to the potent chemoattractant interleukin-8 (IL-8). The
mechanisms of IL-8 receptor regulation are not well defined, although previous
studies have suggested a process of ligand-promoted internalization as a putative
regulatory pathway. Herein, we provide evidence for two distinct processes of
CXCR1 and CXCR2 regulation. Confocal microscopy data showed a redistribution of
CXCR1 expression from the cell surface of neutrophils to internal compartments
after stimulation with IL-8, whereas stimulation with bacterial
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) did not
induce CXCR1 internalization but instead mediated a significant loss of
membrane-proximal CXCR1 staining intensity. To investigate whether proteolytic
cleavage was the mechanism responsible for LPS- and TNF-alpha-induced
downmodulation of IL-8 receptors, we tested a panel of proteinase inhibitors. The
downmodulation of CXCR1 and CXCR2 by LPS and TNF-alpha was most dramatically
inhibited by metalloproteinase inhibitors; 1, 10-phenanthroline and EDTA
significantly attenuated LPS- and TNF-alpha-induced loss of CXCR1 and CXCR2 cell 
surface expression. Metalloproteinase inhibitors also blocked the release of
CXCR1 cleavage fragments into the cell supernatants of LPS- and
TNF-alpha-stimulated neutrophils. In addition, while treatment of neutrophils
with LPS and TNF-alpha inhibited IL-8 receptor-mediated calcium mobilization and 
IL-8-directed neutrophil chemotaxis, both 1, 10-phenanthroline and EDTA blocked
these inhibitory processes. In contrast, metalloproteinase inhibitors did not
affect IL-8-mediated downmodulation of CXCR1 and CXCR2 cell surface expression or
receptor signaling. Thus, these findings may provide further insight into the
mechanisms of leukocyte regulation during immunologic and inflammatory responses.


PMID: 10090924  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

