
1. J Immunol. 1999 Apr 1;162(7):4133-9.

B7-2 is required for the progression but not the initiation of the type 2 immune 
response to a gastrointestinal nematode parasite.

Greenwald RJ(1), Urban JF, Ekkens MJ, Chen S, Nguyen D, Fang H, Finkelman FD,
Sharpe AH, Gause WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Uniformed Services University of
the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.

T cells require CD28/CTLA-4 costimulatory molecule interactions in addition to
Ag-specific signals through the TCR for in vivo effector Th cell function. Some
studies have suggested that the ligands for these costimulatory molecules may
differentially influence effector T cell function with B7-2 favoring a type 2
response and B7-1 favoring a type 1 response, while other studies have suggested 
that these molecules may be redundant. The recent development of B7-2-deficient
mice permits the direct analysis of the requirement of B7-2 during a type 2
immune response to an infectious pathogen. We have examined, in B7-2-deficient
mice, effector Th cell function and the associated type 2 immune response
following infection with Heligmosomoides polygyrus, a natural murine parasitic
nematode. Elevations in cytokine gene expression and protein secretion were
pronounced and comparable in inoculated B7-2-/- and B7-2+/+ mice at day 8 after
H. polygyrus inoculation. However, by day 14 after infection, increases in T cell
cytokine expression were markedly inhibited in H. polygyrus-inoculated B7-2-/-
mice. Furthermore, elevations in serum IgE and germinal center formation were
inhibited at later stages of the immune response, while elevations in serum IgG1 
persisted. These findings suggest that certain T-dependent components vary in
their B7-2-dependency during the type 2 immune response. They further demonstrate
that B7-2 interactions are not necessary for the initiation of the type 2 immune 
response, but are instead required for its progression after the development of
effector T cells.


PMID: 10201938  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

