
1. Leukemia. 1999 Apr;13(4):514-7.

Outpatient management of acute promyelocytic leukemia after consolidation
chemotherapy.

Girmenia C(1), Latagliata R, Tosti S, Morano SG, Celesti F, Coppola L, Spadea A, 
Breccia M, Battistini R, Tafuri A, Cimino G, Mandelli F, Alimena G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie Cellulari ed Ematologia, University La Sapienza,
Rome, Italy.

The feasibility and safety of outpatient management of acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL) during the aplastic phase after intensive consolidation
chemotherapy, the incidence and types of complications requiring readmission to
hospital, and the number of hospital days spared by this policy have been
prospectively evaluated. After chemotherapy administration, patients were
evaluated on an ambulatory basis. In the event of any complication they referred 
to the Emergency Unit (EU) of our Department dedicated to outpatients with
hematologic diseases. Forty patients with APL observed over a 4 year period were 
eligible for intensive chemotherapy. After the achievement of complete remission 
they received a total of 104 consolidation courses and in 98 instances they were 
followed on an ambulatory basis. There were 41 cases (42%) of rehospitalization
for fever (40 cases) or severe anemia (one case). Only one patient died due to a 
brain hemorrhage. Streptococcus viridans was the organism most frequently
isolated from blood. Empiric once-a-day antibacterial therapy with ceftriaxone
and amikacin was effective in 87% of the cases and made possible early discharge 
in 28% of the cases to continue the antibiotic therapy on an outpatient setting. 
Patients were managed out of the hospital for 76% of the post-consolidation
neutropenia period. Thanks to the availability of an EU specifically dedicated to
outpatients with hematologic diseases, out-hospital management of APL patients
after consolidation therapy appeared to be safe, well accepted, potentially
cost-saving, and contributed to saving the risk of developing severe nosocomial
infections.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.leu.2401375 
PMID: 10214855  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

