
1. J Periodontol. 1999 Mar;70(3):274-82.

Interleukin (IL)-1 and Porphyromonas gingivalis lipopolysaccharide stimulation of
IL-6 production by fibroblasts derived from healthy or periodontally diseased
human gingival tissue.

Kent LW(1), Rahemtulla F, Michalek SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Dentistry, The University of Alabama at 
Birmingham, 35294-2170, USA.

BACKGROUND: Human gingival fibroblasts (HGF) play a key role in tissue repair and
destruction. These cells express low levels of interleukin (IL)-6 constitutively 
and increased levels after stimulation with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or the
cytokines IL-1 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha). However, little
information is available on IL-6 production by fibroblasts derived from diseased 
tissue. The present study compared constitutive and induced IL-6 production by
human gingival fibroblasts (HGF) derived from healthy and diseased periodontal
tissue. We also evaluated whether IL-1 acted in a synergistic manner with LPS in 
inducing IL-6 production by HGF and whether LPS acted via CD14.
METHODS: HGF derived from healthy and diseased tissue and foreskin fibroblasts
were grown to confluency, photographed, and counted, and their constitutive IL-6 
production was quantitated by ELISA. Healthy and diseased HGF were also
pretreated with IL-1alpha, followed by incubation with Porphyromonas gingivalis
or Escherichia coli LPS. Culture supernatants were assessed for IL-6 protein by
ELISA and cell lysates for mRNA by reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR). In order to determine if LPS stimulation was mediated through 
the LPS receptor, CD14, surface receptors on HGF were assessed by flow cytometry 
and the total RNA CD14 mRNA was assessed.
RESULTS: Higher quantities of IL-6 were produced by the diseased HGF before and
after stimulation than by the healthy HGF. Pretreatment with IL-1alpha followed
by LPS stimulation of the healthy and diseased HGF cell lines resulted in an
additive effect on IL-6 production. Pretreatment with IL-1alpha followed by a
second incubation with the same stimulant produced higher amounts of IL-6 than
cultures incubated with LPS alone or following IL-1alpha pretreatment. Similar
amounts of IL-6 mRNA were present in unstimulated HGF from either diseased or
healthy tissue and in those incubated with IL-1alpha only. After incubation with 
IL-1alpha and LPS, diseased HGF produced slightly more mRNA than healthy HGF.
CD14 was not expressed by healthy or diseased HGF even after stimulation with
either P. gingivalis or E. coli LPS. CD14 message was also undetectable.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these results indicate heterogeneity among gingival 
fibroblasts and an additive effect of IL-1 and P. gingivalis LPS on IL-6
production by HGF. Furthermore, the LPS effect on HGF was not mediated by CD14.

DOI: 10.1902/jop.1999.70.3.274 
PMID: 10225543  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

