
1. Blood. 1999 May 15;93(10):3317-26.

Modulation of integrin function in hematopoietic progenitor cells by CD43
engagement: possible involvement of protein tyrosine kinase and phospholipase
C-gamma.

Anzai N(1), Gotoh A, Shibayama H, Broxmeyer HE.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology/Immunology, Medicine, and the Walther Oncology
Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

Attachment of cells to extracellular matrix components is critical for the
regulation of hematopoiesis. CD43 is a mucin-like transmembrane sialoglycoprotein
expressed on the surface of almost all hematopoietic cells. A highly extended
structure of extracellular mucin with negative charge may function as a repulsive
barrier to hematopoietic cells. However, some investigators have shown that CD43 
has proadhesive properties, and engagement of CD43 has been reported to
upregulate integrin-mediated cell adhesion in T cells. We found that
cross-linking of CD43 with monoclonal antibodies (MoAbs) enhanced integrin
alpha4beta1 (very late antigen [VLA]-4) and alpha5 beta1 (VLA-5)-dependent
adhesion of human cord blood CD34(+) cells to fibronectin. CD34(+) CD38(hi), but 
not CD34(+)CD38(-/low) cells responded significantly to the stimulus, suggesting 
that committed, but not stem and more immature progenitors are sensitive to
CD43-mediated activation of integrin. To elucidate the molecular mechanism
leading to integrin activation, we used the growth factor-dependent cell line
MO7e. Cross-linking of CD43 induced tyrosine phosphorylation of several
intracellular molecules including the protein tyrosine kinase Syk, the
proto-oncogene product Cbl, and phospholipase C (PLC)-gamma2 in MO7e cells.
Moreover, protein tyrosine kinase inhibitor herbimycin A and PLC inhibitor U73122
both blocked CD43-induced enhancement of adhesion to fibronectin. These results
indicate that signals mediated through CD43 may increase integrin affinity to
fibronectin via a pathway dependent on protein tyrosine kinase and PLC-gamma
activation in hematopoietic progenitors.


PMID: 10233884  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

