
1. Int Immunol. 1999 May;11(5):745-51.

Construction and binding analysis of recombinant single-chain TCR derived from
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes and a cytotoxic T lymphocyte clone directed
against MAGE-1.

Lake DF(1), Salgaller ML, van der Bruggen P, Bernstein RM, Marchalonis JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, and Arizona Cancer Center,
University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85724, USA.

The TCR is responsible for the specificity of cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) by
recognizing peptides presented in the context of MHC. By producing recombinant
soluble TCR, it is possible to study this interaction at the molecular level. We 
generated single-chain TCR (scTCR) from tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) and 
one CTL clone directed against melanoma-associated antigen (MAGE)-1. Sixty-eight 
day anti-MAGE-1 TIL and one cloned anti-MAGE-1 CTL were analyzed by PCR for their
Valpha and Vbeta gene usage. The TIL population showed a restriction in Valpha
and Vbeta usage with only Valpha4 and Valpha9 and Vbeta2 and Vbeta7 expressed.
The anti-MAGE-1 CTL clone demonstrated absolute restriction with only Valpha12
and Vbeta1 expressed. DNA sequence analysis was performed on all V regions. For
the TIL, each possible Valpha-Vbeta combination (i.e. Valpha4-Vbeta2,
Valpha9-Vbeta2, Valpha4-Vbeta7 and Valpha9-Vbeta7) was constructed as a distinct 
scTCR and the recombinant proteins expressed in bacteria. From the anti-MAGE-1
TIL, Valpha4-Vbeta2 scTCR demonstrated binding activity to HLA-A1(+) cells pulsed
with MAGE-1 peptide. Results obtained from screening a panel of our scTCR
constructs on HLA-A1(+) cells pulsed with MAGE-1 peptide or irrelevant peptide
demonstrated that Vbeta2 plays a significant role in binding to the MAGE-1
peptide. Amino acid alignment analysis showed that each Vbeta sequence is
distinctly different from the others. These findings demonstrate that soluble TCR
in single-chain format have binding activity. Furthermore, the results indicate
that in TCR, like antibodies, one chain may contribute a dominant portion of the 
binding activity.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/11.5.745 
PMID: 10330280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

