
1. Hum Immunol. 1999 Apr;60(4):347-60.

A special report: histocompatibility testing guidelines for hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation using volunteer donors. Quality Assurance and Donor
Registries Working Groups of the World Marrow Donor Association.

Hurley CK(1), Wade JA, Oudshoorn M, Middleton D, Kukuruga D, Navarrete C,
Christiansen F, Hegland J, Ren EC, Andersen I, Cleaver SA, Brautbar C, Raffoux C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Georgetown University Medical
School, Washington, DC, USA. hurleyc@gunet.georgetown.edu

The World Marrow Donor Association has formulated guidelines for establishing the
extent and quality of histocompatibility testing for unrelated donor registries, 
umbilical cord blood banks, and transplant centers involved in international
exchange of hematopoietic stem cells for allogeneic transplantation. Registry and
cord blood bank guidelines suggest that, at a minimum, initial HLA typing should 
be performed for three HLA loci, HLA-A, -B, and -DR, at low resolution/split
antigen level. DNA-based testing methods should be utilized for HLA-DR typing.
DNA-based testing for HLA-A and -B should replace serologic testing of new
volunteer donors and cord blood units as robust protocols and reagents become
available to the laboratories. Transplant center guidelines for typing of
patient, family and to confirm the HLA types of potential unrelated donors should
include, at the minimum, typing HLA-A, B, and -DR loci using primarily DNA-based 
testing methods at allele level resolution for DRB1 and low resolution/split
antigen level for HLA-A and -B. It is strongly recommended that the typing of a
patient and the selected donor be performed using the same set of reagents,
methodology, and interpretation criteria with fresh tissue samples to ensure HLA 
identity. Guidelines for laboratory accreditation, approaches to quality
assurance and quality control for HLA testing, and suggestions for the format of 
the HLA database of donor types are also outlined.

DOI: 10.1016/s0198-8859(98)00129-3 
PMID: 10363727  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

