
1. Am J Surg Pathol. 1999 Jun;23(6):656-61.

Spindle cell tumors associated with mycobacteria in lymph nodes of HIV-positive
patients: 'Kaposi sarcoma with mycobacteria' and 'mycobacterial pseudotumor'.

Logani S(1), Lucas DR, Cheng JD, Ioachim HL, Adsay NV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harper Hospital, Karmanos Cancer Institute and Wayne 
State University, Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

Patients infected with HIV often have unusual manifestations of common infections
and neoplasms. One such example is "mycobacterial pseudotumor," an exuberant
spindle cell lesion induced in lymph nodes by mycobacteria. Kaposi sarcoma also
produces a spindle cell proliferation in lymph nodes of HIV-positive patients.
These two entities must be differentiated from one another because of differences
in treatment and prognosis. We report here, however, three cases of intranodal
Kaposi sarcoma with simultaneous mycobacterial infection, the occurrence of which
has not been clearly documented. For comparison, we also studied three cases of
mycobacterial pseudotumor, of which 14 cases have been described to date. There
was considerable histologic overlap between these two lesions. Acid-fast bacilli 
were present in all cases, predominantly in the more epithelioid histiocytes in
the cases of Kaposi sarcoma, and in spindle and epithelioid cells in the cases of
mycobacterial pseudotumor. The morphologic features that favored Kaposi sarcoma
over mycobacterial pseudotumor were the prominent fascicular arrangement of
spindle cells and slitlike spaces, the lack of granular, acidophilic cytoplasm,
and the presence of mitoses. Immunohistochemistry was a reliable adjunct study in
the differential diagnosis, as the spindle cells in mycobacterial pseudotumor
were positive for S-100 protein and CD68 whereas those of Kaposi sarcoma were
CD31- and CD34-positive but negative for S-100 protein and CD68. Awareness that
Kaposi sarcoma may coexist with mycobacterial infection in the same biopsy
specimen is important because these lesions may be misdiagnosed as mycobacterial 
pseudotumor. The clinical impact of distinguishing between Kaposi sarcoma with
mycobacteria and mycobacterial pseudotumor is significant because the presence of
Kaposi sarcoma alters treatment and prognosis.

DOI: 10.1097/00000478-199906000-00004 
PMID: 10366147  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

