
1. Neurol Res. 1999 Jun;21(4):391-8.

Effects of microbial invasion on cerebral hemodynamics and oxygenation monitored 
by near infrared spectroscopy in experimental Escherichia coli meningitis in the 
newborn piglet.

Park WS(1), Chang YS, Ko SY, Kang MJ, Han JM, Lee M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

This study was carried out to elucidate the pathophysiologic mechanism of
cerebral hyperemia observed during the early phase of bacterial meningitis. We
tested the hypothesis that microbial invasion through the blood-brain barrier is 
responsible for cerebral vasodilation and hyperemia in meningitis. Escherichia
coli was given either intravenously (i.v.) or intracisternally (i.c.) to closely 
mimic the primary or secondary bacterial invasion occurring in meningitis and
newborn piglets were grouped according to their invasion results (+ or -); 12 in 
the i.v. (+) group, 14 in the i.v. (-) group, 13 in the i.c. (+) group, 15 in the
i.c. (-) group. The results were compared with eight animals in the control
group. Near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) was employed to monitor changes in total
hemoglobin (HbT), oxygenated hemoglobin (HbO), deoxygenated hemoglobin (Hb),
deduced hemoglobin (HbD), and oxidized cytochrome aa3 (Cyt aa3). HbT, as an index
of cerebral blood volume, increased progressively in both i.v. (+) and i.v. (-)
groups and became significantly different from control and baseline values at 2
h. Hb significantly increased only in i.v. (+) group. HbD, as an index of
cerebral blood flow, decreased significantly in i.v. (+), i.v.(-) and i.c. (-)
groups and this change was mitigated in i.c. (+) group, HbO was reduced in i.c.
(-) group and this decrease was attenuated in i.c. (+) group. Increased Cyt aa3
was observed in all experimental groups after bacterial inoculation. Changes in
ICP, blood pressure, cerebral perfusion pressure, blood or CSF glucose or
lactate, CSF TNF-alpha level, or CSF leukocytes number were not associated with
changes in NIRS findings. These findings suggest that primary or secondary
bacterial invasion across the blood-brain barrier is primarily responsible for
cerebral vasodilation and hyperemia observed during the early phase of bacterial 
meningitis.

DOI: 10.1080/01616412.1999.11740949 
PMID: 10406012  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

