
1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jul 30;274(31):21519-27.

T cell activation stimulates the association of enzymatically active
tyrosine-phosphorylated ZAP-70 with the Crk adapter proteins.

Gelkop S(1), Isakov N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Health Sciences, Cancer 
Research Center, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva 84105, Israel.

Engagement of the T cell antigen receptor initiates signal transduction involving
tyrosine phosphorylation of multiple effector molecules and the formation of
multimolecular complexes at the receptor site. Adapter proteins that possess SH2 
and SH3 protein-protein interaction domains are implicated in the assembly of
cell activation-induced signaling complexes. We found that Crk adapter proteins
undergo activation-induced interaction with the zeta-chain associated protein
(ZAP-70) tyrosine kinase in the human T cell line, Jurkat. Incubation of various 
glutathione S-transferase fusion proteins with a lysate of activated Jurkat cells
resulted in selective association of ZAP-70 with Crk, but not Grb2 or Nck,
adapter proteins. In addition, tyrosine-phosphorylated ZAP-70
co-immunoprecipitated with Crk from a lysate of activated Jurkat cells, and
ZAP-70 association with GST-Crk was observed in a lysate of activated human
peripheral blood T cells. Association between the two molecules was mediated by
direct physical interaction and involved the Crk-SH2 domain and
phosphotyrosyl-containing sequences on ZAP-70. The association required intact
Lck, considered to be an upstream regulator of ZAP-70, because it could not take 
place in activated JCaM1 cells, which express normal levels of ZAP-70 but are
devoid of Lck. Finally, glutathione S-transferase-Crk fusion proteins were found 
to interact predominantly with membrane-residing tyrosine-phosphorylated ZAP-70
that exhibited autophosphorylation activity as well as phosphorylation of an
exogenous substrate, CFB3. These findings suggest that Crk adapter proteins play 
a role in the early activation events of T lymphocytes, apparently, by direct
interaction with, and regulation of, the membrane-residing ZAP-70 protein
tyrosine kinase.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.31.21519 
PMID: 10419455  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

