
1. J Immunol. 1999 Aug 1;163(3):1222-9.

Functional similarity and differences between selection-independent CD4-CD8-
alphabeta T cells and positively selected CD8 T cells expressing the same TCR and
the induction of anergy in CD4-CD8- alphabeta T cells in antigen-expressing mice.

Caveno J(1), Zhang Y, Motyka B, Teh SJ, Teh HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

In TCR-alphabeta transgenic mice, CD4-CD8- TCR-alphabeta+ (alphabeta DN) cells
arise in the absence of positively selecting MHC molecules and are resistant to
clonal deletion in Ag-expressing mice. In this study the activation requirements 
and functional properties of alphabeta double-negative (DN) cells were compared
with those of positively selected CD8+ cells expressing equivalent levels of the 
same MHC class I-restricted transgenic TCR. We found that positively selected
CD8+ cells required a lower density of the antigenic ligand for optimal
proliferative responses compared with alphabeta DN cells derived from
nonpositively selecting mice. However, when the CD8 coreceptor on CD8+ cells was 
blocked with an anti-CD8 mAb, both alphabeta DN and CD8+ cells exhibited the same
dose-response curve to the antigenic ligand and the same dependence on CD28/B7
costimulation. Positively selected CD8+ cells also differed from alphabeta DN
cells in that they differentiated into more efficient killers and IL-2 producers 
after Ag stimulation, even after CD8 blockade. However, Ag-activated alphabeta DN
and CD8+ cells were equally efficient in producing IFN-gamma, suggesting that
this functional property is independent of positive selection. We also found that
alphabeta DN cells recovered from the lymph nodes of Ag-expressing mice were
functionally anergic. This anergic state was associated with defective
proliferation and IL-2 production in response to Ag stimulation. These
observations indicate that alphabeta DN cells can be anergized in vivo by
physiological levels of the antigenic ligand.


PMID: 10415017  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

