
1. Biochemistry. 1999 Aug 3;38(31):9956-63.

Imaging real-time proteolysis of single collagen I molecules with an atomic force
microscope.

Lin H(1), Clegg DO, Lal R.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Research Institute, Department of Molecular, Cellular and
Developmental Biology, University of California, Santa Barbara 93106, USA.
h_lin@lifesci.ucsb.edu

The dynamic process of synthesis and degradation of extracellular matrix
molecules, including various collagens, is important in normal physiological
functions and pathological conditions. Existing models of collagen enzymatic
degradation reactions are derived from bulk biochemical assays. In this study, we
have imaged in real-time individual collagen I molecules and their proteolysis by
Clostridium histolyticum collagenases in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) with
atomic force microscopy (AFM). We have also imaged the likely binding and
unbinding of collagenase molecules to single triple-helical collagen I molecules 
and subsequent proteolysis of subsets of the collagen molecules. The proteolysis 
of collagen molecules was inhibited by reduced calcium and acidification. Results
from AFM study of collagen proteolysis are consistent with SDS-PAGE biochemical
assays. The real-time proteolysis of single collagen I molecules followed simple 
Michaelis-Menton kinetics previously derived from bulk biochemical assays. This
is the first report of imaging real-time proteolysis of single macromolecules and
its inhibition on a molecular scale. A strong correspondence between the kinetics
of proteolysis of single collagen molecules and the kinetics of proteolysis
derived from bulk biochemical assays will have a wide applicability in examining 
real-time enzymatic reactions and their regulation at single molecule structural 
level. Such real-time study of single molecule proteolysis could provide a better
understanding of the interactions between proteases and target proteins as well
as proteases and protease inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1021/bi990800q 
PMID: 10433702  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

