
1. Differentiation. 1999 Jul;65(1):27-42.

Characterization of a functional relationship between hepatocyte growth factor
and mouse bone marrow-derived mast cells.

Fehlner-Gardiner CC(1), Cao H, Jackson-Boeters L, Nakamura T, Elliott BE, Uniyal 
S, Chan BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Western Ontario,
London, Canada.

During the early stage (at 4 weeks) of interleukin-3 (IL-3)-induced development, 
mouse bone marrow-derived mast cells (BMMC) express alpha 4, alpha 5 and alpha 6 
integrins, whereas with further maturation beyond 10 weeks, only alpha 5 integrin
remains stably expressed. Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) modulates the growth and
movement of diverse cell types upon binding to its receptor, encoded by the
proto-oncogene c-met. We report here the expression of c-met by BMMC throughout
the course of their development. In addition, HGF stimulated migration of early
week-4 BMMC, but not of the later stage week-10 BMMC, on fibronectin and laminin 
substrates. The developmental stage-dependent effect of HGF on BMMC was due to
specific stimulation of the migratory function of alpha 4 and alpha 6, but not
alpha 5 integrins. In addition, HGF had no effect on BMMC growth, either alone or
in combination with IL-3. While HGF is stimulatory of the migratory function of
BMMC, our results show that BMMC in turn can modulate HGF function. Thus, upon
activation via the IgE receptors, BMMC released proteases that abolished HGF
activities. Analyses of the degradation products by two-dimensional sodium
dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and Western blot using
antisera prepared against recombinant HGF and the kringle 3 domain of HGF
revealed specific degradation of HGF alpha but not beta/beta' subunits.
Therefore, our results suggest that: 1) the motogenic effect of HGF on BMMC
varies according to the stage of their development, 2) HGF stimulation of BMMC
migration is due to selective activation of alpha 4 and alpha 6, but not alpha 5 
integrin function, and 3) there exists a two-way relationship between BMMC and
HGF such that HGF stimulates the beta 1 integrin-mediated migratory function of
BMMC, which can, in turn, modulate HGF function by release of serine proteases.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1432-0436.1999.6510027.x 
PMID: 10448711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

