
1. J Hypertens. 1999 Sep;17(9):1329-37.

Involvement of receptor-type tyrosine kinase gene families in cardiac
hypertrophy.

Akiyama Y(1), Ashizawa N, Seto S, Ohtsuru A, Kuroda H, Ito M, Yamashita S, Yano
K.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki
University School of Medicine, Nagasaki City, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: The activation of protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) has been postulated 
to be involved in cell differentiation and proliferation. To elucidate the
involvement of tyrosine kinase genes in normal and pathological conditions, we
analysed the expression patterns of receptor-type PTKs in the normal and
hypertensive hypertrophied heart in rats.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Hypertrophied and normal rat hearts were obtained from
hypertensive rats; deoxycorticosterone acetate (DOCA)-salt and 2 kidney-1 clip
(2K-1C), and their sham-operated rats, respectively. A reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was performed using degenerated 
primers which were designed from highly conserved regions in the catalytic
domains of receptor-type PTKs. The PCR products were ligated into a sequence
vector, and subcloned by transforming bacteria. To compare the expression level
of these PTK mRNAs in the normal and hypertrophied heart, we performed
semi-competetive RT-PCR and immunohistochemical and Western blot analyses.
RESULTS: Nucleotide sequencing of approximately 80 clones of PTKs revealed 10
receptor-type, five nonreceptor-type and two unknown types in the rat heart.
Tie-2/Tek, Ryk, insulin-like growth factor-I receptor were abundantly expressed
in the rat heart as members of receptor-type PTKs. Immunohistochemistry and
RT-PCR demonstrated the presence of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-alpha
receptor, PDGF-beta receptor and fibroblast growth factor-3 receptor in both
normal and hypertrophied hearts. We also confirmed the presence of Flt-1,
KDR/FIk-1, and their ligand vascular endothelial growth factor, c-Met and its
ligand hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), and Tie-1, Tie-2/Tek by
immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR. The coexpression of cardiac HGF and c-Met in
hypertrophied hearts, especially in 2K-1 C rats, was induced more intensively
than that in DOCA-salt rats.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that HGF/c-Met interactions may play an
important role in cardiac hypertrophy and remodeling, probably as a result of the
activation of the local renin-angiotensin system.

DOI: 10.1097/00004872-199917090-00014 
PMID: 10489112  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

