
1. Plant Mol Biol. 1999 Jul;40(5):883-92.

Regulation of the hvst1 gene encoding a high-affinity sulfate transporter from
Hordeum vulgare.

Vidmar JJ(1), Schjoerring JK, Touraine B, Glass AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

A cDNA, hvst1, was isolated from Hordeum vulgare by heterologous complementation 
in Escherichia coli. This cDNA encodes a high-affinity sulfate transporter that
is 2442 bp in length and consists of 660 amino acids. Under steady-state
conditions of sulfate supply during culture, sulfate influx (measured at 100
microM external sulfate concentration) and hvst1 transcript level were inversely 
correlated with sulfate concentrations in the culture solution. Glutathione (GSH)
concentrations increased as external sulfate was increased from 2.5 to 250
microM. A time-course study, designed to investigate effects of sulfate
withdrawal on the abundance of hvst1 transcript, showed a 5-fold increase of the 
latter within the first two hours. This was followed by a further slight increase
during the next 46 h. These changes were accompanied by a parallel increase in
sulfate influx and a decrease of root GSH concentrations. When plants that had
been deprived of sulfate for 24 h were exposed to L-cysteine (Cys) or GSH for 3
h, GSH was the more effective down-regulator, reducing hvst1 transcript level to 
below that of unstarved controls. The decrease in transcript abundance induced by
sulfate or Cys was partially relieved by the addition of buthionine sulfoximine
(BSO), an inhibitor of GSH synthesis. Both hvst1 transcripts and sulfate influx
increased as a function of N supply to N-starved plants. Amino oxyacetate acid
(AOA), an aminotransferase inhibitor, when supplied with NO3-, increased
transcript abundance of hvst1, while tungstate, methionine sulfoximine (MSO) and 
azaserine (AZA), inhibitors of nitrate reductase, glutamine synthetase and
glutamate synthase (GOGAT), respectively, were without effect. AOA decreased root
concentrations of aspartate (Asp), Cys and GSH; in contrast, glutamate (Glu)
concentrations remained unchanged.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1006230131841 
PMID: 10487222  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

