
1. Cancer Res. 1999 Sep 15;59(18):4642-50.

Small cell lung carcinomas express shared and private tumor antigens presented by
HLA-A1 or HLA-A2.

Yamazaki K(1), Spruill G, Rhoderick J, Spielman J, Savaraj N, Podack ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Miami School of Medicine, Florida
33101, USA.

Tumor-derived peptides presented by MHC class I molecules are targets for tumor
rejection by CD8+ CTLs. MHC-restricted CD8+ CTLs are required also for the
identification and characterization of tumor antigens that will be useful for
immune therapy. For many human solid tumors, however, tumor antigens remain
undefined because of the difficulty of generating MHC-restricted, tumor-specific 
CTLs required for their analysis. CD8+ CTL responses are modulated by CD4+ helper
T cells and by antigen-presenting cells. In this study, highly purified CD8+ T
cells were mixed with tumor cells in primary cultures in the absence of any other
cells to reduce the complexity of CTL generation. Tumor cells were transfected
with HLA-A1 or HLA-A2 and used to stimulate partly matched HLA-A1- or
HLA-A2-positive CD8+ T cells. Partial MHC class I matching of tumor and CD8+ T
cells and omission of other cells in primary culture was highly effective in
generating MHC class I-restricted CTL to poorly immunogenic small cell lung
carcinomas (SCLCs). Cytotoxicity was further enhanced by cotransfection of tumor 
cells with B7.1 (CD80). ICAM-1 (CD54) was not as effective as costimulation. SCLC
cells presented tumor-specific peptides with HLA-A1 and HLA-A2 and were lysed by 
A1- or A2-restricted CD8+ CTLs. A1- and A2-restricted CD8+ CTLs detected shared
tumor antigens on unrelated SCLC tumor lines in addition to private antigens. The
use of direct antigen presentation by MHC class I-transfected tumors to MHC class
I-matched CD8+ T cells is an effective way to generate MHC class I-restricted
CTLs toward poorly immunogenic tumors in vitro, permitting the molecular
identification of their tumor antigens.


PMID: 10493519  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

