
1. Eur J Biochem. 1999 Oct;265(2):788-97.

Characterization of recombinant and plant-derived mistletoe lectin and their
B-chains.

Eck J(1), Langer M, Möckel B, Witthohn K, Zinke H, Lentzen H.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research and Information Network (BRAIN) GmbH, Zwingenberg,
Germany.

Mistletoe lectin I (pML) and its isoforms ML II and III constitute the active
principle in extract preparations from mistletoe, commonly used as
immunomodulator in adjuvant tumour therapy. The heterodimeric disulfide-linked
cytotoxic protein is classified as type II ribosome inactivating protein (RIP).
Recently, the sequence coding for the mistletoe lectin prepro-protein was
identified and the existence of a single intron-free gene was shown [Eck, J.,
Langer, M., Möckel, B., Baur, A., Rothe, M., Zinke, H. & Lentzen, H. (1999) Eur. 
J. Biochem. 264, 775-784]. The aim of this study was to prepare pure and
homogeneous rMLB-chain as well as rML heterodimer for studying the carbohydrate
binding specificity of recombinant versus natural protein and its contribution to
the observed cytotoxic effect. Expression in E. coli resulted in the production
of insoluble protein (inclusion bodies). A procedure for generating correctly
folded, biochemically and biologically active rMLB was established starting from 
the insoluble single chain. Carbohydrate binding and specificity of pMLB and rMLB
were analysed by a competitive enzyme linked lectin assay (ELLA). Asialofetuin
was able to compete with binding of both chains (50% at 0.8 microM). The
specificity of the B-chains to lactose was more distinct with halfmaximal
competition at 4.9 mM (pMLB) and > 90 mM (rMLB), respectively. Furthermore, in a 
coassociation process rMLA- and rMLB inclusion bodies were associated in one step
by defined dilution yielding active rML-heterodimer. The activities of
recombinant (rML) and plant derived mistletoe lectin (pML) were compared.
Cytotoxicity was determined using MOLT-4 cells and enzymatic rRNA N-glycosidase
activity was measured in a coupled transcription/translation assay. The IC50
values of the two heterodimers were similar in both assays; rMLB-chain did not
show any cytotoxic effect. In the ELLA with lactose as a competitor 50%
competition of binding to asialofetuin was achieved at 1.6 mM (rML) and 1.8 mM
(pML). Hence, using three different assays we found no significant differences
between the recombinant protein and the glycosylated form of ML. Comparing the
biological activities of the single chains with those of the heterodimer we
conclude, that both, lectin activity and the rRNA N-glycosidase activity, are
prerequisites for the cytotoxic effects on target cells.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.1999.00784.x 
PMID: 10504411  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

