
1. Blood. 1999 Oct 15;94(8):2676-85.

A thrombopoietin receptor mutant deficient in Jak-STAT activation mediates
proliferation but not differentiation in UT-7 cells.

Dorsch M(1), Danial NN, Rothman PB, Goff SP.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biophysics, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY 
10032, USA.

Thrombopoietin (TPO) stimulates proliferation and differentiation of cells of the
megakaryocytic lineage. It exerts its function by binding and activating c-mpl, a
member of the hematopoietic receptor superfamily. Upon binding of TPO to its
receptor, numerous signaling events are triggered. These include activation of
the Jak-STAT (signal transducers and activators of transcription) pathway,
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), Tec, and phospatidylinositol (PI)
3-kinase and phosphorylation of Shc and Vav. The contribution of different
signaling pathways to the induction of specific cellular processes such as
proliferation and differentiation is incompletely understood. We have previously 
described a mutant of c-mpl that fails to activate the Jak-STAT pathway but
nevertheless retains its ability to mediate proliferation and activation of most 
signaling events in the murine hematopoietic precursor cell lines BAF/3 and 32D. 
We confirm here the ability of this mutant to mediate proliferation in the
absence of Jak-STAT activation in the human cell line UT-7 and further show that 
this mutant fails to mediate TPO-induced megakaryocytic differentiation.
Comparison of the signaling capacity of this mutant in UT-7 and BAF/3 cells shows
considerable cell-type-specific differences. Whereas in BAF/3 cells the mutant
still mediates activation of Shc, MAPK, Vav, and PI 3-kinase at levels comparable
to the wild-type receptor, these events are strongly diminished in UT-7 cells
expressing the mutant. Furthermore, we show that the C-terminal 25 amino acid
residues of the receptor mutant are crucial for the mitogenic response in UT-7
cells.


PMID: 10515871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

