
1. Arq Gastroenterol. 1999 Jan-Mar;36(1):54-60.

[Association of patterns of Escherichia coli adherence to HEp-2 cells with acute 
and persistent diarrhea].

[Article in Portuguese]

Scaletsky IC(1), Pedroso MZ, Morais MB, Carvalho RL, Silva RM, Fabbricotti SH,
Fagundes-Neto U.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Microbiologia, Imunologia e Parasitologia, Universidade
Federal de São Paulo, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Brasil. scaletsky.dmip@epm.br

In Brazil diarrhea is the cause of approximately 15% of death among infants.
Enteropathogenic E coli is the most important bacterial agent causing acute
diarrhea, which is defined as less than 14 days of duration. About 30% of these
cases may evolve to persistent diarrhea, defined as lasting more than 14 days. In
this work it was carried out a case-control study including 34 children under 2
years of age, and admitted to hospital facilities in São Paulo for rehydration
therapy. Thirty-four age matched children hospitalized in the same facilities,
and presenting no gastrointestinal symptoms were included as controls. Stool
samples were analyzed for the presence of bacterial pathogens (diarrheagenic E
coli, Shigella, Salmonella, Yersinia, and Campylobacter), protoparasytes,
rotavirus, and enteric adenovirus. The E coli strains isolated were analyzed for 
their ability to adhere to HEp-2 cultured cells, in a 3 h adhesion assay. Search 
for homology with DNA probes for localized adherence (EAF, eaeA probes), AA
(enteroagregative adherence) (AA probe), and diffuse adherence (F1845, AIDA-I
probes) was carried out by the colony hybridization method. Twenty-four of the
cases were acute diarrhea and 10 persistent diarrhea. Strains with localized
adherence were associated with acute and persistent diarrhea. About 23.5% of E
coli were associated with typical Enteropathogenic E coli strains (EAF+, eaeA+). 
Enteroaggregative E coli (EAggEC) (AA+) was isolated only from cases and in
similar frequency for acute and persistent diarrhea. Diffusely adherent E coli
(DAEC) which did not hybridize with the diffuse adherence probes were isolated
among cases and controls. E coli eaeA+ with localized-like adherence was isolated
from cases in a frequency three times higher than in controls, suggesting that it
may really have a pathogenic potential.


PMID: 10511881  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

