
1. Nature. 1999 Oct 28;401(6756):898-901.

Influence of environmental changes on degradation of chiral pollutants in soils.

Lewis DL(1), Garrison AW, Wommack KE, Whittemore A, Steudler P, Melillo J.

Author information: 
(1)US Environmental Protection Agency, Ecosystems Research Division, National
Exposure Research Laboratory, Athens, Georgia 30605, USA. LewisDaveL@aol.com

Numerous anthropogenic chemicals of environmental concern--including some phenoxy
acid herbicides, organophosphorus insecticides, polychlorinated biphenyls,
phthalates, freon substitutes and some DDT derivatives--are chiral. Their
potential biological effects, such as toxicity, mutagenicity, carcinogenicity,
and endocrine disrupter activity, are generally enantiomer-selective, and
different enantiomers are preferentially degraded (transformed) by
micro-organisms in various environments. Here we use field and laboratory
experiments to demonstrate that environmental changes in soils can alter these
preferences, and to suggest that the preferences shift owing to different groups 
of related microbial genotypes being activated by different environmental
changes. In Brazilian soils, almost all pasture samples preferentially
transformed the non-herbicidal enantiomer of dichlorprop
((RS)-2-(2,4-dichlorophenoxy)propionic acid), while most forest samples either
transformed the herbicidal enantiomer more readily or as rapidly as the
non-herbicidal enantiomer. Organic nutrient enrichments shifted
enantioselectivity for methyl dichlorprop ((RS)-methyl
2-(2,4-dichlorophenoxy)propionic acid) strongly towards preferentially removing
the non-herbicidal enantiomer in soils from Brazil and North America, potentially
increasing phytotoxicity of its residues relative to that of the racemate.
Assessments of the risks chemical pollutants pose to public health and the
environment need to take into account the chiral selectivity of microbial
transformation processes and their alteration by environmental changes,
especially for pesticides as up to 25 per cent are chiral.

DOI: 10.1038/44801 
PMID: 10553905  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

