
1. Rhinology. 1999 Sep;37(3):113-6.

Prospective randomized investigation for evaluation of postoperative changes in
the microbial climate of paranasal mucosa by the use of different dissoluting
techniques during postoperative care.

Maune S(1), Johannssen V, Sahly H, Werner JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of Kiel, 
Germany.

Erratum in
    Rhinology 1999 Dec;37(4):192. Salhy H [corrected to Sahly H].

Endonasal dissolution by the use of NaCl-solution is a common postoperative
treatment of the nasal mucosa after endonasal surgery. These procedure involve
for example endonasal shower and sterilized solutions. The contamination of nasal
shower in case of unprofessional cleaning after treatment was an argument against
this technique in earlier discussions. The danger of such an infection should be 
avoided by the use of sterilized solution. Therefore the dependence of nasal
microbial climate on different nasal dissoluting techniques was investigated by
the use of such named endonasal shower (Siemens und Co, Bad Ems, Germany) in
comparison with sterilized solution (Rhinomer, Zyma SA, Nyon, France). Microbial 
cultures were investigated of 80 patients after endonasal surgery (53 m, 27 f; 31
+/- 21 age). Surgery was done for the treatment of chronic polypous sinusitis.
Pre-, intra- and postoperative samples were taken in 640 cases to proceed
microbial cultures. Material was transferred with the use of a
Port-A-Cul-transport medium and preparation of the microbial cultures was done
during the first four hours. As a result 895 bacterial clones were cultivated.
These consisted of 87% aerob and 13% anaerob bacteria. Staphylococcus aureus
(39%) and members of the family of Enterobactericae (30%) were the most common
microbes. There was neither an evidence for postoperative microbes on the nasal
mucosa nor a correlation between the dissoluting technique and the postoperative 
outcome. The use of sterilized solutions for the postoperative care of endonasal 
mucosa does not cause an additional worthful effect on neither the postoperative 
microbial climate nor the outcome in comparison to endonasal shower.


PMID: 10567989  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

