
1. J Immunol. 2000 Jan 15;164(2):908-15.

Bacterial clearance and survival are dependent on CXC chemokine receptor-2
ligands in a murine model of pulmonary Nocardia asteroides infection.

Moore TA(1), Newstead MW, Strieter RM, Mehrad B, Beaman BL, Standiford TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary Medicine, University of
Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. tmoore@umich.edu

Survival from murine pulmonary nocardiosis is highly dependent on CXC chemokine
receptor-2 (CXCR2) ligand-mediated neutrophil chemotaxis and subsequent clearance
of the infectious agent Nocardia asteroides. Intratracheal inoculation of N.
asteroides rapidly up-regulated the CXC chemokines macrophage inflammatory
protein-2 (MIP-2) and KC within 24 h, with levels remaining elevated through day 
3 before returning to near baseline levels by day 7. Coinciding with elevated
MIP-2 and KC were the rapid recruitment of neutrophils and clearance of the
organism. Anti-Ly-6G Ab-mediated neutrophil depletion before bacterial challenge 
resulted in strikingly increased mortality to N. asteroides infection. The
relative contribution of MIP-2 in neutrophil recruitment was examined by
anti-MIP-2 Ab treatment before nocardial infection. MIP-2 neutralization had no
detrimental effects on survival, neutrophil recruitment, or bacterial clearance, 
suggesting the usage of additional or alternative CXCR2-binding ligands. The
importance of the CXC family of chemokines was determined by the administration
of an anti-CXCR2 Ab capable of blocking ligand binding in vivo. Anti-CXCR2
treatment greatly increased mortality by preventing neutrophil migration into the
lung. Paralleling this impaired neutrophil recruitment was a 100-fold increase in
lung bacterial burden. Combined, these observations indicate a critical role for 
neutrophils and CXC chemokines during nocardial pneumonia. These data directly
link CXCR2 ligands and neutrophil recruitment and lend further support to the
concept of CXC chemokine redundancy. For infections highly dependent on
neutrophils, such as nocardial pneumonia, this is of critical importance.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.164.2.908 
PMID: 10623839  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

