
1. J Clin Pathol. 1999 Aug;52(8):593-7.

Measurement of vascularity as a diagnostic and prognostic tool for well
differentiated thyroid tumours: comparison of different methods of assessing
vascularity.

Wong NA(1), Willott J, Kendall MJ, Sheffield EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Bristol, Bristol Royal
Infirmary, UK. nacs.wong@ed.ac.uk

AIMS: To determine whether the measurement of vascularity can be used to
differentiate follicular adenomas from follicular carcinomas or to reflect the
prognosis of follicular carcinomas and papillary carcinomas of the thyroid gland,
and to compare four methods of assessing vascularity.
METHODS: Tissue sections from 26 papillary carcinomas, 15 follicular adenomas,
and 15 follicular carcinomas were stained with an antibody to CD34. A
computerised image analysis system was used to calculate, for each tumour, mean
endothelial areas and the mean endothelium to tumour epithelial nucleus area
ratio from 10 systematically selected fields across one dimension of the tumour
("systematic field" analysis) or from the three most vascularised fields of the
tumour ("hot spot" analysis). A European Organisation for Research on Treatment
of Cancer (EORTC) prognostic index was calculated for each papillary carcinoma
and follicular carcinoma.
RESULTS: Significant differences in vascularity between the three tumour groups
could only be shown by comparing mean endothelial area values measured from hot
spots. While the hot spot median mean endothelial area of follicular carcinomas
was significantly greater than that of follicular adenomas, there was a large
overlap between the two groups. For follicular carcinomas, higher hot spot mean
endothelial area values were related to worse prognosis as indicated by the EORTC
prognostic indices. No association between vascularity and prognosis was found
for the papillary carcinomas, regardless of the method of assessing vascularity.
CONCLUSIONS: Measuring endothelial area from hot spots using a computerised image
analysis system is a sensitive method of assessing the vascularity of thyroid
tumours. While vascularity measurement cannot be recommended as a practical tool 
for differentiating between malignant and benign follicular tumours, the
suggestion that vascularity may reflect prognosis for follicular carcinomas
deserves further study.

DOI: 10.1136/jcp.52.8.593 
PMCID: PMC500950
PMID: 10645229  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

