
1. J Immunol. 2000 Mar 15;164(6):2881-9.

A population of in vivo anergized T cells with a lower activation threshold for
the induction of CD25 exhibit differential requirements in mobilization of
intracellular calcium and mitogen-activated protein kinase activation.

Utting O(1), Teh SJ, Teh HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Chronic exposure of mature T cells with specificity for self-Ags can lead to the 
induction of a nonfunctional state which is referred to as T cell anergy. It is
unclear whether anergic T cells are destined for cell death and thereby harmless 
or whether they can contribute to the induction of autoimmunity and/or regulation
of anti-self reactivity. We have begun to address this issue. In a recent study, 
we showed that a population of mature CD4-CD8- T cells that express a transgenic 
TCR specific for the Ld MHC class I molecule are rendered anergic in
Ld-expressing mice. In this study, we show that this population of anergic T
cells possess a lower activation threshold for the induction of CD25 and CD69 in 
response to stimulation by antigenic ligands. Furthermore, these anergic T cells 
undergo extensive proliferation when stimulated with a low-affinity ligand in the
presence of an exogenous source of IL-2. Biochemical analysis of the early
intracellular signaling events of these in vivo anergized T cells showed that
they have a signaling defect at the level of ZAP-70 and linker for the activation
of T cell (LAT) phosphorylation. They also exhibit a defect in mobilization of
intracellular calcium in response to TCR signaling. However, these anergic T
cells demonstrate no defect in SLP-76 phosphorylation and extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2 activation. These biochemical characteristics of the 
anergic T cells were associated with an elevated level of Fyn, but not Lck
expression. The potential contributions of these anergic T cells in the induction
and/or regulation of autoimmune responses are discussed.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.164.6.2881 
PMID: 10706673  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

