
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2000 Apr;18(3):277-85.

Purification and characterization of recombinant forms of murine Tcl1 proteins.

Du Bois GC(1), Song SP, Kulikovskaya I, Rothstein JL, Germann MW, Croce CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, 19107, USA. G_Dubois@iac.jci.tju.edu

The TCL1 gene, which is located on chromosome 14, plays a major role in human
hematopoietic malignancies and encodes a 14-kDa protein whose function has not
been determined. This gene is expressed in pre-B cells, in immature thymocytes,
and, at low levels, in activated T cells but not in peripheral mature B cells and
in normal cells. The Tcl1 protein is similar in its primary structure to a
protein encoded by the mature T-cell proliferation gene (MTCP1). The MTCP1 gene
is located on the X chromosome and has been shown to be involved in rare
chromosomal translocations in T-cell proliferative diseases. The murine TCL1 gene
resides on mouse chromosome 12 and is homologous to the human TCL1 and MTCP1
genes. Murine Tcl1 protein has 116 amino acid residues and shares 50% sequence
identity with human Tcl1, while the human and mouse Mtcp1 are nearly identical,
with conservative differences in only six residues. The TCL1 and MTCP1 genes
appear to be members of a family of genes involved in lymphoid proliferation and 
T-cell malignancies. Our laboratory has undertaken the study of the Tcl1 and
Mtcp1 proteins to determine the structure and the function of these related
proteins. In the present report, we have produced, using a bacterial expression
system, the purified murine Tcl1 protein and a mutant form of murine Tcl1 protein
containing a cysteine to alanine mutation at amino acid position 85. The
recombinant proteins were purified by chromatography on a Ni-NTA resin followed
by reverse-phase FPLC using a buffer system at pH 7.9 and a polymer-based
reverse-phase column. The murine Tcl1 recombinant protein displays limited
solubility and forms disulfide-linked dimers and oligomers, while the mutant
murine Tcl1 C86A protein has increased solubility and does not form higher order 
oligomers. The purified recombinant murine proteins were characterized by
N-terminal sequence analysis, mass spectrometry, and circular dichroism
spectroscopy. Initial results indicate that the mutant murine Tcl1 C86A protein
is suitable for both NMR and X-ray crystallographic methods of structure
determination.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/prep.1999.1186 
PMID: 10733880  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

