
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2000 Feb;88(2):299-307.

Detection of Flavobacterium psychrophilum from fish tissue and water samples by
PCR amplification.

Wiklund T(1), Madsen L, Bruun MS, Dalsgaard I.

Author information: 
(1)Fish Disease Laboratory, Danish Institute for Fisheries Research, The Royal
Veterinary and Agricultural University, Frederiksberg C, Denmark. tow@kvl.dk

Rainbow trout fry syndrome and cold-water disease, caused by Flavobacterium
psychrophilum, are important diseases in farmed salmonids. Some of the presently 
available techniques for the detection of Fl. psychrophilum are either time
consuming or lack sufficient sensitivity. In the present investigation, the
possible detection of Fl. psychrophilum from fish tissue and water samples was
examined using nested PCR with DNA probes against a sequence of the 16S rRNA
genes. The DNA was extracted using Chelex(R) 100 chelating resin. The primers,
which were tested against strains isolated from diseased fish, healthy fish, fish
farm environments and reference strains, proved to be specific for Fl.
psychrophilum. The obtained detection limit of Fl. psychrophilum seeded into
rainbow trout brain tissue was 0.4 cfu in the PCR tube, corresponding to 17 cfu
mg-1 brain tissue. The PCR-assay proved to be more sensitive than agar
cultivation of tissue samples from the brain of rainbow trout injected with Fl.
psychrophilum. In non-sterile fresh water seeded with Fl. psychrophilum the
detection limit of the PCR-assay was 1.7 cfu in the PCR tube, corresponding to
110 cfu ml-1 water. The PCR-assay detected Fl. psychrophilum in water samples
taken from a rainbow trout farm, but Fl. psychrophilum could not be isolated
using inoculation on selective agar. The method presented here has the potential 
to detect low levels of Fl. psychrophilum in fish tissue and in water samples,
and the technique can be a useful tool for understanding the epidemiology of Fl. 
psychrophilum.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2672.2000.00959.x 
PMID: 10735999  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

