
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 May;20(10):3364-76.

A functionally essential domain of RFX5 mediates activation of major
histocompatibility complex class II promoters by promoting cooperative binding
between RFX and NF-Y.

Villard J(1), Peretti M, Masternak K, Barras E, Caretti G, Mantovani R, Reith W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Microbiology, University of Geneva Medical School, 
CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. Jean.Villard@medecine.unige.ch

Major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC-II) molecules occupy a pivotal
position in the adaptive immune system, and correct regulation of their
expression is therefore of critical importance for the control of the immune
response. Several regulatory factors essential for the transcription of MHC-II
genes have been identified by elucidation of the molecular defects responsible
for MHC-II deficiency, a hereditary immunodeficiency disease characterized by
regulatory defects abrogating MHC-II expression. Three of these factors, RFX5,
RFXAP, and RFXANK, combine to form the RFX complex, a regulatory protein that
binds to the X box DNA sequence present in all MHC-II promoters. In this study we
have undertaken a dissection of the structure and function of RFX5, the largest
subunit of the RFX complex. The results define two distinct domains serving two
different essential functions. A highly conserved N-terminal region of RFX5 is
required for its association with RFXANK and RFXAP, for assembly of the RFX
complex in vivo and in vitro, and for binding of this complex to its X box target
site in the MHC-II promoter. This N-terminal region is, however, not sufficient
for activation of MHC-II expression. This requires an additional domain within
the C-terminal region of RFX5. This C-terminal domain mediates cooperative
binding between the RFX complex and NF-Y, a transcription factor binding to the Y
box sequence of MHC-II promoters. This provides direct evidence that
RFX5-mediated cooperative binding between RFX and NF-Y plays an essential role in
the transcriptional activation of MHC-II genes.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.20.10.3364-3376.2000 
PMCID: PMC85629
PMID: 10779326  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

