
1. Psychiatry Res. 2000 Apr 24;94(1):43-9.

Increased anti-streptococcal antibodies in patients with Tourette's syndrome.

Müller N(1), Riedel M, Straube A, Günther W, Wilske B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Ludwig-Maximilian-University, Munich, Germany.
nmueller@psy.med.uni_muenchen.de

Infection or postinfectious phenomena have been postulated to play a role in the 
pathogenesis of children afflicted with the typical symptoms of Tourette's
syndrome (TS). We investigated whether an increase of titers of antistreptococcal
antibodies can be reproduced in our children with TS, and whether this increase
is restricted to children. We examined the titers of two different
antistreptococcal antibodies, antistreptolysin (ASL) and anitDNase B, both in
children and adults. Titer s of ASO and antiDNase B were measured (1) in 13
children/adolescents suffering from TS and in an aged-matched comparison
group;(2) in 23 adult patients, a comparison group of 23 aged-matched controls,
and in another group of 17 aged-matched, non-medicated acute schizophrenics. ASO 
and antiDNase B titers were determined by laser nephelometry using a commercially
available kit. Two antistreptococcal cut-off levels were compared (> 250 U/ml and
400 U/ml). As expected, increases ASO titers (>400 IU/ml) were found in a higher 
portion of children/adolescents with TS compared to controls. Regarding adults,
titers >250 U/ml for both antistreptococcal antigens were found in significantly 
more TS patients than in schizophrenic patients or healthy control subjects. The 
mean values of ASO and antiDNase titers were significantly higher in both groups 
of TS patients compared to control children/adolescents, to the comparison groups
of healthy adults and to schizophrenics. No difference in antistreptococcal
titers was found between schizophrenics and the group of healthy adults. TS
patients exhibited higher antistreptococcal titers than age-matched comparison
groups of both children/adolescents and adults using different types of
calculation. Our findings support the theory that a postinfectious immune
mechanism may play a role in the pathogenesis of TS. The mechanism still needs to
be elucidated.

DOI: 10.1016/s0165-1781(00)00125-6 
PMID: 10788676  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

