
1. J Hematother Stem Cell Res. 2000 Apr;9(2):195-204.

Suppressive effects of TNF-alpha, TGF-beta1, and chemokines on megakaryocytic
colony formation in CD34+ cells derived from umbilical cord blood compared with
mobilized peripheral blood and bone marrow.

Lu L(1), Wang LS, Cooper RJ, Liu HJ, Turner K, Weich N, Broxmeyer HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Walther Oncology Center, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis 46202-5254, USA.

CD34+ cells from human umbilical cord blood (CB) were isolated and investigated
for megakaryocytic (MK) colony formation in response to recombinant human (rh)
stimulatory and suppressive cytokines and compared with their counterparts in
normal BM and G-CSF-mobilized peripheral blood (mPBL). First, we observed that
IL-11 by itself at any dosage had no stimulator activity on MK colony formation
derived from CD34+ cells in CB, mPBL, and BM. IL-3, steel factor (SLF), or
thrombopoietin (Tpo) alone stimulated numbers of colony-forming
unit-megakaryocyte (CFU-MK) in a dose-dependent fashion. Maximum growth of MK
progenitor cells was noted in the presence of a combination of cytokines: IL-11, 
IL-3, SLF, and Tpo. The frequency of CFU-MK in CB and mPBL was significantly
greater than that in BM, and the size of colonies in CB and mPBL was
significantly greater than that in BM, and the size of colonies was larger as
well. In addition, an increased number of big mixed colonies containing MK were
observed in CB and mPBL. In the presence of IL-11, IL-3, SLF, and Tpo, CFU-MK
derived from CB, mPBL, and BM was suppressed by tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-alpha) and transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1). CFU-MK derived from
normal BM was inhibited by some chemokines evaluated, whereas CFU-MK derived from
CB was suppressed only by platelet factor-4 (PF-4), IFN-inducible protein-10
(IP-10), Exodus-1, Exodus-2, and Exodus-3, but to a lesser degree. In CB, unlike 
granulocyte-macrophage (CFU-GM), erythroid (BFU-E), high-proliferative potential 
(HPP-CFC), or multipotential (CFU-GEMM) progenitors, at least a subpopulation of 
MK progenitors are in S-phase. Therefore, CB MK progenitors respond to the
suppressive effects of some members of the chemokine family. Similar results were
noted for burst-forming unit-MK (BFU-MK). Our results indicate that CB and mPBL
are rich sources of MK progenitors and that MK progenitors in CB are responsive
to the suppressive effects of TNF-alpha and TGF-beta1 and some members of the
chemokine family.

DOI: 10.1089/152581600319405 
PMID: 10813532  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

