
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Jun 6;97(12):6687-92.

A sensitized genetic system for the analysis of murine B lymphocyte signal
transduction pathways dependent on Bruton's tyrosine kinase.

Satterthwaite AB(1), Willis F, Kanchanastit P, Fruman D, Cantley LC, Helgason CD,
Humphries RK, Lowell CA, Simon M, Leitges M, Tarakhovsky A, Tedder TF, Lesche R, 
Wu H, Witte ON.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, and Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Modifier screens have been powerful genetic tools to define signaling pathways in
lower organisms. The identification of modifier loci in mice has begun to allow a
similar dissection of mammalian signaling pathways. Transgenic mice (Btk(lo))
expressing 25% of endogenous levels of Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk) have B cell
functional responses between those of wild-type and Btk(-/-) mice. We asked
whether reduced dosage or complete deficiency of genes previously implicated as
Btk regulators would modify the Btk(lo) phenotype. We used two independent assays
of Btk-dependent B cell function. Proliferative response to B cell antigen
receptor cross-linking in vitro was chosen as an example of a relatively simple, 
well-defined signaling system. In vivo response to type II T-independent antigens
(TI-II) measures complex interactions among multiple cell types over time and may
identify additional Btk pathways. All modifiers identified differentially
affected these two assays, indicating that Btk mediates these processes via
distinct mechanisms. Loss of Lyn, PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog), or
SH2-containing inositol phosphatase suppressed the Btk(lo) phenotype in vitro but
not in vivo, whereas CD19 and the p85alpha form of phosphoinositide 3-kinase
behaved as Btk(lo) enhancers in vivo but not in vitro. Effects of Lyn, PTEN, or
p85alpha haploinsufficiency were observed. Haploinsufficiency or complete
deficiency of protein kinase C beta, Fyn, CD22, Galphaq, or Galpha11 had no
detectable effect on the function of Btk(lo) B cells. A transgenic system
creating a reduction in dosage of Btk can therefore be used to identify modifier 
loci that affect B cell responses and quantitatively rank their contribution to
Btk-mediated processes.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.110146697 
PMCID: PMC18703
PMID: 10829070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

