
1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Aug 25;275(34):26515-22.

Synucleins are a novel class of substrates for G protein-coupled receptor
kinases.

Pronin AN(1), Morris AJ, Surguchov A, Benovic JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Institute, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

G protein-coupled receptor kinases (GRKs) specifically recognize and
phosphorylate the agonist-occupied form of numerous G protein-coupled receptors
(GPCRs), ultimately resulting in desensitization of receptor signaling. Until
recently, GPCRs were considered to be the only natural substrates for GRKs.
However, the recent discovery that GRKs also phosphorylate tubulin raised the
possibility that additional GRK substrates exist and that the cellular role of
GRKs may be much broader than just GPCR regulation. Here we report that
synucleins are a novel class of GRK substrates. Synucleins (alpha, beta, gamma,
and synoretin) are 14-kDa proteins that are highly expressed in brain but also
found in numerous other tissues. alpha-Synuclein has been linked to the
development of Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases. We found that all synucleins
are GRK substrates, with GRK2 preferentially phosphorylating the alpha and beta
isoforms, whereas GRK5 prefers alpha-synuclein as a substrate. GRK-mediated
phosphorylation of synuclein is activated by factors that stimulate receptor
phosphorylation, such as lipids (all GRKs) and Gbetagamma subunits (GRK2/3),
suggesting that GPCR activation may regulate synuclein phosphorylation. GRKs
phosphorylate synucleins at a single serine residue within the C-terminal domain.
Although the function of synucleins remains largely unknown, recent studies have 
demonstrated that these proteins can interact with phospholipids and are potent
inhibitors of phospholipase D2 (PLD2) in vitro. PLD2 regulates the breakdown of
phosphatidylcholine and has been implicated in vesicular trafficking. We found
that GRK-mediated phosphorylation inhibits synuclein's interaction with both
phospholipids and PLD2. These findings suggest that GPCRs may be able to
indirectly stimulate PLD2 activity via their ability to regulate GRK-promoted
phosphorylation of synuclein.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M003542200 
PMID: 10852916  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

