
1. Gene. 2000 Jun 27;251(2):141-51.

Organization and transcription of the division cell wall (dcw) cluster in
Neisseria gonorrhoeae.

Francis F(1), Ramirez-Arcos S, Salimnia H, Victor C, Dillon JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, Canada.

A cluster of genes involved in cell division and cell wall (dcw) biosynthesis was
identified in Neisseria gonorrhoeae using genomic analysis and through
verification of gene order by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis. The
gonococcal dcw cluster consists of 17 genes, in the order
5'-mraZ-mraW-ftsI-murE-hyp1-murF- mraY-hyp2-murD-ftsW-murG-murC-ddl -ft
sQ-ftsA-ftsZ-hyp3-3'. The gene organization of the dcw cluster of N. gonorrhoeae 
is more similar to that observed in Gram-negative rods such as Escherichia coli
and Haemophilus influenzae than in Gram-positive bacteria. The cluster is
characterized by several intergenic spaces. Compared with E. coli, two genes,
ftsL and envA, are absent in the gonococcal dcw cluster and three hypothetical
genes are novel to the cluster. The cluster is flanked by two transcriptional
terminators consisting of paired neisserial uptake sequences and also includes
four internal terminators, three of which are paired neisserial uptake sequences.
We also found that a repeated sequence on the gonococcal genome, commonly called 
a Correia element, acts as the fourth transcriptional terminator. All termination
sequences were shown to be fully functional by using reverse transcription PCR
experiments. Transcriptional start sites upstream of ftsQ, ftsA and ftsZ were
determined by primer extension and six promoters were identified; three promoters
were located upstream of ftsZ in the intergenic space, two were upstream of ftsA 
within ftsQ and one was upstream of ftsQ within ddl. Some of these promoters were
preferentially used under anaerobic conditions. The location of these promoters
differed from those described in E. coli indicating dissimilar transcriptional
regulation.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-1119(00)00200-6 
PMID: 10876091  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

