
1. In Vivo. 2000 May-Jun;14(3):441-6.

Effects of naturin 2 on colony formation by hematopoietic progenitor cells in
human umbilical cord blood mediated by induction of release of growth factors.

Lu L(1), Jia XQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis 46202-5254, USA. llu@iupui.edu

Naturin 2, a health drink, contains a mixture of Chinese herb plants and is a
potent immunomodulator. It has anti-tumor effects mediated by immune system. In
the present study, low density (LD) and purified CD34+ cells (enriched for
hematopoietic stem [HSC] and progenitor [HPC]) from human umbilical cord blood
(CB) were assayed for colony formation in response to Naturin 2. First, we
examined the in vitro activity of Naturin 2 on HPC. Naturin 2 by itself
stimulated colony formation derived from either LD or CD34+ CB cells. The
stimulatory effect by Naturin 2 was mediated by both direct and indirect action
on HSCs/HPCs. The indirect action is via releasing of cytokines in the 5
day-conditioned media by LD CB cells with Naturin 2. The stimulatory activities
in the 5 day-conditioned media (CM) could be blocked by the neutralization
antibodies against interleukin (IL)-3, granulocyte macrophage (GM)-colony
stimulating factor (CSF), IL-1 alpha, IL-1 beta and M-CSF. Therefore, the
stimulatory activities detected in the media conditioned are due to the cytokines
released in the cultures. In addition, we have also determined that addition of
Naturin 2 to the cultures with LD or CD34+ cells stimulated by IL-3 and/or GM-CSF
resulted in a decrease of colony formation. The inhibitory effect of Naturin 2
was mediated, at least in part, by releasing suppressive cytokines, interferon
(IFN)-gamma and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, in the 3 day--CM, since
antibodies against these two suppressive cytokines partially blocked the
inhibitory activity. These results demonstrate that Naturin 2 has differential
effects on hematopoiesis.


PMID: 10904879  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

