
1. Springer Semin Immunopathol. 2000;22(1-2):77-84.

Multiple effects of immunostimulatory DNA on T cells and the role of type I
interferons.

Sun S(1), Zhang X, Tough D, Sprent J.

Author information: 
(1)R.W. Johnson Pharmaceutical Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92121, USA.

In addition to stimulating antigen-specific immune responses, infectious agents
cause nonspecific activation of the innate immune system, notably up-regulation
of costimulatory/adhesion molecules on APCs and cytokine production. In recent
years it has become apparent that stimulation of the immune system by
microorganisms is a property of a number of different cellular components,
including DNA. As discussed earlier and elsewhere in this volume, the DNA of
infectious agents--and indeed of all non-vertebrates tested--differs from
mammalian DNA in being enriched for unmethylated CpG motifs. With appropriate
flanking sequences, CpG DNA and synthetic CpG ODNs cause strong activation of
APCs and other cells. In this article we have focussed on the capacity of CpG
DNA/ODNs to alter T cell function. Whether these compounds act directly on T
cells or function indirectly by activating other cells, especially APCs, is
controversial [7, 8, 13, 14]. In contrast to other workers [8], we have yet to
find definitive evidence that CpG DNA/ODNs can provide a co-stimulatory signal
for purified T cells subjected to TCR ligation ([14] and unpublished data of
authors). For this reason we lean to the notion that CpG DNA/ODNs modulate T cell
function by inducing activation of APC rather than by acting directly on T cells.
When injected in vivo in the absence of specific antigen, CpG DNA/ODNs have two
striking effects on T cells, namely (1) induction of overt activation
(proliferation) of memory-phenotype CD8+ cells, and (2) partial activation of all
T cells, including naïve-phenotype T cells. Both actions of CpG DNA/ODNs are
heavily dependent on the production of IFN-I by APC. For memory-phenotype
(CD44hi) CD8+ cells, neither CpG DNA nor IFN-I can cause proliferation of
purified APC-depleted T cells in vitro. Hence, under in vivo conditions, CpG
DNA-induced proliferation of CD44hi CD8+ cells is probably mediated through the
production of a secondary cytokine, i.e., by a cytokine that is directly
stimulatory for CD44hi CD8+ cells. Based on the available evidence, it is highly 
likely that the effector cytokine is IL-15. With this assumption, our current
model is that proliferation of CD44hi CD8+ cells induced by injection of CpG
DNA/ODNs reflects production of IFN-I which, in turn, leads to synthesis of
IL-15. Which particular cell types produce these two cytokines is unclear,
although APCs are probably of prime importance. In addition to inducing
proliferation of memory-phenotype CD8+ cells via IL-15, the IFN-I induced by CpG 
DNA/ODNs can also induce partial activation of naive T cells. This form of
activation leads to up-regulation of CD69 and other molecules but does not cause 
entry into cell cycle. It is of interest that the partial activation of naive T
cells induced by IFN-I is associated with decreased T proliferative responses.
Thus, proliferation of purified naïve T cells elicited by combined TCR/CD28
ligation in vitro is greatly reduced by addition of IFN-I. This inhibitory effect
of IFN-I does not influence cytokine production and probably reflects production 
of cell cycle inhibitors. Surprisingly, except at high doses, IFN-I fails to
exert an anti-proliferative effect when T proliferative responses are driven by
viable APCs. Indeed, in this situation, IFN-I enhances antigen-specific T
proliferative responses, both in vivo and in vitro. This adjuvant effect of IFN-I
is presumably a reflection of APC activation, but direct evidence on this issue
is still lacking. In this article we have emphasized that contact with CpG
DNA/ODNs has multiple effects on T cell function in vivo. Many of these effects
seem to be related to the production of certain cytokines by APCs, notably IFN-I 
and IL-15. It should be stressed, however, that CpG DNA/ODNs probably lead to the
production of many other cytokines. Hence, our current models of how CpG DNA/ODNs
influence T cell function are undoubtedly oversimplified.

DOI: 10.1007/s002810000028 
PMID: 10944802  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

