
1. Caries Res. 2000 Sep-Oct;34(5):432-9.

A randomised controlled trial of the caries-preventive efficacy of a
chlorhexidine-containing varnish in high-caries-risk adolescents.

Forgie AH(1), Paterson M, Pine CM, Pitts NB, Nugent ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Dental Public Health and Health Psychology Section, Dundee Dental Hospital and
School, Dundee, Scotland, UK.

A professionally applied two-stage chlorhexidine varnish, Chlorzoin((R)), was
developed to achieve sustained release and minimise the problems of staining and 
bad taste associated with chlorhexidine mouthrinses. The primary aim of this
randomised controlled clinical trial was to assess the efficacy of Chlorzoin in
reducing the caries increment in high-caries-risk adolescents. Secondary aims
included investigating the effect of compliance upon caries increment, the effect
of Chlorzoin upon salivary mutans streptococci levels and assessing the benefit
of individual dental health advice by dental auxiliaries in a community setting. 
1,240 children, initially aged 11-13 years, assessed to be at high caries risk
were recruited into the trial. The trial design involved four arms: an
observational group, a control group, an active (Chlorzoin) varnish group and a
placebo varnish group. All subjects were examined annually by a calibrated
examiner who was blind to the group allocation. Three-year caries increments were
calculated using clinical, clinical and fibre-optic transillumination, and
clinical and bitewing data sets. The results indicated that the use of Chlorzoin 
had an initial effect on mutans streptococci levels but that no long-term
reduction in caries increment or mutans streptococci infection could be detected.
One reason for this lack of efficacy may have been the regimen of reduced
frequency of varnish applications after the initial period. Children who followed
the protocol and, therefore, were seen regularly by dental auxiliaries had a
lower caries increment than those who did not. This finding was independent of
varnish allocation. In summary, under this regimen, Chlorzoin has been found to
be effective in decreasing salivary mutans streptococci but ineffective as a
caries-preventive agent in high-risk Scottish children when applied pragmatically
in a community setting.

DOI: 10.1159/000016619 
PMID: 11014911  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

