
1. Prostate. 2000 Oct 1;45(2):149-57.

Prostate-specific suicide gene therapy using the prostate-specific membrane
antigen promoter and enhancer.

O'Keefe DS(1), Uchida A, Bacich DJ, Watt FB, Martorana A, Molloy PL, Heston WD.

Author information: 
(1)George M. O'Brien Urology Research Center, Department of Cancer Biology,
Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

BACKGROUND: Prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) is abundantly expressed in 
virtually 100% of prostate cancers and metastases. In addition, unlike
prostate-specific antigen (PSA), PSMA is upregulated under conditions of androgen
deprivation. Therefore, PSMA is an attractive therapeutic target for advanced
prostate cancer. Recently, both the promoter and the enhancer driving
prostate-specific expression of the PSMA gene were cloned. We describe here our
analysis of the PSMA enhancer for the most active region(s) and present a way of 
using the enhancer in combination with the E. coli cytosine deaminase gene for
suicide-driven gene therapy that converts the nontoxic prodrug 5-fluorocytosine
(5-FC) into the cytotoxic drug 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) in prostate cancer cells.
METHODS: Deletion constructs of the full-length PSMA enhancer were subcloned into
a luciferase reporter vector containing either the PSMA or SV-40 promoter. The
most active portion of the enhancer was then determined via luciferase activity
in the C4-2 cell line. We then replaced the luciferase gene with the E. coli
cytosine deaminase gene in the subclone that showed the most luciferase activity.
The specificity of this technique was examined in vitro, using the prostate
cancer cell line LNCaP, its androgen-independent derivative C4-2, and a number of
nonprostatic cell lines. The toxicity of 5-FC and 5-FU on transiently transfected
cell lines was then compared.
RESULTS: The enhancer region originally isolated from the PSMA gene was
approximately 2 kb. Deletion constructs revealed that at least two distinct
regions seem to contribute to expression of the gene in prostate cancer cells,
and therefore the best construct for prostate-specific expression was determined 
to be 1, 648 bp long. The IC(50) of 5-FC was similar in all cell lines tested
(>10 mM). However, transfection with the 1648 nt PSMA enhancer and the PSMA
promoter to drive the cytosine deaminase gene enhanced toxicity in a
dose-dependent manner more than 50-fold, while cells that did not express the
PSMA gene were not significantly sensitized by transfection.
CONCLUSIONS: Suicide gene therapy using the PSMA enhancer may be of benefit to
patients who have undergone androgen ablation therapy and are suffering a relapse
of disease.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/1097-0045(20001001)45:2<149::aid-pros9>3.0.co;2-o 
PMID: 11027414  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

