
1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 5;276(1):329-33.

Lipoarabinomannan from Mycobacterium tuberculosis promotes macrophage survival by
phosphorylating Bad through a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt pathway.

Maiti D(1), Bhattacharyya A, Basu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Bose Institute, 93/1 Acharya Prafulla Chandra Road,
Calcutta 700 009, India.

Efforts in prevention and control of tuberculosis suffer from the lack of
detailed knowledge of the mechanisms used by pathogenic mycobacteria for survival
within host cell macrophages. The exploitation of host cell signaling pathways to
the benefit of the pathogen is a phenomenon that deserves to be looked into in
detail. We have tested the hypothesis that lipoarabinomannan (LAM) from the
virulent species of Mycobacterium tuberculosis possesses the ability to modulate 
signaling pathways linked to cell survival. The Bcl-2 family member Bad is a
proapoptotic protein. Phosphorylation of Bad promotes cell survival in many cell 
types. We demonstrate that man-LAM stimulates Bad phosphorylation in a
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI-3K)-dependent pathway in THP-1 cells. Man-LAM
activated PI-3K. LAM-stimulated phosphorylation of Bad was abrogated in cells
transfected with a dominant-negative mutant of PI-3K (Delta p85), indicating that
activation of PI-3K is sufficient to trigger phosphorylation of Bad by LAM. Since
phosphorylation of Bad occurred at serine 136, the target of the serine/threonine
kinase Akt, the effect of LAM on Akt kinase activity was tested. Man-LAM could
activate Akt as evidenced from phosphorylation of Akt at Thr(308) and by the
phosphorylation of the exogenous substrate histone 2B. Akt activation was
abrogated in cells transfected with Deltap85. The phosphorylation of Bad by
man-LAM was abrogated in cells transfected with a kinase-dead mutant of Akt.
These results establish that LAM-mediated Bad phosphorylation occurs in a
PI-3K/Akt-dependent manner. It is therefore the first demonstration of the
ability of a mycobacterial virulence factor to up-regulate a signaling pathway
involved in cell survival. This is likely to be one of a number of
virulence-associated mechanisms by which bacilli control host cell apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M002650200 
PMID: 11020382  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

