
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2000 Nov;20(2):237-51.

Expression, purification, and characterization of the protein repair
l-isoaspartyl methyltransferase from Arabidopsis thaliana.

Thapar N(1), Clarke S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Molecular Biology Institute, Los
Angeles, California 90095, USA.

Protein l-isoaspartate (d-aspartate) O-methyltransferase (EC 2.1.1. 77) is a
repair enzyme that methylates abnormal l-isoaspartate residues in proteins which 
arise spontaneously as a result of aging. This enzyme initiates their conversion 
back into the normal l-aspartate form by a methyl esterification reaction.
Previously, partial cDNAs of this enzyme were isolated from the higher plant
Arabidopsis thaliana. In this study, we report the cloning and expression of a
full-length cDNA of l-isoaspartyl methyltransferase from A. thaliana into
Escherichia coli under the P(BAD) promoter, which offers a high level of
expression under a tight regulatory control. The enzyme is found largely in the
soluble fraction. We purified this recombinant enzyme to homogeneity using a
series of steps involving DEAE-cellulose, gel filtration, and hydrophobic
interaction chromatographies. The homogeneous enzyme was found to have maximum
activity at 45 degrees C and a pH optimum from 7 to 8. The enzyme was found to
have a wide range of affinities for l-isoaspartate-containing peptides and
displayed relatively poor reactivity toward protein substrates. The best
methyl-accepting substrates were KASA-l-isoAsp-LAKY (K(m) = 80 microM) and
VYP-l-isoAsp-HA (K(m) = 310 microM). We also expressed the full-length form and a
truncated version of this enzyme (lacking the N-terminal 26 amino acid residues) 
in E. coli under the T7 promoter. Both the full-length and the truncated forms
were active, though overexpression of the truncated enzyme led to a complete loss
of activity.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/prep.2000.1311 
PMID: 11049748  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

