
1. Environ Health Perspect. 2000 Oct;108(10):919-30.

Human cell exposure assays of Bacillus thuringiensis commercial insecticides:
production of Bacillus cereus-like cytolytic effects from outgrowth of spores.

Tayabali AF(1), Seligy VL.

Author information: 
(1)Mutagenesis Section, Environmental and Occupational Toxicology Division,
Bureau of Chemical Hazards, Environmental Health Directorate, Health Protection
Branch, Department of Health Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Most contemporary bioinsecticides are derived from scaled-up cultures of Bacillus
thuringiensis subspecies israelensis (Bti) and kurstaki (Btk), whose particulate 
fractions contain mostly B. thuringiensis spores (> 10(12)/L) and proteinaceous
aggregates, including crystal-like parasporal inclusion bodies (PIB). Based on
concerns over relatedness to B. cereus-group pathogens, we conducted extensive
testing of B. thuringiensis (BT) products and their subfractions using seven
human cell types. The Bti/Btk products generated nonspecific cytotoxicities
involving loss in bioreduction, cell rounding, blebbing and detachment,
degradation of immunodetectable proteins, and cytolysis. Their threshold dose (Dt
approximately equal.5 times 10(-14)% BT product/target cell) equated to a single 
spore and a target cell half-life (tLD(50)) of approximately 16 hr. At Dts >
10(4), the tLD(50) rapidly shifted to < 4 hr; with antibiotic present, no
component, including PIB-related [delta]-endotoxins, was cytolytic up to an
equivalent of approximately 10(9 )Dt. The cytolytic agent(s) within the
Bti/Btk-vegetative cell exoprotein (VCP) pool is an early spore outgrowth product
identical to that of B. cereus and acting possibly by arresting protein
synthesis. No cytolytic effects were seen with VCP from B. subtilis and
Escherichia coli. These data, including recent epidemiologic work indicate that
spore-containing BT products have an inherent capacity to lyse human cells in
free and interactive forms and may also act as immune sensitizers. To critically 
impact at the whole body level, the exposure outcome would have to be an
uncontrolled infection arising from intake of Btk/Bti spores. For humans, such a 
condition would be rare, arising possibly in equally rare exposure scenarios
involving large doses of spores and individuals with weak or impaired
microbe-clearance capacities and/or immune response systems.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.00108919 
PMCID: PMC1240123
PMID: 11049810  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

