
1. Arch Toxicol. 2000 Sep;74(7):379-87.

Establishment of a novel in vitro system for studying the interaction of
xenobiotic metabolism of liver and intestinal microflora.

Laube B(1), Winkler S, Ladstetter B, Scheller T, Schwarz LR.

Author information: 
(1)GSF-National Research Centre for Environment and Health, Institute of
Toxicology, Neuherberg/Munich, Germany.

We developed a new two-chamber system for the coculture of hepatocytes and fecal 
microflora under aerobic and anaerobic conditions, respectively, to investigate
the sequential metabolism of chemicals by the liver and microflora in vitro. The 
culture device consisted of two chambers separated by a permeable polycarbonate
membrane. In the aerobic compartment, hepatocytes were cultivated as a monolayer 
on the membrane and in the anaerobic compartment fecal microflora as a
suspension. To characterize the metabolic capacity of the microflora and
hepatocytes, various marker enzymes were studied. Azoreductase, nitroductase,
beta-glucuronidase, beta-glucosidase and sulphatase were tested in the microflora
of the feces from three volunteers who had had significantly different eating
habits for years (daily meat, mixed diet, vegetarian). The microflora exhibited
significant activities and the various enzymes differed only moderately in the
samples from the three volunteers. For rat hepatocytes the activities of various 
cytochrome P450 forms and conjugating enzymes served as markers. The enzyme
activities were tested in the coculture system during a 4-h culture period
intended for the test protocol. Deethylation of ethoxycoumarin and 2alpha-,
6beta- and 16alpha-hydroxylation of testosterone decreased by about 30%, 25%, 40%
and 20%, respectively, while there was no loss of glucuronidation and
sulphonation of 3-OH-benzo(a)pyrene nor of glutathione conjugation of
1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene during the 4-h culture period. The activities of the 
tested hepatic phase I and II enzymes were not changed after coculture of the
hepatocytes with the microflora for 4 h. The applicability of the in vitro system
for studying the metabolic interaction of liver and microflora was demonstrated
using 7-ethoxycoumarin and the developmental drug EMD 57033, a thiadiazinon
derivative from Merck KGaA, as model compounds. Both compounds were oxidized and 
conjugated by liver cells. In the coculture of hepatocytes and fecal microflora
the resulting glucuronides and sulphoconjugates were split by hydrolytic enzymes 
of the intestinal microflora.

DOI: 10.1007/s002040000137 
PMID: 11043493  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

