
1. J Mol Microbiol Biotechnol. 2000 Oct;2(4):581-6.

Insertional inactivation of the prtP gene of Treponema denticola confirms
dentilisin's disruption of epithelial junctions.

Ellen RP(1), Ko KS, Lo CM, Grove DA, Ishihara K.

Author information: 
(1)Dental Research Institute and Medical Research Council Group in Periodontal
Physiology, University of Toronto, Faculty of Dentistry, Ontario, Canada.
richard.ellen@utoronto.ca

The purified chymotrypsin-like protease of Treponema denticola, designated
dentilisin or PrtP (DDBJ accession no. D83264), can disrupt cell-cell junctions
and impair the barrier function of epithelial monolayers in vitro. Serine
protease inhibitors block these effects. Yet, the protease is apparently less
significant in perturbing intracellular signaling pathways and cytoskeletal
rearrangement in fibroblasts. The purpose of this study was to use a
PrtP-deficient mutant of T. denticola to confirm that the cytopathic effects of
whole bacteria and its outer membrane on epithelial cell junctions were primarily
accounted for by the activity of this protease. The prtP gene of ATCC 35405 was
inactivated by insertion of an erythromycin-resistance cassette, yielding mutant 
K1. In contrast to wildtype ATCC 35405, mutant K1 grew in tight cell aggregates; 
the cells had a disrupted outer sheath, as determined by electron microscopy.
When compared by silver stained SDS-PAGE of sonicated extracts of whole cells,
the extract of mutant K1 was missing a band at approximately 90 kDa that was
present in the wildtype ATCC 35405 strain. Whole cells and Triton X-100 outer
membrane (OM) extracts of K1 and the wildtype strains were compared 1) for SAAPNA
degrading activity by a colorimetric assay, 2) for stress fiber disruption in
human gingival fibroblasts (HGF) by fluorescence microscopy of TRITC-phalloidin
stained cells, and 3) the OM extracts only for perturbation of HEp-2 epithelial
monolayers by electrical cell-substrate impedance sensing (ECIS). Mutant K-1
cells and OM had no SAPPNA degrading activity that is characteristic of
dentilisin. K1 cells had HGF stress fiber disrupting activity (86 +/- 4.5% of
HGFs affected) equivalent to both 35405 wildtype strains (84 +/- 3.9% and 71 +/- 
14.1% of HGF, respectively). Yet, mutant K1 OM had diminished stress fiber
disrupting activity (12.9 +/- 4.6% of HGF) compared with its parent 35405's OM
(94.6 +/- 2.9%). The major cytopathogenic difference between the K1 mutant and
wildtype strains was in their OM's effect on epithelial cell junctions. ATCC
35405 OM completely disrupted epithelial resistance in a concentration -
dependent manner; mutant K1 OM had negligible effects. These data confirm that
inactivation of the prtP gene completely reverses T. denticola's disruption of
epithelial junctions, but there are pleiotropic effects of the mutation that may 
account for its apparently diminished effects on the cytoskeleton of HGF when the
cells were challenged with OM extracts.


PMID: 11075935  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

