
1. Yonsei Med J. 2000 Oct;41(5):593-9.

Influence of the sequence variations of the HLA-DR promoters derived from human
melanoma cell lines on nuclear protein binding and promoter activity.

Lee TJ(1), Kim SJ, Park JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Institute for Immunology and Immunological
Diseases, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

In previous studies we reported that the expression of HLA-DR on melanoma cell
lines was differentially modulated by IFN- gamma and that the transcription rate 
was responsible for this differential modulation. We have also reported the
nucleotide sequence variations in the promoter region of HLA-DR genes, and
proposed that differences in the promoter activity by the sequence variations of 
the HLA-DR promoters might contribute to such a differential transcriptional
regulation at the promoter level. In this study, in order to assess whether the
sequence variations of the HLA-DR promoters affect the factor binding and exert
influence on the promoter activity, nuclear factor binding to our previous six
HLA-DRA and fourteen HLA-DRB promoter clones was evaluated with the nuclear
protein extracted from a B-lymphoblastoid cell line (BLCL), BH, together with the
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter assay. In the HLA-DRA promoters,
clone #35 containing one bp nucleotide sequence variation at the octamer binding 
site (OCT) (GATTTGC to GATCTGC) showed relatively weak factor binding. In the
HLA-DRB promoters, clusters I, III, and IV of our previous HLA-DRB promoter
homologues, containing one bp nucleotide sequence variation (GATTCG) in their Y
boxes exhibited weak factor binding and CAT activity compared to other clusters
(GATTGG) that showed strong factor binding and CAT activity. This data suggests
chat the binding patterns of transcription factors influenced by the nucleotide
sequence variations of the HLA-DR promoter could affect the promoter activity and
the DNA sequence elements in the HLA-DR promoter could mediate transcriptional
regulation.

DOI: 10.3349/ymj.2000.41.5.593 
PMID: 11079619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

