
1. Toxicology. 2000 Nov 2;152(1-3):37-45.

Induction of proliferation and cytokine production in human T lymphocytes by
lipopolysaccharide (LPS).

Ulmer AJ(1), Flad H, Rietschel T, Mattern T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Cell Biology, Division of Cellular Immunology,
Research Center Borstel, Parkallee 22, 23845, Borstel, Germany.
ajulmer@fz-borstel.de

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), also known as endotoxin, is a compound of the cell wall
of Gram-negative bacteria, which has been demonstrated to induce inflammatory
reactions in vitro as well as in vivo, including lethal shock. A great number of 
different cells have been documented to be reactive to LPS, e.g.
monocytes/macrophages, vascular cells, polymorphonuclear cells, and even B
lymphocytes. We have now established that T lymphocytes could also contribute to 
an inflammatory reaction to LPS. LPS is a potent inducer of human T-lymphocyte
proliferation and cytokine production. The activation of T lymphocytes by LPS
requires direct cell-to-cell contact with viable accessory monocytes. This
interaction was found to be MHC-unrestricted, but strongly dependent on
costimulatory signals provided by B7/CD28 interactions. The frequency of
responding T lymphocytes is less than 1:1000. A very exciting finding was that
not only monocytes, but also CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells, which circulate in
peripheral blood in very low frequency, exert essential accessory cell activity
during stimulation of T lymphocytes by LPS. In contrast, the response of T
lymphocytes to conventional recall antigens is not controlled by blood stem
cells. These conclusions are based on the observation that depletion of
CD34-positive blood stem cells resulted in a complete loss of LPS-induced
T-lymphocyte stimulation. Addition of CD34-enriched blood stem cells led to a
recovery of reactivity of T lymphocyte to LPS. The characteristics of
T-lymphocyte activation indicate that LPS is neither active as a mitogen, or as a
superantigen, or as a classical antigen, but may activate T lymphocyte through a 
new, so far undescribed, mechanism. Furthermore, the involvement of hematopoietic
blood stem cells in the activation of T lymphocytes by LPS demonstrates a role of
these cells in inflammatory and immunological events.

DOI: 10.1016/s0300-483x(00)00290-0 
PMID: 11090938  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

