
1. Int J Med Microbiol. 2000 Oct;290(4-5):381-7.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa exoenzyme S, a bifunctional type-III secreted cytotoxin.

Barbieri JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee 53226, USA. Toxin@mcw.edu

Our recent studies have shown ExoS to be a bifunctional type-III secreted
cytotoxin. Intracellular expression of the amino terminus of ExoS (C234) in
eukaryotic cells stimulates actin reorganization without cytotoxicity, which
involves small-molecular-weight GTPases of the Rho subfamily. Expression of the
carboxyl terminus of ExoS comprises an ADP-ribosyltransferase domain, which is
cytotoxic when expressed in cultured cells (Pederson and Barbieri, 1998). Rho and
Ras are molecular switches, which control numerous cellular processes. Recent
signaling studies suggest that there is crosstalk between Rho and Ras (Keely et
al, 1997). Ras and Rho also contribute to wound healing processes and tissue
regeneration. Recent studies have shown that microinjection of endothelial cells 
with activated Ras stimulated their motility, while microinjection of
Ras-blocking antibodies inhibited cellular motility that is a component of the
wound healing process (Fox et al., 1994). In addition, hepatocyte growth
factor/scatter factor (HGF/ SF) and epidermal growth factor stimulate cellular
motility through the Ras signal transduction pathway (Ridley et al., 1995). Rac
and Rho are also involved in motility and tissue regeneration, since dominant
negative Rac inhibits the cellular motility stimulated by HGF/SF (Santos et al., 
1997) and inhibition of Rho by either C. difficile ToxA and ToxB or the C.
botulinum C3 transferase inhibits wound healing (Santos et al., 1997). Inhibition
of tissue regeneration and wound healing appear to play a role in the
pathogenesis of C. difficile, since treatment of gastrointestinal mucosa with C. 
difficile ToxA and ToxB alone inhibits regeneration of the gastric mucosa. Thus, 
ExoS may contribute to the establishment of P. aeruginosa infections by
inhibiting wound healing and tissue regeneration by two mechanisms. The amino
terminus of ExoS could inhibit Rho function and wound healing in a manner similar
to C. difficile. Alternatively, ExoS could inhibit the cellular motility and
angiogenesis required for wound healing by ADP-ribosylating Ras. Through the
inhibition of tissue regeneration and wound healing, ExoS may play a pivotal role
in chronic disease by maintaining sites of colonization. Inhibition of Ras or Rho
signaling may also interfere with both innate and acquired immunity.
Small-molecular-weight GTP-binding proteins of the Ras superfamily are required
for cellular processes, such as phagocytosis, as Rho proteins contribute to
phagocytosis (Caron and Hall, 1998). Since Ras functions upstream of Rho in
cellular signaling processes (Ridley et al., 1995), ADP-ribosylation of Ras by
ExoS or the inhibition of Rho function by C234 may inhibit phagocytosis of P.
aeruginosa by macrophages. Other studies indicate that Ras plays a role in T cell
activation (Cantrell, 1994). Thus, ExoS may inhibit acquired immunity by
inhibiting T-cell activation.

DOI: 10.1016/S1438-4221(00)80047-8 
PMID: 11111915  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

