
1. J Immunol. 2000 Dec 15;165(12):7285-92.

Direct detection and magnetic isolation of Chlamydia trachomatis major outer
membrane protein-specific CD8+ CTLs with HLA class I tetramers.

Kim SK(1), Devine L, Angevine M, DeMars R, Kavathas PB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, WI 53706, USA.

We recently identified HLA class I-presented epitopes in the major outer membrane
protein (MOMP) of Chlamydia trachomatis that elicit CTL responses in human
genital tract infections. T cells possessing cytolytic activities specific for
these epitopes could be detected following in vitro stimulation of peripheral
blood CD8(+) T cells with peptides. In the present study we used HLA-A2 tetramers
for detailed characterization of MOMP-specific CTL responses. Ex vivo tetramer
analysis detected MOMP-specific T cells in the peripheral blood of infected
individuals at significant frequencies (0.01-0.20% of CD8(+) T cells). After in
vitro stimulation with peptides, the frequencies of MOMP peptide-specific T cells
increased up to 2.34% of CD8(+) T cells in bulk cultures. In contrast,
HLA-A2/MOMP tetramer-binding T cells were virtually undetectable in the
peripheral blood from uninfected individuals, either ex vivo or after 3 wk of in 
vitro peptide stimulation of their T cells. Magnetically sorted, tetramer-bound T
cells specifically lysed peptide-pulsed targets as well as C.
trachomatis-infected epithelial cells with nearly 50-fold greater per cell
efficiency than that of unsorted populations. This study provides conclusive
evidence of in vivo induction of HLA class I-restricted CD8(+) CTL responses to
C. trachomatis MOMP. Direct detection of these cells with tetramers will allow
their further characterization without prior manipulation and facilitate
monitoring of CTL responses during infections and in immunization trials with
MOMP-based vaccines.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.165.12.7285 
PMID: 11120863  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

