
1. Infect Immun. 2001 Feb;69(2):865-8.

Gene discovery through genomic sequencing of Brucella abortus.

Sánchez DO(1), Zandomeni RO, Cravero S, Verdún RE, Pierrou E, Faccio P, Diaz G,
Lanzavecchia S, Agüero F, Frasch AC, Andersson SG, Rossetti OL, Grau O, Ugalde
RA.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biotecnológicas-Instituto Tecnológico de
Chascomús, CONICET/UNSAM, Universidad Nacional de General San Martín, Buenos
Aires, Argentina.

Brucella abortus is the etiological agent of brucellosis, a disease that affects 
bovines and human. We generated DNA random sequences from the genome of B.
abortus strain 2308 in order to characterize molecular targets that might be
useful for developing immunological or chemotherapeutic strategies against this
pathogen. The partial sequencing of 1,899 clones allowed the identification of
1,199 genomic sequence surveys (GSSs) with high homology (BLAST expect value <
10(-5)) to sequences deposited in the GenBank databases. Among them, 925
represent putative novel genes for the Brucella genus. Out of 925 nonredundant
GSSs, 470 were classified in 15 categories based on cellular function. Seven
hundred GSSs showed no significant database matches and remain available for
further studies in order to identify their function. A high number of GSSs with
homology to Agrobacterium tumefaciens and Rhizobium meliloti proteins were
observed, thus confirming their close phylogenetic relationship. Among them,
several GSSs showed high similarity with genes related to nodule nitrogen
fixation, synthesis of nod factors, nodulation protein symbiotic plasmid, and
nodule bacteroid differentiation. We have also identified several B. abortus
homologs of virulence and pathogenesis genes from other pathogens, including a
homolog to both the Shda gene from Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium and
the AidA-1 gene from Escherichia coli. Other GSSs displayed significant
homologies to genes encoding components of the type III and type IV secretion
machineries, suggesting that Brucella might also have an active type III
secretion machinery.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.69.2.865-868.2001 
PMCID: PMC97963
PMID: 11159979  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

