
1. J Immunol. 2001 Feb 1;166(3):2071-9.

Blockade of secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine exacerbates Propionibacterium
acnes-induced acute lung inflammation.

Itakura M(1), Tokuda A, Kimura H, Nagai S, Yoneyama H, Onai N, Ishikawa S,
Kuriyama T, Matsushima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Preventive Medicine and Core Research for Evolutional 
Science and Technology, University of Tokyo School of Medicine, Bunkyoku, Tokyo, 
Japan.

Chemokine-chemokine receptor interaction plays an essential role in
leukocyte/dendritic cell (DC) trafficking in inflammation and immune responses.
We investigated the pathophysiological roles of secondary lymphoid tissue
chemokine (SLC; CCL21) and macrophage inflammatory protein-2 (MIP-2) in the
development of acute pulmonary inflammation induced by an intratracheal injection
of Propionibacterium acnes in mice. Immunohistochemical studies revealed that SLC
was constitutively expressed in the peribronchial areas and perivascular
lymphatics in normal mice. MIP-2-positive cells were observed in alveolar spaces 
in mice challenged with P. acnes. Both neutralization Abs against MIP-2 and CXC
chemokine receptor 2 alleviated the P. acnes-induced pulmonary inflammation when 
injected before P. acnes Ag challenge. On the other hand, polyclonal anti-SLC Abs
(pAbs) exacerbated the pulmonary inflammation. The numbers of mature DCs (MHC
class II +, CD11c+, and CD86+) as well as macrophages and neutrophils in the P.
acnes Ag-challenged lungs were increased, whereas the number of CD4+ T cells,
including memory T cells, was decreased. The numbers of mature and proliferating 
CD4+ T cells (bromodeoxyuridine(+)CD4+) in regional lymph nodes were decreased in
mice injected with anti-SLC pAbs compared with those in mice treated with control
Abs. An in vitro proliferation assay confirmed the impairment of the Ag-specific 
T cell response in regional lymph nodes of mice treated with anti-SLC pAbs. These
results indicate for the first time a regulatory role for SLC-recruited mature
DCs in bridging an acute inflammatory response (innate immunity) and acquired
immunity in the lung.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.166.3.2071 
PMID: 11160258  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

