
1. J Bacteriol. 2001 Feb;183(3):1038-46.

Connection between poly-beta-hydroxybutyrate biosynthesis and growth on C(1) and 
C(2) compounds in the methylotroph Methylobacterium extorquens AM1.

Korotkova N(1), Lidstrom ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington 98195-1750, USA.

Several DNA regions containing genes involved in poly-beta-hydroxybutyrate (PHB) 
biosynthesis and degradation and also in fatty acid degradation were identified
from genomic sequence data and have been characterized in the serine cycle
facultative methylotroph Methylobacterium extorquens AM1. Genes involved in PHB
biosynthesis include those encoding beta-ketothiolase (phaA), NADPH-linked
acetoacetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) reductase (phaB), and PHB synthase (phaC).
phaA and phaB are closely linked on the chromosome together with a third gene
with identity to a regulator of PHB granule-associated protein, referred to as
orf3. phaC was unlinked to phaA and phaB. Genes involved in PHB degradation
include two unlinked genes predicted to encode intracellular PHB depolymerases
(depA and depB). These genes show a high level of identity with each other at
both DNA and amino acid levels. In addition, a gene encoding beta-hydroxybutyrate
dehydrogenase (hbd) was identified. Insertion mutations were introduced into
depA, depB, phaA, phaB, phaC, and hbd and also in a gene predicted to encode
crotonase (croA), which is involved in fatty acid degradation, to investigate
their role in PHB cycling. Mutants in depA, depB, hbd, and croA all produced
normal levels of PHB, and the only growth phenotype observed was the inability of
the hbd mutant to grow on beta-hydroxybutyrate. However, the phaA, phaB, and phaC
mutants all showed defects in PHB synthesis. Surprisingly, these mutants also
showed defects in growth on C(1) and C(2) compounds and, for phaB, these defects 
were rescued by glyoxylate supplementation. These results suggest that
beta-hydroxybutyryl-CoA is an intermediate in the unknown pathway that converts
acetyl-CoA to glyoxylate in methylotrophs and Streptomyces spp.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.183.3.1038-1046.2001 
PMCID: PMC94972
PMID: 11208803  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

