
1. J Immunol. 2001 Mar 15;166(6):3717-23.

Dendritic cells acquire antigens from live cells for cross-presentation to CTL.

Harshyne LA(1), Watkins SC, Gambotto A, Barratt-Boyes SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Microbiology, Graduate School of Public 
Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

Erratum in
    J Immunol 2001 May 1;166(9):5840.

Dendritic cells (DC) can readily capture Ag from dead and dying cells for
presentation to MHC class I-restricted CTL. We now show by using a primate model 
that DC also acquire Ag from healthy cells, including other DC. Coculture assays 
showed that fluorescently labeled plasma membrane was rapidly and efficiently
transferred between DC, and transfer of intracellular proteins was observed to a 
lesser extent. Acquisition of labeled plasma membrane and intracellular protein
was cell contact-dependent and was primarily a function of immature DC, whereas
both immature and CD40L-matured DC could serve as donors. Moreover, immature DC
could acquire labeled plasma membrane and intracellular proteins from a wide
range of hemopoietic cells, including macrophages, B cells, and activated T
cells. Notably, macrophages, which readily phagocytose apoptotic bodies, were
very inefficient at acquiring labeled plasma membrane and intracellular proteins 
from other live macrophages or DC. With live-cell imaging techniques, we
demonstrate that individual DC physically extract plasma membrane from other DC, 
generating endocytic vesicles of up to 1 microm in diameter. Finally, DC but not 
macrophages acquired an endogenous melanoma Ag expressed by live DC and
cross-presented Ag to MHC class I-restricted CTL, demonstrating the immunological
relevance of our finding. These data show for the first time that DC readily
acquire Ag from other live cells. We suggest that Ag acquisition from live cells 
may provide a novel mechanism whereby DC can present Ag in the absence of direct 
infection, and may serve to expand and regulate the immune response in vivo.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.166.6.3717 
PMID: 11238612  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

