
1. J Periodontal Res. 2001 Feb;36(1):25-31.

Effect of lipopolysaccharide from periodontal pathogens on the production of
tissue plasminogen activator and plasminogen activator inhibitor 2 by human
gingival fibroblasts.

Xiao Y(1), Bunn CL, Bartold PM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Dentistry, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.

Both tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA) and plasminogen activator inhibitor 2
(PAI-2) are important proteolysis factors present in inflamed human periodontal
tissues. The aim of the present study was to investigate the effect of
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) on the synthesis of t-PA and PAI-2 by human gingival
fibroblasts (HGF). LPS from different periodontal pathogens including
Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans, Porphyromonas gingivalis and Fusobacterium 
nucleatum were extracted by the hot phenol water method. The levels of t-PA and
PAI-2 secreted into the cell culture media were measured by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays (ELISA). The mRNA for t-PA and PAI-2 were measured by
RT-PCR. The results showed t-PA synthesis was increased in response to all types 
of LPS studied and PAI-2 level was increased by LPS from A. actinomycetemcomitans
and F. nucleatum, but not P. gingivalis. When comparing the effects of LPS from
non-periodontal bacteria (Escherichia coli and Salmonella enteritidis) with the
LPS from periodontal pathogens, we found that the ratio of t-PA to PAI-2 was
greater following exposure of the cells to LPS from periodontal pathogens. The
highest ratio of t-PA to PAI-2 was found in those cells exposed to LPS from P.
gingivalis. These results indicate that LPS derived from periodontal pathogens
may cause unbalanced regulation of plasminogen activator and plasminogen
activator inhibitor by HGF and such an effect may, in part, contribute to the
destruction of periodontal connective tissue through dysregulated pericellular
proteolysis.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1600-0765.2001.00608.x 
PMID: 11246701  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

