
1. Infect Immun. 2001 Apr;69(4):2596-603.

Mycobacterium bovis BCG-induced granuloma formation depends on gamma interferon
and CD40 ligand but does not require CD28.

Hogan LH(1), Markofski W, Bock A, Barger B, Morrissey JD, Sandor M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Wisconsin
Medical School, Madison, Wisconsin, USA. lhhogan@facstaff.wisc.edu

Progressive granuloma formation is a hallmark of chronic mycobacterial infection.
Granulomas are localized, protective inflammatory reactions initiated by CD4+ T
cells, which contribute to control of bacterial growth and blockade of bacterial 
dissemination. In order to understand the costimulatory requirements that allow
CD4+ T cells to directly or indirectly induce granulomas, we studied granuloma
formation after 6 weeks in Mycobacterium bovis BCG-infected CD28- and CD40 ligand
(CD40L)-deficient mice and compared it to granuloma formation in infected
wild-type inbred mice and infected cytokine-deficient mice. We characterized
granulomas morphologically in liver sections, analyzed granuloma infiltrating
cells by flow cytometry, and measured cytokine production by cultured granuloma
cells. CD28-deficient mice have no defect at the local inflammatory site,
inasmuch as they form protective granulomas and control bacterial growth.
However, there are fewer activated T cells in the spleen compared to infected
wild-type animals, and quantitative differences in the cellular composition of
the granuloma are observed by flow cytometry. In CD40L-deficient mice, the
granuloma phenotype is very similar to the phenotype in gamma interferon
(IFN-gamma)-deficient mice. Both IFN-gamma-deficient and CD40L-deficient mice
form granulomas which prevent bacterial dissemination, but control of bacterial
growth is significantly impaired. The relative proportion of CD4+ T cells in
granulomas from both CD28(-/-) and CD40L(-/-) mice is significantly decreased
compared with wild-type animals. Both models demonstrate that the phenotype and
activation stage of systemic T cells do not always correlate with the phenotype
and activation stage of the localized granulomatous response.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.69.4.2596-2603.2001 
PMCID: PMC98196
PMID: 11254624  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

