
1. Tissue Antigens. 2001 Feb;57(2):95-102.

Non-conservative substitutions distinguish previously uncharacterized HLA-A
molecules.

Hickman HD(1), Cavett JW, Ellexson-Turner ME, Sparkman JN, Bennett TT, Turner S, 
Sidebottom DA, Trachtenberg EA, Confer DL, Hildebrand WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA.

The extent of class I HLA polymorphism is not yet realized, and to provide a
glimpse of the HLA-A polymorphism which remains undetected, we have analyzed
approximately 3,700 National Marrow Donor Program (NMDP) Donor/Recipient Pair
Retrospective Study Samples with HLA-A DNA sequence-based typing (SBT). Seventeen
new HLA-A alleles were detected, with a total of 19 nucleotide substitutions
distinguishing these new alleles from their closest HLA-A relatives. Nearly all
of the new alleles differ by single nucleotide substitutions; a majority of these
substitutions can be explained by gene conversion events but 6 alleles likely
originated by point mutation. Fifteen of the 19 nucleotide substitutions
translate into amino acid differences in the molecule. Structurally, the inferred
amino acid alterations were non-conservative in terms of chemical property, and
most substitutions were positioned in 1 or more of the specificity pockets which 
determine peptide binding. Although these new alleles were identified in a
primarily Caucasian sample population, 9 of the 17 new HLA-A alleles were found
in samples of non-Caucasoid origin. A new allele detection rate of 1 in
approximately 200 individuals in our data set would, therefore, be higher in a
non-Caucasoid sample population. In summary, the single nucleotide substitutions 
that distinguish undetected HLA-A alleles translate into functionally distinct
HLA-A molecules. Further studies of the role of HLA-A in transplantation, in
disease association, and in evolution must therefore accommodate the discovery of
new alleles differing by single nucleotides.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1399-0039.2001.057002095.x 
PMID: 11260503  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

