
1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 15;276(24):21512-20. Epub 2001 Mar 9.

Functional analysis of the trypanosomal AAA protein TbVCP with trans-dominant ATP
hydrolysis mutants.

Lamb JR(1), Fu V, Wirtz E, Bangs JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Wisconsin-Madison Medical School, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

TbVCP is a member of the AAA (ATPases Associated with a variety of cellular
Activities) family of proteins containing two ATPase domains. Southern analysis
indicates TbVCP to have a single-locus, two-copy, genomic organization. One copy,
but not both, can be disrupted by targeted gene replacement, suggesting that
TbVCP is essential for trypanosome viability. Site-directed mutagenesis of the
ATP hydrolysis motifs indicates that the second conserved ATPase domain is
essential for TbVCP activity. Constitutive overexpression of TbVCP with a single 
mutation in the second hydrolysis motif or with mutations in both hydrolysis
motifs was not possible. Regulated overexpression of these mutants resulted in
cell death as a dominant negative phenotype. In each case cell growth arrested at
24-h post-induction and at all stages of the cell cycle as judged by replication 
of nuclear and kinetoplast genomes. Onset of growth arrest coincided with the
development of severe and characteristic morphological alterations for each
mutant. Neither constitutive nor regulated overexpression of wild type TbVCP or
the single first hydrolysis domain mutant had any overt effect on cell viability 
or morphology. However, the distinct phenotype of the double mutant indicates
that the first hydrolysis domain, although not essential, does modulate overall
TbVCP function. Finally, yeast complementation studies demonstrated that TbVCP
can functionally replace the yeast homologue Cdc48p, indicating that
protein.protein interactions essential to function have been maintained over
great phylogenetic distances.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M100235200 
PMID: 11279035  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

