
1. Sex Transm Infect. 2001 Apr;77(2):111-3.

The prevalence of Chlamydia trachomatis infection in male undergraduates: a
postal survey.

Rogstad KE(1), Bates SM, Partridge S, Kudesia G, Poll R, Osborne MA, Dixon S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genito-Urinary Medicine, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield, 
UK.

OBJECTIVES: To determine the prevalence of Chlamydia trachomatis infection in
male undergraduates and to investigate whether prevalence increases with time
spent at university. To investigate the feasibility of screening men for C
trachomatis by self sampling and posting of urine specimens.
METHODS: The study design was a postal survey undertaken by the Department of
Genito-Urinary Medicine (GUM) and Student University Health Service (SUHS) in
SHEFFIELD: 2607 male undergraduates from the SUHS patient list were invited to
participate in the study by providing a first void urine specimen and posting it 
to the laboratory. The main outcome measure was the detection of C trachomatis
infection.
RESULTS: 758 students participated in the study, a response rate of 29.1%. Nine
students (1.2%) tested positive for C trachomatis. The prevalence of infection in
the first, second, and third year of study was 0.7%, 1.5%, and 1.6% of
participants respectively. There was no statistically significant difference in
prevalence of infection between first and third year students (chi(2) test, p =
0.32). However, students with chlamydia had a higher median age (Mann-Whitney U
test, p < or = 0.05). Contact tracing identified four further cases of C
trachomatis infection.
CONCLUSION: Screening for C trachomatis infection by postal survey is feasible.
However, the response rate in this study was poor and the estimated sample size
was not reached. Therefore, it has not been possible to determine the true
prevalence of infection in this population or to accurately assess changes in
prevalence with time spent at university.

DOI: 10.1136/sti.77.2.111 
PMCID: PMC1744289
PMID: 11287689  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

