
1. Cytokine. 2001 Apr 7;14(1):37-48.

IL-10 mediation of activation-induced TH1 cell apoptosis and lymphoid dysfunction
in polymicrobial sepsis.

Ayala A(1), Chung CS, Song GY, Chaudry IH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Surgical Research and Department of Surgery, Brown University
School of Medicine and Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, RI 02903, USA.
AAYALA@LIFESPAN.org

Recent studies suggest that increased activation-induced lymphocyte apoptosis
(AICD) is detected in mouse splenocytes during polymicrobial sepsis which may
contribute to lymphocyte immune dysfunction [i.e., decreased interleukin (IL-)2
and interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) production] leading to the associated morbidity 
seen in those animals. Thus, we wanted to examine the hypothesis that immune
suppressive agents, such as IL-4, IL-10 or prostaglandin E2(PGE2), known to be
elevated in septic animals, also contribute to this increase in AICD. Here we
demonstrate that the inclusion of monoclonal antibody (mAb) to IL-10, but not
anti-IL-4 or ibuprofen (IBU), blunted this sepsis induced increase in splenocyte 
AICD. Additionally, septic mice deficient in the IL-10 gene product (-/-) showed 
neither an increase in AICD nor a loss of IL-2/IFN-gamma release capacity.
Interestingly, mAb to IL-10 did not altered the extent of AICD in a Th2-cell
line, but exogenous IL-10 did potentiate Th1-like cell line AICD. This was
consistent with the finding that the increased AICD seen in septic mouse
splenocytes was restricted largely to the CD4+ cells producing IL-2 (Th1-cells)
and that mAb to IL-10 treatment suppressed this change. Furthermore, IL-10
appears to mediate its AICD effect by upregulation of the Fas receptor and Fas
receptor signaling protein components, but not by altered expression of
Bcl/Bax/Bad family members, in septic mouse splenocytes. To the extent that these
processes contribute in a pathological fashion to the animal's capacity to
survive sepsis we have previously observed that in vivo post-treatment of mice
with mAb IL-10 markedly attenuated septic mortality. Collectively, these data
indicate that in the septic mouse the Th2 cytokine IL-10 not only serves to
actively induce Th1 lymphocyte immune dysfunction but also plays a role in their 
apoptotic depletion. These processes in turn appear to contribute to the animal's
inability to ward off lethal septic challenge.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/cyto.2001.0848 
PMID: 11298491  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

