
1. Keio J Med. 2001 Mar;50(1):39-44.

Characterization of CD1d in mucosal immune function: an immunotherapeutic target 
for inflammatory bowel disease.

Blumberg RS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA. rblumberg@partners.org

In addition to the classical MHC class I and class II molecules, human intestinal
epithelial cells also express nonclassical MHC class I-like molecules on their
cell surface. CD1d is a non-polymorphic MHC-like molecule whose expression is
mainly localized to the epithelial cells of the gastrointestinal tract. The
biochemical structure of CD1d on intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) exists in two
forms: a 37-kD nonglycosylated, beta 2-microglobulin (beta 2M) independent and a 
48-kD glycosylated, beta 2M dependent form. Immunolocalization studies suggest
that the 37-kD nonglycosylated form of CD1d is limited to the apical cell surface
whereas the 48-50-kD glycosylated, beta 2M dependent form of CD1d is expressed
both on the apical and the basolateral surfaces. The beta 2M association with
CD1d seems to be important in regulating the pattern of glycosylation and the
localization of CD1d within the cell based upon studies of the structure of CD1d 
in a transfected model cell line and in polarized epithelial cell monolayers. The
functional role of intestinal CD1d remains unknown. However, based upon in vitro 
studies of the antigens presented by human CD1d and mouse CD1d, CD1d expressed on
IECs likely presents a very hydrophobic glycolipid molecule possibly from the
cell wall of bacteria or host cells. The processed-lipid antigen presented by
CD1d may then involve a yet-to-be-identified subpopulation of the resident,
oligoclonal alpha beta TCR CD8+ intestinal intraepithelial lymphocyte (iIEL) T
cells. Subsequently, these T cells would be very important in regulating the
local immune response by producing cytokines and recruiting other immune
modulating cells to destroy infected cells, regenerate normal IECs, and possibly 
downregulate activated T cells to maintain mucosal integrity.

DOI: 10.2302/kjm.50.39 
PMID: 11296664  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

