
1. J Microbiol Methods. 2001 Jul;45(3):171-85.

Comparison of microbial and meiofaunal community analyses for determining impact 
of heavy metal contamination.

Ellis RJ(1), Neish B, Trett MW, Best JG, Weightman AJ, Morgan P, Fry JC.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, PO Box 915, CF10 3TL,
Cardiff, UK. r.ellis@ic.ac.uk

The impact of long-term heavy metal contamination on soil communities was
assessed by a number of methods. These included plate counts of culturable
bacteria, community level physiological profiling (CLPP) by analysis of the
utilization of multiple carbon sources in BIOLOG plates, community fatty acid
methyl ester (C-FAME) profiling and dehydrogenase enzyme activity measurements.
These approaches were complemented with microscopic assessments of the diversity 
of the nematode community. Samples from two sites with different histories of
heavy-metal input were assessed. Major differences in microbial and meiofaunal
parameters were observed both between and within the sites. There was a large
degree of congruence between each of the microbiological approaches. In
particular, one sample appeared to be distinguished by a reduction in culturable 
bacteria (especially pseudomonads), limited response to carbon sources in CLPP,
and major differences in extracted fatty acid profiles. The use of multivariate
analysis to examine the relationship between microbial and physicochemical
measurements revealed that CLPP and plate counts were useful for determining the 
gross effect of metals on soil microbial communities, whereas proportions of
metal-resistant bacteria and dehydrogenase activity differentiated between the
two sites. Copper and zinc concentrations and pH all showed significant
correlation with the microbial parameters. Nematode community structure was
affected to a greater extent by soil pH than by metal content, but the
within-site rankings were the same as those achieved for microbiological
analyses. The use of these methods for field evaluation of the impact of
industrial pollution may be possible provided care is taken when interpreting the
data.

DOI: 10.1016/s0167-7012(01)00245-7 
PMID: 11348675  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

