
1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 3;276(31):29582-7. Epub 2001 Jun 1.

Role of the linker region of the anion-stimulated ATPase ArsA. Effect of deletion
and point mutations in the linker region.

Jia H(1), Kaur P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia 30303, USA.

The anion-stimulated ATPase ArsA in Escherichia coli consists of two homologous
halves, A1 and A2, which are connected by a 40-amino acid long stretch of
residues designated as the linker region. The linker region of ArsA lies in close
proximity of the nucleotide-binding domain(s) of ArsA and is involved in
significant conformational changes on binding of the substrates. Hence, it has
been suggested earlier that the linker may play an important role in the function
of ArsA. The aim of the present study was to determine the role of the linker by 
deletion and by site-directed mutagenesis of specific residues. Effect of
deletion of the linker was determined by using the in vivo complementation
approach where two halves of ArsA were co-expressed either with or without the
linker region. Two co-expressed halves of ArsA conferred arsenite resistance only
if the linker region was present on one of the halves. Of the six different point
mutations created in the linker region, three (G284S, R290S, and D303G) were seen
to drastically affect the catalytic function of ArsA. In addition, these three
mutant alleles conferred arsenite sensitivity in cells carrying the wild type
arsB gene. Trypsin proteolysis studies carried out with the purified proteins
showed that the A1 nucleotide-binding domain in D303G protein has a conformation 
different from the wild type ArsA, suggesting that the linker region interacts
with the nucleotide-binding domain(s) of ArsA. Based on the studies presented
here, we propose that, in addition to providing flexibility, the nature of the
residues themselves in the linker region is important for the conformation of the
nucleotide-binding domains and for the catalytic function of ArsA.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M103042200 
PMID: 11389146  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

