
1. Hum Immunol. 2001 Jun;62(6):577-88.

Regeneration and tolerance factor is expressed during T-lymphocyte activation and
plays a role in apoptosis.

Boomer JS(1), Derks RA, Lee GW, DuChateau BK, Gilman-Sachs A, Beaman KD.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Immunology Laboratory, Department of Microbiology/Immunology, Finch
University of Health Sciences, The Chicago Medical School, North Chicago, IL
60064, USA.

Regeneration and tolerance factor (RTF) is a protein cloned from the thymus and
expressed on B lymphocytes in normal pregnancy, B lymphocytic leukemia lines, and
T and B lymphocytes in individuals with HIV infection. Findings, using the Jurkat
T-cell model, revealed that RTF is upregulated after activation and anti-RTF
antibody-induced apoptosis. In this article anti-RTF antibody-induced apoptosis
of both unstimulated and activated T lymphocytes. RTF expression was examined in 
human PBMC or purified T lymphocytes after their in vitro activation. Kinetic
studies indicated maximal RTF cell surface expression on activated T lymphocytes 
occurred between expression of the early activation antigen CD69 and the
IL-2alpha receptor (CD25) by multiparameter flow cytometry. RTF receptor
expression correlated with Fas (CD95) and CD25 receptor expression (r2 = 0.6 and 
0.5, respectively). RTF surface expression was dependent on the stimuli used to
activate T lymphocytes. T lymphocytes obtained maximal RTF expression when
activated through the TCR signal complex using anti-CD3epsilon antibody alone
when compared with T lymphocytes activated with costimulation provided by
anti-CD28 antibody alone or with anti-CD28 and anti-CD3epsilon antibody. RTF is
expressed under conditions of both activation and anergy. The RTFs increased
concentration on the surface of anergic T cells may protect these cells from
apoptosis because increased RTF concentrations inhibited anti-RTF induced
apoptosis. These data further characterize the expression of RTF on activated T
lymphocytes and the role of anti-RTF antibody in T-lymphocyte apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1016/s0198-8859(01)00244-0 
PMID: 11390032  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

