
1. Cytokine. 2001 May 7;14(3):152-61.

Expression of IL-1 beta and IL-8 by human gingival epithelial cells in response
to Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans.

Uchida Y(1), Shiba H, Komatsuzawa H, Takemoto T, Sakata M, Fujita T, Kawaguchi H,
Sugai M, Kurihara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology and Endodontology, Hiroshima University Faculty
of Dentistry, 1-2-3, Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima, Japan, 734-8553.

The interaction between epithelial cells and microorganisms is the most important
step in bacterial infections. Epithelial cells in response to exposure to
pathogenic bacteria produce cytokines that initiate inflammation. However, little
is known about the cytokine response of gingival epithelial cells to
periodontopathogenic bacteria. Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans is thought to
play a significant role in the initiation of periodontitis because of its
bacteriological characteristics. In the present study, we investigated the
cytokine induction by human gingival epithelial cells (HGEC) following exposure
to A. actinomycetemcomitans in comparison with human gingival fibroblasts (HGF)
in culture. Northern blot analysis showed that mRNAs of interleukin 1beta
(IL-1beta) and IL-8, but not IL-6, in HGEC were induced in response to A.
actinomycetemcomitans. Secretion of IL-8 by HGEC was also increased following A. 
actinomycetemcomitans challenge, whereas production of IL-1beta could not be
detected. The levels of IL-8 and its mRNA were increased depending on the
concentration of A. actinomycetemcomitans. The co-culture with HGF and A.
actinomycetemcomitans resulted in an increase in the levels of IL-6 and IL-8 mRNA
in HGF. However, HGF exposed to A. actinomycetemcomitans, showed no expression of
IL-1beta mRNA. These findings demonstrated that HGEC and HGF stimulated with A.
actinomycetemcomitans have different profiles in cytokine mRNA expression.
Furthermore, A. actinomycetemcomitans may play an important role in amplifying
the local immune response and in initiating inflammatory reaction through release
of IL-8 from gingival epithelial cells.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/cyto.2001.0863 
PMID: 11396993  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

