
1. Lab Invest. 2001 Jun;81(6):875-85.

Human vasculogenesis ex vivo: embryonal aorta as a tool for isolation of
endothelial cell progenitors.

Alessandri G(1), Girelli M, Taccagni G, Colombo A, Nicosia R, Caruso A, Baronio
M, Pagano S, Cova L, Parati E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Microbiology, University of Brescia, Brescia.

SUMMARY: Vasculogenesis, the de novo formation of new blood vessels from
undifferentiated precursor cells or angioblasts, has been studied with
experimental in vivo and ex vivo animal models, but its mechanism is poorly
understood, particularly in humans. We used the aortic ring assay to investigate 
the angioforming capacity of aortic explants from 11- to 12-week-old human
embryos. After being embedded in collagen gels, the aorta rings produced
branching capillary-like structures formed by mesenchymal spindle cells that
lined a capillary-like lumen and expressed markers of endothelial differentiation
(CD31, CD34, von Willebrand factor [vWF], and fms-like tyrosine kinase-1
[Flk-1]/vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 [VEGFR2]). The cell linings
of these structures showed ultrastructural evidence of endothelial
differentiation. The neovascular proliferation occurred primarily in the outer
aspects of aortic rings, thus suggesting that the new vessels mainly arose from
immature endothelial precursor cells localized in the outer layer of the aortic
stroma, ie, a process of vasculogenesis rather than angiogenesis. The
undifferentiated mesenchymal cells (CD34+/CD31-), isolated and cultured on
collagen-fibronectin, differentiated into endothelial cells expressing CD31 and
vWF. Furthermore, the CD34+/CD31+ cells were capable of forming a network of
capillary-like structures when cultured on Matrigel. This is the first reported
study showing the ex vivo formation of human microvessels by vasculogenesis. Our 
findings indicate that the human embryonic aorta is a rich source of CD34+/CD31- 
endothelial progenitor cells (angioblasts), and this information may prove
valuable in studies of vascular regeneration and tissue bioengineering.

DOI: 10.1038/labinvest.3780296 
PMID: 11406648  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

