
1. Dig Liver Dis. 2001 Apr;33(3):222-9.

Prevalence of Helicobacter pylori infection in coronary artery disease and effect
of its eradication on coronary lumen reduction after percutaneous coronary
angioplasty.

Kowalski M(1), Konturek PC, Pieniazek P, Karczewska E, Kluczka A, Grove R, Kranig
W, Nasseri R, Thale J, Hahn EG, Konturek SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Hertzcentrum Osnabruck-Bad Rothenfelde, Germany.

Comment in
    Dig Liver Dis. 2001 Apr;33(3):214-6.

BACKGROUND: Gastric infection caused by Helicobacter pylori has recently been
associated with increased risk of coronary artery disease.
AIM: To: 1) determine seroprevalence of Helicobacter pylori and its cytotoxin
associated gene A in patients with/without coronary artery disease (group A), 2) 
assess influence of Helicobacter pylori eradication on coronary artery lumen
reduction after percutaneous coronary angioplasty (group B) and 3) determine
influence of Helicobacter pylori eradication on plasma cytokines, lipids and
coagulation factors in patients subjected to percutaneous coronary angioplasty
(group B).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Group A included 100 patients with coronary artery disease 
(subgroup 1) and 100 patients without (subgroup II). For Helicobacter pylori
seroprevalence, plasma anti-Helicobacter pylori and anti-cytotoxin associated
gene A IgG were examined. Group B included 40 patients with significant
single-vessel coronary arterial disease and Helicobacter pylori infection
confirmed by 13C-urea breath test and serologically using anti-Helicobacter
pylori and anti-cytotoxin associated gene A IgG. Six months after percutaneous
coronary angioplasty and triple anti-Helicobacter pylori therapy, the
Helicobacter pylori status reassessed by urea breath test was negative in all but
two patients of subgroup I subjected to Helicobacter pylori therapy. Coronary
angiography and laboratory tests were repeated in both subgroups of group B
included in the trial and reduction in coronary artery lumen in these subgroups
was compared to baseline after percutaneous coronary angioplasty considered as
100%.
RESULTS: Helicobacter pylori seropositivity reached 81.5% of coronary artery
disease (subgroup I) and was significantly higher than that in controls without
coronary artery disease (subgroup II) (51%), the odds ratio being 4.3 for
Helicobacter pylori in coronary artery disease. Cytotoxin associated gene A IgG
detection was also significantly higher (47.3%) in coronary artery disease than
in controls (28%) giving the odds ratio about 2.3. Mean coronary artery lumen
reduction in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary angioplasty + Helicobacter
pylori eradication therapy (subgroup I) was significantly (p<0.05) smaller
compared to percutaneous coronary angioplasty + placebo-treated subgroup II (22% 
vs 41%).
CONCLUSIONS: 1) There is a significant link between coronary artery disease and
infection with Helicobacter pylori, especially expressing CagA proteins, 2)
Helicobacter pylori eradication significantly attenuates reduction in coronary
artery lumen in coronary artery disease patients after percutaneous coronary
angioplasty possibly by elimination of chronic inflammation and decline in
proinflammatory cytokine release, and 3) Infection of Chlamydia pneumoniae in
these percutaneous coronary angioplasty patients is not affected by eradication
therapy.

DOI: 10.1016/s1590-8658(01)80711-8 
PMID: 11407666  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

