
1. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2001 Jul;15(7):989-99.

Expression of hepatocyte growth factor, transforming growth factor alpha,
apoptosis related proteins Bax and Bcl-2, and gastrin in human gastric cancer.

Konturek PC(1), Konturek SJ, Sulekova Z, Meixner H, Bielanski W, Starzynska T,
Karczewska E, Marlicz K, Stachura J, Hahn EG.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Medicine, University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany.
pkonturek@aol.com

BACKGROUND: Gastric cancer is one of the most frequent neoplasms and a leading
cause of the death world-wide. In recent years, epidemiological and animal
studies demonstrated a link between gastric cancer and chronic infection with H. 
pylori. The exact mechanism responsible for the development of gastric cancer in 
H. pylori-infected patients still remains unclear. There is evidence that the
up-regulation of certain growth factors could play an important role in the
promotion of the gastric carcinogenesis.
AIMS: The present study was designed to determine the gene expression of major
known growth factors such as transforming growth factor alpha (TGFalpha),
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and gastrin in the gastric cancer tissue, the
surrounding mucosa and, for comparison, in the normal gastric mucosa.
Furthermore, the luminal and plasma levels of gastrin in patients with gastric
cancer were determined. In addition, the gene and protein expressions of
apoptosis-related proteins such as Bax and Bcl-2 were investigated by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and Western blot. Twenty-five gastric
cancer patients and 40 age- and gender-matched control subjects hospitalized with
non-ulcer dyspepsia were included into this study.
RESULTS: An overall H. pylori-seropositivity among gastric cancer patients was
about 72% and was significantly higher than in the controls (56%). The prevalence
of CagA-positive strains was also significantly higher among gastric cancer
patients than in controls (56% vs. 32%). The gene expression of HGF and TGFalpha 
was detected more frequently in gastric cancer tissue samples than in normal
gastric mucosa (52% vs. 12% for HGF and 48% vs. 24% for TGFalpha). The extent of 
protein expression in Western blotting analysis for HGF and TGFalpha correlated
with the mRNA expression of these factors. Gene expression of gastrin was
detected in the antrum of all tested patients and in the majority (84%) of
gastric cancer patients. The median plasma and luminal concentrations of gastrin 
in gastric cancer patients were significantly higher than in controls. The gene
expression of bcl-2 was detected in all (100%) and that of proapoptotic bax only 
in 56% of gastric cancer samples. In comparison to the surrounding non-tumorous
tisssue, the gene expression of bax was significantly down-regulated and the gene
expression of bcl-2 was up-regulated in gastric cancer tissue. At the protein
level, Bax was not detectable and Bcl-2 was seen in 80% of gastric cancer
samples.
CONCLUSIONS: It is concluded that the patients infected with H. pylori,
especially with CagA-positive strains, are at a higher risk of developing a
gastric cancer. An increased production and release of gastrin, as well as an
over-expression of growth factors such as HGF and TGFalpha, might contribute to
the gastric carcinogenesis. In addition, a dysregulation of the Bax/Bcl-2 system 
with significant up-regulation of Bcl-2 is observed in gastric cancer.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2036.2001.01003.x 
PMID: 11421874  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

