
1. J Immunol. 2001 Jul 15;167(2):682-90.

The Peyer's patch microenvironment suppresses T cell responses to chemokines and 
other stimuli.

Kellermann SA(1), McEvoy LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, DNAX Research Institute, Palo Alto, CA 94304,
USA. kellermann_s@abgenix.com

Immunosurveillance of mucosal sites presents immune cells with challenges not
encountered in the periphery. T cells in the gut must distinguish enteric
pathogens from innocuous non-self Ag derived from food or commensal bacteria. The
mechanisms that regulate T cells in the gut remain incompletely understood. We
assessed the effect of the Peyer's patch microenvironment on T cell responses to 
chemokines. Chemokines are believed to play an important role during T cell
priming by facilitating T cell migration into and within lymphoid tissues as well
as T cell encounter and interaction with APCs. We found a profound suppression of
chemokine-stimulated T cell chemotaxis and actin polymerization in Peyer's patch 
relative to lymph node. Chemokine hyporesponsiveness is imposed upon T cells
within hours of their entry into Peyer's patches and is reversed following their 
removal. Suppression was not restricted to chemokine stimulation, as T cell
responses to Con A and PMA were also suppressed. The global nature of this defect
is further underscored by an impairment in calcium mobilization. Evidence
indicates that a soluble factor contributes to this hyporesponsiveness, and
comparison of Peyer's patches and lymph nodes revealed striking differences in
their chemokine and cytokine constitution, indicating a marked Th2 bias in the
Peyer's patches. The role of the Th2 microenvironment in mediating suppression is
suggested by the ability of Nippostrongylus brasiliensis to elicit
hyporesponsiveness in lymph node T cells. The suppressive milieu encountered by T
cells in Peyer's patches may be critical for discouraging undesired immune
responses and promoting tolerance.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.167.2.682 
PMID: 11441071  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

