
1. J Bacteriol. 2001 Aug;183(15):4599-608.

Competence repression under oxygen limitation through the two-component MicAB
signal-transducing system in Streptococcus pneumoniae and involvement of the PAS 
domain of MicB.

Echenique JR(1), Trombe MC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Genétique et Physiologie Bactérienne, E.A. 3036, Centre
Hospitalo Universitaire de Rangueil, Université Paul Sabatier, 31403 Toulouse
Cedex, France.

In Streptococcus pneumoniae, a fermentative aerotolerant and catalase-deficient
human pathogen, oxidases with molecular oxygen as substrate are important for
virulence and for competence. The signal-transducing two-component systems CiaRH 
and ComDE mediate the response to oxygen, culminating in competence. In this work
we show that the two-component MicAB system, whose MicB kinase carries a PAS
domain, is also involved in competence repression under oxygen limitation.
Autophosphorylation of recombinant MicB and phosphotransfer to recombinant MicA
have been demonstrated. Mutational analysis and in vitro assays showed that the
C-terminal part of the protein and residue L100 in the N-terminal cap of its PAS 
domain are both crucial for autokinase activity in vitro. Although no insertion
mutation in micA was obtained, expression of the mutated allele micA59DA did not 
change bacterial growth and overcame competence repression under microaerobiosis.
This was related to a strong instability of MicA59DA-PO(4) in vitro. Thus,
mutations which either reduced the stability of MicA-PO(4) or abolished kinase
activity in MicB were related to competence derepression under microaerobiosis,
suggesting that MicA-PO(4) is involved in competence repression when oxygen
becomes limiting. The micAB genes are flanked by mutY and orfC. MutY is an
adenine glycosylase involved in the repair of oxidized pyrimidines. OrfC shows
the features of a metal binding protein. We did not obtain insertion mutation in 
orfC, suggesting its requirement for growth. It is proposed that MicAB, with its 
PAS motif, may belong to a set of functions important in the protection of the
cell against oxidative stress, including the control of competence.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.183.15.4599-4608.2001 
PMCID: PMC95355
PMID: 11443095  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

