
1. J Immunol. 2001 Aug 1;167(3):1212-21.

Differences in the expression of human class I MHC alleles and their associated
peptides in the presence of proteasome inhibitors.

Luckey CJ(1), Marto JA, Partridge M, Hall E, White FM, Lippolis JD, Shabanowitz
J, Hunt DF, Engelhard VH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Carter Immunology Center, University of Virginia
Health Sciences Center, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

We have studied the contributions of proteasome inhibitor-sensitive and
-insensitive proteases to the generation of class I MHC-associated peptides. The 
cell surface expression of 13 different human class I MHC alleles was inhibited
by as much as 90% or as little as 40% when cells were incubated with saturating
concentrations of three different proteasome inhibitors. Inhibitor-resistant
class I MHC expression was not due to TAP-independent expression or preexisting
internal stores of peptides. Furthermore, it did not correlate with the amount or
specificity of residual proteasome activity as determined in in vitro proteolysis
assays and was not augmented by simultaneous incubation with multiple inhibitors.
Mass spectrometry was used to directly characterize the peptides expressed in the
presence and absence of proteasome inhibitors. The number of peptide species
detected correlated with the levels of class I detected by flow cytometry. Thus, 
for many alleles, a significant proportion of associated peptide species continue
to be generated in the presence of saturating levels of proteasome inhibitors.
Comparison of the peptide-binding motifs of inhibitor-sensitive and -resistant
class I alleles further suggested that inhibitor-resistant proteolytic activities
display a wide diversity of cleavage specificities, including a trypsin-like
activity. Sequence analysis demonstrated that inhibitor-resistant peptides
contain diverse carboxyl termini and are derived from protein substrates
dispersed throughout the cell. The possible contributions of inhibitor-resistant 
proteasome activities and nonproteasomal proteases residing in the cytosol to the
peptide profiles associated with many class I MHC alleles are discussed.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.167.3.1212 
PMID: 11466336  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

