
1. Blood. 2001 Aug 15;98(4):925-33.

Blocking of c-FLIP(L)--independent cycloheximide-induced apoptosis or
Fas-mediated apoptosis by the CC chemokine receptor 9/TECK interaction.

Youn BS(1), Kim YJ, Mantel C, Yu KY, Broxmeyer HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Chemokines play a pivotal role in regulating leukocyte migration as well as other
biological functions. CC chemokine receptor 9 (CCR9) is a specific receptor for
thymus-expressed CC chemokine (TECK). It is shown here that engagement of CCR9
with TECK leads to phosphorylation of Akt (protein kinase B), mitogen-activated
protein kinases (MAPKs), glycogen synthase kinase--3 beta (GSK-3 beta), and a
forkhead transcription factor, FKHR, in a human T-cell line, MOLT4, that
naturally expresses CCR9. By means of chemical inhibitors, it is shown that
phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI-3 kinase), but not MAPK, is required for
CCR9-mediated chemotaxis. Akt, GSK-3 beta, FKHR, and MAPK have been previously
implicated in cell survival signals in response to an array of death stimuli.
When MOLT4 cells, which expressed Fas as well as CXCR4, were stimulated with
cycloheximide (CHX), an agonistic anti-Fas antibody, or a combination of these,
the cells rapidly underwent apoptosis. However, costimulation of MOLT4 cells with
TECK or stromal derived factor--1 significantly blocked CHX-mediated apoptosis,
whereas stimulation only with TECK partially blocked Fas-mediated apoptosis.
Concomitant with this blocking, cleavage of poly (adenosine
5'-diphosphate--ribose) polymerase and activation of caspase 3 were significantly
attenuated, but the expression level of FLICE inhibitory protein c-FLIP(L), which
had been shown to be regulated by CHX, was unchanged. This demonstrates that
activation of CCR9 leads to phosphorylation of GSK-3 beta and FKHR and provides a
cell survival signal to the receptor expressing cells against CHX. It also
suggests the existence of a novel pathway leading to CHX-induced apoptosis
independently of c-FLIP(L). (Blood. 2001;98:925-933)

DOI: 10.1182/blood.v98.4.925 
PMID: 11493434  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

