
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 Aug 13;1548(2):265-77.

Expression and characterisation of the thrombospondin type I repeats of human
properdin.

Perdikoulis MV(1), Kishore U, Reid KB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, UK.

Properdin, an upregulator of the alternative complement pathway, is central to
deposition of the activated complement fragment C3b on the surfaces of the
pathogens, which it achieves by preventing the dissociation of the Bb catalytic
subunit from the inherently labile C3bBb complexes. It is also known to bind
sulphated glycoconjugates, such as sulphatides. Properdin has an unusual
structure formed by oligomerisation of a rod-like monomer into cyclic dimers,
trimers and tetramers. The monomer (approximately 53 kDa) contains an N-terminal 
region of no known homology, followed by six non-identical repeats of 60 amino
acids (based on exon/intron boundaries), called 'thrombospondin type I repeats'
or TSR modules. We have expressed and purified the N-terminal region and each of 
the individual TSR repeats in Escherichia coli. Although the individual
recombinant TSRs, after a denaturation-renaturation cycle, appeared to be
correctly folded modules, as judged by the one-dimensional (1D)- and 2D-nuclear
magnetic resonance spectra of TSR3, they did not show binding to either C3b or
sulphatide. Polyclonal antibodies were raised against each TSR and were found to 
be module-specific. The anti-TSR5 polyclonal antibody was found to inhibit
binding of native human properdin to solid-phase C3b, or sulphatides. It could
also block properdin-dependent haemolysis of rabbit erythrocytes. These results
are consistent with the view that the TSR5 contains the major site in properdin
which is involved in both C3b and sulphatide binding. It also suggests that a
co-operative intramolecular interaction between TSRs, as found in the native
molecule, is required for TSR5 to bind either C3b or sulphatides.

DOI: 10.1016/s0167-4838(01)00238-2 
PMID: 11513971  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

