
1. Shock. 2001 Sep;16(3):183-8.

PGE2 suppresses intestinal T cell function in thermal injury: a cause of enhanced
bacterial translocation.

Choudhry MA(1), Fazal N, Namak SY, Haque F, Ravindranath T, Sayeed MM.

Author information: 
(1)Burn and Shock Trauma Institute, Department of Surgery and Physiology, Loyola 
University Chicago Medical Center Maywood, Illinois 60153, USA.

Increased gut bacterial translocation in burn and trauma patients has been
demonstrated in a number of previous studies, however, the mechanism for such an 
increased gut bacterial translocation in injured patients remains poorly
understood. Utilizing a rat model of burn injury, in the present study we
examined the role of intestinal immune defense by analyzing the T cell functions.
We investigated if intestinal T cells dysfunction contributes to bacterial
translocation after burn injury. Also our study determined if burn-mediated
alterations in intestinal T cell functions are related to enhanced release of
PGE2. Finally, we examined whether or not burn-related alterations in intestinal 
T cell function are due to inappropriate activation of signaling molecule P59fyn,
which is required for T cell activation and proliferation. The results presented 
here showed an increase in gut bacterial accumulation in mesenteric lymph nodes
after thermal injury. This was accompanied by a decrease in the intestinal T cell
proliferative responses. Furthermore, the treatments of burn-injured animals with
PGE2 synthesis blocker (indomethacin or NS398) prevented both the decrease in
intestinal T cell proliferation and enhanced bacterial translocation. Finally,
our data suggested that the inhibition of intestinal T cell proliferation could
result via PGE2-mediated down-regulation of the T cell activation-signaling
molecule P59fyn. These findings support a role of T cell-mediated immune defense 
against bacterial translocation in burn injury.

DOI: 10.1097/00024382-200116030-00003 
PMID: 11531019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

