
1. Med Sci Monit. 2001 Sep-Oct;7(5):1092-107.

Cancerogenesis in Helicobacter pylori infected stomach--role of growth factors,
apoptosis and cyclooxygenases.

Konturek PC(1), Konturek SJ, Pierzchalski P, Bielański W, Duda A, Marlicz K,
Starzyńska T, Hahn EG.

Author information: 
(1)1st Department of Medicine, University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Epidemiological and animal studies demonstrated a link between
gastric cancer (GC) or mucosal associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma and
chronic infection with Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori). The exact mechanism
responsible for the development of GC and MALT-lymphoma in H. pylori-infected
patients still remains obscure. This report is designed to overview the molecular
biology, especially the gene expression and histochemical manifestation of
gastrin and other growth factors such as transforming growth factor alpha (TGF
alpha) and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) in the GC before and after eradication 
of H. pylori. Furthermore, gene expression of cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1) and COX-2 
and apoptosis-related proteins such as Bax and Bcl-2 are discussed.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The findings originate from two series of patients; Series 
I involving 337 GC patients and 400 age- and gender-matched controls and series 2
including 20 MALT-lymphoma patients and 40 matched controls.
RESULTS: An overall H.pylori-seropositivity reached about 80% in GC and about 90%
in MALT-lymphoma, significantly higher than in non-cancer controls (60%). The
prevalence of CagA-positive strains was about twice as high (about 70%) in GC and
MALT-lymphomas as in sex- and age-matched controls. Expression of gastrin was
detected in antrum of all tested patients but also in majority (90%) of GCs and
MALT-lymphomas tumor tissue. HGF and TGF alpha were expressed more frequently in 
GC tissue than in normal fundic mucosa. COX-1 was similarly expressed in GC and
MALT as in intact mucosa, while COX-2 mRNA was detected only in tumor tissue,
being attenuated by H.pylori eradication in GC and abolished by this therapy in
MALT-lymphoma. The plasma levels of alpha-amidated gastrin in GC and MALT were
several folds higher than in controls. Gene expression of bcl-2 was detected in
all, while bax--only in about 50% of GC samples.
CONCLUSIONS: Infection with H. pylori, especially that expressing
CagA-positivity, is primum movens in developing GC and MALT-lymphoma and the
upregulation of growth factors, particularly of gastrin, and COX-2 and
dysregulation of the Bax/Bcl-2 system seem to contribute to gastric
cancerogenesis.


PMID: 11535962  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

