
1. J Immunol. 2001 Sep 15;167(6):3375-82.

The effect of an anti-HLA-B27 immune response on CTL recognition of Chlamydia.

Popov I(1), Dela Cruz CS, Barber BH, Chiu B, Inman RD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Toronto Western Hospital,
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The interplay between triggering bacteria and HLA-B27 in the pathogenesis of the 
spondyloarthropathies remains one of the most active areas of investigation in
the rheumatic diseases. This has proved difficult to study systematically in the 
clinical setting, and in this study we utilized a rat model to address the
influence that B27-related immunity may have on the process of generating
anti-Chlamydia immunity. When splenocytes from HLA-B27 DNA-immunized Lewis (LEW) 
animals received restimulation in vitro with Chlamydia-treated cells from
B27-transgenic LEW rats, we observed that in addition to the expected CTL
recognition of HLA-B27, there was also anti-Chlamydia CTL killing of
Chlamydia-sensitized syngeneic fibroblast targets. This was not seen when
responding cells in vitro were naive LEW splenocytes. To confirm the existence of
CTLs recognizing both HLA-B27 and Chlamydia, LEW rats were immunized with
B27-transgenic LEW cells, instead of the B27 DNA construct. Splenocytes from the 
immune rats were restimulated in vitro with Chlamydia-treated B27-transgenic LEW 
cells. In this instance, the CTLs retained the allele-specific recognition of
HLA-B27, as well as recognition of Chlamydia-sensitized syngeneic fibroblasts.
Thus, if there is prior expansion of an immune response against HLA-B27, then the
resulting splenocytes demonstrate a reduced threshold for generating a primary
anti-Chlamydia CTL response. These studies implicate a dynamic interrelationship 
between recognition of HLA-B27 and Chlamydia trachomatis. The results may have
implications for deciphering the cellular basis of Chlamydia-induced reactive
arthritis.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.167.6.3375 
PMID: 11544328  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

