
1. J Immunol. 2001 Sep 15;167(6):3223-30.

The HA-2 minor histocompatibility antigen is derived from a diallelic gene
encoding a novel human class I myosin protein.

Pierce RA(1), Field ED, Mutis T, Golovina TN, Von Kap-Herr C, Wilke M, Pool J,
Shabanowitz J, Pettenati MJ, Eisenlohr LC, Hunt DF, Goulmy E, Engelhard VH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Carter Immunology Center, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

Human minor histocompatibility Ags (mHag) present significant barriers to
successful bone marrow transplantation. However, the structure of human mHag and 
the basis for antigenic disparities are still largely unknown. Here we report the
identification of the gene encoding the human mHag HA-2 as a previously unknown
member of the class I myosin family, which we have designated MYO1G. The gene is 
located on the short arm of chromosome 7. Expression of this gene is limited to
cells of hemopoietic origin, in keeping with the previously defined tissue
expression of the HA-2 Ag. RT-PCR amplification of MYO1G from different
individuals led to the identification of two genetic variants, designated
MYO1G(V) and MYO1G(M). The former encodes the peptide sequence previously shown
to be the HA-2 epitope (YIGEVLVSV), whereas the latter shows a single amino acid 
change in this peptide (YIGEVLVSM). This change has only a modest effect on
peptide binding to the class I MHC-restricted element HLA-A*0201, and a minimal
impact on recognition by T cells when added exogenously to target cells.
Nonetheless, as detected using either T cells or mass spectrometry, this amino
acid change results in a failure of the latter peptide to be presented at the
surface of cells that express MYO1G(M) endogenously. These studies have thus
identified a new mHag-encoding gene, and thereby provide additional information
about both the genetic origins of human mHag as well as the underlying basis of
an Ag-positive vs Ag-negative state.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.167.6.3223 
PMID: 11544309  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

