
1. Blood. 2001 Oct 1;98(7):2091-100.

Regulation of the inhibitor-of-apoptosis family member survivin in normal cord
blood and bone marrow CD34(+) cells by hematopoietic growth factors: implication 
of survivin expression in normal hematopoiesis.

Fukuda S(1), Pelus LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and the Walther Oncology Center,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

The inhibitor-of-apoptosis protein survivin is expressed in most cancers and
leukemias and during fetal development, but not in most normal adult tissues.
Survivin expression was analyzed in umbilical cord blood (UCB) and adult bone
marrow CD34(+) cells and in the factor-dependent MO7e cell line; also
investigated was whether survivin expression was regulated by hematopoietic
growth factors. Survivin messsenger RNA (mRNA) and protein were expressed in
fresh UCB and marrow CD34(+) cells. The combination of thrombopoietin, Flt3
ligand, and stem cell factor upregulated survivin expression in CD34(+) cells
within 24 hours; survivin expression was cell-cycle related and highest during
G2/M, whereas growth-factor withdrawal resulted in decreased survivin expression.
Cell-cycle fractionation of UCB CD34(+) with Hoechst-33342/pyronin-Y demonstrated
that survivin message was undetectable in freshly isolated G0 cells, but present 
in G1 cells. After cytokine stimulation, survivin mRNA and protein expression
were observed in both G0 and G1 CD34(+) cells as well as in cells that had
progressed to S and G2/M phase, indicating that survivin expression is regulated 
in all phases of the cell cycle. This contrasts with the expression of survivin
predominantly during G2/M in cancer cells. In CD34(+) cells and MO7e cells,
growth factor-mediated upregulation of survivin was associated with inhibition of
apoptosis, and downregulation of survivin was coincident with increased
apoptosis. Furthermore, an inverse correlation between survivin and active
caspase-3 was observed in CD34(+) cells. These findings demonstrate that survivin
is not a cancer-specific antiapoptotic protein and plays a regulatory role in
normal adult hematopoiesis.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.v98.7.2091 
PMID: 11567995  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

