
1. J Periodontol. 2001 Sep;72(9):1183-91.

Effect of different mouthrinses on morning breath.

van Steenberghe D(1), Avontroodt P, Peeters W, Pauwels M, Coucke W, Lijnen A,
Quirynen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Oral Pathology and Maxillo-Facial Surgery,
Faculty of Medicine, Catholic University of Leuven, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Morning breath odor is an often-encountered complaint. This
double-blind, crossover, randomized study aimed to examine the bad
breath-inhibiting effect of 3 commercially available mouthrinses on morning
halitosis during an experimental period of 12 days without mechanical plaque
control.
METHODS: Twelve medical students with a healthy periodontium refrained from all
means of mechanical plaque control during 3 experimental periods of 12 days (with
intervening washout periods of at least 3 weeks). A professional oral cleaning
preceded each period. During each experimental period, as the only oral hygiene
measure allowed, the students rinsed twice a day with one of the following
formulations in a randomized order: CHX-Alc (a 0.2% chlorhexidine [CHX]
solution); CHX-NaF (CHX 0.12% plus sodium fluoride 0.05%); or CHX-CPC-Zn (CHX
0.05% plus cetylpyridinium chloride 0.05% plus zinc lactate 0.14%). After 12
days, morning breath was scored via volatile sulfur compound (VSC) level
measurements of the mouth air and organoleptic ratings of the mouth air, the
expired air, and a scraping of the tongue coating. At the 12-day visit, a
questionnaire (subjective ratings) was completed and samples taken from both the 
tongue coating and the saliva for anaerobic and aerobic culturing and vitality
staining. The de novo supragingival plaque formation was also recorded. All
parameters were correlated with the baseline registrations.
RESULTS: Although oral hygiene during the 3 experimental periods was limited to
oral rinses, bad breath parameters systematically improved, with the exception of
a slight increase in VSC levels while using CHX-Alc, a finding which was
associated with the direct influence of the CHX on the sulfide monitor. The oral 
microbial load after the use of CHX-NaF remained unchanged, while for the CHX-Alc
and CHX-CPC-Zn, significant reductions in both aerobic and anaerobic colony
forming units (CFU)/ml were noticed in comparison with baseline data for both
tongue coating and saliva samples. The composition of microflora, on the other
hand, did not reveal significant changes. The supragingival plaque formation was 
inhibited, in descending order, by CHX-Alc, CHX-CPC-Zn, and CHX-NaF. The
subjective scores for the rinses indicated a higher appreciation for CHX-CPC-Alc 
and CHX-NaF because of a better taste and fewer side effects.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study demonstrate that morning halitosis can be 
successfully reduced via daily use of mouthrinses. CHX-Alc and CHX-CPC-Zn
mouthrinses result in a significant reduction of the microbial load of tongue and
saliva.

DOI: 10.1902/jop.2000.72.9.1183 
PMID: 11577950  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

