
1. Chem Biol. 2001 Oct;8(10):981-95.

Predicting and harnessing protein flexibility in the design of species-specific
inhibitors of thymidylate synthase.

Fritz TA(1), Tondi D, Finer-Moore JS, Costi MP, Stroud RM.

Author information: 
(1)Macromolecular Structure Group, Department of Biochemistry, University of
California San Francisco, 94143-0448, USA.

BACKGROUND: Protein plasticity in response to ligand binding abrogates the notion
of a rigid receptor site. Thus, computational docking alone misses important
prospective drug design leads. Bacterial-specific inhibitors of an essential
enzyme, thymidylate synthase (TS), were developed using a combination of
computer-based screening followed by in-parallel synthetic elaboration and enzyme
assay [Tondi et al. (1999) Chem. Biol. 6, 319-331]. Specificity was achieved
through protein plasticity and despite the very high sequence conservation of the
enzyme between species.
RESULTS: The most potent of the inhibitors synthesized, N,O-didansyl-L-tyrosine
(DDT), binds to Lactobacillus casei TS (LcTS) with 35-fold higher affinity and to
Escherichia coli TS (EcTS) with 24-fold higher affinity than to human TS (hTS).
To reveal the molecular basis for this specificity, we have determined the
crystal structure of EcTS complexed with DDT and 2'-deoxyuridine-5'-monophosphate
(dUMP). The 2.0 A structure shows that DDT binds to EcTS in a conformation not
predicted by molecular docking studies and substantially differently than other
TS inhibitors. Binding of DDT is accompanied by large rearrangements of the
protein both near and distal to the enzyme's active site with movement of C alpha
carbons up to 6 A relative to other ternary complexes. This protein plasticity
results in novel interactions with DDT including the formation of hydrogen bonds 
and van der Waals interactions to residues conserved in bacterial TS but not hTS 
and which are hypothesized to account for DDT's specificity. The conformation DDT
adopts when bound to EcTS explains the activity of several other LcTS inhibitors 
synthesized in-parallel with DDT suggesting that DDT binds to the two enzymes in 
similar orientations.
CONCLUSIONS: Dramatic protein rearrangements involving both main and side chain
atoms play an important role in the recognition of DDT by EcTS and highlight the 
importance of incorporating protein plasticity in drug design. The crystal
structure of the EcTS/dUMP/DDT complex is a model system to develop more
selective TS inhibitors aimed at pathogenic bacterial species. The crystal
structure also suggests a general formula for identifying regions of TS and other
enzymes that may be treated as flexible to aid in computational methods of drug
discovery.

DOI: 10.1016/s1074-5521(01)00067-9 
PMID: 11590022  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

