
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2001 Nov;67(11):5210-8.

Comparison of cellular and biomass specific activities of dominant
bacterioplankton groups in stratified waters of the Celtic Sea.

Zubkov MV(1), Fuchs BM, Burkill PH, Amann R.

Author information: 
(1)Plymouth Marine Laboratory, Plymouth PL1 3DH, United Kingdom. mvz@pml.ac.uk

A flow-sorting technique was developed to determine unperturbed metabolic
activities of phylogenetically characterized bacterioplankton groups with
incorporation rates of [(35)S]methionine tracer. According to fluorescence in
situ hybridization with rRNA targeted oligonucleotide probes, a clade of
alpha-proteobacteria, related to Roseobacter spp., and a Cytophaga-Flavobacterium
cluster dominated the different groups. Cytometric characterization revealed both
these groups to have high DNA (HNA) content, while the alpha-proteobacteria
exhibited high light scatter (hs) and the Cytophaga-Flavobacterium cluster
exhibited low light scatter (ls). A third abundant group with low DNA (LNA)
content contained cells from a SAR86 cluster of gamma-proteobacteria. Cellular
specific activities of the HNA-hs group were 4- and 1.7-fold higher than the
activities in the HNA-ls and LNA groups, respectively. However, the higher
cellular protein synthesis by the HNA-hs could simply be explained by their
maintenance of a larger cellular protein biomass. Similar biomass specific
activities of the different groups strongly support the main assumption that
underlies the determination of bacterial production: different bacteria in a
complex community incorporate amino acids at a rate proportional to their protein
synthesis. The fact that the highest growth-specific rates were determined for
the smallest cells of the LNA group can explain the dominance of this group in
nutrient-limited waters. The metabolic activities of the three groups accounted
for almost the total bacterioplankton activity, indicating their key
biogeochemical role in the planktonic ecosystem of the Celtic Sea.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.67.11.5210-5218.2001 
PMCID: PMC93292
PMID: 11679347  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

