
1. Dis Aquat Organ. 2001 Sep 12;46(2):129-37.

Phosphorylation-induced activation of tilapia nonspecific cytotoxic cells by
serum cytokines.

Ruiz J(1), Leary JH 3rd, Jaso-Friedmann L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Georgia, Athens 30602-7386, USA.

Cytokines as soluble mediators of immunity are important in understanding
immunological mechanisms against infectious organisms and during stress
conditions. In the present study, the role of protein tyrosine phosphorylation is
assessed in the activation of nonspecific cytotoxic cells (NCC) from tilapia
Oreochromis niloticus by cytokine-like serum factors. NCC are the teleost
equivalent of mammalian natural killer (NK) cells. In teleost fish, NCC are
important mediators of innate immunity against bacterial and parasite insult and 
tumor growth. We have previously shown that exposure of tilapia (a tropical fish)
to cold water temperatures (3 to 5 min at 5 to 10 degrees C) produces
physiological stress responses characterized by immediate phenotypic and
immunological changes. The serum obtained from stressed tilapia contains a
'stress activating serum factor' (SASF) which passively increases in vitro naive 
NCC cytotoxicity 2- to 4-fold over control levels. In an effort to identify the
mechanisms of activation of cytotoxicity by SASF, the phosphorylation status of
tyrosine residues in proteins from treated NCC was determined. NCC were incubated
with heat-inactivated or untreated stress serum and Western blots of the cell
lysates were probed with anti-phosphotyrosine monoclonal antibodies (mabs). The
levels of tyrosine phosphorylation in several proteins of the SASF-activated NCC 
were higher than in control cells. Increased tyrosine phosphorylation was also
induced by incubation of NCC in the presence of the tyrosine phosphatase
inhibitor Na orthovanadate (vanadate). In every case, an increase in
phosphorylation status shown by Western blotting was correlated with increases in
cytotoxic activity of NCC against HL-60 target cells. The enzyme inhibitor
Herbimycin A (HA) has been previously used to inhibit the activity of the
src-family of tyrosine kinases. In the present study, a 4 h pretreatment of NCC
with HA (2 microM), followed by treatment with SASF blocked the activation of
cytotoxicity produced by SASF. These results suggested that activation of NCC by 
cytokine-like factors is mediated through activation of the src family of protein
tyrosine kinases. Activation was associated with increased phosphorylation and
higher cytotoxic effector functions.

DOI: 10.3354/dao046129 
PMID: 11678228  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

