
1. Inorg Chem. 2001 Nov 5;40(23):5942-7.

Enzymatic activity of coenzyme B(12) derivatives with altered axial nucleotides: 
probing the mechanochemical triggering hypothesis in ribonucleotide reductase.

Brown KL(1), Zou X, Li J, Chen G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Ohio University, Athens, Ohio 45701,
USA. brownk3@ohiou.edu

Theoretical studies (J. Inorg. Biochem. 2001, 83, 121) of the involvement of the 
bulky 5,6-dimethylbenzimidazole (Dmbz) ligand of coenzyme B(12)
(5'-deoxyadenosylcobalamin, AdoCbl) in the mechanism of activation of the
carbon-cobalt bond of the coenzyme for homolytic cleavage by AdoCbl-dependent
enzymes (the "mechanochemical triggering" mechanisms) have shown that a purely
steric, ground-state mechanism can supply only a few kilocalories per mole (of
the observed 13-16 kcal mol(-1)) of activation, but that an electronic mechanism,
operating to stabilize the transition state, can explain all of the observed
catalytic effect. To address these mechanisms experimentally, analogues of AdoCbl
in which the Dmbz ligand is replaced by benzimidazole (Ado(Bzim)Cbl) or by
imidazole (Ado(Im)Cbl) have been prepared and characterized. Both of these
analogues support turnover in the AdoCbl-dependent ribonucleoside triphosphate
reductase (RTPR) from Lactobacillus leichmannii at 100% of the activity of AdoCbl
itself, but the Ado(Im)Cbl analogue has a significantly higher K(m).
5'-Deoxyadenosylcobinamide, the analogue in which the axial nucleotide has been
chemically removed, in contrast, is inactive in the spectrophotometric assay,
which indicates that it has at most 1% of the activity of AdoCbl. Stopped-flow
spectrophotometric measurements of the formation of cob(II)alamin at the enzyme
active site show that RTPR binds Ado(Bzim)Cbl slightly more weakly than it does
AdoCbl, but binds Ado(Im)Cbl 8-fold more weakly. While the equilibrium constant
for cob(II)alamin formation is nearly the same for Ado(Bzim)Cbl and AdoCbl, it is
5-fold smaller for Ado(Im)Cbl. Finally, the forward rate constant for
enzyme-induced Co-C bond homolysis was about the same for Ado(Bzim)Cbl and for
AdoCbl but was 17-fold smaller for Ado(Im)Cbl. These results are consistent with 
a small contribution from ground-state mechanochemical triggering, but they do
not in themselves rule out transition-state mechanical triggering.

DOI: 10.1021/ic010796i 
PMID: 11681909  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

