
1. Biomacromolecules. 2000 Winter;1(4):713-20.

Biodegradable poly(ethylene succinate) (PES). 2. Crystal morphology of
melt-crystallized ultrathin film and its change after enzymatic degradation.

Gan Z(1), Abe H, Doi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Polymer Chemistry Laboratory, RIKEN Institute, Hirosawa 2-1, Wako-shi, Saitama
351-0198, Japan.

Poly(ethylene succinate) (PES) ultrathin films with an initial thickness of
approximately 100 nm were prepared by the solution cast method on either cover
glass or freshly cleaved mica as the substrate. The ultrathin films were then
melt-crystallized at a given temperature for a certain period of time. The
surface morphologies of these films on the substrates were observed by an atomic 
force microscope (AFM) and an optical microscope (OM) under ambient conditions.
Two different crystal morphologies having fibril-like structure and flat-on
lamellar crystals with a certain width were formed, and their growth mechanisms
were discussed in association with previous kinetic data. It has been shown that 
at a higher crystallization temperature such as 85 degrees C (smaller degree of
undercooling) the crystal aggregates tend to form lozenge-shaped hedrites which
evolved from a single crystal. The enzymatic degradation of PES crystals on the
ultrathin films was carried out by using a PHB depolymerase from Pseudomonas
stutzeri at room temperature. The crystal morphologies before and after enzymatic
degradation were examined by AFM. The lamellar crystals were hydrolyzed into many
small fragments, and these fragments had the same thickness as that of the
lamellar crystals before enzymatic degradation. The analysis of morphological
results for PES lamellar crystals has revealed the existence of many defects on
the surface of melt-crystallized lamellar crystals. These defects were
preferentially attacked by the enzyme molecules. Hydrolysis starts from the
chains folding in crystal defect area and proceeds along the lateral edges, i.e.,
along the direction perpendicular to the folding chain.

DOI: 10.1021/bm000055t 
PMID: 11710202  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

