
1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 1;277(9):7477-82. Epub 2001 Dec 10.

Inhibition of S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase by acyclic sugar adenosine
analogue D-eritadenine. Crystal structure of S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase
complexed with D-eritadenine.

Huang Y(1), Komoto J, Takata Y, Powell DR, Gomi T, Ogawa H, Fujioka M, Takusagawa
F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Kansas, 1200 Sunnyside
Avenue, Lawrence, KS 66045-7534, USA.

D-eritadenine (DEA) is a potent inhibitor (IC(50) = 7 nm) of
S-adenosyl-l-homocysteine hydrolase (AdoHcyase). Unlike cyclic sugar Ado analogue
inhibitors, including mechanism-based inhibitors, DEA is an acyclic sugar Ado
analogue, and the C2' and C3' have opposite chirality to those of the cyclic
sugar Ado inhibitors. Crystal structures of DEA alone and in complex with
AdoHcyase have been determined to elucidate the DEA binding scheme to AdoHcyase. 
The DEA-complexed structure has been analyzed by comparing it with two structures
of AdoHcyase complexed with cyclic sugar Ado analogues. The DEA-complexed
structure has a closed conformation, and the DEA is located near the bound
NAD(+). However, a UV absorption measurement shows that DEA is not oxidized by
the bound NAD(+), indicating that the open-closed conformational change of
AdoHcyase is due to the substrate/inhibitor binding, not the oxidation state of
the bound NAD. The adenine ring of DEA is recognized by four essential hydrogen
bonds as observed in the cyclic sugar Ado complexes. The hydrogen bond network
around the acyclic sugar moiety indicates that DEA is more tightly connected to
the protein than the cyclic sugar Ado analogues. The C3'-H of DEA is pointed
toward C4 of the bound NAD(+) (C3'...C4 = 3.7 A), suggesting some interaction
between DEA and NAD(+). By placing DEA into the active site of the open
structure, the major forces to stabilize the closed conformation of AdoHcyase are
identified as the hydrogen bonds between the backbone of His-352 and the adenine 
ring, and the C3'-H...C4 interaction. DEA has been believed to be an inactivator 
of AdoHcyase, but this study indicates that DEA is a reversible inhibitor. On the
basis of the complexed structure, selective inhibitors of AdoHcyase have been
designed.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109187200 
PMID: 11741948  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

