
1. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2002 Jan;26(1):105-13.

Acid stimulation reduces bactericidal activity of surface liquid in cultured
human airway epithelial cells.

Nakayama K(1), Jia YX, Hirai H, Shinkawa M, Yamaya M, Sekizawa K, Sasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric and Respiratory Medicine, Tohoku University School of 
Medicine, Sendai, Japan.

To examine the effects of acid exposure with moderate acidity (pH 3.0-5.0) on
bactericidal activity of airway surface liquid (ASL), ASL was collected by
washing the surface of primary cultures of human tracheal epithelial cells 24 h
after treatment with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) adjusted to a pH of 3.0,
4.0, or 5.0. In all ASL, bactericidal activity was sensitive to sodium
concentration. Escherichia coli (500 colony forming units [CFU]) was incubated in
ASL, and the number of surviving bacteria was examined. The number of surviving
bacteria in ASL from cultured cells with acid exposure at pH 3.0-5.0 was
significantly higher than that in control ASL. The minimum inhibitory dilution
ratio of ASL against 500 CFU of E. coli was also examined by microdilution
assays. According to this assay, the bactericidal activity in ASL with acid
challenge at a pH of 3.0 was less than half of that in control ASL. Reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and Western blot analysis showed that the
production of mRNA and protein of human beta-defensin (HBD)-1 were significantly 
decreased by acid exposure at pH 3.0-5.0. In contrast, acid exposure did not
change the production of mRNA and protein of HBD-2 and beta-actin mRNA. These
results indicate that acid exposure, even with moderate acidity, may inhibit the 
production of bactericidal molecules, including HBD-1, in airway epithelial
cells. Acid exposure may reduce bactericidal activity of ASL in human airway
epithelial cells and may increase susceptibility of the airway to bacterial
infection.

DOI: 10.1165/ajrcmb.26.1.4425 
PMID: 11751210  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

