
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2002 Jan;119(1):23-32.

Cysteine proteinases from distinct cellular compartments are recruited to
phagocytic vesicles by Entamoeba histolytica.

Que X(1), Brinen LS, Perkins P, Herdman S, Hirata K, Torian BE, Rubin H, McKerrow
JH, Reed SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Diego, UCSD Medical
Center, 200 West Arbor Drive, San Diego, CA 92103-8416, USA.

Cysteine proteinases, which are encoded by at least seven genes, play a critical 
role in the pathogenesis of invasive amebiasis caused by Entamoeba histolytica.
The study of these enzymes has been hampered by the inability to obtain
significant quantities of the individual native proteinases. We have now
expressed functionally active recombinant ACP1 (EhCP3) and ACP2 (EhCP2)
proteinases in baculoviral expression vectors. The purified recombinant ACP1 and 
ACP2 proteinases exhibited similar activities for fluorogenic peptide substrates,
especially in their preference for an arginine residue at the P2 position.
Although ACP1 and ACP2 are structurally cathepsin L, homology modeling revealed
that the aspartic acid in the S2 pocket would result in a substrate specificity
for positively charged amino acids, like cathepsin B. The hydrolysis of peptide
substrates was strongly inhibited by small peptidyl inhibitors specifically
designed for parasitic cysteine proteinases. Confocal and immunoelectron
microscopy localization of the proteinases with monoclonal and monospecific
antibodies raised to the recombinant enzymes and peptides demonstrated that ACP2 
was membrane-associated while ACP1 was cytoplasmic. Following phagocytosis of
erythrocytes, ACP1, as well as the membrane-associated cysteine proteinase, ACP2,
were incorporated into phagocytic vesicles. These studies suggest that E.
histolytica has a redundancy of cysteine proteinases for intracellular digestion 
and that they may be recruited from different cellular compartments to the site
of digestion of phagocytosed cells. The production of active proteinases in
baculovirus and large scale recombinant enzymes in bacteria should further our
understanding of the role of different cysteine proteinase gene products in
virulence.

DOI: 10.1016/s0166-6851(01)00387-5 
PMID: 11755183  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

