
1. Acta Med Austriaca. 2001;28(5):141-4.

Early clamping of umbilical cord blood and foetal CD34 enrichment.

Pafumi C(1), Milone G, Maggi I, Russo A, Farina M, Pernicone G, Bandiera S,
Giardina P, Mangiafico L, Mancari R, Calogero AE, Cianci A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Catania, Italy. pafumi@mbox.unict.it

We describe the relation between clamping time and blood volume collected, and
two enrichment systems of CD34+ stem cells from umbilical cord blood, in order to
determine the criteria for an excellent recovery with high proliferative ability 
and bone marrow reconstitution. After an obstetrician-based cord blood
collection, the purification of stem cells was performed either with a
combination of monoclonal antibodies, negative selections, using the Stem Sep
method, or with a positive cells selection owing to their surface CD34 antigens, 
using the Mini Macs system. An excellent recovery of haematopoietic
progenitors--burst forming unit erythroid; colony-forming unit granulocyte and
macrophage; and colony-forming unit granulocyte, erythroid, monocyte, and
macrophage--inversely related to an increase in clamping time, was achieved using
the Mini Macs system (54% of colonies with a 90% purity), while the recovery of
haematopoietic progenitors was 35% (with a 80% purity) using the Stem Sep method.
By clamping umbilical cord blood at an early stage, we obtained a greater number 
of CD34+ cells, and their clonogenic activity increased with enrichment. This is 
particularly useful considering that the number of CD34+ stem cells contained in 
a unit of placental blood is sufficient for transplanting into a child but not
for an adult engraftment. Thus, using these methods, we obtain a larger number of
CD34+ stem cells. This increases the possibility of reducing graft versus host
disease in adult patients and produces survival rates similar to the ones we
observed in transplantation of bone marrow from unrelated donors.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1563-2571.2001.01034.x 
PMID: 11774776  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

