
1. Immunobiology. 2001 Dec;204(4):442-57.

The failure of oral tolerance induction is functionally coupled to the absence of
T cells in Peyer's patches under germfree conditions.

Maeda Y(1), Noda S, Tanaka K, Sawamura S, Aiba Y, Ishikawa H, Hasegawa H, Kawabe 
N, Miyasaka M, Koga Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Tokai University School of Medicine,
Isehara, Kanagawa, Japan.

Although intestinal bacterial flora has been thought to play a role in the
induction of oral tolerance, the mechanism has yet to be elucidated. We therefore
examined the bacterial flora-dependent acquisition of susceptibility to oral
tolerance induction using a gnotobiotic murine model. Germ-free (GF) mice
exhibited a significant shortage of T cells in the PPs in comparison to SPF mice.
A recovery in the number of such T cells was accomplished in the gnotobiotic mice
associated with Bifidobacterium infantis or Escherichia coli but not in the
gnotobiotic mice with Clostridium perfringens or Staphylococcus aureus. To
examine the susceptibility to oral tolerance induction, these mice were orally
given ovalbumin (OVA) as a tolerogen and then injected i.p. with the Ag. The
Ag-specific IgG1 in the serum remained at a low level in both SPF and those
gnotobiotic mice groups containing a sufficient number of T cells in the PPs.
However, no such unresponsiveness in the Ab response was observed in GF or the
other gnotobiotic mice groups containing only a few T cells in the tissues.
Adoptive cell transfer analysis clearly showed that a sufficient number of T
cells in the PPs is required for the induction of oral tolerance. Furthermore,
the reduced expression of SLC (secondary lymphoid-tissue chemokine), which is
responsible for T-cell migration to lymphoid organs, was observed in the PPs of
GF mice, resulting in a shortage of T cells in the tissues. However, the reduced 
expression of SLC was restored even in the GF mice after conventionalization,
thus suggesting that the failure of oral tolerance induction is functionally
coupled to the innate absence of T cells under the GF condition.

DOI: 10.1078/0171-2985-00054 
PMID: 11776399  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

