
1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 22;277(12):10452-8. Epub 2002 Jan 9.

Hepatocyte growth factor induces ERK-dependent paxillin phosphorylation and
regulates paxillin-focal adhesion kinase association.

Liu ZX(1), Yu CF, Nickel C, Thomas S, Cantley LG.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Nephrology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520, USA.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) modulates cell adhesion, migration, and branching 
morphogenesis in cultured epithelial cells, events that require regulation of
cell-matrix interactions. Using mIMCD-3 epithelial cells, we studied the effect
of HGF on the focal adhesion proteins, focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and paxillin
and their association. HGF was found to increase the tyrosine phosphorylation of 
paxillin and to a lesser degree FAK. In addition, HGF induced association of
paxillin and activated ERK, correlating with a gel retardation of paxillin that
was prevented with the ERK inhibitor U0126. The ability of activated ERK to
phosphorylate and induce gel retardation of paxillin was confirmed in vitro in
both full-length and amino-terminal paxillin. Several potential ERK
phosphorylation sites in paxillin flank the paxillin-FAK association domains, so 
the ability of HGF to regulate paxillin-FAK association was examined. HGF induced
an increase in paxillin-FAK association that was inhibited by pretreatment with
U0126 and reproduced by in vitro phosphorylation of paxillin with ERK. The
prevention of the FAK-paxillin association with U0126 correlated with an
inhibition of the HGF-mediated FAK tyrosine phosphorylation and inhibition of
HGF-dependent cell spreading and adhesion. An examination of cellular
localization of FAK and paxillin demonstrated that HGF caused a condensation of
focal adhesion complexes at the leading edges of cell processes and FAK-paxillin 
co-localization in these large complexes. Thus, these data suggest that HGF can
induce serine/threonine phosphorylation of paxillin most probably mediated
directly by ERK, resulting in the recruitment and activation of FAK and
subsequent enhancement of cell spreading and adhesion.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M107551200 
PMID: 11784715  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

