
1. Biodegradation. 2001;12(4):235-45.

Bioremediation of DDT in soil by genetically improved strains of soil fungus
Fusarium solani.

Mitra J(1), Mukherjee PK, Kale SP, Murthy NB.

Author information: 
(1)Nuclear Agriculture and Biotechnology Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre,
Mumbai, India.

Bioremediation of DDT in soil by genetically improved recombinants of the soil
fungus Fusarium solani was studied. The parent strains were isolated from soil
enriched with DDD or DDE (immediate anaerobic and aerobic degradation products of
DDT), as further degradation of these products are slow processes compared to the
parent compound. These naturally occurring strains isolated from soil, however,
are poor degraders of DDT and differed in their capability to degrade its
metabolites such as DDD, DDE, DDOH and DBP and other organochlorine pesticides
viz. kelthane and lindane. Synergistic effect was shown by some of these strains,
when grown together in the medium containing DDD and kelthane under mixed culture
condition. No synergism in DDE degradation was observed with the strains isolated
from enriched soil. DDD-induced proteins extracted from individual culture
filtrate (exo-enzyme) when subjected to SDS-Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis
(SDS-PAGE) showed complementary polypeptide bands in these strains i.e., each
strain produced distinct DDD degrading polypeptide bands and the recombinant or
hybrid strains produced all of the bands of the two parents and degraded DDD
better than the parental strains. Recombinant hybrid strains with improved
dehalogenase activity were raised by parasexual hybridisation of two such
complementary isolates viz. isolate 1(P-1) and 4(P-2) showing highest
complementation and are compatible for hyphal fusion inducing heterokaryosis.
These strains are genetically characterised as Kel+Ben(R)DBP-Lin- and
Kel-Ben(r)DBP+Lin+ respectively. Recombinants with mixed genotype, i.e.,
Kel+Ben(R)DBP+Lin+ showing superior degradation quality for DDT were selected for
bioremediation study. Recombination was confirmed by polypeptide band analysis of
DDD induced exo-proteins from culture filtrate using SDS-Polyacrylamide Gel
Electrophoresis (PAGE) and RAPD (Random Amplified Polymorphic DNA) of genomic DNA
using PCR (Polymerase Chain Reaction) technique. SDS-PAGE showed combination of
DDD induced polypeptide bands characteristic of both the parents in the
recombinants or the hybrids. PCR study showed the parent specific bands in the
recombinant strains confirming gene transformation.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1013117406216 
PMID: 11826906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

