
1. Scand J Immunol. 2002 Jan;55(1):88-95.

Megakaryothrombopoiesis during ex vivo expansion of human cord blood CD34+ cells 
using thrombopoietin.

Woo SY(1), Kie JH, Ryu KH, Moon HS, Chung WS, Hwang DH, Kim SK, Han TH, Hahn MJ, 
Chong YH, Park HK, Seoh JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Medical Research Center, College of Medicine, Ewha
Womans University, Yangchon-Gu, Seoul 158-710, Korea.

Thrombopoietin (TPO) is one of the most promising stimulants for ex vivo
expansion of haematopoietic stem cells. Previously, we have found that TPO
induces a characteristic pattern of apoptosis during ex vivo expansion of human
cord blood (CB) CD34+ cells and that the TPO-induced apoptotic cells belong to
megakaryocyte (MK) lineage. In this study, we have examined the maturation of MK 
and platelet production in association with the TPO-induced apoptosis. CD34+
cells, purified from human CB, were expanded in serum-free conditions stimulated 
with TPO. Apoptosis was confirmed by terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase-mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate-biotin nick end labelling (TUNEL) 
assay and electron microscopy (EM). Simultaneous measurement of DNA content and
immunophenotyping revealed that the cells with higher DNA content (>8 N)
constituted less than 5% of the CD41+ fractions until day 14, implying premature 
apoptosis of MKs before full polyploidization. Nevertheless, EM observation
showed not only platelet territories but also newly produced platelets in which
granules and microfilaments could be identified. Furthermore, flow cytometry
demonstrated that the platelet fraction expressed P-selectin and an activation
motif on GPIIb/IIIa recognized by monoclonal antibody PAC-1 upon stimulation with
adenosine diphosphate (ADP). In addition, periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive
materials and nonspecific esterase activities could be demonstrated. Therefore,
it is suggested that platelet production and the accompanying processes, rather
than apoptosis only, be hastened during the ex vivo expansion of CB CD34+ cells
when using TPO.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-3083.2002.01031.x 
PMID: 11841696  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

