
1. J Clin Periodontol. 2002 Jan;29(1):62-72.

Effect of the enamel matrix derivative Emdogain on the growth of periodontal
pathogens in vitro.

Spahr A(1), Lyngstadaas SP, Boeckh C, Andersson C, Podbielski A, Haller B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Conservative Dentistry, Periodontology and Pedodontics,
University Hospital of Ulm, Germany. axel.spahr@medizin.uni-ulm.de

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of Emdogain (EMD),
used for periodontal regeneration, on the growth of periodontal pathogens like
Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans, Porphyromonas gingivalis and Prevotella
intermedia. For comparison, we studied the effect of EMD on several microbes
associated with other oral diseases as well as its effect on non-pathogenic oral 
inhabitants.
METHODS: Freshly prepared EMD or its vehicle propylene glycol alginate (PGA)
alone were added to calibrated suspensions of microbes. As a control, imitating
the post-surgical subgingival situation after flap closure, a serum/NaCl-solution
mixture was used. Aliquots for growth assays were taken at scheduled times for
calculation of colony-forming units and cell densities over an observation period
of 24 h. Additionally, EMD was spotted onto selected, newly seeded microbes
growing on agar plates to see if growth inhibition zones could be produced.
RESULTS: The study revealed a marked inhibitory effect of EMD on the growth of
the gram-negative periodontal pathogens. A. actinomycetemcomitans showed a
significant decrease (p=0.012) in viable counts after 24 h when EMD was added at 
baseline. P. gingivalis and P. intermedia also showed a marked growth reduction
in the presence of EMD and in these cultures no viable microbes could be detected
anymore after 24 h. In contrast, no significant growth inhibition was observed in
gram-positive bacteria.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that EMD has a positive effect on the
composition of bacterial species in the post-surgical periodontal wound, by
selectively restricting growth of periopathogens that could hamper the wound
healing and reduce the outcome of regenerative procedures.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1600-051x.2002.290110.x 
PMID: 11846851  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

