
1. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Feb 15;11(4):439-44.

Breaks at telomeres and TRF2-independent end fusions in Fanconi anemia.

Callén E(1), Samper E, Ramírez MJ, Creus A, Marcos R, Ortega JJ, Olivé T, Badell 
I, Blasco MA, Surrallés J.

Author information: 
(1)Group of Mutagenesis, Department of Genetics and Microbiology, Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193 Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare genetic disease characterized by chromosome
instability, progressive pancytopenia and cancer susceptibility. Telomeres are
intimately related to chromosome stability and play an important role in
organismal viability at the hematological level. Since previous works suggested
an accelerated shortening of telomeres in FA, we have studied several markers of 
telomere integrity and function in FA patients and age-matched controls to get
insights into the mechanisms and consequences of telomere erosion in FA. A higher
frequency of extra-chromosomic TTAGGG signals and of chromosome ends with
undetectable TTAGGG repeats was observed in FA cells by fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH), suggesting intensive breakage at telomeric sequences. This 
was proven by measuring the frequency of excess of telomeric signals per cell,
which was 2.8-fold higher in FA. Consistent with previous reports, quantitative
FISH analysis showed an accelerated telomere shortening of 0.68 kb in FA, which
occurred concurrently in both chromosome arms in a similar magnitude. Our data
therefore suggest that the telomere erosion in FA is caused by a higher rate of
breakage at TTAGGG sequences in vivo in differentiated cells, in addition to mere
replicative shortening during lymphocyte proliferation. Consistent with impaired 
telomeres in FA patients, we observed a >10-fold increase in chromosome end
fusions in FA compared to normal controls. This observation was independent of
TRF2, a telomere binding factor that protects human telomeres from end fusions,
since immunohistochemistry studies in FA cell lines and corrected counterparts by
retrovirus-mediated transfer of FANCA and FANCD2 cDNA showed that a functional FA
pathway is not required for telomere binding of TRF2.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/11.4.439 
PMID: 11854176  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

