
1. J Immunol. 2002 Mar 15;168(6):2683-8.

Recognition of nonclassical HLA class I antigens by gamma delta T cells during
pregnancy.

Barakonyi A(1), Kovacs KT, Miko E, Szereday L, Varga P, Szekeres-Bartho J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Pecs University, Medical
School, Pecs, Hungary.

The healthy trophoblast does not express classical HLA-A and HLA-B products;
therefore, an MHC-restricted recognition of trophoblast-presented Ags is
unlikely. In the decidua and also in peripheral blood of healthy pregnant women, 
gammadelta T cells significantly increase in number. We investigated the possible
role of gammadelta T cells in recognition of trophoblast-presented Ags. PBL and
isolated gammadelta T cells from healthy pregnant women as well as from those at 
risk for premature pregnancy termination were conjugated to choriocarcinoma cells
(JAR) transfected with nonclassical HLA Ags (HLA-E, HLA-G). To investigate the
involvement of killer-inhibitory/killer-activatory receptors in trophoblast
recognition, we tested the effect of CD94 block on cytotoxic activity of
Vdelta2(+) enriched gammadelta T cells to HLA-E- and/or HLA-G-transfected
targets. Lymphocytes from healthy pregnant women preferentially recognized HLA(-)
choriocarcinoma cells, whereas those from pathologically pregnant patients did
not discriminate between HLA(+) and HLA(-) cells. Normal pregnancy Vdelta2(+) T
cells conjugated at a significantly increased rate to HLA-E transfectants,
whereas Vdelta2(+) lymphocytes from pathologically pregnant women did not show a 
difference between those and HLA(-) cells. Blocking of the CD94 molecule of
Vdelta2(+) lymphocytes from healthy pregnant women resulted in an increased
cytotoxic activity to HLA-E-transfected target cells. These data indicate that
Vdelta2(+) lymphocytes of healthy pregnant women recognize HLA-E on the
trophoblast, whereas Vdelta1 cells react with other than HLA Ags. In contrast to 
Vdelta2(+) lymphocytes from healthy pregnant women, those from women with
pathological pregnancies do not recognize HLA-E via their killer-inhibitory
receptors and this might account for their high cytotoxic activity.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.168.6.2683 
PMID: 11884433  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

