
1. Mol Biol Rep. 2001;28(2):63-72.

Functional analysis of a chromosomal arsenic resistance operon in Pseudomonas
fluorescens strain MSP3.

Prithivirajsingh S(1), Mishra SK, Mahadevan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, University of Texas-MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston 77030, USA. pssingh@mdanderson.org

We reported earlier about the detection of a chromosomally located arsenic operon
(arsRBC) in a gram-negative bacterium Pseudomonas fluorescens strain MSP3, which 
showed resistance to elevated levels of sodium arsenate and sodium arsenite. The 
genes for arsenic resistance were cloned into the HindIII site of pBluescript
vector producing three clones MSA1, MSA2 and MSI3 conferring resistance to sodium
arsenate and arsenite salts. They were further sub-cloned to delineate the insert
size and the sub-clones were designated as MSA11, MSA12 and MSI13. The sub-clone 
pMSA12 (2.6 kb) fragment was further packaged into EcoRI-PstI site of M13mp19 and
sequenced. Nucleotide sequencing revealed the presence of three open reading
frames homologous to the arsR, arsB and arsC genes of arsenic resistance. Three
cistrons of the ars operon encoded polypeptides ArsR, ArsB and ArsC with
molecular weights ranging approximately 12, 37and 24 kDa, respectively. These
polypeptides were visualized on SDS-PAGE stained with Coomassie blue and measured
in a densitometer. The arsenic resistance operon (arsRBC) of strain MSP3 plasmid 
pMSA12 consists of 3 genes namely, arsR--encoding a repressor regulatory protein,
arsB--the determinant of the membrane efflux protein that confers resistance by
pumping arsenic from the cells and arsC--a small cytoplasmic polypeptide required
for arsenate resistance only, not for arsenite resistance. ArsB protein is
believed to use the cell membrane potential to drive the efflux of intracellular 
arsenite ions. ArsC encodes for the enzyme arsenate reductase which reduces
intracellular As(V) (arsenate) to more toxic As(III) (arsenite) and is
subsequently extruded from the cell. The arsenate reductase activity was present 
in the soluble cytoplasmic fraction in E. coli clones. In the context of
specified function of the arsenic operon encoded proteins, uptake and efflux
mechanisms were studied in the wild strain and the arsenate/arsenite clones. The 
cell free filtrates of the arsenate clones (MSA11 and MSA12) obtained from P.
fluorescens containing the arsC gene showed that arsenate reduction requires
glutathione reductase, glutathione (GSH), glutaredoxin and ArsC protein. The
protein was purified in an active form and a spectrophotometric assay was
developed in which the oxidation of NADPH was coupled to reduction of arsenate.
The molecular weights and the location of the polypeptides were obtained from
Coomassie stained SDS-PAGE of extracellular and intracellular fractions of the
cells.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1017950207981 
PMID: 11931390  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

