
1. Przegl Epidemiol. 2001;55 Suppl 3:117-25.

[Tuberculosis and mycobacteriosis important opportunistic disease in AIDS
patients].

[Article in Polish]

Zalewska-Schönthaler N(1), Schönthaler-Humiecka J, Podlasin R, Cholewińska G,
Rzeszkowicz T, Mikuła T, Horban A.

Author information: 
(1)Wojewódzki Szpital Zakaźny w Warszawie.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the search was investigation of tuberculosis in AIDS
patients. Each year 8-9 mln people fall ill of tuberculosis and one third of them
die. To the infection of tuberculosis and fast development into active state are 
especially exposed people with AIDS.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: 696 people were examined on tuberculosis most of which were
AIDS patients hospitalized and cured in Hospital of Infection Diseases and Prison
Hospital. 159 patients were women and 537 were men. The average age was between
25 and 45 (70%). The investigated population was characterized according to age, 
social and living conditions, using drugs and former contact with tuberculosis.
All patients suspected of tuberculosis had chest X-rayed, sputum, BAL and pleural
liquor were taken to bacteriological examination when extrapulmonary tuberculosis
was suspected. The material was taken adequately to the disease process: CSF,
urine, lymph nodes, peritoneal fluids, blood, stool, swabs and other.
Bacteriological investigations have been carried out by fast cultivating method
since 1998 and rapid genetic method since 1999. Apart from modern, fast
diagnostic methods, routine bacteriological procedures were applied in
tuberculosis diagnosis.
RESULTS: More than 30% of the examined population were from bad social-living
conditions, 78% had risk factors, 65% were drug users. The analysis of the
tuberculosis illness from 1997 to July 2001 shows growing tendency. Nowadays it
is 20% cases proved by bacteriological diagnosis. The structure of falling ill
with tuberculosis has changed. Considerable increase of extrapulmonary
tuberculosis was observed, 20 patients died due to tuberculosis and 8 patients
due to mycobacteriosis. Resistance of M.tub.complex occurred within the range of 
10% cases.


PMID: 11984937  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

