
1. Mol Biol Cell. 2002 May;13(5):1522-35.

Coordinated traffic of Grb2 and Ras during epidermal growth factor receptor
endocytosis visualized in living cells.

Jiang X(1), Sorkin A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
Denver 80111, USA.

Activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) triggers multiple
signaling pathways and rapid endocytosis of the epidermal growth factor
(EGF)-receptor complexes. To directly visualize the compartmentalization of
molecules involved in the major signaling cascade, activation of Ras GTPase, we
constructed fusions of Grb2, Shc, H-Ras, and K-Ras with enhanced cyan fluorescent
protein (CFP) or yellow fluorescent protein (YFP), and used live-cell
fluorescence imaging microscopy combined with the fluorescence resonance energy
transfer (FRET) technique. Stimulation of cells by EGF resulted in the
accumulation of large pools of Grb2-CFP and YFP-Shc in endosomes, where these two
adaptor proteins formed a complex with EGFR. H-Ras and K-Ras fusion proteins were
found at the plasma membrane, particularly in ruffles and lamellipodia, and also 
in endosomes independently of GTP/GDP loading and EGF stimulation. The relative
amount of endosomal H-Ras was higher than that of K-Ras, whereas K-Ras
predominated at the plasma membrane. On application of EGF, Grb2, and Ras
converge in the same endosomes through the fusion of endosomes containing either 
Grb2 or Ras or through the joint internalization of two proteins from the plasma 
membrane. To examine the localization of the GTP-bound form of Ras, we used a
FRET assay that exploits the specific interaction of GTP-bound CFP-Ras with the
YFP-fused Ras binding domain of c-Raf. FRET microscopy revealed that GTP-bound
Ras is located at the plasma membrane, mainly in ruffles and at the cell edges,
as well as in endosomes containing EGFR. These data point to the potential for
endosomes to serve as sites of generation for persistent signaling through Ras.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.01-11-0552 
PMCID: PMC111124
PMID: 12006650  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

