
1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002 May 15;165(10):1445-50.

Differential role of interleukin-6 in lung inflammation induced by lipoteichoic
acid and peptidoglycan from Staphylococcus aureus.

Leemans JC(1), Vervoordeldonk MJ, Florquin S, van Kessel KP, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Internal Medicine, Division of Clinical Immunology 
and Rheumatology, Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam.

Lipoteichoic acids (LTA) and peptidoglycans (PepG) are major components of the
cell walls of gram-positive bacteria that trigger inflammatory responses in
vitro. To study the in vivo effects of LTA and PepG from Staphylococcus aureus in
lungs and to determine the role of interleukin (IL)-6 herein, these compounds
were intranasally administered to IL-6 gene deficient (IL-6(-/-)) and wild type
(IL-6(+/+)) mice. In IL-6(+/+) mice, LTA and PepG induced acute pulmonary
inflammation in a dose-dependent way, characterized by neutrophilic influx and
IL-6 production in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. Endogenously produced IL-6
attenuated inflammation induced by 10 microg LTA, as reflected by enhanced
neutrophil influx, and increased tumor necrosis factor-alpha, macrophage
inflammatory protein-1-alpha, and cytokine-induced neutrophil chemoattractant
(KC) release into bronchoalveolar lavage fluid of IL-6(-/-) mice, compared with
IL-6(+/+) mice. By contrast, pulmonary inflammation induced by 100 microg LTA was
similar (neutrophil influx) or even tended to be attenuated (cytokine and
chemokine release) in IL-6(-/-) mice. Endogenous IL-6 increased inflammation
induced by PepG, as reflected by decreased neutrophil influx into lungs of
IL-6(-/-) mice, compared with IL-6(+/+) mice. These data suggest that IL-6 plays 
an anti-inflammatory role during LTA-induced pulmonary inflammation, which is
dependent on the severity of the inflammatory challenge, and a proinflammatory
role in peptidoglycan-induced acute lung inflammation. Thus, the contribution of 
IL-6 to lung inflammation may vary with the stimulus used.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.2106045 
PMID: 12016110  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

