
1. Infect Immun. 2002 Jul;70(7):3611-20.

Expression of the Plasmodium falciparum immunodominant epitope (NANP)(4) on the
surface of Salmonella enterica using the autotransporter MisL.

Ruiz-Pérez F(1), León-Kempis R, Santiago-Machuca A, Ortega-Pierres G, Barry E,
Levine M, González-Bonilla C.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Investigación Médica en Inmunología e Infectología, Hospital de
Infectología Dr. Daniel Méndez Hernández, Centro Médico La Raza, Instituto
Mexicano del Seguro Social, Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Gram-negative bacterial proteins which are exported from the cytosol to the
external environment by the type V secretion system are also known as
autotransporters. Once translocated to the periplasmic compartment by the
sec-dependent general secretory pathway, their C-terminal domain forms a pore
through which the N-terminal domain travels to the outer membrane without the
need of other accessory proteins. MisL (protein of membrane insertion and
secretion) is a protein of unknown function located in the pathogenicity island
SPI-3 of Salmonella enterica and classified as an autotransporter due to its high
homology to Escherichia coli AIDA-I. In the present work, the MisL C-terminal
translocator domain was used to display the immunodominant B-cell epitope of the 
circumsporozoite protein (CSP) from Plasmodium falciparum on the surface of
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (serovar Typhimurium SL3261) and serovar 
Typhi (serovar Typhi CVD 908). The MisL beta domain was predicted by alignment
with AIDA-I, amplified from serovar Typhimurium SL3261, cloned in a plasmid fused
to four repeats of the tetrapeptide NANP behind the Escherichia coli heat-labile 
enterotoxin B subunit signal peptide to ensure periplasmic traffic, and expressed
under the control of the anaerobically inducible nirB promoter. The fusion
protein was translocated to the outer membrane of both bacterial strains,
although the foreign epitope was displayed more efficiently in serovar
Typhimurium SL3261, which elicited a better specific antibody response in BALB/c 
mice. More importantly, antibodies were able to recognize the native CSP in P.
falciparum sporozoites. These results confirm that MisL is indeed an
autotransporter and that it can be used to express foreign immunogenic epitopes
on the surface of gram-negative bacteria.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.70.7.3611-3620.2002 
PMCID: PMC128084
PMID: 12065502  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

