
1. Mol Med. 2002 Feb;8(2):95-102.

Nonredundant antioxidant defense by multiple two-cysteine peroxiredoxins in human
prostate cancer cells.

Shen C(1), Nathan C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Weill Medical College, Cornell
University, New York, New York 10021, USA. cnathan@med.cornell.edu

BACKGROUND: Peroxiredoxins (Prxs) are antioxidant enzymes expressed by most
free-living organisms, often in multiple isoforms. Because mammalian Prxs have
not been experimentally deleted or inhibited, it is not known how much they
contribute to antioxidant defense, nor whether the multiple isoforms afford
redundant or additive protection.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Expression of the four members of the 2-Cys family of
human Prxs was tested in human tumor cell lines. Monospecific antibodies were
developed and used to monitor the extent and specificity of inhibition of
expression of each isoform in prostate cancer cells stably transfected with
antisense constructs.
RESULTS: Seventeen tumor lines transcribed genes for all four human Prxs.
Prostate cancer cells coexpressed each isoform at the protein level. Stable
transfection with antisense allowed partial, selective suppression of Prx 1, 2,
3, or 4. Prostate cancer cells were rendered more sensitive to hydrogen peroxide 
or an organic hydroperoxide when Prx 1, 2, or 3 but not 4 was partially
suppressed, bringing them into the range of sensitivity of mouse cells. The
effect of partially suppressing a single Prx was comparable to that of depleting 
glutathione. In contrast, sensitization to adriamycin, an antitumor agent with a 
redox-active quinone, followed the partial suppression of Prxs 1, 2, or 4 but not
3. Individual suppression of Prxs 1-4 had no effect on sensitivity of the cells
to reactive nitrogen intermediates, tumor necrosis factor (TNF), paclitaxel
(Taxol), or etoposide.
CONCLUSIONS: The 2-Cys Prxs act in a mutually nonredundant and sometimes
stress-specific fashion to protect human cells from oxidant injury. The
substantial resistance of human cells to hydroperoxides may result in part from
the additive action of multiple Prxs.


PMCID: PMC2039972
PMID: 12080185  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

