
1. Cell Microbiol. 2002 Jul;4(7):447-60.

Identification of MEK- and phosphoinositide 3-kinase-dependent signalling as
essential events during Chlamydia pneumoniae invasion of HEp2 cells.

Coombes BK(1), Mahony JB.

Author information: 
(1)Father Sean O'Sullivan Research Centre, St. Joseph's Hospital, Hamilton,
Ontario, Canada.

The ability of Chlamydia pneumoniae to survive and cause disease is predicated on
efficient invasion of cellular hosts. While it is recognized that chlamydial
determinants are important for mediating attachment and uptake into
non-phagocytic cells, little is known about the bacterial ligands and cellular
receptors that facilitate invasion or host cell signal transduction pathways
implicated in this process. We used transmission and scanning electron microscopy
to demonstrate that attachment of bacteria to host cells induced the appearance
of microvilli on host cell membranes. Invasion occurred 30-120 min after cell
contact with the subsequent loss of membrane microvilli. Using an epithelial cell
infection model, C. pneumoniae invasion caused a rapid and sustained increase in 
MEK-dependent phosphorylation and activation of ERK1/2, followed by PI
3-kinase-dependent phosphorylation and activation of Akt. Tyrosine
phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) preceded its appearance in a
complex with the p85 subunit of PI 3-kinase during chlamydial invasion and
isoform-specific tyrosine phosphorylation of the docking protein Shc also
occurred at the time of attachment and entry of bacteria. Chlamydia entry but not
attachment could be abrogated with specific inhibitors of MEK, PI 3-kinase and
actin polymerization, demonstrating the importance of these signalling pathways
and an intact actin cytoskeleton for C. pneumoniae invasion. These results
suggest that activation of specific cell signalling pathways is an essential
strategy used by C. pneumoniae to invade epithelial cells.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1462-5822.2002.00203.x 
PMID: 12102690  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

