
1. Arthritis Res. 2002;4 Suppl 3:S141-52. Epub 2002 May 9.

Multiple roles for tumor necrosis factor-alpha and lymphotoxin alpha/beta in
immunity and autoimmunity.

McDevitt H(1), Munson S, Ettinger R, Wu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University Medical Center,
California 94305, USA. hughmcd@stanford.edu

Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha and lymphotoxin (LT) alpha/beta play multiple
roles in the development and function of the immune system. This article focuses 
on three important aspects of the effects of these cytokines on the immune
response and on autoimmunity. In several experimental systems (Jurkat T cells,
murine T-cell hybridomas), TNF-alpha appears to cause a downregulation of
signaling through the TCR, revealed by changes in calcium flux, activation of
p21, p23 and ZAP70, and a decrease in nuclear activation of NF-kappaB. Previous
and present results suggest that TNF-alpha interferes in some manner with
signaling through the TCR, at a locus yet to be delineated. Transgenic expression
of LTbetaR-Fc in nonobese diabetic (NOD) transgenic mice results in prevention of
type 1 diabetes in NOD mice as long as the level of expression of the fusion
protein (under the control of the cytomegalovirus promoter) remains above a level
of 2-3 microg/ml. Once the expression levels of the fusion protein have dropped
below this critical level, the diabetic process resumes and the animals become
diabetic at 40-50 weeks of age, whereas nontransgenic littermates develop
diabetes by 25-30 weeks of age. The paradoxical effects of neonatal TNF-alpha
administration in NOD mice in increasing incidence of and hastening onset of type
1 diabetes, while neonatal anti-TNF administration completely prevents all signs 
of islet cell autoimmunity, are due partly to the low levels of CD4+CD25+ T cells
in NOD mice. These low levels are reduced by a further 50% on neonatal
administration of nontoxic levels of TNF-alpha. In contrast, neonatal
administration of anti-TNF-alpha results in a dramatic increase in the levels of 
CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells, to levels beyond those seen in wild-type untreated 
NOD mice. TNF-alpha and LTalpha/beta thus have pleomorphic regulatory effects on 
the development and expression of autoimmunity.

DOI: 10.1186/ar570 
PMCID: PMC3240146
PMID: 12110133  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

