
1. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2002 Jul 20;79(2):170-9.

The measurement of Bacillus mycoides spore adhesion using atomic force
microscopy, simple counting methods, and a spinning disk technique.

Bowen WR(1), Fenton AS, Lovitt RW, Wright CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Complex Fluids Processing, Department of Chemical and Biological
Process Engineering, University of Wales Swansea, Singleton Park, Swansea SA2
8PP, UK. r.bowen@swansea.ac.uk

An atomic force microscope has been used to study the adhesion of Bacillus
mycoides spores to a hydrophilic glass surface and a hydrophobic-coated glass
surface. AFM images of spores attached to the hydrophobic-coated mica surface
allowed the measurement of spore dimensions in an aqueous environment without
desiccation. The spore exosporium was observed to be flexible and to promote the 
adhesion of the spore by increasing the area of spore contact with the surface.
Results from counting procedures using light microscopy matched the density of
spores observed on the hydrophobic-coated glass surface with AFM. However, no
spores were observed on the hydrophilic glass surface with AFM, a consequence of 
the weaker adhesion of the spores at this surface. AFM was also used to quantify 
directly the interactions of B. mycoides spores at the two surfaces in an aqueous
environment. The measurements used "spore probes" constructed by immobilizing a
single spore at the apex of a tipless AFM cantilever. The data showed that
stretching and sequential bond breaking occurred as the spores were retracted
from the hydrophilic glass surface. The greatest spore adhesion was measured at
the hydrophobic-coated glass surface. An attractive force on the spores was
measured as the spores approached the hydrophobic-coated surface. At the
hydrophilic glass surface, only repulsive forces were measured during the
approach of the spores. The AFM force measurements were in qualitative agreement 
with the results of a hydrodynamic shear adhesion assay that used a spinning disk
technique. Quantitatively, AFM measurements of adhesive force were up to 4 x
10(3) times larger than the estimates made using the spinning disk data. This is 
a consequence of the different types of forces applied to the spore in the
different adhesion assays. AFM has provided some unique insights into the
interactions of spores with surfaces. No other instrument can make such direct
measurements for single microbiological cells.

Copyright 2002 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bit.10321 
PMID: 12115433  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

