
1. J Med Entomol. 2002 Jul;39(4):568-73.

Stable chromosomal inversion polymorphisms and insecticide resistance in the
malaria vector mosquito Anopheles gambiae (Diptera: Culicidae).

Brooke BD(1), Hunt RH, Chandre F, Carnevale P, Coetzee M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, School of
Pathology of the National Health Laboratory Service and the University of
Witwatersrand, Johnnesburg, South Africa. basilb@mail.saimr.wits.ac.za

Anopheles gambiae Giles has been implicated as a major vector of malaria in
Africa. A number of paracentric chromosomal inversions have been observed as
polymorphisms in wild and laboratory populations of this species. These
polymorphisms have been used to demonstrate the existence of five reproductive
units in West African populations that are currently described as incipient
species. They have also been correlated with various behavioral characteristics
such as adaptation to aridity and feeding preference and have been associated
with insecticide resistance. Two paracentric inversions namely 2La and 2Rb are
highly ubiquitous in the wild and laboratory populations sampled. Both inversions
are easily conserved during laboratory colonization of wild material and one
shows significant positive heterosis with respect to Hardy-Weinberg proportions. 
Inversion 2La has previously been associated with dieldrin resistance and
inversion 2Rb shows an association with DDT resistance based on this study. The
stability and maintenance of these inversions as polymorphisms provides an
explanation for the transmission and continued presence of DDT and dieldrin
resistance in a laboratory strain of An. gambiae in the absence of insecticide
selection pressure. This effect may also be operational in wild populations.
Stable inversion polymorphism also provides a possible mechanism for the
continual inheritance of suitable genetic factors that otherwise compromise the
fitness of genetically modified malaria vector mosquitoes.

DOI: 10.1603/0022-2585-39.4.568 
PMID: 12144286  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

