
1. Transplantation. 2002 Jul 27;74(2):268-77.

Identification of the nonclassical HLA molecules, mica, as targets for humoral
immunity associated with irreversible rejection of kidney allografts.

Sumitran-Holgersson S(1), Wilczek HE, Holgersson J, Söderström K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology, Transplantation Surgery, and Microbiology and
Tumor Biology Center, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge University Hospital AB,
Stockholm, Sweden. suchitra.holgersson@impi.ki.se.

BACKGROUND: A substantial portion of kidney allografted patients experience early
acute rejection episodes and even irreversible rejections in the early
posttransplantation period. The presence of HLA alloantibodies before grafting is
associated with early immunological complications, but in many patients
rejections and graft loss occur even in the absence of such antibodies.
METHODS: In this study, 748 serum samples taken before and at various time points
after kidney transplantation from 139 patients were investigated for the
presence, frequency, and specificity of kidney microvascular endothelial cell
(KMEC)-reactive antibodies using major histocompatability class (MHC) I-related
chain A (MICA) transfected cells and flow cytometry, antibody blocking
experiments, and Western blotting. The ability of MICA-specific antibodies to fix
complement and to induce a prothrombotic phenotype in KMECs was investigated.
RESULTS: A polymorphic, 62 kDa nonclassical HLA class I molecule is identified as
a new target molecule for reactivity in sera from patients with irreversible
rejections. Specific blocking and transfection experiments verified the target
molecule as MICA. A significant correlation was established for pre- or
posttransplantation MICA humoral immunity and graft loss (P<0.001). MICA-specific
antibody titers increased in the posttransplantation period and were present
before any signs of clinical rejection. MICA antibody-containing patient sera
induced a prothrombotic phenotype in KMECs.
CONCLUSION: The increasing polymorphism detected at the MIC loci combined with
the results of this study suggest that typing for the MIC loci and crossmatching 
for the detection of anti-MIC antibodies before transplantation should be used
routinely. A better recipient-donor selection based on a negative crossmatch for 
both anti-donor HLA and MICA antibodies will decrease early graft rejections and 
losses.

DOI: 10.1097/00007890-200207270-00019 
PMID: 12151741  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

