
1. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2002 Aug;17(8):897-907.

Downregulation of the proteasome subunits, transporter, and antigen presentation 
in hepatocellular carcinoma, and their restoration by interferon-gamma.

Matsui M(1), Machida S, Itani-Yohda T, Akatsuka T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Saitama Medical School, Japan.

BACKGROUND: In our previous study, expressions of human histocompatibility
leukocyte antigens class I molecules (HLA-I) and the transporter associated with 
antigen processing (TAP) 1/2 genes were investigated in seven hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) cell lines. Two cell lines, Hep-3B and HuH-7, showed a reduced
level of TAP, which might cause the low surface expression of HLA-I. In order to 
understand the downregulation mechanism of antigen presentation in tumors, the
two cell lines were further investigated.
METHODS: Expressions of HLA-I and antigen presentation-related genes were
analyzed by flow cytometry and polymerase chain reaction, respectively. Antigen
presentation was tested in 51Cr-release assays.
RESULTS: Flow cytometric analyses revealed low surface expression of HLA-I on
Hep-3B and HuH-7 cells. Introduction of HLA-A2 gene did not result in a high
surface expression of HLA-A2. This suggested the downregulation of HLA-I
expression might be related to defects in the antigen presentation machinery. We 
then examined expression levels of various antigen presentation-related genes.
Hep-3B and HuH-7 demonstrated low expression of the low-molecular-weight protein 
(LMP) 2, LMP7, TAP1, and HLA-I heavy-chain transcripts. The downregulation of
these genes was dissolved by treatment with gamma-interferon. Furthermore,
allo-specific cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) lines failed to recognize Hep-3B and
HuH-7 cells, while they killed IFN-gamma-treated Hep-3B and HuH-7 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that defects in the antigen presentation-related
molecules might cause downregulation of HLA-I expression, antigen presentation,
and subsequently, escape from specific CTL killing. The downregulation could be
restored by IFN-gamma treatment, suggesting the potential use of IFN-gamma for
therapeutic purposes.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1440-1746.2002.02837.x 
PMID: 12164966  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

