
1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2002 Sep 4;94(17):1311-9.

Effects of vitamin D(3)-binding protein-derived macrophage activating factor
(GcMAF) on angiogenesis.

Kanda S(1), Mochizuki Y, Miyata Y, Kanetake H, Yamamoto N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Division of Endothelial
Cell Biology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagasaki, Japan.
shigeruk@net.nagasaki-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: The vitamin D(3)-binding protein (Gc protein)-derived macrophage
activating factor (GcMAF) activates tumoricidal macrophages against a variety of 
cancers indiscriminately. We investigated whether GcMAF also acts as an
antiangiogenic factor on endothelial cells.
METHODS: The effects of GcMAF on angiogenic growth factor-induced cell
proliferation, chemotaxis, and tube formation were examined in vitro by using
cultured endothelial cells (murine IBE cells, porcine PAE cells, and human
umbilical vein endothelial cells [HUVECs]) and in vivo by using a mouse cornea
micropocket assay. Blocking monoclonal antibodies to CD36, a receptor for the
antiangiogenic factor thrombospondin-1, which is also a possible receptor for
GcMAF, were used to investigate the mechanism of GcMAF action.
RESULTS: GcMAF inhibited the endothelial cell proliferation, chemotaxis, and tube
formation that were all stimulated by fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2),
vascular endothelial growth factor-A, or angiopoietin 2. FGF-2-induced
neovascularization in murine cornea was also inhibited by GcMAF. Monoclonal
antibodies against murine and human CD36 receptor blocked the antiangiogenic
action of GcMAF on the angiogenic factor stimulation of endothelial cell
chemotaxis.
CONCLUSIONS: In addition to its ability to activate tumoricidal macrophages,
GcMAF has direct antiangiogenic effects on endothelial cells independent of
tissue origin. The antiangiogenic effects of GcMAF may be mediated through the
CD36 receptor.

DOI: 10.1093/jnci/94.17.1311 
PMID: 12208896  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

