
1. Microb Pathog. 2002 Sep;33(3):135-43.

Mutation of csk, encoding the C-terminal Src kinase, reduces Pseudomonas
aeruginosa internalization by mammalian cells and enhances bacterial
cytotoxicity.

Evans DJ(1), Kuo TC, Kwong M, Van R, Fleiszig SM.

Author information: 
(1)Morton D. Sarver Laboratory for Cornea and Contact Lens Research, School of
Optometry, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720, USA.

Clinical isolates of Pseudomonas aeruginosa are either invasive or cytotoxic
towards mammalian epithelial cells, endothelial cells, and macrophages. Invasion 
requires host cell actin cytoskeleton function, and ExsA-regulated proteins of P.
aeruginosa that inhibit invasion (ExoS and ExoT) can disrupt the cytoskeleton.
Another ExsA regulated protein, ExoU, is involved in the cytotoxic activity of
cytotoxic strains. Src-family kinases are thought to participate in the
regulation of cytoskeleton function. Recent studies have suggested that
Src-family tyrosine kinases, p60-Src and p59-Fyn, are activated during P.
aeruginosa invasion. Using fibroblasts homozygous for mutation of csk (-/-), we
tested the hypothesis that mutation of csk, encoding a negative regulator of
Src-family tyrosine kinases, would be important in P. aeruginosa invasion and
cytotoxicity. Mutation of csk was found to reduce invasion by approximately
8-fold, without reducing bacterial adherence to cells (P=0.0001). Conversely, csk
(-/-) cells were approximately 5-fold more susceptible to ExoU-dependent
cytotoxicity (P=0.024), which was accompanied by a small increase in
ExsA-regulated adherence. ExoT-dependent invasion inhibitory activity of
cytotoxic P. aeruginosa was attenuated in csk (-/-) cells as compared to normal
fibroblasts. These data show that fibroblasts, like epithelial cells, are
susceptible to P. aeruginosa invasion and cytotoxicity. They also show a role for
Csk in P. aeruginosa invasion, while providing further evidence that actin
cytoskeleton disruption contributes to ExsA-regulated P. aeruginosa cytotoxicity 
and invasion inhibition.

DOI: 10.1006/mpat.2002.0521 
PMID: 12220990  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

