
1. Blood. 2002 Oct 1;100(7):2463-71.

The antiapoptosis protein survivin is associated with cell cycle entry of normal 
cord blood CD34(+) cells and modulates cell cycle and proliferation of mouse
hematopoietic progenitor cells.

Fukuda S(1), Foster RG, Porter SB, Pelus LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and the Walther Oncology Center,
Indiana University School of Medicine; and the Walther Cancer Institute,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

The inhibitor of the apoptosis protein (IAP) survivin is expressed in
proliferating cells such as fetal tissues and cancers. We previously reported
that survivin is expressed and growth factor regulated in normal adult CD34(+)
cells. Herein, we examined survivin expression in CD34(+) cells before and after 
cell cycle entry and demonstrate a role for survivin in cell cycle regulation and
proliferation. Analysis of known human IAPs revealed that only survivin is
cytokine regulated in CD34(+) cells. Survivin expression is coincident with cell 
cycle progression. Up-regulation of survivin by thrombopoietin (Tpo), Flt3 ligand
(FL), and stem cell factor (SCF) occurred in underphosphorylated-retinoblastoma
protein (Rb)(positive), Ki-67(negative), and cyclin D(negative) CD34(+) cells.
Quantitative real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
and multivariate flow cytometry demonstrated that Tpo, SCF, and FL increase
survivin mRNA and protein in quiescent G(0) CD34(+) cells without increasing
Ki-67 expression, indicating that cytokine-stimulated up-regulation of survivin
in CD34(+) cells occurs during G(0), before cells enter G(1). Selective
inhibition of the PI3-kinase/AKT and mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK(p42/44)) pathways blocked survivin up-regulation by growth factors before
arresting cell cycle. Retrovirus transduction of survivin-internal ribosome entry
site-enhanced green fluorescent protein (survivin-IRES-EGFP) in primary mouse
marrow cells increased granulocyte macrophage-colony-forming units (CFU-GM) by
1.7- to 6.2-fold and the proportion of CFU-GM in S phase, compared to vector
control. An antisense survivin construct decreased total and S-phase CFU-GM.
These studies provide further evidence that survivin up-regulation by growth
factors is not a consequence of cell cycle progression and strongly suggest that 
survivin is an important early event for cell cycle entry by CD34(+) cells.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.V100.7.2463 
PMID: 12239157  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

