
1. Blood. 2002 Oct 1;100(7):2562-71.

Role for granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in the generation of human T
regulatory type 1 cells.

Rutella S(1), Pierelli L, Bonanno G, Sica S, Ameglio F, Capoluongo E, Mariotti A,
Scambia G, d'Onofrio G, Leone G.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Hematology and Gynecology, Catholic University Medical School, 
Rome, and the Laboratory of Clinical Pathology and Microbiology, IRCCS San
Gallicano, Rome, Italy. sergiorutella@tin.it

Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) may affect T-cell homeostasis by
multiple mechanisms, inducing polarization of cytokine secretion, inhibition of
T-cell proliferation, and enhancement of T-cell apoptosis. We analyzed the
production of interleukin-10 (IL-10) and transforming growth factor-beta1
(TGF-beta1) by T cells from healthy volunteer donors treated with recombinant
human G-CSF. Highly purified CD4(+) T cells obtained before and after G-CSF
administration (pre-G and post-G, respectively) were activated using the
allogeneic mixed leukocyte reaction. Post-G CD4(+) T cells produced high levels
of IL-10 but undetectable levels of IL-2 and IL-4, whereas the level of TGF-beta1
release was comparable to that of pre-G CD4(+) T cells. Notably, post-G CD4(+) T 
cells proliferated poorly in response to alloantigens and to recall antigens and 
suppressed the proliferation of autologous CD4(+) T cells in a cell
contact-independent and an antigen-nonspecific manner. TGF-beta1 and IL-10 were
not dispensable for post-G CD4(+) T cells to mediate suppression, as shown by
neutralization studies. Compared with pre-G CD4(+) T cells, alloantigen-activated
post-G CD4(+) T cells preferentially expressed markers associated with memory T
cells, in conjunction with reduced levels of CD28 and CD62L. Collectively, these 
data demonstrate that CD4(+) T cells exposed to G-CSF in vivo acquire the
properties of T regulatory (Tr) cells once triggered in vitro through the T-cell 
receptor, including a peculiar cytokine production profile
(IL-10(++)TGF-beta1(+)IL-2(low/-)IL-4(low/-)), an intrinsic low proliferative
capacity, and a contact-independent suppression of antigen-driven proliferation. 
Tr cells generated ex vivo after exposure to G-CSF might be clinically relevant
for transplantation medicine and for the treatment of human immune-mediated
diseases.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2001-12-0291 
PMID: 12239170  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

