
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Oct 1;99(20):13142-7. Epub 2002 Sep 23.

HecA, a member of a class of adhesins produced by diverse pathogenic bacteria,
contributes to the attachment, aggregation, epidermal cell killing, and virulence
phenotypes of Erwinia chrysanthemi EC16 on Nicotiana clevelandii seedlings.

Rojas CM(1), Ham JH, Deng WL, Doyle JJ, Collmer A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology and L. H. Bailey Hortorium, Cornell University, 
Ithaca, NY 14853.

Erwinia chrysanthemi is representative of a broad class of bacterial pathogens
that are capable of inducing necrosis in plants. The E. chrysanthemi EC16 hecA
gene predicts a 3,850-aa member of the Bordetella pertussis filamentous
hemagglutinin family of adhesins. A hecATn7 mutant was reduced in virulence on
Nicotiana clevelandii seedlings after inoculation without wounding.
Epifluorescence and confocal laser-scanning microscopy observations of hecA and
wild-type cells expressing the green fluorescent protein revealed that the mutant
is reduced in its ability to attach and then form aggregates on leaves and to
cause an aggregate-associated killing of epidermal cells. Cell killing also
depended on production of the major pectate lyase isozymes and the type II, but
not the type III, secretion pathway in E. chrysanthemi. HecA homologs were found 
in bacterial pathogens of plants and animals and appear to be unique to pathogens
and universal in necrogenic plant pathogens. Phylogenetic comparison of the
conserved two-partner secretion domains in the proteins and the 16S rRNA
sequences in respective bacteria revealed the two datasets to be fundamentally
incongruent, suggesting horizontal acquisition of these genes. Furthermore, hecA 
and its two homologs in Yersinia pestis had a G+C content that was 10% higher
than that of their genomes and similar to that of plant pathogenic Ralstonia,
Xylella, and Pseudomonas spp. Our data suggest that filamentous
hemagglutinin-like adhesins are broadly important virulence factors in both plant
and animal pathogens.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.202358699 
PMCID: PMC130600
PMID: 12271135  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

