
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2002 Oct;40(10):3606-12.

Identification of Bartonella bacilliformis genotypes and their relevance to
epidemiological investigations of human bartonellosis.

Birtles RJ(1), Fry NK, Ventosilla P, Cáceres AG, Sánchez E, Vizcarra H, Raoult D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Sciences, University
of Liverpool, Neston, Cheshire CH64 7TE, UK. richard.birtles@liverpool.ac.uk

Genotypic diversity among 26 isolates of Bartonella bacilliformis obtained from
different areas of Peru, and at different times, was assessed by comparison of
DNA sequences derived from 16S-23S ribosomal DNA intergenic spacer regions (ISR) 
and a citrate synthase gene (gltA) fragment and by amplified fragment length
polymorphism (AFLP) analysis. gltA comparison divided the isolates into two
groups, whereas ISR comparison revealed six sequences. AFLP analysis using a
selective primer delineated five profiles that correlated well with those
obtained by sequence comparison. Combination of all three data sets divided the
isolates into six genotypes. One of these genotypes was common to isolates
collected from a large area in western Peru that corresponded to the region of
endemicity for bartonellosis; however, isolates belonging to two other genotypes 
were also found within this region. Two of these genotypes were found in isolates
isolated more than 35 years apart. The remaining three genotypes were each
specifically associated with three outbreaks of bartonellosis that have recently 
occurred in areas where the disease had not previously been recognized.
Demonstration of the unique nature of these isolates indicates that the outbreaks
with which they were associated did not result from the introduction of disease
by individuals who acquired their infection in the recognized region of
endemicity. The sources of these outbreaks remain unknown. A consensus approach
to bacterial typing using comparative sequence analysis of multiple genetic loci 
and the pan-genomic sampling of AFLP appears to offer a well-supported assessment
of B. bacilliformis diversity, and the genotypic differences identified appear to
have epidemiological significance.

DOI: 10.1128/jcm.40.10.3606-3612.2002 
PMCID: PMC130851
PMID: 12354853  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

