
1. Otolaryngol Pol. 2002;56(4):409-13.

A newly discovered function of palatine tonsils in immune defence: the expression
of defensins.

Weise JB(1), Meyer JE, Helmer H, Wittrock H, Maune S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of Kiel, 
Germany.

The palatine tonsils have an undoubted role in the immune defence system. After
antigen contact an effective adaptive immune response by B- and T-cell
lymphocytes will be released. In addition the palatine tonsils seem to exert
influence to the defence by the innate immune system. Therefore, we studied the
ability of palatine tonsils to express different alpha and beta defensins and to 
find out any distinctions in chronic inflamed tonsils. Total RNA of 49 specimens 
of hyperplastic tonsils and chronic tonsillitis with pathological provided
evidence of Actinomyces israelii was isolated using TRIzol protocol, reverse
transcribed and the HNP-1, HNP-4, HBD-1 and HBD-2 gene expression densitometric
determined, standardised in relation to glycerinaldehyd-3-phosphatdehydrogenase
gene expression, after a semiquantitative polymerase chain reaction was
performed. mRNA of HNP-1, HNP-4, HBD-1 and HBD-2 was detected in tissue samples, 
but their amount differed within the two defensin families and tissue of origins.
HBD-1 was detected in all 49 tissues of hyperplastic tonsils and chronic
tonsillitis. Only in chronic inflamed tonsils the amount of HBD-2 mRNA expression
was significant increased. In these specimens also mean relative expression rate 
of all defensins was observed to be manifestly increased. Palatine tonsils
express mRNA for different alpha and beta defensins and this expression suggest a
newly supposed function in immune defence: the participation in the innate,
non-adaptive immune system. Thus, palatine tonsils have a potentially influence
in the growth and control of the physiological mouth bacteria by their
bactericidal activity.


PMID: 12378798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

