
1. Neoplasia. 2002 Nov-Dec;4(6):510-22.

Met-HGF/SF signal transduction induces mimp, a novel mitochondrial carrier
homologue, which leads to mitochondrial depolarization.

Yerushalmi GM(1), Leibowitz-Amit R, Shaharabany M, Tsarfaty I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Microbiology, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv
University, Israel.

Met-hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor (HGF/SF) signaling plays an important
role in epithelial tissue morphogenesis, lumen formation, and tumorigenicity. We 
have recently demonstrated that HGF/SF also alters the metabolic activity of
cells by enhancing both the glycolytic and oxidative phosphorylation pathways of 
energy production. Using differential display polymerase chain reaction, we
cloned a novel gene, designated mimp (Met-Induced Mitochondrial Protein), which
is upregulated in NIH-3T3 cells cotransfected with both HGF/SF and Met (HMH
cells). Northern and Western blot analyses showed that mimp is induced in several
Met-expressing cell lines following treatment with HGF/SF. Mimp encodes a 33-kDa 
protein that shows sequence homology to the family of mitochondrial carrier
proteins (MCPs). Murine Mimp (mMimp) is expressed in a wide variety of tissues,
exhibiting an expression pattern similar to Met. Predominant expression is seen
in liver, kidney, heart, skeletal muscle, and testis. Using immunostaining for
HA-tagged mMimp and a GFP-mMimp chimeric protein as well as subcellular
fractionation, we determined that Mimp is primarily localized to the
mitochondria. Ectopic expression of mMimp in the Met-responsive adenocarcinoma
cell line, DA3, reduced the mitochondrial membrane potential (uncoupling
activity). The extent of the mitochondrial depolarization positively correlated
with the level of Mimp expression. Our results demonstrate that Mimp is a novel
mitochondrial carrier homologue upregulated by Met-HGF/SF signal transduction,
which leads to mitochondrial depolarization, and suggest novel links among
tyrosine kinase signaling, mitochondrial function, and cellular bioenergetics.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.neo.7900272 
PMCID: PMC1503665
PMID: 12407445  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

