
1. BMC Microbiol. 2002 Nov 13;2:33. Epub 2002 Nov 13.

Colony shape as a genetic trait in the pattern-forming Bacillus mycoides.

Di Franco C(1), Beccari E, Santini T, Pisaneschi G, Tecce G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica e Biologia Molecolare, Università La Sapienza, P. le 
A. Moro 5, 00185 Roma, Italy. carmen.difranco@uniroma1.it

BACKGROUND: Bacillus mycoides Flügge, a Gram-positive, non-motile soil bacterium 
assigned to Bacillus cereus group, grows on agar as chains of cells linked end to
end, forming radial filaments curving clock- or counter-clockwise (SIN or DX
morphotypes). The molecular mechanism causing asymmetric curving is not known:
our working hypothesis considers regulation of filamentous growth as the
prerequisite for these morphotypes.
RESULTS: SIN and DX strains isolated from the environment were classified as B.
mycoides by biochemical and molecular biology tests. Growth on agar of different 
hardness and nutrient concentration did not abolish colony patterns, nor was
conversion between SIN and DX morphotypes ever noticed. A number of morphotype
mutants, all originating from one SIN strain, were obtained. Some lost turn
direction becoming fluffy, others became round and compact. All mutants lost wild
type tight aggregation in liquid culture. Growth on agar was followed by
microscopy, exploring the process of colony formation and details of cell
divisions. A region of the dcw (division cell wall) cluster, including ftsQ,
ftsA, ftsZ and murC, was sequenced in DX and SIN strains as a basis for studying 
cell division. This confirmed the relatedness of DX and SIN strains to the B.
cereus group.
CONCLUSIONS: DX and SIN asymmetric morphotypes stem from a close but not
identical genomic context. Asymmetry is established early during growth on agar. 
Wild type bacilli construct mostly uninterrupted filaments with cells dividing at
the free ends: they "walk" longer distances compared to mutants, where enhanced
frequency of cell separation produces new growing edges resulting in round
compact colonies.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-2-33 
PMCID: PMC138795
PMID: 12429070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

