
1. J Inorg Biochem. 2002 Nov 25;92(3-4):141-8.

Biological activity of palladium(II) and platinum(II) complexes of the acetone
Schiff bases of S-methyl- and S-benzyldithiocarbazate and the X-ray crystal
structure of the [Pd(asme)2] (asme=anionic form of the acetone Schiff base of
S-methyldithiocarbazate) complex.

Akbar Ali M(1), Mirza AH, Butcher RJ, Tarafder MT, Keat TB, Ali AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Universiti Brunei Darussalam, Jalan Tungku Link,
Negara Brunei Darussalam, BE 1410, Gadong, Brunei. akbar@fos.ubd.edu.bn

Palladium(II) and platinum(II) complexes of general empirical formula, [M(NS)(2)]
(NS=uninegatively charged acetone Schiff bases of S-methyl- and
S-benzyldithiocarbazate; M=Pt(II) and Pd(II)) have been prepared and
characterized by a variety of physicochemical techniques. Based on conductance,
IR and electronic spectral evidence, a square-planar structure is assigned to
these complexes. The crystal and molecular structure of the [Pd(asme)(2)] complex
(asme=anionic form of the acetone Schiff base of S-methyldithiocarbazate) has
been determined by X-ray diffraction. The complex has a distorted cis-square
planar structure with the ligands coordinated to the palladium(II) ions as
uninegatively charged bidentate NS chelating agents via the azomethine nitrogen
and the mercaptide sulfur atoms. The distortion from a regular square-planar
geometry is attributed to the restricted bite angles of the ligands.
Antimicrobial tests indicate that the Schiff bases exhibit strong activities
against the pathogenic bacteria, Bacillus subtilis (mutant defective DNA repair),
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, B. subtilis (wild type) and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and the fungi, Candida albicans (CA), Candida lypotica
(2075), Saccharomyces cerevisiae (20341) and Aspergillus ochraceous (398)-the
activities exhibited by these compounds being greater than that of the standard
antibacterial and antifungal drugs, streptomycin and nystatin, respectively. The 
palladium(II) and platinum(II) complexes are inactive against most of these
organisms but, the microbe, Pseudomonas aeruginosa shows strong sensitivity to
the platinum(II) complexes. Screening of the compounds for their cytotoxicities
against T-lymphoblastic leukemia cancer cells has shown that the acetone Schiff
base of S-methyldithiocarbazate (Hasme) exhibits a very weak activity, whereas
the S-benzyl derivative (Hasbz) is inactive. However, the palladium(II) complexes
exhibit strong cytotoxicities against this cancer; their activities being more
than that of the standard anticancer drug, tamoxifen. The [Pt(asme)(2)] complex
exhibits a very weak cytotoxicity, whereas [Pt(asbz)(2)] is inactive against
leukemic cells.

DOI: 10.1016/s0162-0134(02)00559-7 
PMID: 12433421  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

