
1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

J Exp Med. 2002 Nov 18;196(10):1291-305.

Silencing of B cell receptor signals in human naive B cells.

Feldhahn N(1), Schwering I, Lee S, Wartenberg M, Klein F, Wang H, Zhou G, Wang
SM, Rowley JD, Hescheler J, Krönke M, Rajewsky K, Küppers R, Müschen M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, University of
Cologne, 50931 Köln, Germany.

Retraction in
    J Exp Med. 2006 Nov 27;203(12):2779.

To identify changes in the regulation of B cell receptor (BCR) signals during the
development of human B cells, we generated genome-wide gene expression profiles
using the serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE) technique for CD34(+)
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), pre-B cells, naive, germinal center (GC), and
memory B cells. Comparing these SAGE profiles, genes encoding positive regulators
of BCR signaling were expressed at consistently lower levels in naive B cells
than in all other B cell subsets. Conversely, a large group of inhibitory
signaling molecules, mostly belonging to the immunoglobulin superfamily (IgSF),
were specifically or predominantly expressed in naive B cells. The quantitative
differences observed by SAGE were corroborated by semiquantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and flow cytometry. In a
functional assay, we show that down-regulation of inhibitory IgSF receptors and
increased responsiveness to BCR stimulation in memory as compared with naive B
cells at least partly results from interleukin (IL)-4 receptor signaling.
Conversely, activation or impairment of the inhibitory IgSF receptor LIRB1
affected BCR-dependent Ca(2+) mobilization only in naive but not memory B cells. 
Thus, LIRB1 and IL-4 may represent components of two nonoverlapping gene
expression programs in naive and memory B cells, respectively: in naive B cells, 
a large group of inhibitory IgSF receptors can elevate the BCR signaling
threshold to prevent these cells from premature activation and clonal expansion
before GC-dependent affinity maturation. In memory B cells, facilitated
responsiveness upon reencounter of the immunizing antigen may result from
amplification of BCR signals at virtually all levels of signal transduction.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20020881 
PMCID: PMC2193982
PMID: 12438421  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

