
1. Arch Inst Pasteur Madagascar. 2000;66(1-2):9-12.

[Xenopsylla cheopis (Siphonaptera: Xenopsyllinae), fleas in rural plague areas of
high altitude Madagascar: level of sensitivity to DDT, pyrethroids and carbamates
after 50 years of chemical vector control].

[Article in French]

Ratovonjato J(1), Duchemin JB, Duplantier JM, Chanteau S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur de Madagascar, BP 1274-101 Antananarivo-Madagascar.

The resistance of Xenopsylla cheopis from urban area to pyrethroids, to DDT, and 
their susceptibility to carbamate are known. We have evaluated the susceptibility
of X. cheopis collected from three rural localities: Ambodisiarivo (district of
Antananarivo Avaradrano), Mandoto (district of Betafo), Analaroa (district of
Anjozorobe) in the province of Antananarivo and in Besoa (district of Ambalavao) 
in the province of Fianarantsoa. The standard WHO protocol was used and four
insecticides were tested: deltamethrin 0.025%, cyfluthrin 0.15% (pyrethroids),
DDT 4% (organochlorine), propoxur 1% and bendiocarb 0.1% (carbamate). X. cheopis 
has been shown resistance to DDT 4%, to deltamethrin 0.025% but was susceptible
in the rural area around Antananarivo City. They were tolerant to deltamethrin
0.025% and cyfluthrin 0.15% but susceptible to propoxur 0.1% and bendiocarbe 1%
in the districts of Betafo and Anjozorobe. In Besoa, X. cheopis was resistant to 
DDT 4%, tolerant to deltamethrin 0.025% and cyfluthrin 0.15% but susceptible to
propoxur 0.1% and bendiocarbe 1%. These results indicate that DDT and pyrethroids
can not be recommended any more for the vector control in the rural area around
the capital. The use of pyrethroids in the other districts of the central
highland must be joined with a X. cheopis susceptibility control. In case of
resistance to pyrethroids, carbamates would be proposed to control plague vector 
in the rural area. The high level of resistance to DDT and pyrethroid in the
rural area around the capital confirms the importance of studying the flea
population in different area of Madagascar and the possibility of the gene
resistance propagation.


PMID: 12463026  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

