
1. Cell Cycle. 2002 Sep-Oct;1(5):322-6.

Elevation of Survivin levels by hematopoietic growth factors occurs in quiescent 
CD34+ hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells before cell cycle entry.

Fukuda S(1), Pelus LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.

Survivin is a member of the inhibitor of apoptosis protein (IAP) family that is
overexpressed during G(2)/M phase in most cancer cells. In contrast, we
previously reported that Survivin is expressed throughout the cell cycle in
normal CD34(+) hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells stimulated by the
combination of Thrombopoietin (Tpo), Stem Cell Factor (SCF) and Flt3 ligand (FL).
In order to address whether Survivin expression is specifically up-regulated by
hematopoietic growth factors before cell cycle entry, we isolated quiescent
CD34(+) cells and investigated Survivin expression in response to growth factor
stimulation. Survivin is up-regulated in CD34(+) cells with 2N DNA content
following growth factor addition, suggesting it becomes elevated during
G(0)/G(1). Survivin is barely detectable in freshly isolated umbilical cord blood
(UCB) Ki-67(negative) and Cyclin D(negative) CD34(+) cells, however incubation
with Tpo, SCF and FL for 20 hrs results in up-regulation without entry of cells
into cell cycle. Culture of G(0) CD34(+) cells isolated based on Hoechst
33342/PyroninY staining with Tpo, SCF and FL for 48 hrs, results in significantly
elevated Survivin mRNA and protein levels. Moreover, labeling of fresh G(0)
CD34(+) cells with 5-(and 6-) carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester
(CFSE) before culture with growth factors for up to 72 hrs, revealed that
Survivin expression was elevated in CFSE(bright) G(0) CD34(+) cells, indicating
that up-regulation occurred before entry into G1. These results suggest that
up-regulation of Survivin expression in CD34(+) cells is an early event in cell
cycle entry that is regulated by hematopoietic growth factors and does not simply
reflect cell cycle progression and cell division.


PMID: 12461294  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

