
1. J Clin Periodontol. 2002 Nov;29(11):1012-22.

Interactions between stress, interleukin-1beta, interleukin-6 and cortisol in
periodontally diseased patients.

Mengel R(1), Bacher M, Flores-De-Jacoby L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, School of Dental Medicine, Institute of Hygiene 
and Microbiology, Philipps-University, Marburg, Germany.
mengel@mailer.uni-marburg.de

BACKGROUND/AIMS: The aim of the present study was to measure interleukin-1beta,
interleukin-6 and cortisol levels in the peripheral blood of periodontally
diseased patients in order to record any interactions with psychosocial stress.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The test group comprised 16 patients with untreated and 14 
with treated aggressive generalized periodontitis (AGP), five patients with
untreated aggressive localized periodontitis (ALP) and five with chronic
generalized periodontitis (CGP). The control group comprised 40 periodontally
healthy probands. Blood was taken from the cephalic vein of all patients and
controls at the same time (8 a.m.) each day. IL-1beta, IL-6 and cortisol levels
were then measured with a sensitive ELISA, the 'Quantikine HS Immunoassay Kit'
(Biermann Diagnostica, Bad Nauheim, FRG). The clinical examination covered
probing depth, gingival recession, gingival index, plaque index and clinical
attachment level. A questionnaire was used to ask the patients and controls about
their attitude to life and the stress induced by their jobs and their families.
Previous and current levels of tobacco consumption were also recorded.
Statistical evaluation was based on the Mann-Whitney U-Wilcoxon test for
comparison of blood serum values and clinical parameters between patients and
controls, and the Kruskal-Wallis test for intergroup comparison. All data were
correlated by means of Spearman's rank correlation coefficient, and significance 
levels relating to stress and smoking were determined with the chi-square test.
RESULTS: With respect to cortisol, the results showed no significant differences 
either between the patient groups or in comparison with the controls. IL-1beta
was detected only in the AGP patients and their controls, but with no significant
differences. IL-6 was detected in virtually all patients and controls, but with
no significant differences. Only in the untreated AGP patients was IL-6
significantly elevated (P < 0.05) and a slight correlation with attachment loss
recorded. In all AGP patients a slight correlation between IL-1beta and IL-6 was 
recorded. Evaluation of the questionnaire revealed a higher proportion of
untreated AGP patients than of controls with a pessimistic attitude to life. In
all AGP patients, family-induced stress and smoking were found to correlate with 
attachment loss. In the untreated AGP patients, smoking correlated with IL-1beta 
protein content, and in the controls there was a moderate correlation between
smoking and IL-6 levels.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study found no correlation between the immunological
mediators (IL-1beta, IL-6), glucocorticoids (cortisol) and the registered stress 
values. However, the patients with untreated AGP showed signs of a pessimistic
attitude to life, and an elevated IL-6 level was recorded in the peripheral
blood. As a restrictive factor it should be borne in mind that the number of
patients investigated was too small for adequate conclusions to be drawn.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1600-051x.2002.291106.x 
PMID: 12472994  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

