
1. Clin Cancer Res. 2003 Jan;9(1):316-26.

Inhibition of constitutive STAT3 activity sensitizes resistant non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma and multiple myeloma to chemotherapeutic drug-mediated apoptosis.

Alas S(1), Bonavida B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of
California Los Angeles School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles,
California 90095, USA.

Hematopoietic malignancies have been shown to depend on cytokine growth factor
autocrine/paracrine loops for growth and differentiation. This results in the
constitutive activation of cytokine-mediated transcription factors like signal
transducer and activators of transcription (STAT) 3 in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
(NHL) and multiple myeloma (MM). Recent evidence demonstrates that cytokines also
contribute to a drug-resistant phenotype in many tumor cell types. We
hypothesized that inhibitors of the STAT3 pathway would sensitize drug-resistant 
and endogenous cytokine-dependent NHL and MM tumor cells to the cytotoxic effects
of chemotherapeutic drugs. We examined an AIDS-related NHL cell line, 2F7, known 
to be dependent on interleukin (IL)-10 for survival and an MM cell line, U266,
known to be dependent on IL-6 for survival. IL-10 and IL-6 signal the cells
through the activation of Janus kinase (JAK)1 and JAK2, respectively. Thus, we
investigated the effect of two chemical STAT3 pathway inhibitors, namely,
piceatannol (JAK1/STAT3 inhibitor) and tyrphostin AG490 (JAK2/STAT3 inhibitor),
on the tumor cells for sensitization to therapeutic drugs. We demonstrate by
phosphoprotein immunoblotting analysis and electrophoretic mobility shift
analysis that piceatannol and AG490 inhibit the constitutive activity of STAT3 in
2F7 and U266, respectively. Furthermore, piceatannol and AG490 sensitize 2F7 and 
U266 cells, respectively, to apoptosis by a range of therapeutic drugs including 
cisplatin, fludarabine, Adriamycin, and vinblastine. The specificity of the
inhibitors was corroborated in experiments showing that piceatannol had no effect
on U266 and, likewise, AG490 has no effect on 2F7. The sensitization observed by 
these inhibitors correlated with the inhibition of Bcl-2 expression in 2F7 and
Bcl-xL expression in U266. Altogether, these results demonstrate that STAT3
pathway inhibitors are a novel class of chemotherapeutic sensitizing agents
capable of reversing the drug-resistant phenotype of cytokine-dependent tumor
cells.


PMID: 12538484  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

