
1. J Neurobiol. 2003 Feb 15;54(3):473-85.

Protein expression levels of the Src activating protein AFAP are developmentally 
regulated in brain.

Clump DA(1), Clem R, Qian Y, Guappone-Koay A, Berrebi AS, Flynn DC.

Author information: 
(1)The Mary Babb Randolph Cancer Center and the Department of Microbiology,
Immunology and Cell Biology, West Virginia University, Morgantown, West Virginia 
26506-9300, USA.

The Src family of nonreceptor tyrosine kinases plays an important role in
modulating signals that affect growth cone extension, neuronal differentiation,
and brain development. Recent reports indicate that the Src SH2/SH3 binding
partner AFAP-110 has the capacity to modulate actin filament integrity as a cSrc 
activating protein and as an actin filament bundling protein. Both AFAP-110 and a
brain specific isoform called AFAP-120 (collectively referred to as AFAP) exist
at high levels in chick embryo brain. We sought to identify the localization of
AFAP in mouse brain in order to identify its expression pattern and potential
role as a cellular modulator of Src family kinase activity and actin filament
integrity in the brain. In E16 mouse embryos, AFAP expression levels were very
high and concentrated in the olfactory bulb, cortex, forebrain, cerebellum, and
various peripheral sensory structures. In P3 mouse pups, overall expression was
reduced compared to E16 embryos, and AFAP was found primarily in olfactory bulb, 
cortex, and cerebellum. AFAP expression levels were significantly reduced in
adult mice, with high expression levels only detected in the olfactory bulb.
Western blot analysis indicated that concentrated expression of AFAP correlates
well with the AFAP-120 isoform, which appears to be a splice variant of AFAP-110.
As the expression pattern of AFAP overlaps with the reported expression patterns 
of cSrc and Fyn, we hypothesize that AFAP is positioned to modulate signal
transduction cascades that direct activation of these nonreceptor tyrosine
kinases and concomitant cellular changes that occur in actin filaments during
brain development.

Copyright 2003 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/neu.10143 
PMID: 12532398  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

