
1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 28;278(13):11570-8. Epub 2003 Jan 22.

Organic hydroperoxide resistance gene encodes a thiol-dependent peroxidase.

Cussiol JR(1), Alves SV, de Oliveira MA, Netto LE.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade de São Paulo,
Rua do Matão 277, São Paulo SP Brazil 05508-900.

ohr (organic hydroperoxide resistance gene) is present in several species of
bacteria, and its deletion renders cells specifically sensitive to organic
peroxides. The goal of this work was to determine the biochemical function of Ohr
from Xylella fastidiosa. All of the Ohr homologues possess two cysteine residues,
one of them located in a VCP motif, which is also present in all of the proteins 
from the peroxiredoxin family. Therefore, we have investigated whether Ohr
possesses thiol-dependent peroxidase activity. The ohr gene from X. fastidiosa
was expressed in Escherichia coli, and the recombinant Ohr decomposed
hydroperoxides in a dithiothreitol-dependent manner. Ohr was about twenty times
more efficient to remove organic hydroperoxides than to remove H(2)O(2). This
result is consistent with the organic hydroperoxide sensitivity of Delta ohr
strains. The dependence of Ohr on thiol compounds was ascertained by glutamine
synthetase protection assays. Approximately two thiol equivalents were consumed
per peroxide removed indicating that Ohr catalyzes the following reaction: 2RSH +
ROOH --> RSSR + ROH + H(2)O. Pretreatment of Ohr with N-ethyl maleimide and
substitution of cysteine residues by serines inhibited this peroxidase activity
indicating that both of the Ohr cysteines are important to the decomposition of
peroxides. C125S still had a residual enzymatic activity indicating that Cys-61
is directly involved in peroxide removal. Monothiol compounds do not support the 
peroxidase activity of Ohr as well as thioredoxin from Saccharomyces cerevisiae
and from Spirulina. Interestingly, dithiothreitol and dyhydrolipoic acid, which
possess two sulfhydryl groups, do support the peroxidase activity of Ohr. Taken
together our results unequivocally demonstrated that Ohr is a thiol-dependent
peroxidase.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M300252200 
PMID: 12540833  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

