
1. Infect Immun. 2003 Feb;71(2):850-6.

DNA from periodontopathogenic bacteria is immunostimulatory for mouse and human
immune cells.

Nonnenmacher C(1), Dalpke A, Zimmermann S, Flores-De-Jacoby L, Mutters R, Heeg K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, Philipps University, Marburg,
Germany.

Although bacterial DNA (bDNA) containing unmethylated CpG motifs stimulates
innate immune cells through Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR-9), its precise role in the
pathophysiology of diseases is still equivocal. Here we examined the
immunostimulatory effects of DNA extracted from periodontopathogenic bacteria. A 
major role in the etiology of periodontal diseases has been attributed to
Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans, Porphyromonas gingivalis, and
Peptostreptococcus micros. We therefore isolated DNA from these bacteria and
stimulated murine macrophages and human gingival fibroblasts (HGF) in vitro.
Furthermore, HEK 293 cells transfected with human TLR-9 were also stimulated with
these DNA preparations. We observed that DNA from these pathogens stimulates
macrophages and gingival fibroblasts to produce tumor necrosis factor alpha and
interleukin-6 in a dose-dependent manner. Methylation of the CpG motifs abolished
the observed effects. Activation of HEK 293 cells expressing TLR-9 which were
responsive to bDNA but not to lipopolysaccharide confirmed that immunostimulation
was achieved by bDNA. In addition, the examined bDNA differed in the ability to
stimulate murine macrophages, HGF, and TLR-9-transfected cells. DNA from A.
actinomycetemcomitans elicited a potent cytokine response, while DNA from P.
gingivalis and P. micros showed lower immunostimulatory activity. Taken together,
the results strongly suggest that DNA from A. actinomycetemcomitans, P.
gingivalis, and P. micros possesses immunostimulatory properties in regard to
cytokine secretion by macrophages and fibroblasts. These stimulatory effects are 
due to unmethylated CpG motifs within bDNA and differ between distinct
periodontopathogenic bacteria strains. Hence, immunostimulation by DNA from A.
actinomycetemcomitans, P. gingivalis, and P. micros could contribute to the
pathogenesis of periodontal diseases.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.71.2.850-856.2003 
PMCID: PMC145359
PMID: 12540566  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

