
1. J Periodontal Res. 2003 Feb;38(1):90-6.

Enhanced expression of vascular endothelial growth factor by periodontal
pathogens in gingival fibroblasts.

Suthin K(1), Matsushita K, Machigashira M, Tatsuyama S, Imamura T, Torii M, Izumi
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Kagoshima University Dental School, Kagoshima,
Japan.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) has recently attracted attention as a
potent inducer of vascular permeability and angiogenesis. Aberrant angiogenesis
is often associated with lesion formation in chronic periodontitis. The aim of
the present study was to investigate the properties of VEGF expression in human
gingival fibroblasts (HGF) culture. HGF were stimulated with lipopolysaccharide
(LPS), vesicle (Ve) and outer membrane protein (OMP) from Actinobacillus
actinomycetemcomitans and Porphyromonas gingivalis. HGF constitutively produced
VEGF and levels were significantly enhanced (P < 0.01) by stimulation with Ve and
OMP from A. actinomycetemcomitans and P. gingivalis at concentrations of 10
microg/ml or higher. On the other hand, VEGF levels were not increased by LPS
stimulation. VEGF mRNA expression was also observed in Ve- and OMP-stimulated
HGF. A vascular permeability enhancement (VPE) assay was performed using guinea
pigs to ascertain whether supernatant from cultures of Ve- and OMP-stimulated HGF
enhance vascular permeability in vivo. Supernatant from cultures of Ve- and
OMP-stimulated HGF strongly induced VPE. This was markedly suppressed upon
simultaneous injection of anti-VEGF polyclonal antibodies with the supernatant.
Heating and protease treatment of the stimulants reduced the VEGF enhancing
levels in Ve and OMP in vitro. These results suggest that Ve and OMP may be
crucial heat-labile and protease-sensitive components of periodontal pathogens
that enhance VEGF expression. In addition, VEGF might be associated with the
etiology of periodontitis in its early stages according to neovascularization
stimulated by periodontal pathogens causing swelling and edema.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1600-0765.2003.01646.x 
PMID: 12558942  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

