
1. Curr Pharm Des. 2003;9(3):201-20.

Natural killer T cells as targets for therapeutic intervention in autoimmune
diseases.

Wilson MT(1), Van Kaer L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Natural killer T (NKT) cells are a subset of lymphocytes that express receptors
characteristic of conventional T cells together with receptors typically found on
natural killer cells. A key feature of NKT cells is the expression of a
semi-invariant T cell receptor that is specific for glycolipid antigens presented
by the unusual major histocompatibility complex class I-like molecule CD1d. While
their precise immunological functions remain unknown, NKT cells have been
implicated in the regulation of adaptive immune responses, including those
directed against autoantigens. These findings raise the possibility that specific
stimulation of NKT cells may be exploited for therapeutic purposes. A number of
laboratories have tested this hypothesis, utilizing the sea sponge-derived agent 
alpha-galactosylceramide (alpha-GalCer), a specific agonist of NKT cells.
Administration of alpha-GalCer to mice results in potent activation of NKT cells,
rapid and robust cytokine production, and activation of a variety of cells of the
innate and adaptive immune systems. Most notably, repeated administration of
alpha-GalCer to mice favors the generation of conventional T lymphocytes
producing T helper (Th) type 2 cytokines such as IL-4 and IL-10. These findings
suggest that alpha-GalCer can modulate inflammatory conditions that are mediated 
by pathogenic Th1 cells. Indeed, recent studies have demonstrated that
alpha-GalCer prevents the development of Type 1 diabetes in non-obese diabetic
mice and central nervous system inflammation in mouse models of multiple
sclerosis. Collectively, these studies provide a solid foundation for the
development of NKT cell ligands as pharmacological agents for treatment of
autoimmune diseases.

DOI: 10.2174/1381612033392080 
PMID: 12570826  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

