
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2003;94(3):462-74.

Volatile compounds produced by Lactobacillus fermentum, Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
and Candida krusei in single starter culture fermentations of Ghanaian maize
dough.

Annan NT(1), Poll L, Sefa-Dedeh S, Plahar WA, Jakobsen M.

Author information: 
(1)Food Research Institute (CSIR), Accra, Ghana.

AIMS: To identify and compare the volatile compounds associated with maize dough 
samples prepared by spontaneous fermentation and by the use of added starter
cultures in Ghana.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The starter cultures examined were Lactobacillus fermentum, 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Candida krusei. For identification of aroma
volatiles, extracts by the Likens-Nickerson simultaneous distillation and
extraction technique were analysed by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry
(GC-MS) and using a trained panel of four judges by GC-Olfactometry
(GC-sniffing). Compounds identified by GC-MS in maize dough samples after 72 h of
fermentation included 20 alcohols, 22 carbonyls, 11 esters, seven acids, a furan 
and three phenolic compounds. Of the total 64 volatile compounds, 51 were
detected by GC-sniffing as contributing to the aroma of the different fermented
dough samples. Spontaneously fermented maize dough was characterized by higher
levels of carbonyl compounds while fermentations with added L. fermentum recorded
the highest concentration of acetic acid. S. cerevisiae produced higher amounts
of fusel alcohols and increasing levels of esters with fermentation time and C.
krusei showed similarity to L. fermentum with lower levels of most volatiles
identified.
CONCLUSION: The present study has given a detailed picture of the aroma compounds
in fermented maize and demonstrated that the predominant micro-organisms in
fermented maize dough can be used as starter cultures to modify the aroma of
fermented maize dough.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: The study has documented the advantage of
using starter cultures in African traditional food processing and provided a
scientific background for introducing better controlled fermentations.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2672.2003.01852.x 
PMID: 12588555  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

