
1. J Periodontol. 2003 Jan;74(1):90-6.

Molecular interaction of Porphyromonas gingivalis with host cells: implication
for the microbial pathogenesis of periodontal disease.

Amano A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Frontier Biology, Osaka University Graduate School of
Dentistry, Suita-Osaka, Japan. amanoa@dent.osaka-u.ac.jp

Porphyromonas gingivalis is a predominant periodontal pathogen, which expresses a
number of potential virulence factors involved in the pathogenesis of
periodontitis. Among them, fimbriae are a critical factor to mediate the
bacterial interaction with host tissues, which promotes the bacterial adhesion to
and invasion of the targeted sites. Fimbriae are capable of binding to human
salivary components, commensal bacteria, and a variety of host cells including
macrophages, epithelial cells, and fibroblasts. Human extracellular matrix (ECM) 
proteins such as vitronectin and fibronectin play important roles in cellular
signal transduction via binding to receptor integrins. Fimbriae showed
significant binding affinity to ECM proteins and clearly inhibited the molecular 
interactions between vitronectin/fibronectin and their receptor alphavbeta3 and
alpha5beta1 integrins overexpressed on Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell strain.
P. gingivalis fimbriae are likely to interrupt the cellular signaling via ECM
proteins/integrins in periodontal regions. Fimbriae are also thought to be
critically important in invasive events of the organism to host cells. The fimA
genes, encoding FimA (a subunit of fimbriae), of P. gingivalis strains are
classified into 5 types, I to V. Recent clinical investigations demonstrated the 
close relationship between the organisms with type II fimA and periodontitis
development. Recombinant FimA (rFimA) proteins of types I to V were generated to 
compare their adhesion/invasion abilities to human gingival fibroblasts (HGF) and
a human epithelial cell line (HEp-2 cells), respectively. There were no
significant differences in the adhesion ability of microspheres (MS) coated with 
these rFimAs to HGF; however, the adhesion of type II rFimA-MS to HEp-2 cells was
significantly greater than that of other rFimA types. It was also observed that
the type II rFimA-MS markedly invaded the epithelial cells and accumulated around
the nuclei. Collectively, these findings suggest that fimbriae of P. gingivalis, 
especially type II, are involved in the initiation and progression of human
periodontitis.

DOI: 10.1902/jop.2003.74.1.90 
PMID: 12593602  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

