
1. Chem Biol Interact. 2003 Feb 1;143-144:129-37.

Ligand-induced conformational changes of betaine aldehyde dehydrogenase from
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Amaranthus hypochondriacus L. leaves affecting the
reactivity of the catalytic thiol.

Muñoz-Clares RA(1), González-Segura L, Mújica-Jiménez C, Contreras-Díaz L.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioqui;mica, Facultad de Química, Universidad Nacional
Autónoma de México, D.F., 04510, Mexico, Mexico. lares@servidor.unam.mx

The reaction catalyzed by betaine aldehyde dehydrogenase (BADH) involves the
nucleophilic attack of a catalytic cysteinyl residue on the aldehyde substrate.
As a possible mechanism of regulation, we have studied the modulation by ligands 
of the reactivity and/or accessibility of the essential thiol of the enzyme from 
the human pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa and the leaves of the plant Amaranthus 
hypochondriacus (amaranth). In the absence of ligands, the kinetics of
inactivation by thiol modifying reagents of both enzymes were biphasic,
suggesting the existence of two enzyme conformers differing in the reactivity of 
their catalytic thiolate. Preincubation of P. aeruginosa BADH with the coenzymes 
or the aldehyde prior to the chemical modification brought about active site
rearrangements that resulted in an important decrease in the inactivation rate.
Amaranth BADH responded similarly to the preincubation with NADH or betaine
aldehyde but NAD(+) elicited opposite changes, increasing the rate of
inactivation after prolonged preincubation. In amaranth BADH, the different
behavior of both coenzymes, and the observed biphasic inactivation kinetics are
consistent with the previously proposed iso kinetic mechanism, characterized by
the existence of two interconvertible apoenzyme forms, one able to bind NAD(+)
and the other NADH. Taken together, our results suggest that ligand-induced
conformational changes in BADH from the two sources studied might be important
for both proper enzyme function and protection against oxidation.

DOI: 10.1016/s0009-2797(02)00197-7 
PMID: 12604197  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

