
1. Chemphyschem. 2003 Feb 17;4(2):162-8.

Electrochemical approaches for chemical and biological analysis on Mars.

Kounaves SP(1).

Collaborators: Kounaves SP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155, USA.
samuel.kounaves@tufts.edu
(2)Tufts U, Medford, MA

Obtaining in situ chemical data from planetary bodies such as Mars or Europa can 
present significant challenges. The one analytical technique that has many of the
requisite characteristics to meet such a challenge is electroanalysis. Described 
here are three electroanalytical devices designed for in situ geochemical and
biological analysis on Mars. The Mars Environmental Compatibility Assessment
(MECA) was built and flight qualified for the now cancelled NASA Mars 2001
Lander. Part of MECA consisted of four "cells" containing arrays of
electrochemical based sensors for measuring the ionic species in soil samples. A 
next-generation MECA, the Robotic Chemical Analysis Laboratory (RCAL), uses a
carousel-type system to allow for greater customization of analytical procedures.
A second instrument, proposed as part of the 2007 CryoScout mission, consists of 
a flow-through inorganic chemical analyzer (MICA). CryoScout is a torpedo-like
device designed for subsurface investigation of the stratigraphic climate record 
embedded in Mars' north polar cap. As the CryoScout melts its way through the ice
cap, MICA will collect and analyze the meltwater for a variety of inorganics and 
chemical parameters. By analyzing the chemistry locked in the layers of dust,
salt, and ice, geologists will be able to determine the recent history of
climate, water, and atmosphere on Mars and link it to the past. Finally,
electroanalysis shows its abilities in the detection of possible microorganism on
Mars or elsewhere in the solar system. To identify an unknown microorganism, one 
that may not even use Earth-type biochemistry, requires a detection scheme which 
makes minimal assumptions and looks for the most general features. Recent work
has demonstrated that the use of an array of electrochemical sensors which
monitors the changes in a solution via electrical conductivity, pH, and ion
selective electrodes, can be used to detect minute chemical perturbations caused 
by the growth of bacteria and with the correct methodology provide unamibiguous
detection of such life forms.

DOI: 10.1002/cphc.200390026 
PMID: 12619415  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

