
1. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2003 Feb;31(4):269-73.

Comparison between two strategies for umbilical cord blood collection.

Solves P(1), Moraga R, Saucedo E, Perales A, Soler MA, Larrea L, Mirabet V,
Planelles D, Carbonell-Uberos F, Monleón J, Planells T, Guillén M, Andrés A,
Franco E.

Author information: 
(1)Valencia Cord Blood Bank, Processing and Cryopreservation Service, Valencia
Transfusion Centre, Spain.

The use of cord blood (CB) for transplantation has increased greatly in recent
years. The collection strategy is the first step in collecting good-quality CB
units. There are two main techniques for collecting CB from the umbilical vein:
in the delivery room while the placenta is still in the uterus by midwives and
obstetricians or in an adjacent room after placental delivery by CB bank trained 
personnel. In this study, the benefits and disadvantages between the two
different CB collection strategies were evaluated, in order to improve CB bank
methodology. Valencia CB bank maintains the two different collection strategies. 
CB was obtained from 569 vaginal and 70 caesarean deliveries and obstetrical and 
clinical charts were reviewed. Before processing CB units, volume was calculated 
and samples were drawn for cell counts. After processing and before
cryopreservation samples were drawn for cell counts, CD34+cell analysis,
viability, clonogenic assays and microbiology were drawn directly from the bags. 
We compared the efficiency of the two collection techniques. Obstetric data and
umbilical CB were obtained from 569 vaginal (264 collected in utero and 305
collected ex utero) and 70 caesarean deliveries. The proportion of excluded CB
units before processing was 33% for vaginal ex utero, 25% for vaginal in utero
and 46% for caesarean deliveries. Differences were statistically significant. For
vaginal deliveries a larger volume and a higher number of nucleated cells,
percentage of CD34+ cells and colony-forming units (CFUs) were harvested in the
in utero collection group. There was no statistical difference between CB
collected after placental expulsion from vaginal and caesarean deliveries.
Comparison between all vaginal and caesarean deliveries did not show any
difference. We conclude that the mode of collection influences the haematopoietic
content of CB donations. Collection before placental delivery is the best
approach to CB collection and allows optimisation of CB bank methodology.
Caesarean deliveries seem to contain similar progenitor content to vaginal
deliveries.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bmt.1703809 
PMID: 12621461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

