
1. Exp Hematol. 2003 Mar;31(3):251-60.

Profiling of differentially expressed apoptosis-related genes by cDNA arrays in
human cord blood CD34+ cells treated with etoposide.

Tao W(1), Hangoc G, Hawes JW, Si Y, Cooper S, Broxmeyer HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Walther Oncology Center, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Ind 46202-5254, USA. wetao@iupui.edu

OBJECTIVE: Understanding the molecular events that contribute to survival of and 
drug-induced apoptosis in hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSC/P) can
have impact on more rational approaches to blood cancer therapeutic design, as
well as on strategies to minimize toxic side effects of chemotherapeutic drugs.
Here we sought to systematically evaluate the basic molecular components and main
pathways that govern and mediate cellular response initiated within human CD34(+)
cells to etoposide-induced apoptosis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Human CD34(+) cells were isolated from umbilical cord
blood (CB) and expanded in vitro. Expression of apoptosis-related genes in the
control and etoposide treated cells was determined using cDNA array and
quantitative real-time RT-PCR.
RESULTS: We identified a set of apoptosis-related genes expressed in highly
purified normal human CB CD34(+) cells and determined how the expression of these
genes changed in response to etoposide treatment. In addition, TRAIL does not
induce apoptosis of normal human CD34(+) cells, and it has no cytotoxic effect on
human CD34(+) cells that are undergoing apoptosis in response to growth factor
withdrawal. This may be due to upregulation of cytotoxic receptors as well as the
decoy receptor for TRAIL, and c-FLIP.
CONCLUSION: p53, c-Myc, and BAFF pathways are main pathways utilized by CD34(+)
cells to arrest cell-cycle progression at multiple checkpoints, to halt
proliferation, and to induce apoptosis as part of their cellular response to
etoposide. Multiple known pro-survival and pro-apoptotic pathways are
simultaneously activated in etoposide-treated CD34(+) cells. Also, TRAIL, used
alone or in concert with chemotherapeutic drugs, may be of use as a safe blood
cancer therapeutic with no or low toxicity for HSC/P.

Copyright 2003 International Society for Experimental Hematology

DOI: 10.1016/s0301-472x(02)01083-4 
PMID: 12644023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

