
1. Int Rev Immunol. 2002 Nov-Dec;21(6):471-95.

Immunological relationship between the mother and the fetus.

Szekeres-Bartho J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Medical School, Pecs
University, Pecs, Hungary.

The immunological relationship between the mother and the fetus is a
bi-directional communication determined on the one hand by fetal antigen
presentation and on the other hand by recognition of and reaction to these
antigens by the maternal immune system. There is evidence now that immunological 
recognition of pregnancy is important for the maintenance of gestation, and that 
inadequate recognition of fetal antigens might result in failed pregnancy. In
contrast to HLA-A and -B Class I genes that are downregulated in human
trophoblast cells, nonpolymorphic Class I molecules, e.g., HLA-G Class Ib, are
expressed in extravillous cytotrophoblast and also in endothelial cells of fetal 
vessels in the chorionic villi as well as in amnion cells and amniotic fluid. The
trophoblast does not induce transplantation immunity and resists NK- and
CTL-mediated lysis in vitro. According to our present knowledge, HLA-G presents
antigens for gamma/delta T cells and at the same time defends the trophoblast
from cytotoxic effector mechanisms. Since polymorphic MHC is absent from the
trophoblast, presentation of fetally derived antigens is unlikely to be MHC
restricted. gamma/delta T cells recognize a distinct group of ligands with a
smaller receptor repertoire than alpha/beta T cells. Most gamma/delta T cells
recognize unprocessed foreign antigens without MHC. In the decidua gamma/delta
TCR-positive cells significantly increase in number and the majority of decidual 
gamma/delta T cells are in an activated form due to recognition of conserved
mammalian molecules on the trophoblast. Following recognition of fetally derived 
antigens, the immune system reacts with the setting in of a wide range of
protective mechanisms. Many observations suggest that pregnancy is associated
with an altered TH1/TH2 balance. Maternal immune response is biased toward
humoral immunity and away from cell-mediated immunity that could be harmful to
the fetus. Cytokines of maternal origin act on placental development. On the
other hand, antigen expression on the placenta determines maternal cytokine
pattern. Normal human pregnancy is characterized by low peripheral NK activity,
and increased NK activity seems to play a role in spontaneous abortions of
unknown etiology. In early human pregnancy the majority of uterine lymphocytes
are CD56(bright) granulated NK cells, which do not express CD16 or CD3. In
rodents and humans, uterine NK cells are under hormonal control. In early
pregnancy they are enriched at sites where fetal trophoblast infiltrates the
decidua. The dynamics of the appearance of uterine NK cells suggest that one of
the functions of these cells is control of placentation. Another protective
mechanism operating in favor of pregnancy is progesterone-dependent
immunomodulation. Due to stimulation by fetally derived antigens, pregnancy
lymphocytes develop progesterone receptors and in the presence of progesterone
produce a mediator (PIBF) that, through altering the cytokine balance, inhibits
NK activity and exerts an antiabortive effect in mice.

DOI: 10.1080/08830180215017 
PMID: 12650238  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

