
1. Clin Exp Allergy. 2003 Apr;33(4):531-7.

Expression of the neutrophil-activating CXC chemokine ENA-78/CXCL5 by human
eosinophils.

Persson T(1), Monsef N, Andersson P, Bjartell A, Malm J, Calafat J, Egesten A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Lund University, Malmö University
Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Eosinophils are seen at sites of inflammation in diseases such as
helminthic infestation, asthma, ulcerative colitis and some neoplastic diseases. 
They are also associated with connective tissue remodelling, for example in
longstanding asthma. In the present study, we investigated whether eosinophils
express the CXC chemokine epithelial cell-derived neutrophil activating peptide
(ENA-78/CXCL5), a chemokine that can activate neutrophils and in addition
possesses angiogenic properties. Immunocytochemistry detected CXCL5 in
eosinophils and the peptide was localized in the specific granules by
immunoelectron microscopy.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In eosinophil lysates, 12 +/- 2 pg (mean +/- SEM) of CXCL5
was detected per 106 cells by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Weak
constitutive expression of CXCL5, as well as the related CXC chemokine
IL-8/CXCL8, could be detected in freshly isolated eosinophils by RT-PCR. However,
during prolonged incubation of eosinophils, a strong increase in both CXCL5 and
IL-8/CXCL8 expression was seen, as detected by RT-PCR, and increasing amounts of 
CXCL5 peptide with time were detected in the incubation medium by ELISA. Addition
of TNF-alpha neutralizing antibodies during prolonged incubation significantly
inhibited CXCL5 production, demonstrating involvement of auto- and paracrine
effects from TNF-alpha produced by eosinophils themselves. Addition of IFN-gamma 
showed a strong inhibitory effect on CXCL5 synthesis.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that, through expression of CXCL5, eosinophils
can recruit and activate CXC receptor 2 (CXCR2)-bearing cells such as neutrophils
at sites of inflammation. Eosinophils may also promote connective tissue
remodelling through release of this peptide.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2222.2003.01609.x 
PMID: 12680872  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

