
1. Dent Clin North Am. 2003 Apr;47(2):319-36.

Nutrition and dental caries.

Mobley CC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community Dentistry, University of Texas Health Science Center
at San Antonio Dental School, Mail Code 7917 7703, Floyd Curl Drive, San Antonio,
TX 78229-3900, USA. mobleyc@uthscsa.edu

Promotion of sound dietary practices is an essential component of caries
management, along with fluoride exposure and oral hygiene practices. Scientific
discoveries have lead to better understanding of the caries process, the
ever-expanding food supply, and the interaction between the two. Fermentable
carbohydrates interact dynamically with oral bacteria and saliva, and these foods
will continue to be a major part of a healthful diet. Dental health professionals
can serve their patients and the public by providing comprehensive oral health
care and by promoting lifestyle behaviors to improve oral and general health
within the time constraints of their practice. Dietary advice given should not
contradict general health principles when providing practical guidance to reduce 
caries risk. The following principles should guide messages: * Encourage balanced
diets based on moderation and variety as depicted by the Food Guide Pyramid and
the Dietary Guidelines for Americans to provide a sound approach. Avoid
references to "bad" foods and focus on "good" diets that include a variety of
foods. * Give examples of how combining and sequencing foods can enhance
mastication, saliva production, and oral clearance at each eating occasion.
Combining dairy foods with sugary foods, raw foods with cooked, and protein-rich 
foods with acidogenic foods are all good examples. Suggest that eating and
drinking be followed by cariostatic foods such as xylitol chewing gum. * Drink
water to satisfy thirst and hydration needs as often as possible. Restrict
consumption of sweetened beverages to meal and snack times when they can be
combined with other cariostatic foods. * When a patient reports excessive dietary
intake of a fermentable carbohydrate to the point of displacing other important
foods in the diet, identify alternatives that will help the patient maintain or
achieve a healthy body weight, oral health status, and a nutrient-dense intake.

DOI: 10.1016/s0011-8532(02)00102-7 
PMID: 12699234  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

