
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2003 Jun 15;83(2):205-18.

A retail and consumer phase model for exposure assessment of Bacillus cereus.

Nauta MJ(1), Litman S, Barker GC, Carlin F.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiological Laboratory for Health Protection, National Institute for
Public Health and the Environment (RIVM), P.O. Box 1, 3720 BA Bilthoven, The
Netherlands. Maarten.Nauta@rivm.nl

An exposure assessment is conducted for psychrotrophic and mesophilic Bacillus
cereus in a cooked chilled vegetable product. A model is constructed that covers 
the retail and consumer phase of the food pathway, using the output of a similar 
model on the industrial process as input. Microbial growth is the predominant
process in the model. Variability in time and temperature during transport and
storage is included in the model and different domestic refrigerator temperature 
distributions are compared. As an end point, probable levels of B. cereus colony 
forming units (cfu) in packages of vegetable purée are predicted at the moment
the consumer takes the product from its refrigerator, that is prior to a cooking 
process. The psychrotrophic strain is predicted to end up above a threshold level
of 10(5) cfu/g in 0.9% to 6.3% of the vegetable purée packages, depending on
domestic refrigerator temperature. Accounting for spoilage this reduces to 0.3%
to 2.4%. Even if the purée is stored at 4 degrees C in the domestic refrigerator 
and use-by-date (UBD) is respected, the threshold level may be passed. For the
mesophilic strain the threshold level is rarely passed, but in contrast to the
total viable count, the spore load at the end point is predicted to be higher
than in the psychrotrophic strain. Our study illustrates how an exposure
assessment model, which may be used in quantitative risk assessment, can
integrate expertise in modelling, food processing and microbiology over the food 
pathway, and thus evaluate food safety, identify gaps in knowledge and compare
risk management measures. As important gaps in knowledge, the lack of sporulation
and germination models and data, validated non-isothermal growth models and a
spoilage model useful for risk assessment are identified. Knowledge of the
dose-response relationship is limited and does not allow a full risk assessment. 
It is shown that exposure can be lowered by lowering domestic refrigerator
temperatures, and less so much by monitoring and withdrawing contaminated
products at the end of industrial processing.

DOI: 10.1016/s0168-1605(02)00374-4 
PMID: 12706041  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

