
1. Biochemistry. 2003 May 6;42(17):4954-61.

Thermodynamic and kinetic analysis of a peptide-class I MHC interaction
highlights the noncovalent nature and conformational dynamics of the class I
heterotrimer.

Binz AK(1), Rodriguez RC, Biddison WE, Baker BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Notre Dame, 251
Nieuwland Science Hall, Notre Dame, Indiana 46556-5670, USA.

The class I major histocompatibility (MHC) molecule is a heterotrimer composed of
a heavy chain, the small subunit beta(2)-microglobulin (beta(2)m), and a peptide.
Fluorescence anisotropy has been used to assay the interaction of a labeled
peptide with a recombinant, soluble form of the class I MHC HLA-A2. Consistent
with earlier work, peptide binding is shown to be a two-step process limited by a
conformational rearrangement in the heavy chain/beta(2)m heterodimer. However, we
identify two pathways for peptide dissociation from the heterotrimer: (1) initial
peptide dissociation leaving a heavy chain/beta(2)m heterodimer and (2) initial
dissociation of beta(2)m, followed by peptide dissociation from the heavy chain. 
Eyring analyses of rate constants measured as a function of temperature permit
for the first time a complete thermodynamic characterization of peptide binding. 
We find that in this case peptide binding is mostly entropically driven, likely
reflecting the hydrophobic character of the peptide binding groove and the
peptide anchor residues. Thermodynamic and kinetic analyses of peptide-MHC
interactions as performed here may be of practical use in the engineering of
peptides with desired binding properties and will aid in the interpretation of
the effects of MHC and peptide substitutions on peptide binding and T cell
reactivity. Finally, our data suggest a role for beta(2)m in dampening
conformational dynamics in the heavy chain. Remaining conformational variability 
in the heavy chain once beta(2)m has bound may be a mechanism to promote
promiscuity in peptide binding.

DOI: 10.1021/bi034077m 
PMID: 12718537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

