
1. Zh Obshch Biol. 2003 Mar-Apr;64(2):128-45.

[The budget model of ecosystem of a shallow highly eutrophic lake].

[Article in Russian]

Kazantseva TI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Zoological Institute, Russian Academy of Science, Universitetskaya nab. 1, St.
Petersburg 199034, Russia. model@zin.ru

A model of energy budget of Lake Bolshoi Okunenok ecosystem was based on the data
received during field studies from May through November 1986. The model takes
into account 36 components including dissolved organic matter, bacteria,
phytoplankton, zooplankton, meiobenthos, macrobenthos, fish, suspended and
sediment detritus. The growing season has been divided into 16 intervals
according to the number of observations. The balance equation for each live
component describes the change in its biomass for a time interval between two
successive sampling dates. The change is considered as a balance of energy input 
with assimilation or feeding, and energy loss due to respiration, excretion,
predation, natural mortality, fishery catchment or and emergence of imago
insects. For non-live components we estimate an increase and a decrease in their 
mass due to the activity of living organisms, as well as organic matter exchange 
between water and sediments. Seasonal value of balance elements for each
component are equal to sums of appropriate interval value. Comparison of energy
flows through different links of a trophic web has shown that the role of a
bacterial-detrial link was extremely important in Lake Bolshoi Okunenok for the
growth season of 1986. Detritus constituted 58% of seasonal diet of non-predatory
zooplankton, 39% of diet of predatory zooplankton, 50% of diet of planktivorous
fish (fry of whitefish) and 92% of diet of benthivorous fish (fry of carp). The
contribution of bacteria to the total seasonal decomposition amounted to 46%.
Approximately 57% of the forage phytoplankton production, 86% of non-predatory
benthos production, and 23-38% of the other trophic groups production were
consumed by all grazers. "Coefficient of energy transformation" is proposed. It
is calculated as: CET(s, k) = Ps(k)/Pk, where Ps(k) is production of consumers
"s", built due to consumption of source "k"; Pk is production of source "k"
itself. In Lake Bolshoi Okunenok only 14% of energy built by phytoplankton were
accumulated in organic matter of zooplankton due to direct consumption.


PMID: 12723370  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

