
1. Thorax. 2003 May;58(5):425-30.

Increased concentrations of human beta-defensins in plasma and bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid of patients with diffuse panbronchiolitis.

Hiratsuka T(1), Mukae H, Iiboshi H, Ashitani J, Nabeshima K, Minematsu T, Chino
N, Ihi T, Kohno S, Nakazato M.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Miyazaki Medical College, Miyazaki,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Human beta-defensin (HBD)-1 and -2 are antimicrobial peptides present
in the respiratory tract. Recent reports have indicated reduced activity of
beta-defensins in cystic fibrosis, suggesting that beta-defensins may play an
important role in the pathological process of chronic respiratory tract
infection. Diffuse panbronchiolitis (DPB) is a progressive disease characterised 
by frequent episodes of superimposed infection, typically caused by Pseudomonas
aeruginosa. The aim of this study was to elucidate the role of these
antimicrobial peptides in this disease.
METHODS: The concentrations of HBD-1 and HBD-2 in plasma and bronchoalveolar
lavage (BAL) fluid from 33 patients with DPB and 30 normal adults were measured
by radioimmunoassay. Localisation of HBD-2 was investigated immunohistochemically
in an open lung biopsy specimen obtained from a patient with DPB.
RESULTS: High concentrations of HBD-1 and HBD-2 were noted in BAL fluid from DPB 
patients. Increased plasma concentrations of HBD-2, but not HBD-1, were found in 
patients with DPB compared with control subjects. In patients with DPB the HBD-2 
concentration in BAL fluid correlated significantly with the numbers of cells
recovered from the BAL fluid (total cells, neutrophils, and lymphocytes) and with
the BAL fluid concentration of IL-1beta. Synthetic HBD-2, but not HBD-1, had dose
dependent bactericidal activity against P aeruginosa. Treatment of 14 patients
with macrolides significantly reduced BAL fluid concentrations of HBD-2 but not
HBD-1 or plasma concentrations of HBD-1 and HBD-2. Immunohistochemistry of lung
tissue showed localisation of HBD-2 in the epithelia of the distal bronchioles.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that beta-defensins, particularly HBD-2,
participate in antimicrobial defence in the respiratory tract in DPB, and that
the BAL fluid concentration of HBD-2 may be a useful marker of airway
inflammation in patients with DPB.

DOI: 10.1136/thorax.58.5.425 
PMCID: PMC1746672
PMID: 12728165  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

