
1. J Immunol. 2003 May 15;170(10):5309-16.

Expression and production of the CXC chemokine growth-related oncogene-alpha by
human eosinophils.

Persson-Dajotoy T(1), Andersson P, Bjartell A, Calafat J, Egesten A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Lund University, Malmö University
Hospital, Malmö, Sweden. Terese.Dajotoy@mikrobiol.mas.lu.se

Eosinophils are seen together with neutrophils at sites of inflammation. However,
their roles are not clear. In addition, eosinophils infiltrate tumor tissue in
some neoplastic diseases. In this study, we show that large amounts of the
neutrophil-activating CXC chemokine growth-related oncogene (GRO)-alpha can be
produced by human eosinophils. Eosinophils showed presence of preformed GRO-alpha
in the crystalloid-containing specific granules (190 pg/2 x 10(6) cells). During 
incubation, a strong increase in GRO-alpha gene expression was seen. At a low
cell density, addition of TNF-alpha or IL-1 beta increased the production of
GRO-alpha in eosinophils, which was not the case at a higher cell density.
Eosinophils can produce TNF-alpha themselves, and neutralizing Abs against
TNF-alpha significantly inhibited GRO-alpha production. This suggests that
autocrine and paracrine effects from TNF-alpha can be important when
up-regulating GRO-alpha gene expression. In contrast, IFN-gamma, a prototypic
Th1-cytokine, down-regulated expression of GRO-alpha. This may be important
during resolution of inflammation but also suggests different roles for
eosinophils depending on the inflammatory context. Tumor-infiltrating eosinophils
in Hodgkin's disease of the nodular sclerosing type are associated with a poor
prognosis. Eosinophils from such tumor tissue showed an abundant expression of
GRO-alpha. The GRO-alpha receptor CXCR2 was also detected in tumor tissue,
proposing interactions between eosinophils and the tumor. Our findings suggest
that eosinophils can promote inflammation through recruitment of CXCR2-bearing
cells. In addition, this feature of the eosinophils indicates a role for these
cells in the biology of certain tumors.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.170.10.5309 
PMID: 12734381  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

