
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2003 May;69(5):2800-9.

The ars detoxification system is advantageous but not required for As(V)
respiration by the genetically tractable Shewanella species strain ANA-3.

Saltikov CW(1), Cifuentes A, Venkateswaran K, Newman DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department Geological and Planetary Sciences, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.

Arsenate [As(V); HAsO(4)(2-)] respiration by bacteria is poorly understood at the
molecular level largely due to a paucity of genetically tractable organisms with 
this metabolic capability. We report here the isolation of a new As(V)-respiring 
strain (ANA-3) that is phylogenetically related to members of the genus
Shewanella and that also provides a useful model system with which to explore the
molecular basis of As(V) respiration. This gram-negative strain
stoichiometrically couples the oxidation of lactate to acetate with the reduction
of As(V) to arsenite [As(III); HAsO(2)]. The generation time and lactate molar
growth yield (Y(lactate)) are 2.8 h and 10.0 g of cells mol of lactate(-1),
respectively, when it is grown anaerobically on lactate and As(V). ANA-3 uses a
wide variety of terminal electron acceptors, including oxygen, soluble ferric
iron, oxides of iron and manganese, nitrate, fumarate, the humic acid functional 
analog 2,6-anthraquinone disulfonate, and thiosulfate. ANA-3 also reduces As(V)
to As(III) in the presence of oxygen and resists high concentrations of As(III)
(up to 10 mM) when grown under either aerobic or anaerobic conditions. ANA-3
possesses an ars operon (arsDABC) that allows it to resist high levels of
As(III); this operon also confers resistance to the As-sensitive strains
Shewanella oneidensis MR-1 and Escherichia coli AW3110. When the gene encoding
the As(III) efflux pump, arsB, is inactivated in ANA-3 by a polar mutation that
also eliminates the expression of arsC, which encodes an As(V) reductase, the
resulting As(III)-sensitive strain still respires As(V); however, the generation 
time and the Y(lactate) value are two- and threefold lower, respectively, than
those of the wild type. These results suggest that ArsB and ArsC may be useful
for As(V)-respiring bacteria in environments where As concentrations are high,
but that neither is required for respiration.

DOI: 10.1128/aem.69.5.2800-2809.2003 
PMCID: PMC154534
PMID: 12732551  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

