
1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

J Immunol. 2003 Jun 1;170(11):5690-6.

Neutrophil serine proteinases activate human nonepithelial cells to produce
inflammatory cytokines through protease-activated receptor 2.

Uehara A(1), Muramoto K, Takada H, Sugawara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Graduate School of Dentistry,
Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

Retraction in
    Muramoto K, Sugawara S. J Immunol. 2010 Apr 1;184(7):4043.

Protease-activated receptors (PARs) compose a family of G protein-coupled
receptors activated by proteolysis with exposure of their tethered ligand.
Recently, we reported that a neutrophil-derived serine proteinase, proteinase 3
(PR3), activated human oral epithelial cells through PAR-2. The present study
examined whether other neutrophil serine proteinases, human leukocyte elastase
(HLE), and cathepsin G (Cat G) activate nonepithelial cells, human gingival
fibroblasts (HGF). HLE and Cat G as well as PR3 activated HGF to produce IL-8 and
monocyte chemoattractant protein 1. Human oral epithelial cells but not HGF
express mRNA and protein of secretory leukocyte protease inhibitor, an inhibitor 
of HLE and Cat G, and recombinant secretory leukocyte protease inhibitor clearly 
inhibited the activation of HGF induced by HLE and Cat G but not by PR3. HGF
express PAR-1 and PAR-2 mRNA in the cells and the proteins on the cell surface.
HLE and Cat G cleaved the peptide corresponding to the N terminus of PAR-2 with
exposure of its tethered ligand. Treatment with trypsin, an agonist for PAR-2,
and a synthetic PAR-2 agonist peptide induced intracellular Ca(2+) mobilization
and rendered cells refractory to subsequent stimulation with HLE and Cat G. The
production of cytokine induced by HLE and Cat G and the PAR-2 agonist peptide was
completely abolished by inhibition of phospholipase C. These findings suggest
that neutrophil serine proteinases have equal ability to activate human
nonepithelial cells through PAR-2 to produce inflammatory cytokines and may
control a number of inflammatory processes such as periodontitis.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.170.11.5690 
PMID: 12759451  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

