
1. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2003 May;82(5):439-42.

Comparison between two cord blood collection strategies.

Solves P(1), Mirabet V, Larrea L, Moraga R, Planelles D, Saucedo E, Uberos FC,
Planells T, Guillen M, Andres A, Monleon J, Soler MA, Franco E.

Author information: 
(1)Valencia Cord Blood Bank, Valencia Transfusion Centre, and La Fe University
Hospital, Valencia, Spain. solves_pil@gva.es

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Collection strategy is the first step for collecting
good quality cord blood (CB) units. There are two principal different techniques 
to collect CB from the umbilical vein: in the delivery room while the placenta is
still in the uterus by midwives and obstetricians or in an adjacent room after
placental delivery by CB-bank trained personnel. In this study, the benefits and 
disadvantages between two different CB collection strategies were evaluated in
order to improve CB bank methodology.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Valencia CB bank maintains the two different collection
strategies aforementioned. Before processing CB units, volume was calculated and 
samples were drawn for cell counts. After processing and before cryopreservation,
samples for cell counts, CD34 analysis, viability, clonogenic assays and
microbiology were drawn directly from the bags. We compared the efficiency of the
two collection techniques.
RESULTS: Obstetric date and umbilical CB was obtained from 848 vaginal (484
collected in uterus and 364 collected ex uterus). The proportion of excluded CB
units before processing was 33% for ex uterus and 25% for in uterus. The
difference was statistically significant. A larger volume and a higher number of 
total nucleated cells, CD34+ cells and CFUs were harvested in the in uterus
collection group.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: Based on our findings, we conclude that the mode 
of collection influences the hematopoietic content of CB donations. Collection
before placental delivery is the best approach to CB collection and allows
optimizing CB bank methodology.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1600-0412.2003.00129.x 
PMID: 12752074  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

