
1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 15;278(33):31078-87. Epub 2003 May 19.

Identification, purification, and characterization of an eukaryotic-like
phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase (coenzyme A biosynthetic pathway) in the
hyperthermophilic archaeon Pyrococcus abyssi.

Armengaud J(1), Fernandez B, Chaumont V, Rollin-Genetet F, Finet S, Marchetti C, 
Myllykallio H, Vidaud C, Pellequer JL, Gribaldo S, Forterre P, Gans P.

Author information: 
(1)CEA VALRHO, DSV-DIEP, SBTN, Service de Biochimie post-génomique and
Toxicologie Nucléaire, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France. armengaud@cea.fr

Although coenzymeA (CoA) is essential in numerous metabolic pathways in all
living cells, molecular characterization of the CoA biosynthetic pathway in
Archaea remains undocumented. Archaeal genomes contain detectable homologues for 
only three of the five steps of the CoA biosynthetic pathway characterized in
Eukarya and Bacteria. In case of phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase (PPAT)
(EC 2.7.7.3), the putative archaeal enzyme exhibits significant sequence
similarity only with its eukaryotic homologs, an unusual situation for a protein 
involved in a central metabolic pathway. We have overexpressed in Escherichia
coli, purified, and characterized this putative PPAT from the hyperthermophilic
archaeon Pyrococcus abyssi (PAB0944). Matrix-assisted laser desorption
ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry and high performance liquid
chromatography measurements are consistent with the presence of a dephospho-CoA
(dPCoA) molecule tightly bound to the polypeptide. The protein indeed catalyzes
the synthesis of dPCoA from 4'-phosphopantetheine and ATP, as well as the reverse
reaction. The presence of dPCoA stabilizes PAB0944, as it induces a shift from 76
to 82 degrees C of the apparent Tm measured by differential scanning
microcalorimetry. Potassium glutamate was found to stabilize the protein at 400
mm. The enzyme behaves as a monomeric protein. Although only distantly related,
secondary structure prediction indicates that archaeal and eukaryal PPAT belong
to the same nucleotidyltransferase superfamily of bacterial PPAT. The existence
of operational proteins highly conserved between Archaea and Eukarya involved in 
a central metabolic pathway challenge evolutionary scenarios in which eukaryal
operational proteins are strictly of bacterial origin.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M301891200 
PMID: 12756245  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

