
1. Br J Dermatol. 2003 Apr;148(4):670-9.

Normal keratinocytes express Toll-like receptors (TLRs) 1, 2 and 5: modulation of
TLR expression in chronic plaque psoriasis.

Baker BS(1), Ovigne JM, Powles AV, Corcoran S, Fry L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College of Science,
Technology and Medicine, St Mary's Campus, Norfolk Place, Paddington, London W2
1PG, UK. b.baker@ic.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are part of the innate immune system
involved in the response to microbial pathogens. TLR2 recognizes various ligands 
expressed by Gram-positive bacteria, while TLR3, TLR4 and TLR5 are specific for
double-stranded RNA, Gram-negative lipopolysaccharides and bacterial flagellin,
respectively.
OBJECTIVES: To determine, firstly, whether epidermal keratinocytes of normal skin
express TLRs and, secondly, whether modulation of TLR expression occurs in
psoriasis, an inflammatory skin disease associated with certain microorganisms
such as streptococci, staphylococci and yeasts.
METHODS: Eight samples of normal, and 15 samples of lesional and nonlesional
psoriatic skin were stained with polyclonal antibodies specific for TLR1-5 using 
an avidin-biotin-peroxidase technique.
RESULTS: Epidermal keratinocytes in normal skin constitutively expressed TLR1,
TLR2 and TLR5, while TLR3 and TLR4 were, in most cases, barely detectable.
Cytoplasmic TLR1 and TLR2 were expressed throughout the epidermis, with higher
staining of the latter on basal keratinocytes, while TLR5 expression was
concentrated in the basal layer. In contrast, in lesional epidermis from patients
with psoriasis, TLR2 was more highly expressed on the keratinocytes of the upper 
epidermis than on the basal layer, while TLR5 was downregulated in basal
keratinocytes compared with corresponding nonlesional psoriatic epidermis. In
addition, nuclear TLR1 staining was observed in the upper layers of both
nonlesional and lesional psoriatic epidermis, but not in that of normal skin.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that TLRs expressed by epidermal
keratinocytes constitute part of the innate immune system of the skin. The
relevance of altered keratinocyte TLR expression in psoriasis remains to be
determined.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2133.2003.05287.x 
PMID: 12752123  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

