
1. Water Res. 2003 Jun;37(11):2555-70.

Effect of feeding pattern and storage on the sludge settleability under aerobic
conditions.

Martins AM(1), Heijnen JJ, van Loosdrecht MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Engineering, Delft University of Technology,
Julianalaan 67, 2628 BC Delft, The Netherlands. a.martins@tnw.tudelft.nl

The selection of filamentous bacteria is often assumed to be associated with
specific microbial properties such as growth rate, substrate uptake rate,
substrate affinity and potential for substrate storage. In this study we aimed to
verify some of these factors. Sequencing batch reactor (SBR) systems were used to
scale-down aerobic activated sludge systems with an aerobic selector. Adding
acetate in different aerobic feeding periods allowed us to simulate a variable
relative size of aerobic selector with different bulk liquid substrate
concentrations. The experiments showed that as expected, the aerobic fill time
ratio (FTR(ox)) and the corresponding feast period, which can be assumed similar 
to contact time in an aerobic selector, had a strong effect on the sludge
settleability. Promoting a strong substrate gradient in the SBR (FTR(ox)<5.4%)
resulted in good sludge settleability (SVI<120mLg(-1)). Whenever acetate was
added in a limiting rate (FTR(ox)>6.2%), a condition in which the acetate
concentration in the reactor was always very low, the sludge settleability
decreased (SVI>150mLg(-1)). Sludge settleability could be improved by changing
the feeding strategy to a pulse feed. The maximum specific acetate uptake rate
and poly beta-hydroxybutyrate (PHB) production rate of bad settling sludge,
including bulking sludge, was similar to well-settling sludge, which is not in
accordance with the general assumptions that well settling sludge have a higher
maximal substrate uptake rate and better storage capacities. An alternative
hypothesis for the development of filamentous structures in biological flocs has 
been formulated. It is hypothesized that bulking sludge originates from the
presence of substrate gradients in sludge aggregates. Whereas at low bulk liquid 
substrate concentration filamentous bacteria give easier access to the substrate 
at the outside of the flocs and thereby proliferate, at high bulk liquid
substrate concentration there is no substrate advantage for filamentous organisms
and smooth bacterial structures predominate. In this hypothesis there is no need 
for an intrinsic difference in kinetic parameters between floc and filamentous
bacteria. Where presence of filamentous bacteria is related to process
conditions, the presence of a specific filament is likely due to presence of a
specific limiting substrate.

DOI: 10.1016/S0043-1354(03)00070-8 
PMID: 12753833  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

