
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2003 Jun;69(6):3223-30.

Cultivation-dependent and -independent approaches for determining bacterial
diversity in heavy-metal-contaminated soil.

Ellis RJ(1), Morgan P, Weightman AJ, Fry JC.

Author information: 
(1)NERC Centre for Population Biology, Imperial College London, Ascot, Berkshire 
SL5 7PY, United Kingdom. r.ellis@imperial.ac.uk

In recent years, culture-independent methods have been used in preference to
traditional isolation techniques for microbial community analysis. However, it is
questionable whether uncultured organisms from a given sample are important for
determining the impact of anthropogenic stress on indigenous communities. To
investigate this, soil samples were taken from a site with patchy metal
contamination, and the bacterial community structure was assessed with a variety 
of approaches. There were small differences in microscopic epifluorescence
bacterial counts. Denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) profiles of 16S 
rRNA gene fragments (16S-DGGE) amplified directly from soil samples were highly
similar. A clone library generated from the most contaminated sample revealed a
diverse bacterial community, which showed similarities to pristine soil
communities from other studies. However, the proportion of bacteria from the soil
samples that were culturable on standard plate-counting media varied between 0.08
and 2.2%, and these values correlated negatively with metal concentrations. The
culturable communities from each sample were compared by 16S-DGGE of plate washes
and by fatty acid profiling of individual isolates. Each approach indicated that 
there were considerable differences between the compositions of the culturable
communities from each sample. DGGE bands from both culture-based and
culture-independent approaches were sequenced and compared. These data indicated 
that metal contamination did not have a significant effect on the total genetic
diversity present but affected physiological status, so that the number of
bacteria capable of responding to laboratory culture and their taxonomic
distribution were altered. Thus, it appears that plate counts may be a more
appropriate method for determining the effect of heavy metals on soil bacteria
than culture-independent approaches.

DOI: 10.1128/aem.69.6.3223-3230.2003 
PMCID: PMC161537
PMID: 12788719  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

