
1. Nat Med. 2003 Jul;9(7):959-63.

Rapid myeloerythroid repopulation after intrafemoral transplantation of NOD-SCID 
mice reveals a new class of human stem cells.

Mazurier F(1), Doedens M, Gan OI, Dick JE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, University Health Network, and Dept of
Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Toronto, 620 University Ave,
Toronto, Ontario M5G 2C1, Canada.

A major problem hampering effective stem cell-based therapies is the absence of a
clear understanding of the human hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) pool composition. 
The severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) repopulating cell (SRC)
xenotransplant assay system provides a powerful tool for characterizing the
frequency, cell surface markers, cell cycle status, homing and response to
cytokine stimulation of human HSCs. Clonal tracking of retrovirally transduced
SRCs and transplantation of specific subpopulations revealed SRC classes with
distinct repopulation potentials. However, all HSC repopulation assays are based 
on intravenous injection, a complex process that requires circulation through
blood, recognition and extravasation through bone marrow vasculature, and
migration to a supportive microenvironment. Thus, some classes of HSCs may remain
undetected. By direct intrafemoral injection, we identified rapid SRCs (R-SRCs)
within the Lin-CD34+CD38loCD36- subpopulation. R-SRCs rapidly generate high
levels of human myeloid and erythroid cells within the injected femur, migrate to
the blood and colonize individual bones of non-obese diabetic (NOD)-SCID mice
within 2 weeks after transplantation. Lentivector-mediated clonal analysis of
individual R-SRCs revealed heterogeneity in their proliferative and migratory
properties. The identification of a new HSC class and an effective intrafemoral
assay provide the tools required to develop more effective stem cell-based
therapies that rely on rapid reconstitution.

DOI: 10.1038/nm886 
PMID: 12796774  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

