
1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003;(2):CD003875.

Enamel matrix derivative (Emdogain) for periodontal tissue regeneration in
intrabony defects.

Esposito M(1), Coulthard P, Worthington HV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomaterials and Department of Prosthetic Dentistry/Dental
Material Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy at Goteborg University, PO Box 412,
Medicinaregatan 8B, Goteborg, Sweden. marco.esposito@biomaterials.gu.se

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005;(4):CD003875.

BACKGROUND: Periodontitis is a chronic infective disease of the gums caused by
bacteria present in dental plaque. This condition induces the breakdown of the
tooth supporting apparatus until teeth are lost. Surgery may be indicated to
arrest disease progression and regenerate lost tissues. Several surgical
techniques have been developed to regenerate periodontal tissues including guided
tissue regeneration (GTR), bone grafting (BG) and the use of enamel matrix
derivative (EMD). EMD is an extract of enamel matrix and contains amelogenins of 
various molecular weights. There is evidence to show that amelogenins are
involved not only in enamel formation, but also in the formation of the
periodontal attachment during tooth formation.
OBJECTIVES: To test the efficacy of EMD in comparison with open flap debridement,
GTR and various BG procedures for the treatment of intrabony defects.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Oral Health Group's Trials Register,
the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), MEDLINE and EMBASE.
Several journals were handsearched. No language restrictions were applied.
Authors of randomised controlled trials (RCTs) identified, personal contacts and 
the manufacturer were contacted to identify unpublished trials. Most recent
search: January 2003.
SELECTION CRITERIA: RCTs on patients affected by periodontitis having intrabony
defects treated with EMD compared with open flap debridement, GTR and various BG 
procedures with at least one year follow up. The outcome measures considered
were: tooth loss, changes in probing attachment levels (PAL), pocket depths
(PPD), gingival recessions (REC), marginal bone levels on intraoral radiographs
and postoperative infections.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Screening of eligible studies, assessment of the
methodological quality of the trials and data extraction were conducted in
duplicate and independently by two reviewers. Results were expressed as random
effect models using weighted mean differences for continuous outcomes and
relative risk for dichotomous outcomes with 95% confidence interval (CI).
Heterogeneity was investigated including both clinical and methodological
factors.
MAIN RESULTS: No difference in tooth loss was observed. A meta-analysis including
eight trials showed that Emdogain treated sites displayed statistically
significant PAL improvements (mean difference 1.3 mm, 95%CI: 0.8 to 1.8) and PPD 
reduction (1 mm, 95%CI: 0.5 to 1.4) when compared to flap surgery. Comparing
Emdogain with GTR (six trials), GTR showed a statistically significant reduction 
of PPD (0.6 mm) and increase of REC (0.5 mm). No difference in postoperative
infections was observed.
REVIEWER'S CONCLUSIONS: Emdogain is able to significantly improve PAL levels
(1.3mm) and PPD reduction (1mm) when compared to flap surgery, however these
results may not have a great clinical impact, since it has not been shown that
more periodontally compromised teeth could be saved. There was no evidence of
clinically important differences between GTR and Emdogain.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003875 
PMID: 12804493  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

