
1. J Immunol. 2003 Jul 1;171(1):69-77.

Thy-1 signaling in the context of costimulation provided by dendritic cells
provides signal 1 for T cell proliferation and cytotoxic effector molecule
expression, but fails to trigger delivery of the lethal hit.

Haeryfar SM(1), Al-Alwan MM, Mader JS, Rowden G, West KA, Hoskin DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie
University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.

Cross-linking of the GPI-anchored protein Thy-1 results in T cell proliferation
and IL-2 synthesis. However, the exact function of Thy-1 in the process of T cell
activation remains unknown, as does the effect of costimulation on Thy-1-driven T
cell responses. In this study, we have investigated the ability of Thy-1 to
substitute for traditional signal 1 in the context of costimulation provided by
dendritic cells. Dendritic cells dramatically enhanced T cell proliferation and
IL-2 synthesis in response to Thy-1 triggering by anti-Thy-1 mAb. This effect was
not dependent on dendritic cell Fcgamma receptors, but was a result of
B7-mediated costimulation (signal 2). T cells were also activated when microbeads
coated with a combination of anti-Thy-1 and anti-CD28 mAbs were used to supply
signals 1 and 2, respectively. Thy-1-stimulated T cells adhere to target cells
and express perforin, granzyme B, and Fas ligand, but fail to kill target cells
due to an inability to reorganize their secretion machinery. Moreover, in
contrast to TCR signaling, Thy-1 triggering failed to induce cytotoxicity in
redirected lysis assays. We conclude that Thy-1 triggering can partially
substitute for signal 1, which, in combination with a strong signal 2, leads to
robust T cell proliferation, IL-2 synthesis, and cytotoxic effector molecule
expression, but does not induce cytolytic function. The block at the level of
cytotoxic effector function that results when T cells are activated in the
absence of a classical, Ag-specific signal 1 may constitute a mechanism to ensure
the specificity of CTL responses and prevent potentially harmful promiscuous
cytotoxicity.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.171.1.69 
PMID: 12816984  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

