
1. J Immunol. 2003 Jul 1;171(1):37-46.

The uterine NK cell population requires IL-15 but these cells are not required
for pregnancy nor the resolution of a Listeria monocytogenes infection.

Barber EM(1), Pollard JW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for the Study of Reproductive Biology and Women's Health, Department of
Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, 
NY 10461, USA.

During pregnancy in mice, uterine natural killer (uNK) cells abundantly
accumulate on the mesometrial side of the placenta. In this study, we show that
the presence of both mature and immature uNK cells requires IL-15. Bone marrow
transplantation of NK cell-negative mice due to null mutations in the
recombination-activating gene (Rag) 2/common cytokine receptor gamma-chain
(Rag2(-/-)gamma(c)(-/-)) genes indicated that uNK cells originate from the bone
marrow and require IL-15 to develop. NK cells are thought to be central players
in the immune response to intracellular pathogens such as Listeria monocytogenes,
a bacterium that also has a predilection for replication in the placenta.
However, IL-15(-/-), NK cell-deficient mice were relatively protected from this
infection compared with wild-type mice, and during pregnancy the absence of NK
cells did not compromise the immune response at this site. The loss of uNK cells 
results in decidual abnormalities, including thickening of the arterial walls
with luminal narrowing and a hypocellular decidua basalis. These defects were
rescued by bone marrow transplantation of the Rag2(-/-)gamma(c)(-/-) mice that
restored the uNK cell population. The decidual abnormalities in the IL-15(-/-)
mice however did not result in infertility as gestation times and litter sizes
were comparable to those of wild-type mice. Fetal weights were mildly
compromised, consistent with the arterial pathologies. These results show that
uNK cells are not required for successful pregnancy and that NK cells are not
essential for an adequate immune response to L. monocytogenes in either pregnant 
or nonpregnant mice.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.171.1.37 
PMID: 12816981  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

