
1. Theor Appl Genet. 2003 Jun;107(1):36-42. Epub 2003 Mar 21.

Use of mid-parent values and progeny tests to increase the efficiency of potato
breeding for combined processing quality and disease and pest resistance.

Bradshaw JE(1), Dale MF, Mackay GR.

Author information: 
(1)Scottish Crop Research Institute, Invergowrie, Dundee DD2 5DA, Scotland.
jbrads@scri.sari.ac.uk

A potato breeding strategy is presented which avoids the common but ineffective
practice of intense early-generation visual selection between seedlings in a
glasshouse and spaced plants at a seed site. Once pair crosses have been made,
progeny tests are used to discard whole progenies before starting conventional
within-progeny selection at the unreplicated small-plot stage. Clones are also
visually selected from the best progenies for use as parents in the next cycle of
crosses whilst they are multiplied to provide enough tubers for assessment of
their yield and quality. Mid-parent values, as well as progeny tests, are then
used to select between the resultant crosses. Material from other breeding
programmes can be included in the parental assessments and used in the next cycle
of crosses if superior. Finally, in seeking new cultivars, the number of clones
on which to practise selection is increased by sowing more true seed of the best 
progenies, but without selection until the small-plot stage. Traits considered
are resistance to late blight [ Phytophthora infestans (Mont.) de Bary] and to
the white potato cyst nematode [ Globodera pallida (Stone)], fry colour and tuber
yield and appearance, as visually assessed by breeders. The theoretical
superiority of the strategy for seeking new cultivars lies in being able to
practise between-cross selection for a number of economically important traits
within 1 or 2 years of making crosses, something that is not possible on
individuals as seedlings in the glasshouse or spaced plants at the seed site.
This also means that full-sib family selection can be operated on a 3-year cycle,
an improvement on current practice of clonal selection on what is often at least 
a nine-year cycle. New cultivars can be sought with more confidence from the best
progenies in each cycle, and modern methods of rapid multiplication used to
reduce the number of clonal generations required to find the best clones.

DOI: 10.1007/s00122-003-1219-y 
PMID: 12835930  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

