
1. J Bacteriol. 2003 Jul;185(14):4152-62.

Crystal structures of active fully assembled substrate- and product-bound
complexes of UDP-N-acetylmuramic acid:L-alanine ligase (MurC) from Haemophilus
influenzae.

Mol CD(1), Brooun A, Dougan DR, Hilgers MT, Tari LW, Wijnands RA, Knuth MW, McRee
DE, Swanson RV.

Author information: 
(1)Syrrx Inc., San Diego, California 92121, USA.

UDP-N-acetylmuramic acid:L-alanine ligase (MurC) catalyzes the addition of the
first amino acid to the cytoplasmic precursor of the bacterial cell wall
peptidoglycan. The crystal structures of Haemophilus influenzae MurC in complex
with its substrate UDP-N-acetylmuramic acid (UNAM) and Mg(2+) and of a fully
assembled MurC complex with its product UDP-N-acetylmuramoyl-L-alanine (UMA), the
nonhydrolyzable ATP analogue AMPPNP, and Mn(2+) have been determined to 1.85- and
1.7-A resolution, respectively. These structures reveal a conserved, three-domain
architecture with the binding sites for UNAM and ATP formed at the domain
interfaces: the N-terminal domain binds the UDP portion of UNAM, and the central 
and C-terminal domains form the ATP-binding site, while the C-terminal domain
also positions the alanine. An active enzyme structure is thus assembled at the
common domain interfaces when all three substrates are bound. The MurC active
site clearly shows that the gamma-phosphate of AMPPNP is positioned between two
bound metal ions, one of which also binds the reactive UNAM carboxylate, and that
the alanine is oriented by interactions with the positively charged side chains
of two MurC arginine residues and the negatively charged alanine carboxyl group. 
These results indicate that significant diversity exists in binding of the UDP
moiety of the substrate by MurC and the subsequent ligases in the bacterial cell 
wall biosynthesis pathway and that alterations in the domain packing and tertiary
structure allow the Mur ligases to bind sequentially larger UNAM peptide
substrates.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.185.14.4152-4162.2003 
PMCID: PMC164886
PMID: 12837790  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

