
1. Proteins. 2003 Sep 1;52(4):624-32.

Structure, evolution, and inhibitor interaction of S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine
hydrolase from Plasmodium falciparum.

Bujnicki JM(1), Prigge ST, Caridha D, Chiang PK.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Laboratory, International Institute of Molecular and Cell
Biology, Warsaw, Poland. iamb@genesilico.pl

S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase (SAHH) is a key regulator of
S-adenosylmethionine-dependent methylation reactions and an interesting
pharmacologic target. We cloned the SAHH gene from Plasmodium falciparum
(PfSAHH), with an amino acid sequence agreeing with that of the PlasmoDB genomic 
database. Even though the expressed recombinant enzyme, PfSAHH, could use
3-deaza-adenosine (DZA) as an alternative substrate in contrast to the human
SAHH, it has a unique inability to substitute 3-deaza-(+/-)aristeromycin (DZAri) 
for adenosine. Among the analogs of DZA, including neplanocin A, DZAri was the
most potent inhibitor of the PfSAHH enzyme activity, with a K(i) of about 150 nM,
whether Ado or DZA was used as a substrate. When the same DZA analogs were tested
for their antimalarial activity, they also inhibited the in vitro growth of P.
falciparum parasites potently. Homology-modeling analysis revealed that a single 
substitution (Thr60-Cys59) between the human and malarial PfSAHH, in an otherwise
similar SAH-binding pocket, might account for the differential interactions with 
the nucleoside analogs. This subtle difference in the active site may be
exploited in the development of novel drugs that selectively inhibit PfSAHH. We
performed a comprehensive phylogenetic analysis of the SAHH superfamily and
inferred that SAHH evolved in the common ancestor of Archaea and Eukaryota, and
was subsequently horizontally transferred to Bacteria. Additionally, an analysis 
of the unusual and uncharacterized AHCYL1 family of the SAHH paralogs extant only
in animals reveals striking divergence of its SAH-binding pocket and the loss of 
key conserved residues, thus suggesting an evolution of novel function(s).

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.10446 
PMID: 12910461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

