
1. Cancer Res. 2003 Aug 15;63(16):5011-20.

Contribution of the MUC1 tandem repeat and cytoplasmic tail to invasive and
metastatic properties of a pancreatic cancer cell line.

Kohlgraf KG(1), Gawron AJ, Higashi M, Meza JL, Burdick MD, Kitajima S, Kelly DL, 
Caffrey TC, Hollingsworth MA.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, and the
Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 
Omaha, Nebraska 68198-6805, USA.

MUC1 is a polymorphic, highly glycosylated, type I transmembrane protein
expressed by ductal epithelial cells of many organs including pancreas, breast,
gastrointestinal tract, and airway. MUC1 is overexpressed and differentially
glycosylated by adenocarcinomas that arise in these organs, and is believed to
contribute to invasive and metastatic potential by contributing to cell surface
adhesion properties [via the tandem repeat (TR) domain] and through morphogenetic
signal transduction [via the cytoplasmic tail (CT)]. The large extracellular TR
of MUC1 consists of a heavily glycosylated, 20 amino acid sequence that shows
allelic variation with respect to number of repeats. This portion of MUC1 may
directly mediate adhesive or antiadhesive interactions with other surface
molecules on adjacent cells and through these interactions initiate signal
transduction pathways that are transmitted through the CT. We investigated the
contribution of the TR domain and the CT of MUC1 to the in vivo invasive and
metastatic potential, and the gene expression profile of the human pancreatic
tumor cell line S2-013. Results showed that S2-013 cells overexpressing
full-length MUC1 displayed a less invasive and metastatic phenotype compared with
control-transfected cells and cells expressing MUC1 lacking the TR domain or CT. 
Clonal populations were analyzed by cDNA array gene expression analysis, which
showed differences in the gene expression profiles between the different cell
lines. Among the genes differentially expressed were several that encode proteins
believed to play a role in invasion and metastasis.


PMID: 12941828  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

