
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2003 Sep;74(3):352-9.

Expression of IL-2 receptor beta and gamma chains by human gingival fibroblasts
and up-regulation of adhesion to neutrophils in response to IL-2.

Ozawa A(1), Tada H, Tamai R, Uehara A, Watanabe K, Yamaguchi T, Shimauchi H,
Takada H, Sugawara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tohoku University Graduate School
of Dentistry, Sendai, Japan.

To investigate the role of human gingival fibroblasts (HGF), the major
constituents of gingival tissue in periodontal inflammatory disease, the
expression of interleukin-2 receptor (IL-2R) alpha, beta, and gamma chains was
examined. Immunohistochemistry showed a pronounced accumulation of CD8(+) T cells
in the inflamed lamina propria of gingival tissue from patients with adult
periodontitis. HGF express IL-2Rbeta and IL-2Rgamma at mRNA and protein levels,
but the expression of IL-2Ralpha could not be detected, as assessed by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and flow cytometry. IL-2Rbeta, and -gamma
expressed on HGF were functionally active, as addition of neutralizing
anti-IL-2Rbeta and -gamma antibodies caused inhibition of the IL-2-induced
production of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), and addition of IL-2
induced phosphorylation of Janus tyrosine kinase 3, which is critical in
signaling through IL-2Rgamma in HGF. The IL-2-induced MCP-1 production was
significantly inhibited by pretreatment with neutralizing antibody to IL-15.
Addition of IL-2 also induced a marked up-regulation of the expression of
intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) on the surface of HGF, which in turn, 
significantly augmented the adhesion of human neutrophils, which were inhibited
by an anti-ICAM-1 antibody. These results suggest that HGF express functional
IL-2Rbetagamma, respond to IL-2 from infiltrated T cells, and actively
participate in the inflammatory process in the periodontal region and that IL-15 
produced by HGF sustains IL-2-mediated signaling in HGF.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.0103044 
PMID: 12949238  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

