
1. Microb Drug Resist. 2003 Fall;9(3):231-41.

Normally functioning murF is essential for the optimal expression of methicillin 
resistance in Staphylococcus aureus.

Sobral RG(1), Ludovice AM, Gardete S, Tabei K, De Lencastre H, Tomasz A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica da 
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, 2780 Oeiras, Portugal.

A carboxy-terminal fragment of murF was used to construct and insert a suicide
plasmid into the chromosomal copy of the gene in the highly and homogeneously
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) strain COL by Campbell type
integration. The plasmid insertion generated a mutant in which the MIC value for 
oxacillin was reduced from 400 microg/ml of the parental strain to 0.75 microg/ml
in 90% of the cells of the mutant cultures that were heterogeneous: they
contained subpopulations of bacteria with a frequency of 10(-3) that were capable
of expressing resistance at nearly the parental level. The impact of the murF
mutation on antibiotic resistance was selective for beta-lactam antibiotics:
there was no change in the susceptibility of the mutant to D-cycloserine,
fosfomycin, beta-D-chloro-alanine, moenomycin, bacitracin, or vancomycin.
Analysis of the mutant peptidoglycan showed decrease in the percentage of
oligomeric components in rough proportion to the accumulation of several abnormal
muropeptide components, which were identified as structural variants of the
disaccharide tripeptide monomer. An abnormal cell wall precursor identified as
UDP MurNac tripeptide was also detected in the cytoplasmic pool of the mutant
strain. A normal proportion of oligomers and a greatly reduced representation of 
the disaccharide tripeptide were demonstrated in the cell wall of the murF
mutant's subpopulation that has retained the parental level of resistance.
Northern analysis demonstrated a drastic reduction in the transcription rate of
mecA in mutant F9 whereas mecA transcription increased in the subpopulation of
bacteria that retained high-level resistance.

DOI: 10.1089/107662903322286436 
PMID: 12959401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

