
1. J Immunol. 1992 Mar 1;148(5):1458-64.

Cleavage of the cell-surface O-sialoglycoproteins CD34, CD43, CD44, and CD45 by a
novel glycoprotease from Pasteurella haemolytica.

Sutherland DR(1), Abdullah KM, Cyopick P, Mellors A.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Research Laboratories, Toronto Hospital, Ontario, Canada.

The study of structural/functional characteristics of the cell-surface
glycoproteins of leukocytes has led to a better understanding of the
differentiation and maturation of hematopoietic cells. We have assessed the
ability of a unique metalloprotease that is secreted by the bovine fibrinous
pneumonia pathogen Pasteurella haemolytica, to cleave cell-surface glycoproteins 
expressed on human leukocytes. Biochemical analysis shows that the O-glycosylated
cell surface Ag CD34, CD43 (leukosialin), CD44 (hyaluronic acid receptor), and
CD45 (leukocyte common Ag), are all cleaved by this protease. Although these
enzyme-sensitive structures contain N-linked glycans, they are all extensively
glycosylated with O-linked carbohydrates, which are especially abundant on CD34
and CD43. In contrast, the glycoproteins CD18/11a,b,c (leukocyte integrins), CD71
(transferrin receptor), HLA class I, and 8A3 Ag, which contain N-linked glycans
but no O-sialo-glycans, were resistant to the action of the enzyme. Inasmuch as
previous studies using glycophorin A had indicated that the substrate specificity
of this enzyme may be uniquely restricted to the cleavage of
O-sialoglycoproteins, we have designated this activity, P. haemolytica
glycoprotease. Immunofluorescence analysis with a variety of antibodies to
different epitopes of the P. haemolytica glycoprotease-sensitive structures
indicate that this enzyme may have widespread applications in epitope-mapping
studies, and represents a novel tool with which to study structure/function
relationships for O-sialoglycosylated cell-surface proteins. However, most
significantly these results suggest that the P. haemolytica glycoprotease may be 
of use in the affinity purification and recovery of clinically important
leukocyte subsets, such as primitive hematopoietic progenitors that express CD34.


PMID: 1371528  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

