
1. J Immunol. 1992 May 15;148(10):3004-11.

Role of endogenous peptides in murine allogenic cytotoxic T cell responses
assessed using transfectants of the antigen-processing mutant 174xCEM.T2.

Crumpacker DB(1), Alexander J, Cresswell P, Engelhard VH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville 22908.

One model to explain the high frequency of alloreactive T cells proposes that
allogeneic MHC molecules are recognized together with host cell-derived peptides.
A model system was developed to investigate the relevance of this mechanism by
expression of H-2Dd or H-2Ld in 174xCEM.T2 (T2) cells. This human cell line
contains a mutation in its Ag-processing pathway that should restrict the
association of endogenous peptides with cell surface class I molecules. CTL
generated by stimulating C57BL/6 (H-2b) responder cells with H-2Dd or H-2Ld
transfectants of the human B cell line C1R or the murine T cell lymphoma EL4 were
assayed for their ability to recognize alloantigenic determinants on these
transfectants. The major fraction of the H-2Dd-specific allogeneic CTL response, 
generated in a MLC or under clonal limiting dilution conditions, was composed of 
T cells that recognized H-2Dd expressed on C1R or EL4 cells, but failed to
recognize this molecule on T2 cells. Clonal analysis indicated that approximately
one-third of these CTL recognized determinants that were unique to H-2Dd
expressed on C1R stimulator cells whereas the remainder recognized determinants
that were also found on EL4 transfectants. Less than 10% of H-2Dd-reactive CTL
recognized the T2 transfectant, and these clones also killed C1R-Dd and EL4-Dd.
This result suggests that the great majority of H-2Dd-specific alloreactive CTL
recognize determinants that are formed by a complex of H-2Dd with endogenous
peptides that are absent or significantly reduced in T2 cells. Based on
recognition of human or murine transfectants, these CTL exhibit some level of
specificity for the structure or composition of the bound peptides. Examination
of allogeneic CTL specific for H-2Ld revealed populations similar to those
described for H-2Dd. In addition, a major new population was present that
recognized determinants shared between C1R-Ld and T2-Ld but not present on
EL4-Ld. These results are consistent with the idea that the alloreactive response
to H-2Ld is also largely dependent on the presence of bound peptide. However,
they also may indicate that the H-2Ld molecule expressed on T2 cells is occupied 
by one or more peptides that are shared with other human, but not murine, cells. 
The significance of these results to current models of alloreactivity is
discussed.


PMID: 1374446  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

