
1. J Immunol. 1992 Dec 1;149(11):3482-8.

Superantigen and HLA-DR ligation induce phospholipase-C gamma 1 activation in
class II+ T cells.

Kanner SB(1), Odum N, Grosmaire L, Masewicz S, Svejgaard A, Ledbetter JA.

Author information: 
(1)Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Research Institute, Seattle, WA 98121.

Bacterial enterotoxin superantigens bind directly to HLA class II molecules
(HLA-DR) expressed on both APC and activated human T cells, and simultaneously
bind to certain V beta chains of the TCR. In this report, we compared early T
cell signaling events in human alloantigen-stimulated T cells when activated by
HLA-DR ligation through antibody cross-linking or by direct enterotoxin
superantigen binding. Both types of stimuli induced tyrosine phosphorylation of
phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C gamma 1 (PLC gamma 1) and an
increase in intracellular calcium concentration; however, superantigen-induced
signaling was stronger than class II ligation alone. Antibody-mediated ligation
of HLA-DR with CD3 resulted in augmented PLC gamma 1 activation and increased
calcium mobilization, consistent with a mechanism of superantigen activity
through a combination of class II and CD3/Ti signals. In addition,
down-modulation of CD3 receptors with antibody demonstrated that
superantigen-induced signaling events were CD3-dependent. Superantigen signaling 
was also class II-dependent, in that resting T cells were not responsive to
direct enterotoxin stimulation. To address how early signal transducing activity 
correlated with T cell responsiveness, alloantigen-primed T cells were activated 
with immobilized class II-specific mAb or soluble superantigen. Both HLA-DR
mAb-stimulated T cells and enterotoxin-treated T cells proliferated strongly in
response to co-stimulation by a combination of CD28 receptor engagement and PMA
addition. In addition, superantigen-induced growth was induced by CD28 receptor
ligation with antibody or the B7 counter-receptor expressed on Chinese hamster
ovary cells. Taken together, these results indicate that class II molecules
expressed on activated T cells are directly coupled to the PLC gamma 1 signal
transduction pathway, and that coligation of HLA-DR with CD3 augments T cell
signaling comparable to that induced by enterotoxin superantigen. Thus, we
suggest that superantigen-induced early signaling responses in activated T cells 
may be due in part to class II transmembrane signals induced when HLA-DR and V
beta are ligated in cis.


PMID: 1385526  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

