
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Dec;12(12):5610-9.

Activation of the HLA-DRA gene in primary human T lymphocytes: novel usage of
TATA and the X and Y promoter elements.

Matsushima GK(1), Itoh-Lindstrom Y, Ting JP.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill 27599-7295.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Aug;13(8):5132.

Human T lymphocytes express human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DR-alpha (DRA) upon
mitogenic or antigenic stimulation. DR+ T cells are also found in a number of
inflammatory and autoimmune diseases and have a proposed role in these diseases. 
The molecular mechanism of DR regulation in untransformed blood T lymphocytes was
studied here by transient transfection of DRA-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
reporter gene constructs. Several novel features of this regulation were
observed. During the early stages of T-cell activation by mitogens or antigens,
strong promoter induction was exhibited with the proximal 43 bp of the DRA
promoter which contains a TATTA motif. Addition of upstream X and Y DNA elements 
augmented the response. This contrasts with data from transformed cell lines in
which the proximal 43 bp produced no detectable promoter function, and the
inclusion of X and Y elements is essential for basal level expression. Mutation
of the TATTA motif or substitution with a functional but different TATA element
produced errant initiation and greatly reduced gene expression. Interestingly, T 
lymphocytes from a normal donor were DR+ prior to in vitro stimulation, and
again, strong promoter activity was observed with 43 bp of proximal sequence.
Unexpectedly, the presence of the X and Y elements correlated with a suppression 
of class II promoter function and surface antigen expression. This study of
nontransformed lymphocytes reveals several novel features of DRA gene regulation 
and underscores the value and necessity of such studies.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.12.12.5610 
PMCID: PMC360500
PMID: 1448091  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

