
1. Sci Total Environ. 2003 Oct 1;314-316:637-49.

Modelling intertidal sediment transport for nutrient change and climate change
scenarios.

Wood R(1), Widdows J.

Author information: 
(1)Plymouth Marine Laboratory, Prospect Place, West Hoe, Plymouth PL1 3DH, UK.
r.wood@pml.ac.uk

A model of intertidal sediment transport, including effects of bioturbation and
biostabilisation, was applied to two transects on the east coast of England:
Leverton (within the Wash) and Skeffling (in the Humber Estuary). The physical
and biological parameters were chosen to represent four 1-year scenarios: a
baseline year (1995), the same year but with estuarine nitrate inputs reduced by 
50% and by 16%, and a year with climate change effects estimated for 2050. The
changes in nitrate supply can potentially change microphytobenthos numbers within
the surface sediment, which will then affect erodibility. The model results show 
a range of behaviour determined by bathymetry, external forcing and biotic state.
When intertidal sediment transport is dominated by external sediment supply, the 
model produces highest deposition at the most offshore point, and there is
greatest deposition in the winter and spring, when offshore sediment
concentrations are highest. When intertidal processes dominate intertidal
sediment transport, there is a peak of deposition at the high-shore level and
erosion at mid-tide levels. The greatest deposition now occurs in winter and
summer, when low chlorophyll levels mean that the sediment is most erodible. The 
Skeffling transect was dominated by intertidal processes for the baseline
scenario and with a 16% reduction in nitrate. Under the climate change (warm
winter) scenario, the Skeffling transect was dominated by external sediment
supply. The scenario with 50% reduction in nitrate gave intermediate behaviour at
Skeffling (intertidally driven during the winter and summer, and governed by
offshore sediment supply during spring and autumn). The Leverton transect was
dominated by offshore sediment supply for all the scenarios.

DOI: 10.1016/s0048-9697(03)00088-3 
PMID: 14499556  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

