
1. J Immunol. 2003 Oct 1;171(7):3636-44.

Protein kinase A regulatory subunit type II beta directly interacts with and
suppresses CREB transcriptional activity in activated T cells.

Elliott MR(1), Tolnay M, Tsokos GC, Kammer GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Wake Forest University School of
Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

Levels of the type IIbeta regulatory subunit (RIIbeta) of protein kinase A are
abnormally high in the nuclei of T cells of some subjects with the autoimmune
disorder systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). However, the role of nuclear RIIbeta
in the regulation of T cell function is unknown. Based on previous studies
demonstrating that nuclear protein kinase A-RII subunits can modify cAMP response
element (CRE)-dependent transcription, we tested the hypothesis that nuclear
RIIbeta can alter CRE-directed gene expression in T cells through interaction
with the nuclear transcription factor CRE-binding protein CREB. To test this
hypothesis, we used the RIIbeta-deficient S49 and the Jurkat T cell lines. In
both cell lines, transient transfection of RIIbeta resulted in nuclear
localization of a portion of the ectopically expressed RIIbeta. In vitro and in
vivo analyses revealed a novel, specific interaction between RIIbeta and CREB
that mapped to the N-terminal 135 aa of RIIbeta. In functional studies, RIIbeta
inhibited the transcriptional activity of a GAL4-CREB fusion protein by 67% in
Jurkat T cells following activation with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 mAbs.
Importantly, deletion of the CREB-binding region of RIIbeta completely abrogated 
inhibition. Additionally, RIIbeta suppressed CRE-directed reporter gene
expression and substantially reduced induction of promoter activity and
endogenous protein levels of the CREB-dependent gene, c-fos, in activated T
cells. We conclude that nuclear RIIbeta can act as a repressor of CREB
transcriptional activity in T cells, providing a potential functional
significance for aberrant levels of nuclear RIIbeta in systemic lupus
erythematosus T cells.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.171.7.3636 
PMID: 14500661  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

