
1. J Oral Sci. 2003 Sep;45(3):127-37.

The effects of extracts from periodontopathic bacteria on human periodontal
fibroblasts stimulated with mineralization supplements.

Marquez-San Miguel S(1), Rupf S, Frenzel J, Eschrich K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Leipzig, 04103
Leipzig, Germany. symone@flashmail.com

Bacterial effects on in vitro mineralization of human periodontal fibroblasts
(HPF) have not yet been examined in great detail. In our study, we investigated
the effects of soluble extracts of the periodontopathic bacteria Porphyromonas
gingivalis, Bacteroides forsythus and, Treponema denticola on cell proliferation,
mineralization, as well as on osteoblastic markers present in HPF cultured in
vitro, such as alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity and collagen content.
Periodontal fibroblasts stimulated by B-glycerophosphate, ascorbic acid and
dexamethasone (BAD) or by dexamethasone and ascorbic acid (DA) were compared to
unstimulated cells. During the cultivation period, the stimulation of HPF by
combined dexamethasone and ascorbic acid (DA) had a strong inductive effect on
proliferation, ALP activity and collagen formation. The extracts obtained from
the periodontal pathogens had a suppressing effect on the proliferation rate of
HPF. The extracts from P. gingivalis, B. forsythus and T. denticola caused a
decrease in ALP activity within 24 h of application. While extracts obtained from
P. gingivalis and B. forsythus induced a reduction in collagen content in BAD-
and DA-stimulated HPF cells, T. denticola extracts led to an increase in
collagen. Our data suggest that specific periodontopathic bacteria may suppress
tissue regeneration in vivo not only by activating host defense mechanisms but
also directly via a suppression of growth and differentiation of HPF and a
reduction in the extracellular collagen matrix. For the process of pocket
formation, not even the direct influence of viable bacteria seems to be
necessary. Additionally, long-distance effects of bacteria harboured in
periodontal pockets or in root canals may be of importance.

DOI: 10.2334/josnusd.45.127 
PMID: 14650577  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

