
1. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2003 Dec;136(4):943-55.

Cloning of bovine peroxiredoxins-gene expression in bovine tissues and amino acid
sequence comparison with rat, mouse and primate peroxiredoxins.

Leyens G(1), Donnay I, Knoops B.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Sciences vétérinaires, Institut des Sciences de la Vie, Université
catholique de Louvain, Place Croix du Sud 5, B-1348 Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.
leyens@vete.ucl.ac.be

The peroxiredoxin (PRDX) family is a recently identified family of peroxidases
found in organisms ranging from bacteria to mammals. In mammals, six PRDX
isoforms have been characterized in human (Homo sapiens), rat (Rattus norvegicus)
and mouse (Mus musculus). PRDXs are cytosolic, secreted or targeted to organelles
such as peroxisomes, mitochondria and the nucleus. Some PRDXs are synthesized as 
larger precursor proteins with a presequence that is cleaved to produce the
mature form. To study the expression of the six PRDXs in bovine (Bos taurus), we 
first cloned cDNAs coding for PRDX1, PRDX2, PRDX4 and PRDX5. PRDX3 and PRDX6 had 
previously been cloned and characterized in bovine. The comparison of bovine
PRDXs with their rat, mouse and primate orthologues reveals a minimum of 95%
similarity of mature proteins. Even though mitochondrial or export signal
presequences are normally less conserved, the unprocessed proteins still present 
a minimum of 84% similarity. Nevertheless, a major divergence lies at the
N-terminus of bovine PRDX2, where a Cys-Val-Cys motif was identified. The
expression of the six PRDXs in 22 bovine tissues has been studied by RT-PCR. Our 
results point out the ubiquity of the different PRDX transcripts in bovine
tissues. The important conservation of the different PRDXs, the multiple
processes they have been associated with, as well as the ubiquity of all the
members of the family analyzed in this study for the first time altogether,
suggest that they play a major role in the basal metabolism of mammalian cells.

DOI: 10.1016/s1096-4959(03)00290-2 
PMID: 14662316  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

