
1. Ginekol Pol. 2003 Oct;74(10):1262-8.

[Is the mother's bacterial vaginosis with PROM a significant factor for
intrauterine infection of the fetus in preterm labor before 32 weeks of
gestation].

[Article in Polish]

Rzanek-Głowacka J(1), Pieta-Dolińska A, Zieba K, Oszukowski P.

Author information: 
(1)Kliniki Perinatologii Instytutu Centrum Zdrowia Matki Polki w Łodzi.

OBJECTIVE: Bacterial vaginosis of pregnant woman is an important factor of
appearance of the PROM in result of intrauterine infections on every stage of
pregnancy. Frequency exist of intrauterine infection evaluate from 1 to 10%
pregnancies. Clinical chorio-amnionitis complicates 1-5% of term pregnancies, but
nearly 25% of preterm deliveries and really increase morbidity and mortality of
newborns and they are also a reason of mothers morbidity. A condition of
recognition the intrauterine infections is ascertainment of infection factor risk
of mother and appearance of clinic symptoms of newborns. The aim of this work was
a valuation of dependence between bacterial flora taken from cervics uteri of
pregnant woman with PROM who gave birth with preterm below 32 weeks and a
presence of clinic and laboratory symptoms of infections and the presence of
bacterial flora in blood culture of the newborns.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: 37 pregnant women at the age from 20 to 43 hospitalized in 
Department Perinatology ICZMP between 1999-2001 because of PROM and a threat of
preterm labor at the fetal age from 24 to 32 weeks were taken by an analysis. The
average time of amniotic liquid outflowing before the labor was 11.1 days +/-
8.63, average length persistence of pregnancy was 27.6 hbd +/- 1.85, average born
mass was 1029 g +/- 187.5. Laboratory factors and clinics symptoms
chorionamnionitis, bacteriology cultures of swabs from cervics uteri and
information of the labor of pregnant women were analyzed. Diagnostics of newborns
contained: making of blood cultures and skin, nose, throat, urine cultures,
estimation WBC and level CRP, estimation of lungs X-ray.
RESULTS: In result of bacteriology cultures from cervics uteri of mothers gained 
bacteria of frequent occurrence: Staphylococcus epiderm.--27%, E. coli--19%,
Streptococcus gr. B--10.8%, Enterococcus foecalis--8.1%. In result of
bacteriology cultures of newborns blood gained bacteria of frequent occurrence:
Staphylococcus epiderm.--13.5%, Staphylococcus haemolitycus--10.8%, Klebsiella
pneumoniae--10.8%, Pseudomonas aeruginosa--8.1%. In 97.3% cases at newborns
appeared inborn infections in a shape of pneumonia confirmed by X-ray.
Confirmation of intrauterine infection in histopathology examination of the
placenta in a shape of chorionamnionitis was shown in 25 cases, in other words in
67.5%. Positive results of pathogenic bacteriology flora cultures taken from
cervics uteri was in 50% pregnant woman, however in 43% of newborns bacteriology 
cultures of the blood were positive. In none of the analyzed preterm labor cases 
with PROM bacterial flora from positive cultures taken from cervics uteri of
mothers did not correlate with bacterial flora found in blood cultures of
newborns.
CONCLUSIONS: On a base of analyzed values PROM of mothers with bacterial
vaginosis is the important factor risk of the evolution of intrauterine
infections of newborns, besides did not ascertain the dependence between the
values of bacteriology cultures taken from cervics uteri of mothers and the
values of bacteriology cultures of the newborns blood with clinic symptoms of
intrauterine infection.


PMID: 14669428  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

