
1. J Immunol. 2004 Jan 1;172(1):398-409.

Essential contribution of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1/C-C chemokine
ligand-2 to resolution and repair processes in acute bacterial pneumonia.

Amano H(1), Morimoto K, Senba M, Wang H, Ishida Y, Kumatori A, Yoshimine H, Oishi
K, Mukaida N, Nagatake T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nijigaoka Hospital, 1-1 Nijigaoka,
Nagasaki City, Nagasaki 852-8055, Japan. chinu@ceres.dti.ne.jp

Neutrophil infiltration is the first step in eradication of bacterial infection, 
but neutrophils rapidly die after killing bacteria. Subsequent accumulation of
macrophage lineage cells, such as alveolar macrophages (AMs), is essential to
remove dying neutrophils, which are a source of injurious substances. Macrophage 
lineage cells can promote tissue repair, by producing potential growth factors
including hepatocyte growth factor (HGF). However, it remains elusive which
factor activates macrophage in these processes. Intratracheal instillation of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa caused neutrophil infiltration in the airspace;
subsequently, the numbers of total AMs and neutrophil ingested AMs were
increased. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid levels of monocyte chemoattractant 
protein (MCP)-1/CC chemokine ligand-2 (CCL2), a potent macrophage-activating
factor, were increased before the increases in the number of AM ingesting
neutrophils and HGF levels in BAL fluid. Immunoreactive MCP-1 proteins were
detected in alveolar type II epithelial cells and AMs only after P. aeruginosa
infection. The administration of anti-MCP-1/CCL2 Abs reduced the increases in the
number of AM-ingesting neutrophils and HGF levels in BAL fluid, and eventually
aggravated lung tissue injury. In contrast, the administration of MCP-1/CCL2
enhanced the increases in the number of AM ingesting neutrophils and HGF levels
in BAL fluid, and eventually attenuated lung tissue injury. Furthermore,
MCP-1/CCL2 enhanced the ingestion of apoptotic neutrophils and HGF production by 
a mouse macrophage cell line, RAW 267.4, in a dose-dependent manner.
Collectively, MCP-1/CCL2 has a crucial role in the resolution and repair
processes of acute bacterial pneumonia by enhancing the removal of dying
neutrophils and HGF production by AMs.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.172.1.398 
PMID: 14688348  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

