
1. Water Sci Technol. 2003;48(8):103-10.

Membrane bioreactors for final treatment of wastewater.

Galil NI(1), Sheindorf Ch, Stahl N, Tenenbaum A, Levinsky Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil Engineering, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology,
Haifa 32000, Israel. galilno@tx.technion.ac.il

The full-scale existing treatment plant in a paper mill in Hedera, Israel,
includes equalization, solids separation by either straining or by dissolved air 
flotation and biological treatment by activated sludge. The operation of the
existing biological process is often characterized by disturbances, mainly bad
settling, voluminous bioflocs, followed by wash-out of the biosolids. This paper 
summarizes the results obtained in a study based on a pilot plant including a
membrane biological reactor (MBR) compared to the "conventional" activated sludge
process in the aerobic treatment of the effluent obtained from an anaerobic
reactor. During the pilot operation period (about 90 days after achieving steady 
state) the MBR system provided steady operation performance, while the activated 
sludge produced effluent characterized by oscillatory values. The results are
based on average values and indicate much lower levels of suspended solids in the
MBR effluent, 2.5 mg/L, as compared to 37 mg/L in the activated sludge. As a
result, the total organic mater content was also substantially lower in the MBR
effluent, 129 vs 204 mg/L as COD, and 7.1 vs 83 mg/L as BOD. The MBR enabled
better nitrification. The ability to develop and maintain a concentration of over
11,000 mg/L of mixed liquor volatile suspended solids in the MBR bioreactor
enabled an intensive bioprocess at relatively high cell residence time. As a
result the biosolids which had to be removed as excess sludge were characterized 
by relatively low volatile/total suspended solids ratio, around 0.78. This could 
facilitate and lower the cost of biosolids treatment and handling. The results of
this comparative study indicate that in the case of MBR there will be no need for
further treatment, while after activated sludge additional filtration will be
required. The study leads to the conclusion that MBR will be the best technology 
for aerobic treatment of the anaerobic effluent of the paper mill.


PMID: 14682576  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

