
1. Infect Immun. 2004 Jan;72(1):352-8.

Innate immune response of oral and foreskin keratinocytes: utilization of
different signaling pathways by various bacterial species.

Chung WO(1), Dale BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
98195-7132, USA. sochung@u.washington.edu

The innate immune response is critical for the epithelial antimicrobial barrier. 
The human beta-defensins are small, cationic antimicrobial peptides that are made
by epithelial cells and that play a role in mucosal and skin defenses. Human
beta-defensin 1 (hBD-1) is expressed constitutively in epithelial tissues,
whereas hBD-2 and hBD-3 are expressed in response to bacterial stimuli or
inflammation. Previous studies showed that hBD-2 was induced by Fusobacterium
nucleatum cell wall extract without the involvement of the NF-kappaB
transcription factors, which typically are associated with innate immunity and
inflammation. The goal of this study was to characterize signaling pathways
involved in hBD-2 induction in response to commensal and pathogenic bacteria.
Cultured human oral and foreskin keratinocytes were treated separately with
inhibitors of NF-kappaB, c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), and p38 and then
stimulated with oral commensal Streptococcus gordonii, oral pathogens
Porphyromonas gingivalis and Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans, skin commensal
Staphylococcus epidermidis, or skin pathogen Streptococcus pyogenes. Different
bacteria induced different levels of hBD-2 and in response to the various
inhibitors tested, although certain common patterns were observed for commensal- 
and pathogen-stimulated cells. hBD-2 induction by all bacteria tested was
partially or completely blocked by inhibitors of the JNK and p38 pathways.
However, in addition, hBD-2 induction by pathogenic bacteria in both oral and
foreskin keratinocytes was blocked by inhibitors of NF-kappaB. The results
indicate that commensal and pathogenic bacteria utilize different pathways in
hBD-2 induction and suggest that epithelial cells from different body sites have 
common signaling mechanisms to distinguish between commensal and pathogenic
bacteria.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.72.1.352-358.2004 
PMCID: PMC343965
PMID: 14688115  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

