
1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2004 Feb;97(3-4):137-48.

Expression of immune response genes in rainbow trout skin induced by Gyrodactylus
derjavini infections.

Lindenstrøm T(1), Secombes CJ, Buchmann K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Section of Fish Diseases, Royal
Veterinary and Agricultural University, Stigbøjlen 4, DK-1870 Frederiksberg C,
Denmark. thl@kvl.dk

By means of semi-quantitative RT-PCR, expression of a number of immune relevant
genes was studied in skin of small rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss (Walbaum,
1792) fry during both primary and secondary infections with the ectoparasitic
monogenean Gyrodactylus derjavini Mikailov, 1975. The target genes studied
included the cyto- and chemokines TNF-alpha1, TNF-alpha2, TGF-beta and IL-8, the 
inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and cyclooxygenase (COX-2) genes and
finally, two cell markers, the beta-chains of TCR and MHC II, from the adaptive
arm of the immune system. In general, constitutive expression of all studied
genes was apparent. Significant increases in expression of the TNF-alpha1 isoform
could be observed at day 8 p.i. in primary infections and although less marked,
the alpha2 isoform of TNF showed a similar trend. With the cytokine TGF-beta,
8-10 times increase in the transcription levels was observed in secondary
infections compared to uninfected hosts. However, no parasite related changes in 
expression patterns could be observed for IL-8. Parasite infections elicited
strong iNOS expression by 4 days p.i., but significant differences were not
detected before day 8 p.i., when transcript levels were increased 5.5-9.6 times
compared to uninfected controls. Augmented expression of COX-2 could also be
observed in primary, but not secondary, infections at later stages of infections.
No clear parasite related changes in transcript levels of the two cell markers
TCRbeta and MHC IIbeta could be observed. Although the cellular source(s) was not
determined, most of the examined factors appear to take part in a local
signalling network of pivotal importance for the initiation, orchestration,
effectuation and modulation of immune responses in rainbow trout against the
ectoparasite G. derjavini.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2003.08.016 
PMID: 14741133  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

