
1. J Immunol. 2004 Mar 1;172(5):2870-7.

In vivo VL-targeted activation-induced apoptotic supraclonal deletion by a
microbial B cell toxin.

Goodyear CS(1), Narita M, Silverman GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatic Disease Core Center, Department of Medicine, University of
California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

To interfere with host immune responses, some microbial pathogens produce
proteins with the properties of superantigens, which can interact via conserved V
region framework subdomains of the Ag receptors of lymphocytes rather than the
complementarity-determining region involved in the binding of conventional Ags.
In recent studies, we have elucidated how a model B cell superantigen affects the
host immune system by targeting a conserved V(H) site on the Ag receptors of B
lymphocytes. To determine whether these findings represent a general paradigm, we
investigated the in vivo immunobiologic properties of protein L of
Peptostreptococcus magnus (PpL), a microbial Ig-binding protein specific for a V 
region site on Ig L chains. Our studies confirmed that PpL binding is restricted 
to a subset of murine Vkappa-expressing B cells, and found that B cells with
stronger PpL-binding activity are associated with certain B cell subsets: splenic
marginal zone (CD21(high) CD23(low)), splenic CD1(+), peritoneal B-1a (IgD(low)
CD5(+)), and CD21(high) CD24(high) B cells in peripheral lymph nodes, mesenteric 
lymph nodes, and Peyer's patches. Infusion of PpL triggered a sequence of events 
in B cell receptor (BCR)-targeted B cells, with rapid down-regulation of BCR, the
induction of an activation phenotype, and limited rounds of proliferation.
Apoptosis followed through a process heralded by the dissipation of mitochondrial
membrane potential, the induction of the caspase pathway, DNA fragmentation, and 
the deposition of B cell apoptotic bodies. These studies define a common pathway 
by which microbial toxins that target V region-associated BCR sites induce
programmed cell death.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.172.5.2870 
PMID: 14978088  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

