
1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2004 Jan;4(1):1-14.

Expression of costimulatory molecules (CD80, CD86, CD28, CD152), accessory
molecules (TCR alphabeta, TCR gammadelta) and T cell lineage molecules (CD4+,
CD8+) in PBMC of leprosy patients using Mycobacterium leprae antigen (MLCWA) with
murabutide and T cell peptide of Trat protein.

Sridevi K(1), Neena K, Chitralekha KT, Arif AK, Tomar D, Rao DN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS),
Ansari Nagar, New Delhi-110029, India.

In leprosy, cell-mediated immunity (CMI) is more significant than humoral
response to eliminate intracellular pathogen. T cell defect is a common feature
in lepromatous leprosy (LL) patients as compared to tuberculoid type (TT)
patients. For efficient initiation of CD4+, T cell response requires T cell
receptor (TCR) activation and costimulation provided by molecules on
antigen-presenting cells (APC) and their counter receptors on T cells. In our
previous study, the defective T cell function in LL patients was restored to a
proliferating state with the release of TH1 type cytokines using mycobacterial
antigen(s) with two immunomodulators (Murabutide (MDP-BE) and T cell epitope of
Trat protein of Escherichia coli) by presenting the antigen in particulate form
in vitro to PBMC derived from leprosy patients. This observation prompted us to
study the expression of the costimulatory molecules (CD80, CD86, CD28, CD152),
other accessory molecules (TCR alphabeta/gammadelta) and T cell lineage molecules
(CD4+ and CD8+) during constitutive and activated state of peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) derived from normal and leprosy individuals using
different formulations of Mycobacterium leprae total cell wall antigen (MLCWA),
Trat and MDP-BE using flow cytometric analysis. An increased surface expression
of CD80, CD86 and CD28 but decreased CD152 expression was observed when PBMC of
normal, BT/TT (tuberculoid) and BL/LL (lepromatous) patients were stimulated in
vitro with MLCWA+MDP-BE+Trat peptide using liposomal mode of antigen delivery,
while opposite results were obtained with the antigen alone. Antibody inhibition 
study using antihuman CD80 or CD86 completely abolished the T cell
lymphoproliferation, thereby reconfirming the importance of these costimulatory
molecules during T cell activation/differentiation. Though the liposome-entrapped
antigen formulation has no effect on expression of alphabeta/gammadelta T cell
receptor, the constitutive levels of TCR gammadelta were high in lepromatous
patients. Thus, TCR bearing gammadelta appears to have a negligible regulatory
role in peripheral blood of leprosy patients. The percentage of cells positive
for CD4+ are increased in inducible state in all the three groups, while
CD8+-positive cells were decreased in LL patients, thereby reconfirming the fact 
that priming of CD4+ cells are necessary for producing final effector functions. 
Lastly, intracellular cytokine staining experiment indicated that CD4+ cells are 
the major producers of IFN-gamma but not NK cells. The study highlights the
reversal of T cell anergy especially in lepromatous patients through the
modulation of costimulatory molecule expression under the influence of Th1
cytokines, i.e., IL-2 and IFNgamma.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2003.09.001 
PMID: 14975355  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

