
1. J Clin Periodontol. 2004 Feb;31(2):85-90.

Impact of mouthrinses on morning bad breath in healthy subjects.

Carvalho MD(1), Tabchoury CM, Cury JA, Toledo S, Nogueira-Filho GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prosthodontics and Periodontics, Faculty of Dentistry of
Piracicaba, University of Campinas, Piracicaba, SP, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: During sleep, a proliferation of oral bacteria is responsible for the
release of offending gases in morning breath even in healthy people. Thus, the
aim of this study was to evaluate the bad breath-inhibiting effect of four
commercially available mouthrinses (0.03% triclosan, 0.12% chlorhexidine
gluconate, 0.05% cetylpyridinium chloride and essential oils) on morning breath
when compared with a positive and a negative control.
METHOD: A six-step double-blind, crossover, randomised study was conducted in 12 
dental students with healthy periodontium, who refrained from mechanical plaque
control during a 4-day period. The subjects were instructed to rinse twice daily 
with the assigned product during each period. Fifteen-day washout intervals were 
used. Before professional plaque and tongue coating removal (baseline), the
morning breath was scored through volatile sulphur compounds (VSCs) level
measured by a sulphide monitor. After 4 days, VSCs and plaque index (PI) were
recorded.
RESULTS: Even in the absence of mechanical plaque control, there was a decrease
in VSC level with the use of all mouthrinses, with the exception of an increase
with the use of the negative control. The VSC formation was inhibited in
descending order, by positive control (0.2% chlorhexidine), 0.12% chlorhexidine, 
triclosan and essential oils and cetylpyridinium chloride. Plaque formation was
inhibited by chlorhexidine mouthrinses and essential oils.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that mouthrinses can reduce morning bad
breath, and that such a reduction is not attributable only to the reduction of
supragingival plaque formation.

Copyright Blackwell Munksgaard, 2004.

DOI: 10.1111/j.0303-6979.2004.00452.x 
PMID: 15016031  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

