
1. Mol Reprod Dev. 2004 May;68(1):17-24.

Specific gene silencing in the pre-implantation stage mouse embryo by an siRNA
expression vector system.

Haraguchi S(1), Saga Y, Naito K, Inoue H, Seto A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Shiga University of Medical Science, Seta, Otsu,
Shiga, Japan. sh431@mole.bio.cam.ac.uk

Recently, small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) have become a powerful and widely used 
tool for the analysis of gene function in mammalian cells. Here we report that
the microinjection of an siRNA expression vector into the nucleus is an efficient
and powerful method of specific gene silencing in pre-implantation mouse embryos.
We used this method to examine the expression of two genes EGFP and Oct4. Vectors
encoding siRNAs targeted against EGFP or Oct4 were injected into the pronucleus
or nucleus of zygotes, which were then cultured until the blastocyst stage. When 
the effects of RNAi were examined in blastocyst stage eggs, there was robust
inhibition of the gene product in a concentration-dependent manner at both the
mRNA and the protein level. The expression of other endogenous genes was not
affected, showing the specificity of the vector-mediated RNAi. In addition, this 
method was effective for inhibiting maternally expressed mRNA. To demonstrate
that RNAi of Oct4 induced a similar phenotype to that of Oct4-null embryos, the
blastocysts were further cultured in ES medium. After the fourth day of culture, 
the embryos either had outgrown only a layer of trophoblast cells or showed
developmental arrest at the blastocyst stage (>90%). Moreover, concomitant with
Oct4 suppression at the blastocyst stage, we observed inhibition of Fgf4, a gene 
that is known to be induced downstream of Oct4 expression. Taken together, these 
results demonstrate that the use of siRNA expression vector is a powerful way to 
achieve gene silencing in the pre-implantation stage embryo.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mrd.20047 
PMID: 15039944  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

