
1. Lancet. 2004 Mar 13;363(9412):852-9.

A combined syndrome of juvenile polyposis and hereditary haemorrhagic
telangiectasia associated with mutations in MADH4 (SMAD4).

Gallione CJ(1), Repetto GM, Legius E, Rustgi AK, Schelley SL, Tejpar S, Mitchell 
G, Drouin E, Westermann CJ, Marchuk DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

BACKGROUND: Juvenile polyposis and hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia are
autosomal dominant disorders with distinct and non-overlapping clinical features.
The former, an inherited gastrointestinal malignancy predisposition, is caused by
mutations in MADH4 (encoding SMAD4) or BMPR1A, and the latter is a vascular
malformation disorder caused by mutations in ENG (endoglin) or ACVRL1 (ALK1). All
four genes encode proteins involved in the transforming-growth-factor-beta
signalling pathway. Although there are reports of patients and families with
phenotypes of both disorders combined, the genetic aetiology of this association 
is unknown.
METHODS: Blood samples were collected from seven unrelated families segregating
both phenotypes. DNA from the proband of each family was sequenced for the
ACVRL1, ENG, and MADH4 genes. Mutations were examined for familial cosegregation 
with phenotype and presence or absence in population controls. Findings No
patient had mutations in the ENG or ACVRL1 genes; all had MADH4 mutations. Three 
cases of de-novo MADH4 mutations were found. In one, the mutation was passed on
to a similarly affected child. Each mutation cosegregated with the syndromic
phenotype in other affected family members.
INTERPRETATION: Mutations in MADH4 can cause a syndrome consisting of both
juvenile polyposis and hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia phenotypes. Since
patients with these disorders are generally ascertained through distinct medical 
specialties, genetic testing is recommended for patients presenting with either
phenotype to identify those at risk of this syndrome. Patients with juvenile
polyposis who have an MADH4 mutation should be screened for the vascular lesions 
associated with hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia, especially occult
arteriovenous malformations in visceral organs that may otherwise present
suddenly with serious medical consequences.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(04)15732-2 
PMID: 15031030  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

