
1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2003 Dec;1010:573-6.

Role of phospholipomannan in Candida albicans escape from macrophages and
induction of cell apoptosis through regulation of bad phosphorylation.

Ibata-Ombetta S(1), Idziorek T, Trinel PA, Poulain D, Jouault T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Mycologie Fondamentale et Appliquée, Inserm EMI0360, Université
de Lille II, 59037 Lille Cedex, France.

Candida albicans, the most common opportunistic fungal pathogen of humans is a
part of the normal microbial flora. To investigate host-parasite interaction
related to the commensal-pathogen switch of this yeast we compared the response
of macrophages to C. albicans and to the non-pathogenic yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. In contrast to S. cerevisiae, C. albicans survived within
macrophages. This escape from macrophages was associated with qualitative
differences in the sequential phosphorylation of MEK, ERK1/2, and p90RSK during
phagocytosis. Decreased activation of this pathway was observed with C. albicans 
and was associated with a species-specific overexpression of the MEK phosphatase,
MKP-1. Dysregulation of the ERK1/2/p90RSK signal transduction pathway by C.
albicans was associated downstream with reduction in Bad phosphorylation,
specifically at Ser-112, and disappearance of free Bcl-2. This ended at apoptosis
of cells that have ingested C. albicans, as revealed by staining of
phosphatidylserine exposure in the macrophage outer membrane. The role of
phospholipomannan (PLM), a phylogenetically unique glycolipid with a
phytoceramide moiety expressed at the surface of and shed by C. albicans, was
examined. Addition of PLM to macrophages led to dysregulation similar to that
observed with live C. albicans and promoted the survival of the sensitive S.
cerevisiae within the cells. Evidence of externalization of membranous
phosphatidylserine, loss of mitochondrial integrity, and DNA fragmentation after 
incubation of macrophages with PLM suggest that this molecule supported the
activities observed with C. albicans yeast cells.

DOI: 10.1196/annals.1299.107 
PMID: 15033794  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

