
1. J Immunol. 1992 Sep 1;149(5):1548-55.

The MB-1/B29 heterodimer couples the B cell antigen receptor to multiple src
family protein tyrosine kinases.

Lin J(1), Justement LB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston
77550.

The B cell Ag receptor complex is comprised of membrane (m)IgM or mIgD
noncovalently associated with one or more heterodimers, each containing one
subunit of MB-1 (IgM alpha or IgD alpha) and one of B29 (Ig beta or Ig gamma). It
is known that cross-linking of the B cell Ag receptor results in protein tyrosine
kinase activation. Recent reports from other laboratories have demonstrated that 
mIg coprecipitates with multiple src family protein tyrosine kinases, including
blk, lyn, and fyn. However, the mechanism by which these kinases are physically
coupled to the Ag receptor has not been confirmed. It has been hypothesized that 
the mIg-associated proteins MB-1 and B29 provide a physical link between the Ag
receptor (mIg) and one or more protein tyrosine kinases. In this study, we
confirm previous findings demonstrating that the B cell Ag receptor
coprecipitates with the MB-1/B29 heterodimer as well as the protein tyrosine
kinases blk, lyn, and fyn under mild detergent conditions (1% digitonin).
Additionally, we demonstrate that in detergent conditions (1% Nonidet P-40
(NP-40)) which disrupt the association between mIg and the MB-1/B29 heterodimer, 
no protein tyrosine kinase activity can be detected in association with mIg.
These findings indicated that NP-40 effectively dissociates the B cell Ag
receptor from ancillary signal transducing proteins. MB-1 and B29 were however,
found to coprecipitate with blk, lyn, and fyn isolated from B cell lysates
containing 1% NP-40. No significant difference was observed in the stoichiometry 
of association between the kinases and the MB-1/B29 heterodimer in the presence
of 1% NP-40 when compared to 1% digitonin. It was further determined that in
resting B cells, only a small fraction (approximately 1-3%) of the MB-1/B29
heterodimers appear to be complexed with protein tyrosine kinases. Finally, based
on preclearing experiments, it appears that individual heterodimers may associate
with a single species of protein tyrosine kinase. These data support the
hypothesis that the MB-1/B29 heterodimer couples the antigen receptor to protein 
tyrosine kinases, thereby providing a physical link that facilitates Ag
receptor-mediated regulation of kinase activity.


PMID: 1506682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

