
1. Curr Microbiol. 2004 May;48(5):341-7.

Isolation and characterization of arsenate-reducing bacteria from
arsenic-contaminated sites in New Zealand.

Anderson CR(1), Cook GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Otago School of Medical Sciences, University of
Otago, P.O. Box 56, Dunedin, New Zealand. craig.anderson@gmm.gu.se

Two environmental sites in New Zealand were sampled (e.g., water and sediment)
for bacterial isolates that could use either arsenite as an electron donor or
arsenate as an electron acceptor under aerobic and anaerobic growth conditions,
respectively. These two sites were subjected to widespread arsenic contamination 
from mine tailings generated from historic gold mining activities or from
geothermal effluent. No bacteria were isolated from these sites that could
utilize arsenite or arsenate under the respective growth conditions tested, but a
number of chemoheterotrophic bacteria were isolated that could grow in the
presence of high concentrations of arsenic species. In total, 17 morphologically 
distinct arsenic-resistant heterotrophic bacteria isolates were enriched from the
sediment samples, and analysis of the 16S rRNA gene sequence of these bacteria
revealed them to be members of the genera Exiguobacterium, Aeromonas, Bacillus,
Pseudomonas, Escherichia, and Acinetobacter. Two isolates, Exiguobacterium sp.
WK6 and Aeromonas sp. CA1, were of particular interest because they appeared to
gain metabolic energy from arsenate under aerobic growth conditions, as
demonstrated by an increase in cellular growth yield and growth rate in the
presence of arsenate. Both bacteria were capable of reducing arsenate to arsenite
via a non-respiratory mechanism. Strain WK6 was positive for arsB, but the
pathway of arsenate reduction for isolate CA1 was via a hitherto unknown
mechanism. These isolates were not gaining an energetic advantage from arsenate
or arsenite utilization, but were instead detoxifying arsenate to arsenite. As a 
subsidiary process to arsenate reduction, the external pH of the growth medium
increased (i.e., became more alkaline), allowing these bacteria to grow for
extended periods of time.

DOI: 10.1007/s00284-003-4205-3 
PMID: 15060729  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

