
1. Int J Oncol. 2004 May;24(5):1057-67.

Sp1 regulates expression of MET, and ribozyme-induced down-regulation of MET in
fibrosarcoma-derived human cells reduces or eliminates their tumorigenicity.

Liang H(1), O'Reilly S, Liu Y, Abounader R, Laterra J, Maher VM, McCormick JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI 48824-1302, USA.

Changes in expression of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and its receptor, MET,
are associated with formation and malignant progression of human tumors. In the
present study, 10 of 11 human fibrosarcoma cell lines tested expressed
significantly higher levels of MET than were found in a series of normal human
fibroblast lines. Still more significant, MET was constitutively phosphorylated
in all 11 fibrosarcoma lines, whereas the normal fibroblasts exhibited very low
levels of the phosphorylated form. All the cell lines expressed HGF mRNA. To
determine the role of MET and/or HGF in tumorigenesis, a fibrosarcoma line
expressing high levels of MET protein and low levels of HGF/NK2 mRNA was stably
transfected with a hammerhead ribozyme targeting MET. In addition, a fibrosarcoma
line expressing high levels of both MET protein and HGF/NK2 mRNA was transfected 
with a ribozyme targeting MET, or with a ribozyme targeting MET and another
targeting HGF. The transfectant cell lines no longer formed tumors, or did so at 
a greatly reduced frequency and/or longer latency. Because Sp1 is a transcription
factor for MET, we assayed the cell lines for their level of Sp1 protein. Sp1 was
markedly overexpressed in 7 of the 11 fibrosarcoma lines compared to normal
fibroblast lines. Deletion analysis and site-directed mutagenesis of the MET
promoter revealed that tandem Sp1 sites in the proximal promoter are critical for
transcription of MET. Increased expression of Sp1 in a normal human fibroblast
line containing a MET promoter-luciferase construct resulted in a dose-dependent 
increase in luciferase. Conversely, inhibition of Sp1 binding to DNA in a
fibrosarcoma cell line, using an Sp1 decoy, dramatically reduced MET expression. 
Taken together, these results indicate that in human fibrosarcoma cells, high
levels of the phosphorylated form of MET are required for tumor formation and
that Sp1 can function to control the level of MET.


PMID: 15067326  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

