
1. Environ Pollut. 2000 Jul;109(1):35-42.

Effects of long-term contamination of DDT on soil microflora with special
reference to soil algae and algal transformation of DDT.

Megharaj M(1), Kantachote D, Singleton I, Naidu R.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Land and Water, Glen Osmond, SA 5064, Australia.
megharaj.mallavarapu@adl.clw.csiro.au

DDT (1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethane) and its principle
metabolites, DDE (1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethylene) and DDD
(1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethane) are widespread environmental
contaminants but little information is available concerning their effects on
non-target microflora (especially microalgae and cyanobacteria) and their
activities in long-term contaminated soils. For this reason a long-term
DDT-contaminated soil was screened for DDT residues and toxicity to
microorganisms (bacteria, fungi, algae), microbial biomass and dehydrogenase
activity. Also, five pure cultures isolated from various sites (two unicellular
green algae and three dinitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria) were tested for their
ability to metabolise DDT. Viable counts of bacteria and algae declined with
increasing DDT contamination while fungal counts, microbial biomass and
dehydrogenase activity increased in medium-level contaminated soil (27 mg DDT
residues kg(-1) soil). All the tested parameters were greatly inhibited in
high-level contaminated soil (34 mg DDT residues kg(-1) soil). Species
composition of algae and cyanobacteria was altered in contaminated soils and
sensitive species were eliminated in the medium and high contaminated soils
suggesting that these organisms could be useful as bioindicators of pollution.
Microbial biomass and dehydrogenase activity may not serve as good bioindicators 
of pollution since these parameters were potentially influenced by the increase
in fungal (probably DDT resistant) counts. All the tested algal species
metabolised DDT to DDE and DDD; however, transformation to DDD was more
significant in the case of dinitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria.

DOI: 10.1016/s0269-7491(99)00231-6 
PMID: 15092910 

