
1. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2004 Apr;23(4):850-6.

Multiple mechanisms contribute to the biodegradation of benzo[a]pyrene by
petroleum-derived multicomponent nonaqueous-phase liquids.

Kanaly RA(1), Watanabe K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Applied Microbiology, Marine Biotechnology Institute, 3-75-1
Heita, Kamaishi City, Iwate 026-0001, Japan.

The presence of multicomponent nonaqueous-phase liquids (NAPLs) on contaminated
sites critically alters the biodegradation susceptibility of many target
pollutants, including polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. This study investigated
the effects of petroleum-derived multicomponent NAPLs on biodegradation of
benzo[a]pyrene by a bacterial consortium in liquid culture. When high-boiling
point diesel fuel distillate (HBD)-NAPL was added to liquid culture, the
consortium initiated benzo[a]pyrene mineralization after a lag period of several 
days. This lag period was not observed in the mineralization of phenanthrene,
anthracene, and chrysene by the same consortium with HBD. Nonaqueous-phase
liquids added to cultures pregrown before experimentation largely affected the
extent of benzo[a]pyrene mineralization and the duration of lag period in
subsequent experiments, suggesting that NAPL presence was important for
maintaining the efficiency of the mineralizing consortium. Experiments using
further fractionated oil components suggested that stimulation of benzo[a]pyrene 
mineralization by NAPLs was fraction dependent; an alkylated aromatic fraction
was more effective than aromatic and aliphatic fractions. The effect of NAPL on
benzo[a]pyrene biodegradation was determined to be multimechanistic; that is,
NAPL acted as a cosolvent for polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon dissolution, as a
substrate to induce cometabolic degradative pathways, and as an agent to
formulate the effective microbial consortium. Data suggest that the third
mechanism was of particular importance for rapid benzo[a]pyrene mineralization.

DOI: 10.1897/03-191 
PMID: 15095879  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

