
1. J Biochem. 2004 Apr;135(4):555-65.

A new recombinant single chain trispecific antibody recruits T lymphocytes to
kill CEA (carcinoma embryonic antigen) positive tumor cells in vitro efficiently.

Wang XB(1), Zhao BF, Zhao Q, Piao JH, Liu J, Lin Q, Huang HL.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of
Science, 100101, Beijing, China.

Anti-tumor associated antigen (TAA).CD3.CD28 trispecific antibody(TsAb) is able
to provide two signals for fully and continuously activation of T lymphocytes and
recruit them around tumor cells, presenting an attractive concept in tumor
immunotherapy. Here, a new single chain trispecific antibody (scTsAb), named
CEA-scTsAb, was constructed by fusion of anti-CEA (Carcinoma Embryonic Antigen)
single chain antibody (scFv), anti-CD3 scFv and anti-CD28 VH, spaced by
polypeptide interlinkers taken from the fragment of constant region (FC) of human
IgG and human serum albumin (HSA). It was expressed in Escherichia coli at low
temperature (30 degrees C) with up to 50% of the antibody being present in
soluble form. After one step of DEAE anion chromatography, the soluble product
was sufficiently pure for further in vitro activity assays. First, it was proved 
that CEA-scTsAb could recognize three antigens (CEA, CD28 and Jurkat cell
membrane antigen) specifically and could distinguish antigen positive cells from 
antigen negative cells in vitro. Then fresh PBMC (peripheral blood mononuclear
cells), without being pre-treated by co-stimulatory reagents, such as IL-2 or
CD28 mAb, were used as effector cells to test their ability to mediate tumor
specific cytolysis of CEA-positive tumor cells, SW1116. It was found by
photomicrography that T lymphocytes were attracted to SW1116 cells in the
presence of CEA-scTsAb, which resulted in effective cytolysis of tumor cells. As 
shown by MTT assay, the efficacy of tumor specific cytolysis mediated by
CEA-scTsAb related to both the quantity and activation of PBMC. At an effector
cells/target cells ratio (E/T) of 5, it was proved by dual-color FACS with
propidium iodide (PI) and FITC-annexin V that both necrosis and apoptosis of
tumor cells were causes of tumor specific cytolysis. In summary, a new single
chain trispecific (CEA x CD3 x CD28) antibody was constructed and characterized
carefully in this paper and was found to possess functions: (i) to activate T
lymphocytes independently of additional co-stimulatory signal, (ii) to attract
activated T lymphocytes around CEA-positive tumor cells, (iii) to attack
CEA-positive tumor cells with recruited T lymphocytes. Because it recognizes a
widely distributed tumor antigen (CEA), with moderate molecular weight (about 75 
kDa) and a simple production procedure, and is able to mediate a high level of
tumor specific cytolysis without any additional co-stimulating reagents,
CEA-scTsAb is very promising for the task of immunotherapy in future.

DOI: 10.1093/jb/mvh065 
PMID: 15115782  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

