
1. Am J Gastroenterol. 2004 May;99(5):894-904.

Presence of bacteria and innate immunity of intestinal epithelium in childhood
celiac disease.

Forsberg G(1), Fahlgren A, Hörstedt P, Hammarström S, Hernell O, Hammarström ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology, Umeå University, Umeå,
Sweden.

Erratum in
    Am J Gastroenterol. 2004 Jul;99(7):following 1406.

Comment in
    Am J Gastroenterol. 2004 May;99(5):905-6.

OBJECTIVES: Exposure to gliadin and related prolamins and appropriate HLA-DQ
haplotype are necessary but not sufficient for contracting celiac disease (CD).
Aberrant innate immune reactions could be contributing risk factors. Therefore,
jejunal biopsies were screened for bacteria and the innate immune status of the
epithelium investigated.
METHODS: Children with untreated, treated, challenged CD, and controls were
analyzed. Bacteria were identified by scanning electron microscopy. Glycocalyx
composition and mucin and antimicrobial peptide production were studied by
quantitative RT-PCR, antibody and lectin immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Rod-shaped bacteria were frequently associated with the mucosa of CD
patients, with both active and inactive disease, but not with controls. The
lectin Ulex europaeus agglutinin I (UEAI) stained goblet cells in the mucosa of
all CD patients but not of controls. The lectin peanut agglutinin (PNA) stained
glycocalyx of controls but not of CD patients. mRNA levels of mucin-2 (MUC2),
alpha-defensins HD-5 and HD-6, and lysozyme were significantly increased in
active CD and returned to normal in treated CD. Their expression levels
correlated to the interferon-gamma mRNA levels in intraepithelial lymphocytes.
MUC2, HD-5, and lysozyme proteins were seen in absorptive epithelial cells.
beta-defensins hBD-1 and hBD-2, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CEA cell adhesion
molecule-1a (CEACAM1a), and MUC3 were not affected.
CONCLUSIONS: Unique carbohydrate structures of the glycocalyx/mucous layer are
likely discriminating features of CD patients. These glycosylation differences
could facilitate bacterial adhesion. Ectopic production of MUC2, HD-5, and
lysozyme in active CD is compatible with goblet and Paneth cell metaplasia
induced by high interferon-gamma production by intraepithelial lymphocytes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1572-0241.2004.04157.x 
PMID: 15128357  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

