
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 1992 Jul;71(4):179-96.

Centrofacial malignant granulomas. Clinicopathologic study of 40 cases and review
of the literature.

Grange C(1), Cabane J, Dubois A, Raphaël M, Chomette G, Lamas G, Godeau P, Meyer 
B, Imbert JC.

Author information: 
(1)Service de médecine interne, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Paris, France.

An important problem in the treatment of centrofacial ulcerations is to establish
a precise diagnosis, since similar clinical and microscopic findings can result
from many different causes (as in the centrofacial malignant granuloma syndrome
[CFMG]). A comprehensive surgical biopsy protocol (known as SNFMI/GMCF),
involving microbiology, parasitology, immunology and pathology laboratories,
allowed us to evaluate and to treat 40 cases of CFMG, who form the basis of this 
report. In 13 of them, specific diagnoses were found and curative treatments
could be given. In the remaining 27, the optical microscopy pattern met the
criteria for CFMG without identifiable origin or the presence of so-called lethal
midline granulomas; however, a more precise evaluation with the help of
immunofluorescence studies led to the recognition of malignant lymphoma
(ulcerative lymphoma of the midface [ULM]). Most of these lymphomas belonged to
the T cell lineage; the others were of B lymphoid origin, or, more rarely, of
histiocytic origin. Patients with ULM received radiotherapy and chemotherapy with
a response rate of 70.3%; however, the toxicity was significant, with frequent
occurrence of chemotherapy-induced neutropenia followed by severe infectious
facial cellulitis. Six patients were enrolled in a preliminary open trial of
treatment with recombinant alpha-2b interferon with little success. Three
patients were treated with radiation therapy only, and survived. Thus, CFMG is a 
syndrome with specific causes and treatments, requiring multiple extensive
biopsies to make the correct diagnosis. The recognition of ULM as the cause of
the previously called "lethal midline granulomas" leads logically to the use of
chemotherapy with growth factors in order to ameliorate its bad prognosis.

DOI: 10.1097/00005792-199207000-00001 
PMID: 1518392  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

