
1. Immunol Cell Biol. 2004 Jun;82(3):285-94.

Antigen specificity of semi-invariant CD1d-restricted T cell receptors: the best 
of both worlds?

Gumperz JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Wisconsin
Medical School, 1300 University Avenue, Madison, WI 53706, USA.
jegumpert@wisc.edu

T lymphocytes are characterized by the use of structurally diverse TCR. The
discovery of subsets of canonical T cells that have structurally homogeneous TCR 
presents an enigma: What antigens do these T cells recognize, and how does their 
antigen specificity relate to their functions? One subset of canonical T cells is
restricted by CD1d, a non-classical antigen presenting molecule that presents
lipids and glycolipids. Canonical CD1d-restricted T cells have semi-invariant TCR
consisting of an invariantly rearranged TCR alpha chain, paired with diversely
rearranged TCR beta chains. Most respond strongly to the unusual glycolipid
alpha-galactosylceramide (alpha-GalCer), and can also respond to cellular
antigens presented by CD1d. Mounting evidence indicates that alpha-GalCer
responsive T cells are heterogeneous in their reactivities to cellular antigens, 
suggesting that an individual semi-invariant TCR may be capable of recognizing
more than one ligand. Recent crystal structures of CD1b molecules with three
different bound lipids indicate that the antigenic features of lipids may be
localized over a smaller area than those of peptides, and that the positioning of
the polar head group can vary substantially. A model that explains how
CD1d-restricted T cells could possess both conserved and heterogeneous antigen
specificities, is that different lipid antigens may interact with distinct areas 
of a TCR due to differences in the positioning of the polar head group. Hence,
canonical CD1d-restricted TCR could recognize conserved antigens via the
invariant TCR alpha chain, and have diverse antigen specificities that are
conferred by their individual TCR beta chains.

DOI: 10.1111/j.0818-9641.2004.01257.x 
PMID: 15186260  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

