
1. J Infect Dis. 2004 Jun 15;189(12):2308-17. Epub 2004 May 25.

Inhibition of the tissue factor/factor VIIa pathway does not influence the
inflammatory or antibacterial response to abdominal sepsis induced by Escherichia
coli in mice.

Weijer S(1), Schoenmakers SH, Florquin S, Levi M, Vlasuk GP, Rote WE, Reitsma PH,
Spek CA, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Internal Medicine and Department of Infectious
Diseases, Tropical Medicine, and AIDS, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
s.weijer@amc.uva.nl.

BACKGROUND: Anticoagulants have gained increasing attention for the treatment of 
sepsis. Inhibition of the tissue factor (TF)/factor (F) VIIa pathway has been
shown to attenuate the activation of coagulation and to prevent death in a
primate model of sepsis caused by gram-negative bacteria.
METHODS: To determine the role of the TF/FVIIa complex in the host response to
peritonitis, mice received an intraperitoneal injection of live Escherichia coli 
with or without concurrent treatment with recombinant nematode anticoagulant
protein c2 (rNAPc2), a selective inhibitor of the TF/FVIIa pathway.
RESULTS: Peritonitis was associated with an increase in the expression of TF at
the tissue level and activation of coagulation, as reflected by elevated levels
of thrombin-antithrombin complexes and by increased fibrin(ogen) deposition in
the liver and lungs. rNAPc2 strongly attenuated this procoagulant response but
did not influence the inflammatory response (histopathology, leukocyte
recruitment to the peritoneal cavity, and cytokine and chemokine levels).
Moreover, rNAPc2 did not alter bacterial outgrowth locally or dissemination of
the infection, and survival was not different between rNAPc2-treated mice and
control mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that TF/FVIIa activity contributes to the
activation of coagulation during E. coli peritonitis but does not play a role in 
the inflammatory response or antibacterial host defense.

DOI: 10.1086/421031 
PMID: 15181580  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

