
1. Circulation. 2004 Jul 13;110(2):193-200. Epub 2004 Jun 14.

Soluble fibrin is the main mediator of Staphylococcus aureus adhesion to
platelets.

Niemann S(1), Spehr N, Van Aken H, Morgenstern E, Peters G, Herrmann M, Kehrel
BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care, University Hospital
Muenster, Muenster, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Infective endocarditis (IE) caused by Staphylococcus aureus is
associated with significant morbidity and mortality rates. Platelets play a dual 
role as adhesive cells forming associates with bacteria as well as specialized
inflammatory cells. The specific role of the various factors involved in
bacteria-platelet association has not yet been fully elucidated.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We observed a dramatic increase in the capability to bind S 
aureus when platelets were activated with thrombin (from 5% to 30%, P<0.001). To 
pinpoint platelet-binding sites involved in the interaction, platelets from
knockout mice and from patients with selective inherited deficiency of membrane
proteins or of granules were used. CD36, GPIIb/IIIa, and P-selectin were excluded
as receptors for S aureus. Platelets from patients with alpha-delta-storage pool 
disease and Gray platelet syndrome indicate the requirement of alpha-granule
contents. Platelet activation by ADP did not promote platelet-S aureus associate 
formation, although these platelets were covered with bound fibrinogen. Only
small numbers of associates between fibrinogen-covered bacteria and ADP-activated
platelets were observed. Formation of fibrin alone was also not sufficient to
induce association. Only when fibrin formation and platelet activation occurred
together were large numbers of associates formed (P<0.001). A potential receptor 
for fibrin on S aureus is clumping factor A. Addition of thrombospondin-1 to
control platelets increased the number of associates (P=0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: Soluble fibrin but not fibrinogen is the main mediator of platelet-S
aureus association. In addition, platelet activation and the release of
alpha-granule contents, particularly thrombospondin-1, is a requirement for
platelet-S aureus association.

DOI: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000134486.93030.E7 
PMID: 15197141  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

