
1. Ginecol Obstet Mex. 2004 Feb;72:68-75.

[Frequency, risk factors and vaginal colonization due to Escherichia coli].

[Article in Spanish]

González Pedraza Avilés A(1), Sánchez Hernández G, Ponce Rosas RE.

Author information: 
(1)Clinica de Medicina Familiar Dr. Ignacio Chávez, ISSSTE, México, DF.
albemari@correo.unam.mx

INTRODUCTION: Recent studies associate Escherichia coli with symptomatic
infections at vaginal level, mainly associated to changes in the normal flora
taken place by a series of factors characteristic of the host. To recognize their
colonization frequency and these factors, it becomes important due to their
association with perinatal complications, besides considering this colonization
like the critical step preceding urinary tract infection.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the frequency of colonization of Escherichia coli in 519 
female patients, the role of the bacterium in the vaginal ecology likes probable 
cause of clinical manifestations and to recognize the associate's factors of risk
with its vaginal colonization.
METHODS: 519 women were studied: 350 symptomatic and 169 asymptomatic. Vaginal
swab specimens were inoculated onto the routine mediums. Associations of
Escherichia coli with various risk factors were examined by using odds ratios
(ORs) and 95% confidence intervals, and statistical significance was assessed by 
the Chi statistic or Fischer's exact test.
RESULTS: Overall Escherichia coli was isolated from 95 (18.3%) of the women.
Factors that were significantly associated with vaginal carriage of E. coli were 
the age extreme groups, the climacteric, and the bad genital habits.
CONCLUSIONS: The highest frequency of vaginal colonization for Escherichia coli
was presented in the population groups where there is hormonal deficiency, mainly
of estrogens of the type estradiol. The vaginal colonization for E. coli doesn't 
associate to sexual behavior. Although E. coli doesn't produce defined symptoms
at vaginal level, the relatively low carriage rate indicates that this organism
should not be considered as part of the normal indigenous vaginal flora and that 
it should take into account due to the perinatal complication it is associated.


PMID: 15216904  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

