
1. Dis Aquat Organ. 2004 Apr 21;59(1):79-84.

Experimental infection of Flavobacterium psychrophilum in fins of Atlantic salmon
Salmo salar revealed by scanning electron microscopy.

Martínez JL(1), Casado A, Enríquez R.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología de Organismos y Sistemas, Universidad de Oviedo, c/
Catedrático Rodrigo Uría s/n, 33071 Oviedo, Spain. juanlm@uniovi.es

Infections caused by Flavobacterium psychrophilum include 'bacterial coldwater
disease' (BCWD) and 'rainbow trout fry syndrome' (RTFS), which are severe
diseases that can cause high mortality and significant losses in hatchery-reared 
salmonids worldwide. Usually, these conditions start with necrosis along the edge
of the fins. As the infection progresses, both the fish surface and the internal 
organs can be involved. The aetiological agent produces a Ca-dependent protease
that can be responsible for some of the pathogenic responses, although the
precise nature of the response remains to be elucidated. Atlantic salmon Salmo
salar were experimentally infected by F. psychrophilum in order to investigate
the bacterial invasion in the fin tissues by scanning electron microscopy. The
images showed numerous bacteria embedded in the mucous layer when this remained
on the tegument. In other zones without mucus, it was observed that bacteria were
present on the axis of fin rays, but not on the epidermal surface. The material
on these axes was largely eroded by tubular boreholes, and bacterial rods could
be seen in these perforations. EDX (Energy Dispersive X-ray) microanalysis of the
axis of the fin rays showed significant amounts of P and Ca, revealing the
ossification of the ray axis. The protease activity could explain the formation
of the tubular boreholes, allowing the bacteria the necessary Ca for the
activation of the enzyme. The erosion pattern suggests that the gliding motility 
of F. psychrophilum could be involved in this burrowing ability.

DOI: 10.3354/dao059079 
PMID: 15212296  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

