
1. Indian J Exp Biol. 2003 Sep;41(9):1046-67.

Anaerobic biodegradation of aromatic compounds.

Jothimani P(1), Kalaichelvan G, Bhaskaran A, Selvaseelan DA, Ramasamy K.

Author information: 
(1)Fermentation Laboratory, Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore 641
003, India.

Many aromatic compounds and their monomers are existing in nature. Besides they
are introduced into the environment by human activity. The conversion of these
aromatic compounds is mainly an aerobic process because of the involvement of
molecular oxygen in ring fission and as an electron acceptor. Recent literatures 
indicated that ring fission of monomers and obligomers mainly occurs in anaerobic
environments through anaerobic respiration with nitrate, sulphate, carbon dioxide
or carbonate as electron acceptors. These anaerobic processes will help to work
out the better situation for bioremediation of contaminated environments. While
there are plenty of efforts to reduce the release of these chemicals to the
environment, already contaminated sites need to be remediated not only to restore
the sites but to prevent the leachates spreading to nearby environment. Basically
microorganisms are better candidates for breakdown of these compounds because of 
their wider catalytic mechanisms and the ability to act even in the absence of
oxygen. These microbes can be grouped based on their energy mechanisms. Normally,
the aerobic counterparts employ the enzymes like mono-and-dioxygenases. The end
product is basically catechol, which further may be metabolised to CO2 by means
of quinones reductases cycles. In the absense of reductases compounds, the
reduced catechols tend to become oxidised to form many quinone compounds. The
quinone products are more recalcitrant and lead to other aesthetic problems like 
colour in water, unpleasant odour, etc. On the contrary, in the reducing
environment this process is prevented and in a cascade of pathways, the cleaved
products are converted to acetyl co-A to be integrated into other central
metabolite paths. The central metabolite of anaerobic degradation is invariably
co-A thio-esters of benzoic acid or hydroxy benzoic acid. The benzene ring
undergoes various substitution and addition reactions to form chloro-, nitro-,
methyl- compounds. For complete degradation the side chains must be removed first
and then the benzene ring is activated by carboxylation or hydroxylation or co-A 
thioester formation. In the next step the activated ring is converted to a form
that can be collected in the central pool of metabolism. The third step is the
channeling reaction in which the products of the catalysis are directed into
central metabolite pool. The enzymes involved in these mechanisms are mostly
benzyl co-A ligase, benzyl alcohol dehydrogenase. Other enzymes involved in this 
path are yet to be purified though many of the reactions products that have been 
theoretically postulated have been identified. This is mainly due to the
instability of intermediate compounds as well as the association of the enzyme
substrate is femoral and experimental conditions need to be sophisticated further
for isolation of these enzymes. The first structural genes of benzoate and
hydroxy benzoate ligases were isolated from Rhodopseudomonas palustris. This gene
cluster of 30 kb size found in Rhodopseudomonas palustris coded for the Bad A
protein. Similarly, some of the bph A,B,C and D cluster of genes coding for the
degradation of pentachlorobenzenes were located in Pseudomonas
pseudoalgaligenesKF 707.


PMID: 15242297  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

