
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2004 Aug;137(2):379-85.

beta-Defensin-3 and -4 in intestinal epithelial cells display increased mRNA
expression in ulcerative colitis.

Fahlgren A(1), Hammarstrom S, Danielsson A, Hammarstrom ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology, Umeå University, Umeå,
Sweden.

mRNA expression of two recently described human beta-defensins (hBD-3 and hBD-4) 
in epithelial cells of normal small and large intestine and the impact of chronic
intestinal inflammation on their expression levels was investigated. Intestinal
specimens from patients with ulcerative colitis (UC), Crohn's disease (CD) and
controls with no history of inflammatory bowel disease were studied. hBD-3 and
hBD-4 mRNAs were determined in freshly isolated epithelial cells by real-time
quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (QRT-PCR) and by in 
situ hybridization. The effect of proinflammatory cytokines on hBD-3 and hBD-4
mRNA expression in colon carcinoma cells was also investigated. Purified
epithelial cells of normal small and large intestine expressed both hBD-3 and
hBD-4 mRNA, with higher expression levels of hBD-3 mRNA. In situ hybridization
revealed higher levels of mRNA expression in the crypt- compared to the
villus/luminal-compartment. Interferon (IFN)-gamma, but not tumour necrosis
factor (TNF)-alpha or IL-1beta, augmented hBD-3 mRNA expression. None of these
agents stimulated hBD-4 expression. Colonic epithelial cells from patients with
UC displayed a significant increase in hBD-3 and hBD-4 mRNA compared to
epithelial cells of controls. In contrast, small intestinal epithelial cells from
CD patients did not show increased expression levels compared to the
corresponding control cells. Moreover, Crohn's colitis did not show increased
expression of hBD-4 mRNA, while the data are inconclusive for hBD-3 mRNA. We
conclude that the chronic inflammatory reaction induced in the colon of UC
patients enhances hBD-3 and hBD-4 mRNA expression in the epithelium, whereas in
CD this is less evident.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2004.02543.x 
PMCID: PMC1809118
PMID: 15270856  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

