
1. Arch Oral Biol. 2004 Sep;49(9):727-38.

Direct detection of cell surface interactive forces of sessile, fimbriated and
non-fimbriated Actinomyces spp. using atomic force microscopy.

Tang G(1), Yip HK, Samaranayake LP, Chan KY, Luo G, Fang HH.

Author information: 
(1)Oral Bio-Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, The University of Hong Kong, 34
Hospital Road, Hong Kong SAR, China.

Actinomyces species are predominant early colonizers of the oral cavity and prime
mediators of inter-bacterial adhesion and coaggregation. Previous workers have
evaluated the adhesion of Actinomyces spp. by quantitative assessment of sessile,
as opposed to planktonic cells attached to substrates, but did not quantify the
cell surface interactive forces. Therefore we used atomic force microscopy to
directly detect the interactive force between an approaching silicon tip and
sessile Actinomyces spp. adhering to a substrate, at nanonewton (nN) range force 
levels. A total of eight strains each belonging to fimbriated and non-fimbriated 
Actinomyces species were employed, namely A. bovis, A. gerencseriae, A. israelii,
A. meyeri, A. naeslundii genospecies 1 and 2, A. odontolyticus and A. viscosus.
The sterile mica discs, used as the adhesion substrate, were immersed in
mono-species bacterial suspensions for five days to obtain a thin bacterial
biofilm. Interactive forces were measured using a silicon nitride cantilever
attached to a Nanoscope IIIA atomic force microscope. The interactive forces
between the approaching silicon nitride tip and bacterial biofilm surfaces were
randomly quantified at three different locations on each cell; namely, the cell
surface proper, the periphery of the cell and the substrate and, the interface
between two cells. When the interactive forces at these locations of the same
species were compared, significantly higher force levels at the cell-cell
interface than the other two locations were noted with A. gerencseriae (P <
0.001), A. viscosus (P < 0.01) and A. israelii (P < 0.05). When the interactive
forces of different Actinomyces spp. at an identical location were compared,
fimbriated A. naeslundii genospecies 2 showed the greatest interactive force at
the cell surface proper (-32.6 +/- 8.7 nN, P < 0.01). A. naeslundii genospecies
1, 2 and A. viscosus demonstrated greater interactive force at the cell-mica
periphery than the other five species (P < 0.05); A. viscosus (-34.6 +/- 10.5 nN)
displayed greater interactive force at the cell-cell interface than the others (P
< 0.01), except for A. gerencseriae (P > 0.05). These data indicate that
fimbriated Actinomyces spp., including A. naeslundii genospecies 1, 2 and A.
viscosus exert higher cell surface interactive forces than those devoid of
fimbriae and, such variable force levels may modulate their adhesion and
coaggregation during biofilm formation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2004.04.003 
PMID: 15275860  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

