
1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 24;279(39):40972-9. Epub 2004 Jul 24.

Disruption of a salt bridge dramatically accelerates subunit exchange in duck
delta2 crystallin.

Yu B(1), Paroutis P, Davidson AR, Howell PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Biology and Biochemistry, Research Institute,
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

Intragenic complementation is a unique property of oligomeric enzymes with which 
to study subunit-subunit interactions. Complementation occurs when different
subunits, each possessing distinct mutations that render the individual
homomutant proteins inactive, interact to form a heteromutant protein with
partial recovery of activity. In this paper, complementation events between human
argininosuccinate lyase (ASL) and its homolog, duck delta2 crystallin, were
characterized. Different active site mutants in delta2 crystallin complement by
the regeneration of native-like active sites as reported previously for ASL. The 
complementarity of the ASL and delta2 crystallin subunit interfaces was
illustrated by the in vivo formation of active hybrid tetramers from inactive ASL
and inactive delta2 crystallin mutants. Subunits of both ASL and delta2
crystallin do not dissociate and reassociate in vitro at room temperature, even
after 6 days of incubation, indicating that the multimerization interface is very
strong. However, disruption of a salt bridge network in the tetrameric interface 
of delta2 crystallin caused a drastic acceleration of subunit dissociation.
Double mutants combining these interface mutants with active site mutants of
delta2 crystallin were able to dissociate and reassociate to form active
tetramers in vitro within hours. These results suggest that exchange of subunits 
may occur without unfolding of the monomer. Intragenic complementation in these
interface mutants occurs by reintroducing the native salt bridge interaction upon
hetero-oligomerization. Our studies demonstrate the value of intragenic
complementation as a tool for investigating subunit-subunit interactions in
oligomeric proteins.

Copyright 2004 American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M405300200 
PMID: 15273245  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

