
1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 15;279(42):44057-64. Epub 2004 Jul 27.

Metabolic biotinylation as a probe of supramolecular structure of the triad
junction in skeletal muscle.

Lorenzon NM(1), Haarmann CS, Norris EE, Papadopoulos S, Beam KG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Anatomy Section, Colorado State University,
Fort Collins 80523, USA.

Excitation-contraction coupling in skeletal muscle involves conformational
coupling between dihydropyridine receptors (DHPRs) in the plasma membrane and
ryanodine receptors (RyRs) in the sarcoplasmic reticulum. However, it remains
uncertain what regions, if any, of the two proteins interact with one another.
Toward this end, it would be valuable to know the spatial interrelationships of
DHPRs and RyRs within plasma membrane/sarcoplasmic reticulum junctions. Here we
describe a new approach based on metabolic incorporation of biotin into targeted 
sites of the DHPR. To accomplish this, cDNAs were constructed with a biotin
acceptor domain (BAD) fused to selected sites of the DHPR, with fluorescent
protein (XFP) attached at a second site. All of the BAD-tagged constructs
properly targeted to junctions (as indicted by small puncta of XFP) and were
functional for excitation-contraction coupling. To determine whether the
introduced BAD was biotinylated and accessible to avidin (approximately 60 kDa), 
myotubes were fixed, permeablized, and exposed to fluorescently labeled avidin.
Upon expression in beta1-null or dysgenic (alpha1S-null) myotubes, punctate
avidin fluorescence co-localized with the XFP puncta for BAD attached to the
beta1a N- or C-terminals, or the alpha1S N-terminal or II-III loop. However, BAD 
fused to the alpha1S C-terminal was inaccessible to avidin in dysgenic myotubes
(containing RyR1). In contrast, this site was accessible to avidin when the
identical construct was expressed in dyspedic myotubes lacking RyR1. These
results indicate that avidin has access to a number of sites of the DHPR within
fully assembled (RyR1-containing) junctions, but not to the alpha1S C-terminal,
which appears to be occluded by the presence of RyR1.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M405318200 
PMID: 15280388  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

