
1. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2004 Jul;20 Suppl 1:158-64.

Helicobacter pylori eradication treatment modulates epithelial cell proliferation
and tissue content of hepatocyte growth factor in the gastric mucosa.

Suzuki M(1), Suzuki H, Masaoka T, Tanaka S, Suzuki K, Ishii H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Clinical Research Institute, National
Hospital Organization Tokyo Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan. msuzuki@ntmc.hosp.go.jp

BACKGROUND: Although Helicobacter pylori infection is now acknowledged as a major
promoter of gastric cancer in humans, the carcinogenetic process of this effect
has not been fully elucidated. Precancerous lesions such as intestinal
metaplasia, enhanced proliferation of epithelial cells and elevated level of
growth factors have been postulated to play a role.
AIM: To analyse a relationship between gastric mucosal proliferation, mucosal
content of hepatocyte growth factor and prevalence of intestinal metaplasia
before and after successful H. pylori eradication therapy.
METHODS: We evaluated 25 H. pylori-eradicated patients. At initial endoscopic
examination, two biopsy tissue samples each were obtained from the antrum and
great curvature of the corpus. Tissue content of hepatocyte growth factor and
neutrophil myeloperoxidase were measured using an ELISA method, and histological 
assessment of intestinal metaplasia (haematoxylin and eosin) and proliferating
cells (Ki-67 immunostaining) was performed. The patients were treated with a
1-week course of triple therapy. At 10 months after successful eradication,
biochemical and histological assessments were repeated.
RESULTS: Among all patients (n = 25), no intestinal metaplasia was detected in
the corpus mucosa, but was observed in 10 patients (40%) in the antrum. This
prevalence ratio was not changed after eradication. A slight decrease in HGF
content was demonstrated in both sites, but the level of antral hepatocyte growth
factor was significantly decreased in patients with intestinal metaplasia but not
in those without. Proliferative index (Ki-67 positive cells/epithelium) was
decreased after eradication therapy in both sites. An increase in proliferative
index was observed in the antrum with intestinal metaplasia compared with that
without, which significantly decreased after eradication therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: H. pylori eradication therapy in the present study afforded an
inhibitory effect on epithelial cell proliferation and on the mucosal content of 
HGF.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2036.2004.01971.x 
PMID: 15298622  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

