
1. J Periodontol. 2004 Jun;75(6):858-65.

Effect of enamel matrix derivative on periodontal ligament cells in vitro is
diminished by Porphyromonas gingivalis.

Inaba H(1), Kawai S, Nakayama K, Okahashi N, Amano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Frontier Biology, Osaka University Graduate School of
Dentistry, Suita-Osaka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Enamel matrix derivative (EMD) has been shown to possess a mitogenic 
effect to induce effective periodontal regeneration, however, it is unclear
whether periodontal pathogens can modulate the effect of EMD. The present study
examined the influence of Porphyromonas gingivalis on EMD-stimulated periodontal 
ligament (PDL) cells.
METHODS: P. gingivalis ATCC33277 and its mutants deficient in fimbriae (delta
fimA) or gingipains (delta rgpA delta rgpB, delta kgp, and delta rgpA delta rgpB 
delta kgp) were employed. PDL cells were grown on EMD-coated dishes and infected 
with P. gingivalis wild strain or a mutant. Cell migration and proliferation were
then evaluated with an in vitro wound healing assay. The expression of
transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) and insulin-like growth factor I
(IGF-I) mRNA by PDL cells was examined. Further, the degradation and
phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) as well
as paxillin in infected PDL cells were estimated using Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: P. gingivalis ATCC33277 inhibited the migration and proliferation of PDL
cells on EMD-coated dishes, and the mutants delta fimA, delta rgpA delta rgpB,
and delta kgp showed the same effects. Further, each of these organisms
diminished the expression of TGF-beta1 and IGF-I mRNA, as well as the
phosphorylation of ERK1/2 from EMD-stimulated PDL cells. In addition, total
paxillin protein was markedly degraded by both the wild-type strain and each of
the mutants except for delta rgpA delta rgpB delta kgp, which showed a negligible
effect in all of the assays with EMD-stimulated PDL cells.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that P. gingivalis diminishes the effect of EMD
on PDL cells in vitro through a cooperative action of gingipains.

DOI: 10.1902/jop.2004.75.6.858 
PMID: 15295953  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

