
1. Dev Biol. 2004 Sep 1;273(1):106-20.

Tbx5 and Tbx4 transcription factors interact with a new chicken PDZ-LIM protein
in limb and heart development.

Krause A(1), Zacharias W, Camarata T, Linkhart B, Law E, Lischke A, Miljan E,
Simon HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Feinberg School of Medicine, Children's Memorial
Institute for Education and Research, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60614,
USA.

The T-domain transcription factors, Tbx5 and Tbx4, play important roles in
vertebrate limb and heart development. To identify interacting and potential
Tbx-regulating proteins, we performed a yeast two-hybrid screen with the
C-terminal domain of Tbx5 as bait. We identified a new PDZ-LIM protein composed
of one N-terminal PDZ and three C-terminal LIM domains, which we named chicken
LMP-4. Among the Tbx2, 3, 4, 5 subfamily, we observed exclusive interaction with 
Tbx5 and Tbx4 proteins. Tbx3 nor Tbx2 can substitute for LMP-4 binding. While
chicken LMP-4 associates with Tbx5 or Tbx4, it uses distinct LIM domains to bind 
to the individual proteins. Subcellular co-localization of LMP-4 and Tbx proteins
supports the protein interaction and reveals interference of LMP-4 with Tbx
protein distribution, tethering the transcription factors to the cytoskeleton.
The protein-protein interaction indicates regulation of Tbx function at the level
of transcription factor nuclear localization. During chicken limb and heart
development, Tbx5/LMP-4 and Tbx4/LMP-4 are tightly co-expressed in a temporal and
spatial manner, suggesting that they operate in the same pathway. Surprisingly,
chicken LMP-4 expression domains outside those of Tbx5 in the heart led to the
discovery of Tbx4 expression in the outflow tract and the right ventricle of this
organ. The Tbx4-expressing cells coincide with those of the recently discovered
secondary anterior heart-forming field. The discrete posterior or anterior
expression domains in the heart and the exclusive fore- or hindlimb expression of
Tbx5 and Tbx4, respectively, suggest common pathways in the heart and limbs. The 
identification of a new Tbx5/4-specific binding factor further suggests a novel
mechanism for Tbx transcription factor regulation in development and disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2004.05.024 
PMID: 15302601  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

