
1. Heredity (Edinb). 2004 Oct;93(4):379-89.

Variable fitness effects of Wolbachia infection in Drosophila melanogaster.

Fry AJ(1), Palmer MR, Rand DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Box G-W, Brown University,
Providence, RI 02912, USA. afry@mbl.edu

Maternally inherited Wolbachia bacteria are extremely widespread among insects
and their presence is usually associated with parasitic modifications of host
fitness. Wolbachia pipientis infects Drosophila melanogaster populations from all
continents, but their persistence in this species occurs despite any strong
parasitic effects. Here, we have investigated the symbiosis between Wolbachia and
D. melanogaster and found that Wolbachia infection can have significant survival 
and fecundity effects. Relative to uninfected flies, infected females from three 
fly strains showed enhanced survival or fecundity associated with Wolbachia
infection, one strain showed both and one strain responded positively to
Wolbachia removal. We found no difference in egg hatch rates (cytoplasmic
incompatibility) for crosses between infected males and uninfected females,
although there were fecundity differences. Females from this cross consistently
produced fewer eggs than infected females and these fecundity differences could
promote the spread of infection just like cytoplasmic incompatibility. More
surprising, we found that infected females often had the greatest fecundity when 
mated to uninfected males. This could also promote the spread of Wolbachia
infection, though here the fitness benefits would also help to spread infection
when Wolbachia are rare. We suggest that variable fitness effects, in both sexes,
and which interact strongly with the genetic background of the host, could
increase cytoplasmic drive rates in some genotypes and help explain the
widespread persistence of Wolbachia bacteria in D. melanogaster populations.
These interactions may further explain why many D. melanogaster populations are
polymorphic for Wolbachia infection. We discuss our results in the context of
host-symbiont co-evolution.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.hdy.6800514 
PMID: 15305172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

