
1. Sci Total Environ. 2004 Sep 20;331(1-3):143-55.

Polybrominated diphenyl ethers and organochlorine compounds in biota from the
marine environment of East Greenland.

Vorkamp K(1), Christensen JH, Riget F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Chemistry and Microbiology, National Environmental
Research Institute, Frederiksborgvej 399, Roskilde, Denmark. kvo@dmu.dk

Ten black guillemot eggs, 19 ringed seals, 20 shorthorn sculpins and 20 Arctic
chars were collected around Ittoqqortoormiit (Scoresbysund, Central East
Greenland) in summer 2001 and analysed for 11 brominated diphenyl ether congeners
(BDEs) and organochlorine compounds. Congeners BDE85 and BDE183 were not detected
in any sample. SigmaBDE was highest in black guillemot eggs, with a median value 
of 80 ng/g lipid weight. This was approximately three times higher than that
found for black guillemot eggs from West Greenland, thus supporting the spatial
trend observed for organochlorines in Greenland. The median SigmaBDE
concentration in ringed seal blubber was 36 ng/g lipid weight. This was clearly
higher than SigmaBDE concentrations in ringed seal from the Canadian Arctic, but 
slightly lower than those found in ringed seals from Svalbard collected in 1981
and approximately 10 times lower than levels in seals from the Baltic Sea. Adult 
ringed seals had significantly higher SigmaBDE concentrations than animals less
than 5 years old. Shorthorn sculpin liver and Arctic char muscle had similar
concentrations of SigmaBDE, both with a median value of 7-10 ng/g lipid weight.
The levels in shorthorn sculpin were similar to those reported from a previous
study in Southwest Greenland. SigmaBDE levels correlated with PCB, DDT and
chlordane-concentrations in the same samples, indicating similar mechanisms of
uptake, bioaccumulation and biomagnification. The summed chlorobiphenyl
concentrations in the same samples exceeded the SigmaBDE concentrations by a
factor of approximately 15-30. The BDE congener patterns in black guillemot eggs 
and ringed seals were investigated using compound ratios and multivariate data
analysis. The intraspecies variance was relatively small for black guillemot eggs
and larger for ringed seals. Ringed seals had higher relative levels of the lower
BDE congeners, e.g. BDE28 and BDE47 than black guillemots. The reasons for these 
different accumulation patterns are largely unknown and may reflect
species-related differences in pollutant exposure, bioavailablity and metabolism.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2004.03.026 
PMID: 15325146  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

