
1. Curr Biol. 1993 Oct 1;3(10):645-57.

B-cell antigen receptor motifs have redundant signalling capabilities and bind
the tyrosine kinases PTK72, Lyn and Fyn.

Law DA(1), Chan VW, Datta SK, DeFranco AL.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Microbiology and Immunology and The George Williams Hooper
Foundation, University of California, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

BACKGROUND: The 13 cell antigen receptor (BCR) is a multimeric protein complex
consisting of an antigen recognition structure (membrane immunoglobulin) and two 
associated proteins, lg-alpha and Ig-beta It has been proposed that signalling
through the BCR involves Ig-alpha and Ig-beta. Both of these proteins contain
within their cytoplasmic domains an amino-acid motif that is present in a number 
of immune recognition receptors, including the BCR, T-cell antigen receptor and
Fc receptor complexes. This motif, termed the antigen-receptor homology motif
(ARH1), appears to have signal transduction ability.
RESULTS: We now show that the presence of cytoplasmic regions containing the ARM 
motif from either Ig-alpha or Ig-beta is sufficient to confer signalling
capability on an otherwise non-functional fusion protein. Both Ig-alpha- and
Ig-beta-containing chimeras induced, in an apparently redundant fashion,
signalling events seen upon membrane immunoglobulin crosslinking, including
tyrosine phosphorylation of particular proteins, phosphoinositicle breakdown and 
calcium mobilization. Furthermore, crosslinking of the chimeras resulted in
tyrosine phosphorylation of the Ig-alpha and Tg-beta tails and their association 
with the tyrosine kinases PTK72, p53/56(lyn) and p59(fyn).
CONCLUSIONS: These observations indicate that Ig-alpha and Ig-beta are
responsible for coupling membrane immunoglobulin to intracellular signalling
components. Moreover, they demonstrate that a number of tyrosine kinases
associate directly with the cytoplasmic domains of both Ig-alpha and Ig-beta.
Stimulation of the chimeras, which results in tyrosine phosphorylation of the
ig-alpha and Ig-beta tails, is a prerequisite for some of these associations. The
implications of these findings for the mechanism by which the BCR initiates the
signalling reactions are discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/0960-9822(93)90062-s 
PMID: 15335855 

