
1. Medicina (B Aires). 2004;64(4):306-12.

Evaluation of phenotypic and genotypic markers for clinical strains of
Acinetobacter baumannii.

Limansky AS(1), Zamboni MI, Guardati MC, Rossignol G, Campos E, Viale AM.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Rosario (IBR, CONICET), Facultad 
de Ciencias Bioquímicas y Farmacéuticas, Universidad Nacional de Rosario,
Argentina. alimansk@infovia.com.ar

Acinetobacter baumannii is an important opportunistic pathogen that is rapidly
evolving toward multidrug resistance and is involved in various nosocomial
infections that are often severe. It strongly prompts the epidemiological study
of A. baumannii infections. However, there is no a generally accepted typing
scheme. Different genotypic and phenotypic procedures were evaluated for the
characterization of clinical isolates of A. baumannii isolated from a community
hospital of Rosario, Argentina (Hospital de Emergencias Clemente Alvarez, HECA), 
during a period of four years. These included PCR with degenerate oligonucleotide
primers (DO-PCR), repetitive extragenic palindromic-PCR (REP-PCR), pulsed-field
gel electrophoresis (PFGE), and antibiotyping. Amongst individual methods, DO-PCR
and PFGE were found the most suitable methods to discriminate A. baumannii
clinical isolates [discriminatory indexes (D) of 0.98 and 0.96, respectively]. On
the other hand, both antibiotyping and REP-PCR were much less discriminatory (D: 
0.86 and 0.77, respectively). The combination of antibiotyping with any of the
above genotypic procedures was found to largely increase D. In particular, the
combination of DO-PCR and antibiotyping provided the best discriminatory method
for epidemiological studies of A. baumannii. Combination of the different
genotypic and phenotypic procedures allowed the inference of genetic
relationships and dissemination of multidrug-resistant A. baumannii clones in
HECA in the period 1994-1999. One particular strain, which showed sensibility to 
carbapenems, was found widely distributed in this hospital during 1994-1996. A
different strain, showing additional resistance to carbapenems, rapidly
disseminated in HECA in coincidence with the introduction of imipenem therapy in 
1997.


PMID: 15338972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

