
1. J Immunol. 2004 Sep 15;173(6):4120-9.

Activation of signaling lymphocytic activation molecule triggers a signaling
cascade that enhances Th1 responses in human intracellular infection.

Quiroga MF(1), Martínez GJ, Pasquinelli V, Costas MA, Bracco MM, Malbrán A,
Olivares LM, Sieling PA, García VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Parasitology, and Immunology, University of Buenos
Aires School of Medicine, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

T cell production of IFN-gamma contributes to host defense against infection by
intracellular pathogens, including mycobacteria. Lepromatous leprosy, the
disseminated form of infection caused by Mycobacterium leprae, is characterized
by loss of cellular response against the pathogen and diminished Th1 cytokine
production. Relieving bacterial burden in Ag-unresponsive patients might be
achieved through alternative receptors that stimulate IFN-gamma production. We
have previously shown that ligation of signaling lymphocytic activation molecule 
(SLAM) enhances IFN-gamma in mycobacterial infection; therefore, we investigated 
molecular pathways leading from SLAM activation to IFN-gamma production in human 
leprosy. The expression of the SLAM-associated protein (an inhibitory factor for 
IFN-gamma induction) on M. leprae-stimulated cells from leprosy patients was
inversely correlated to IFN-gamma production. However, SLAM ligation or exposure 
of cells from lepromatous patients to a proinflammatory microenvironment
down-regulated SLAM-associated protein expression. Moreover, SLAM activation
induced a sequence of signaling proteins, including activation of the NF-kappaB
complex, phosphorylation of Stat1, and induction of T-bet expression, resulting
in the promotion of IFN-gamma production, a pathway that remains quiescent in
response to Ag in lepromatous patients. Therefore, our findings reveal a cascade 
of molecular events during signaling through SLAM in leprosy that cooperate to
induce IFN-gamma production and strongly suggest that SLAM might be a focal point
for therapeutic modulation of T cell cytokine responses in diseases characterized
by dysfunctional Th2 responses.

Copyright 2004 The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.173.6.4120 
PMID: 15356162  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

