
1. J Immunol. 2004 Sep 15;173(6):3816-24.

Expression of the glucocorticoid receptor from the 1A promoter correlates with T 
lymphocyte sensitivity to glucocorticoid-induced cell death.

Purton JF(1), Monk JA, Liddicoat DR, Kyparissoudis K, Sakkal S, Richardson SJ,
Godfrey DI, Cole TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia.

Glucocorticoid (GC) hormones cause pronounced T cell apoptosis, particularly in
immature thymic T cells. This is possibly due to tissue-specific regulation of
the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) gene. In mice the GR gene is transcribed from
five separate promoters designated: 1A, 1B, 1C, 1D, and 1E. Nearly all cells
express GR from promoters 1B-1E, but the activity of the 1A promoter has only
been reported in the whole thymus or lymphocyte cell lines. To directly assess
the role of GR promoter use in sensitivity to glucocorticoid-induced cell death, 
we have compared the activity of the GR 1A promoter with GC sensitivity in
different mouse lymphocyte populations. We report that GR 1A promoter activity is
restricted to thymocyte and peripheral lymphocyte populations and the cortex of
the brain. The relative level of expression of the 1A promoter to the 1B-1E
promoters within a lymphocyte population was found to directly correlate with
susceptibility to GC-induced cell death, with the extremely GC-sensitive CD4+CD8+
thymocytes having the highest levels of GR 1A promoter activity, and the
relatively GC-resistant alphabetaTCR+CD24(int/low) thymocytes and peripheral T
cells having the lowest levels. DNA sequencing of the mouse GR 1A promoter
revealed a putative glucocorticoid-response element. Furthermore, GR 1A promoter 
use and GR protein levels were increased by GC treatment in thymocytes, but not
in splenocytes. These data suggest that tissue-specific differences in GR
promoter use determine T cell sensitivity to glucocorticoid-induced cell death.

Copyright 2004 The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.173.6.3816 
PMID: 15356129  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

