
1. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2004 Oct;16(10):1017-25.

Failure of the gut barrier system enhances liver injury in rats: protection of
hepatocytes by gut-derived hepatocyte growth factor.

Choda Y(1), Morimoto Y, Miyaso H, Shinoura S, Saito S, Yagi T, Iwagaki H, Tanaka 
N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Okayama University Graduate School 
of Medicine and Dentistry, Shikata-cho, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Clinical and experimental studies suggest that impairment of the
mucosal barrier system increases gut-derived endotoxin in the portal blood, which
causes liver injury. The aim of this study was to elucidate the mechanism of
liver injury caused by gut defence failure.
DESIGN: Wistar rats were administered either enteral lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or 
LPS via the portal vein.
METHODS: Blood samples were collected via the inferior vena cava at necropsy.
Serum aspartate transaminase (AST) and alanine transaminase (ALT) were analysed
by standard enzymatic procedures and cytokines [tumour necrosis factor-alpha,
interleukin (IL)-1beta, interferon-gamma, IL-6 and hepatocyte growth factor
(HGF)] were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Livers were removed
and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. CD14, CD68, Toll-like receptor (TLR) 2, TLR4 
and Fas ligand (FasL) were analysed immunohistochemically. Expression of TLR2,
TLR4 and CD14 mRNA was determined by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction.
RESULTS: In enterally-treated rats, AST and ALT were not increased and cytokine
levels were under the limits of detection in the absence of a rise in HGF.
Enteral administration of LPS increased HGF dose-dependently. Injection of LPS in
the portal vein resulted in significant increases in AST, ALT, tumour necrosis
factor-alpha, IL-1beta, interferon-gamma and IL-6 levels, but no change in HGF
levels. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that intraportal LPS administration
increased CD14, TLR4, CD68 and FasL. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction analysis demonstrated that TLR4 mRNA expression was upregulated 0.5 h
after intraportal LPS administration.
CONCLUSION: s Our data suggest that Kupffer cell activation mediated by
intraportal LPS via TLR4 is involved in liver injury, possibly through both
tumour necrosis factor-alpha/IL-1beta and FasL, and that lack of HGF activity in 
the impaired gut could not counteract liver injury.

DOI: 10.1097/00042737-200410000-00011 
PMID: 15371926  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

