
1. Clin Oral Investig. 2005 Mar;9(1):38-45. Epub 2004 Sep 22.

Antimicrobial effects of a new therapeutic liquid dentifrice formulation on oral 
bacteria including odorigenic species.

Sreenivasan PK(1), Furgang D, Zhang Y, DeVizio W, Fine DH.

Author information: 
(1)Colgate-Palmolive Company, 909 River Road, Piscataway, NJ 08855, USA.

The control of oral malodor is well-recognized in efforts to improve oral health.
Antimicrobial formulations can mitigate oral malodor, however, procedures to
assess effects on oral bacteria including those implicated in halitosis are
unavailable. This investigation examined the antimicrobial effects of a new
liquid triclosan/copolymer dentifrice (test) formulation that demonstrated
significant inhibition of oral malodor in previous organoleptic clinical studies.
Procedures compared antimicrobial effects of the test and control formulations on
a range of oral micro-organisms including members implicated in halitosis,
substantive antimicrobial effects of formulations with hydroxyapatite as a
surrogate for human teeth and ex vivo effects on oral bacteria from human
volunteers. With Actinomyces viscosus, as a model system, the test formulation
demonstrated a dose-dependent effect. At these concentrations the test
formulation provided significant antimicrobial effects on 13 strains of oral
bacteria including those implicated in bad breath at selected posttreatment time 
points. Treatment of hydroxyapatite by the test dentifrice resulted in a
significant and substantive antimicrobial effect vs. controls. Oral bacteria from
subjects treated ex vivo with the test dentifrice resulted in significant
reductions in cultivable oral bacteria and odorigenic bacteria producing hydrogen
sulfide. In summary, microbiological methods adapted to study odorigenic bacteria
demonstrate the significant antimicrobial effects of the test
(triclosan/copolymer) dentifrice with laboratory and clinical strains of oral
bacteria implicated in bad breath.

DOI: 10.1007/s00784-004-0285-0 
PMID: 15449114  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

