
1. J Biol Chem. 1992 Mar 15;267(8):5451-9.

Peptide binding to HLA-A2 and HLA-B27 isolated from Escherichia coli.
Reconstitution of HLA-A2 and HLA-B27 heavy chain/beta 2-microglobulin complexes
requires specific peptides.

Parker KC(1), Carreno BM, Sestak L, Utz U, Biddison WE, Coligan JE.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Resources Branch, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

The specificity of peptide binding by human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I
molecules was investigated in a cell-free direct-binding assay. Peptides were
assessed for binding to HLA-A2 and HLA-B27 by measuring the formation of
heterotrimeric HLA complexes that consisted of iodinated beta 2-microglobulin,
HLA heavy chain fragments isolated from the Escherichia coli cytoplasm, and
peptide. In this system, no detectable HLA heavy chain-beta 2-microglobulin
complexes were formed unless appropriate peptides were intentionally added to the
reconstitution solution. Analysis with monoclonal antibodies demonstrated that
these heterotrimeric complexes were correctly folded. Five nonhomologous
peptides, known to form complexes with HLA-A2 or HLA-B27 from T-cell functional
studies, were tested for their capacity to bind to HLA-A2 and HLA-B27 using the
reconstitution assay. Four of the peptides bound to the appropriate class I
molecule only. One peptide and some (but not all) substitution analogs of it
bound to both HLA-A2 and HLA-B27. The effect of peptide length on binding to
HLA-B27 was studied, and it was found that the optimal length was 9 or 10 amino
acid residues; however, one peptide that bound to HLA-B27 was 15 amino acids
long. All peptides that bound to HLA-B27 in the direct-binding assay also
competed with antigenic peptides for binding to HLA-B27 on the surface of intact 
cells, as determined by a standard cytotoxic T-lymphocyte functional assay. Thus,
we conclude that HLA-A2 and HLA-B27 bind distinct but partially overlapping sets 
of peptides and that, at least in vitro, the assembly of HLA heavy chain-beta
2-microglobulin complexes requires specific peptides.


PMID: 1544922  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

