
1. Microb Pathog. 2004 Oct;37(4):215-24.

Sequential patterns of gene expression by bovine monocyte-derived macrophages
associated with ingestion of mycobacterial organisms.

Weiss DJ(1), Evanson OA, Deng M, Abrahamsen MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Minnesota, 1971 Commonwealth Avenue, St Paul, MN 55108,
USA. weiss005@umn.edu

We investigated mechanisms involved in killing of mycobacterial organisms by
comparing the response of bovine monocyte-derived macrophages to ingestion of
Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis or M. avium subsp. avium organisms.
Previous studies have shown that bovine macrophages have the capacity to kill M. 
avium subsp. avium organisms in vitro but cannot kill M. avium subsp.
paratuberculosis organisms. We used bovine cDNA microarray technology to
investigate sequential gene expression by bovine monocyte-derived macrophages and
function assays to correlate gene expression with biological activity. Results of
the gene expression studies indicated substantial differences between macrophages
phagocytizing the two organisms. At 2, 6, and 24h after infection, 12, 53, and 19
genes, respectively, were differentially expressed. Over all time periods,
approximately twice as many genes had lower expression in M. avium subsp.
paratuberculosis-infected macrophages than had greater expression. Differentially
regulated genes of most interest to antimicrobial responses included inflammatory
molecules (transforming growth factor-beta, thrombospondin 1, monocyte chemokine,
and cathepsin K), phagosome-lysosome-related genes (H(+) ATPases,
lysosomal-associated membrane protein 2, vesicle trafficking protein, and solute 
carrier protein), and apoptosis-related genes (tumor necrosis factor
receptor-associated factor 2, and tumor protein p(53) binding protein). Function 
assays indicated that M. avium subsp. avium-infected macrophages had a greater
capacity to acidify phagosomes and a greater percentage of apoptotic cells. In
conclusion, these results suggest that a complex interaction between macrophages 
and mycobacterial organisms is involved in determining the fate of the organism. 
Although multiple genes and metabolic pathways are involved, the capacity of
cells to acidify phagosomes and induce apoptosis appears to play a prominent
role.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2004.07.001 
PMID: 15458782  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

