
1. J Immunol. 2004 Oct 15;173(8):5165-70.

Protease-activated receptor signaling increases epithelial antimicrobial peptide 
expression.

Chung WO(1), Hansen SR, Rao D, Dale BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, University of Washington, Seattle 98195-7132, USA.
sochung@u.washington.edu

Epithelial tissues provide both a physical barrier and an antimicrobial barrier. 
Antimicrobial peptides of the human beta-defensin (hBD) family are part of the
innate immune responses that play a role in mucosal defense. hBDs are made in
epithelia including oral epithelium where the bacterial load is particularly
great. hBD-2 and hBD-3 are up-regulated in response to bacterial stimuli.
Previous studies show that hBD-2 expression in human gingival epithelial cells
(GEC) is stimulated by both nonpathogenic and pathogenic bacteria, including
Porphyromonas gingivalis, a Gram-negative pathogen associated with periodontitis.
Present evidence suggests that hBD-2 expression in GEC uses several signaling
pathways, including an NF-kappaB-mediated pathway but without apparent LPS-TLR4
signaling. Protease-activated receptors (PAR) are G-protein-coupled receptors
that mediate cellular responses to extracellular proteinases. P. gingivalis
secretes multiple proteases that contribute to its virulence mechanisms. To
determine whether PAR signaling is used in hBD-2 induction, GEC were stimulated
with wild-type P. gingivalis or mutants lacking one or more proteases. hBD-2 mRNA
expression was reduced in GEC stimulated with single protease mutants (11-67%
compared with wild type), strongly reduced in double mutants (0.1-16%), and
restored to wild-type levels (93%) in mutant with restored protease activity.
Stimulation by wild type was partially blocked by inhibitors of phospholipase C, 
a main signaling pathway for PARs. Expression of hBD-3 was unaffected. Peptide
agonist of PAR-2, but not PAR-1 activator, also induced hBD-2 in GEC. Thus, P.
gingivalis proteases are directly involved in regulation of hBD-2 in cultured
GEC, and this induction partially uses the PAR-2 receptor and signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.173.8.5165 
PMID: 15470061  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

