
1. Arthritis Rheum. 2004 Nov;50(11):3526-34.

Production of endogenous antibiotics in articular cartilage.

Varoga D(1), Pufe T, Harder J, Meyer-Hoffert U, Mentlein R, Schröder JM, Petersen
WJ, Tillmann BN, Proksch E, Goldring MB, Paulsen FP.

Author information: 
(1)Schleswig-Holstein University and University Hospital, 24098 Kiel, Germany.

Comment in
    Arthritis Rheum. 2004 Nov;50(11):3401-3.

OBJECTIVE: Defensins are broad-spectrum antimicrobial peptides that are
components of innate immunity. To date, only epithelial surfaces and blood cells 
have been shown to produce these cationic peptides in bactericidal concentrations
when challenged with microorganisms or inflammatory cytokines. Infections caused 
by gram-negative pathogens occur only infrequently in association with joint
surgery. The present study was undertaken to investigate whether this may be
explained by intraarticular production of gram-negative-specialized antimicrobial
peptides.
METHODS: Healthy articular cartilage and cultured T/C-28a2 chondrocytes were
assessed, by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and
immunohistochemistry, for expression of various antimicrobial peptides. The
expression of human beta-defensin 2 (HBD-2) was studied in cultured chondrocytes 
after exposure to bacterial supernatants and proinflammatory cytokines and was
assayed by real-time RT-PCR and immunoblot analysis. A septic arthritis mouse
model was used to investigate the regulation of the murine homolog of HBD-2 in
articular cartilage after bacterial inoculation.
RESULTS: Healthy articular cartilage and T/C-28a2 chondrocytes were able to
produce different antimicrobial peptides. After exposure to gram-negative
bacteria and proinflammatory cytokines, expression of cartilage-derived HBD-2
strongly increased. Immunoblot analysis revealed up-regulation of the
gram-negative-specialized HBD-2 in microbicidal doses. Immunohistochemistry
analysis revealed induction of the murine homolog of HBD-2 in vivo after
intraarticular injection of bacteria.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrated a previously unrecognized function of human
chondrocytes. In addition to its biomechanical properties, articular cartilage
has the ability to produce antimicrobial substances when challenged with
microorganisms. The expression of HBD-2 in microbicidal doses suggests that
antimicrobial peptides may contribute to host defense mechanisms in articular
joints.

DOI: 10.1002/art.20605 
PMID: 15529375  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

