
1. Infect Immun. 2004 Dec;72(12):6773-9.

Downregulation of CXCR1 and CXCR2 expression on human neutrophils by Helicobacter
pylori: a new pathomechanism in H. pylori infection?

Schmausser B(1), Josenhans C, Endrich S, Suerbaum S, Sitaru C, Andrulis M,
Brändlein S, Rieckmann P, Müller-Hermelink HK, Eck M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pathologie, Universität Würzburg, Josef-Schneider-Strasse 2,
97080 Würzburg, Germany. schmausser@web.de

In Helicobacter pylori gastritis, neutrophil activation and migration, which play
central roles in the pathogenesis of the disease, are regulated by the neutrophil
attractant chemokines interleukin 8 (IL-8) and Groalpha, whose secretion is
induced by H. pylori. However, the modulation of the corresponding chemokine
receptors CXCR1 and CXCR2 on human neutrophils under the influence of H. pylori
has not been investigated. Incubation of neutrophils with cag(+) and cag deletion
H. pylori strains resulted in a complete downregulation of the CXCR1 and the
CXCR2 receptors after 0.5 h, as tested by fluorescence-activated cell sorter
analysis, independent of the cag status. Downregulation of CXCR1 and CXCR2 seems 
to occur via receptor internalization and rapid degradation, as shown by confocal
microscopy and immunoblotting. Neither the proinflammatory cytokines IL-8 and
tumor necrosis factor alpha produced by the neutrophils themselves nor H. pylori 
lipopolysaccharide, which are the known regulators of these two chemokine
receptors, was responsible for the downregulation. Reverse transcription-PCR
analysis showed that CXCR1 and CXCR2 mRNAs of neutrophils were reduced at a later
time than the CXCR1 and CXCR2 proteins. Moreover, cag(+) H. pylori strains
induced significantly stronger downregulation of CXCR1 and CXCR2 mRNAs than the
cag deletion mutant. Therefore, receptor protein and mRNA downregulation seem to 
be mediated by two independent mechanisms. Data obtained by immunohistochemistry 
suggested that downmodulation of CXCR1 and CXCR2 on neutrophils may also occur in
vivo in the human stomach during H. pylori infection. Downregulation of CXCR1 and
CXCR2 expression on neutrophils in H. pylori infection by H. pylori itself may
represent a new mechanism of modulating neutrophil migration and activation in
the gastric mucosa.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.72.12.6773-6779.2004 
PMCID: PMC529101
PMID: 15557597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

