
1. J Cell Biochem. 2005 Mar 1;94(4):835-47.

T-cell factor-4-dependent up-regulation of fibronectin is involved in fibroblast 
growth factor-2-induced tube formation by endothelial cells.

Kanda S(1), Miyata Y, Kanetake H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Division of Endothelial
Cell Biology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Science, 1-7-1
Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8501, Japan. shigeruk@net.nagasaki-u.ac.jp

Deletion of fibronectin or its receptor, alpha(5) integrin, interferes with the
formation of a functional circulation in mice. We hypothesized that
alpha(5)beta(1) integrin/fibronectin interaction may be involved in
differentiation of endothelial cells during angiogenesis. We examined the effect 
of blocking antibody against alpha(5)beta(1) integrin in fibroblast growth
factor-2 (FGF-2)-induced angiogenesis by Matrigel plug assay. Although the
antibody did not inhibit the recruitment of endothelial cells into plugs, it
inhibited organization of lumen-containing capillaries. The antibody also
inhibited FGF-2-induced tube formation by murine brain capillary endothelial
cells (IBE cells) cultured in type I collagen gels. We previously showed that
FGF-2 failed to induce tube formation by IBE cells expressing kinase-dead c-Fyn
(KDFyn cells). Association with beta-catenin enhances the transcriptional
activity of T-cell factor-4 (TCF-4), which up-regulates the expression of
fibronectin. FGF-2 induced association of beta-catenin with TCF-4 and
up-regulation of fibronectin in IBE cells, but not in KDFyn cells. Expression of 
mutant TCF-4, which does not associate with beta-catenin, inhibited FGF-2-induced
tube formation and expression of fibronectin in IBE cells. FGF-2-induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of beta-catenin, and association with TCF-4 was increased in IBE 
cells, but not in KDFyn cells. Taken together, interaction of alpha(5)beta(1)
integrin and fibronectin is involved in FGF-2-induced tube formation by
endothelial cells and up-regulation of fibronectin through TCF-4 seemed to be
involved in this process.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.20354 
PMID: 15578569  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

