
1. Am J Clin Nutr. 2004 Dec;80(6):1618-25.

Lactobacillus rhamnosus induces peripheral hyporesponsiveness in stimulated CD4+ 
T cells via modulation of dendritic cell function.

Braat H(1), van den Brande J, van Tol E, Hommes D, Peppelenbosch M, van Deventer 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Internal Medicine and the Department of
Gastroenterology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
h.braat@meandermc.nl

BACKGROUND: Although it is widely recognized that the intake of so-called
probiotic microorganisms is beneficial in chronic mucosal inflammation and
topical allergic disease, the immunologic details explaining how such bacteria
can exert these effects remain obscure.
OBJECTIVE: We determined whether Lactobacillus rhamnosus can modulate T cell
responses in vitro and in vivo.
DESIGN: In vitro, human monocyte-derived dendritic cells (DCs) matured in the
presence of L. rhamnosus were used to instruct naive CD4+ T cells; subsequently, 
the T cell response was assessed with the use of CD3/CD28 and interleukin (IL) 2.
Cytokine production by ex vivo-stimulated naive cells and memory T cells was
measured before and after oral supplementation with L. rhamnosus in 6 healthy
volunteers and 6 patients with Crohn disease.
RESULTS: A decreased T cell proliferation and cytokine production, especially of 
IL-2, IL-4, and IL-10, was observed in CD3/CD28-stimulated T cells derived from
L. rhamnosus-matured DCs. This T cell hyporesponsiveness was associated with
enhanced DC-T cell interaction and normal responsiveness of T cells for IL-2. In 
vivo oral supplementation of L. rhamnosus for 2 wk induced a similar T cell
hyporesponsiveness, including impaired ex vivo T helper subsets 1 and 2 responses
without up-regulation of immunoregulatory cytokines in cohorts of both healthy
volunteers and patients with Crohn disease.
CONCLUSIONS: We propose that L. rhamnosus modulates DC function to induce a novel
form of T cell hyporesponsiveness; this mechanism might be an explanation for the
observed beneficial effects of probiotic treatment in clinical disease.

DOI: 10.1093/ajcn/80.6.1618 
PMID: 15585777  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

