
1. World J Gastroenterol. 2005 Jan 7;11(1):99-103.

Concentrations of alpha- and beta-defensins in gastric juice of patients with
various gastroduodenal diseases.

Nishi Y(1), Isomoto H, Mukae H, Ishimoto H, Wen CY, Wada A, Ohnita K, Mizuta Y,
Murata I, Hirayama T, Nakazato M, Kohno S.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Nagasaki University School of
Medicine, Japan.

AIM: To determine the concentration of alpha- and beta-defensins in gastric juice
of patients with various gastroduodenal diseases.
METHODS: Concentrations of human neutrophil peptides (HNPs) 1-3, the major forms 
of alpha-defensins, and human beta-defensin (HBD)-1 and HBD-2 were measured by
radioimmunoassay in plasma and gastric juice of 84 subjects, consisting of 54
Helicobacter pylori-infected and 30 uninfected subjects. They included 33
patients with chronic gastritis (CG), 12 with gastric ulcer (GU), 11 with
duodenal ulcer (DU), 11 with benign gastric polyp (BGP) and 16 with normal mucosa
(N group) on upper endoscopy. Plasma pepsinogen I and II levels, biomarkers for
gastric mucosal inflammation and atrophy, were also measured.
RESULTS: Gastric juice HNPs 1-3 levels in patients with CG, GU and BGP were
significantly higher than those in patients with DU and N. Gastric juice HBD-2
concentrations in patients with CG and GU were significantly higher than those in
the N group, but were significantly lower in DU patients than in GU patients.
Gastric juice HBD-1 levels and plasma levels of these peptides were similar in
the patient groups. Concentrations of gastric juice HNPs 1-3 and HBD-2 of in H
pylori-infected patients were significantly different from those in uninfected
subjects. HNPs 1-3 concentrations in gastric juice correlated negatively with
plasma pepsinogen I levels and I/II ratios. HBD-2 levels in gastric juice
correlated positively and negatively with plasma pepsinogen II concentrations and
I/II ratios, respectively.
CONCLUSION: HNPs 1-3 and HBD-2 levels in gastric juice are diverse among various 
gastrointestinal diseases, reflecting the inflammatory and atrophic events of the
background gastric mucosa affected by H pylori.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v11.i1.99 
PMCID: PMC4205393
PMID: 15609405  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

