
1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2004 Nov;10(6):763-70.

Autoantibodies against the bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein from
inflammatory bowel disease patients can impair the antibiotic activity of
bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein.

Schinke S(1), Fellermann K, Herlyn K, Reichel PH, Fundke R, Stange EF, Gross WL, 
Schultz H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, University of Luebeck, Bad Bramstedt, Germany.

Bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein (BPI) is an antineutrophil
cytoplasmic autoantibody (ANCA) target antigen in inflammatory bowel disease
(IBD). The aim of this study was to characterize binding regions of
BPI-autoantibodies and to analyze their ability to block the antibiotic effect of
BPI. Sera of 24 ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease patients were examined in 
indirect immuno-fluorescence, ANCA enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and
by epitope mapping with 13mer peptides and Western blot for presence of
BPI-autoantibodies. IgG preparations were used to determine inhibition of BPI's
antimicrobial function by BPI-autoantibodies in a bacterial growth inhibition
assay. BPI-autoantibodies were detected by ELISA in 18/24 patients. Epitope
mapping and western blotting revealed an additional 3 patients with
BPI-autoantibodies. IgG preparations of all patients with Crohn's disease and 9
of 12 ulcerative colitis patients could inhibit the antibiotic function of BPI in
vitro as compared with healthy control subjects. Inhibiting BPI-autoantibodies
correlated with extraintestinal manifestations, peripheral blood leukocyte
counts, and anemia. BPI-autoantibodies recognizing the N-terminal portion were
associated with greater mucosal damage and intestinal extent of disease. BPI is a
frequent target antigen of autoantibodies in ulcerative colitis and Crohn's
disease. Inhibition of the antibiotic function mediated by the N-terminal region 
of BPI by these autoantibodies may contribute to a proinflammatory environment in
IBD patients.

DOI: 10.1097/00054725-200411000-00011 
PMID: 15626895  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

