
1. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2004 Nov;25(11):666-70.

[Expression of human HSF in E. coli and its effects on mobilization of
hematopoietic stem cells in rhesus monkeys].

[Article in Chinese]

Qi CM(1), Yang KG, Chen SS, Zhang YL, Deng YC, Su L, Wang YD, Luo S, Liu CZ, Luo 
QL, Xiong GL.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, CAMS & PUMC, Beijing 100005, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the expression of hHSF in E. coli and its effect on the
mobilization of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells.
METHODS: The hHSF gene was obtained by overlapping PCR and cloned into the vector
pET30a to yield pET30a-hHSF, which was transformed into E. coli BL21(DE3) and
expressed with IPTG induction. Subsequently, rhHSF was purified by gel filtration
and cation exchange chromatography and subjected to refolding. Molecular weight
of hHSF was measured by MALDI-TOF Mass Spectroscopy. The N terminal amino acid
sequence rhHSF was determined by protein sequencing. rhHSF was profiled in rhesus
monkey for mobilization of peripheral blood stem cells. Eight rhesus monkeys were
equally divided into two groups. The first group was administered single
subcutaneous injection of 500 microg/kg hHSF, while the other one was
administered 10 microg.kg(-1).d(-1) G-CSF for 4 days followed by a single
subcutaneous injection of 500 microg/kg rhHSF.
RESULTS: The sequence coding hHSF was confirmed by sequencing and the
induced-expression level was about 30% of total cell proteins. The purity of
target protein was over 95%. The sequence of N terminal 10 amino acids and the
amino acid composition were consistent with the theoretical parameters; molecular
weight of rhHSF was 7540. The peripheral CD34(+) cells, CFU-GM yields, and
neutrophils peaked at 3 h (16.3-folds increase compared with baseline), 1 h
(1.9-folds increase) and 45 min (4.4-folds increase) respectively after the
single injection of rhHSF. The addition of rhHSF after the last dose of G-CSF
boosted these levels to 25.8-folds, 8.7-folds and 8.3-folds respectively.
CONCLUSION: hHSF is highly expressed in E. coli and rapidly mobilizes the
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells and neutrophils in rhesus monkeys. hHSF shows
distinct synergistic effect with G-CSF.


PMID: 15634571  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

