
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2005 Feb;39(2):296-306.

Overexpression and purification of Pyrococcus abyssi phosphopantetheine
adenylyltransferase from an optimized synthetic gene for NMR studies.

Nálezková M(1), de Groot A, Graf M, Gans P, Blanchard L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Résonance Magnétique Nucléaire, Institut de Biologie
Structurale Jean-Pierre Ebel (CEA-CNRS-UJF), UMR 5075, 41 rue Jules Horowitz,
38027 Grenoble cedex 1, France.

Phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase (PPAT) is an essential enzyme that
catalyses a rate-limiting step in coenzyme A (CoA) biosynthesis in all organisms.
This study was conducted to obtain a high amount of pure, soluble, and stable
PPAT from the hyperthermophilic archaeon Pyrococcus abyssi with the aim of
investigating its structural characterization by NMR. Production of this enzyme
from its natural gene in the Escherichia coli classical expression strain
(BL21(DE3)) was not possible, most likely due to the presence of a high number of
E. coli rare codons. Only a low amount of P. abyssi PPAT was previously obtained 
in two E. coli strains encoding tRNAs that recognize these rare E. coli codons
and only by using a very rich growth medium. It was not possible to use this
strategy to prepare labelled samples for the NMR study, thus another solution had
to be found. Therefore, a synthetic gene encoding P. abyssi PPAT was constructed 
for which not only the rare codons were changed but which was also optimized to
avoid other expression-limiting factors such as internal ribosome entry sites,
RNA secondary structures, and DNA repeats. Gene optimization strongly increased
the yield of P. abyssi PPAT in E. coli BL21(DE3) and allowed us to start the
structural characterization of the enzyme. Circular dichroism and 2D NMR
experiments indicate the presence of a well-ordered structure for P. abyssi PPAT 
and also confirm the existence of this enzyme as a monomer in solution.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2004.11.003 
PMID: 15642482  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

