
1. Infect Immun. 2005 Feb;73(2):761-9.

Helicobacter pylori induces transendothelial migration of activated memory T
cells.

Enarsson K(1), Brisslert M, Backert S, Quiding-Järbrink M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Göteborg University, Box
435, 405 30 Göteborg, Sweden. karin.enarsson@microbio.gu.se

Helicobacter pylori infection is associated with pronounced infiltration of
granulocytes and lymphocytes into the gastric mucosa, resulting in active chronic
gastritis that may develop into duodenal ulcer disease or gastric adenocarcinoma.
Infiltrating T cells play a major role in the pathology of these diseases, but
the signals involved in recruitment of T cells from blood to H. pylori-infected
tissues are not well understood. We therefore examined H. pylori-induced T-cell
transendothelial migration (TEM). The Transwell system, employing a monolayer of 
human umbilical vein endothelial cells, was used as a model to study TEM. H.
pylori induced a significant T-cell migration, compared to spontaneous migration.
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells migrated to the same extent in response to H. pylori,
whereas there was significantly larger transmigration of memory T cells compared 
to naive T cells. Both H. pylori culture filtrate and urease induced migration,
and the presence of the H. pylori cag pathogenicity island increased TEM. T-cell 
TEM was mediated by LFA-1-ICAM-1 interactions in accordance with an increased
ICAM-1 expression on the endothelial cells after contact with H. pylori.
Migrating T cells had increased expression of activation marker CD69 and
chemokine receptors CXCR3, CCR4, and CCR9. Furthermore, T cells migrating in
response to H. pylori secreted Th1 but not Th2 cytokines upon stimulation. In
conclusion, our data indicate that live H. pylori and its secreted products
contribute to T-cell recruitment to the gastric mucosa and that the responding T 
cells have an activated memory Th1 phenotype.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.73.2.761-769.2005 
PMCID: PMC546998
PMID: 15664914  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

