
1. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2005 Jun;288(6):C1402-10. Epub 2005 Feb 2.

ATR/TEM8 is highly expressed in epithelial cells lining Bacillus anthracis' three
sites of entry: implications for the pathogenesis of anthrax infection.

Bonuccelli G(1), Sotgia F, Frank PG, Williams TM, de Almeida CJ, Tanowitz HB,
Scherer PE, Hotchkiss KA, Terman BI, Rollman B, Alileche A, Brojatsch J, Lisanti 
MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
1300 Morris Park Ave., Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Anthrax is a disease caused by infection with spores from the bacteria Bacillus
anthracis. These spores enter the body, where they germinate into bacteria and
secrete a tripartite toxin that causes local edema and, in systemic infections,
death. Recent studies identified the cellular receptor for anthrax toxin (ATR), a
type I membrane protein. ATR is one of the splice variants of the tumor
endothelial marker 8 (TEM8) gene. ATR and TEM8 are identical throughout their
extracellular and transmembrane sequence, and both proteins function as receptors
for the toxin. ATR/TEM8 function and expression have been associated with
development of the vascular system and with tumor angiogenesis. TEM8 is
selectively upregulated in endothelial cells during blood vessel formation and
tumorigenesis. However, selective expression of TEM8 in endothelial cells
contradicts the presumably ubiquitous expression of the receptor. To resolve this
controversial issue, we evaluated the distribution of ATR/TEM8 in a variety of
tissues. For this purpose, we generated and characterized a novel anti-ATR/TEM8
polyclonal antibody. Here, we show that this novel antibody recognizes all three 
ATR/TEM8 isoforms, which are widely and differentially expressed in various
tissue types. We found that ATR/TEM8 expression is not only associated with tumor
endothelial cells, as previously described. Indeed, ATR/TEM8 is highly and
selectively expressed in the epithelial cells lining those organs that constitute
the anthrax toxin's sites of entry, i.e., the lung, the skin, and the intestine. 
In fact, we show that ATR/TEM8 is highly expressed in the respiratory epithelium 
of the bronchi of the lung and is particularly abundant in the ciliated
epithelial cells coating the bronchi. Furthermore, immunostaining of skin
biopsies revealed that ATR/TEM8 is highly expressed in the keratinocytes of the
epidermis. Finally, we show that the epithelial cells lining the small intestine 
strongly express ATR/TEM8 isoforms. This is the first demonstration that the
ATR/TEM8 protein is highly expressed in epithelial cells, which represent the
primary location for bacterial invasion. These results suggest that the ATR/TEM8 
expression pattern that we describe here is highly relevant for understanding the
pathogenesis of anthrax infection.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.00582.2004 
PMID: 15689409  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

