
1. J Cell Sci. 2005 Mar 1;118(Pt 5):961-70. Epub 2005 Feb 15.

Pigment epithelium-derived factor inhibits fibroblast-growth-factor-2-induced
capillary morphogenesis of endothelial cells through Fyn.

Kanda S(1), Mochizuki Y, Nakamura T, Miyata Y, Matsuyama T, Kanetake H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Division of Endothelial
Cell Biology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Science, 1-7-1
Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8501, Japan. shigeruk@net.nagasaki-u.ac.jp

Pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF) exerts anti-angiogenic actions. However,
the signal-transduction pathways regulated by PEDF remain to be elucidated. We
show here that PEDF inhibited fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF-2) induced
capillary morphogenesis of a murine brain capillary endothelial cell line (IBE
cells) and of human umbilical-vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) cultured on
growth-factor-reduced Matrigel. We previously showed that FGF-2-mediated
capillary morphogenesis was blocked by the Src-kinase inhibitor PP2 and that
expression of dominant negative Fyn in IBE cells inhibited capillary
morphogenesis. We examined the effect of PEDF on kinase activity of Fyn and found
that PEDF downregulated FGF-2-promoted Fyn activity by tyrosine phosphorylation
at the C-terminus in a Fes-dependent manner. In a stable IBE cell line expressing
kinase-inactive Fes (KE5-15 Fes cells), PEDF failed to inhibit FGF-2-induced
capillary morphogenesis or Fyn activity. PEDF induced the colocalization of Fyn
and Fes in IBE cells expressing wild-type Fes, but not in KE5-15 Fes cells. In
addition, wild-type Fes increased the tyrosine phosphorylation of Fyn in vitro,
suggesting that Fes might directly phosphorylate Fyn. Expression of
constitutively active Fyn (Y531F) in IBE cells exhibited capillary morphogenesis 
in the absence of FGF-2 and was resistant for PEDF treatment. Our results suggest
that PEDF downregulates Fyn through Fes, resulting in inhibition of FGF-2-induced
capillary morphogenesis of endothelial cells.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.01686 
PMID: 15713745  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

