
1. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2005 Mar;21(2):147-51.

Defence molecules in intestinal innate immunity against bacterial infections.

Eckmann L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
California 92093, USA. leckmann@ucsd.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Antimicrobial proteins are key effector molecules of innate
immunity. The review discusses recent progress in understanding the function of
these host defence molecules in intestinal physiology.
RECENT FINDINGS: All antimicrobial proteins can inhibit or kill bacteria in
vitro, but differ markedly in their localization, regulation, and additional
activities. alpha-Defensins are expressed constitutively in human neutrophils and
small intestinal Paneth cells, where they require proteolytic processing and
signal-induced release to be active in the intestinal lumen. Neutrophil-derived
alpha-defensins can inhibit angiogenesis. Cryptdin-related sequence peptides form
a subfamily of alpha-defensins in murine but not human Paneth cells that can form
covalently linked heterodimers, leading to increased structural diversity and
antimicrobial target range. Human beta-defensins (hBD) are expressed prominently 
in epithelial cells of the intestinal tract and other organs exposed to the
environment. Their epithelial production is either constitutive, as exemplified
by hBD-1, or strongly inducible, as shown for hBD-2,-3, and -4. Human
cathelicidin, LL-37/hCAP18, is expressed constitutively by differentiated
epithelial cells in the colon and stomach, but not the small intestine, as well
as neutrophils and mast cells. It has multiple functions beyond its antimicrobial
activity, including promotion of angiogenesis, attraction of leukocyte subsets,
and activation of chemokine secretion. Angiogenins are a family of host
defence-related ribonucleases, of which at least one is secreted by murine Paneth
cells.
SUMMARY: The differential expression of diverse antimicrobial proteins in the
gastrointestinal tract suggests that they occupy distinct functional niches in
mucosal innate defence, which holds promise for pharmacological exploitation of
their antimicrobial properties.

DOI: 10.1097/01.mog.0000153311.97832.8c 
PMID: 15711205  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

