
1. Ann Hematol. 2005 May;84(5):331-8. Epub 2005 Feb 23.

Reduced-intensity conditioning followed by allografting of CD34-selected stem
cells and < or =10(6)/kg T cells may have an adverse effect on transplant-related
mortality.

Hartwig UF(1), Winkelmann N, Wehler T, Kreiter S, Schneider PM, Meyer RG, Ullmann
AJ, Huber C, Kolbe K, Herr W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine III, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany.

In patients undergoing allogeneic peripheral blood stem cell (PBSC)
transplantation after reduced-intensity conditioning (RIC), graft-versus-host
disease (GVHD) represents a major cause of morbidity and mortality. T-cell
depletion (TCD) prevents GVHD but carries potential risks of graft failure,
opportunistic infections, and disease relapse. We explored ex vivo TCD of stem
cell allografts that were administered after RIC treatment. Thirteen high-risk
patients with hematological malignancies were treated with a
fludarabine/melphalan-based RIC regimen followed by transplantation of
immunomagnetically selected CD34(+) PBSC from HLA-identical sibling or matched
unrelated donors. Patients were sequentially enrolled in two cohorts: group A
(n=6) received antithymocyte globulin (ATG) during conditioning and 10(5) donor T
cells/kg at transplantation, while group B (n=7) received 10(6) donor T cells/kg 
without ATG pretreatment. Primary graft failure occurred in two patients of group
A and in one patient of group B. Complete donor chimerism persisting more than 1 
year was achieved in two cases per cohort. Acute grade II to IV or chronic
extensive GVHD were observed in a total of six patients (group A, 2; group B, 4).
Procedure-related deaths were mainly due to severe pneumonia occurring in two
patients of group A and in five patients of group B. These results suggest that
CD34 selection of reduced-intensity PBSC allografts may cause adverse effects
upon specific antimicrobial immunity which can lead to fatal infections,
particularly in high-risk patients. In our study, simultaneous add-back of < or
=10(6)/kg donor T cells was unable to compensate for this deficiency.

DOI: 10.1007/s00277-004-1001-5 
PMID: 15726363  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

