
1. Biochemistry. 2005 Mar 1;44(8):2974-81.

Chemical mechanism and substrate specificity of RhlI, an acylhomoserine lactone
synthase from Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Raychaudhuri A(1), Jerga A, Tipton PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia,
Missouri 65211, USA.

The enzyme RhlI catalyzes the formation of N-butyrylhomoserine lactone from
S-adenosylmethionine and N-butyrylacyl carrier protein. N-Butyrylhomoserine
lactone serves as a quorum-sensing signal molecule in Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and
is implicated in the regulation of many processes involved in bacterial virulence
and infectivity. The P. aeruginosa genome contains three genes encoding acyl
carrier proteins. We have cloned all three genes, expressed the acyl carrier
proteins, and characterized each as a substrate for RhlI. A continuous,
spectrophotometric assay was developed to facilitate kinetic and mechanistic
studies of RhlI. Acp1, which has not been characterized previously, was a good
substrate for RhlI, with a K(m) of 7 microM; the reaction proceeded with a k(cat)
value of 0.35 s(-1). AcpP, which supports fatty acid biosynthesis, was also a
good substrate in the RhlI reaction, where k(cat) was 0.46 s(-1), and the K(m)
for AcpP was 6 microM. The third acyl carrier protein, Acp3, was a poor substrate
for RhlI, with a K(m) of 280 microM; k(cat) was 0.03 s(-1). Taken together with
microarray data from the literature which show that expression of the gene
encoding Acp1 is under the control of the quorum-sensing system, our data suggest
that Acp1 is likely to be the substrate for RhlI in vivo. Isotope labeling
studies were conducted to investigate the chemical mechanism of the
RhlI-catalyzed lactonization reaction. Solvent deuterons were not incorporated
into product, which implicates a direct attack mechanism in which the carboxylate
oxygen of the presumptive N-butyryl-SAM intermediate attacks the methylene carbon
adjacent to the sulfonium ion. Alternative mechanisms, in which
N-butyrylvinylglycine is formed via elimination of methylthioadenosine, were
ruled out on the basis of the observation that RhlI failed to convert authentic
N-butyrylvinylglycine to N-butyryl-L-homoserine lactone.

DOI: 10.1021/bi048005m 
PMID: 15723540  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

