
1. Transfus Apher Sci. 2005 Feb;32(1):63-72.

Mobilization and collection of peripheral blood progenitor cells for
transplantation.

Reddy RL(1).

Author information: 
(1)American Red Cross Midwest Region Blood Services and Department of Pathology
and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 3838 Dewey Avenue,
Omaha, NE 68105, USA. reddyr@usa.redcross.org

Bone marrow transplantation gradually expanded as a treatment modality for
various malignant and non malignant disease conditions. Since the discoveries of 
the potential of Peripheral Blood Progenitor Cells (PBPC) in the hematopoietic
reconstitution mid 1980s and early 1990s PBPC gradually replaced bone marrow as
the preferred source of stem cells. The introduction of hematopoietic cytokines
that can mobilize large number of progenitors into circulation accelerated PBPC
usage. Technological advancements in the apheresis instrumentation greatly helped
in the conversion from marrow to PBPC. PBPC collection is less painful, less
expensive and transplant with PBPC results in faster hematological recovery than 
with marrow. Almost all of the autologous transplants are currently performed
with PBPC and a similar trend is seen with the allogeneic transplants. The
progenitor cell mobilization regimen for autologous patients can be cytokines
alone or cytokines combined with chemotherapy. In the majority of the patients
the required minimal cell dose of 2.5-5.0 x 10(6)/kg CD34+ cells can be collected
in one or two apheresis collections. A few of autologous transplant patients who 
mobilize poorly require several collections. Allogeneic donors are generally
mobilized with daily subcutaneous injections of G-CSF 10 microg/kg for 5 days.
The PBPC are collected in one or two apheresis procedures. The side effects of
G-CSF are generally mild to moderate; however rare serious reactions including
rupture of the spleen have been reported. The collection of PBPC in pediatric
patients poses additional challenges yet an adequate dose of cells can be
collected with the available apheresis instrumentation. The apheresis collection 
procedures are safe with no serious adverse consequences. Future scientific
advancements may expand the use of PBPC for other clinical application in
addition to the current use for hematological reconstitution.

DOI: 10.1016/j.transci.2004.10.007 
PMID: 15737875  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

