
1. J Periodontal Res. 2005 Apr;40(2):158-67.

Effects of enamel matrix proteins on tissue formation along the roots of human
teeth.

Bosshardt DD(1), Sculean A, Windisch P, Pjetursson BE, Lang NP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology and Fixed Prosthodontics, School of Dental
Medicine, University of Berne, Berne, Switzerland. dieter.bosshardt@zmk.unibe.ch

OBJECTIVE: Enamel matrix-derived proteins (EMD) are thought to trigger the
formation of acellular extrinsic fibre cementum (AEFC), while other reports
indicate that EMD may have osteogenic potential. The aim of the present study was
to characterize the tissues developing on the root surface following application 
of EMD.
METHODS: Twelve human periodontitis-affected teeth, scheduled for extraction,
were treated with EMD. Two to 6 weeks later, the teeth were extracted,
demineralized and processed for embedding in acrylic and epoxy resins. New tissue
formation was analysed by light and transmission electron microscopy.
RESULTS: New tissue formation on the root was observed in the notch and on both
scaled and unscaled root surfaces distant of the notch area in six defects. The
newly formed tissues on the root were thick, collagenous, devoid of extrinsic
fibres, and had an irregular surface contour. The presence of electron-dense,
organic material in the collagenous matrix indicated at least partial
mineralization. Embedded cells were numerous and the cells on the matrix surface 
were very large in size. Abundant rough endoplasmic reticulum and a prominent
Golgi complex were evident. The presence of a split between the treated root
surfaces and the newly formed tissue was a common observation, as was the
presence of bacteria and host cells in the interfacial gap.
CONCLUSION: Following treatment with EMD, a bone-like tissue resembling cellular 
intrinsic fibre cementum may develop on the root surfaces, instead of AEFC.
Furthermore, EMD may both induce de novo formation of a mineralized connective
tissue on scaled root surfaces and stimulate matrix deposition on old native
cementum. Interfacial bonding appeared to be weak after 6 weeks of healing.

Copyright (c) Blackwell Munksgaard 2005.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0765.2005.00785.x 
PMID: 15733151  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

