
1. J Mol Med (Berl). 2005 Aug;83(8):587-95. Epub 2005 Apr 9.

Human defensins.

Schneider JJ(1), Unholzer A, Schaller M, Sch채fer-Korting M, Korting HC.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik f체r Dermatologie und Allergologie,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit채t M체nchen, Frauenlobstrasse 9-11, 80337 Munich,
Germany. josefschneider@gmx.de

Antimicrobial peptides are small, cationic, amphiphilic peptides of 12-50 amino
acids with microbicidal activity against both bacteria and fungi. The eukaryotic 
antimicrobial peptides may be divided into four distinct groups according to
their structural features: cysteine-free alpha-helices, extended cysteine-free
alpha-helices with a predominance of one or two amino acids, loop structures with
one intramolecular disulfide bond, and beta-sheet structures which are stabilised
by two or three intramolecular disulfide bonds. Mammalian defensins are part of
the last-mentioned group. The mammalian defensins can be subdivided into three
main classes according to their structural differences: the alpha-defensins,
beta-defensins and the recently described theta-defensins. Mammalian
alpha-defensins are predominantly found in neutrophils and in small intestinal
Paneth cells, whereas mammalian beta-defensins have been isolated from both
leukocytes and epithelial cells. Recently, two novel human beta-defensins, human 
beta-defensin-3 (HBD-3), and human beta-defensin-4 (HBD-4) have been discovered. 
Similar to HBD-1 and HBD-2, HBD-3 has microbicidal activity towards the
Gram-negative bacteria (Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia coli) and the yeasts 
Candida albicans and Malassezia furfur. In addition, HBD-3 kills Gram-positive
bacteria such as Streptococcus pyogenes or Staphylococcus aureus, including
multi-resistant S. aureus strains, and even vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus
faecium. In contrast to HBD-1 and HBD-2, significant expression of HBD-3 has been
demonstrated in non-epithelial tissues, such as leukocytes, heart and skeletal
muscle. HBD-4 is expressed in certain epithelia and in neutrophils. Its
bactericidal activity against P. aeruginosa is stronger than that of the other
known beta-defensins. Here we present an overview of human antimicrobial peptides
with some emphasis on their antifungal properties.

DOI: 10.1007/s00109-005-0657-1 
PMID: 15821901  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

