
1. BMC Gastroenterol. 2005 Apr 12;5:13.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) in fecal samples: rapid detection by surface
plasmon resonance.

Nayeri F(1), Aili D, Nayeri T, Xu J, Almer S, Lundström I, Akerlind B, Liedberg
B.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Infectious Diseases, University Hospital, Linköping, Sweden.
fariba.nayeri@lio.se

BACKGROUND: The development of biosensors, based on surface plasmon resonance
(SPR) technology, enables monitoring of a variety of biospecific interactions
without the need for chemical-, biological- or radiological-labelled reagents.
METHOD: We utilised SPR to detect hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) in reconstituted
faecal samples and studied samples from patients with infectious gastroenteritis 
(n = 20) and normal controls (n = 10). Mouse anti-human HGF monoclonal antibodies
and recombinant human HGF receptor (c-Met)/Fc chimera were immobilised in flow
cells of a CM5 biosensor chip.
RESULTS: We found that infectious gastroenteritis produced a higher signal
response compared to controls, due to binding of HGF to monoclonal anti-HGF
antibody as well as binding of HGF to c-Met receptor (p < 0.01). The SPR signal
response correlated with results from ELISA (r = 72%, p > 0.001). The signal
response decreased significantly (p < 0.05) when samples were diluted with
dextran, because of reduction in both specific as well as unspecific binding of
HGF to dextran. The decrease in the specific response might imply that the
dextran- binding site for HGF overlaps with the antibody binding epitope, or that
dextran binding induces a conformational change of the HGF molecule. Bands
corresponding to HGF were found by gel electrophoresis of purified faeces in an
affinity chromatography column immobilised by HGF ligands.
CONCLUSION: Determination of HGF by SPR might be beneficial in diagnosis of acute
situations that present with symptoms of gastroenteritis and may, possibly, guide
appropriate medical treatments. This is to our knowledge the first report on the 
use of SPR for detection of HGF in faeces samples.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-230X-5-13 
PMCID: PMC1090571
PMID: 15826299  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

