
1. BMC Immunol. 2005 Apr 18;6:8.

Accumulation of marginal zone B cells and accelerated loss of follicular
dendritic cells in NF-kappaB p50-deficient mice.

Ferguson AR(1), Corley RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Boston University School of Medicine, 715 Albany
Street, Boston, MA 02118, USA. arf@bu.edu

BACKGROUND: Marginal zone (MZ) B cells play important roles in the early phases
of humoral immune responses. In addition to possessing an inherent capacity to
rapidly differentiate into antibody secreting cells, MZ B cells also help to
regulate the fate of both T-independent and T-dependent blood-borne antigens in
the spleen. For T-dependent antigens, MZ B cells bind IgM-antigen complexes in a 
complement-dependent manner. Once MZ B cells bind IgM-containing immune complexes
(IgM-IC), they transport them into B cell follicles for deposition onto
follicular dendritic cells (FDCs), an important component of secreted IgM's
ability to enhance adaptive immune responses. To further define the requirement
for MZ B cells in IgM-IC deposition, mice deficient in the NF-kappaB protein p50,
which have been reported to lack MZ B cells, were analyzed for their ability to
trap IgM-IC onto FDCs.
RESULTS: Mice (2 months of age) deficient in p50 (p50-/-) had small numbers of MZ
B cells, as determined by cell surface phenotype and localization in the splenic 
MZ. These cells bound high levels of IgM-IC both in vivo and in vitro. Subsequent
to the binding of IgM-IC by the MZ B cells in p50-/- mice, small amounts of
IgM-IC were found localized on FDCs, suggesting that the MZ B cells retained
their ability to transport these complexes into splenic follicles. Strikingly, MZ
B cells accumulated with age in p50-/- mice. By 6 months of age, p50-/- mice
contained normal numbers of these cells as defined by CD21/CD23 profile and high 
level expression of CD1d, CD9, and IgM, and by their positioning around the
marginal sinus. However, FDCs from these older p50-/- mice exhibited a reduced
capacity to trap IgM-IC and retain complement components.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate that while the p50 component of the
NF-kappaB transcription complex plays an important role in the early development 
of MZ B cells, MZ B cells can develop and accumulate in mice lacking this
protein. These results highlight the interface between genetic deficiencies and
age, and suggest that different transcription factors may play distinct roles in 
the development and maintenance of cell populations at different ages.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2172-6-8 
PMCID: PMC1087843
PMID: 15836790  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

