
1. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2005 May;288(5):H2476-83.

Mitochondrial DNA mutations activate programmed cell survival in the mouse heart.

Zhang D(1), Mott JL, Chang SW, Stevens M, Mikolajczak P, Zassenhaus HP.

Author information: 
(1)Saint Louis University Health Science Center, Department of Molecular
Microbiology and Immunology, St. Louis, Missouri 63104, USA.

Increased frequencies of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations characterize the
aging heart and are also found in idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy and end-stage
heart failure. The pathogenic potential of such mutations is unclear. Transgenic 
mice showing accelerated accumulation of mtDNA mutations and dilated
cardiomyopathy due to expression of an error-prone mtDNA polymerase specifically 
in the heart were characterized by Western blot analysis and immunohistochemistry
for the levels of pro- and antiapoptotic proteins. By 8 wk of age, when
frequencies of mtDNA mutations were approximately 0.01% and all transgenic mice
showed four-chamber cardiac dilation, a vigorous prosurvival response was
evident. Upregulated were Bcl-2, Bcl-xl, Bfl1, heat shock protein 27, and
X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein, all of which function to inhibit
apoptosis. Although translocation of Bax to mitochondria was also seen, it was
not integrated into the mitochondrial membrane. Treatment of transgenic mice with
doxorubicin failed to induce apoptosis, in contrast to controls, showing that the
prosurvival response protected cardiomyocytes from a death stimulus. Increased
apoptosis and release of cytochrome c appeared to precede the establishment of
the prosurvival state suggesting that it may reflect a response to activation of 
programmed cell death pathways. It has been proposed that a programmed cell
survival response is activated in the failing and aging heart. We show that
elevated frequencies of mtDNA mutations may serve as one trigger for the
activation of such a response.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.00670.2004 
PMID: 15840907  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

