
1. Carcinogenesis. 1992 May;13(5):751-8.

N-acetylated and deacetylated 4'-fluoro-4-aminobiphenyl and 4-aminobiphenyl
adducts differ in their ability to inhibit DNA replication of single-stranded M13
in vitro and of single-stranded phi X174 in Escherichia coli.

van de Poll ML(1), Lafleur MV, van Gog F, Vrieling H, Meerman JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Toxicology, Sylvius Laboratories, University of Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Calf thymus single-stranded (ss) DNA was modified with the N-sulfate conjugate of
N-hydroxy-2-acetylaminofluorene (N-OH-AAF),
N-hydroxy-4'-fluoro-4-acetylaminobiphenyl (N-OH-FAABP) or
N-hydroxy-4-acetylaminobiphenyl (N-OH-AABP) to yield predominantly N-acetylated
adducts of 2-aminofluorene, 4-aminobiphenyl and 4'-fluoro-4-amino-biphenyl
respectively to C8 of deoxyguanosine (dG-C8-AAF, dG-C8-AABP and dG-C8-FAABP). The
modified DNAs were used as templates for in vitro DNA synthesis. DNA replication 
on the randomly primed template was inhibited as compared to control (unmodified)
DNA to the same extent by all three types of adducts, irrespective of whether
polymerization was performed by Escherichia coli DNA polymerase I, modified T7
DNA polymerase or Thermus aquaticus (Taq) DNA polymerase. In addition, all three 
types of adducts completely blocked replication of ss phi X174 in an E. coli
host: on average one adduct per DNA molecule was sufficient to inactivate the
bacteriophage. Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of DNA fragments synthesized by
E. coli DNA polymerase I on FAABP- and AABP-modified ss M13mp9 DNA templates,
showed that termination occurred predominantly one nucleotide before (and
occasionally opposite) a modified deoxyguanosine in the template. However, the
deacetylated adducts, dG-C8-AF, dG-C8-ABP and dG-C8-FABP (obtained by reacting
DNA with their N-trifluoroacetyl-N-acetoxy esters) were frequently bypassed
during replication of ss phi X174 in E. coli, though with different efficiencies:
1 out 7, 1 out of 2 and 1 out of 3 adducts on average respectively caused
bacteriophage inactivation. Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis showed that
termination of DNA synthesis occurred at least as frequently opposite as 3' to a 
modified deoxyguanosine in the template.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/13.5.751 
PMID: 1586987  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

