
1. J Biol Chem. 1992 May 25;267(15):10856-65.

Sequencing, cloning, and expression of human red cell-type acid phosphatase, a
cytoplasmic phosphotyrosyl protein phosphatase.

Wo YY(1), McCormack AL, Shabanowitz J, Hunt DF, Davis JP, Mitchell GL, Van Etten 
RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907.

Low molecular weight phosphotyrosyl protein phosphatases of human placenta and
human red cell were purified and sequenced by a combination of Edman degradation 
and tandem mass spectrometry. Screening of a human placental lambda gt11 cDNA
library yielded overlapping cDNA clones coding for two distinct human cytoplasmic
low molecular weight phosphotyrosyl protein phosphatases (HCPTPs). The two
longest clones, designated HCPTP1-1 and HCPTP2-1, were found to have identical
nucleotide sequences, with the exception of a 108-base pair segment in the middle
of the open reading frame. Polymerase chain reaction studies with human genomic
DNA suggest that the difference between HCPTP1-1 and HCPTP2-1 does not result
from alternative RNA splicing. Studies with a human chromosome 2-specific library
confirmed that these sequences are located on chromosome 2, which is known to be 
the location of red cell acid phosphatase locus ACP1. The coding sequences of
HCPTP1-1 and HCPTP2-1 were placed downstream from a bacteriophage T7 promoter and
the proteins were expressed in Escherichia coli. The resulting recombinant
enzymes (designated HCPTP-A and HCPTP-B, respectively) showed molecular weights
of 18,000 by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, and both 
of them exhibited immunoreactivity with antisera raised against authentic human
placental and bovine heart enzymes. The expressed proteins were highly active
towards the phosphatase substrates p-nitrophenyl phosphate, beta-naphthyl
phosphate, and O-phospho-L-tyrosine, but not alpha-naphthyl phosphate, threonine 
phosphate, or O-phospho-L-serine. HCPTP-A and -B possessed effectively identical 
amino acid compositions, immunoreactivities, inhibition by formaldehyde, and
kinetic properties when compared with two human red cell acid phosphatase
isoenzymes. It is concluded that HCPTP-A and -B are the fast and slow forms of
red cell acid phosphatase, respectively, and that this enzyme is not unique to
the red cell but is instead expressed in all human tissues.


PMID: 1587862  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

