
1. Gastroenterology. 2005 May;128(5):1327-39.

A secreted low-molecular-weight protein from Helicobacter pylori induces
cell-cycle arrest of T cells.

Gerhard M(1), Schmees C, Voland P, Endres N, Sander M, Reindl W, Rad R, Oelsner
M, Decker T, Mempel M, Hengst L, Prinz C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, Technical University, Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Although Helicobacter pylori is recognized by the human immune
system, the bacteria are not eliminated and lead to a chronic inflammation of the
gastric mucosa.
METHODS: We investigated the interaction of H. pylori with human lymphocytes. T
and B lymphocytes were isolated from H. pylori-infected patients and stimulated
with anti-CD3/CD28 or interleukin-6.
RESULTS: Proliferation of lymphocytes was abolished on co-incubation with
different H. pylori strains (1-5 bacteria/cell) or with protein extracts of
culture supernatants. Inhibition of proliferation was independent of known
virulence factors. The factor is a protein or protein complex with an apparent
molecular weight between 30 and 60 kilodaltons, clearly distinct from VacA.
Although antigen-specific activation of T cells (as shown by nuclear factor of
activated T cells [NFAT]-activation, interferon-gamma production, and CD25 or
CD69 up-regulation) remained intact, cell-cycle analysis showed that S-phase
entry of T cells was inhibited completely by H. pylori. Consequently, stimulated 
T cells arrested in the G1 phase of the cell cycle. Western blot analysis showed 
markedly reduced phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma protein (pRb), suggesting 
inhibition of G1 cyclin-dependent kinase activity. In line with this, activities 
of cyclin D3 and cyclin E were down-regulated, and levels of the cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor p27Kip1 were increased. Mouse embryonic fibroblasts deficient in
p27 showed a decrease in H. pylori-induced inhibition of cell proliferation,
suggesting a central role for p27 in mediating H. pylori-induced G1 arrest.
CONCLUSIONS: Induction of cell-cycle arrest in lymphocytes may be of major
significance for the chronic persistence of bacteria in the human stomach.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2005.03.018 
PMID: 15887115  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

