
1. Traffic. 2005 Jun;6(6):459-73.

The Listeria protein internalin B mimics hepatocyte growth factor-induced
receptor trafficking.

Li N(1), Xiang GS, Dokainish H, Ireton K, Elferink LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Texas Medical
Branch, Galveston, TX 77555-1043, USA.

Increased hepatocyte growth factor receptor (HGFR) signaling correlates closely
with neoplastic invasion and metastatic potential of many human cancers.
Hepatocyte growth factor receptor signaling is initiated by binding the
physiological ligand HGF or the internalin B (InlB) protein of Listeria
monocytogenes. Subsequent degradation of endocytosed HGFR terminates receptor
signaling. Previously reported discrepancies in InlB and HGF-induced HGFR
signaling could reflect differences in receptor internalization and degradation
in response to these distinct ligands. We report that soluble InlB and HGF are
mechanistically equivalent in triggering clathrin-dependent endocytosis and
lysosomal degradation of HGFR. After internalization, InlB and HGF colocalize
with Rab5, EEA1 and the transferrin receptor in classical early endosomes.
Hepatocyte growth factor receptor internalization was prevented by overexpression
of dominant negative mutants of dynamin 1 and epidermal growth factor
phosphorylation substrate 15, but not caveolin 1, the GTPase Arf6 or the
cholesterol-chelating drug Nystatin. Thus, HGFR internalization is principally
clathrin-mediated and is not regulated by clathrin- independent pathways.
Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase signaling and HGF-regulated tyrosine kinase
substrate were not required for ligand-triggered internalization of HGFR but were
essential for subsequent lysosomal degradation. Thus, soluble InlB and HGF induce
HGFR endocytosis and degradation by indistinguishable mechanisms, suggesting that
InlB may be exploited to regulate pathogenic HGFR signaling.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2005.00290.x 
PMID: 15882443  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

