
1. Crit Care Med. 2005 May;33(5):1036-43.

Toll-like receptor 4 deficiency and acute pancreatitis act similarly in reducing 
host defense during murine Escherichia coli peritonitis.

van Westerloo DJ(1), Weijer S, Bruno MJ, de Vos AF, Van't Veer C, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Internal Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Acute pancreatitis is frequently complicated by Gram-negative sepsis. 
Mammalian cells recognize lipopolysaccharide from Gram-negative bacteria via
Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4. The objective of this study was to determine the role
of TLR4 in the defense against Gram-negative sepsis in previously healthy mice
and in animals with preexisting pancreatitis.
DESIGN: A controlled, in vivo laboratory study.
SETTING: Research laboratory of a health sciences university.
SUBJECTS: Female C3H/HeJ (nonfunctional TLR4 mutant) and C3H/HeN (wild-type)
mice.
INTERVENTIONS: Abdominal sepsis was induced by the intraperitoneal injection of
Escherichia coli. Pancreatitis was induced by 12 hourly intraperitoneal
injections of cerulein.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: The following experiments were performed. First,
healthy TLR4 mutant mice demonstrated an enhanced bacterial load and
dissemination of the infection relative to wild-type mice after intraperitoneal
injection with E. coli, associated with a reduced early release of
proinflammatory cytokines and an attenuated influx of neutrophils into the
peritoneal fluid. Second, wild-type mice in which acute pancreatitis was induced 
by repeated cerulein injections showed an increased bacterial load and
dissemination of E. coli relative to wild-type mice without pancreatitis, which
was accompanied by a blunted proinflammatory cytokine response by peritoneal
macrophages ex vivo and a diminished early cytokine and neutrophil response in
vivo. Third, whereas the severity of cerulein-induced pancreatitis was similar in
TLR4 mutant and wild-type mice, the important contribution of TLR4 to an
effective host defense against E. coli sepsis observed in previously healthy mice
was no longer present in mice with preexisting pancreatitis.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that TLR4 deficiency and acute pancreatitis act
similarly in reducing host defense against E. coli peritonitis and that the role 
of TLR4 in severe Gram-negative infection depends, at least in part, on the
presence of preexisting critical illness.

DOI: 10.1097/01.ccm.0000162684.11375.85 
PMID: 15891333  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

