
1. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2005 Sep 20;91(6):760-7.

Developing high cell density fed-batch cultivation strategies for heterologous
protein production in Pichia pastoris using the nitrogen source-regulated FLD1
Promoter.

Resina D(1), Cos O, Ferrer P, Valero F.

Author information: 
(1)Departament d'Enginyeria Química, Escola Tècnica Superior d'Enginyeria,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193-Bellaterra, Spain.

A Pichia pastoris strain expressing a Rhizopus oryzae lipase gene under the
transcriptional control of the promoter from the P. pastoris formaldehyde
dehydrogenase 1 gene (PFLD) was utilized to study the feasibility of this
expression system for recombinant protein production using methanol-free
fed-batch high cell density cultivations. We have developed a simple and reliable
fed-batch strategy using the PFLD system based on the use of methylamine and
sorbitol as nitrogen and carbon sources, respectively, for the induction phase.
Three different fed-batch fermentations were performed at three different
constant growth rates, i.e., at a low growth rate (0.005/h), at an intermediate
growth rate of (0.01/h), and at a constant residual sorbitol concentration of 8
g/L, i.e., allowing cells to grow at high (near micro(max)) growth rate (0.02/h).
Important differences were observed between the lower and higher growth rate
cultivation phases in terms of specific production rate (q(p)) profiles. In all
three cases, maximum q(p) were reached soon after the start of the induction
phase; after that maximum, an exponential decrease reaching final values close to
zero were observed, except for the cells growing at near micro(max). The best
results in terms of Y(P/X), productivity and specific productivity were obtained 
when the microorganism was growing at the highest growth rate. Furthermore, such 
results were significantly better in relation to those obtained with the
PAOX-based system expressing the same protein.

(c) 2005 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bit.20545 
PMID: 15918169  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

