
1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Aug 5;280(31):28412-23. Epub 2005 May 25.

Protein kinase C betaII plays an essential role in dendritic cell differentiation
and autoregulates its own expression.

Cejas PJ(1), Carlson LM, Zhang J, Padmanabhan S, Kolonias D, Lindner I, Haley S, 
Boise LH, Lee KP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of Miami School of Medicine, Miami, Florida 33156, USA.

Dendritic cells (DC) arise from a diverse group of hematopoietic progenitors and 
have marked phenotypic and functional heterogeneity. The signal transduction
pathways that regulate the ability of progenitors to undergo DC differentiation, 
as well as the specific characteristics of the resulting DC, are only beginning
to be characterized. We have found previously that activation of protein kinase C
(PKC) by cytokines or phorbol esters drives normal human CD34(+) hematopoietic
progenitors and myeloid leukemic blasts (KG1, K562 cell lines, and primary
patient blasts) to differentiate into DC. We now report that PKC activation is
also required for cytokine-driven DC differentiation from monocytes. Of the cPKC 
isoforms, only PKC-betaII was consistently activated by DC
differentiation-inducing stimuli in normal and leukemic progenitors. Transfection
of PKC-betaII into the differentiation-resistant KG1a subline restored the
ability to undergo DC differentiation in a signal strength-dependent fashion as
follows: 1) by development of characteristic morphology; 2) the up-regulation of 
DC surface markers; 3) the induction of expression of the NFkappaB family member 
Rel B; and 4) the potent ability to stimulate allo-T cells. Most unexpectedly,
the restoration of PKC-betaII signaling in KG1a was not directly due to
overexpression of the transfected classical PKC (alpha, betaII, or gamma) but
rather through induction of endogenous PKC-beta gene expression by the
transfected classical PKC. The mechanism of this positive autoregulation involves
up-regulation of PKC-beta promoter activity by constitutive PKC signaling. These 
findings indicate that the regulation of PKC-betaII expression and signaling play
critical roles in mediating progenitor to DC differentiation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M500345200 
PMID: 15917249  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

