
1. Clin Immunol. 2005 Jul;116(1):42-53.

Expression of cutaneous lymphocyte-associated antigen (CLA) in tonsillar T-cells 
and its induction by in vitro stimulation with alpha-streptococci in patients
with pustulosis palmaris et plantaris (PPP).

Nozawa H(1), Kishibe K, Takahara M, Harabuchi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Asahikawa Medical College,
Midorigaoka Higashi 2-1-1-1, Asahikawa, Hokkaido 078-8510, Japan.
hayabusan4@aol.com

Pustulosis palmaris et plantaris (PPP) is known to be a one of the tonsil-related
diseases because tonsillectomy is quite effective in curing this condition.
However etiological association between tonsils and PPP have not fully clarified 
yet. Cutaneous lymphocyte-associated antigen (CLA) is known to be a specific
homing receptor that facilitates T-cell migration into skin. In this study, we
investigated the expression of CLA on T-cells in tonsil, peripheral blood, and
skin from patients with PPP. Two-color flow cytometric and two-color
immunohistological analyses revealed that the numbers of CLA/CD3 double-positive 
cells in freshly isolated tonsillar mononuclear cells (TMC) and in tonsillar
tissues were significantly higher in patients with PPP than in patients without
PPP (P<0.01, each). In vitro stimulus with alpha-streptococcal antigens enhanced 
CLA expression of tonsillar T-cells and TGF-beta production of TMC in patients
with PPP (P<0.01, each), but did not in patients without PPP. In peripheral blood
from PPP patients, the number of the CLA/CD3 double-positive cells significantly 
decreased at 6 months after tonsillectomy (P<0.05). The CLA/CD3 double-positive
cells and the postcapillary venule that expressed with a ligand of CLA,
E-selectin, were found more frequently in the plantar skin from patients with PPP
as compared to that from healthy volunteers (P<0.01, each). These data suggest
that a novel immune response to alpha-streptococci may enhance CLA expression on 
tonsillar T-cells through TGF-beta production in patients with PPP, resulting in 
moving of CLA-positive tonsillar T-cells to skin and tissue damages. This may
play a key role in pathogenesis of PPP.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clim.2005.01.009 
PMID: 15925831  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

