
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2005 Jun;71(6):2925-33.

Accelerated sulfur cycle in coastal marine sediment beneath areas of intensive
shellfish aquaculture.

Asami H(1), Aida M, Watanabe K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Applied Microbiology, Marine Biotechnology Institute, 3-75-1
Heita, Kamaishi, Iwate 026-0001, Japan.

Prokaryotes in marine sediments taken from two neighboring semi-enclosed bays
(the Yamada and Kamaishi bays) at the Sanriku coast in Japan were investigated by
the culture-independent molecular phylogenetic approach coupled with chemical and
activity analyses. These two bays were chosen in terms of their similar
hydrogeological and chemical characteristics but different usage modes; the
Yamada bay has been used for intensive shellfish aquaculture, while the Kamaishi 
bay has a commercial port and is not used for aquaculture. Substantial
differences were found in the phylogenetic composition of 16S rRNA gene clone
libraries constructed for the Yamada and Kamaishi sediments. In the Yamada
library, phylotypes affiliated with delta-Proteobacteria were the most abundant, 
and those affiliated with gamma-Proteobacteria were the second-most abundant. In 
contrast, the Kamaishi library was occupied by phylotypes affiliated with
Planctomycetes, gamma-Proteobacteria, delta-Proteobacteria, and Crenarchaeota. In
the gamma-Proteobacteria, many Yamada phylotypes were related to free-living and 
symbiotic sulfur oxidizers, whereas the Kamaishi phylotype was related to the
genus Pseudomonas. These results allowed us to hypothesize that sulfate-reducing 
and sulfur-oxidizing bacteria have become abundant in the Yamada sediment. This
hypothesis was supported by quantitative competitive PCR (qcPCR) with
group-specific primers. The qcPCR also suggested that organisms closely related
to Desulfotalea in the Desulfobulbaceae were the major sulfate-reducing bacteria 
in these sediments. In addition, potential sulfate reduction and sulfur oxidation
rates in the sediment samples were determined, indicating that the sulfur cycle
has become active in the Yamada sediment beneath the areas of intensive shellfish
aquaculture.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.71.6.2925-2933.2005 
PMCID: PMC1151846
PMID: 15932986  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

