
1. FEBS Lett. 2005 Jun 20;579(16):3449-60.

Upregulation of human mitochondrial NADH dehydrogenase subunit 5 in intestinal
epithelial cells is modulated by Vibrio cholerae pathogenesis.

Sarkar M(1), Das S, Bandyopadhaya A, Ray K, Chaudhuri K.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics & Genomics Group, Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, 4, Raja
S.C. Mullick Road, Jadavpur, Kolkata-700 032, India.

Cholera still remains an important global predicament especially in India and
other developing countries. Vibrio cholerae, the etiologic agent of cholera,
colonizes the small intestine and produces an enterotoxin that is largely
responsible for the watery diarrheal symptoms of the disease. Using RNA
arbitrarily primed PCR, ND5 a mitochondria encoded subunit of complex I of the
mitochondrial respiratory chain was found to be upregulated in the human
intestinal epithelial cell line Int407 following exposure to V. cholerae. The
upregulation of ND5 was not observed when Int407 was infected with Escherichia
coli strains. Incubation with heat-killed V. cholerae or cholera toxin or culture
supernatant also showed no such upregulation indicating the involvement of live
bacteria in the process. Infection of the monolayer with aflagellate non-motile
mutant of V. cholerae O395 showed a very significant (59-fold) downregulation of 
ND5. In contrast, a remarkable upregulation of ND5 expression (200-fold) was
observed in a hyperadherent icmF insertion mutant with reduced motility. V.
cholerae cheY4 null mutant defective in adherence and motility also resulted in
significantly reduced levels of ND5 expression while mutant with the cheY4 gene
duplicated showing increased adherence and motility resulted in increased
expression of ND5. These results clearly indicate that both motility and
adherence to intestinal epithelial cells are possible triggering factors
contributing to ND5 mRNA expression by V. cholerae. Interestingly infection with 
insertion mutant in the gene coding for ToxR, the master regulator of virulence
in V. cholerae resulted in significant downregulation of ND5 expression. However,
infection with ctxA or toxT insertion mutants did not show any significant
changes in ND5 expression compared to wild-type. Almost no expression of ND5 was 
observed in case of mutation in the gene coding for OmpU, a ToxR activated
protein. Thus, infection of Int407 with virulence mutant strains of V. cholerae
revealed that the ND5 expression is modulated by the virulence of V. cholerae in 
a ToxT independent manner. Although no difference in the mitochondrial copy
number could be detected between infected and uninfected cells, the modulation of
the expression of other mitochondrial genes were also observed. Incidentally,
upon V. cholerae infection, complex I activity was found to increase about
3-folds after 6 h. This is the first report of alteration in mitochondrial gene
expression upon infection of a non-invasive enteric bacterium like V. cholerae
showing its modulation with adherence, motility and virulence of the organism.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2005.05.012 
PMID: 15946665  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

