
1. J Periodontol. 2005 Jun;76(6):972-9.

Outer membrane vesicles from Porphyromonas gingivalis affect the growth and
function of cultured human gingival fibroblasts and umbilical vein endothelial
cells.

Bartruff JB(1), Yukna RA, Layman DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics, Louisiana State University School of Dentistry,
New Orleans, LA 70119, USA.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study was to examine the effects of outer
membrane vesicles (OMV) obtained from Porphyromonas gingivalis (Pg) on the growth
and function of human gingival fibroblasts (HGF) and human umbilical vein
endothelial cells (HUVEC).
METHODS: OMV were obtained from a cell-free growth medium of Pg ATCC 33277 by 40%
NH2SO4 precipitation and ultracentrifugation. Cell proliferation was measured by 
3H-thymidine incorporation into growing HGF and HUVEC. Endothelial cell function 
was determined by their capacity to form a network of capillary tubes on an
extracellular matrix (ECM).
RESULTS: Proliferating HGF and HUVEC demonstrated a significant dose-dependent
inhibition of 3H-thymidine uptake when cultured with 0 to 40 microg/ml of OMV
protein. HGF and HUVEC showed an IC50 of growth of about 9.0 microg/ml and 4.5
microg/ml of OMV protein, respectively. Capillary tube formation by HUVEC
cultured on an ECM was suppressed by 70% to 80% with 5 microg/ml OMV protein
after 18 hours of incubation. The presence of proteolytic enzymes in the OMV did 
not contribute to capillary tube disruption, since blocking enzyme activity with 
specific inhibitors did not reduce the suppression of capillary tube formation.
After heating at 90 degrees C for 5 minutes, OMV significantly lost their
capacity to suppress capillary tube formation.
CONCLUSIONS: OMV significantly inhibit the proliferation of cultured HGF and
HUVEC in a dose-dependent manner. OMV suppressed the capillary tube formation by 
cultured HUVEC. The factor(s) appeared to be a protein and not endotoxin because 
its inhibitory activity was markedly reduced by heat inactivation. These studies 
suggest that OMV contribute to chronic periodontitis by suppressing cell
proliferation and revascularization in periodontal tissues.

DOI: 10.1902/jop.2005.76.6.972 
PMID: 15948693  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

