
1. J Dermatol Sci. 2005 Nov;40(2):123-32. Epub 2005 Jun 15.

Synergistic effect of antibacterial agents human beta-defensins, cathelicidin
LL-37 and lysozyme against Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli.

Chen X(1), Niyonsaba F, Ushio H, Okuda D, Nagaoka I, Ikeda S, Okumura K, Ogawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, 2-1-1
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The antimicrobial properties of the skin are attributed to several
agents including human beta-defensins (hBDs), cathelicidin LL-37 and skin
lysozyme. Although these antibacterial agents reside in the skin to protect it
against infection, it is not well known whether the total analysis of all
combinations of these agents may result in synergistic effect to enhance their
antibacterial activities against invading microorganisms.
OBJECTIVE: To elucidate the interactions between keratinocyte-derived
antibacterial agents in the extracellular milieu, we investigated the individual 
and synergistic activities of hBDs, LL-37 and lysozyme against Staphylococcus
aureus and Escherichia coli in neutral and acidic milieus.
METHODS: The colorimetric method using alamarBlue was employed to assess the
antibacterial activities of hBD-1, -2, -3, LL-37 and lysozyme and the viability
of bacteria was read spectrophotometrically.
RESULTS: In both neutral and acidic pH milieus, hBD-1, -2, -3, LL-37 and lysozyme
exhibited antibacterial activity against S. aureus and E. coli in a
dose-dependent manner. Interestingly, the antibacterial activity of hBD-1, -2, -3
and lysozyme but not LL-37 was significantly enhanced in acidic milieu (pH 4.6). 
Furthermore, various combinations of above agents resulted in a synergistic or
additive antibacterial effect against S. aureus and E. coli in neutral milieu.
The synergistic effect of hBDs, LL-37 and lysozyme against S. aureus was further 
significantly enhanced in acidic milieu. In contrast, above antibacterial agents 
exhibited mainly additive rather than synergistic effect on antibacterial
activity against E. coli in acidic milieu.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, these results provide a novel evidence of
antimicrobial mechanism of natural human skin-derived antibacterial agents
against bacterial infection, and their involvement in innate immunity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2005.03.014 
PMID: 15963694  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

