
1. Infect Immun. 2005 Jul;73(7):3851-9.

Arrangement of the translocator of the autotransporter adhesin involved in
diffuse adherence on the bacterial surface.

Müller D(1), Benz I, Tapadar D, Buddenborg C, Greune L, Schmidt MA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Infektiologie, Zentrum für Molekularbiologie der Entzündung
(ZMBE), Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität, Von-Esmarch-Str. 56, D-48149 Münster, 
Germany.

Autotransporters of gram-negative bacteria are single-peptide secretion systems
that consist of a functional N-terminal alpha-domain ("passenger") fused to a
C-terminal beta-domain ("translocator"). How passenger proteins are translocated 
through the outer membrane has not been resolved, and at present essentially
three different models are discussed. In the widely accepted "hairpin model" the 
passenger proteins are translocated through a channel formed by the beta-barrel
of the translocator that is integrated in the outer membrane. This model has been
challenged by a recent proposal for a general autotransporter model suggesting
that there is a hexameric translocation pore that is generated by the
oligomerization of six beta-domains. A third model suggests that conserved Omp85 
participates in autotransporter integration and passenger protein translocation. 
To examine these models, in this study we investigated the presence of putative
oligomeric structures of the translocator of the autotransporter adhesin involved
in diffuse adherence (AIDA) in vivo by cross-linking techniques. Furthermore, the
capacity of isolated AIDA fusion proteins to form oligomers was studied in vitro 
by several complementary analytical techniques, such as analytical gel
filtration, electron microscopy, immunogold labeling, and cross-linking of
recombinant autotransporter proteins in which different passenger proteins were
fused to the AIDA translocator. Our results show that the AIDA translocator is
mostly present as a monomer. Only a fraction of the AIDA autotransporter was
found to form dimers on the bacterial surface and in solution. Higher-order
structures, such as hexamers, were not detected either in vivo or in vitro and
can therefore be excluded as functional moieties for the AIDA autotransporter.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.73.7.3851-3859.2005 
PMCID: PMC1168569
PMID: 15972470  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

