
1. J Bacteriol. 2005 Jul;187(14):4853-64.

Global analysis of cellular factors and responses involved in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa resistance to arsenite.

Parvatiyar K(1), Alsabbagh EM, Ochsner UA, Stegemeyer MA, Smulian AG, Hwang SH,
Jackson CR, McDermott TR, Hassett DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine, OH 45267-0524, USA.

The impact of arsenite [As(III)] on several levels of cellular metabolism and
gene regulation was examined in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. P. aeruginosa isogenic
mutants devoid of antioxidant enzymes or defective in various metabolic pathways,
DNA repair systems, metal storage proteins, global regulators, or quorum sensing 
circuitry were examined for their sensitivity to As(III). Mutants lacking the
As(III) translocator (ArsB), superoxide dismutase (SOD), catabolite repression
control protein (Crc), or glutathione reductase (Gor) were more sensitive to
As(III) than wild-type bacteria. The MICs of As(III) under aerobic conditions
were 0.2, 0.3, 0.8, and 1.9 mM for arsB, sodA sodB, crc, and gor mutants,
respectively, and were 1.5- to 13-fold less than the MIC for the wild-type
strain. A two-dimensional gel/matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of
flight analysis of As(III)-treated wild-type bacteria showed significantly
(>40-fold) increased levels of a heat shock protein (IbpA) and a putative
allo-threonine aldolase (GlyI). Smaller increases (up to 3.1-fold) in expression 
were observed for acetyl-coenzyme A acetyltransferase (AtoB), a probable aldehyde
dehydrogenase (KauB), ribosomal protein L25 (RplY), and the probable DNA-binding 
stress protein (PA0962). In contrast, decreased levels of a heme oxygenase
(HemO/PigA) were found upon As(III) treatment. Isogenic mutants were successfully
constructed for six of the eight genes encoding the aforementioned proteins. When
treated with sublethal concentrations of As(III), each mutant revealed a marginal
to significant lag period prior to resumption of apparent normal growth compared 
to that observed in the wild-type strain. Our results suggest that As(III)
exposure results in an oxidative stress-like response in P. aeruginosa, although 
activities of classic oxidative stress enzymes are not increased. Instead, relief
from As(III)-based oxidative stress is accomplished from the collective
activities of ArsB, glutathione reductase, and the global regulator Crc. SOD
appears to be involved, but its function may be in the protection of
superoxide-sensitive sulfhydryl groups.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.187.14.4853-4864.2005 
PMCID: PMC1169530
PMID: 15995200  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

