
1. Crit Care Med. 2005 Jul;33(7):1624-33.

Acute hyperglycemia and the innate immune system: clinical, cellular, and
molecular aspects.

Turina M(1), Fry DE, Polk HC Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, the Price Institute of Surgical Research, University of
Louisville School of Medicine, University of Louisville Hospital, Louisville, KY,
USA.

OBJECTIVE: To extract from the biomedical literature the reported effects of
acute hyperglycemia on the major components of the innate immune system and to
describe the clinical benefits of strict blood glucose control in certain
patients.
DATA SOURCE AND SELECTION: A Medline/PubMed search (1966 to July 2004) with
manual cross-referencing was conducted, including all relevant articles
investigating the effects of acutely elevated glucose levels on innate immunity. 
All publication types, languages, or subsets were searched.
DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: Original and selected review articles, short
communications, letters to the editor, and chapters of selected textbooks were
extracted. Most recent and relevant clinical trials were reviewed for the
introductory section to provide the clinical background to this topic. The
selected bench laboratory articles were then divided into three main categories
based on the timing of events: a) the early phase of the innate immune reaction; 
b) the cytokine network; and c) the phagocytic phase. The most obvious findings
related to hyperglycemia included reduced neutrophil activity (e.g., chemotaxis, 
formation of reactive oxygen species, phagocytosis of bacteria), despite
accelerated diapedesis of leukocytes into peripheral tissue, as well as specific 
alterations of cytokine patterns with increased concentrations of the early
proinflammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-6.
Furthermore, a reduction of endothelial nitric oxide formation takes place, thus 
decreasing microvascular reactivity to dilating agents such as bradykinin, and
complement function (e.g., opsonization, chemotaxis) is impaired, despite
elevations of certain complement factors.
CONCLUSIONS: Acute, short-term hyperglycemia affects all major components of
innate immunity and impairs the ability of the host to combat infection, even
though certain distinctive proinflammatory alterations of the immune response can
be observed under these conditions.

DOI: 10.1097/01.ccm.0000170106.61978.d8 
PMID: 16003073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

