
1. J Immunol. 2005 Jul 15;175(2):1030-40.

X box-like sequences in the MHC class II region maintain regulatory function.

Gomez JA(1), Majumder P, Nagarajan UM, Boss JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, 1600 Clifton Road, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Sequences homologous to the canonical MHC class II (MHC-II) gene X box regulatory
elements were identified within the HLA-DR subregion of the human MHC and termed 
X box-like (XL) sequences. Several XL box sequences were found to bind the MHC
class II-specific transcription factors regulatory factor X and CIITA and were
transcriptionally active. The histone code associated with the XL boxes and that 
of the HLA-DRA X box was determined. Using CIITA-positive and -negative B cell
lines, CIITA-specific histone modifications were identified and found to be
consistent among the active XL boxes. Although a remarkable similarity was
observed for most modifications, differences in magnitude between the HLA-DRA
promoter for modifications associated with the assembly of the general
transcription factors, such as histone H3 lysine 9 acetylation and H3 lysine 4
trimethylation, distinguished the very active HLA-DRA promoter from the XL box
regions. In response to IFN-gamma, XL box-containing histones displayed increased
acetylation, coincident with CIITA expression and that observed in B cells,
suggesting that the end point mechanisms of chromatin remodeling for cell
type-specific MHC-II expression were similar. Lastly, an interaction between one 
XL box and the HLA-DRA promoter was observed in a chromatin-looping assay.
Therefore, these data provide evidence that certain XL box sequences contribute
to a global increase in chromatin accessibility of the HLA-DR region in B
lymphocytes and in response to IFN-gamma and supports the involvement of these XL
sequences in the regulation of MHC-II genes.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.175.2.1030 
PMID: 16002703  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

