
1. Langmuir. 2005 Jul 19;21(15):6970-8.

Probing the properties of lipopolysaccharide monolayers and their interaction
with the antimicrobial peptide polymyxin B by atomic force microscopy.

Roes S(1), Seydel U, Gutsmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunochemistry and Biochemical Microbiology, Division of
Biophysics, Research Center Borstel, Leibniz-Center for Medicine and Biosciences,
Parkallee 10, D-23845 Borstel, Germany.

In contrast to the majority of all known cell types, Gram-negative bacteria have 
a second membrane, the outer membrane, which is an asymmetric bilayer composed of
a phospholipid inner leaflet and a glycolipid outer leaflet. The glycolipid
layer, in most cases being composed of a lipopolysaccharide (LPS), is the first
target for antimicrobial agents. To get a basic understanding of the
membrane-forming properties of LPS, we reconstituted monolayers of deep rough
mutant LPS from Salmonella enterica serova Minnesota (R595 LPS), its lipid A
moiety, and of the synthetic tetraacyl compound 406 (resembling the biosynthetic 
lipid A precursor IVa) at the air-water interface of a film balance. The
liquid-expanded (LE) and liquid-condensed (LC) domains in the coexisting region
were investigated with epifluorescence and, after transferring the monolayer onto
mica, as a Langmuir-Blodgett film, with atomic force microscopy (AFM). The
fluorescence and the AFM images showed identical domain structure. The higher
resolution of the AFM images, however, contained more topographic details.
Different heights and adhesion forces between the LE and LC domains could be
observed. Differences in the adhesion forces between the AFM tip and the sample
were determined in the repulsive and the attractive dynamic scanning modes,
demonstrating the importance of a careful interpretation of height images. We
propose that an increase in the lateral pressure causing the LE-LC transition of 
the monolayers leads to a reorientation of the molecules due to a tilt angle
between the alkyl chains and the diglucosamine backbone. LPS monolayers have been
utilized as a simplified reconstitution model of the outer membrane to study the 
interaction with antimicrobial agents. We investigated the action of the
polycationic peptide polymyxin B (PMB) and found dramatic influences on the
domain structures.

DOI: 10.1021/la048218c 
PMID: 16008411  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

