
1. Int J Mol Med. 2005 Aug;16(2):205-13.

Cloning of the nucleostemin gene and its function in transforming human embryonic
bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells into F6 tumor cells.

Han C(1), Zhang X, Xu W, Wang W, Qian H, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Molecular and Medical Biotechnology, School of Life
Science, Nanjing Normal University, 112 Ninghai Road, Nanjing, Jiangsu, 210097,
China.

We recently established a novel tumor cell line denominated as F6, which was
derived from mutated human embryonic bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs).
The difference between gene expression of F6 cells and MSCs was distinguished by 
fluorescent differential display. Results showed that the expression of
nucleostemin, a novel factor participating in the control of stem and cancer cell
proliferation, was different in F6 cells and MSCs. To further understand its role
in transforming human embryonic bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells into F6 tumor 
cells, the full-length nucleostemin gene (1650 bp) from an LTEP-a-2 cell line was
cloned, and GST-nucleostemin protein was expressed in E. coli. The
characteristics of nucleostemin expression in F6 cells and other human cancer
cell lines were investigated by RT-PCR, Western blot analysis, immunocytochemical
staining, fluorescent microscope and confocal laser scanning microscope. The
levels of nucleostemin gene expression were detected by real-time PCR in F6 tumor
tissue obtained from SCID nude mice at 4, 6 and 7 weeks after the injection of F6
cells, and from the lung tissue of five lung cancer patients. Results showed that
nucleostemin gene expression increased significantly in F6 tumor tissue and lung 
cancer tissue. The results also showed that transfection with
pcDNA3.1(+)-GFP-nucleostemin for 4-20 weeks promoted cell size augmentation and
nuclei multiplication, and the cells were converted to giant cell-like cells.
Western blot analysis revealed that expression levels of nucleostemin in the
nuclei and cytoplasm of cancer cell lines, e.g. F6, LTEP-a-2, U937, SW480 and
95D, were higher than those in MSCs and COS-7 cells. Levels of nucleostemin in F6
cells were notably high and confirmed with immunohistochemical staining. These
results implied that nucleostemin may play an important role in both
tumorigenesis and transforming human embryonic bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells
into F6 tumor cells.


PMID: 16012751  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

