
1. Langmuir. 2005 May 10;21(10):4642-7.

Effects of lactose permease on the phospholipid environment in which it is
reconstituted: a fluorescence and atomic force microscopy study.

Merino S(1), Domènech O, Viñas M, Montero MT, Hernández-Borrell J.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Fisicoquímica and Química Física, Universitat de Barcelona,
E-08028 Barcelona, Spain.

The membrane transport protein lactose permease (LacY), a member of the major
facilitator superfamily containing 12 membrane-spanning segments connected by
hydrophilic loops, was reconstituted in liposomes whose composition was
1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine and
1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoglycerol in a 3:1 molar ratio. The
structural order of the lipid membranes, in the presence and absence of LacY, was
assessed using steady-state fluorescence anisotropy. The features of the
anisotropy curves obtained with 1,6-phenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene and
1-(4-trimethylammoniumphenyl)-6-phenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene p-toluenesulfonate
suggest a surface effect of LacY on the membranes. Atomic force microscopy
imaging of supported planar bilayers (SPBs) deposited onto mica was used to
examine the effect of LacY on the nanostructure of the phospholipid matrix. Two
separated domains were observed in SPBs formed from pure phospholipid mixture.
Protein assemblies segregated from the rest of the matrix were observed after the
extension of proteoliposomes. The effect of the protein on the electrostatic
surface potential of the bilayer was also examined using a fluorescent pH
indicator, 4-heptadecyl-7-hydroxycoumarin. Changes in surface potential were
enhanced in the presence of the substrate (i.e., lactose). Taken together the
results indicate that LacY is segregated into the phospholipid matrix and has
moderate effects on the acyl chain order of the bilayers. The changes in surface 
electrical properties of the bilayers suggest a role for the phospholipid
headgroups in proton transfer to the amino acids involved in substrate
translocation.

DOI: 10.1021/la047102d 
PMID: 16032883  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

