
1. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2005 May;40(5):501-7.

Oesophageal defensin expression during Candida infection and reflux disease.

Kiehne K(1), Brunke G, Meyer D, Harder J, Herzig KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein,
Campus Kiel, Germany. kkiehne@1med.uni-kiel.de

OBJECTIVE: Alpha (alpha-) and beta (beta-) defensins are major constituents of
the innate defence system, providing rapid antimicrobial action. The expression
of alpha- and beta-defensins in the oesophagus and stomach by quantitative,
real-time, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in healthy individuals was studied to 
define the influence of oesophageal Candida infection on their expression in
comparison to oesophageal reflux disease.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Biopsy samples were taken from the upper gastrointestinal
tract, mRNA was extracted, reverse transcribed into cDNA and real-time reverse
transcription PCR (RT-PCR) analysis measuring transcript number of a-defensins
and ss-defensins performed. Standard curves allowed quantification of gene copies
per weight of mRNA.
RESULTS: hBD-1, hBD-2 and hBD-3 had their highest expression levels in the
oesophagus with factor 3 to 5 lower in the stomach. Candida oesophagitis resulted
in massive up-regulation of hBD-2 (800-fold), while hBD-1 and hBD-3 expression
were slightly increased. In addition, expression of HNP 1-3 was detected,
indicating infiltration of neutrophil granulocytes. In reflux disease, an
up-regulation of hBD-2 (20-fold) and hBD-3 (50-fold) could also be observed,
while hBD-1, hBD-4 and HD5 remained unaffected. Cytokine expression of
interleukin-1beta, interleukin-6 and interleukin-8 were increased in both groups,
while interleukin-10 expression was elevated only in reflux lesions.
CONCLUSIONS: Candida colonization induced a high expression of antimicrobial
peptides. In oesophageal reflux disease, induction of defensin expression could
also be observed but to a lower degree. Therefore, up-regulation of defensins
might protect against invasive candidiasis and keep the Candida infection limited
to the mucosal surface.

DOI: 10.1080/00365520510015386 
PMID: 16036501  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

