
1. Dig Dis Sci. 2005 Jul;50(7):1252-9.

Enhanced human beta-defensin-2 (hBD-2) expression by corticosteroids is
independent of NF-kappaB in colonic epithelial cells (CaCo2).

Witthöft T(1), Pilz CS, Fellermann K, Nitschke M, Stange EF, Ludwig D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine I, Division of Gastroenterology, University Hospital of
Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.

Beta-defensins are small cationic peptides with antimicrobial properties that
contribute to innate host defense. Unlike human beta-defensin-1 (hBD-1), which is
produced constitutively, human beta-defensin-2 (hBD-2) is expressed after
adequate stimulation by cytokines and/or bacterial endotoxins in epithelial
tissue and mononuclear phagocytes but may be deficient in patients with Crohn's
disease. To further elucidate the role of the intestinal epithelium in
antimicrobial host defense, gene regulation of hBD-2 and the interaction with
NF-kappaB were analyzed in a cell culture model. Human colonic epithelial cells
(CaCo2) were stimulated by pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1beta, TNF-alpha,
IF-gamma) to induce hBD-2 mRNA transcription. Interactions with NF-kappaB were
analyzed using specific inhibitors (sulfasalazine, gliotoxine, dexamethasone) at 
different concentrations. Defensin mRNA expression was quantified by competitive 
RT-PCR and antibacterial capacity of supernatants was determined by an
antimicrobial assay. HBD-2 mRNA transcription and antimicrobial activity of CaCo2
cells were induced by stimulation with pro-inflammatory cytokines. Induction was 
not inhibited by sulfasalazine or gliotoxine, whereas dexamethasone further
enhanced both gene transcription and antimicrobial capacity. The lack of
inhibition of induced hBD-2 expression by specific NF-kappaB antagonists suggests
an additional pathway of activation, independent of NF-kappaB. The induction of
hBD-2 expression in cytokine-stimulated CaCo2 cells by corticosteroids indicates 
further immunomodulatory ability of steroid hormones not yet understood.

DOI: 10.1007/s10620-005-2768-5 
PMID: 16047468  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

