
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2005 Aug 15;103(1):79-89.

Intense light pulses decontamination of minimally processed vegetables and their 
shelf-life.

Gómez-López VM(1), Devlieghere F, Bonduelle V, Debevere J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Food Microbiology and Food Preservation, Ghent University,
Coupure Links, 653, 9000 Gent, Belgium.

Intense light pulses (ILP) is a new method intended for decontamination of food
surfaces by killing microorganisms using short time high frequency pulses of an
intense broad spectrum, rich in UV-C light. This work studied in a first step the
effect of food components on the killing efficiency of ILP. In a second step, the
decontamination of eight minimally processed (MP) vegetables by ILP was
evaluated, and thirdly, the effect of this treatment on the shelf-life of MP
cabbage and lettuce stored at 7 degrees C in equilibrium modified atmosphere
packages was assessed by monitoring headspace gas concentrations, microbial
populations and sensory attributes. Proteins and oil decreased the
decontamination effect of ILP, whilst carbohydrates and water showed variable
results depending on the microorganism. For this reason, high protein and fat
containing food products have little potential to be efficiently treated by ILP. 
Vegetables, on the other hand, do not contain high concentrations of both
compounds and could therefore be suitable for ILP treatment. For the eight tested
MP vegetables, log reductions up to 2.04 were achieved on aerobic mesophilic
counts. For the shelf-life studies, respiration rates at 3% O2 and 7 degrees C
were 14.63, 17.89, 9.17 and 16.83 ml O2/h kg produce for control and treated
cabbage, and control and treated lettuce respectively; used packaging
configurations prevented anoxic conditions during the storage times. Log
reductions of 0.54 and 0.46 for aerobic psychrothrophic count (APC) were achieved
after flashing MP cabbage and lettuce respectively. APC of treated cabbage became
equal than that from control at day 2, and higher at day 7, when the tolerance
limit (8 log) was reached and the panel detected the presence of unacceptable
levels of off-odours. Control never reached 8 log in APC and were sensory
acceptable until the end of the experiment (9 days). In MP lettuce, APC of
controls reached rejectable levels at day 2, whilst that of treated samples did
after 3 days. Both samples were sensory unacceptable at day 3, controls because
of bad overall visual quality (OVQ), off-odour and leaf edge browning and treated
samples due to bad OVQ; browning inhibitors might be proposed to preserve OVQ.
Yeasts and lactic acid bacteria counts were low in all the samples. It seems that
ILP treatment alone under the conditions used in this work does not increase MP
vegetables shelf-life in spite of the reduction in the initial microbial load.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2004.11.028 
PMID: 16084268  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

