
1. Crit Care Med. 2005 Aug;33(8):1770-8.

Aspiration pneumonitis primes the host for an exaggerated inflammatory response
during pneumonia.

van Westerloo DJ(1), Knapp S, van't Veer C, Buurman WA, de Vos AF, Florquin S,
van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Experimental Internal Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

Comment in
    Crit Care Med. 2005 Aug;33(8):1877-8.

OBJECTIVE: Nosocomial pneumonia is a feared complication in the critically ill
patient. Aspiration pneumonitis is frequently complicated by infections. The
objective of this study was to determine the influence of aspiration pneumonitis 
on the host response to a common nosocomial respiratory pathogen.
DESIGN: Controlled, in vivo laboratory study.
SETTING: Research laboratory of a health sciences university.
SUBJECTS: Female C57Bl/6 mice.
INTERVENTIONS: Mice received hydrochloric acid or saline intratracheally followed
16 hrs later by Klebsiella pneumoniae.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Hydrochloric acid induced a mild aspiration
pneumonitis. Nonetheless, hydrochloric acid aspiration resulted in a markedly
increased inflammatory response in the lung on infection with K. pneumoniae. This
enhanced inflammatory reaction was accompanied by a greatly increased outgrowth
of K. pneumoniae in lungs of mice previously exposed to hydrochloric acid.
Preexisting aspiration pneumonitis also triggered mouse lungs in vivo and
alveolar macrophages ex vivo for enhanced release of proinflammatory mediators on
stimulation with Klebsiella lipopolysaccharide. Inhibition of tumor necrosis
factor-alpha resulted in an increased inflammatory reaction and enhanced
bacterial outgrowth in mice with primary K. pneumoniae pneumonia, whereas it had 
no effect in mice with preexisting aspiration pneumonitis.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate a) that aspiration pneumonitis renders the host 
more susceptible to respiratory tract infection with K. pneumoniae, concurrently 
priming the lung for an exaggerated inflammatory response; and b) that although
tumor necrosis factor-alpha plays a major role in the host response to primary
infection, it does not affect lung inflammation or defense after aspiration
pneumonitis.

DOI: 10.1097/01.ccm.0000172277.41033.f0 
PMID: 16096455  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

