
1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2005 Sep;11(9):704-12.

Assessment of fluorescent amplified fragment length polymorphism analysis for
epidemiological genotyping of Legionella pneumophila serogroup 1.

Fry NK(1), Afshar B, Visca P, Jonas D, Duncan J, Nebuloso E, Underwood A,
Harrison TG.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Respiratory & Systemic Infection Laboratory, Centre 
for Infections, London, UK. Norman.Fry@HPA.org.uk

This study assessed the reproducibility and epidemiological concordance of
double-enzyme fluorescent amplified fragment length polymorphism (fAFLP) analysis
for genotyping of Legionella pneumophila serogroup (sg) 1. fAFLP fragment
analysis was performed on three different sequencing platforms (one gel- and two 
capillary-based) in different laboratories with a well-characterised set of 50
strains of L. pneumophila sg 1. fAFLP data were analysed with the Pearson
correlation similarity coefficient, using a range of parameters, and dendrogram
outputs were converted to arbitrary types after selection of a specified
percentage similarity threshold. The results obtained were compared with those
obtained by the standard non-fluorescent AFLP method and were found to be broadly
concordant. Using optimised settings for each fAFLP method to analyse the panel
of 50 strains, epidemiological concordance (E) and reproducibility (R) values of 
1.00 were obtained, and the number of types ranged from nine to 15, compared with
E=1.00 and R=1.00, with 16 types, for the non-fluorescent AFLP protocol. The
study demonstrated the potential of fAFLP for typing strains of L. pneumophila sg
1 on all three platforms; however, inter-platform comparison of fAFLP data was
not achieved. fAFLP analysis may have a role in the fingerprinting of multiple
isolates during Legionella outbreak investigations, but further work is required 
before type designations and identification libraries can be developed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-0691.2005.01224.x 
PMID: 16104984  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

