
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Oct 7;335(4):1060-9.

New mutant Chinese hamster ovary cell representing an unknown gene for attachment
of glycosylphosphatidylinositol to proteins.

Hong Y(1), Kang JY, Kim YU, Shin DJ, Choy HE, Maeda Y, Kinoshita T.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Research Center for Enteropathogenic Bacteria and Department of
Microbiology, Chonnam National University Medical School, Gwangju, Republic of
Korea. yjhong@chonnam.ac.kr

Aerolysin, a secreted bacterial toxin from Aeromonas hydrophila, binds to
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored protein and kills the cells by
forming pores. Both GPI and N-glycan moieties of GPI-anchored proteins are
involved in efficient binding of aerolysin. We isolated various Chinese hamster
ovary (CHO) mutant cells resistant to aerolysin. Among them, CHOPA41.3 mutant
cells showed several-fold decreased expression of GPI-anchored proteins. After
transfection of N-acetylglucosamine transferase I (GnT1) cDNA, aerolysin was
efficiently bound to the cells, indicating that the resistance against aerolysin 
in this cells was mainly ascribed to the defect of N-glycan maturation. CHOPA41.3
cells also accumulated GPI intermediates lacking ethanolamine phosphate
modification on the first mannose. After stable transfection of PIG-N cDNA
encoding GPI-ethanolamine phosphate transferase1, a profile of accumulated GPI
intermediates became similar to that of GPI transamidase mutant cells. It
indicated, therefore, that CHOPA41.3 cells are defective in GnT1, ethanolamine
phosphate modification of the first mannose, and attachment of GPI to proteins.
The GPI accumulation in CHOPA41.3 cells carrying PIG-N cDNA was not normalized
after transfection with cDNAs of all known components in GPI transamidase
complex. Microsomes from CHOPA41.3 cells had normal GPI transamidase activity.
Taken together, there is an unknown gene required for efficient attachment of GPI
to proteins.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.07.177 
PMID: 16102723  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

