
1. J Immunol. 2005 Sep 1;175(5):3092-3101.

NKT cell stimulation with glycolipid antigen in vivo: costimulation-dependent
expansion, Bim-dependent contraction, and hyporesponsiveness to further antigenic
challenge.

Uldrich AP(#)(1), Crowe NY(#)(1), Kyparissoudis K(1), Pellicci DG(1), Zhan Y(2), 
Lew AM(2), Bouillet P(2), Strasser A(2), Smyth MJ(3), Godfrey DI(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Victoria, 3010, Australia.
(2)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, Melbourne, Victoria 3050 Australia.
(3)Cancer Immunology Program, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Victoria,
3002, Australia.
(#)Contributed equally

Activation of NKT cells using the glycolipid alpha-galactosylceramide
(alpha-GalCer) has availed many investigations into their immunoregulatory and
therapeutic potential. However, it remains unclear how they respond to
stimulation in vivo, which costimulatory pathways are important, and what factors
(e.g., Ag availability and activation-induced cell death) limit their response.
We have explored these questions in the context of an in vivo model of NKT cell
dynamics spanning activation, population expansion, and subsequent contraction.
Neither the B7/CD28 nor the CD40/CD40L costimulatory pathway was necessary for
cytokine production by activated NKT cells, either early (2 h) or late (3 days)
after initial stimulation, but both pathways were necessary for normal
proliferative expansion of NKT cells in vivo. The proapoptotic Bcl-2 family
member Bim was necessary for normal contraction of the NKT cell population
between days 3-9 after stimulation, suggesting that the pool size is regulated by
apoptotic death, similar to that of conventional T cells. Ag availability was not
the limiting factor for NKT cell expansion in vivo, and a second alpha-GalCer
injection induced a very blunted response, whereby cytokine production was
reduced and further expansion did not occur. This appeared to be a form of anergy
that was intrinsic to NKT cells and was not associated with inhibitory NK
receptor signaling. Furthermore, NKT cells from mice pre-challenged with
alpha-GalCer in vivo showed little cytokine production and reduced proliferation 
in vitro. In summary, this study significantly enhances our understanding of how 
NKT cells respond to primary and secondary antigenic challenge in vivo.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.175.5.3092 
PMCID: PMC1360163
PMID: 16116198  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

