
1. Ter Arkh. 2005;77(7):33-9.

[Infectious complications after transplantation of autologous hemopoietic blood
cells in patients with hematological malignancies].

[Article in Russian]

Mendeleeva LP, Mitish NE, Kliasova GA, Petrova NA, Liubimova LS, Gribanova EO,
Pokrovskaia OS, Garanzha TA, Kostina IE, Kalinin NN, Gretsov EM, Savchenko VG.

AIM: To characterize infectious complications arising within 30 days after
transplantation of autologous hemopoietic blood cells in 42 patients with
hematological malignancy (HM); to compare the course of early posttransplantation
period with reference to a kind of high-dose conditioning and dose of
transplanted CD34+ cells.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Autotransplantation (AT) was conducted as consolidation of 
a complete or partial remission in 20 patients with multiple myeloma, 14 patients
with lymphogranulomatosis and lymphosarcoma, 7 patients with acute leukemia and 1
patient with rabdomyosarcoma. The program of pretransplantation conditioning
corresponded to the disease form and included: melphalan, BEAM,
busulphane-cyclophosphamide. The number of transplanted CD34+ cells was 1.7-20.1 
(median 5.3) x l0(6) cell/kg. The transplantation was followed by selective
intestinal decontamination and mycosis prophylaxis. Fever was managed with
antibiotics.
RESULTS: An early period after AT ran without febrile episodes in 7 (17%)
patients. This allowed physicians to avoid systemic antibiotic therapy. The
infectious focus was not definitely localized in 35 patients with febrile fever
in 77% cases. Clinically and bacteriologically verified infections were detected 
in 8 (19%) patients: 7 cases of pneumonia and 1 of bacteriemia. None of the
patients died of infection early after AT. Not a single case of invasive
aspergillesis was registered.
CONCLUSION: Incidence and features of infections did not vary with the above
diseases and did not depend on the dose of transplanted CD34+ cells. The kind of 
high-dose conditioning had a significant influence on the time of granulocyte
recovery, duration of agranulocytosis, duration of one febrile episode and of
antibiotic therapy. The dose of transplanted CD34+ cells also influenced the time
of granulocyte recovery and duration of antibiotic therapy.


PMID: 16116906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

