
1. Gut. 2006 Jan;55(1):26-33. Epub 2005 Aug 26.

Novel action of gastric proton pump inhibitor on suppression of Helicobacter
pylori induced angiogenesis.

Yeo M(1), Kim DK, Han SU, Lee JE, Kim YB, Cho YK, Kim JH, Cho SW, Hahm KB.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Research Centre for Gastroenterology, Ajou University Medical Centre,
San 5, Wonchon-dong, Yeongtong-gu, Suwon, 442-749, Korea. marie8346@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Although activation of mitogen activated protein kinases (MAPKs) by
Helicobacter pylori infection is associated with induction of host angiogenesis, 
which may contribute to H pylori associated gastric carcinogenesis, the strategy 
for its prevention has not been identified. As we previously reported a strong
inhibitory action of gastric proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) on MAPK extracellular 
signal regulated kinase (ERK)1/2 phosphorylation, we investigated whether PPIs
could suppress the H pylori induced angiogenesis via inhibition of MAPK ERK1/2.
METHODS: To address the relationship between H pylori infection and angiogenesis,
comparative analysis of density of CD34(+) blood vessel was performed in tissues 
obtained from 20 H pylori positive gastritis and 18 H pylori negative gastritis
patients. Expression of hypoxia inducible factor 1 (HIF-1alpha) and vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) was tested by reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction and secretion of interleukin 8, and VEGF was measured by ELISA. To
evaluate the direct effect of H pylori infection on the tubular formation of
human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC), an in vitro angiogenesis assay
was employed. Activation of MAPK and nuclear factor kappaB (NFkappaB) was
detected by immunoblotting.
RESULTS: H pylori positive gastritis patients showed a higher density of CD34(+) 
blood vessels (mean 40.9 (SEM 4.4)) than H pylori negative gastritis patients
(7.2+/-0.8), which was well correlated with expression of HIF-1alpha. Conditioned
media from H pylori infected gastric epithelial cells directly induced tubular
formation of HUVEC and the increase of in vitro angiogenesis was suppressed by
PPI treatment. Infection of H pylori significantly upregulated expression of
HIF-1alpha and VEGF in gastric epithelial cells and expression of proangiogenic
factors was mediated by MAPK activation and partially responsible for NFkappaB
activation. PPIs effectively inhibited the phosphorylation of MAPK ERK1/2 that is
a principal signal for H pylori induced angiogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: The fact that PPIs could downregulate H pylori induced angiogenesis 
indicates that antiangiogenic treatment using a PPI could be a promising
protective therapeutic approach for H pylori associated carcinogenesis.

DOI: 10.1136/gut.2005.067454 
PMCID: PMC1856363
PMID: 16127019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

