
1. Eur J Immunol. 2005 Oct;35(10):2962-9.

Specific ICAM-3 grabbing nonintegrin-related 1 (SIGNR1) expressed by marginal
zone macrophages is essential for defense against pulmonary Streptococcus
pneumoniae infection.

Koppel EA(1), Wieland CW, van den Berg VC, Litjens M, Florquin S, van Kooyk Y,
van der Poll T, Geijtenbeek TB.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cell Biology and Immunology, VU University Medical Center Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The dendritic cell-specific ICAM-3-grabbing nonintegrin (DC-SIGN) homolog,
SIGN-related 1 (SIGNR1) is a pathogen receptor expressed by splenic marginal zone
and peritoneal macrophages, and is essential for clearance of Streptococcus
pneumoniae by phagocytosis after intraperitoneal infection. Here, we identified
an important in vivo function for SIGNR1 in S. pneumonia infection induced via
its natural entrance route. Upon intranasal infection with S. pneumoniae,
SIGNR1-deficient mice did not clear bacteria from lung and blood, and displayed
severely enhanced inflammatory parameters compared to the wild-type mice.
However, SIGNR1 is not expressed by alveolar macrophages, suggesting that another
mechanism than a decrease in phagocytosis is responsible for this difference.
Natural anti-phosphorylcholine IgM produced by marginal zone B cells is essential
for protection against infection with S. pneumoniae. Strikingly, during
infection, SIGNR1-deficient mice failed to produce a rapid anti-phosphorylcholine
IgM response. Marginal zone macrophages have been suggested to capture antigens
for presentation to marginal zone B cells. We demonstrate that marginal zone
macrophages from SIGNR1-deficient mice in contrast to wild-type mice are not able
to capture pneumococci from blood, suggesting that SIGNR1 on marginal zone
macrophages captures S. pneumoniae for antigen presentation to and activation of 
marginal zone B cells, resulting in an anti-phosphorylcholine IgM response.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.200526216 
PMID: 16134084  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

