
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2005 Sep;151(Pt 9):3027-3039. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.28131-0.

An unusual Tn21-like transposon containing an ars operon is present in highly
arsenic-resistant strains of the biomining bacterium Acidithiobacillus caldus.

Tuffin IM(1), de Groot P(1), Deane SM(1), Rawlings DE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Stellenbosch University, Private Bag X1,
Matieland, 7602, South Africa.

A transposon, TnAtcArs, that carries a set of arsenic-resistance genes was
isolated from a strain of the moderately thermophilic, sulfur-oxidizing,
biomining bacterium Acidithiobacillus caldus. This strain originated from a
commercial plant used for the bio-oxidation of gold-bearing arsenopyrite
concentrates. Continuous selection for arsenic resistance over many years had
made the bacterium resistant to high concentrations of arsenic. Sequence analysis
indicated that TnAtcArs is 12 444 bp in length and has 40 bp terminal inverted
repeat sequences and divergently transcribed resolvase and transposase genes that
are related to the Tn21-transposon subfamily. A series of genes consisting of
arsR, two tandem copies of arsA and arsD, two ORFs (7 and 8) and arsB is situated
between the resolvase and transposase genes. Although some commercial strains of 
At. caldus contained the arsDA duplication, when transformed into Escherichia
coli, the arsDA duplication was unstable and was frequently lost during
cultivation or if a plasmid containing TnAtcArs was conjugated into a recipient
strain. TnAtcArs conferred resistance to arsenite and arsenate upon E. coli
cells. Deletion of one copy of arsDA had no noticeable effect on resistance to
arsenite or arsenate in E. coli. ORFs 7 and 8 had clear sequence similarity to an
NADH oxidase and a CBS-domain-containing protein, respectively, but their
deletion did not affect resistance to arsenite or arsenate in E. coli. TnAtcArs
was actively transposed in E. coli, but no increase in transposition frequency in
the presence of arsenic was detected. Northern hybridization and reporter gene
studies indicated that although ArsR regulated the 10 kb operon containing the
arsenic-resistance genes in response to arsenic, ArsR had no effect on the
regulation of genes associated with transposition activity.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.28131-0 
PMID: 16151213  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

