
1. J Bacteriol. 2005 Oct;187(20):6991-7.

Novel pathway for arsenic detoxification in the legume symbiont Sinorhizobium
meliloti.

Yang HC(1), Cheng J, Finan TM, Rosen BP, Bhattacharjee H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Wayne
State University, 540 East Canfield Avenue, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

We report a novel pathway for arsenic detoxification in the legume symbiont
Sinorhizobium meliloti. Although a majority of ars operons consist of three
genes, arsR (transcriptional regulator), arsB [As(OH)3/H+ antiporter], and arsC
(arsenate reductase), the S. meliloti ars operon includes an aquaglyceroporin
(aqpS) in place of arsB. The presence of AqpS in an arsenic resistance operon is 
interesting, since aquaglyceroporin channels have previously been shown to
adventitiously facilitate uptake of arsenite into cells, rendering them sensitive
to arsenite. To understand the role of aqpS in arsenic resistance, S. meliloti
aqpS and arsC were disrupted individually. Disruption of aqpS resulted in
increased tolerance to arsenite but not arsenate, while cells with an arsC
disruption showed selective sensitivity to arsenate. The results of transport
experiments in intact cells suggest that AqpS is the only protein of the S.
meliloti ars operon that facilitates transport of arsenite. Coexpression of S.
meliloti aqpS and arsC in a strain of E. coli lacking the ars operon complemented
arsenate but not arsenite sensitivity. These results imply that, when S. meliloti
is exposed to environmental arsenate, arsenate enters the cell through phosphate 
transport systems and is reduced to arsenite by ArsC. Internally generated
arsenite flows out of the cell by downhill movement through AqpS. Thus, AqpS
confers arsenate resistance together with ArsC-catalyzed reduction. This is the
first report of an aquaglyceroporin with a physiological function in arsenic
resistance.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.187.20.6991-6997.2005 
PMCID: PMC1251620
PMID: 16199569  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

