
1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2006 Jan 1;173(1):122-9. Epub 2005 Oct 6.

Differential roles of CD14 and toll-like receptors 4 and 2 in murine
Acinetobacter pneumonia.

Knapp S(1), Wieland CW, Florquin S, Pantophlet R, Dijkshoorn L, Tshimbalanga N,
Akira S, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Internal Medicine Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, G2-132, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

RATIONALE: Acinetobacter baumannii is an opportunistic bacterial pathogen that is
increasingly associated with gram-negative nosocomial pneumonia, but the
molecular mechanisms that play a role in innate defenses during A. baumannii
infection have not been elucidated.
OBJECTIVE: To gain first insight into the role of CD14 and Toll-like receptors 4 
and 2 in host response to A. baumannii pneumonia.
METHODS: Respective gene-deficient mice were intranasally infected with A.
baumannii, and bacterial outgrowth, lung inflammation, and pulmonary
cytokine/chemokine responses were determined. To study the importance of LPS in
the inflammatory response, mice were also challenged with A. baumannii LPS.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Bacterial counts were increased in CD14 and
Toll-like receptor 4 gene-deficient mice, and only these animals developed
bacteremia. The pulmonary cytokine/chemokine response was impaired in Toll-like
receptor 4 knockout mice and the onset of lung inflammation was delayed. In
contrast, Toll-like receptor 2-deficient animals displayed an earlier cell influx
into lungs combined with increased macrophage inflammatory protein-2 and monocyte
chemoattractant protein-1 concentrations, which was associated with accelerated
elimination of bacteria from the pulmonary compartment. Neither CD14 nor
Toll-like receptor 4 gene-deficient mice responded to intranasal administration
of LPS, whereas Toll-like receptor 2 knockout mice were indistinguishable from
wild-type animals.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that CD14 and Toll-like receptor 4 play a key
role in innate sensing of A. baumannii via the LPS moiety, resulting in effective
elimination of the bacteria from the lung, whereas Toll-like receptor 2 signaling
seems to counteract the robustness of innate responses during acute A. baumannii 
pneumonia.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200505-730OC 
PMID: 16210672  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

