
1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005 Oct 19;(4):CD003875.

Enamel matrix derivative (Emdogain) for periodontal tissue regeneration in
intrabony defects.

Esposito M(1), Grusovin MG, Coulthard P, Worthington HV.

Author information: 
(1)School of Dentistry, University of Manchester, Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery,
Higher Cambridge Street, Manchester, UK M15 6FH. espositomarco@hotmail.com

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;(4):CD003875.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003;(2):CD003875.

BACKGROUND: Periodontitis is a chronic infective disease of the gums caused by
bacteria present in dental plaque. This condition induces the breakdown of the
tooth supporting apparatus until teeth are lost. Surgery may be indicated to
arrest disease progression and regenerate lost tissues. Several surgical
techniques have been developed to regenerate periodontal tissues including guided
tissue regeneration (GTR), bone grafting (BG) and the use of enamel matrix
derivative (EMD). EMD is an extract of enamel matrix and contains amelogenins of 
various molecular weights. Amelogenins are involved in the formation of enamel
and periodontal attachment formation during tooth development.
OBJECTIVES: To test whether EMD is effective, and to compare EMD versus GTR, and 
various BG procedures for the treatment of intrabony defects.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane OHG Trials Register, Cochrane Central
Register of Controlled Trials, MEDLINE and EMBASE. Several journals were
handsearched. No language restrictions were applied. Authors of RCTs identified, 
personal contacts and the manufacturer were contacted to identify unpublished
trials. Most recent search: May 2005.
SELECTION CRITERIA: RCTs on patients affected by periodontitis having intrabony
defects of at least 3 mm treated with EMD compared with open flap debridement,
GTR and various BG procedures with at least 1 year follow up. The outcome
measures considered were: tooth loss, changes in probing attachment levels (PAL),
pocket depths (PPD), gingival recessions (REC), bone levels from the bottom of
the defects on intraoral radiographs, aesthetics and adverse events. The
following time-points were to be evaluated: 1, 5 and 10 years.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Screening of eligible studies, assessment of the
methodological quality of the trials and data extraction were conducted in
duplicate and independently by two authors. Results were expressed as
random-effects models using mean differences for continuous outcomes and risk
ratios (RR) for dichotomous outcomes with 95% confidence intervals (CI). It was
decided not to investigate heterogeneity, but a sensitivity analysis for the risk
of bias of the trials was performed.
MAIN RESULTS: Ten trials were included out of 29 potentially eligible trials. No 
included trial presented data after 5 years of follow up, therefore all data
refer to the 1-year time point. A meta-analysis including eight trials showed
that EMD treated sites displayed statistically significant PAL improvements (mean
difference 1.2 mm, 95% CI 0.7 to 1.7) and PPD reduction (0.8 mm, 95% CI 0.5 to
1.0) when compared to placebo or control treated sites, though a high degree of
heterogeneity was found. Significantly more sites had < 2 mm PAL gain in the
control group, with RR 0.48 (95% CI 0.29 to 0.80). Approximately six patients
needed to be treated (NNT) to have one patient gaining 2 mm or more PAL over the 
control group, based on a prevalence in the control group of 35%. No differences 
in tooth loss or aesthetic appearance as judged by the patients were observed.
When evaluating the only two trials at a low risk of bias in a sensitivity
analysis, the effect size for PAL was 0.6 mm, which was less than 1.2 mm for the 
overall result. Comparing EMD with GTR (five trials), GTR showed a statistically 
significant increase of REC (0.4 mm) and significantly more postoperative
complications. No trials were found comparing EMD with BG.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: One year after its application, EMD significantly improved 
PAL levels (1.2 mm) and PPD reduction (0.8 mm) when compared to a placebo or
control, however, the high degree of heterogeneity observed among trials suggests
that results have to be interpreted with great caution. In addition a sensitivity
analyses indicated that the overall treatment effect might be overestimated. The 
actual clinical advantages of using EMD are unknown. With the exception of
significantly more postoperative complications in the GTR group, there was no
evidence of clinically important differences between GTR and EMD.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003875.pub2 
PMID: 16235343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

