
1. J Immunol. 2005 Nov 1;175(9):6076-84.

Arginine-specific gingipains from Porphyromonas gingivalis stimulate production
of hepatocyte growth factor (scatter factor) through protease-activated receptors
in human gingival fibroblasts in culture.

Uehara A(1), Muramoto K, Imamura T, Nakayama K, Potempa J, Travis J, Sugawara S, 
Takada H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tohoku University Graduate School
of Dentistry, Sendai, Japan. kyoro@mail.tains.tohoku.ac.jp

Cystein proteinases (gingipains) from Porphyromonas gingivalis cleave a broad
range of in-host proteins and are considered to be key virulence factors in the
onset and development of adult periodontitis and host defense evasion. In
periodontitis, an inflammatory disease triggered by bacterial infection, the
production of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is induced not only by various
factors derived from the host, such as inflammatory cytokines, but also by
bacterial components. In this study we examined the possible enhanced production 
of HGF produced by human gingival fibroblasts upon stimulation with gingipains.
Arginine-specific gingipain (Rgp) caused a marked production of HGF into the
supernatant, the induction of HGF expression on the cell surface, and the
up-regulation of HGF mRNA expression in a dose-dependent and an enzymatic
activity-dependent manner. Because it has been reported that Rgp activated
protease-activated receptors (PARs), we examined whether the induction of HGF
triggered by Rgps on human gingival fibroblasts occurred through PARs. An RNA
interference assay targeted to PAR-1 and PAR-2 mRNA revealed that
gingipains-induced secretion of HGF was significantly inhibited by RNA
interference targeted to PAR-1 and PAR-2. In addition, the Rgps-mediated HGF
induction was completely inhibited by the inhibition of phospholipase C and was
clearly inhibited by RNA interference targeted to p65, which is an NF-kappaB
component. These results suggest that Rgps activated human gingival fibroblasts
to secrete HGF in the inflamed sites and the mechanism(s) involved may actively
participate in both inflammatory and reparative processes in periodontal
diseases.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.175.9.6076 
PMID: 16237103  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

