
1. J Immunol. 2005 Nov 1;175(9):5716-23.

Estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) deficiency in macrophages results in increased 
stimulation of CD4+ T cells while 17beta-estradiol acts through ERalpha to
increase IL-4 and GATA-3 expression in CD4+ T cells independent of antigen
presentation.

Lambert KC(1), Curran EM, Judy BM, Milligan GN, Lubahn DB, Estes DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, University of Missouri,
Columbia, MO 65211, USA.

The effects of 17beta-estradiol (E2) on immune function have been extensively
reported. The effects are dependent on concentration and duration of exposure and
potential differences in signaling between the known E2 receptors, estrogen
receptors (ER) alpha and ERbeta. Through the use of ER-deficient mice, we and
others have begun to demonstrate the role of the two known receptors in
modulating immune functional activities. Previous studies have shown that cells
of the innate immune system have altered function (bactericidal capacity) and
patterns of cytokine expression (increased proinflammatory cytokine expression)
through amelioration of ERalpha signaling. In this study, we extend these studies
to analysis of T cell differentiation and proliferation in APC-dependent and
APC-independent in vitro assay systems. Our results demonstrate that ERalpha
deficiency in splenic macrophages, but not CD11c+ splenic dendritic cells pulsed 
with OVA significantly enhances proliferative responses and IFN-gamma production 
by transgenic OVA peptide-specific (OT-II) CD4+ T cells when compared with
Ag-pulsed APC from wild-type littermates. The addition of E2 in this culture
system did not significantly affect the production of IFN-gamma. In addition,
when purified CD4+ T cells from ERalpha-deficient and wild-type littermates were 
stimulated with anti-CD3/CD28 Ab in the absence of E2, there were no significant 
differences in IFN-gamma or IL-4 production. However, the addition of E2
significantly increased IL-4 secretion, as well as increased GATA-3 mRNA levels
from ERalpha-replete CD4+ T cells, while this effect was abrogated in
ERalpha-deficient CD4+ T cells.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.175.9.5716 
PMID: 16237062  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

