
1. J Orthop Trauma. 2005 Oct;19(9):591-6.

Contaminant seeding in bone by different irrigation methods: an experimental
study.

Kalteis T(1), Lehn N, Schröder HJ, Schubert T, Zysk S, Handel M, Grifka J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Regensburg, Kaiser-Karl
V.-Allee 3, D-93077 Bad Abbach, Germany. thomas.kalteis@klinik.uni-regensburg.de

OBJECTIVE: This study was designed to investigate the effectiveness of using
various devices and manual procedures for cleansing bacterially contaminated bone
tissue and to assess the risk of iatrogenic bacterial seeding in deep bone
layers.
METHODS: In an in vitro model, human femoral heads were contaminated with
Escherichia coli and then cleansed with pulsatile high-pressure lavage, pulsatile
low-pressure lavage, manual rinsing with bulb syringe lavage, or manual rinsing
with combined brush cleaning. The numbers of bacteria that remained or those that
were introduced by the rinsing procedures were quantitatively determined at
depths of 0 to 1 cm, 1 to 2 cm, and 2 to 3 cm.
RESULTS: Both pulsatile high-pressure lavage and brush cleaning were more
effective than pulsatile low-pressure lavage and bulb syringe lavage for the
purpose of surface cleansing. The differences were highly significant (P <
0.001). There was no significant difference in the decontaminating effect between
pulsatile high-pressure lavage and brush cleaning (P = 0.24). The bacterial
contamination attributable to the cleansing procedure, as measured at tissue
depths of 1 to 2 cm and 2 to 3 cm, was significantly higher after pulsatile
high-pressure lavage and after pulsatile low-pressure lavage than it was after
bulb syringe lavage or brush cleaning (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: In this in vitro investigation of cancellous bone, the brush
cleansing was just as effective for getting rid of bacterial contamination as
pulsatile high-pressure lavage, and carries a significantly lesser risk of
iatrogenic bacterial seeding into deeper tissue layers. In the light of these
promising results obtained by the cleansing of cancellous bone contaminated with 
bacteria, it would be desirable to perform supplementary in vitro and in vivo
investigations into brush cleansing.

DOI: 10.1097/01.bot.0000174032.91936.4a 
PMID: 16247302  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

