
1. Waste Manag. 2006;26(10):1108-18. Epub 2005 Nov 15.

A full-scale study of treatment of pig slurry by composting: kinetic changes in
chemical and microbial properties.

Ros M(1), García C, Hernández T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Soil and Water Conservation and Management of Organic Wastes,
Centro de Edafología y Biología Aplicada del Segura, CEBAS-CSIC, P.O. Box 164,
30100 Espinardo-Murcia, Spain.

Since the indiscriminate disposal of pig slurry can cause not only air pollution 
and bad odours but also nutrient pollution of ground waters and superficial
waters, composting is sometimes used as one environmentally acceptable method for
recycling pig manure. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of
composting pig slurry on its sanitation (evaluated by ecotoxicity assays and
pathogen content determination), as well as to determine the effect of a
carbon-rich bulking agent (wood shavings, WS) and the starting C/N ratio on the
changes undergone by different chemical (volatile organic matter, C and N
fractions) and microbiological (microbial biomass C, ATP, dehydrogenase activity,
urease, protease, phosphatase, and beta-glucosidase activities) parameters during
composting. Pig slurry mixed with bulking agent (P+WS) and the solid faction
separated from it, both with (PSF+WS) and without bulking agent (PSF), were
composted for 13 weeks. Samples for analysis were taken from composting piles at 
the start of the process and at 3, 6, 9, and 13 weeks after the beginning of
composting. The total organic carbon, water soluble C and ammonium content
decreased with composting, while Kjeldahl N and nitrate content increased. The
nitrification process in the PSF+WS pile was more intense than in the PSF or P+WS
composting piles. The pathogen content decreased with composting, as did
phytotoxic compounds, while the germination index increased with compost age.
Piles with bulking agent showed higher values of basal respiration, microbial
biomass carbon, ATP and hydrolase activities during the composting process than
piles without bulking agent.

DOI: 10.1016/j.wasman.2005.08.008 
PMID: 16293406  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

