
1. Cont Lens Anterior Eye. 1999;22(2):58-68.

Acanthamoeba keratitis in Scotland: risk factors for contact lens wearers.

Seal DV(1), Kirkness CM, Bennett HG, Peterson M; Keratitis Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Tennent Institute of Ophthalmology, University of Glasgow, Western Infirmary, 
Glasgow G11 6NT. eyehealth@compuserve.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate risk factors for Acanthamoeba keratitis amongst contact
lens wearers in Scotland.
DESIGN: Patients with Acanthamoeba keratitis in the Scottish study, all of whom
wore contact lenses, were compared with 46 healthy asymptomatic contact
lens-wearing controls. They were all visited at home for contact lens and
environmental microbiological sampling. In addition, all 288 optical practices in
the West of Scotland were polled for contact lens types and disinfecting
solutions sold in 1995, and a sample, each of whom fitted more than 500 contact
lenses per year, were polled for a second time. Independently, a poll was
commissioned by the Eyecare Information Service in July/August 1995 to estimate
the numbers of contact lens wearers in Scotland and the UK. Industry was polled
for numbers of each contact lens disinfecting regimen sold in Scotland in 1995.
SETTING: West of Scotland, UK.
SUBJECTS: All contact lens wearers among the 3 million population of the West of 
Scotland Health Board Areas.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Risk factors for Acanthamoeba infection and
recommendations for its prevention.
RESULTS: When Acanthamoeba infection occurred, patients' home water systems were 
frequently (54%) found to be colonised by this amoeba. Patients more frequently
washed their storage cases in tap water than controls (P<0.05) with resulting
contamination, kept storage cases wet rather than air drying them (P<0.05), and
had coliform bacteria cultured from the storage case (P<0.05) and had viable
Acanthamoeba within the storage case (P<0.0001). Overall, patients were found to 
have significantly more risk factors than controls (P<0.0001). The noncompliant
use of chlorine tablet disinfection, or failure to disinfect contact lenses at
all, was associated with increased risk (P<0.05). Ionic high water content
contact lenses (FDA group 4 material), when used without disinfection or with
non-compliant use of low chlorine (Soflab) tablet-based disinfection, were
associated with increased risk of Acanthamoeba infection (P<0.05). In log-linear 
modelling of risky hygiene behaviours associated with contamination of storage
cases with Acanthamoeba, the most significant behaviour was found to be use of
the less effective disinfection methods (chlorine tablets or no disinfection).
However further investigation showed that these methods were associated with an
increased probability of rinsing the storage case in tap water, so that these two
behaviours are confounded in the group studied.
CONCLUSIONS: Failure to disinfect contact lenses, non-compliant use of chlorine
tablets and/or introduction of tap water rinsing of storage cases were associated
with increased risk of Acanthamoeba infection. New multipurpose solutions and
hydrogen peroxide gave the lowest risk of Acanthamoeba infection, with no
statistically significant difference between them. Ionic high-water content (FDA 
group 4) contact lenses were at increased risk of being associated with
Acanthamoeba keratitis if used without effective disinfection (multipurpose
solutions or hydrogen peroxide). The use of domestic tap water for contact lens
and storage case hygiene must be avoided, as a chain-of-causation' was identified
from the home water supply.

DOI: 10.1016/s1367-0484(99)80004-6 
PMID: 16303407 

