
1. J Periodontol. 2005 Dec;76(12):2223-9.

Apple- and hop-polyphenols protect periodontal ligament cells stimulated with
enamel matrix derivative from Porphyromonas gingivalis.

Inaba H(1), Tagashira M, Kanda T, Ohno T, Kawai S, Amano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Frontier Biology, Osaka University Graduate School of
Dentistry, Osaka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Enamel matrix derivative (EMD) is a tissue regenerative agent used
clinically as an adjunct to periodontal surgery. It was previously demonstrated
that Porphyromonas gingivalis, a periodontal pathogen, significantly diminished
the efficacy of EMD with periodontal ligament (PDL) cells through the proteolytic
actions of Arg- and Lys-gingipains (Rgp and Kgp). Thus, antiproteolytic
supplements are considered clinically desirable for effective periodontal
regenerative therapies. In the present study, we examined apple- (AP) and
hop-polyphenols to determine their ability to protect EMD-stimulated PDL cells
from P. gingivalis.
METHODS: AP, apple condensed tannin (ACT), hop bract polyphenol (HBP), high and
low molecular weight fractions of HBP (HMW-HBP and LMW-HBP), and epigallocatechin
gallate (EGCg) were used. PDL cells were grown on EMD-coated dishes and infected 
with P. gingivalis, and cellular migration and proliferation were evaluated with 
an in vitro assay of wound healing assay in the presence or absence of the
polyphenols.
RESULTS: Each polyphenol significantly enhanced the viability of PDL cells
infected with P. gingivalis, whereas only EGCg demonstrated cytotoxicity.
Further, all polyphenols significantly inhibited Rgp activity, with AP, ACT, and 
HBP more effective toward Kgp. P. gingivalis markedly diminished the migration
and proliferation of EMD-stimulated PDL cells, whereas the addition of AP, ACT,
HBP, and HMW-HBP significantly protected the cells from bacterial cytotoxicity.
In contrast, EGCg and LMW-HBP did not show protective effects.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that AP, ACT, AP, HBP, and HMW-HBP protect
EMD-stimulated PDL cells from P. gingivalis and may be therapeutically useful
supplements for EMD therapy.

DOI: 10.1902/jop.2005.76.12.2223 
PMID: 16332233  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

