
1. Biophys J. 2006 Mar 1;90(5):1821-9. Epub 2005 Dec 16.

Structure, surface interactions, and compressibility of bacterial S-layers
through scanning force microscopy and the surface force apparatus.

Martín-Molina A(1), Moreno-Flores S, Perez E, Pum D, Sleytr UB, Toca-Herrera JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Physique Statistique de l'Ecole Normale Supérieure, CNRS and
Universities Paris VI and Paris VII, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France.

Two-dimensional crystalline bacterial surface layers (S-layers) are found in a
broad range of bacteria and archaea as the outermost cell envelope component. The
self-assembling properties of the S-layers permit them to recrystallize on solid 
substrates. Beyond their biological interest as S-layers, they are currently used
in nanotechnology to build supramolecular structures. Here, the structure of
S-layers and the interactions between them are studied through surface force
techniques. Scanning force microscopy has been used to study the structure of
recrystallized S-layers from Bacillus sphaericus on mica at different 1:1
electrolyte concentrations. They give evidence of the two-dimensional
organization of the proteins and reveal small corrugations of the S-layers formed
on mica. The lattice parameters of the S-layers were a=b=14 nm, gamma=90 degrees 
and did not depend on the electrolyte concentration. The interaction forces
between recrystallized S-layers on mica were studied with the surface force
apparatus as a function of electrolyte concentration. Force measurements show
that electrostatic and steric interactions are dominant at long distances. When
the S-layers are compressed they exhibit elastic behavior. No adhesion between
recrystallized layers takes place. We report for the first time, to our
knowledge, the value of the compressibility modulus of the S-layer (0.6 MPa). The
compressibility modulus is independent on the electrolyte concentration, although
loads of 20 mN m-1 damage the layer locally. Control experiments with denatured
S-proteins show similar elastic properties under compression but they exhibit
adhesion forces between proteins, which were not observed in recrystallized
S-layers.

DOI: 10.1529/biophysj.105.067041 
PMCID: PMC1367331
PMID: 16361337  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

