
1. Mol Immunol. 2006 Apr;43(11):1864-71. Epub 2005 Dec 20.

Intracellular co-localization of SPLUNC1 protein with nanobacteria in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma epithelia HNE1 cells depended on the bactericidal
permeability increasing protein domain.

Zhou HD(1), Li GY, Yang YX, Li XL, Sheng SR, Zhang WL, Zhao J.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Central South University, Hunan 410078, China.

Epithelial surfaces constitute natural immunobarriers against environmental
threats. These barriers are brimming with fluids that bind, transport, cleave or 
degrade bacterial cells and their endotoxic by-products. Saliva and the airway
surface-lining fluid (ASL) comprise the important fluid constituents. Short
palate, lung and nasal epithelium clone 1 (SPLUNC1) is a potential host defensive
protein that is secreted from the submucosal gland to the saliva and nasal lavage
fluid. However, its antimicrobial spectrum and antimicrobial mechanism is not
clear. Through green fluorescence protein (GFP) mediated subcellular localization
experiments in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) HNE1 cell line, we determined that 
the intracellular GFP-tagged SPLUNC1 protein binds to a miniscule microorganisms,
approximately 50-400nm in size, after the bactericidal permeability increasing
protein (BPI) domain was deleted, GFP-tagged truncated SPLUNC1 protein lost its
function of binding to the miniscule microorganisms. We verified that these
microorganisms are nanobacteria (NB) with a negative staining using transmitted
electronic microscope (TEM) and immunofluorescent analysis using an NB-specific
antibody. We isolated and cultured the NB from the cultured nasopharyngeal
carcinoma epithelia HNE1 cell supernatant. We found that the NB did not absorb
the Hoechst stain, even when we extended the staining time to 35min. However,
with the time extension the larger sized NB (larger than 300nm) did stain
positively. From the biopsy specimen of NPC, we also detected the NB, which can
lead to the swelling of mitochondria in the infected host cells. We hypothesize
that SPLUNC1 and NB co-localization is due to the GFP-tagged SPLUNC1 protein
binding to the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) of the Gram-negative NB, which can play
an important role in the host defense of nasopharyngeal epithelium. This research
sheds new light on the mechanism of SPLUNC1 involvement in the host upper
respiratory tract defense system.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2005.10.021 
PMID: 16364440  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

