
1. J Immunol. 2006 Jan 15;176(2):1131-40.

Selectin ligand-independent priming and maintenance of T cell immunity during
airborne tuberculosis.

Schreiber T(1), Ehlers S, Aly S, Hölscher A, Hartmann S, Lipp M, Lowe JB,
Hölscher C.

Author information: 
(1)Junior Research Group Molecular Infection Biology, Research Center Borstel,
Germany.

Immunity to Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection is critically dependent on the
timely priming of T effector lymphocytes and their efficient recruitment to the
site of mycobacterial implantation in the lung. E-, P-, and L-selectin
counterreceptors control lymphocyte homing to lymph nodes and leukocyte
trafficking to peripheral sites of acute inflammation, their adhesive function
depending on fucosylation by fucosyltransferases (FucT) IV and VII. To address
the relative importance of differentially glycosylated selectin counterreceptors 
for priming of T cell effector functions in a model of mycobacteria-induced
granulomatous pulmonary inflammation, we used aerosol-borne M. tuberculosis to
infect FucT-IV-/-, FucT-VII-/-, FucT-IV-/-/FucT-VII-/-, or wild-type control
mice. In lymph nodes, infected FucT-IV-/-/FucT-VII-/- and, to a lesser extent,
FucT-VII-/- mice had severely reduced numbers of T cells and reduced Ag-specific 
effector responses. By contrast, recruitment of activated T cells into the lungs 
was similar in all four groups of mice during infection and expression of T cell,
and macrophage effector functions were only delayed in lungs of
FucT-IV-/-/FucT-VII-/- mice. Importantly, lungs from all groups expressed CXCL13,
CCL21, and CCL19 and displayed organized follicular neolymphoid structures after 
infection with M. tuberculosis, which suggests that the lung served as a selectin
ligand-independent priming site for immune responses to mycobacterial infection. 
All FucT-deficient strains were fully capable of restricting M. tuberculosis
growth in infected organs until at least 150 days postinfection. Our observations
indicate that leukocyte recruitment functions dictated by FucT-IV and
FucT-VII-dependent selectin ligand activities are not critical for inducing or
maintaining T cell effector responses at levels necessary to control pulmonary
tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.176.2.1131 
PMID: 16394002  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

