
1. Infect Immun. 1992 Aug;60(8):3360-8.

Treponema denticola induces actin rearrangement and detachment of human gingival 
fibroblasts.

Baehni PC(1), Song M, McCulloch CA, Ellen RP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Dental Medicine, University of Geneva, Switzerland.

Spirochetes are associated with destructive periodontal diseases, and one
cultivatable oral species, Treponema denticola, binds to mammalian cells and
perturbs metabolism. To evaluate the cytoskeletal responses and attachment
functions of human gingival fibroblasts (HGF) exposed to T. denticola, monolayers
of HGF were incubated with T. denticola strains ATCC 35405, e, and e' in
serum-free medium. HGF retracted pseudopods, rounded up, and ultimately detached 
from the substratum. Scanning electron microscopy showed spirochetes in close
contact with HGF surfaces; occasionally, bacteria were partially submerged
between folds in the HGF membrane. Blebbing and numerous microvilli formed on the
cell surface as the HGF retracted. By confocal microscopy, spirochetes were
detected in contact with the HGF surface but were never found on the ventral
surface of fibroblasts between the substratum and cell. Morphological alterations
were associated with and preceded by actin assembly, as measured by microscopic
fluorimetry: there was a 263% increase in actin fluorescence over controls within
30 min. Detachment of fibroblasts from the substratum was related to incubation
time and was dependent on the concentration of T. denticola. Detachment was
observed for all strains tested and was also dependent on the viability of T.
denticola: UV light, heat, and metronidazole treatment markedly reduced the HGF
detachment response. Detachment was also significantly reduced by the protease
inhibitor phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride. HGF viability was not significantly
affected by coincubation with spirochetes, as measured by lactate dehydrogenase
release. Thus, T. denticola induces rapid cytoskeletal remodelling followed by
cell detachment, which might be stimulated by a bacterially associated protease
but is not likely directly mediated by proteolytic degradation at the
cell-substratum adhesive contact points.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.60.8.3360-3368.1992 
PMCID: PMC257322
PMID: 1639504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

