
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2006 Feb;143(2):194-202.

The natural killer T lymphocyte: a player in the complex regulation of autoimmune
diabetes in non-obese diabetic mice.

Cardell SL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Göteborg University,
Göteborg, Sweden. Susanna.Cardell@immuno.lu.se

Manipulation of the immune response to specifically prevent autoaggression
requires an understanding of the complex interactions that occur during the
pathogenesis of autoimmunity. Much attention has been paid to conventional T
lymphocytes recognizing peptide antigens presented by classical major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and II molecules, as key players in the 
destructive autoreactive process. A pivotal role for different types of
regulatory T lymphocytes in modulating the development of disease is also well
established. Lately, CD1d-restricted natural killer T (NKT) lymphocytes have been
the subject of intense investigation because of their ability to regulate a
diversity of immune responses. The non-classical antigen presenting molecule CD1d
presents lipids and glycolipids to this highly specialized subset of T
lymphocytes found in both humans and mice. From experimental models of
autoimmunity, evidence is accumulating that NKT cells can protect from disease.
One of the best studied is the murine type 1 diabetes model, the non-obese
diabetic (NOD) mouse. While the NKT cell population was first recognized to be
deficient in NOD mice, augmenting NKT cell activity has been shown to suppress
the development of autoimmune disease in this strain. The mechanism by which
CD1d-restricted T cells exert this function is still described incompletely, but 
investigations in NOD mice are starting to unravel specific effects of NKT cell
regulation. This review focuses on the role of CD1d-restricted NKT cells in the
control of autoimmune diabetes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2005.02942.x 
PMCID: PMC1809596
PMID: 16412042  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

