
1. Vet Microbiol. 2006 May 31;114(3-4):252-9. Epub 2006 Jan 19.

Comparative immunogenicity of M. hyopneumoniae NrdF encoded in different
expression systems delivered orally via attenuated S. typhimurium aroA in mice.

Chen AY(1), Fry SR, Forbes-Faulkner J, Daggard GE, Mukkur TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological and Physical Sciences, University of Southern
Queensland, Cnr Baker and West Street, Toowoomba, Qld 4350, Australia.

The Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae ribonucleotide reductase R2 subunit (NrdF) gene
fragment was cloned into eukaryotic and prokaryotic expression vectors and its
immunogenicity evaluated in mice immunized orally with attenuated Salmonella
typhimurium aroA CS332 harboring either of the recombinant expression plasmids.
We found that NrdF is highly conserved among M. hyopneumoniae strains. The
immunogenicity of NrdF was examined by analyzing antibody responses in sera and
lung washes, and the cell-mediated immune (CMI) response was assessed by
determining the INF-gamma level produced by splenocytes upon in vitro stimulation
with NrdF antigen. S. typhimurium expressing NrdF encoded by the prokaryotic
expression plasmid (pTrcNrdF) failed to elicit an NrdF-specific serum or
secretory antibody response, and IFN-gamma was not produced. Similarly, S.
typhimurium carrying the eukaryotic recombinant plasmid encoding NrdF (pcNrdF)
did not induce a serum or secretory antibody response, but did elicit significant
NrdF-specific IFN-gamma production, indicating induction of a CMI response.
However, analysis of immune responses against the live vector S. typhimurium aroA
CS332 showed a serum IgG response but no mucosal IgA response in spite of its
efficient invasiveness in vitro. In the present study we show that the DNA
vaccine encoding the M. hyopneumoniae antigen delivered orally via a live
attenuated S. typhimurium aroA can induce a cell-mediated immune response. We
also indicate that different live bacterial vaccine carriers may have an
influence on the type of the immune response induced.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2005.12.009 
PMID: 16426773  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

