
1. Vet Microbiol. 2006 Jun 15;115(1-3):117-27. Epub 2006 Jan 20.

Virulence-associated gene profiling of Streptococcus suis isolates by PCR.

Silva LM(1), Baums CG, Rehm T, Wisselink HJ, Goethe R, Valentin-Weigand P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut fuer Mikrobiologie, Zentrum fuer Infektionsmedizin, Stiftung
Tieraerztliche Hochschule Hannover, D-30173 Hannover, Germany.

Definition of virulent Streptococcus suis strains is controversial. One
successful approach for identification of virulent European strains is
differentiation of capsular serotypes (or the corresponding cps types) and
subsequent detection of virulence-associated factors, namely the extracellular
factor (EF, epf), the muramidase-released protein (MRP, mrp) and the hemolysin
suilysin (SLY, sly). In this work we present a novel multiplex PCR (MP-PCR) and
an mrp variant PCR for identification and characterization of virulent S. suis
strains. These new methods were used to identify association of disease with
particular profiles of virulence-associated genes. The MP-PCR allowed
identification of S. suis through detection of the housekeeping gene gdh,
differentiation of four cps types (1, 2, 7 and 9), and detection of epf, mrp, sly
and arcA (arginine deiminase from S. suis). Furthermore, this study describes the
first PCR assay for differentiation of at least six mrp variants. Expression of
the corresponding size variants of MRP was shown for four of the six mrp
variants, but was undetectable for the two larger mrp variants in the particular 
strains investigated. The results of this study suggest that cps7 strains are
associated with pneumonia and that variation of mrp is very pronounced among
these strains. Gene profiles of invasive, pneumonia and carrier S. suis isolates 
by combination of PCR assays allowed differentiation of 24 different genotypes
among cps1, 2, 7 and 9 strains. Forty-five percent of the invasive S. suis
diseases investigated in this study were caused by only two of these genotypes,
namely cps2/mrp+/epf+/sly+ and cps9/mrp(*)/epf-/sly+. Thus, this study
demonstrates for the first time a uniform profile of the particular
virulence-associated genes for the vast majority of the investigated invasive
cps9 strains.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2005.12.013 
PMID: 16431041  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

