
1. J Biol Chem. 1992 Aug 15;267(23):16417-23.

Cloning and characterization of the gene encoding the IDH1 subunit of
NAD(+)-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase from Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Cupp JR(1), McAlister-Henn L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Irvine 92717.

NAD(+)-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase from Saccharomyces cerevisiae is
composed of two nonidentical subunits, designated IDH1 and IDH2. The gene
encoding IDH2 was previously cloned and sequenced (Cupp, J.R., and
McAlister-Henn, L. (1991) J. Biol. Chem. 266, 22199-22205), and in this paper we 
describe the isolation of a yeast genomic clone containing the IDH1 gene. A
fragment of the IDH1 gene was amplified by the polymerase chain reaction method
utilizing degenerate oligonucleotides based on tryptic peptide sequences of the
purified subunit; this fragment was used to isolate a full length IDH1 clone. The
nucleotide sequence of the IDH1 coding region was determined and encodes a
360-residue polypeptide including an 11-residue mitochondrial targeting
presequence. Amino acid sequence comparison between IDH1 and IDH2 reveals a 42%
sequence identity, and both IDH1 and IDH2 show approximately 32% identity to
Escherichia coli NAD(P)(+)-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase. To examine the
function of the IDH1 subunit and to determine the metabolic role of
NAD(+)-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase the IDH1 gene was disrupted in a wild
type haploid yeast strain and in a haploid strain lacking IDH2. The IDH1
disruption strains expressed no detectable IDH1 as determined by Western blot
analysis, and these strains were found to lack NAD(+)-dependent isocitrate
dehydrogenase activity indicating that IDH1 is essential for a functional enzyme.
Over-expression of IDH1 in a strain containing IDH2 restored wild type activity
but did not result in increased levels of activity, suggesting that both IDH1 and
IDH2 are required for a functional enzyme. Growth phenotype analysis of the IDH1 
disruption strains revealed that they grew at a reduced rate on the
nonfermentable carbon sources examined (glycerol, lactate, and acetate),
consistent with NAD(+)-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase performing a critical
role in oxidative function of the citric acid cycle. In addition, the IDH1
disruption strains grew at wild type rates in the absence of glutamate,
indicating that these strains are not glutamate auxotrophs.


PMID: 1644826  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

