
1. Oncogene. 2006 Mar 23;25(13):1922-30.

The green tea catechins, (-)-Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) and
(-)-Epicatechin-3-gallate (ECG), inhibit HGF/Met signaling in immortalized and
tumorigenic breast epithelial cells.

Bigelow RL(1), Cardelli JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Feist-Weiller Cancer Center,
Louisiana State University-Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA 71130, USA.

The hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) receptor, Met, is a strong prognostic
indicator of breast cancer patient outcome and survival, suggesting that
therapies targeting Met may have beneficial outcomes in the clinic.
(-)-Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), a catechin found in green tea, has been
recognized as a potential therapeutic agent. We assessed the ability of EGCG to
inhibit HGF signaling in the immortalized, nontumorigenic breast cell line,
MCF10A, and the invasive breast carcinoma cell line, MDA-MB-231. HGF treatment in
both cell lines induced rapid, sustained activation of Met, ERK and AKT.
Pretreatment of cells with concentrations of EGCG as low as 0.3 microM inhibited 
HGF-induced Met phosphorylation and downstream activation of AKT and ERK.
Treatment with 5.0 microM EGCG blocked the ability of HGF to induce cell motility
and invasion. We assessed the ability of alternative green tea catechins to
inhibit HGF-induced signaling and motility. (-)-Epicatechin-3-gallate (ECG)
functioned similar to EGCG by completely blocking HGF-induced signaling as low as
0.6 microM and motility at 5 microM in MCF10A cells; whereas, (-)-epicatechin
(EC) was unable to inhibit HGF-induced events at any concentration tested.
(-)-Epigallocatechin (EGC), however, completely repressed HGF-induced AKT and ERK
phosphorylation at concentrations of 10 and 20 microM, but was incapable of
blocking Met activation. Despite these observations, EGC did inhibit HGF-induced 
motility in MCF10A cells at 10 microM. These observations suggest that the R1
galloyl and the R2 hydroxyl groups are important in mediating the green tea
catechins' inhibitory effect towards HGF/Met signaling. These combined in vitro
studies reveal the possible benefits of green tea polyphenols as cancer
therapeutic agents to inhibit Met signaling and potentially block invasive cancer
growth.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1209227 
PMID: 16449979  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

