
1. Dalton Trans. 2006 Mar 7;(9):1123-33. Epub 2006 Feb 7.

The enzymatic activation of coenzyme B12.

Brown KL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Ohio University, Athens, OH 45701,
USA. brownk3@ohiou.edu

The enzymatic "activation" of coenzyme B12 (5'-deoxyadenosylcobalamin, AdoCbl),
in which homolysis of the carbon-cobalt bond of the coenzyme is catalyzed by some
10(9)- to 10(14)-fold, remains one of the outstanding problems in bioinorganic
chemistry. Mechanisms which feature the enzymatic manipulation of the axial Co-N 
bond length have been investigated by theoretical and experimental methods.
Classical mechanochemical triggering, in which steric compression of the long
axial Co-N bond leads to increased upward folding of the corrin ring and
stretching of the Co-C bond is found to be feasible by molecular modeling, but
the strain induced in the Co-C bond seems to be too small to account for the
observed catalytic power. The modeling study shows that the effect is a steric
one which depends on the size of the axial nucleotide base, as substitution of
imidazole (Im) for the normal 5,6-dimethylbenzimidazole (Bzm) axial base
decreases the Co-C bond labilization considerably. An experimental test was thus 
devised using the coenzyme analog with Im in place of Bzm (Ado(Im)Cbl). Studies
of the enzymatic activation of this analog by the B12-dependent ribonucleoside
triphosphate reductase from Lactobacillus leichmannii coupled with studies of the
non-enzymatic homolytic lability of the Co-C bond of Ado(Im)Cbl show that the
enzyme is only slightly less efficient (3.8-fold, 0.8 kcal mol(-1)) at activating
Ado(Im)Cbl than at activating AdoCbl itself. This suggests, in agreement with the
modeling study, that mechanochemical triggering can make only a small
contribution to the enzymatic activation of AdoCbl. Another possibility,
electronic stabilization of the Co(II) homolysis product by compression of the
axial Co-N bond, requires that enzymatic activation be sensitive to the basicity 
of the axial nucleotide. Preliminary studies of the enzymatic activation of a
coenzyme analog with a 5-fluoroimidazole axial nucleotide suggest that the
catalysis of Co-C bond homolysis may indeed be significantly slowed by the
decrease in basicity.

DOI: 10.1039/b517599m 
PMID: 16482346  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

