
1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2006 Jun 15;111(3-4):231-8. Epub 2006 Mar 3.

Association of a bovine CXCR2 gene polymorphism with neutrophil survival and
killing ability.

Rambeaud M(1), Clift R, Pighetti GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, 114 McCord Hall, The University of Tennessee,
Knoxville, TN 37996, USA.

Recent research in our lab has demonstrated a significant association between the
incidence of subclinical mastitis and specific polymorphisms of the CXCR2 gene in
Holstein dairy cows. This gene encodes a receptor for interleukin-8 (IL-8), a key
regulator of neutrophil migration, killing and survival. Because of the
importance of this gene in neutrophil function, we hypothesized that differences 
in neutrophil killing and survival may exist among the CXCR2 genotypes and
potentially contribute to the observed variation in intramammary infections. To
test this hypothesis, neutrophils were isolated from cows representing each CXCR2
+777 genotype (GG, GC or CC) and tested for suppression of apoptosis, reactive
oxygen species (ROS) generation, glutathione levels, and bactericidal activity. A
significant increase in survival was observed in neutrophils from cows with a CC 
genotype when compared to those with a GG genotype in response to IL-8, but not
dexamethasone. In contrast, a significant reduction in neutrophil ROS generation 
in response to phorbol-13-myristate-12 acetate (PMA) was observed in cows with a 
CC genotype when compared to those with a GG genotype. However, no differences in
bactericidal activity or glutathione levels were observed among genotypes. The
functional activity of neutrophils from cows heterozygous for this polymorphism
was intermediate between those with homozygous genotypes for those assays where
differences were observed among homozygous genotypes. In summary, our results
suggest that neutrophils from Holstein cows with different CXCR2 genotypes vary
in their ability to suppress apoptosis and produce ROS. These differences have
the potential to influence overall neutrophil function and may partially explain 
the variation observed with respect to mastitis in vivo. These results provide a 
foundation for future research aimed at better understanding the basic
differences between dairy cows genetically more or less susceptible to mastitis
and has the potential to provide novel preventive and therapeutic measures
against inflammatory diseases such as mastitis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2006.01.019 
PMID: 16516978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

