
1. Otolaryngol Pol. 2005;59(6):865-9.

[Nasal septal abscess and palatine process of the maxilla abscess complicating
acute rhinosinusitis in a 12-year old boy].

[Article in Polish]

Zielnik-Jurkiewicz B(1), Sosińska OO, Fudalej P.

Author information: 
(1)Oddział Otolaryngologiczny, Szpital Dzieciecy, SZPZOZ im. Prof. J.
Bogdanowicza w Warszawie.

We report a case of nasal septal abscess and palatine process of the maxilla
abscess secondary to acute rhinosinusitis in an 12-year-old boy. Rare
complication of acute sinusitis is the nasal septum abscess; even rarer is the
abscess of the palatine process of the maxilla, which our patient presented.
Nasal septum abscess is an reservoir of suppurative secretion between cartilage
or bone of the septum and their periostium or perichondrium. Nasal septum abscess
is most often bilateral, causing nasal cavities obstruction. Other symptoms are: 
nasal pain, fever, headache, nasal tenderness, bad general feeling. Spontaneous
abscesses of nasal septum are rare and occur due to acute ethmoid or sphenoid
sinusitis and inflammations originating from teeth. Patophysiology of nasal
septum abscess depends on its etiology. The isolated acute sphenoid sinusitis may
lead to occurrence of nasal septum abscess by spreading of inflammatory changes
under periostium along the anterior surface of sphenoid bone and damaging the
periostium of vomer and perpendicular lamina of ethmoid bone into
subperichondrial space of quadrangular cartilage. Inflammation of inferior wall
of sphenoid sinus located over fornix of nasopharynx might have lead to
appearance of the palatine process of the maxilla abscess. We consider this
mechanism of abscess creation occurred in our patient. Another possible mechanism
comprehends spreading of inflammatory process through bone fissures, congenital
bone malformations of due to thrombophlebitis. Recommended procedure in cases of 
confirmed nasal septum abscess is surgical decompression from semitransverse
incision of the column and abscess drainage. Aspiration and bacteriological
culture allow for exact establishment of proper antibiotic treatment. Antibiotic 
therapy should be conducted for 2-3 weeks according to bacterial sensitivity to
chemotherapeutics. In reexamination of our boy's nasal septum cavity of abscess
was assessed and a small cartilage defect was noted. Necrotic changes in nasal
septum cartilages arise due to ischemia and compression by residual pathological 
contents between perichondrium and cartilage. Proper recognition and surgical and
preservative treatment lead to total recovery. In our boy, control examinations
after 2 and 6 months confirmed recovery without recurrence and later
complications.


PMID: 16521453  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

