
1. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2006 May 5;94(1):167-76.

Nanoscale investigation on adhesion of E. coli to surface modified silicone using
atomic force microscopy.

Cao T(1), Tang H, Liang X, Wang A, Auner GW, Salley SO, Ng KY.

Author information: 
(1)Deartment of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Wayne State
University, Detroit, Michigan 48202, USA.

Bacterial adhesion on biomaterial surfaces is the initial step in establishing
infections and leads to the formation of biofilms. In this study, silicone was
modified with different biopolymers and silanes, including: heparin, hyaluronan, 
and self-assembled octadecyltrichlorosilane (OTS), and fluoroalkylsilane (FAS).
The aim was to provide a stable and bacteria-resistant surface by varying the
degree of hydrophobicity and the surface structure. The adhesion of Escherichia
coli (JM 109) on different modified silicone surfaces was investigated by atomic 
force microscopy (AFM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Mica, an ideal
hydrophilic and smooth surface, was employed as a control specimen to study the
effect of hydrophobicity and surfaces roughness on bacterial adhesion. AFM probes
were coated with E. coli and the force measurements between the
bacteria-immobilized tip and various materials surfaces were obtained while
approaching to and retracting from the surfaces. A short-range repulsive force
was observed between the FAS coated silicone and bacteria. The pull-off force of 
bacteria to FAS was the smallest among coated surfaces. On the other hand,
heparin exhibited a long-range attractive force during approach and required a
higher pull-off force in retraction. Both AFM and SEM results indicated that FAS 
reduced bacterial adhesion whereas heparin enhanced the adhesion compared to pure
silicone. The work demonstrates that hydrophobicity cannot be used as a criterion
to predict bacterial adhesion. Rather, both the native properties of the
individual strain of bacteria and the specific functional structure of the
surfaces determine the strength of force interaction, and thus the extent of
adhesion.

DOI: 10.1002/bit.20841 
PMID: 16538682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

