
1. Crit Care Resusc. 2005 Mar;7(1):32-9.

Recent insights into the pathogenesis of severe sepsis.

Tetta C(1), Fonsato V, Ronco C, Camussi G.

Author information: 
(1)Fresenius Medical Care, Bad Homburg, Germany. ciro.tetta@fmc-ag.com

OBJECTIVE: Severe sepsis remains the dominant challenge in the care of critically
ill patients. Over the last 10 years a large body of research has modified our
understanding of this condition. In this article, we review the evolution of our 
understanding of the molecular mechanisms responsible for the development of this
clinical syndrome.
DATA SOURCES: The authors undertook a critical review of the literature on the
molecular basis of the pathogenesis of sepsis with particular emphasis on the
role of cytokines, toll-like receptors, adhesion molecules, coagulation cascade
molecules and the possible role of in-vitro experimental models of
blood-endothelium interaction.
SUMMARY OF REVIEW: Recent insights into the molecular mechanisms responsible for 
the pathogenesis of the severe sepsis syndrome suggest that pro- and anti-
inflammatory pathways are simultaneously activated and interact in a dynamic way.
Pro-inflammatory cytokines previously considered as targets for intervention have
typically been already activated and de-activated by the time the clinical
diagnosis is made and intervention is possible. Cellular activity involving white
cell-endothelial interactions occur later, making them a more attractive option
for therapeutic intervention. Immunological incompetence rather than
over-activity may be the most common state of cell function in critically ill
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Our understanding of the the pathogenesis of severe sepsis continues
to grow. Expression of membrane surface molecules such as toll-like receptors,
adhesion molecules and cytokine receptors induce a high degree of redundancy and 
amplification. Cell responsiveness is reduced in an attempt to circumvent the
amplification loop. However, the ensuing interaction between the host and the
pathogen(s) may lead to an immune deficiency, leaving the field open to further
invasion by the original bacteria or to superimposed infection agents.
Endothelium-white cell interactions might be an appropriate target for future
interventions.


PMID: 16548817 

