
1. J Pathol. 2006 Jun;209(2):190-7.

Altered bone morphogenetic protein signalling in the Helicobacter pylori-infected
stomach.

Bleuming SA(1), Kodach LL, Garcia Leon MJ, Richel DJ, Peppelenbosch MP, Reitsma
PH, Hardwick JC, van den Brink GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Internal Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, and Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology,
Geneva University Hospital, Switzerland.

Morphogens regulate epithelial cell fate decisions in the adult gastrointestinal 
tract. The authors hypothesized that influx of inflammatory cells into the lamina
propria may disturb the normal expression gradients of morphogens (morphogenetic 
landscape) in gastrointestinal epithelia. Changes in the activity of the bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP) pathway in normal and Helicobacter pylori-infected
gastric mucosa were therefore examined. It is shown that BMP receptors, the
activated (phosphorylated) form of the intracellular BMP signal transduction
protein SMAD1, and BMP target ID2 all localize to gastric epithelial cells that
are at the end of the axis of epithelial renewal in normal mucosa. Colonization
of human gastric mucosa with H. pylori was associated with an increase in BMP2
expression due to influx of inflammatory cells that produce BMP2. Furthermore,
whereas no BMP4 was detected in the normal antrum, focal infiltrates of
BMP4-expressing cells were found in the H. pylori-infected stomach. This influx
of BMP-expressing cells was associated with an increase in epithelial BMP
signalling. Interestingly, a shift in activity of the BMP pathway was observed
towards the precursor cell compartment (isthmus) of the gastric units. Thus, H.
pylori infection results in an influx of inflammatory cells that disturb the
normal activity gradient of a morphogenetic pathway with an established role in
epithelial cell fate regulation. The data suggest that morphological changes in
epithelial histology may result from alterations in the morphogenetic landscape
secondary to changes in the cellular composition of the lamina propria.

Copyright (c) 2006 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

DOI: 10.1002/path.1976 
PMID: 16550632  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

