
1. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Feb;14(1):123-7.

[Establishment of purification procedure for recombinant fusion protein
B7-2-PE40KDEL].

[Article in Chinese]

Guan HR(1), Sun YY, Yuan ZH, Zhang HL, Liang F, Liu N, Guo SQ, Xi CX, Xi YZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Hospital Affiliated to Academy of Military Medical
Sciences, Laboratory of Immunoassay, National Center of Biomedical Analysis,
Beijing 100071, China.

This study was aimed to establish downstream purification procedure by which the 
protein of interest can be purified to higher purity rapidly and efficiently. The
different combinations of various purification strategies, methods and conditions
were compared, including reversed phase chromatography, metal chelating
chromatography, anion exchange chromatography, blue dye affinity chromatography, 
filtration chromatography and so on. The results showed that in reversed phase
chromatography, isolated protein of interest was denatured and precipitated
immediately after chromatography because methanol or acetonitrile were adopted as
the organic phase. In blue dye affinity chromatography expecting to purify the
protein of interest in one step, protein of interest was difficultly
differentiated from mixed protein as much proteins bound to the chromatography
media by non-specific affinity. While there is a translation-enhancing sequence
T7-g10 in the PRSETA-B7-2-PE40KDEL expression vector, so it adds 6 histidines to 
the N terminus of the protein of interest, this allows to purify the protein of
interest by metal chelating chromatography. Based on this characteristic, a
three-step chromatography line including metal chelating chromatography, anion
exchange chromatography and filtration chromatography was finally established
after repeated experiments. By this way the purity of protein of interest reached
95% and the total recovery rate was 8%. The result of Western blot indicated that
the expressed and purified recombinant B7-2-PE40KDEL could specifically bind with
mAb against human B7-2 and multiple antibody against PEA. The cytotoxicity of the
recombinant toxin tested by MTT method showed that the B7-2-PE40KDEL could
selectively kill Jurkat cell line expressing CD28 receptor well and had no
killing effect on the Raji cell line unexpressing CD28 receptor. It is concluded 
that a high efficient and speedy three-step purification procedure for the
purifying recombinant protein B7-2-PE40KDEL was established, and this procedure
possess selective killing activity on CD28 positive T lymphocytes.


PMID: 16584607  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

