
1. Respir Res. 2006 Apr 4;7:57.

Inhalation of beta 2 agonists impairs the clearance of nontypable Haemophilus
influenzae from the murine respiratory tract.

Maris NA(1), Florquin S, van't Veer C, de Vos AF, Buurman W, Jansen HM, van der
Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical Center, 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. namaris@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Nontypable Haemophilus influenzae (NTHi) is a common bacterial
pathogen causing human respiratory tract infections under permissive conditions
such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Inhalation of beta2-receptor
agonists is a widely used treatment in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. The aim of this study was to determine the effect of
inhalation of beta2 agonists on the host immune response to respiratory tract
infection with NTHi.
METHODS: Mouse alveolar macrophages were stimulated in vitro with NTHi in the
presence or absence of the beta2 receptor agonists salmeterol or salbutamol. In
addition, mice received salmeterol or salbutamol by inhalation and were
intranasally infected with NTHi. End points were pulmonary inflammation and
bacterial loads.
RESULTS: Both salmeterol and salbutamol inhibited NTHi induced tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNFalpha) release by mouse alveolar macrophages in vitro by a beta 
receptor dependent mechanism. In line, inhalation of either salmeterol or
salbutamol was associated with a reduced early TNFalpha production in lungs of
mice infected intranasally with NTHi, an effect that was reversed by concurrent
treatment with the beta blocker propranolol. The clearance of NTHi from the lungs
was impaired in mice treated with salmeterol or salbutamol, an adverse effect
that was prevented by propranolol and independent of the reduction in TNFalpha.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that inhalation of salmeterol or salbutamol may
negatively influence an effective clearance of NTHi from the airways.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-7-57 
PMCID: PMC1456968
PMID: 16595015  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

