
1. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2006 May;56(2):219-35.

Rhizosphere bacteria affected by transgenic potatoes with antibacterial
activities compared with the effects of soil, wild-type potatoes, vegetation
stage and pathogen exposure.

Rasche F(1), Hödl V, Poll C, Kandeler E, Gerzabek MH, van Elsas JD, Sessitsch A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioresources, ARC Seibersdorf Research GmbH, Seibersdorf,
Austria.

A greenhouse experiment was performed to analyze a potential effect of
genetically modified potatoes expressing antibacterial compounds
(attacin/cecropin, T4 lysozyme) and their nearly isogenic, nontransformed
parental wild types on rhizosphere bacterial communities. To compare plant
transformation-related variations with commonly accepted impacts caused by
altered environmental conditions, potatoes were cultivated under different
environmental conditions, for example using contrasting soil types. Further,
plants were challenged with the blackleg pathogen Erwinia carotovora ssp.
atroseptica. Rhizosphere soil samples were obtained at the stem elongation and
early flowering stages. The activities of various extracellular rhizosphere
enzymes involved in the C-, P- and N-nutrient cycles were determined as the rates
of fluorescence of enzymatically hydrolyzed substrates containing the highly
fluorescent compounds 4-methylumbelliferone or 7-amino-4-methyl coumarin. The
structural diversity of the bacterial communities was assessed by 16S rRNA-based 
terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis, and 16S rRNA gene
clone libraries were established for the flowering conventional and T4
lysozyme-expressing Desirée lines grown on the chernozem soil, each line treated 
with and without E. carotovora ssp. atroseptica. Both genetic transformation
events induced a differentiation in the activity rates and structures of
associated bacterial communities. In general, T4 lysozyme had a stronger effect
than attacin/cecropin. In comparison with the other factors, the impact of the
genetic modification was only transient and minor, or comparable to the dominant 
variations caused by soil type, plant genotype, vegetation stage and pathogen
exposure.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6941.2005.00027.x 
PMID: 16629752  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

