
1. Crit Care Med. 2006 Jun;34(6):1758-68.

Hypertonic saline enhances host defense to bacterial challenge by augmenting
Toll-like receptors.

Chen LW(1), Huang HL, Lee IT, Hsu CM, Lu PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital, National Yang-Ming
Medical University, Taipei (L-WC, I-TL), R.O.C.

Comment in
    Crit Care Med. 2006 Jun;34(6):1849-50.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether hypertonic saline infusion modulates thermal
injury-induced bacterial translocation and host response to bacterial challenge
through the augmentation of Toll-like receptors (TLRs).
DESIGN: Prospective, experimental study.
SETTING: Research laboratory at a university hospital.
SUBJECTS: Thermal injury models in the mice.
INTERVENTIONS: In experiment 1, mice underwent burn were given with 10 mL/kg
hypertonic saline (7.5% NaCl), 10 mg/kg saline (N/S1), or 80 mL/kg saline (N/S2) 
at 4 or 8 hrs after burn. At 24 hrs after burn, mesenteric lymph nodes were
harvested for bacterial translocation assay. In experiment 2, mice receiving
hypertonic saline or saline after thermal injury received peritoneal challenge
with Escherichia coli, and bacterial clearance was measured. In experiment 3,
peritoneal cells from mice receiving hypertonic saline or saline after thermal
injury were incubated with E. coli, and bacterial count, TLR2, TLR4, MIP2, CXCR2,
pp38, and ERK expression were evaluated. In experiment 4, reactive oxygen species
production, CXCR2, MIP2, TLR2, and TLR4 expression of bone marrow neutrophil from
mice receiving hypertonic saline or saline treatment after thermal injury were
evaluated. In experiment 5, neutrophil were cultured with hypertonic saline or
N/S and incubated with E. coli. TLR2 and TLR4 expression and bacterial count were
evaluated. In experiment 6, mice were fed with oral antibiotics with or without
lipopolysaccharide, a TLR ligand, supplements. At 24 hrs after burn, mesenteric
lymph nodes were harvested for bacterial translocation assay, and neutrophils
were harvested for TLR2 and TLR4 protein assay.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Hypertonic saline decreased thermal injury-induced
bacterial translocation. Hypertonic saline increased bacterial clearance,
phagocytic activity, and TLR2, TLR4, CXCR2, pp38, and p44/42 expression of
peritoneal cells. Hypertonic saline treatment at 4 or 8 hrs after thermal injury 
decreased reactive oxygen species production of neutrophil. Hypertonic saline
injection increased TLR2, TLR4, and pp38 expression of neutrophil. In vitro
treatment of neutrophil with hypertonic saline increased phagocytic activity and 
TLR2 and TLR4 expression. Commensal depletion with oral antibiotics decreased
TLR2 and TLR4 expression of neutrophil; lipopolysaccharide increased TLR4
expression of neutrophil and decreased thermal injury-induced bacterial
translocation.
CONCLUSIONS: Restoration of extracellular fluid in burn shock with hypertonic
saline decreased thermal injury-induced bacterial translocation. Hypertonic
saline increased the phagocytic activity and TLR2, TLR4, CXCR2, pp38, and P44/42 
expression of peritoneal cells. Hypertonic saline decreased reactive oxygen
species but increased TLR2, TLR4, and pp38 expression and phagocytic activity of 
bone marrow neutrophil. Stimulation of the TLRs with lipopolysaccharide in
commensal depleted mice increased TLRs expression of neutrophil and decreased
thermal injury-induced bacterial translocation. Taken together with the fact that
stimulation of TLRs with hypertonic saline increases phagocytic activity of
systemic inflammatory cells, we conclude that TLRs play a critical role in the
innate immunity by recognizing bacteria and that hypertonic saline enhances host 
response to bacterial challenge by increasing TLRs of inflammatory cells.

DOI: 10.1097/01.CCM.0000218810.66485.01 
PMID: 16625117  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

