
1. Crit Care Med. 2006 Jun;34(6):1725-30.

Local activation of the tissue factor-factor VIIa pathway in patients with
pneumonia and the effect of inhibition of this pathway in murine pneumococcal
pneumonia.

Rijneveld AW(1), Weijer S, Bresser P, Florquin S, Vlasuk GP, Rote WE, Spek CA,
Reitsma PH, van der Zee JS, Levi M, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, Laboratory of Experimental
Internal Medicine, Department of Pulmonology, University of Amsterdam, the
Netherlands.

Comment in
    Crit Care Med. 2006 Jun;34(6):1842-4.

OBJECTIVE: The tissue factor (TF)-factor VIIa (FVIIa) complex not only is
essential for activation of blood coagulation but also affect the inflammatory
response during sepsis. The objective of this study was to determine the role of 
TF-FVIIa in pneumonia caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae, the most important
causative organism in community-acquired pneumonia and a major cause of sepsis.
DESIGN: A controlled, in vivo laboratory study.
SETTING: Research laboratory of a health sciences university.
PATIENTS AND SUBJECTS: Patients with unilateral community-acquired pneumonia and 
female BALB/c mice.
INTERVENTIONS: Bilateral bronchoalveolar lavage was performed in patients with
community-acquired pneumonia. In mice, pneumonia was induced by intranasal
inoculation with S. pneumoniae with or without concurrent inhibition of TF-FVIIa 
by subcutaneous injections of recombinant nematode anticoagulant protein
(rNAPc2).
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Patients with unilateral community-acquired
pneumonia demonstrated elevated concentrations of FVIIa, soluble TF, and
thrombin-antithrombin complexes in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid obtained from the
infected site compared with the uninfected site. Mice with S. pneumoniae
pneumonia displayed increased TF expression and fibrin deposits in lungs together
with elevated thrombin-antithrombin complex levels in bronchoalveolar lavage
fluid; inhibition of TF-FVIIa by rNAPc2 attenuated the procoagulant response in
the lung but did not affect host defense, as reflected by an unaltered outgrowth 
of pneumococci and an unchanged survival.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that TF-FVIIa activity contributes to activation 
of coagulation in the lung during pneumococcal pneumonia but does not play an
important role in the antibacterial host defense in this murine model.

DOI: 10.1097/01.CCM.0000218807.20570.C2 
PMID: 16625114  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

