
1. J Pathol. 2006 Jun;209(2):166-73.

Expression and regulation of human beta-defensin-2 in osteoarthritic cartilage.

Varoga D(1), Paulsen FP, Kohrs S, Grohmann S, Lippross S, Mentlein R, Tillmann
BN, Goldring MB, Besch L, Pufe T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic and Trauma Surgery, University Hospital
Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Germany. deikevaroga@hotmail.com

Defensins are antibiotic peptides that are involved in host defence at epithelial
and mesenchymal surfaces. Previous studies have shown the induction of human
beta-defensin-3 (HBD-3) in osteoarthritic joints, suggesting that these molecules
have functions in addition to their ability to kill microbes. The aim of this
study was to investigate the production of a further human beta-defensin, named
HBD-2, in osteoarthritis (OA) and to determine its regulation by inflammatory
cytokines. Healthy and osteoarthritic cartilage was assessed for HBD-2 expression
by RT-PCR, immunohistochemistry, and ELISA. C28/I2 chondrocytes, primary
chondrocytes, and cartilage explants were cultured for in vitro studies. After 24
h of stimulation with tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), interleukin-1
(IL-1) or IL-6, real-time RT-PCR and ELISA experiments were performed to evaluate
the effect of these cytokines on the production of HBD-2. In contrast to healthy 
cartilage, HBD-2 expression was identified in most of the OA samples examined
(eight of ten). Cytokines that are potentially involved in the pathogenesis of
OA, namely TNF-alpha, IL-1, and IL-6, were transcriptional inducers of HBD-2 in
cultured chondrocytes and cartilage explants in vitro, as measured by real-time
RT-PCR and ELISA. These results illustrate the induction of HBD-2 in
osteoarthritic cartilage and suggest that it is a further factor in the
pathogenesis of OA. However, further studies are required to elucidate the role
played by HBD-2 in osteoarthritic cartilage.

Copyright (c) 2006 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

DOI: 10.1002/path.1974 
PMID: 16622898  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

