
1. J Immunol. 2006 Jun 1;176(11):7104-11.

Identical TCR beta-chain rearrangements in streptococcal angina and skin lesions 
of patients with psoriasis vulgaris.

Diluvio L(1), Vollmer S, Besgen P, Ellwart JW, Chimenti S, Prinz JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich, Munich,
Germany.

Tonsillar infection with Streptococcus pyogenes may induce several nonsuppurative
autoimmune sequelae. The precise pathogenetic mechanisms behind this clinically
well-established association are still unresolved. Using TCR analysis, we sought 
to identify a link between streptococcal tonsillitis and the T cell-mediated
autoimmune response in psoriasis. Three patients with streptococcal-induced
psoriasis underwent tonsillectomy. Using size spectratyping and sequencing of TCR
beta-chain variable region gene (TCRBV) rearrangements, we compared the TCR usage
of psoriatic skin lesions, blood, tonsils, and tonsillar T cells fractionated
according to the expression of the skin address in "cutaneous
lymphocyte-associated Ag" (CLA). TCRBV-size spectratype analysis of the blood
lymphocytes, tonsils, and the CLA-negative tonsillar T cells revealed largely
unselected T cell populations. Instead, TCRBV gene families of the psoriatic
lesions and skin-homing CLA-positive tonsillar T cells displayed highly
restricted spectratypes. Sequencing of TCRBV cDNA identified various clonal TCRBV
rearrangements within the psoriatic lesions that indicated Ag-driven T cell
expansion. Several of these clonotypes were also detected within the tonsils and,
in one of the patients, within the small subset of CLA-positive tonsillar T
cells, suggesting that T cells from the same T cell clones were simultaneously
present within skin and tonsillar tissue. Because after tonsillectomy psoriasis
cleared in all three patients our observations indicate that T cells may connect 
psoriatic inflammation to streptococcal angina. They suggest that the chronic
streptococcal immune stimulus within the tonsils could act as a source for
pathogenic T cells in poststreptococcal disorders, and they may help to explain
why eliminating this source with tonsillectomy may improve streptococcal-induced 
sequelae.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.176.11.7104 
PMID: 16709873  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

