
1. J Immunol. 2006 Jun 15;176(12):7542-56.

Group B Streptococcus induces macrophage apoptosis by calpain activation.

Fettucciari K(1), Fetriconi I, Mannucci R, Nicoletti I, Bartoli A, Coaccioli S,
Marconi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, General Pathology and
Immunology Section, S. Maria Hospital, Didactic and Scientific Division of Terni,
Perugia University, Italy.

Group B Streptococcus (GBS) has developed several strategies to evade immune
defenses. We show that GBS induces macrophage (Mphi) membrane permeability
defects and apoptosis, prevented by inhibition of calcium influx but not
caspases. We analyze the molecular mechanisms of GBS-induced murine Mphi
apoptosis. GBS causes a massive intracellular calcium increase, strictly
correlated to membrane permeability defects and apoptosis onset. Calcium increase
was associated with activation of calcium-dependent protease calpain,
demonstrated by casein zymography, alpha-spectrin cleavage to a calpain-specific 
fragment, fluorogenic calpain-substrate cleavage, and inhibition of these
proteolyses by calpain inhibitors targeting the calcium-binding,
3-(4-Iodophenyl)-2-mercapto-(Z)-2-propenoic acid, or active site (four different 
inhibitors), by calpain small-interfering-RNA (siRNA) and EGTA. GBS-induced Mphi 
apoptosis was inhibited by all micro- and m-calpain inhibitors used and m-calpain
siRNA, but not 3-(5-Fluoro-3-indolyl)-2-mercapto-(Z)-2-propenoic acid
(micro-calpain inhibitor) and micro-calpain siRNA indicating that m-calpain plays
a central role in apoptosis. Calpain activation is followed by Bax and Bid
cleavage, cytochrome c, apoptosis-inducing factor, and endonuclease G release
from mitochondria. In GBS-induced apoptosis, cytochrome c did not induce
caspase-3 and -7 activation because they and APAF-1 were degraded by calpains.
Therefore, apoptosis-inducing factor and endonuclease G seem the main mediators
of the calpain-dependent but caspase-independent pathway of GBS-induced
apoptosis. Proapoptotic mediator degradations do not occur with nonhemolytic GBS,
not inducing Mphi apoptosis. Apoptosis was reduced by Bax siRNA and Bid siRNA
suggesting Bax and Bid degradation is apoptosis correlated. This signaling
pathway, different from that of most pathogens, could represent a GBS strategy to
evade immune defenses.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.176.12.7542 
PMID: 16751401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

