
1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Aug 11;281(32):22992-3002. Epub 2006 Jun 5.

Physiological regulation of ATP release at the apical surface of human airway
epithelia.

Okada SF(1), Nicholas RA, Kreda SM, Lazarowski ER, Boucher RC.

Author information: 
(1)Cystic Fibrosis/Pulmonary Research and Treatment Center, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. seiko_okada@med.unc.edu

Extracellular ATP and its metabolite adenosine regulate mucociliary clearance in 
airway epithelia. Little has been known, however, regarding the actual ATP and
adenosine concentrations in the thin ( approximately 7 microm) liquid layer
lining native airway surfaces and the link between ATP release/metabolism and
autocrine/paracrine regulation of epithelial function. In this study, chimeric
Staphylococcus aureus protein A-luciferase (SPA-luc) was bound to endogenous
antigens on primary human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cell surface and ATP
concentrations assessed in real-time in the thin airway surface liquid (ASL). ATP
concentrations on resting cells were 1-10 nm. Inhibition of ecto-nucleotidases
resulted in ATP accumulation at a rate of approximately 250 fmol/min/cm2,
reflecting the basal ATP release rate. Following hypotonic challenge to promote
cell swelling, cell-surface ATP concentration measured by SPA-luc transiently
reached approximately 1 microm independent of ASL volume, reflecting a transient 
3-log increase in ATP release rates. In contrast, peak ATP concentrations
measured in bulk ASL by soluble luciferase inversely correlated with volume. ATP 
release rates were intracellular calcium-independent, suggesting that
non-exocytotic ATP release from ciliated cells, which dominate our cultures,
mediated hypotonicity-induced nucleotide release. However, the cystic fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) did not participate in this function. 
Following the acute swelling phase, HBE cells exhibited regulatory volume
decrease which was impaired by apyrase and facilitated by ATP or UTP. Our data
provide the first evidence that ATP concentrations at the airway epithelial
surface reach the range for P2Y2 receptor activation by physiological stimuli and
identify a role for mucosal ATP release in airway epithelial cell volume
regulation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M603019200 
PMCID: PMC2924190
PMID: 16754672  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

