
1. J Mol Biol. 2006 Jun 30;360(1):145-56. Epub 2006 May 15.

Self-association of the transmembrane domain of an anthrax toxin receptor.

Go MY(1), Kim S, Partridge AW, Melnyk RA, Rath A, Deber CM, Mogridge J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, 1
King's College Circle, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5S 1A8.

Protective antigen (PA), lethal factor (LF) and edema factor (EF) are secreted
individually by Bacillus anthracis. These components of anthrax toxin must then
assemble into complexes to intoxicate mammalian cells. Toxin assembly initiates
when molecules of PA bind mammalian receptors ANTXR1/2 and are cleaved by surface
proteases into 20 kDa and 63 kDa fragments. After PA20 dissociates,
receptor-bound PA63 homo-oligomerizes into heptamers. Oligomeric PA63 binds EF
and LF and these complexes are internalized into an acidic compartment where the 
two enzymatic components are translocated across the membrane by a channel formed
by heptameric PA63. Since oligomerization of PA63 is required to bind and
translocate the enzymatic components, we sought to determine whether interactions
between toxin receptors could facilitate the assembly process. In the present
work, we performed a co-immunoprecipitation experiment to demonstrate that ANTXR1
is oligomeric in mammalian cells. Computer modeling predicted the
self-association of the ANTXR1 transmembrane domain and we detected
oligomerization of ANTXR1 transmembrane domain peptides in the membrane-mimetic
environment of SDS micelles using fluorescence resonance energy transfer.
Furthermore, the ANTXR1 transmembrane domain mediated oligomerization of a
reporter protein construct in a bacterial membrane. In both assays, mutations
that disrupted the interaction were consistent with the interaction being
mediated through an asymmetric binding interface. Mutations that impaired
self-association of the transmembrane domain reduced the rate of PA63 heptamer
formation on the mammalian cell surface. Our findings indicate that ANTXR1
transmembrane domains self-associate and that these interactions may stabilize
intermediate oligomerization states of ANTXR1-PA63 complexes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.04.072 
PMID: 16756998  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

