
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2006 Jun;44(6):2160-6.

Genetically diverse group A streptococci from children in far-western Nepal share
high genetic relatedness with isolates from other countries.

Sakota V(1), Fry AM, Lietman TM, Facklam RR, Li Z, Beall B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bacterial and Myotic Diseases, Respiratory Diseases Branch,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA 30333, USA.

The genetic diversity of group A streptococci (GAS) throughout much of the world 
has not been adequately explored. To assess genetic variation among GAS in
western Nepal, 120 noninvasive GAS, collected from eight different villages, were
genetically characterized using emm typing, sof sequencing, and multilocus
sequence typing (MLST). A high level of genetic diversity was observed among
these isolates, with 51 genotypes based upon 51 multilocus sequence types (STs), 
45 emm sequence types, and 28 sof sequence types. On the basis of shared ST-emm
and sof-emm associations, 40 of the 51 genotypes were identical or highly related
to genotypes characterized from locations outside of Nepal, even though most of
the emm sequence and clonal types are rare among GAS within the United States.
When analyzing all known STs highly related to Nepal STs, only one example of
similar STs shared between a sof PCR-positive strain and a sof PCR-negative
strain was observed. Since previous data indicate free exchange of MLST loci
between sof-positive and sof-negative strains, there is possibly selection
against the expansion of subclones resulting from horizontal transfers of sof or 
emm genes between sof-positive and sof-negative strains. All 45 emm types
encountered in Nepal have also been documented from other countries. These data, 
together with data encompassing the past decade of emm type surveillance, support
the possibility that most existing GAS emm types have been discovered. Similarly,
since most (40/51) strain types were highly related to strains found elsewhere,
it is likely that a major fraction of the existing GAS clonal complexes have been
discovered.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.02456-05 
PMCID: PMC1489425
PMID: 16757615  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

