
1. Infect Immun. 2006 Jul;74(7):3967-78.

Circulating gamma delta T cells in response to Salmonella enterica serovar
enteritidis exposure in chickens.

Berndt A(1), Pieper J, Methner U.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institute, Institute of Molecular Pathogenesis, Naumburger 
Str. 96a, D-07743 Jena, Germany. angela.berndt@fli.bund.de

gammadelta T cells are considered crucial to the outcome of various infectious
diseases. The present study was undertaken to characterize gammadelta (T-cell
receptor 1(+) [TCR1(+)]) T cells phenotypically and functionally in avian immune 
response. Day-old chicks were orally immunized with Salmonella enterica serovar
Enteritidis live vaccine or S. enterica serovar Enteritidis wild-type strain and 
infected using the S. enterica serovar Enteritidis wild-type strain on day 44 of 
life. Between days 3 and 71, peripheral blood was examined flow cytometrically
for the occurrence of gammadelta T-cell subpopulations differentiated by the
expression of T-cell antigens. Three different TCR1(+) cell populations were
found to display considerable variation regarding CD8alpha antigen expression:
(i) CD8alpha(+high) TCR1(+) cells, (ii) CD8alpha(+dim) TCR1(+) cells, and (iii)
CD8alpha(-) TCR1(+) cells. While most of the CD8alpha(+high) TCR1(+) cells
expressed the CD8alphabeta heterodimeric antigen, the majority of the
CD8alpha(+dim) TCR1(+) cells were found to express the CD8alphaalpha homodimeric 
form. After immunization, a significant increase of CD8alphaalpha(+high)
gammadelta T cells was observed within the CD8alpha(+high) TCR1(+) cell
population. Quantitative reverse transcription-PCR revealed reduced interleukin-7
receptor alpha (IL-7Ralpha) and Bcl-x expression and elevated IL-2Ralpha mRNA
expression of the CD8alphaalpha(+high) gammadelta T cells. Immunohistochemical
analysis demonstrated a significant increase of CD8alpha(+) and TCR1(+) cells in 
the cecum and spleen and a decreased percentage of CD8beta(+) T cells in the
spleen after Salmonella immunization. After infection of immunized animals,
immune reactions were restricted to intestinal tissue. The study showed that
Salmonella immunization of very young chicks is accompanied by an increase of
CD8alphaalpha(+high) gammadelta T cells in peripheral blood, which are probably
activated, and thus represent an important factor for the development of a
protective immune response to Salmonella organisms in chickens.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01128-05 
PMCID: PMC1489728
PMID: 16790770  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

