
1. Cytotherapy. 2006;8(3):265-76.

Analysis and cryopreservation of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells from
umbilical cord blood.

Meyer TP(1), Hofmann B, Zaisserer J, Jacobs VR, Fuchs B, Rapp S, Weinauer F,
Burkhart J.

Author information: 
(1)Blood Donor Service, Bavarian Red Cross, Herzon-Heinrich-Strasse 4, 80336
Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Umbilical cord blood (UCB) is an important source of hematopoietic
stem and progenitor cells (HSC/HPC) for the reconstitution of the hematopoietic
system after clinical transplantation. Cryopreservation of these cells is
critical for UCB banking and transplantation as well as for research applications
by providing readily available specimens. The objective of this study was to
optimize cryopreservation conditions for CD34+ HSC/HPC from UCB.
METHODS: Cryopreservation of CD34+ HSC/HPC from UCB after mononuclear cell (MNC) 
preparation was tested in a research-scale setup. Experimental variations were
concentration of the cryoprotectant, the protein additive and cell concentration.
In addition, protocols involving slow, serial addition and removal of DMSO were
compared with standard protocols (fast addition and removal of DMSO) in order to 
avoid osmotic stress for the cryopreserved cells. Viability and recoveries of
MNC, CD34+ cells and total colony-forming units (CFU) were calculated as
read-outs. In addition, sterility testing of the collected UCB units before
further processing was performed.
RESULTS: The optimal conditions for cryopreservation of CD34+ HPC in MNC
preparations were 10% DMSO and 2% human albumin at high cell concentrations (5 x 
10(7) MNC/mL) with fast addition and removal of DMSO. After cryopreservation
using a computer-controlled freezer, high viabilities (89%) and recoveries for
CD34+ cells (89%) as well as for CFU (88%) were observed. Microbial contamination
of the collected UCB samples was reduced to a rate of 6.4%.
DISCUSSION: Optimized cryopreservation conditions were developed for UCB MNC in
respect of the composition of the cryosolution. In addition, our results showed
that fast addition of DMSO is essential for improved cryopreservation and
post-thaw quality assessment results, whereas the speed of DMSO removal after
thawing has little influence on the recoveries of CD34+ cells and CFU.

DOI: 10.1080/14653240600735685 
PMID: 16793735  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

