
1. J Periodontal Res. 2006 Aug;41(4):334-9.

Expression of beta-defensin-2 in human gingival epithelial cells in response to
challenge with Porphyromonas gingivalis in vitro.

Taguchi Y(1), Imai H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Dentistry (Periodontology), Osaka Dental University, Osaka,
Japan. taguchi@stu.osaka-dent.ac.jp

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Human beta-defensin-2 (hBD-2) is an antimicrobial
peptide that is produced by epithelial cells after stimulation with
microorganisms and inflammatory mediators. Compared with gram-positive bacteria, 
gram-negative bacteria, which are typically detected in the periodontal pockets
in periodontitis, elicit a stronger antibacterial peptide response of hBD-2 by
epithelial cells. The purpose of this study was to investigate the expression of 
hBD-2 and relationships between it and inflammatory mediators in human gingival
epithelial cells (HGEC) in response to challenge with Porphyromonas gingivalis in
vitro.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: mRNA expression of hBD-2 in HGEC stimulated with or without
P. gingivalis was assessed using a semiquantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Primary cultured HGEC were activated by 
live P. gingivalis, and inflammatory cytokine production was examined using an
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: The level of hBD-2 mRNA in HGEC treated with P. gingivalis increased
with exposure time. After 48 h, the mRNA in P. gingivalis was significantly
increased compared with that in control HGEC. The interleukin-8 production rate
was much greater in stimulated HGEC than in the control HGEC, almost always
showing a significant difference after 3 h. The production of interleukin-1beta
was not increased as much as that of interleukin-8.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that the expression of hBD-2 in HGEC is P.
gingivalis-dependently induced and is likely to be connected with the initial
stage of the inflammatory response.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0765.2006.00879.x 
PMID: 16827729  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

