
1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2006 Jul 13;7:342.

EMD: an ensemble algorithm for discovering regulatory motifs in DNA sequences.

Hu J(1), Yang YD, Kihara D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907,
USA. hu5@purdue.edu

BACKGROUND: Understanding gene regulatory networks has become one of the central 
research problems in bioinformatics. More than thirty algorithms have been
proposed to identify DNA regulatory sites during the past thirty years. However, 
the prediction accuracy of these algorithms is still quite low. Ensemble
algorithms have emerged as an effective strategy in bioinformatics for improving 
the prediction accuracy by exploiting the synergetic prediction capability of
multiple algorithms.
RESULTS: We proposed a novel clustering-based ensemble algorithm named EMD for de
novo motif discovery by combining multiple predictions from multiple runs of one 
or more base component algorithms. The ensemble approach is applied to the motif 
discovery problem for the first time. The algorithm is tested on a benchmark
dataset generated from E. coli RegulonDB. The EMD algorithm has achieved 22.4%
improvement in terms of the nucleotide level prediction accuracy over the best
stand-alone component algorithm. The advantage of the EMD algorithm is more
significant for shorter input sequences, but most importantly, it always
outperforms or at least stays at the same performance level of the stand-alone
component algorithms even for longer sequences.
CONCLUSION: We proposed an ensemble approach for the motif discovery problem by
taking advantage of the availability of a large number of motif discovery
programs. We have shown that the ensemble approach is an effective strategy for
improving both sensitivity and specificity, thus the accuracy of the prediction. 
The advantage of the EMD algorithm is its flexibility in the sense that a new
powerful algorithm can be easily added to the system.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-7-342 
PMCID: PMC1539026
PMID: 16839417  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

