
1. Glycobiology. 2006 Dec;16(12):1194-206. Epub 2006 Aug 9.

Molecular cloning and characterization of a novel human
beta1,3-glucosyltransferase, which is localized at the endoplasmic reticulum and 
glucosylates O-linked fucosylglycan on thrombospondin type 1 repeat domain.

Sato T(1), Sato M, Kiyohara K, Sogabe M, Shikanai T, Kikuchi N, Togayachi A,
Ishida H, Ito H, Kameyama A, Gotoh M, Narimatsu H.

Author information: 
(1)Glycogene Function Team of Research Center for Glycoscience (RCG), National
Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Tukuba, Ibaraki, 
Japan.

Protein O-linked fucosylation is an unusual glycosylation associated with many
important biological functions such as Notch signaling. Two fucosylation pathways
synthesizing O-fucosylglycans have been reported on cystein-knotted proteins,
that is, on epidermal growth factor-like (EGF-like) domains and on thrombospondin
Type 1 repeat (TSR) domains. We report here the molecular cloning and
characterization of a novel beta1,3-glucosyltransferase (beta3Glc-T) that
synthesizes a Glcbeta1,3Fucalpha- structure on the TSR domain. We found a novel
glycosyltransferase gene with beta1,3-glycosyltransferase (beta3GT) motifs in
databases. The recombinant enzyme expressed in human embryonic kidney 293T
(HEK293T) cells exhibited glucosyltransferase activity toward
fucose-alpha-para-nitrophenyl (Fucalpha-pNp). Thin-layer chromatography (TLC)
analysis revealed that the product of the recombinant enzyme migrated to the same
position as did the product of endogenous beta3Glc-T of Chinese hamster ovary
(CHO) cells. The two products could be digested by beta-glucosidase from almond
and by exo-1,3-beta-glucanase from Trichoderma sp. These results strongly
suggested that the product has the structure of Glcbeta1-3Fuc. Therefore, we
named this novel enzyme beta3Glc-T. Immunostaining revealed that FLAG-tagged
beta3Glc-T is an enzyme residing in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) via retention 
signal, "REEL," which is a KDEL-like sequence, at the C-terminus. The TSR domain 
expressed in Escherichia coli was first fucosylated by the recombinant protein
O-fucosyltransferase 2 (POFUT2), after which it became an acceptor substrate for 
the recombinant beta3Glc-T, which could apparently transfer Glc to the
fucosylated TSR domain. Our results suggest that a novel glycosyltransferase,
beta3Glc-T, contributes to the elongation of O-fucosylglycan and that this occurs
specifically on TSR domains.

DOI: 10.1093/glycob/cwl035 
PMID: 16899492  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

