
1. J Invest Dermatol. 1990 Jun;94(6):786-92.

Lymphocyte migration into the skin: the role of lymphocyte homing receptor (CD44)
and endothelial cell antigen (HECA-452).

Jalkanen S(1), Saari S, Kalimo H, Lammintausta K, Vainio E, Leino R, Duijvestijn 
AM, Kalimo K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Turku University, Finland.

Lymphocyte migration into the lymphoid organs and sites of inflammation is
controlled by lymphocyte-endothelial cell interaction at sites where lymphocytes 
exit from the blood. Expression of Hermes-defined CD44 class of lymphocyte homing
receptor and HECA-452 antigen specific for high-endothelium-mediating physiologic
lymphocyte extravasation was studied in dermatitis herpetiformis, celiac disease,
psoriasis, mycosis fungoides, lymphocytosis cutis, atopic dermatitis, and
allergic contact dermatitis. Also, duodenal biopsies of patients suffering from
dermatitis herpetiformis or celiac disease were studied for existence of these
antigens. Infiltrating lymphocytes in the skin and in the duodenal area expressed
homing receptor molecules when studied with monoclonal antibodies, Hermes-1 and
Hermes-3, that recognize the CD44 class of molecules involved in lymphocyte
binding to high endothelial venules in peripheral lymph nodes, mucosa-associated 
lymphatic tissues, and inflamed synovium. However, the HECA-452 antigen was not
detected on the venules, neither in the skin nor in the duodenum. Even the
venules possessing high endothelium morphologically were HECA-452 negative. These
findings suggest the CD44 class of lymphocyte homing receptor(s) is also involved
in lymphocyte homing to inflamed skin and the duodenal area of the gut. However, 
on the basis of HECA-452 staining, high endothelial venules in inflamed skin and 
duodenum are not antigenically identical with high endothelial venules in
organized lymphoid tissues. This finding indirectly supports the idea that
molecules and/or mechanisms mediating lymphocyte extravasation might be distinct 
in these organs.

DOI: 10.1111/1523-1747.ep12874646 
PMID: 1693939  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

