
1. J Immunol. 2006 Sep 15;177(6):3920-9.

Structural basis of inducible costimulator ligand costimulatory function:
determination of the cell surface oligomeric state and functional mapping of the 
receptor binding site of the protein.

Chattopadhyay K(1), Bhatia S, Fiser A, Almo SC, Nathenson SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Inducible costimulator (ICOS) ligand (ICOSL), a B7-related transmembrane
glycoprotein with extracellular IgV and IgC domains, binds to ICOS on activated T
cells and delivers a positive costimulatory signal for optimal T cell function.
Toward determining the structural features of ICOSL crucial for its costimulatory
function, the present study shows that ICOSL displays a marked oligomerization
potential, resembling more like B7-1 than B7-2. Use of ICOSL constructs lacking
either the IgC or IgV domain demonstrates that receptor binding is mediated
solely by the IgV domain but requires the IgC domain for maintaining the
structural integrity of the protein. To map further the receptor recognition
surface on ICOSL, a homology-based protein structure model of the ICOS:ICOSL
complex was constructed. Based on predictions from the model, a series of
mutations were generated targeting the potential receptor binding surface on
ICOSL, and the mutants were tested for their biological function in terms of ICOS
binding and T cell costimulation ability. The results provide experimental
validation of the model and show that the receptor binding site on ICOSL is
constituted chiefly by aromatic/hydrophobic residues. Critical ICOSL residues
essential for ICOS binding map to the GFCC'C'' beta-sheet face of the IgV domain 
and approximately overlap with the B7-1/B7-2 motif(s) that recognize CD28/CTLA-4.
Altogether, similar structural features of ICOSL and B7 isoforms suggest a close 
evolutionary relationship between these costimulatory ligands, yet differences at
the same time explain their unique specificity for the cognate binding partners, 
ICOS and CD28/CTLA-4, respectively.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.177.6.3920 
PMID: 16951355  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

