
1. BMC Microbiol. 2006 Sep 18;6:78.

M. leprae inhibits apoptosis in THP-1 cells by downregulation of Bad and Bak and 
upregulation of Mcl-1 gene expression.

Hasan Z(1), Ashraf M, Tayyebi A, Hussain R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, The Aga Khan University, Karachi,
Pakistan. zahra.hasan@aku.edu

BACKGROUND: Virulent Mycobacterium leprae interfere with host defense mechanisms 
such as cytokine activation and apoptosis. The mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis
is regulated by the Bcl-2 family of proteins. Expression of Fas ligand and
apoptotic proteins is found in leprosy lesions and M. leprae has been shown to
activate pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 genes, Bak and Bax. However, the mechanism by which 
M. leprae modulates apoptosis is as yet unclear. We investigated expression of
apoptotic genes in THP-1 monocytes in response to infection by M. leprae and
non-pathogenic M. bovis BCG.
RESULTS: M. leprae did not induce apoptosis in THP-1 cells, while BCG induced a
significant loss of cell viability by 18 h post-infection at both (multiplicity
of infection) MOI-10 and 20, with an increase by 48 h. BCG-induced cell death was
accompanied by characteristic apoptotic DNA laddering in cells. Non-viable BCG
had a limited effect on host cell death suggesting that BCG-induced apoptosis was
a function of mycobacterial viability. M. leprae also activated lower levels of
TNF-alpha secretion and TNF-alpha mRNA expression than BCG. Mycobacterium-induced
activation of apoptotic gene expression was determined over a time course of
infection. M. leprae reduced Bad and Bak mRNA expression by 18 h
post-stimulation, with a further decrease at 48 h. Outcome of cell viability is
determined by the ratio between pro- and anti-apoptotic proteins present in the
cell. M. leprae infection resulted in downregulation of gene expression ratios,
Bad/Bcl-2 mRNA by 39% and Bak/Bcl-2 mRNA by 23%. In contrast, live BCG increased 
Bad/Bcl-2 mRNA (29 %) but had a negligible effect on Bak/Bcl-2 mRNA. Heat killed 
BCG induced only a negligible (1-4 %) change in mRNA expression of either
Bak/Bcl-2 or Bad/Bcl-2. Additionally, M. leprae upregulated the expression of
anti-apoptotic gene Mcl-1 while, BCG downregulated Mcl-1 mRNA.
CONCLUSION: This study proposes an association between mycobacterium-induced
apoptosis in THP-1 cells and the regulation of Bcl-2 family of proteins. M.
leprae restricts apoptosis in THP-1 cells by downregulation of Bad and Bak and
upregulation of Mcl-1 mRNA expression.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-6-78 
PMCID: PMC1592106
PMID: 16978419  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

