
1. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol. 2006;20(4):709-19.

Can gastric cancer be prevented by Helicobacter pylori eradication?

Malfertheiner P(1), Fry LC, Mönkemüller K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious Diseases,
Otto-von-Guericke University, Universitätsklinikum Magdeburg, Leipziger Strasse
44, Magdeburg, Germany. peter.malfetheiner@medizin.uni-magdeburg.de

Helicobacter pylori infection always causes chronic gastritis and triggers
several gastroduodenal pathologies ranging from peptic ulcer disease to gastric
cancer. It is well established that H. pylori eradication decreases the incidence
of gastroduodenal ulcer and its recurrence. However, despite being accepted as
the critical risk factor for gastric cancer, there is no conclusive evidence that
H. pylori eradication decreases the incidence of gastric cancer. Bacterial
virulence characteristics, as well as genetic predisposition of the host in
conjunction with certain environmental conditions, are the major factors which
influence the development of gastric cancer. Preclinical and clinical data
suggest that reversibility of precancerous lesions (atrophic gastritis and
intestinal metaplasia) is possible in some patients after H. pylori eradication. 
Since neoplastic lesions do not progress - or even regress in some cases - after 
H. pylori eradication, eradication therapy should be considered even in patients 
with precancerous lesions. Nonetheless, progression of atrophic gastritis and
intestinal metaplasia into cancer has been also demonstrated in patients after H.
pylori eradication, suggesting that there might be a point of no return where
genetic changes have already happened and are irreversible despite elimination of
the triggering carcinogen (H. pylori). At the present time the clinical decision 
to treat a patient is based on established risk profiles. A general
screen-and-treat policy, although desirable, currently awaits a less complex
treatment regimen.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpg.2006.04.005 
PMID: 16997155  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

