
1. Arthritis Rheum. 2006 Oct;54(10):3126-34.

In vitro and in vivo efficacy of a recombinant immunotoxin against folate
receptor beta on the activation and proliferation of rheumatoid arthritis
synovial cells.

Nagai T(1), Tanaka M, Tsuneyoshi Y, Matsushita K, Sunahara N, Matsuda T, Yoshida 
H, Komiya S, Onda M, Matsuyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima University,
Kagoshima, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of the recombinant immunotoxin dsFv
anti-FRbeta-PE38, which consists of the disulfide-stabilized Fv fragment (dsFv)
of the anti-folate receptor beta (anti-FRbeta) antibody and the 38-kd portion of 
Pseudomonas exotoxin A (PE38), on the activation and proliferation of cells that 
function in inflammatory and degradative processes in rheumatoid arthritis (RA)
synovial tissue.
METHODS: The Ig VH-PE38 fusion protein and the Ig VL protein were produced in
Escherichia coli, and then joined with a disulfide bond by engineering cysteine
residues in the framework regions of these proteins. The effects of dsFv
anti-FRbeta-PE38 on the activation and proliferation of cells in RA synovial
tissue were investigated by immunohistochemistry; the numbers of cells expressing
CD68, vascular cell adhesion molecule 1, angiopoietin 1, CD34, proliferating cell
nuclear antigen, and interleukin-6 and the numbers of apoptotic cells were
counted in RA synovial tissue engrafted into SCID mice treated or not treated
with dsFv anti-FRbeta-PE38. The effects of dsFv anti-FRbeta-PE38 on the
generation of osteoclasts from RA adherent synovial mononuclear cells in vitro
was investigated by counting the number of resorption pits on dentin slices
treated or not treated with dsFv anti-FRbeta-PE38.
RESULTS: Administration of dsFv anti-FRbeta-PE38 reduced the numbers of
macrophages, activated fibroblast-like cells, endothelial cells, and
proliferating cells and increased the numbers of apoptotic cells in RA synovial
tissue engrafted into SCID mice. In vitro, the generation of osteoclasts from RA 
adherent synovial mononuclear cells was largely suppressed by treatment with dsFv
anti-FRbeta-PE38.
CONCLUSION: Our findings show that dsFv anti-FRbeta-PE38 immunotoxin would be a
promising tool for the treatment of RA synovitis, especially when administered
intraarticularly.

DOI: 10.1002/art.22082 
PMID: 17009233  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

