
1. J Mol Biol. 2006 Nov 17;364(1):1-8. Epub 2006 Sep 8.

Conserved small non-coding RNAs that belong to the sigmaE regulon: role in
down-regulation of outer membrane proteins.

Johansen J(1), Rasmussen AA, Overgaard M, Valentin-Hansen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern
Denmark, Campusvej 55, DK-5230, Odense M, Denmark.

Enteric bacteria respond to misfolded proteins by activating the transcription of
"heat shock" genes. These genes are arranged in two major regulons controlled by 
the alternative sigma factors sigmaH and sigmaE. The two transcription factors
coordinate the stress response in different cellular compartments; the sigmaH
regulon is induced by stress in the cytoplasm whereas the sigmaE regulon is
activated by stress signals in the cell envelope. In Escherichia coli sigmaE
plays a central role in maintaining cell envelope integrity both under stress
conditions and during normal growth. Previous work established that sigmaE is
essential for viability of the bacterium and up-regulates expression of
approximately 100 protein-encoding genes that influences nearly every aspect of
the cell envelope. Moreover, the expression of several outer membrane proteins is
down-regulated upon sigmaE activation. Here, we show that two Hfq-binding small
RNAs, MicA and RybB, are under positive control of sigmaE. Transient induction of
RybB resulted in decreased levels of the mRNAs encoding OmpC and OmpW. sigmaE
-mediated regulation of ompC and ompW expression was abolished in strains lacking
RybB or Hfq. Recently MicA was shown to act in destabilizing the ompA transcript 
when rapidly grown cells entered the stationary phase of growth. Also, the
alternative sigma factor down-regulates this message in a small non-coding
RNA-dependent fashion. These findings add the sigmaE regulon to the growing list 
of stress induced regulatory circuits that include small regulatory RNAs and
provide insight in a homeostatic loop that prevent a build-up of unassembled
outer membrane proteins in the envelope.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.09.004 
PMID: 17007876  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

