
1. J Cell Physiol. 2007 Jan;210(1):237-45.

Desensitization of GABA(B) receptor signaling by formation of protein complexes
of GABA(B2) subunit with GRK4 or GRK5.

Kanaide M(1), Uezono Y, Matsumoto M, Hojo M, Ando Y, Sudo Y, Sumikawa K, Taniyama
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical 
Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan.

We investigated the role of G protein coupled-receptor kinases (GRKs) in the
desensitization of GABA(B) receptor-mediated signaling using Xenopus oocytes and 
baby hamster kidney (BHK) cells. Baclofen elicited inward K(+) currents in
oocytes coexpressing heterodimeric GABA(B) receptor, GABA(B1a) subunit (GB(1a)R) 
and GABA(B2) subunit (GB(2)R), together with G protein-activated inwardly
rectifying K(+) channels (GIRKs), in a concentration-dependent manner. Repetitive
application of baclofen to oocytes coexpressing GABA(B)R and GIRKs did not change
peak K(+) currents in the first and second responses, but the latter responses
were significantly attenuated by coexpression of either GRK4 or GRK5 with
attenuation efficacy of GRK4 > GRK5. Coexpression of other GRKs including GRK2,
GRK3, and GRK6 had no effect on GABA(B) receptor-mediated desensitization
processes. In BHK cells coexpressing GRK4 fused to Venus (brighter variant of
yellow fluorescent protein, GRK4-Venus) with GB(1a)R and GB(2)R, GRK4-Venus was
expressed in the cytosol but was translocated to the plasma membranes by GABA(B)R
activation. In BHK cells coexpressing GRK4 fused to Cerulean (brighter variant of
cyan fluorescent protein, GRK4-Cerulean) with GB(1a)R and GB(2)R-Venus,
fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) analysis demonstrated that
GRK4-Cerulean formed a protein complex with GB(2)R-Venus. Immunoprecipitation and
Western blot analysis confirmed GB(2)R-GRK4 complex formation. GRK5 also formed a
complex with GB(2)R on the plasma membranes as determined by FRET and Western
blotting but not GRK2, GRK3, and GRK6. Our results indicate that GRK4 and GRK5
desensitize GABA(B) receptor-mediated responses by forming protein complexes with
GB(2)R subunit of GABA(B)R at the plasma membranes.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.20863 
PMID: 17013811  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

