
1. Kidney Int. 2006 Dec;70(11):1942-7. Epub 2006 Oct 11.

The urokinase plasminogen activator receptor is crucially involved in host
defense during acute pyelonephritis.

Roelofs JJ(1), Rouschop KM, Teske GJ, Claessen N, Weening JJ, van der Poll T,
Florquin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. j.j.roelofs@amc.uva.nl

The urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) is expressed at the cell
surface of inflammatory cells and plays an important role in neutrophil
migration. To investigate the in vivo role of uPAR during urinary tract
infection, acute pyelonephritis was induced in uPAR-/- and wild-type (WT) mice by
intravesical inoculation with 1 x 10(9) colony-forming units (CFU) of
uropathogenic Escherichia coli. Mice were killed after 24 and 48 h, after which
bacterial outgrowth and cytokine levels in kidney homogenates were determined.
Influx of neutrophils was quantified by myeloperoxidase-enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay. uPAR-/- kidneys had significantly higher numbers of E. coli 
CFU, accompanied by higher levels of interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta), IL-6,
keratinocyte-derived chemokine (KC), macrophage inflammatory protein-2 (MIP-2),
and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha). However, the number of infiltrating 
neutrophils was similar in uPAR-/- and WT mice at both time points, suggesting
that uPAR-/- neutrophils have a lower ability to eliminate E. coli. To further
investigate this, neutrophil oxidative burst and phagocytosis was measured. The
generation of reactive oxygen species upon stimulation with E. coli was not
diminished in uPAR-/- neutrophils compared with WT. Interestingly, uPAR-/-
neutrophils displayed significantly impaired phagocytosis of E. coli organisms
compared with WT neutrophils. We conclude that uPAR is crucially involved in host
defense through phagocytosis during E. coli induced acute pyelonephritis.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.ki.5001947 
PMID: 17035942  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

