
1. Mol Immunol. 2007 Mar;44(8):2023-35. Epub 2006 Nov 1.

Comparison of gene expression by co-cultured WC1+ gammadelta and CD4+ alphabeta T
cells exhibiting a recall response to bacterial antigen.

Blumerman SL(1), Herzig CT, Wang F, Coussens PM, Baldwin CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst, MA 01003, USA.

Immunization of cattle with a Leptospira borgpetersenii serovar hardjo-bovis
vaccine results in the development of a recall response by WC1(+) gammadelta T
cells and CD4(+) alphabeta T cells characterized by proliferation and
interferon-gamma production. It was hypothesized that these two T cell
subpopulations had largely redundant effector functions, principally differing in
their requirements for activation. To test this, gene expression in cells
proliferating to antigen were compared utilizing RT-PCR and bovine microarrays.
Both T cell populations had similar transcript profiles for effector molecules,
including IFN-gamma, FasL and granzyme B. In contrast, transcripts for
costimulatory receptors and ligands were notably different following activation, 
as WC1(+) T cells expressed no or lower levels of transcripts for CD28 and CD40L,
while CD4(+) T cells expressed substantial levels of both. However, both cell
types had high levels of CTLA-4 transcript suggesting the cells may be regulated 
similarly following activation but differ in their need for and ability to
provide costimulation. Microarray analyses to extend the number of genes examined
revealed that while both subpopulations upregulated anti-apoptotic genes as well 
as those involved in cell activation and protein biosynthesis, overall there were
limited differences between the two antigen-activated cell populations. Those
genes that did differ were involved in cell signaling, protein production and
intracellular protein trafficking. These results strengthen the hypothesis that
these particular activated WC1(+) and CD4(+) T cells have overlapping effector
functions and therefore may differ principally with regard to how they are
recruited into immune responses.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2006.09.020 
PMID: 17081609  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

