
1. Crit Care Med. 2007 Jan;35(1):57-63.

Salmeterol enhances pulmonary fibrinolysis in healthy volunteers.

Maris NA(1), de Vos AF, Bresser P, van der Zee JS, Jansen HM, Levi M, van der
Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine Center, Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Various lung diseases are associated with local activation of
coagulation and concurrent inhibition of fibrinolysis. Although salmeterol, a
beta2-adrenoceptor agonist with profound bronchodilatory properties, has been
studied extensively, the effects of this compound on the pulmonary hemostatic
balance are not elucidated.
DESIGN: A single-blinded, placebo-controlled study.
SETTING: University hospital and laboratory.
SUBJECTS: A total of 32 human volunteers.
INTERVENTIONS: Subjects inhaled 100 microg of salmeterol or placebo (t = -30
mins) followed by 100 microg of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or normal saline (t = 0 
mins; n = 8 per group).
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Measurements were performed in bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid obtained 6 hrs postchallenge. Inhalation of LPS enhanced pulmonary
coagulation as determined by an increase in the concentrations of
thrombin-antithrombin complexes, factor VIIa, and soluble tissue factor in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (all p < .05 vs. saline). LPS concurrently inhibited
pulmonary fibrinolysis, as reflected by a decrease in bronchoalveolar lavage
fluid plasminogen activator activity together with an increase in plasminogen
activator inhibitor type 1 (both p < .05 vs. saline). Moreover, LPS inhalation
was associated with a suppression of the anticoagulant protein C pathway, as
indicated by an increase in soluble thrombomodulin and decreases in protein C and
activated protein C levels in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (all p < .05 vs.
saline). Salmeterol, either with or without LPS inhalation, enhanced fibrinolysis
(plasminogen activator activity and tissue-type and urokinase-type plasminogen
activator levels) but did not influence LPS-induced changes in coagulation or the
protein C pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: Salmeterol has profibrinolytic properties in the normal lung and
when applied in a model of sterile pulmonary inflammation.

DOI: 10.1097/01.CCM.0000249827.29387.4E 
PMID: 17080003  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

