
1. Stem Cells Dev. 2006 Oct;15(5):687-95.

Syngenic bone marrow cells restore hepatic function in carbon
tetrachloride-induced mouse liver injury.

Jung YJ(1), Ryu KH, Cho SJ, Woo SY, Seoh JY, Chun CH, Yoo K, Moon IH, Han HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Ewha Woman's University College of Medicine, Ewha 
Medical Research Center, Seoul, Korea.

Progenitor cells in bone marrow have been explored for the treatment of liver
injury. Stem cell homing to the injured tissue is regulated through stromal cell 
derived factor-1 (SDF-1) and its receptor CXCR4. We hypothesized that syngenic
bone marrow cells (BMCs) would restore hepatic function in the injured liver
through the regulation by SDF-1/CXCR4 system. After injecting carbon
tetrachloride (CCl(4)), the mice were injected with syngenic BMCs or normal
saline. Morphological and functional analysis of the liver was performed. Flow
cytometry for the stem cell markers and CXCR4 was done with the liver, BM, and
spleen cells from each group. Carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester was
used to trace the homing of transplanted BMCs. The SDF-1 expression of the liver 
was assessed by immunohistochemistry. Hepatosplenomegaly and necrosis of the
CCl(4)-injected mouse liver were improved after BMCs transplantation The hepatic 
enzymes were increased after injury and then decreased after BMCs
transplantation. The expression of stem cell markers and CXCR4 was exclusively
increased in the damaged liver compared to the BM and spleen, and even more
elevated after BMCs transplantation. SDF-1 expression in the liver was observed
after CCl(4) injection and it was elevated after BMCs transplantation. The
intrinsic and extrinsic BMCs migrate specifically to the injured liver rather
than BM or spleen, and the transplanted BMCs contribute to the repair of the
damaged liver. SDF-1/CXCR-4 interaction plays a role in stem cell homing toward
the damaged organ, and transplanted BMCs are involved in the up-regulated SDF-1
expression seen in the injured liver.

DOI: 10.1089/scd.2006.15.687 
PMID: 17105404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

