
1. J Histochem Cytochem. 2007 Mar;55(3):263-74. Epub 2006 Nov 13.

A distinctive set of genes is upregulated during the inflammation-carcinoma
sequence in mouse stomach infected by Helicobacter felis.

Kobayashi M(1), Lee H, Schaffer L, Gilmartin TJ, Head SR, Takaishi S, Wang TC,
Nakayama J, Fukuda M.

Author information: 
(1)Glycobiology Program, Cancer Research Center, Burnham Institute for Medical
Research, 10901 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Helicobacter pylori infects over half the population worldwide and is a leading
cause of chronic gastritis and gastric cancer. However, the mechanism by which
this organism induces inflammation and carcinogenesis is not fully understood. In
the present study we used insulin-gastrin (INS-GAS) transgenic mice that fully
develop gastric adenocarcinoma after infection of H. pylori-related Helicobacter 
felis. Histological examination revealed that more than half of those mice
developed invasive adenocarcinoma after 8 months of infection. These carcinomas
were stained by NCC-ST-439 and HECA-452 that recognize 6-sulfated and
non-sulfated sialyl Lewis X. Lymphocytic infiltration predominantly to submucosa 
was observed in most H. felis-infected mice, and this was associated with the
formation of peripheral lymph node addressin (PNAd) on high endothelial venule
(HEV)-like vessels detected by MECA-79. Time-course analysis of gene expression
by using gene microarray revealed upregulation of several inflammation-associated
genes including chemokines, adhesion molecules, surfactant protein D (SP-D), and 
CD74 in the infected stomach. Immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated that SP-D
is expressed in hyperplasia and adenocarcinoma whereas CD74 is expressed in
adenocarcinoma in situ and invasive carcinoma. These results as a whole indicate 
that H. felis induces HEV-like vessels and inflammation-associated chemokines and
chemokine receptors, followed by adenocarcinoma formation.

DOI: 10.1369/jhc.6A7097.2006 
PMID: 17101721  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

