
1. Clin Chem. 2007 Jan;53(1):104-10. Epub 2006 Nov 16.

High-volume extraction of nucleic acids by magnetic bead technology for
ultrasensitive detection of bacteria in blood components.

Störmer M(1), Kleesiek K, Dreier J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Laboratoriums und Transfusionsmedizin, Herz und Diabeteszentrum
Nordrhein-Westfalen, Universitätsklinik der Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bad
Oeynhausen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Nucleic acid isolation, the most technically demanding and laborious 
procedure performed in molecular diagnostics, harbors the potential for
improvements in automation. A recent development is the use of magnetic beads
covered with nucleic acid-binding matrices. We adapted this technology with a
broad-range 23S rRNA real-time reverse transcription (RT)-PCR assay for fast and 
sensitive detection of bacterial contamination of blood products.
METHODS: We investigated different protocols for an automated high-volume
extraction method based on magnetic-separation technology for the extraction of
bacterial nucleic acids from platelet concentrates (PCs). We added 2 model
bacteria, Staphylococcus epidermidis and Escherichia coli, to a single pool of
apheresis-derived, single-donor platelets and assayed the PCs by real-time RT-PCR
analysis with an improved primer-probe system and locked nucleic acid technology.
Co-amplification of human beta(2)-microglobulin mRNA served as an internal
control (IC). We used probit analysis to calculate the minimum concentration of
bacteria that would be detected with 95% confidence.
RESULTS: For automated magnetic bead-based extraction technology with the
real-time RT-PCR, the 95% detection limit was 29 x 10(3) colony-forming units
(CFU)/L for S. epidermidis and 22 x 10(3) CFU/L for E. coli. No false-positive
results occurred, either due to nucleic acid contamination of reagents or
externally during testing of 1030 PCs.
CONCLUSIONS: High-volume nucleic acid extraction improved the detection limit of 
the assay. The improvement of the primer-probe system and the integration of an
IC make the RT-PCR assay appropriate for bacteria screening of platelets.

DOI: 10.1373/clinchem.2006.070987 
PMID: 17110475  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

