
1. Blood. 1991 Jul 1;78(1):30-7.

Expression of the YB5.B8 antigen (c-kit proto-oncogene product) in normal human
bone marrow.

Ashman LK(1), Cambareri AC, To LB, Levinsky RJ, Juttner CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Adelaide, South
Australia.

The c-kit proto-oncogene product is a member of the family of growth factor
receptors with intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity. In the mouse c-kit maps to the
W locus, which is known to be of central importance in hematopoiesis. Monoclonal 
antibody (MoAb) YB5.B8, which was raised against peripheral blood blast cells
from a patient with acute myeloid leukemia (AML), was recently shown to bind to
the extracellular domain of the c-kit product. This antibody does not bind
detectably to normal peripheral blood cells and identifies a sub-group of AML
patients with poor prognosis. We have used MoAb YB5.B8 to study the expression of
c-kit by normal human bone marrow cells by immunofluorescence and flow cytometry,
and to isolate multipotential and erythroid colony-forming cells. In a series of 
11 normal adult bone marrow specimens, MoAb YB5.B8 bound to 4.0% +/- 1.8% of the 
cells in the low-density fraction. Dual-labeling experiments were performed with 
YB5.B8, and CD33, CD34, and CD10 MoAbs. Three populations of cells binding YB5.B8
could be identified based on their pattern of coexpression of the other markers; 
ie, YB5.B8+/CD34+/CD33-, YB5.B8+/CD34+/CD33+ and YB5.B8+/CD34+/CD33+. These
populations had distinctive two-dimensional light scatter characteristics and are
likely to correspond to precursor colony-forming cells, colony-forming cells, and
maturing mast cells, respectively. No cells binding both YB5.B8 and an MoAb to
the early lymphoid marker CD10 were found, implying that most early lymphoid
cells do not express c-kit. MoAbs to the c-kit protein should prove valuable in
multimarker studies of human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. Definition 
of a reference range of c-kit expression in normal human bone marrow will provide
a sound basis for further studies of this marker in diagnosis and prognosis in
AML.


PMID: 1712644  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

