
1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006 Oct;1081:276-9.

Characterization of lactic acid bacteria and other gut bacteria in pigs by a
macroarraying method.

Thanantong N(1), Edwards S, Sparagano OA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Agriculture, Food and Rural Development, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 7RU, UK.

Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) consist of many genera, Gram-positive, and
nonspore-forming micro-organisms; some members being used as probiotics while
some others have negative effects on pig health. Bacterial species in the
gastrointestinal tract can produce antibacterial substances, reduce serum
cholesterol in their host, or can be responsible for growth reduction, diarrhea, 
and intestinal epithelial damage. It is therefore important for the pig industry 
to evaluate the impact of food and farm management on the presence of "good" or
"bad" bacteria and the risk for consumers. This articles focuses on the molecular
identification of gut microflora species following different diets given to pigs 
in UK and correlating the data on growth, health, and welfare. First of all, pig 
feces were individually collected from sows before and after farrowing and also
from piglets before and after weaning over several months. Bacteria colonies were
grown on MRS agar plates from feces and DNA was extracted (QIAamp DNA stool kit) 
and amplified using 16S rDNA (27f and 519r) primers. DNA sequencing and sequence 
alignment allowed us to identify species-specific zones, which were used as
probes in a macroarray system also known as reverse line blot hybridization. Some
probes were found to be species specific for the following species: Lactobacillus
acidophilus, L. animalis, L. gallinarum, L. kitasanotis, L salivarius,
Streptococcus alactolyticus, S. hyointestinalis, and Sarcina ventriculi. Actual
studies are now focusing on the impact of diets of the microflora in different
gut parts and at different stages of the animal's life.

DOI: 10.1196/annals.1373.037 
PMID: 17135526  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

