
1. J Food Prot. 2006 Nov;69(11):2581-6.

Microflora of minimally processed frozen vegetables sold in Gaborone, Botswana.

Manani TA(1), Collison EK, Mpuchane S.

Author information: 
(1)University of Malawi, Lilongwe, Malawi.

Two hundred samples of minimally processed, frozen, and prepacked potato chips,
peas, corn, and a variety of combined vegetables from supermarkets in Gaborone,
Botswana, were examined microbiologically. Determination of aerobic mesophilic
plate count, aerobic psychrotrophic plate count, lactic acid bacteria, yeasts and
molds, coliforms, Listeria spp., and Staphylococcus aureus were done. Chips had
the lowest mean log values for all of the microorganisms enumerated except yeasts
and molds. The mean log values for single vegetables ranged from 3.6 to 9.1, 3.4 
to 8.9, 2.9 to 5.6, and 2.1 to 6.5 log CFU/ g aerobic mesophilic plate count,
aerobic psychrotrophic plate count, lactic acid bacteria, and yeasts and molds,
respectively. The microbial profiles of peas and corn were almost similar (P <
0.001). The mean values for combined vegetables were clustered within 4.6 and 5.4
and 4.2 and 5.2 log CFU/g aerobic mesophilic plate count and aerobic
psychrotrophic plate count, respectively. All of the vegetables had a coliform
population distribution ranging from 0 to < 10(4) most probable number per g. The
predominant gram-negative bacteria isolated included members of
Enterobacteriaceae and Pseudomonaceae (86.2%). Escherichia coli was not detected 
in all of the samples. The organisms isolated included those responsible for
spoilage in frozen vegetables, namely Pseudomonas, Klebsiella, Corynebacterium,
lactic acid bacteria, and Flavobacterium. The predominant lactic acid bacteria
were Lactobacillus spp. (55.9%). Other spoilage organisms were yeasts, and
Cryptococcus spp. (55.4%) was predominant. Pathogens, namely Listeria
monocytogenes, were also isolated at a rate of 2 to 10%, of which 4% was from
corn, 2% each from peas and country crop, and 10% from stir-fry. Bacillus cereus 
was also isolated and accounted for 7.7% of the microorganisms from corn. S.
aureus was isolated from all of the vegetables. Enterotoxigenic strains were from
corn, peas, mixed vegetables, and stir-fry, and all of them produced enterotoxin 
A. In addition, the isolates from stir-fry vegetables also produced enterotoxins 
B and C. The study reveals the presence of pathogens and emerging opportunistic
pathogens in the ready-to-use or ready-to-eat vegetables. If E. coli is the only 
indicator for safety and acceptability, consumers may be exposed to foodborne
diseases. Inclusion of other groups as indicator organisms is suggested.
Retailers are urged to invest in standby generators to maintain the cold chain.

DOI: 10.4315/0362-028x-69.11.2581 
PMID: 17133799  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

