
1. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2006 Oct-Dec;19(4):775-86.

Effect of Bifidobacterium infantis on Interferon- gamma- induced keratinocyte
apoptosis: a potential therapeutic approach to skin immune abnormalities.

Cinque B(1), Di Marzio L, Della Riccia DN, Bizzini F, Giuliani M, Fanini D, De
Simone C, Cifone MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of L'Aquila, Italy.

Current management of atopic dermatitis is mainly directed to the reduction of
cutaneous inflammation. Since patients with atopic dermatitis show abnormalities 
in immunoregulation, a therapy aimed to adjust their immune function could
represent an alternative approach, particularly in the severe form of the
disease. Indeed, T-lymphocytes constitute a large population of cellular
infiltrate in atopic/allergic inflammation and a dysregulated T-cell induced
keratinocyte apoptosis appears to be an important pathogenetic factor of the
eczematous disease. In recent years, attention has been focused on the
interaction between host and probiotics which may have anti-inflammatory
properties and immunomodulatory activities. The aim of the present work is to
investigate the effect of a selected probiotic extract, the Bifidobacterium
infantis extract, on a human keratinocyte cell line (HaCaT) abnormal apoptosis
induced by activated-T-lymphocyte. An in vitro model of atopic dermatitis was
used to assess the ability of the probiotic extract to protect HaCaT from
apoptosis induced by soluble factors (IFN-gamma and CD95 ligand) released by
human T-lymphocytes in vitro activated with anti-CD3/CD28 mAbs or
Phytohemoagglutinin. Evidence is given that the bacterial extract treatment was
able to totally prevent T lymphocyte-induced HaCaT cell apoptosis in vitro. The
mechanism underlying this inhibitory effect has been suggested to depend on the
ability of the bacterial extract to significantly reduce anti-CD3/CD28 mAbs and
mitogen-induced T-cell proliferation, IFN-gamma generation and CD95 ligand
release. These preliminary results may represent an experimental basis for a
potential therapeutic approach mainly targeting the skin disorders-associated
immune abnormalities.

DOI: 10.1177/039463200601900407 
PMID: 17166399  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

