
1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2007 Jan;13(1):63-9.

Significance of human beta-defensins in the epithelial lining fluid of patients
with chronic lower respiratory tract infections.

Yanagi S(1), Ashitani J, Imai K, Kyoraku Y, Sano A, Matsumoto N, Nakazato M.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Miyazaki University School of Medicine,
Miyazaki, Japan.

Human beta-defensins (hBDs) are the most abundant antimicrobial peptides in
epithelial cells, and function in the host immune system. Respiratory epithelial 
cells express hBDs to inhibit bacterial proliferation during respiratory tract
infections. The aim of this study was to investigate the release of hBDs into the
respiratory tract and their benefit as a host defence system in chronic
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections. The levels of four hBD peptides (hBD-1-hBD-4) 
were measured in the bronchial epithelial lining fluid (ELF) of nine patients
with chronic lower respiratory tract infection caused by P. aeruginosa. Eight
patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and eight volunteers free of
pulmonary disease were recruited as controls. ELF was obtained by bronchoscopic
microsampling and hBD levels were measured by radioimmunoassays. The
antimicrobial effects of hBDs were studied individually and in combination using 
an in-vitro colony count assay for P. aeruginosa. Concentrations of hBD-1 and
hBD-3 tended to be higher in patients with chronic lower respiratory tract
infection than in the controls. hBD-2 and hBD-4 were detected in ELF from five
and four of nine patients, respectively, but the hBD levels in controls were all 
below the limits of detection. All patients with infection caused by mucoid P.
aeruginosa had detectable hBD-2 and hBD-4 levels in ELF. In-vitro colony count
assays showed a potential synergism between hBD-2 and hBD-4 in inhibiting
bacterial proliferation. The findings indicate that hBDs, especially hBD-2 and
hBD-4, are pathophysiologically important in infections caused by mucoid strains 
of P. aeruginosa.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-0691.2006.01574.x 
PMID: 17184289  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

