
1. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 Apr;292(4):G958-63. Epub 2007 Jan
4.

Iron chelation acutely stimulates fetal human intestinal cell production of IL-6 
and VEGF while decreasing HGF: the roles of p38, ERK, and JNK MAPK signaling.

Markel TA(1), Crisostomo PR, Wang M, Herring CM, Lahm T, Meldrum KK, Lillemoe KD,
Rescorla FJ, Meldrum DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana, USA.

Bacteria have developed mechanisms to sequester host iron via chelators such as
deferoxamine (DFO). Interestingly, DFO has been shown to stimulate acute
intestinal epithelial cell inflammatory cytokine production in the absence of
bacteria; however, this mechanism has not been elucidated. Intestinal epithelial 
cell production of IL-6 and TNF-alpha is elevated in various gastrointestinal
pathologies, including acute intestinal ischemia. Similarly, VEGF and HGF are
essential to intestinal epithelial cell integrity. Therapeutic strategies that
decrease IL-6 and TNF-alpha while increasing VEGF and HGF therefore have
theoretical appeal. We hypothesized that 1) fetal human intestinal epithelial
cells acutely produce increased IL-6, TNF-alpha, VEGF, and HGF during iron
chelation and 2) the MAPK pathway mediates these effects. Fetal human intestinal 
epithelial cells were stimulated by iron chelation (1 mM DFO) with and without
p38 MAPK, ERK, or JNK inhibition. Supernatants were harvested after 24 h of
incubation, and IL-6, TNF-alpha, VEGF, and HGF levels were quantified by ELISA.
Activation of MAPK pathways was confirmed by Western blot analysis. DFO
stimulation resulted in a significant increase in epithelial cell IL-6 and VEGF
production while yielding a decrease in HGF production (P<0.05). Unexpectedly,
TNF-alpha was not detectable. p38 MAPK, ERK, and JNK inhibition significantly
decreased IL-6, VEGF, and HGF production (P<0.05). In conclusion, DFO acutely
increases fetal human intestinal epithelial cell IL-6 and VEGF expression while
causing an unexpected decrease in HGF expression and no detectable TNF-alpha
production. Furthermore, chelator-induced intestinal epithelial cell cytokine
expression depends on p38, ERK, and JNK MAPK pathways.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.00502.2006 
PMID: 17204543  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

