
1. J Phys Chem B. 2007 Jan 25;111(3):551-63.

Gram-negative outer and inner membrane models: insertion of cyclic cationic
lipopeptides.

Clausell A(1), Garcia-Subirats M, Pujol M, Busquets MA, Rabanal F, Cajal Y.

Author information: 
(1)Physical Chemistry Department and Institute of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology,
University of Barcelona, Av. Joan XXIII s/n, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.

Most Gram-negative bacteria are susceptible to polymyxin B (PxB), and development
of resistance to this cationic lipopeptide is very rare. PxB mechanism of action 
involves interaction with both the outer membrane (OM) and the inner membrane
(IM) of bacteria. For the design of new antibiotics based on the structure of PxB
and with improved therapeutic indexes, it is essential to establish the key
features of PxB that are important for activity. We have used an approach based
on mimicking the outer layers of the OM and the IM of Gram-negative bacteria
using monolayers of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or anionic
1-palmitoyl-2-oleoylglycero-sn-3-phosphoglycerol (POPG), respectively, and using 
a combination of penetration assay, analysis of pressure/area curves, and
Brewster angle microscopy to monitor surface morphology changes. Synthetic
analogue sp-B maintains the basic structural characteristics of the natural
compound and interacts with the OM and the IM in a similar way. Analogue sp-C,
with a mutation of the sequence [d-Phe6-Leu7] into [d-Phe6-Dab7], shows that this
hydrophobic domain is involved in LPS binding. The significant role of the
positive charges is demonstrated with sp-Dap analogue, where
l-alpha,gamma-diaminobutyric acid residues Dab1 and Dab8 are replaced by
l-alpha,gamma-diaminopropionic acid (Dap), resulting in lower degrees of
insertion in both LPS and PG monolayers. The importance of the N-terminal acyl
chain is demonstrated with polymyxin B nonapeptide (PxB-np). PxB-np shows lower
affinity for LPS compared to PxB, sp-B, or sp-C, but it does not insert into PG
monolayers, although it binds superficially to the anionic film. Since PxB
microbial killing appears to be mediated by osmotic instability due to OM-IM
phospholipid exchange, the ability of the different peptides to induce
membrane-membrane lipid exchange has been studied by use of phospholipid
unilamellar vesicles. Results indicate that cationic amphipathicity determines
peptide activity.

DOI: 10.1021/jp064757+ 
PMID: 17228913  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

