
1. Microbes Infect. 2007 Feb;9(2):134-41. Epub 2006 Dec 14.

Mice lacking SIGNR1 have stronger T helper 1 responses to Mycobacterium
tuberculosis.

Wieland CW(1), Koppel EA, den Dunnen J, Florquin S, McKenzie AN, van Kooyk Y, van
der Poll T, Geijtenbeek TB.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical Center, 
University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis and the associated disease tuberculosis are health
risks causing many deaths worldwide each year in humans. M. tuberculosis targets 
dendritic cell (DC)-specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3 grabbing
non-integrin (DC-SIGN) to induce immunosuppression, since interaction of DC-SIGN 
with mycobacterial mannose-capped lipoarabinomannan (ManLAM) induces interleukin 
(IL)-10 and prevents DC maturation. We investigated the role of a murine homolog 
of DC-SIGN, SIGN Related 1 (SIGNR1), in a model of M. tuberculosis infection
using SIGNR1 deficient (KO) mice. Although SIGNR1 is expressed by macrophages and
not by DCs, it also interacts with M. tuberculosis similar to DC-SIGN. Peritoneal
macrophages from SIGNR1 KO mice produce less IL-10 upon stimulation with ManLAM
than those from wild-type mice, suggesting that the interaction of ManLAM with
SIGNR1 can result in immunosuppression similar to its human homolog. Indeed,
early in infection, we observed increased T cell activity in SIGNR1 KO mice and
increased IFNgamma production by splenocytes in SIGNR1 KO mice. However, we did
not detect any differences between WT and KO mice in mycobacterial loads in the
lungs or distant organs after M. tuberculosis infection resulting in similar
survival rates. Moreover, we found that SIGNR1 is not present on alveolar
macrophages of uninfected mice nor is it induced on lung macrophages throughout
infection. Therefore, our data suggest that although SIGNR1 has a similar binding
specificity as DC-SIGN, its role is limited during murine M. tuberculosis
infection.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2006.10.018 
PMID: 17224292  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

