
1. J Immunol. 2007 Feb 1;178(3):1845-51.

Prednisolone dose-dependently influences inflammation and coagulation during
human endotoxemia.

de Kruif MD(1), Lemaire LC, Giebelen IA, van Zoelen MA, Pater JM, van den
Pangaart PS, Groot AP, de Vos AF, Elliott PJ, Meijers JC, Levi M, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. m.d.dekruif@amc.uva.nl

The effects of steroids on the outcome of sepsis are dose dependent. Low doses
appear to be beneficial, but high doses do not improve outcome for reasons that
are insufficiently understood. The effects of steroids on systemic inflammation
as a function of dose have not previously been studied in humans. To determine
the effects of increasing doses of prednisolone on inflammation and coagulation
in humans exposed to LPS, 32 healthy males received prednisolone orally at doses 
of 0, 3, 10, or 30 mg (n = 8 per group) at 2 h before i.v. injection of
Escherichia coli LPS (4 ng/kg). Prednisolone dose-dependently inhibited the
LPS-induced release of cytokines (TNF-alpha and IL-6) and chemokines (IL-8 and
MCP-1), while enhancing the release of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10.
Prednisolone attenuated neutrophil activation (plasma elastase levels) and
endothelial cell activation (von Willebrand factor). Most remarkably,
prednisolone did not inhibit LPS-induced coagulation activation, measured by
plasma concentrations of thrombin-antithrombin complexes, prothrombin fragment
F1+2, and soluble tissue factor. In addition, activation of the fibrinolytic
pathway (tissue-type plasminogen activator and plasmin-alpha(2)-antiplasmin
complexes) was dose-dependently enhanced by prednisolone. These data indicate
that prednisolone dose-dependently and differentially influences the systemic
activation of different host response pathways during human endotoxemia.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.178.3.1845 
PMID: 17237435  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

