
1. J Clin Invest. 2007 Feb;117(2):428-37. Epub 2007 Jan 25.

Mechanism underlying inhibition of intestinal apical Cl/OH exchange following
infection with enteropathogenic E. coli.

Gill RK(1), Borthakur A, Hodges K, Turner JR, Clayburgh DR, Saksena S, Zaheer A, 
Ramaswamy K, Hecht G, Dudeja PK.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Digestive Diseases and Nutrition, Department of Medicine,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA. rgill@uic.edu

Enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) is a major cause of infantile diarrhea, but the
pathophysiology underlying associated diarrhea is poorly understood. We examined 
the role of the luminal membrane Cl(-)/OH(-) exchange process in EPEC
pathogenesis using in vitro and in vivo models. Cl(-)/OH(-) exchange activity was
measured as OH(-) gradient-driven (36)Cl(-) uptake. EPEC infection (60 minutes-3 
hours) inhibited apical Cl(-)/OH(-) exchange activity in human intestinal Caco-2 
and T84 cells. This effect was dependent upon the bacterial type III secretory
system (TTSS) and involved secreted effector molecules EspG and EspG2, known to
disrupt the host microtubular network. The microtubule-disrupting agent
colchicine (100 muM, 3 hours) also inhibited (36)Cl(-) uptake. The plasma
membrane expression of major apical anion exchanger DRA (SLC26A3) was
considerably reduced in EPEC-infected cells, corresponding with decreased
Cl(-)/OH(-) exchange activity. Confocal microscopic studies showed that EPEC
infection caused a marked redistribution of DRA from the apical membrane to
intracellular compartments. Interestingly, infection of cells with an EPEC mutant
deficient in espG significantly attenuated the decrease in surface expression of 
DRA protein as compared with treatment with wild-type EPEC. EPEC infection in
vivo (1 day) also caused marked redistribution of surface DRA protein in the
mouse colon. Our data demonstrate that EspG and EspG2 play an important role in
contributing to EPEC infection-associated inhibition of luminal membrane chloride
transport via modulation of surface DRA expression.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI29625 
PMCID: PMC1770946
PMID: 17256057  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

