
1. Transfus Med. 2007 Feb;17(1):61-70.

Detection of bacteria in platelet concentrates prepared from spiked single
donations using cultural and molecular genetic methods.

Störmer M(1), Cassens U, Kleesiek K, Dreier J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Laboratoriums- und Transfusionsmedizin, Herz- und Diabeteszentrum
Nordrhein-Westfalen, Universitätsklinik der Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bad
Oeynhausen, Germany. jdreier@hdz-nrw.de

Bacteria show differences in their growth kinetics depending on the type of blood
component. On to storage at 22 degrees C, platelet concentrates (PCs) seem to be 
more prone to bacterial multiplication than red cell concentrates. Knowledge of
the potential for bacterial proliferation in blood components, which are stored
at a range of temperatures, is essential before considering implementation of a
detection strategy. The efficacy of bacterial detection was determined, using
real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), following
bacterial growth in blood components obtained from a deliberately contaminated
whole-blood (WB) unit. Cultivation was used as the reference method. WB was
spiked with 2 colony-forming units mL(-1)Staphylococcus epidermidis or Klebsiella
pneumoniae, kept for 15 h at room temperature and component preparation was
processed. Samples were drawn, at intervals throughout the whole separation
process, from each blood component. Nucleic acids were extracted using an
automated high-volume extraction method. The 15-h storage revealed an
insignificant increase in bacterial titre. No bacterial growth was detected in
red blood cell or plasma units. K. pneumoniae showed rapid growth in the pooled
PC and could be detected immediately after preparation using RT-PCR. S.
epidermidis grew slowly and was detected 24 h after separation. These experiments
show that sampling is indicative at 24 h after preparation of PCs at the earliest
to minimize the sampling error.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3148.2006.00710.x 
PMID: 17266705  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

