
1. Langmuir. 2007 Feb 27;23(5):2747-54. Epub 2007 Jan 30.

Nanomechanical properties of globular proteins: lactate oxidase.

Parra A(1), Casero E, Lorenzo E, Pariente F, Vázquez L.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Analítica y Análisis Instrumental, Universidad
Autónoma de Madrid, 28049 Madrid, Spain.

We report on the study of the nanomechanical properties of a lactate oxidase
(LOx) monolayer immobilized on gold substrates by atomic force microscopy
techniques operating under buffer conditions. Topographical contact mode imaging 
evidenced the protein deformation under the applied tip load. We performed
approaching force curves with both stiff and soft cantilevers by imposing maximum
loads of 1.6 nN and 400 pN, respectively. We found that the experimental data
were well fitted by the Hertz model for a conical indenter. The use of two types 
of cantilevers allowed us to check further the consistency of the applicability
of the Hertz model to the experimental data. After analyzing 180 curves, we
obtained an average value of Young's modulus for the LOx layer in the 0.5-0.8 GPa
range. These results agreed with those obtained for LOx submonolayer deposits on 
mica substrates, which allows discarding any important contribution from the
underlying substrate on the measured properties. This range of values is closer
to those obtained by other techniques on other globular proteins in comparison
with those reported in previous AFM studies on similar systems. We found that for
our experimental conditions the force curves can be, in principle, well fitted by
the Hertz model for both conical and spherical indenter geometries. However, as
the Young's modulus obtained for both geometries can differ appreciably, it
becomes necessary to assess which indenter geometry is more adequate to explain
the experimental data. For such purpose a systematic study of the indentation
versus applied force curves obtained from both fittings for all the experimental 
curves was done.

DOI: 10.1021/la062864p 
PMID: 17261045  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

