
1. Environ Microbiol. 2007 Mar;9(3):612-24.

Traditional cattle manure application determines abundance, diversity and
activity of methanogenic Archaea in arable European soil.

Gattinger A(1), Höfle MG, Schloter M, Embacher A, Böhme F, Munch JC, Labrenz M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Soil Ecology, GSF-National Research Center for Environment and
Health, Ingolstädter Landstr. 1, D-85764 Neuherberg, Germany.

Based on lipid analyses, 16S rRNA/rRNA gene single-strand conformation
polymorphism fingerprints and methane flux measurements, influences of the
fertilization regime on abundance and diversity of archaeal communities were
investigated in soil samples from the long-term (103 years) field trial in Bad
Lauchstädt, Germany. The investigated plots followed a gradient of increasing
fertilization beginning at no fertilization and ending at the 'cattle manure'
itself. The archaeal phospholipid etherlipid (PLEL) concentration was used as an 
indicator for archaeal biomass and increased with the gradient of increasing
fertilization, whereby the concentrations determined for organically fertilized
soils were well above previously reported values. Methane emission, although at a
low level, were occasionally only observed in organically fertilized soils,
whereas the other treatments showed significant methane uptake. Euryarchaeotal
organisms were abundant in all investigated samples but 16S rRNA analysis also
demonstrated the presence of Crenarchaeota in fertilized soils. Lowest molecular 
archaeal diversity was found in highest fertilized treatments. Archaea
phylogenetically most closely related to cultured methanogens were abundant in
these fertilized soils, whereas Archaea with low relatedness to cultured
microorganisms dominated in non-fertilized soils. Relatives of Methanoculleus
spp. were found almost exclusively in organically fertilized soils or cattle
manure. Methanosarcina-related microorganisms were detected in all soils as well 
as in the cattle manure, but soils with highest organic application rate were
specifically dominated by a close phylogenetic relative of Methanosarcina
thermophila. Our findings suggest that regular application of cattle manure
increased archaeal biomass, but reduced archaeal diversity and selected for
methanogenic Methanoculleus and Methanosarcina strains, leading to the
circumstance that high organic fertilized soils did not function as a methane
sink at the investigated site anymore.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2006.01181.x 
PMID: 17298362  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

