
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2007 May;81(5):1224-35. Epub 2007 Feb 20.

NKT cells direct monocytes into a DC differentiation pathway.

Hegde S(1), Chen X, Keaton JM, Reddington F, Besra GS, Gumperz JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Wisconsin
Medical School, 1300 University Ave., Madison, WI 53705, USA.

Monocytes can differentiate into macrophages or dendritic cells (DCs). The
processes that promote their differentiation along one pathway rather than the
other remain unknown. NKT cells are regulatory T cells that respond functionally 
to self and foreign antigens presented by CD1d molecules. Hence, in addition to
contributing to antimicrobial responses, they may carry out autoreactively
activated functions when there is no infectious challenge. However, the
immunological consequences of NKT cell autoreactivity remain poorly understood.
We show here that human NKT cells direct monocytes to differentiate into immature
DCs. The ability to induce monocyte differentiation was CD1d-dependent and
appeared specific to NKT cells. Addition of exogenous antigens or costimulation
from IL-2 was not required but could enhance the effect. DC differentiation was a
result of NKT cell secretion of GM-CSF and IL-13, cytokines that were produced by
the NKT cells upon autoreactive activation by monocytes. NKT cells within PBMC
samples produced GM-CSF and IL-13 upon exposure to autologous monocytes directly 
ex vivo, providing evidence that such NKT cell-autoreactive responses can occur
in vivo. These results show that when NKT cells are activated by autologous
monocytes, they are capable of providing factors that specifically direct
monocyte differentiation into immature DCs. Thus, autoreactively activated NKT
cells may contribute to the maintenance of the immature DC population, and
microbial infection or inflammatory conditions that activate NKT cells further
could stimulate them to promote an increased rate of DC differentiation.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.1206718 
PMID: 17311932  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

