
1. Planta. 2007 Jul;226(2):429-42. Epub 2007 Feb 24.

Characterization of vascular-specific RSs1 and rolC promoters for their
utilization in engineering plants to develop resistance against hemipteran insect
pests.

Saha P(1), Chakraborti D, Sarkar A, Dutta I, Basu D, Das S.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Molecular and Cellular Genetics, Bose Institute, P1/12 C.I.T. Scheme
VIIM, Kolkata 700054, West Bengal, India.

Rice sucrose synthase1, RSs1 (isolated from rice) and rolC (isolated from
Agrobacterium rhizogenes) promoters were evaluated by binding analyses of their
respective cis-elements with host nuclear transcription factors. The expression
profile of an insecticidal protein driven by these promoters in transgenic plants
was monitored. Motif-search analysis with available phloem-specific promoter
sequences revealed the presence of two BoxII elements in RSs1. An octopine
synthase element, a stem-specific, a root-specific and a light-responsive element
were found in the rolC promoter, whereas the ASL box, GATA and 13 bp motifs were 
detected in both promoters. Binding analysis of these cis-elements (both in
native and mutant forms) with the trans-factors present in the nuclear extracts
from rice, tobacco and chickpea, followed by electrophoretic mobility shift
assay, documented a highly specific cis-trans interaction. Both promoters were
utilized to express Allium sativum leaf agglutinin (ASAL) gene in the three
aforementioned plant systems. By immunohistochemistry and
immunohistofluorescence, specific patterns of ASAL accumulation were detected in 
vascular tissues of single copy transgenic plants. Transgenic plants expressing
ASAL in a phloem-specific manner demonstrated about 60-65% more insecticidal
activity than control plants. The two promoters, which evolved independently from
two distinctly unrelated origins, were found to maintain their functionality in a
conserved manner. They were able to express the insecticidal protein coding ASAL 
as transgene both in monocot and dicot hosts. Thus, the two promoters are
valuable as prospective phloem-specific promoters for use in plant
biotechnological programmes.

DOI: 10.1007/s00425-007-0493-3 
PMID: 17323077  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

