
1. BMC Biotechnol. 2007 Mar 21;7:15.

High efficiency electrotransformation of Lactococcus lactis spp. lactis cells
pretreated with lithium acetate and dithiothreitol.

Papagianni M(1), Avramidis N, Filioussis G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hygiene and Technology, School of Veterinary Medicine, Aristotle
University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki 54006, Greece. mp2000@vet.auth.gr

BACKGROUND: A goal for the food industry has always been to improve strains of
Lactococcus lactis and stabilize beneficial traits. Genetic engineering is used
extensively for manipulating this lactic acid bacterium, while electropolation is
the most widely used technique for introducing foreign DNA into cells. The
efficiency of electrotransformation depends on the level of electropermealization
and pretreatment with chemicals which alter cell wall permeability, resulting in 
improved transformation efficiencies is rather common practice in bacteria as in 
yeasts and fungi. In the present study, treatment with lithium acetate (LiAc) and
dithiothreitol (DTT) in various combinations was applied to L. lactis spp. lactis
cells of the early-log phase prior to electroporation with plasmid pTRKH3 (a 7.8 
kb shuttle vector, suitable for cloning into L. lactis). Two strains of L. lactis
spp. lactis were used, L. lactis spp. lactis LM0230 and ATCC 11454. To the best
of our knowledge these agents have never been used before with L. lactis or other
bacteria.
RESULTS: Electrotransformation efficiencies of up to 105 transformants per mug
DNA have been reported in the literature for L. lactis spp.lactis LM0230. We
report here that treatment with LiAc and DDT before electroporation increased
transformation efficiency to 225 +/- 52.5 x 107 transformants per mug DNA, while 
with untreated cells or treated with LiAc alone transformation efficiency
approximated 1.2 +/- 0.5 x 105 transformants per mug DNA. Results of the same
trend were obtained with L. lactis ATCC 11454, although transformation efficiency
of this strain was significantly lower. No difference was found in the survival
rate of pretreated cells after electroporation. Transformation efficiency was
found to vary directly with cell density and that of 1010 cells/ml resulted in
the highest efficiencies. Following electrotransformation of pretreated cells
with LiAc and DDT, pTRKH3 stability was examined. Both host-vector systems proved
to be reproducible and highly efficient.
CONCLUSION: This investigation sought to improve still further transformation
efficiencies and to provide a reliable high efficiency transformation system for 
L. lactis spp. lactis. The applied methodology, tested in two well-known strains,
allows the production of large numbers of transformants and the construction of
large recombinant libraries.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6750-7-15 
PMCID: PMC1838899
PMID: 17374174  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

