
1. Clin Exp Med. 2007 Mar;7(1):30-8.

Mice deficient in Vbeta8+NKT cells are resistant to experimental hepatitis but
are partially susceptible to generalised Shwartzman reaction.

Habu Y(1), Shinomiya N, Kinoshita M, Matsumoto A, Kawabata T, Seki S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, National Defense Medical College,
3-2 Namiki, Tokorozawa 359-8513, Japan,.

NKT cells are responsible for hepatitis induced either by concanavalin A (Con-A) 
or alpha-galactosylceramide (alpha-GalCer), and they are also profoundly involved
in the generalised Shwartzman reaction (GSR) induced by consecutive injections of
interleukin (IL)-12 and lipopolysaccharide (LPS). In the present study, using
NC/Nga (NC) mice and SJL mice lacking the Vbeta(+)8 gene, we examined the role of
Vbeta(+)8+NKT cells in hepatitis models and in the GSR. The absence of
Vbeta(+)8+NKT cells in the liver mononuclear cells (MNC) was confirmed by the
alpha-GalCer/CD1d/Ig dimer. Unexpectedly, other dimer+NKT cells including
Vbeta7(+)NKT cells in these mice were found to decrease in comparison to that of 
C57BL/6 mice. No significant hepatocyte injury was observed after alpha-GalCer or
Con-A administration in either mice. The serum interferon (IFN)-gamma, IL-4 and
tumour necrosis factor (TNF) levels did not increase in these mice after
alpha-GalCer injection, however these cytokines substantially increased after
Con-A administration, thus suggesting that the roles of NKT cells differ between 
the two hepatitis models. However, in GSR, although neither mice showed lower
IFN-gamma levels after a priming IL-12 injection, they showed TNF levels
comparable to those in normal mice after LPS injection, and thus resulted in a
decreased but substantial mortality. Although liver MNC from IL-12-injected SJL
mice showed an impaired antitumour cytotoxicity, liver MNC of NC mice exhibited a
greater antitumour cytotoxicity than that of C57BL/6 mice because liver NK cells 
proportionally increased in NC mice. These results confirm the critical role that
Vbeta8(+)NKT cells play in both liver and multi-organ injury.

DOI: 10.1007/s10238-007-0122-2 
PMID: 17380303  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

