
1. BMC Struct Biol. 2007 Mar 27;7:16.

Binding of Sudan II and IV to lecithin liposomes and E. coli membranes: insights 
into the toxicity of hydrophobic azo dyes.

Li L(1), Gao HW, Ren JR, Chen L, Li YC, Zhao JF, Zhao HP, Yuan Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control and Resource Reuse, College of
Environmental Science and Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai 200092, PR
China. yaya1120@163.com <yaya1120@163.com>

BACKGROUND: Sudan red compounds are hydrophobic azo dyes, still used as food
additives in some countries. However, they have been shown to be unsafe, causing 
tumors in the liver and urinary bladder in rats. They have been classified as
category 3 human carcinogens by the International Agency for Research on Cancer. 
A number of hypotheses that could explain the mechanism of carcinogenesis have
been proposed for dyes similar to the Sudan red compounds. Traditionally,
investigations of the membrane toxicity of organic substances have focused on
hydrocarbons, e.g. polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), and DDT. In contrast 
to hydrocarbons, Sudan red compounds contain azo and hydroxy groups, which can
form hydrogen bonds with the polar head groups of membrane phospholipids. Thus,
entry may be impeded. They could have different toxicities from other lipophilic 
hydrocarbons. The available data show that because these compounds are
lipophilic, interactions with hydrophobic parts of the cell are important for
their toxicity. Lipophilic compounds accumulate in the membrane, causing
expansion of the membrane surface area, inhibition of primary ion pumps and
increased proton permeability.
RESULTS: This work investigated the interactions of the amphiphilic compounds
Sudan II and IV with lecithin liposomes and live Escherichia coli (E. coli).
Sudan II and IV binding to lecithin liposomes and live E. coli corresponds to the
Langmuir adsorption isotherm. In the Sudan red compounds--lecithin liposome
solutions, the binding ratio of Sudan II to lecithin is 1/31 and that of Sudan IV
to 1/314. The binding constant of the Sudan II-lecithin complex is 1.75 x 104 and
that of the Sudan IV-lecithin complex 2.92 x 105. Besides, the influences of pH, 
electrolyte and temperature were investigated and analyzed quantitatively. In the
Sudan red compounds--E.coli mixture, the binding ratios of Sudan II and Sudan IV 
to E.coli membrane phospholipid are 1/29 and 1/114. The binding constants of the 
Sudan II--and Sudan IV- E.coli membrane phospholipid complexes are 1.86 x 104 and
6.02 x 104. Over 60% of Sudan II and 75% of Sudan IV penetrated into E.coli, in
which 90% of them remained in the E.coli membrane.
CONCLUSION: Experiments of Sudan II and IV binding to lecithin liposomes and live
E. coli indicates that amphiphilic compounds may be sequestered in the lecithin
liposomes and membrane phospholipid bilayer according to the Langmuir adsorption 
law. Penetration into the cytosol was impeded and inhibited for Sudan red
compounds. It is possible for such compounds themselves (excluding their
metabolites and by-products)not result directly in terminal toxicity. Therefore, 
membrane toxicity could be manifested as membrane blocking and membrane
expansion. The method established here may be useful for evaluating the
interaction of toxins with membranes.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6807-7-16 
PMCID: PMC1852319
PMID: 17389047  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

