
1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2007 Jul;13(7):847-55.

Beta-defensin production by human colonic plasma cells: a new look at plasma
cells in ulcerative colitis.

Rahman A(1), Fahlgren A, Sitohy B, Baranov V, Zirakzadeh A, Hammarström S,
Danielsson A, Hammarström ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Immunology, Umeå University, Umeå,
Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Previously, we showed that colonic epithelium of ulcerative colitis
(UC) patients expresses increased levels of mRNA for 3 antimicrobial peptides,
human beta-defensin 2 (hBD-2), hBD-3, and hBD-4 compared to controls.
METHODS: Human colon mucosa was analyzed using double immunofluorescence
staining, in situ hybridization, immunoelectron microscopy, and quantitative
real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) with specific
antibodies and probes in the respective assays.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that lamina propria in colon from UC patients, Crohn's
colitis patients, and controls contain cells that express hBD-2. These cells were
identified as mature plasma cells by the highly specific CD138 marker, by their
prominent IgA or IgG expression, and by their ultrastructural characteristics. By
immunoelectron microscopy it was furthermore shown that the hBD-2 peptide was
expressed in rough endoplasmic reticulum, the Golgi complex, and cytoplasmic
vesicles, reflecting consecutive steps of synthesis and transport for secretion. 
Plasma cells were 2-3 times more abundant in UC colon than in control colon and
Crohn's colitis. Moreover, plasma cells in UC colon expressed hBD-3 and hBD-4
mRNA. Additionally, hBD-2 mRNA expression was demonstrated in 3 out of 4
well-characterized plasma cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: Mature colonic plasma cells can express multiple beta-defensins. In 
UC, defensin production by plasma cells is probably clinically relevant since
plasma cells accumulate in large numbers between the distorted crypts and
muscularis mucosae, first focally than diffusely, so as to protect against
microbial attack.

DOI: 10.1002/ibd.20141 
PMID: 17387677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

