
1. Blood. 2007 Aug 1;110(3):860-9. Epub 2007 Apr 6.

The chemokine GRObeta mobilizes early hematopoietic stem cells characterized by
enhanced homing and engraftment.

Fukuda S(1), Bian H, King AG, Pelus LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Walther Oncology Center, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

Mobilized peripheral blood hematopoietic stem cells (PBSCs) demonstrate
accelerated engraftment compared with bone marrow; however, mechanisms
responsible for enhanced engraftment remain unknown. PBSCs mobilized by GRObeta
(GRObeta(Delta4)/CXCL2(Delta4)) or the combination of GRObeta(Delta4) plus
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) restore neutrophil and platelet
recovery faster than G-CSF-mobilized PBSCs. To determine mechanisms responsible
for faster hematopoietic recovery, we characterized immunophenotype and function 
of the GRObeta-mobilized grafts. PBSCs mobilized by GRObeta(Delta4) alone or with
G-CSF contained significantly more Sca-1(+)-c-kit(+)-lineage(-) (SKL) cells and
more primitive CD34(-)-SKL cells compared with cells mobilized by G-CSF and
demonstrated superior competitive long-term repopulation activity, which
continued to increase in secondary and tertiary recipients.
GRObeta(Delta4)-mobilized SKL cells adhered better to VCAM-1(+) endothelial cells
compared with G-CSF-mobilized cells. GRObeta(Delta4)-mobilized PBSCs did not
migrate well to the chemokine stromal derived factor (SDF)-1alpha in vitro that
was associated with higher CD26 expression. However, GRObeta(Delta4)-mobilized
SKL and c-Kit(+) lineage(-) (KL) cells homed more efficiently to marrow in vivo, 
which was not affected by selective CXCR4 and CD26 antagonists. These data
suggest that GRObeta(Delta4)-mobilized PBSCs are superior in reconstituting
long-term hematopoiesis, which results from differential mobilization of early
stem cells with enhanced homing and long-term repopulating capacity. In addition,
homing and engraftment of GRObeta(Delta4)-mobilized cells is less dependent on
the SDF-1alpha/CXCR4 axis.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2006-06-031401 
PMCID: PMC1924764
PMID: 17416737  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

