
1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Oncogene. 2007 Sep 13;26(42):6184-93. Epub 2007 Apr 9.

Rituximab inhibits the constitutively activated PI3K-Akt pathway in B-NHL cell
lines: involvement in chemosensitization to drug-induced apoptosis.

Suzuki E(1), Umezawa K, Bonavida B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, Jonsson
Comprehensive Cancer Center, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, University 
of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1747, USA.

Retraction in
    Oncogene. 2016 Oct 20;35(42):5576.

Rituximab (chimeric anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody) is currently being used, alone
or in combination with chemotherapy, in the treatment of B-non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
(B-NHL). We have reported that rituximab treatment of B-NHL cell lines sensitizes
the drug-resistant tumor cells to apoptosis by various chemotherapeutic drugs and
chemosensitization was, in large part, owing to the selective inhibition of the
anti-apoptotic Bcl-(XL) gene product. The constitutive activation of the Akt
pathway in B-NHL results in overexpression and functional activation of Bcl-(xL).
Hence, we hypothesized that rituximab-induced inhibition of Bcl-(xL) expression
and chemosensitization may result, in part, from its inhibitory activity of the
Akt pathway. This hypothesis was tested using the drug-resistant Ramos and Daudi 
B-NHL cell lines. Time kinetic analysis revealed that treatment with rituximab
inhibited phosphorylation of Akt, but not unphosphorylated Akt, and the
inhibition was first detected at 6 h post-rituximab treatment. Similar time
kinetics revealed rituximab-induced inhibition of p-PDK1, p-Bad, p-IKKalpha/beta 
and p-Ikappabetaalpha and no inhibition of unphosphorylated proteins. In
addition, rituximab treatment resulted in significant increase of Bcl-(xL)-Bad
heterodimeric complexes as compared to untreated cells. The role of the Akt
pathway in the regulation of resistance was corroborated by the use of the Akt
inhibitor, LY294002, and by transfection with siRNA Akt. Treatment of tumor cells
with LY294002 or with Akt siRNA, but not control siRNA, resulted in inhibition of
Bcl-(xL) expression and sensitization to drug-induced apoptosis. Although
rituximab did not inhibit the Akt pathway nor sensitized the rituximab-resistant 
Ramos RR1 clone, treatment with LY294002 or Akt siRNA sensitized the clone to
drug-induced apoptosis. The present findings demonstrate for the first time that 
rituximab inhibits the constitutively activated Akt pathway in B-NHL cell lines, 
and this inhibition contributes to sensitization of drug-resistant cells to
apoptosis by chemotherapeutic drugs. The findings also identify the Akt pathway
as target for therapeutic intervention in the reversal of rituximab and
drug-resistant B-NHL.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1210448 
PMID: 17420722  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

