
1. Dis Aquat Organ. 2007 Feb 8;74(1):37-47.

Identification of potential vaccine target antigens by immunoproteomic analysis
of a virulent and a non-virulent strain of the fish pathogen Flavobacterium
psychrophilum.

Sudheesh PS(1), LaFrentz BR, Call DR, Siems WF, LaPatra SE, Wiens GD, Cain KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Fish and Wildlife Resources,e Aquaculture Research Institute,
University of Idaho, Moscow, Idaho 83844-1136, USA.

Flavobacterium psychrophilum is the etiological agent of bacterial coldwater
disease (CWD) and rainbow trout fry syndrome (RTFS). To identify antigens
associated with virulence or host immunity, we compared total and immunogenic
proteins of cellular and extracellular products (ECP) between a virulent
(CSF-259-93) and non-virulent (ATCC 49418) strain of F. psychrophilum.
One-dimensional sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of
total cellular proteins revealed only minor differences between the strains;
however, separation of ECP showed that proteins were differentially expressed.
Western blot analysis using rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) anti-CSF-259-93
sera showed greater reactivity to proteins of the virulent strain, including many
> 50 kDa. Further analysis by 2-dimensional electrophoresis (2DE) identified
numerous differences between the strains. Western blot analysis combined with 2DE
identified several immunogenic proteins that reacted with the antisera and were
shared between the 2 strains. However, at least 15 immunogenic proteins appeared 
to be unique to the virulent strain, while 4 such proteins were identified in the
non-virulent strain; 8 proteins unique to the virulent strain and 6 shared
proteins were further analyzed for identification by liquid chromatography-mass
spectrometry/mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Of these, 3 immunogenic
proteins (heat shock proteins HSP 60 and HSP 70) and 2 other proteins (ATP
synthase and thermolysin) were conclusively identified. The 2 highly immunogenic 
heat shock proteins were shown to share extensive homology with heat shock
proteins of related bacteria. This approach for antigen identification may
provide a basis for targeted vaccine development against CWD and RTFS.

DOI: 10.3354/dao074037 
PMID: 17425262  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

