
1. BMC Microbiol. 2007 Apr 17;7:32.

Bactericidal action of positive and negative ions in air.

Fletcher LA(1), Gaunt LF, Beggs CB, Shepherd SJ, Sleigh PA, Noakes CJ, Kerr KG.

Author information: 
(1)School of Civil Engineering, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
L.A.Fletcher@leeds.ac.uk <L.A.Fletcher@leeds.ac.uk>

BACKGROUND: In recent years there has been renewed interest in the use of air
ionisers to control of the spread of airborne infection. One characteristic of
air ions which has been widely reported is their apparent biocidal action.
However, whilst the body of evidence suggests a biocidal effect in the presence
of air ions the physical and biological mechanisms involved remain unclear. In
particular, it is not clear which of several possible mechanisms of electrical
origin (i.e. the action of the ions, the production of ozone, or the action of
the electric field) are responsible for cell death. A study was therefore
undertaken to clarify this issue and to determine the physical mechanisms
associated with microbial cell death.
RESULTS: In the study seven bacterial species (Staphylococcus aureus,
Mycobacterium parafortuitum, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Acinetobacter baumanii,
Burkholderia cenocepacia, Bacillus subtilis and Serratia marcescens) were exposed
to both positive and negative ions in the presence of air. In order to
distinguish between effects arising from: (i) the action of the air ions; (ii)
the action of the electric field, and (iii) the action of ozone, two
interventions were made. The first intervention involved placing a thin mica
sheet between the ionisation source and the bacteria, directly over the agar
plates. This intervention, while leaving the electric field unaltered, prevented 
the air ions from reaching the microbial samples. In addition, the mica plate
prevented ozone produced from reaching the bacteria. The second intervention
involved placing an earthed wire mesh directly above the agar plates. This
prevented both the electric field and the air ions from impacting on the
bacteria, while allowing any ozone present to reach the agar plate. With the
exception of Mycobacterium parafortuitum, the principal cause of cell death
amongst the bacteria studied was exposure to ozone, with electroporation playing 
a secondary role. However in the case of Mycobacterium parafortuitum,
electroporation resulting from exposure to the electric field appears to have
been the principal cause of cell inactivation.
CONCLUSION: The results of the study suggest that the bactericidal action
attributed to negative air ions by previous researchers may have been
overestimated.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-7-32 
PMCID: PMC1868029
PMID: 17439657  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

