
1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2007 Mar;14(2):94-101.

Concentration of organochlorine pollutants in surface waters of the central
European biosphere reserve Krivoklatsko.

Kocí V(1), Ocelka T, Dragoun D, Vit M, Grabic R, Sváb M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Chemistry, ICT Prague, Technicka 5, 166 28 Prague 
6, Czech Republic. Vladimir.Koci@vscht.cz

GOAL, SCOPE AND BACKGROUND: The article is focused on dioxin, furan, PCB and
organochlorine pesticide monitoring in the surface waters of the Central
European, protected natural reserve Krivoklatsko, under the UNESCO programme Man 
and Biosphere. Persistent compounds are presently transported via different means
throughout the entire world. This contamination varies significantly between
sites. This raises the question of what constitutes the naturally occurring
background levels of POPs in natural, unpolluted areas, but which are close to
industrialised regions. Information of real background POP contamination can be
of high value for risk assessment management of those sites evidently polluted
and for the defining of de-contamination limits. Preserved areas should not be
seen as isolated regions in which the impacts of human activities and natural
factors are either unexpected or overlooked. Every ambient region, even those
protected by a law or other means, are still closely connected to neighbouring
human developed and impacted areas, and are therefore subject to this
anthropogenic contamination. These areas adjacent to natural reserves are sources
of diverse substances, via entry of air, water, soil and/or biota. After an
extended period of industrial activities, organochlorine pollutants, even those
emitted in trace concentrations have reached detectable levels. For future
research and for the assessment of environmental changes, present levels of
contamination would be of high importance. This work publishes data of the
contamination with organochlorine pollutants of this natural region, where
biodiversity and ecological functions are of the highest order.
METHODS: Semipermeable membrane devices (SPMDs) were utilised as the sampling
system. SPMDs were deployed in two small creeks and one water reservoir selected 
in the central part of the Krivoklatsko Natural Reserve, where it could be
expected that any possible contamination by POPs would be lowest. The exposed
SPMDs were analysed both for chemical contents of POPs and for toxicity
properties. The chemical analyses of dibenzodioxins, dibenzo-furans, PCBs and
OCPs were analysed by GC/MS/MS on GCQ or PolarisQ (Thermoquest). Toxicity
bioassays were performed on the alga Desmodesmus subspicatus, bacteria Vibrio
fischeri and crustacean Daphnia magna. All toxicity data were expressed as the
effective volume Vtox. Vtox is a toxicity parameter, the determination of which
is independent of SPMD deployment time and pre-treatment dilution (unlike, for
example, the EC50 of the SPMD extract).
RESULTS: The following chemical parameters were monitored: (1) tetra, penta, hexa
and hepta dibenzo-p-dioxins and furans; (2) all those detectable from tri-
through deca-polychloriated biphenyls (PCBs) and (3) a group of organochlorine
pesticides: hexachlorobenzene and isomers of hexachlorocyclohexane, DDE, DDD and 
DDT. The concentrations of dioxins and furans on the assessed sites varied from
under detection levels up to 7 pg.l(-1); PCBs were detected in a sum
concentration up to 2.8 ng.l(-1); and organochlorine pesticides up to 346
pg.l(-1). The responses of bioassays used were very low, with the values obtained
for Vtox being under 0.03 l/d.
DISCUSSION: Toxicity testing showed no toxicity responses, demonstrating that the
system used is in coherence with the ecological status of the assessed sites.
Values of Vtox were under the critical value--showing no toxicity. The PCA of
chemical analysis data and toxicity responses resulted in no correlations between
these two groups of parameters. This demonstrated that the present level of
contamination has had no direct adverse effects on the biota.
CONCLUSIONS: The concentration values of six EPA-listed, toxic dioxins and sums
of tetra-hepta dioxins; nine EPA toxic dibenzofurans and the sums of tetra-hepta 
bibenzofurans are presented together with all tri-deka PCBs and organochlorine
pesticides (alfa-, beta-, gama-, delta-HCH, HCB, opDDE, ppDDE, opDDD, ppDDD,
opDDT, ppDDT). These values represent possible current regional natural
background values of these substances monitored within the Central European
region, with no recorded adverse effects on the freshwater ecosystem (up until
the present time).
RECOMMENDATIONS AND PERSPECTIVES: Assessment of dioxins, furans and other
organochlorine compounds within natural reserves can be important for the
monitoring of human-induced impacts on preserved areas. No systematic monitoring 
of these substances in areas not directly affected by industry has generally been
realised. There is a paucity of data of the presence of any of these substances
within natural regions. Further monitoring of contamination of both soil and
biota by dioxins and furans in preserve regions is needed and can be used for
future monitoring of man-made activities and/or accidents. Semipermeable membrane
devices proved to be a very good sampling system for the monitoring of trace
concentrations of ambient organochlorine compounds. Toxicity evaluation using the
Vtox concept demonstrated that those localities assessed expressed no toxicity.

DOI: 10.1065/espr2006.10.353 
PMID: 17455818  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

