
1. J Immunol. 2007 May 15;178(10):6181-90.

Distinct endosomal trafficking requirements for presentation of autoantigens and 
exogenous lipids by human CD1d molecules.

Chen X(1), Wang X, Keaton JM, Reddington F, Illarionov PA, Besra GS, Gumperz JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Wisconsin
School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

CD1d molecules present both self Ags and microbial lipids to NKT cells. Previous 
studies have established that CD1d lysosomal trafficking is required for
presentation of autoantigens to murine invariant NKT cells. We show in this study
that this is not necessary for autoantigen presentation by human CD1d, but
significantly affects the presentation of exogenous Ags. Wild-type and
tail-deleted CD1d molecules stimulated similar autoreactive responses by human
NKT clones, whereas presentation of exogenous lipids by tail-deleted CD1d was
highly inefficient. Chloroquine treatment markedly inhibited exogenous Ag
presentation by wild-type CD1d transfectants, but did not affect NKT autoreactive
responses. Conversely, APC expression of HLA-DRalphabeta and the invariant chain 
(Ii) was associated with faster internalization of CD1d into the endocytic system
and enhanced CD1d-mediated presentation of exogenous Ags, but did not appear to
augment NKT autoreactivity. Knockdown of the Ii by small interfering RNA resulted
in reduced CD1d surface expression and slower internalization in HLA-DR+ APCs,
but not HLA-DR- APCs, demonstrating a direct effect of MHC/Ii complexes on CD1d
trafficking. CD1d-mediated presentation of exogenous Ags was much more efficient 
in immature dendritic cells, which actively recycle MHC class II molecules
through the endocytic system, than in mature dendritic cells that have stabilized
MHC class II expression at the cell surface, suggesting a physiological role for 
MHC/Ii complexes in modulating CD1d function. These results indicate that
autoantigens and exogenous lipids are acquired by human CD1d at distinct cellular
locations, and that Ii trafficking selectively regulates CD1d-mediated
presentation of extracellular Ags.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.178.10.6181 
PMID: 17475845  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

