
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2007 Aug;149(2):344-52. Epub 2007 May 22.

Selection of probiotic bacteria for prevention of allergic diseases:
immunomodulation of neonatal dendritic cells.

Niers LE(1), Hoekstra MO, Timmerman HM, van Uden NO, de Graaf PM, Smits HH,
Kimpen JL, Rijkers GT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. L.E.M.Niers@umcutrecht.nl

Modification of intestinal microbiota early in life by administration of
probiotic bacteria may be a potential approach to prevent allergic disease. To
select probiotic bacteria for in vivo purposes, we investigated the capacity of
probiotic bacteria to interact with neonatal dendritic cells (DC) and studied the
ensuing T cell polarizing effect. Immature DC were generated from cord
blood-derived monocytes and maturation was induced by maturation factors (MF),
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) plus MF and Bifidobacterium bifidum, B. infantis,
Lactobacillus salivarius, Lactococcus lactis alone or combined with MF. After 12 
days of co-culture with DC and Staphylococcus aureus enterotoxin B (SEB) as
antigenic stimulus, cytokine production by autologous T cells was determined by
intracellular cytokine staining. Additionally, cells were stimulated with CD3 and
CD28 monoclonal antibodies and cytokines were measured in supernatants by
multiplex assay. The probiotic strains induced partial maturation of DC. Full
maturation of DC was induced for all strains tested when MF was added. The
percentage of interleukin (IL)-4 producing T cells was lower in T cell cultures
stimulated with B. bifidum matured DC compared to MF and LPS matured DC, which
coincided with a higher percentage of interferon (IFN)-gamma-producing T cells.
Furthermore, T cells stimulated by B. bifidum matured DC produced significantly
more IL-10 compared to MF matured DC. Selected species of the Bifidobacterium
genus prime in vitro cultured neonatal DC to polarize T cell responses and may
therefore be candidates to use in primary prevention of allergic diseases.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2007.03421.x 
PMCID: PMC1941957
PMID: 17521319  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

