
1. Exp Eye Res. 2007 Jul;85(1):142-53. Epub 2007 Apr 14.

Exposure of human corneal epithelial cells to contact lenses in vitro suppresses 
the upregulation of human beta-defensin-2 in response to antigens of Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa.

Maltseva IA(1), Fleiszig SM, Evans DJ, Kerr S, Sidhu SS, McNamara NA, Basbaum C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Optometry, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

Bacterial keratitis is a sight-threatening complication of contact lens wear, and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a commonly isolated pathogen. The mechanisms by which
lenses predispose the cornea to P. aeruginosa infection are unknown. Corneal
epithelial cells express numerous innate defenses, some of which have
bactericidal effects against P. aeruginosa. One of these is human beta-defensin-2
(hBD-2), which is upregulated in response to lipopolysaccharide or flagellin
antigens. We hypothesized that prior exposure of corneal epithelia to a contact
lens would interfere with upregulation of hBD-2 in response to P. aeruginosa. A
novel in vitro model was used in which cultured human corneal epithelial cells
were exposed to a hydrophilic contact lens for up to 3.5 days prior to challenge 
with a culture supernatant of P. aeruginosa antigens for 6h. Without prior lens
exposure, the supernatant caused >2-fold upregulation of hBD-2 mRNA message and
expression of hBD-2 peptide. Prior contact lens exposure blocked this
upregulation without obvious effects on cell health. Western immunoblot and
luciferase reporter studies showed that Pseudomonas-induced hBD-2 upregulation
involved MyD88, c-Jun N-terminal kinase and both AP-1 and NF-kappaB transcription
factors. Contact lenses did not affect surface expression of Toll-like
receptor-2, -4 or -5, but did block antigen activation of AP-1, but not
NF-kappaB, transcription factors. These data show that contact lenses can
interfere with epithelial defense responses to bacterial antigens in vitro, and
if translated in vivo, could help predispose the cornea to infection.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2007.04.001 
PMID: 17531223  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

