
1. Eur Respir J. 2007 Sep;30(3):423-8. Epub 2007 May 30.

Natural anticoagulants limit lipopolysaccharide-induced pulmonary coagulation but
not inflammation.

Choi G(1), Vlaar AP, Schouten M, Van't Veer C, van der Poll T, Levi M, Schultz
MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Academic Medical Centre, University of 
Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands. godachoi@mail.com

Pulmonary coagulopathy and hyperinflammation may contribute to an adverse outcome
in sepsis. The present study determines the effects of natural inhibitors of
coagulation on bronchoalveolar haemostasis and inflammation in a rat model of
endotoxaemia. Male Sprague-Dawley rats were randomised to treatment with normal
saline, recombinant human activated protein C (APC), plasma-derived antithrombin 
(AT), recombinant human tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI), heparin or
recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (tPA). Rats were intravenously injected 
with lipopolysaccharide (LPS), which induced a systemic inflammatory response and
pulmonary inflammation. Blood and bronchoalveolar lavage were obtained at 4 and
16 h after LPS injection, and markers of coagulation and inflammation were
measured. LPS injection caused an increase in the levels of thrombin-AT
complexes, whereas plasminogen activator activity was attenuated, both
systemically and within the bronchoalveolar compartment. Administration of APC,
AT and TFPI significantly limited LPS-induced generation of thrombin-AT complexes
in the lungs, and tPA stimulated pulmonary fibrinolytic activity. However, none
of the agents had significant effects on the production of pulmonary cytokines,
chemokines, neutrophil influx and myeloperoxidase activity. Natural inhibitors of
coagulation prevent bronchoalveolar activation of coagulation, but do not induce 
major alterations of the pulmonary inflammatory response in rat endotoxaemia.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00165606 
PMID: 17537762  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

