
1. Biochemistry. 2007 Jul 3;46(26):7713-27. Epub 2007 Jun 9.

Synthesis and characterization of allosteric probes of substrate channeling in
the tryptophan synthase bienzyme complex.

Ngo H(1), Harris R, Kimmich N, Casino P, Niks D, Blumenstein L, Barends TR, Kulik
V, Weyand M, Schlichting I, Dunn MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of California, Riverside, California
92521, USA.

Allosteric interactions regulate substrate channeling in Salmonella typhimurium
tryptophan synthase. The channeling of indole between the alpha- and beta-sites
via the interconnecting 25 A tunnel is regulated by allosteric signaling arising 
from binding of ligand to the alpha-site, and covalent reaction of l-Ser at the
beta-site. This signaling switches the alpha- and beta-subunits between open
conformations of low activity and closed conformations of high activity. Our
objective is to synthesize and characterize new classes of alpha-site ligands
(ASLs) that mimic the binding of substrates, 3-indole-d-glycerol 3'-phosphate
(IGP) or d-glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (G3P), for use in the investigation of
alpha-site-beta-site interactions. The new synthesized IGP analogues contain an
aryl group linked to an O-phosphoethanolamine moiety through amide, sulfonamide, 
or thiourea groups. The G3P analogue, thiophosphoglycolohydroxamate, contains a
hydroxamic acid group linked to a thiophosphate moiety. Crystal structures of the
internal aldimine complexed with G3P and with three of the new ASLs are
presented. These structural and solution studies of the ASL complexes with the
internal aldimine form of the enzyme establish the following. (1) ASL binding
occurs with high specificity and relatively high affinities at the alpha-site.
(2) Binding of the new ASLs slows the entry of indole analogues into the
beta-site by blocking the tunnel opening at the alpha-site. (3) ASL binding
stabilizes the closed conformations of the beta-subunit for the
alpha-aminoacrylate and quinonoid forms of the enzyme. (4) The new ASLs exhibit
allosteric properties that parallel the behaviors of IGP and G3P.

DOI: 10.1021/bi700385f 
PMID: 17559195  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

