
1. Infect Immun. 2007 Aug;75(8):4040-9. Epub 2007 Jun 11.

Pertussis toxin utilizes proximal components of the T-cell receptor complex to
initiate signal transduction events in T cells.

Schneider OD(1), Weiss AA, Miller WE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry, and Microbiology, University
of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 2256 Medical Science Building, 231 Albert
Sabin Way, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0524, USA.

Pertussis toxin (PTx) is an AB(5) toxin produced by the human pathogen Bordetella
pertussis. Previous work demonstrates that the five binding (B) subunits of PTx
can have profound effects on T lymphocytes independent of the enzymatic activity 
of the A subunit. Stimulation of T cells with holotoxin (PTx) or the B subunit
alone (PTxB) rapidly induces signaling events resulting in inositol phosphate
accumulation, Ca(2+) mobilization, interleukin-2 (IL-2) production, and mitogenic
cell growth. Although previous reports suggest the presence of PTx signaling
receptors expressed on T cells, to date, the receptor(s) and membrane proximal
signaling events utilized by PTx remain unknown. Here we genetically and
biochemically define the membrane proximal components utilized by PTx to initiate
signal transduction in T cells. Using mutants of the Jurkat T-cell line deficient
for key components of the T-cell receptor (TCR) pathway, we have compared
stimulation with PTx to that of anti-CD3 monoclonal antibody (MAb), which
directly interacts with and activates the TCR complex. Our genetic data in
combination with biochemical analysis show that PTx (via the B subunit) activates
TCR signaling similar to that of anti-CD3 MAb, including activation of key
signaling intermediates such as Lck, ZAP-70, and phospholipase C-gamma1.
Moreover, the data indicate that costimulatory activity, as provided by CD28
ligation, is required for PTx to fully stimulate downstream indicators of T-cell 
activation such as IL-2 gene expression. By illuminating the signaling pathways
that PTx activates in T cells, we provide a mechanistic understanding for how
these signals deregulate immune system functions during B. pertussis infection.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00414-07 
PMCID: PMC1951969
PMID: 17562776  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

