
1. Transfus Med Rev. 2007 Jul;21(3):237-54.

Real-time polymerase chain reaction in transfusion medicine: applications for
detection of bacterial contamination in blood products.

Dreier J(1), Störmer M, Kleesiek K.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Laboratoriums und Transfusionsmedizin, Herz und Diabeteszentrum
Nordrhein-Westfalen, Universitätsklinik der Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bad
Oeynhausen, Germany. jdreier@hdz-nrw.de

Bacterial contamination of blood components, particularly of platelet
concentrates (PCs), represents the greatest infectious risk in blood transfusion.
Although the incidence of platelet bacterial contamination is approximately 1 per
2,000 U, the urgent need for a method for the routine screening of PCs to improve
safety for patients had not been considered for a long time. Besides the
culturing systems, which will remain the criterion standard, rapid methods for
sterility screening will play a more important role in transfusion medicine in
the future. In particular, nucleic acid amplification techniques (NATs) are
powerful potential tools for bacterial screening assays. The combination of
excellent sensitivity and specificity, reduced contamination risk, ease of
performance, and speed has made real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
technology an appealing alternative to conventional culture-based testing
methods. When using real-time PCR for the detection of bacterial contamination,
several points have to be considered. The main focus is the choice of the target 
gene; the assay format; the nucleic acid extraction method, depending on the
sample type; and the evaluation of an ideal sampling strategy. However, several
factors such as the availability of bacterial-derived nucleic acid amplification 
reagents, the impracticability, and the cost have limited the use of NATs until
now. Attempts to reduce the presence of contaminating nucleic acids from reagents
in real-time PCR have been described, but none of these approaches have proven to
be very effective or to lower the sensitivity of the assay. Recently, a number of
broad-range NAT assays targeting the 16S ribosomal DNA or 23S ribosomal RNA for
the detection of bacteria based on real-time technology have been reported. This 
review will give a short survey of current approaches to and the limitations of
the application of real-time PCR for bacterial detection in blood components,
with emphasis on the bacterial contamination of PCs.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tmrv.2007.03.006 
PMID: 17572262  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

