
1. Folia Morphol (Warsz). 2007 May;66(2):100-3.

Enamel matrix derivative Emdogain as an adjuvant for a laterally-positioned flap 
in the treatment of gingival recession: an electron microscopic appraisal.

Lafzi A(1), Farahani RM, Tubbs RS, Roushangar L, Shoja MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics, School of Dentistry, Tabriz University of Medical 
Sciences, Tabriz, Iran, and Paediatric Neurosurgery, Children's Hospital,
Birmingham, AL 35233, USA.

Enamel matrix derivative (EMD), such as Emdogain, has been suggested for the
improvement of wound healing in periodontal surgical therapy. The present
qualitative study seeks to illustrate the ultrastructural changes associated with
a human gingival wound at 10 days after the application of EMD as an adjunct to a
laterally-positioned flap in a patient with gingival recession. An otherwise
healthy patient, who had been suffering from bilateral gingival recession defects
on teeth #23 and #26, was studied. One defect was treated with a
laterally-positioned flap, while the other was treated with a combination of EMD 
and a laterally-positioned flap. Ten days after the operation gingival biopsy
specimens were obtained from the dentogingival region and examined using a
transmission electron microscope. A considerable difference was found in both the
cellular and extracellular phases of EMD and non-EMD sites. The fibroblasts of
EMD site were more rounded with plump cytoplasms and euchromatic nuclei. A
well-developed rough endoplasmic reticulum and numerous mitochondria could be
detected. In contrast, the fibroblasts of non-EMD site were of flattened
spindle-like morphology. While the signs of apoptosis could rarely be detected at
EMD site, apoptotic bodies and ultra-structural evidence of apoptosis
(crescent-like heterochromatic nuclei and dilated nuclear envelopes) were
consistent features at non-EMD site. The extracellular matrix at EMD site mainly 
consisted of well-organised collagen fibres, while non-EMD site contained sparse 
and incompletely-formed collagen fibres. Coccoid bacteria were noted within the
extracellular matrix and neutrophils at non-EMD site. It seems that EMD may
enhance certain features of gingival wound healing, which may be attributable to 
its anti-apoptotic, anti-bacterial or anti-inflammatory properties.


PMID: 17594666  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

