
1. Mutat Res. 2007 Sep 1;622(1-2):70-83. Epub 2007 Jun 2.

Genes, diet and inflammatory bowel disease.

Ferguson LR(1), Shelling AN, Browning BL, Huebner C, Petermann I.

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Nutrition, Faculty of Medical & Health Science, The University
of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland, New Zealand. l.ferguson@auckland.ac.nz

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) arises in part from a genetic predisposition,
through the inheritance of a number of contributory genetic polymorphisms. These 
variant forms of genes may be associated with an abnormal response to normal
luminal bacteria. A consistent observation across most populations is that any of
three polymorphisms of the Caspase-activated recruitment domain (CARD15) gene are
more prevalent in IBD patients as compared with unaffected controls. Similar
aberrant responses to bacteria are associated with variants in Autophagy-related 
16-like 1 (ATG16L1) and human defensin (HBD-2, -3 and -4) genes. The defective
bacterial signal in turn leads to an excessive immune response, presenting as
chronic gut inflammation in susceptible individuals. Inconsistent population
reports implicate the major histocompatability complex (MHC), that encodes a
number of human leukocyte antigens (HLA), MHC class I chain-related gene A (MICA)
or cytokines, such as tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha). Toll-like
receptors encoded by the TLR4 or TLR9 genes may also play a role. Recent whole
genome scans suggest that a rare variant in the interleukin-23 receptor (IL23R)
gene may actually protect against IBD. Other implicated genes may affect mucosal 
cell polarity (Drosophila discs large homologue 5, DLG5) or mucosal transporter
function (sodium dependent organic cation transporters, SLC22A4 and SLC22A5). A
variant in ABCB1 (ATP-binding cassette subfamily B member 1) may be especially
associated with increased risk of UC. While pharmacogenetics is increasingly
being used to predict and optimise clinical response to therapy, nutrigenetics
may have even greater potential. In many cases, IBD can be controlled through
prescribing an elemental diet, which appears to act through modulating cytokine
response and changing the gut microbiota. More generally, no single group of
dietary items is beneficial or detrimental to all patients, and elimination diets
have been used to individualise dietary requirements. However, recognising the
nature of the genes involved may suggest a more strategic approach. Pro- or
prebiotics will directly influence the microbial flora, while immunonutrition,
including omega-3 fatty acids and certain polyphenols, may reduce the symptoms of
gut inflammation. The expression of gut transporters may be modulated through
various herbal remedies including green tea polyphenols. Such approaches would
require that the gene of interest is functioning normally, other than its
expression being up or down-regulated. However, new approaches are being
developed to overcome the effects of polymorphisms that affect the function of a 
gene. A combination of human correlation studies with experimental models could
provide a rational strategy for optimising nutrigenetic approaches to IBD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2007.05.011 
PMID: 17628615  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

