
1. PLoS One. 2007 Jul 25;2(7):e677.

Commensal bacteria and expression of two major intestinal chemokines, TECK/CCL25 
and MEC/CCL28, and their receptors.

Meurens F(1), Berri M, Siggers RH, Willing BP, Salmon H, Van Kessel AG, Gerdts V.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte et Immunité des Muqueuses, UR 1282, Infectiologie Animale et Santé 
Publique, Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique, Nouzilly, France.
meurens@tours.inra.fr

BACKGROUND: CCL25/TECK and CCL28/MEC are CC chemokines primarily expressed in
thymic dendritic cells and mucosal epithelial cells. Their receptors, CCR9 and
CCR10, are mainly expressed on T and B lymphocytes. In human, mouse, pig and
sheep CCL25 and CCL28 play an important role in the segregation and the
compartmentalization of the mucosal immune system. As evidenced by early
comparisons of germ-free and conventional animals, the intestinal bacterial
microflora has a marked effect on host intestinal immune functions. However,
little is known about the impact of bacterial colonization on constitutive and
induced chemokine expressions as well as on the generation of anti-inflammatory
mechanisms.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Therefore, we decided to focus by qPCR on the
mRNA expression of two main gut chemokines, CCL25 and CCL28, their receptors CCR9
and CCR10, the Tregs marker Foxp3 and anti-inflammatory cytokines TGF-beta and
IL-10 following colonization with different bacterial species within the small
intestine. To accomplish this we used an original germ-free neonatal pig model
and monoassociated pigs with a representative Gram-negative (Escherichia coli) or
Gram-positive (Lactobacillus fermentum) commensal bacteria commonly isolated from
the neonatal pig intestine. Our results show a consistent and marked effect of
microbial colonization on the mRNA expression of intestinal chemokines, chemokine
receptors, Foxp3 and TGF-beta. Moreover, as evidenced by in vitro experiments
using two different cell lines, the pattern of regulation of CCL25 and CCL28
expression in the gut appears complex and suggests an additional role for in vivo
factors.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Taken together, the results highlight the key role of
bacterial microflora in the development of a functional intestinal immune system 
in an elegant and relevant model for human immune system development.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0000677 
PMCID: PMC1919421
PMID: 17653288  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

