
1. Hematology. 2007 Aug;12(4):325-30.

Evaluation of TCR Vbeta subfamily T cell expansion in NOD/SCID mice transplanted 
with human cord blood hematopoietic stem cells.

Lin C(1), Chen S, Yang L, Tan Y, Bai X, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical College of Jinan
University, Guangzhou, PR China.

Examination of the T cell receptor (TCR) gene repertoire is important in the
analysis of the immune status of models, because clonal expansion of T cells
permits the identification of specific antigen responses of T cells. Little is
known about T-cell immunity in the humanized NOD/SCID mouse model. TCR Vbeta
repertoire usage and clonality were analyzed to investigate the distribution and 
clonal expansion of TCR Vbeta subfamily T cells in NOD/SCID mice transplanted
with human cord blood (CB) hematopoietic stem cells. The NOD/SCID mice were
sublethally irradiated ((60)Co, 300cGy) to eliminate residual innate immunity in 
the host. The experimental mice were transplanted intravenously with CB CD34(+)
cells sorted by MACS. After 6 weeks, RNA was obtained from peripheral blood, bone
marrow and thymus of the study animals. The gene expression and clonality of the 
TCR Vbeta repertoire were determined by RT-PCR and GeneScan techniques. A
restricted range of TCR Vbeta usage was exhibited in the bone marrow of mice,
which included TCR Vbeta 1, 2, 9, 13 and 19. Further, oligoclonal expression of
some TCR Vbeta subfamilies (Vbeta9, 13, 19) was identified by GeneScan technique.
To investigate the reason for oligoclonal expansion of the TCR Vbeta subfamily T 
cells from CB in mouse models, the T-cell culture with tissue-antigen of NOD/SCID
mouse was performed in vitro. The cells from peripheral blood mononuclear cells
and bone marrow, spleen, thymus in NOD/SCID mice were frozen and thawed, and used
as tissue-antigen. CB mononuclear cells were separately cultured with the
component from those murine cells for 15-20 days. Oligoclonal expression or
oligoclonal trend of some TCR Vbeta subfamilies (Vbeta10, 11 and Vbeta2, 15, 16, 
19) was detected in T cells after stimulation with tissue-antigen of NOD/SCID
mouse. Interestingly, a similar clonal expansion of the TCR Vbeta11 subfamily was
found in T cells cultured with peripheral blood, bone marrow and spleen
respectively. The TCR Vbeta subfamily T cells could be reconstituted in humanized
NOD/SCID mouse transplanted with CD34(+) cells from CB. The restricted expression
and clonal expansion of some CB T cell clones may be induced by tissue-antigens
of NOD/SCID mice.

DOI: 10.1080/10245330701342342 
PMID: 17654060  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

