
1. BMC Microbiol. 2007 Jul 24;7:70.

Roles of curli, cellulose and BapA in Salmonella biofilm morphology studied by
atomic force microscopy.

Jonas K(1), Tomenius H, Kader A, Normark S, Römling U, Belova LM, Melefors O.

Author information: 
(1)Swedish Institute for Infectious Disease Control, Solna, Sweden.
Kristina.Jonas@smi.ki.se <Kristina.Jonas@smi.ki.se>

BACKGROUND: Curli, cellulose and the cell surface protein BapA are matrix
components in Salmonella biofilms. In this study we have investigated the roles
of these components for the morphology of bacteria grown as colonies on agar
plates and within a biofilm on submerged mica surfaces by applying atomic force
microscopy (AFM) and light microscopy.
RESULTS: AFM imaging was performed on colonies of Salmonella Typhimurium grown on
agar plates for 24 h and on biofilms grown for 4, 8, 16 or 24 h on mica slides
submerged in standing cultures. Our data show that in the wild type curli were
visible as extracellular material on and between the cells and as fimbrial
structures at the edges of biofilms grown for 16 h and 24 h. In contrast to the
wild type, which formed a three-dimensional biofilm within 24 h, a curli mutant
and a strain mutated in the global regulator CsgD were severely impaired in
biofilm formation. A mutant in cellulose production retained some capability to
form cell aggregates, but not a confluent biofilm. Extracellular matrix was
observed in this mutant to almost the same extent as in the wild type.
Overexpression of CsgD led to a much thicker and a more rapidly growing biofilm. 
Disruption of BapA altered neither colony and biofilm morphology nor the ability 
to form a biofilm within 24 h on the submerged surfaces. Besides curli, the
expression of flagella and pili as well as changes in cell shape and cell size
could be monitored in the growing biofilms.
CONCLUSION: Our work demonstrates that atomic force microscopy can efficiently be
used as a tool to monitor the morphology of bacteria grown as colonies on agar
plates or within biofilms formed in a liquid at high resolution.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-7-70 
PMCID: PMC1949822
PMID: 17650335  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

