
1. PLoS Med. 2007 Jul 31;4(7):e248.

Toll-like receptor 2 impairs host defense in gram-negative sepsis caused by
Burkholderia pseudomallei (Melioidosis).

Wiersinga WJ(1), Wieland CW, Dessing MC, Chantratita N, Cheng AC,
Limmathurotsakul D, Chierakul W, Leendertse M, Florquin S, de Vos AF, White N,
Dondorp AM, Day NP, Peacock SJ, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. w.j.wiersinga@amc.uva.nl

BACKGROUND: Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are essential in host defense against
pathogens by virtue of their capacity to detect microbes and initiate the immune 
response. TLR2 is seen as the most important receptor for gram-positive bacteria,
while TLR4 is regarded as the gram-negative TLR. Melioidosis is a severe
infection caused by the gram-negative bacterium, Burkholderia pseudomallei, that 
is endemic in Southeast Asia. We aimed to characterize the expression and
function of TLRs in septic melioidosis.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Patient studies: 34 patients with melioidosis demonstrated 
increased expression of CD14, TLR1, TLR2, and TLR4 on the cell surfaces of
monocytes and granulocytes, and increased CD14, TLR1, TLR2, TLR4, LY96 (also
known as MD-2), TLR5, and TLR10 mRNA levels in purified monocytes and
granulocytes when compared with healthy controls. In vitro experiments:
Whole-blood and alveolar macrophages obtained from TLR2 and TLR4 knockout (KO)
mice were less responsive to B. pseudomallei in vitro, whereas in the reverse
experiment, transfection of HEK293 cells with either TLR2 or TLR4 rendered these 
cells responsive to this bacterium. In addition, the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) of 
B. pseudomallei signals through TLR2 and not through TLR4. Mouse studies:
Surprisingly, TLR4 KO mice were indistinguishable from wild-type mice with
respect to bacterial outgrowth and survival in experimentally induced
melioidosis. In contrast, TLR2 KO mice displayed a markedly improved host
defenses as reflected by a strong survival advantage together with decreased
bacterial loads, reduced lung inflammation, and less distant-organ injury.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with melioidosis displayed an up-regulation of multiple
TLRs in peripheral blood monocytes and granulocytes. Although both TLR2 and TLR4 
contribute to cellular responsiveness to B. pseudomallei in vitro, TLR2 detects
the LPS of B. pseudomallei, and only TLR2 impacts on the immune response of the
intact host in vivo. Inhibition of TLR2 may be a novel treatment strategy in
melioidosis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0040248 
PMCID: PMC1950213
PMID: 17676990  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

