
1. Mol Biol Cell. 2007 Oct;18(10):3941-51. Epub 2007 Aug 1.

Aberrant chromatin remodeling by retinoic acid receptor alpha fusion proteins
assessed at the single-cell level.

Qiu J(1), Huang Y, Chen G, Chen Z, Tweardy DJ, Dong S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Infectious Disease, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by specific chromosomal
translocations, which generate fusion proteins such as promyelocytic leukemia
(PML)-retinoic acid receptor (RAR)alpha and promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger
(PLZF)-RARalpha (X-RARalpha). In this study, we have applied lac operator array
systems to study the effects of X-RARalpha versus wild-type RARalpha on
large-scale chromatin structure. The targeting of these enhanced cyan fluorescent
protein-lac repressor-tagged RARalpha-containing proteins to the
gene-amplification chromosomal region by lac operator repeats led to local
chromatin condensation, recruitment of nuclear receptor corepressor, and histone 
deacetylase complex. The addition of retinoic acid (RA) induced large-scale
chromatin decondensation in cells expressing RARalpha; however, cells expressing 
X-RARalpha, especially PML-RARalpha, demonstrated insensitive response to this
effect of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). Although we did not reveal differences 
in RA-dependent colocalization of either silencing mediator for retinoid and
thyroid or steroid receptor coactivator (SRC)-1 with RARalpha versus X-RARalpha, 
the hormone-independent association between SRC-1 and X-RARalpha on the array has
been identified. Rather, compared with cells expressing RARalpha, fluorescence
recovery after photobleaching of live transfected cells, demonstrated decreased
mobility of SRC-1 on the X-RARalpha-bound chromatin. Thus, the impaired ability
of APL fusion proteins to activate gene transcription in response to ATRA
corresponds to their reduced ability to remodel chromatin, which may link to
their ability to impair the mobility of key nuclear receptor coregulators.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e07-03-0245 
PMCID: PMC1995740
PMID: 17671166  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

