
1. Zhongguo Xiu Fu Chong Jian Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Jul;21(7):688-92.

[Experimental study on umbilical vascular compliance and expression of antigen
after removing endothelial cell].

[Article in Chinese]

Li Z(1), Li Z, Yi X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of North China Coal 
Medical College, Tangshan Hebei, 063000, PR China. zhanqingli@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate which is better method zymogen or low temperature frozen
in removing vascular endothelial cell so as to lay a foundation for creating a
kind of brace which is not to be rejected and the same as own blood vessel.
METHODS: Fresh and not damaged umbilical blood vessel was collected from natural 
labour women, human umbilical blood vessel was remove carefully from normal
foetus, then was put into disinfectant at 37 C for 24 hours. They were divided
into 3 groups:normal group (NG), zymogen group (ZG) and low temperature frozen
group (LG). ZG: 0.1% collagen II enzyme was added in umbilical blood vessel and
closed the both sides and the vascular endothelial cell was removed in 37 C
water. LG:Umbilical blood vessel was put into liquid nitrogen for 24 hours after 
frozened step by step, and then it was put into 37 C water for 30-60s and the
vascular endothelial cells were washed away by normal saline. NG:Umbilical blood 
vessel was kept into 4 C Kerb's liquid. The bacteria were cultured in each group.
The samples were stained by HE, elastic fiber and collagen fiber were observed by
light and scanning electron microscope. The difference of compliance was
compared. Human leukocyte antigen ABC (HLA-ABC) and HLA-DR were observed by
immunohistochemical method and the expression of antigen of umbilical blood
vessel was analysed. Results In LG, umbilical vascular endothelial cells were
removed completely; artery showed vertical smooth muscle and vein showed elastic 
membrane. In ZG, umbilical vascular endothelial cells were removed completely
after 20 minutes; artery showed vertical smooth muscle cells and vein showed
lower endothelial layer. The vascular compliance in LG was higher than that in
NG, and the latter was also higher than that in ZG, but showing no significant
differences (P > 0.05). The compliance of umbilical vein was 2-3 times as much as
that of umbilical artery. The expression of HLA-ABC and HLA-DR in LG and ZG were 
lower than that in NG, showing significant differences (P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: Low temperature frozen method and zymogen method (0.1% collagen II
enzyme for 20 min) can remove vascular endothelial cells of human umbilical blood
vessel completely. Low temperature frozen method was better than zymogen method.


PMID: 17694655  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

