
1. Int J Med Microbiol. 2008 Jan;298(1-2):21-6. Epub 2007 Aug 16.

Improving live attenuated bacterial carriers for vaccination and therapy.

Loessner H(1), Endmann A, Leschner S, Bauer H, Zelmer A, zur Lage S, Westphal K, 
Weiss S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Inhoffenstr. 7,
D-38124 Braunschweig, Germany.

Live attenuated bacteria are well established as vaccines. Thus, their use as
carriers for prophylactic and therapeutic macromolecules is a logical
consequence. Here we describe several experimental applications of bacteria to
carry heterologous macromolecules into the murine host. First, Listeria
monocytogenes are described that are able to transfer eukaryotic expression
plasmids into host cells for gene therapy. High multiplicities of infection are
still required for efficient gene transfer and we point out some of the
bottlenecks that counteract a more efficient transfer and application in vivo.
Then, we describe Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (S. typhimurium) as an 
expression plasmid transfer vehicle for oral DNA vaccination of mice. We
demonstrate that the stabilization of the plasmid transformants results in an
improved immune response. Stabilization was achieved by replacing the origin of
replication of the original high-copy-number plasmid by a low-copy-number origin.
Finally, we describe Salmonella carriers for the improved expression of
heterologous proteins. We introduce a system in which the plasmid is carried as a
single copy during cultivation but is amplified several fold upon infection of
the host. Using the same in vivo inducible promoter for both protein expression
and plasmid amplification, a substantial increase in antigen expression in vivo
can be achieved. A modification of this approach is the introduction of inducible
gene expression in vivo with a low-molecular-weight compound. Using P(BAD)
promoter and L-arabinose as inducer we were able to deliberately activate genes
in the bacterial carrier. No background activity could be observed with P(BAD)
such that an inducible suicide gene could be introduced. This is adding an
important safety feature to such live attenuated carrier bacteria.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmm.2007.07.005 
PMID: 17702649  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

