
1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2007 Oct;13 Suppl 3:1-46.

Guidelines for the validation and application of typing methods for use in
bacterial epidemiology.

van Belkum A(1), Tassios PT, Dijkshoorn L, Haeggman S, Cookson B, Fry NK, Fussing
V, Green J, Feil E, Gerner-Smidt P, Brisse S, Struelens M; European Society of
Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases (ESCMID) Study Group on
Epidemiological Markers (ESGEM).

Author information: 
(1)Erasmus MC, Department of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. a.vanbelkum@erasmusmc.nl

For bacterial typing to be useful, the development, validation and appropriate
application of typing methods must follow unified criteria. Over a decade ago,
ESGEM, the ESCMID (Europen Society for Clinical Microbiology and Infectious
Diseases) Study Group on Epidemiological Markers, produced guidelines for optimal
use and quality assessment of the then most frequently used typing procedures. We
present here an update of these guidelines, taking into account the spectacular
increase in the number and quality of typing methods made available over the past
decade. Newer and older, phenotypic and genotypic methods for typing of all
clinically relevant bacterial species are described according to their
principles, advantages and disadvantages. Criteria for their evaluation and
application and the interpretation of their results are proposed. Finally, the
issues of reporting, standardisation, quality assessment and international
networks are discussed. It must be emphasised that typing results can never stand
alone and need to be interpreted in the context of all available epidemiological,
clinical and demographical data relating to the infectious disease under
investigation. A strategic effort on the part of all workers in the field is thus
mandatory to combat emerging infectious diseases, as is financial support from
national and international granting bodies and health authorities.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-0691.2007.01786.x 
PMID: 17716294  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

