
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Nov 16;363(2):322-8. Epub 2007 Sep 6.

Role of adenosine kinase in the control of Streptomyces differentiations: Loss of
adenosine kinase suppresses sporulation and actinorhodin biosynthesis while
inducing hyperproduction of undecylprodigiosin in Streptomyces lividans.

Rajkarnikar A(1), Kwon HJ, Suh JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Division of Bioscience and Bioinformatics,
Myongji University, Yongin 449-728, Republic of Korea.

Adenosine kinase (ADK) catalyses phosphorylation of adenosine (Ado) and generates
adenosine monophosphate (AMP). ADK gene (adk(Sli), an ortholog of SCO2158) was
disrupted in Streptomyces lividans by single crossover-mediated vector
integration. The adk(Sli) disruption mutant (Deltaadk(Sli)) was devoid of
sporulation and a plasmid copy of adk(Sli) restored sporulation ability in
Deltaadk(Sli), thus indicating that loss of adk(Sli) abolishes sporulation in S. 
lividans. Ado supplementation strongly suppressed sporulation ability in S.
lividans wild-type (wt), supporting that disruption of adk(Sli) resulted in Ado
accumulation, which in turn suppressed sporulation. Cell-free experiments
demonstrated that Deltaadk(Sli) lacked ADK activity and in vitro characterization
confirms that adk(Sli) encodes ADK. The intracellular level of Ado was highly
elevated while the AMP level was significantly reduced after loss of adk(Sli)
while Deltaadk(Sli) displayed no significant derivation from wt in the levels of 
S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH) and S-adenosylmethionine (SAM). Notably, Ado
supplementation to wt lowered AMP content, albeit not to the level of
Deltaadk(Sli), implying that the reduction of AMP level is partially forced by
Ado accumulation in Deltaadk(Sli). In Deltaadk(Sli), actinorhodin (ACT)
production was suppressed and undecylprodigiosin (RED) production was
dramatically enhanced; however, Ado supplementation failed to exert this
differential control. A promoter-probe assay verified repression of actII-orf4
and induction of redD in Deltaadk(Sli), substantiating that unknown metabolic
shift(s) of ADK-deficiency evokes differential genetic control on secondary
metabolism in S. lividans. The present study is the first report revealing the
suppressive role of Ado in Streptomyces development and the differential
regulatory function of ADK activity in Streptomyces secondary metabolism,
although the underlying mechanism has yet to be elucidated.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.08.169 
PMID: 17869216  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

