
1. Ceska Slov Farm. 2007 Jun;56(3):141-5.

[Chitosan in topical preparations].

[Article in Slovak]

Matusová D(1), Truplová E.

Author information: 
(1)Fakulta zdravotníckych specializacných stúdií SZU v Bratislave, Katedra
farmaceutickej technológie, Slovenská republika. desana.matusova@szu.sk

Chitosan in topical preparations Within the framework of experimental work at the
Department of Pharmaceutical Technology of Slovak Medical University, "insect"
chitin obtained from the buff-tailed bumblebee (Bombus terrestris) was processed 
to produce dosage forms and compared with commercially available chitin, or
chitosan, obtained from shrimps (Pandalus borealus). The paper aimed to find
whether insect chitin, or chitosan, possessed similar technological properties as
commercially available and for topical preparations used products. Samples were
prepared containing chitin, or chitosan, of different origin, 0.25 and 0.5% in a 
gel base. In some gels the gel base was acidified with citric acid (in an amount 
of 0.75%) or lactic acid (1%) to improve the mechanical properties of foils. All 
samples were well applicable and after drying a relatively resistant transparent 
layer was formed on the skin. All samples could be made to produce elastic foils,
which after moistening clung well to the skin. Both chitin and chitosan obtained 
from the bodies of buff-tailed bumblebees differed from reference materials
obtained from shrimps by the degree of deacetylation, possessed different
technological properties, e.g., finer fibres, were more fragile, and when wet,
they could be disintegrated better, which is obvious also from the results of
microscopic evaluation. Chitosan prepared from chitin SAV (insect) possessed
substantially finer particles in the dosage form. The evaluation of the flow
properties of the prepared samples revealed that except Sample I (gel base alone)
they are time-dependent tixotropic systems. Whereas chitin gels did not show any 
antimicrobial effect (which is apparently connected with bad solubility of
chitin), gels with chitosan showed this activity. A more marked effect was
observed in the strains of Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and 
in Escherichia coli it was weaker. The paper reports the first tentative results 
of comparisons of chitin- and chitosan-containing gels obtained from insects and 
those obtained from shrimps, showing that the prepared samples were of comparable
quality.


PMID: 17867527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

