
1. J Immunol. 2007 Oct 1;179(7):4376-82.

Binding of lymphoid chemokines to collagen IV that accumulates in the basal
lamina of high endothelial venules: its implications in lymphocyte trafficking.

Yang BG(1), Tanaka T, Jang MH, Bai Z, Hayasaka H, Miyasaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunodynamics, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Osaka
University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.

Certain lymphoid chemokines are selectively and constitutively expressed in the
high endothelial venules (HEV) of lymph nodes and Peyer's patches, where they
play critical roles in the directional migration of extravasating lymphocytes
into the lymphoid tissue parenchyma. How these chemokines are selectively
localized and act in situ, however, remains unclear. In the present study, we
examined the possibility that basal lamina-associated extracellular matrix
proteins in the HEVs are responsible for retaining the lymphoid chemokines
locally. Here we show that collagen IV (Col IV) bound certain lymphoid
chemokines, including CCL21, CXCL13, and CXCL12, more potently than did
fibronectin or laminin-1, but it bound CCL19 and CCL5 only weakly, if at all.
Surface plasmon resonance analysis indicated that Col IV bound CCL21 with a low
nanomolar K(D), which required the C-terminal region of CCL21. Col IV can
apparently hold these chemokines in their active form upon binding, because the
Col IV-bound chemokines induced lymphocyte migration efficiently in vitro. We
found by immunohistochemistry that Col IV and CCL21, CXCL13, and CXCL12 were
colocalized in the basal lamina of HEVs. When injected s.c. into plt/plt mice,
CCL21 colocalized at least partially with Col IV on the basal lamina of HEVs in
draining lymph nodes. Collectively, our results suggest that Col IV contributes
to the creation of a lymphoid chemokine-rich environment in the basal lamina of
HEVs by binding an array of locally produced lymphoid chemokines that promote
directional lymphocyte trafficking from HEVs into the lymphoid tissue parenchyma.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.179.7.4376 
PMID: 17878332  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

