
1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2007 Oct;48(10):4509-18.

Functions of MUC16 in corneal epithelial cells.

Blalock TD(1), Spurr-Michaud SJ, Tisdale AS, Heimer SR, Gilmore MS, Ramesh V,
Gipson IK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Schepens Eye Research Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

PURPOSE: The membrane-associated mucin MUC16, a heavily O-glycosylated
transmembrane protein, is expressed by the ocular surface epithelia and localized
on the tips of the surface microplicae. Although its functions in the ocular
surface glycocalyx are unknown, it is thought that MUC16 provides a disadhesive
barrier to the epithelial membrane. Two other membrane-associated mucins
expressed by ocular surface epithelia, MUC1 and MUC4, are multifunctional and
have signaling capabilities through their cytoplasmic tails and EGF-like domains,
respectively. The MUC16 cytoplasmic tail has not been characterized, but, because
it contains a polybasic amino acid sequence, it potentially interacts with the
actin cytoskeleton through ezrin/radixin/moesin (ERM) actin-binding proteins.
METHODS: The interaction of MUC16 with the actin cytoskeleton through ERMs was
investigated using cytoplasmic tail peptides and ERM pull-down experiments. MUC16
functions were determined using RNA interference in immortalized human
corneal-limbal epithelial (HCLE) cells. The effect of MUC16 knockdown on
microplicae structure in HCLE cells was determined using scanning and
immunoelectron microscopy. HCLE cells were incubated with rose bengal dye to
measure the role of MUC16 in ocular surface barrier function. Binding of
fluorescently labeled Staphylococcus aureus to HCLE cells was measured to
determine the role of MUC16 in the protection of pathogen adherence on the ocular
surface epithelium.
RESULTS: MUC16 cytoplasmic tail peptides bound the N-terminus of ERMs, with no
detectable binding of MUC1 and MUC4 peptides. No effect on surface membrane
projections could be detected in HCLE cells after MUC16 suppression; however,
HCLE cells incubated with rose bengal showed that exclusion of the dye was
significantly reduced in cells with MUC16 suppression. In addition, S. aureus
binding to HCLE cells was significantly increased with MUC16 suppression.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that MUC16 is a multifunctional molecule
linked to the actin cytoskeleton. The expression of MUC16 in the ocular surface
glycocalyx helps provide a disadhesive protective barrier for the epithelial
surface.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.07-0430 
PMID: 17898272  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

