
1. J Aerosol Med. 2007 Fall;20(3):282-93.

Estimating in vivo airway surface liquid concentration in trials of inhaled
antibiotics.

Hasan MA(1), Lange CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton,
Alberta, Canada.

Antibiotic drugs exhibit concentration dependence in their efficacy. Therefore,
ensuring appropriate concentration of these drugs in the relevant body fluid is
important for obtaining the desired therapeutic and physiological action. Until
recently there had been no suitable method available to measure or estimate
concentration of drugs in the human airways resulting from inhaled aerosols or to
determine the amount of inhaled antibiotics required to ensure minimum inhibitory
concentration of a drug in the airway surface liquid (ASL). In this paper a
numerical method is used for estimating local concentration of inhaled
pharmaceutical aerosols in different generations of the human tracheobronchial
airways. The method utilizes a mathematical lung deposition model to estimate
amounts of aerosols depositing in different lung generations, and a recent ASL
model along with deposition results to assess the concentration of deposited
drugs immediately following inhalation. Examples of concentration estimates for
two case studies: one for the antibiotic tobramycin against Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, and another for taurolidine against Burkholderia cepacia are
presented. The aerosol characteristics, breathing pattern and properties of
nebulized solutions were adopted from two recent clinical studies on efficacy of 
these drugs in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients and from other sources in the
literature. While the clinically effective tobramycin showed a concentration
higher than the required in vivo concentration, that for the ineffective
taurolidine was found to be below the speculated required in vivo concentration. 
Results of this study thus show that the mathematical ASL model combined with the
lung deposition model can be an effective tool for helping decide the optimum
dosage of inhaled antibiotic drugs delivered during human clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1089/jam.2007.0603 
PMID: 17894535  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

