
1. J Environ Sci (China). 2007;19(1):60-6.

Analysis of bacterial community structures in two sewage treatment plants with
different sludge properties and treatment performance by nested PCR-DGGE method.

Liu XC(1), Zhang Y, Yang M, Wang ZY, Lv WZ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Environmental Aquatic Chemistry, Research Center for
Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China.
liuxinchun415@yahoo.com.cn

The bacterial community structures in two sewage treatment plants with different 
processes and performance were investigated by denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis (DGGE) of nested polymerase chain reaction (nested PCR) amplified
16S rRNA gene fragments with group-specific primers. Samples of raw sewage and
treated effluents were amplified using the whole-cell PCR method, and the
activated sludge samples were amplified using the extracted genomic DNA before
the PCR products were loaded on the same DGGE gel for bacterial community
analysis. Ammonia-oxidizing bacterial and actinomycetic community analysis were
also carried out to investigate the relationship between specific population
structures and system or sludge performance. The two plants demonstrated a
similarity in bacterial community structures of raw sewage and activated sludge, 
but they had different effluent populations. Many dominant bacterial populations 
of raw sewage did not appear in the activated sludge samples, suggesting that the
dominant bacterial populations in raw sewage might not play an important role
during wastewater treatment. Although the two plants had different sludge
properties in terms of settleability and foam forming ability, they demonstrated 
similar actinomycetic community structures. For activated sludge with bad
settling performance, the treated water presented a similar DGGE pattern with
that of activated sludge, indicating the nonselective washout of bacteria from
the system. The plant with better ammonium removal efficiency showed higher
ammonia-oxidizing bacteria species richness. Analysis of sequencing results
showed that the major populations in raw sewage were uncultured bacterium, while 
in activated sludge the predominant populations were beta proteobacteria.

DOI: 10.1016/s1001-0742(07)60010-2 
PMID: 17913155  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

