
1. Hepatology. 2007 Dec;46(6):1993-2002.

Hepatocyte growth factor signaling pathway inhibits cholesterol
7alpha-hydroxylase and bile acid synthesis in human hepatocytes.

Song KH(1), Ellis E, Strom S, Chiang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Biochemistry, Northeastern Ohio
Universities College of Medicine, Rootstown, OH 44272, USA.

Bile acid synthesis in the liver is regulated by the rate-limiting enzyme
cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1). Transcription of the CYP7A1 gene is
inhibited by bile acids and cytokines. The rate of bile acid synthesis is reduced
immediately after partial hepatectomy and during the early stage of liver
regeneration. Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) released from stellate cells
activates a receptor tyrosine kinase c-Met, in hepatocytes and stimulates
signaling pathways that regulate cell growth, proliferation, and apoptosis. This 
study demonstrated that HGF strongly and rapidly repressed CYP7A1 mRNA expression
and the rate of bile acid synthesis in primary human hepatocytes. HGF rapidly
induced c-Jun and small heterodimer partner mRNA and protein expression and
increased phosphorylation of ERK1/2, JNK, and c-Jun. Specific inhibitors of
protein kinase C, extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2), and c-Jun
N-terminal kinase (JNK) blocked HGF inhibition of CYP7A1 expression. Knockdown of
c-Met by small interfering RNA resulted in a significant increase in CYP7A1 and
blocked HGF inhibition of CYP7A1 mRNA expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays showed that HGF induced recruitment of c-Jun and small heterodimer partner
(SHP) but reduced recruitment of the coactivators peroxisome proliferators
activated receptor rho coactivator 1alpha (PGC-1alpha) and cAMP response element 
binding protein (CREB)-binding protein (CBP) to chromatin.CONCLUSION: This study 
demonstrated that HGF is a novel regulator of CYP7A1 and bile acid synthesis in
human hepatocytes and may protect hepatocytes from accumulating toxic bile acids 
and developing intrahepatic cholestasis during the early stage of liver
regeneration.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.21878 
PMID: 17924446  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

