
1. Int J Med Microbiol. 2008 Jan;298(1-2):105-14. Epub 2007 Oct 23.

Development of a tripartite vector system for live oral immunization using a
gram-negative probiotic carrier.

Buddenborg C(1), Daudel D, Liebrecht S, Greune L, Humberg V, Schmidt MA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Infektiologie, Zentrum für Molekularbiologie der Entzündung,
Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Von-Esmarch-Str. 56, D-48149 Münster, 
Germany.

The mucosa represents the primary target site and thus the first barrier for most
microbial pathogens. Nevertheless, nearly all present-day vaccines are applied by
an invasive route, target the systemic immune system, and do not confer efficient
mucosal protection. Currently, mucosal immunity can only be achieved by the
delivery of antigens via the mucosal route. Therefore, multiple efforts are under
way to develop mucosal vaccines and particularly live oral vaccines as these
would confer considerable advantages. We have engineered the AIDA autotransporter
system for the surface presentation and/or release of heterologous polypeptides. 
This study is focused on the development and evaluation of a tripartite live
bacterial vector system for oral vaccination based on the AIDA autotransporter,
heterologous virulence factor-derived (poly-)peptides, and the apathogenic
Escherichia coli Nissle 1917 strain as a live carrier. Potentially with this
system also attenuated Salmonella or Shigella strains might be employed as
carriers. Model antigens included e.g. the p60 antigen of Listeria monocytogenes,
the OspA/OspG antigens of B. burgdorferi, the LT-B subunit of E. coli, and Stx-B 
subunits of enterohemorrhaghic E. coli (EHEC), all representing crucial virulence
factors of important bacterial pathogens. Exemplary oral immunization studies
were conducted using different regimes in BALB/c mice with candidate vaccines
expressing Stx B-subunits and OspA and OspG proteins. To monitor the induction of
immune responses, specific antibody titers in serum as well as secreted mucosal
antibodies of local and distal mucosal surfaces were determined. Antigen-specific
mucosal as well as systemic antibodies could be induced; however, thus far the
response turned out to be heterogeneous and appeared not to be sufficient to
mediate protection.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmm.2007.08.008 
PMID: 17936683  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

