
1. Biomacromolecules. 2007 Dec;8(12):3718-22. Epub 2007 Nov 3.

Layer-by-layer assembly of bioengineered flagella protein nanotubes.

Kumara MT(1), Tripp BC, Muralidharan S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Nanotechnology Research and Computation Center,
Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, Michigan 49008-5413, USA.

Flagella nanotubes present on the surface of E. coli bacteria were bioengineered 
to display arginine-lysine and glutamic acid-aspartic acid peptide loops. These
protein bionanotubes were demonstrated to self-assemble, layer-by-layer, by
atomic force microscopy (AFM) on gold-coated mica and quartz surfaces. Flagella
with arginine-lysine loops were assembled in a bottom-up manner on a gold-coated 
mica surface by employing the molecular complementarity of the
biotin-streptavidin interaction. Self-assembled monolayers of alkylamines on the 
gold surface were derivatized with biotin, followed by binding of streptavidin to
the biotinylated surface. The amine groups of the flagella peptide loops were
chemically attached to biotin through a polyethyleneoxide spacer and paired with 
streptavidin on the gold surface. This process could be repeated to generate
multiple layers of flagella. Flagella with glutamic acid-aspartic acid peptide
loops were self-assembled on quartz surfaces by electrostatic attraction to
protonated amine groups. The quartz surface was silanized to obtain amine groups,
which were used to assemble the first layer of glutamic acid-aspartic acid
peptide loop flagella nanotubes. This layer was covered with polyethyleneimine
through electrostatic attraction and employed to assemble a second layer of
flagella. The self-assembled glutamic acid-aspartic acid flagella were also used 
to demonstrate the biomineralization of CaCO 3. The layer-by-layer self-assembly 
employing electrostatic attraction yielded a more uniform layer of flagella than 
the one obtained with the molecular complementarity of the biotin-streptavidin
pair.

DOI: 10.1021/bm7005449 
PMID: 17979244  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

