
1. Mol Cell Biochem. 2008 Feb;309(1-2):87-97. Epub 2007 Nov 16.

Inhibition of apoptosis, activation of NKT cell and upregulation of CD40 and
CD40L mediated by M. leprae antigen(s) combined with Murabutide and Trat peptide 
in leprosy patients.

Chattree V(1), Khanna N, Bisht V, Rao DN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari
Nagar, New Delhi 110029, India. dnrao311@rediffmail.com

Protective immunity against intracellular pathogen Mycobacterium leprae is
dependent on the activation of T cells. Repeated stimulation of T cells by M.
leprae antigens MLCwA (M. leprae total cell wall antigen) and ManLAM
(mannose-capped lipoarabinomannan), may lead to apoptosis in leprosy patients. In
the present study, inhibition of the Fas-induced apoptosis of peripheral blood
mononuclear cells of leprosy patients was investigated using above M. leprae
antigen(s), in combination with immunomodulators murabutide (MB) and a Trat
peptide in particulate form (liposome). Incubation of the cells with antigen
containing the two immunomodulators in particulate form (liposomes) led to
decrease in percentage of propidium iodide positive cells and T cells expressing 
Fas-FasL as well as decreased caspase-8/-3 activities in lepromatous patients,
thereby inhibiting apoptosis, while converse was true upon stimulation with
soluble antigen. Concurrently, there was an upregulation of antiapoptotic protein
Bcl-xL in lepromatous patients, leading to the inhibition of apoptosis. It was
also observed that same formulation upregulated the expression of CD40 on B cells
and monocytes-macrophages and CD40L on T cells of lepromatous leprosy patients.
The same liposomal formulation significantly increased the expression of CD1b and
CD1d on monocytes-macrophages as well as percentage of NKT cells secreting
IFN-gamma in lepromatous leprosy patients. Thus, the liposomal formulation of
antigen with the immunomodulators in vitro promoted the activation of CD40:CD40L 
pathways and NKT cell function involved in providing cell-mediated immunity to
these patients. The same formulation also caused reversal of T cell anergy by
inhibiting apoptosis through decreased expression of death receptors (Fas-FasL)
and caspase activities (3 and 8) and increased expression of antiapoptotic
protein Bcl-xL in these patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s11010-007-9646-8 
PMID: 18008143  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

