
1. Biochemistry. 2007 Dec 18;46(50):14487-99. Epub 2007 Nov 21.

Rational redesign of the 4-chlorobenzoate binding site of 4-chlorobenzoate:
coenzyme a ligase for expanded substrate range.

Wu R(1), Reger AS, Cao J, Gulick AM, Dunaway-Mariano D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico
87131, USA.

Environmental aromatic acids are transformed to chemical energy in bacteria that 
possess the requisite secondary pathways. Some of these pathways rely on the
activation of the aromatic acid by coenzyme A (CoA) thioesterification catalyzed 
by an aromatic acid: CoA ligase. Adaptation of such pathways to the
bioremediation of man-made pollutants such as polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) and 
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) requires that the chlorinated benzoic acid 
byproduct that is formed be able to be eliminated by further degradation. To take
advantage of natural benzoic acid degrading pathways requiring initial ring
activation by thioesterification, the pathway aromatic acid:CoA ligase must be an
effective catalyst with the chlorinated benzoic acid. This study, which focuses
on the 4-chlorobenzoate:CoA ligase (CBL) of the 4-monochlorobiphenyl degrading
bacterium Alcaligenes sp. strain ALP83, was carried out to determine if the
4-chlorobenzoate binding site of this enzyme can be transformed by rational
design to recognize the chlorobenzoic acids formed in the course of breakdown of 
other environmental PCB congeners. The fundamental question addressed in this
study is whether it is possible to add or subtract space from the
substrate-binding pocket of this ligase (to complement the topology of the
unnatural aromatic substrate) without causing disruption of the ligase catalytic 
machinery. Herein, we report the results of a substrate specificity analysis
that, when interpreted within the context of the X-ray crystal structures, set
the stage for the rational design of the ligase for thioesterification of two
PCB-derived chlorobenzoic acids. The ligase was first optimized to catalyze CoA
thioesterification of 3,4-dichlorobenzoic acid, a poor substrate, by truncating
Ile303, a large hydrophobic residue that packs against the ring meta-C(H) group. 
The structural basis for the approximately 100-fold enhancement in the rate of
3,4-dichlorobenzoate thioesterification catalyzed by the I303A and I303G CBL
mutants was validated by determination of the crystal structure of the
3,4-dichlorobenzoate-bound enzymes. Determinations of the structures of I303
mutant complexes of 3-chlorobenzoate, a very poor substrate, revealed
nonproductive binding as a result of the inability of the substrate ring C(4)H
group to fill the pocket that binds the C(4)Cl group of the native substrate. The
C(4)Cl pocket of the CBL I303A mutant was then reduced in size by strategic amino
acid replacement. A 54-fold improvement in catalytic efficiency was observed for 
the CBL F184W/I303A/V209T triple mutant. The results of this investigation are
interpreted as evidence that the plasticity of the ligase catalytic scaffold is
sufficient to allow expansion of substrate range by rational design. The
combination of structural and kinetic analyses of the constructed mutants proved 
to be an effective approach to engineering the ligase for novel substrates.

DOI: 10.1021/bi701609w 
PMCID: PMC4710512
PMID: 18027984  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

