
1. Peptides. 2008 Jan;29(1):1-6. Epub 2007 Oct 24.

Evaluation of the inhibitory effects of human serum components on bactericidal
activity of human beta defensin 3.

Maisetta G(1), Di Luca M, Esin S, Florio W, Brancatisano FL, Bottai D, Campa M,
Batoni G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Patologia Sperimentale, Biotecnologie Mediche, Infettivologia 
ed Epidemiologia, University of Pisa, Via S. Zeno 35-39, 56127 Pisa, Italy.

Naturally occurring cationic antimicrobial peptides (CAPs) are an essential
component of the innate immune system of multicellular organisms. At
concentrations generally higher than those found in vivo, most CAPs exhibit
strong antibacterial properties in vitro, but their activity may be inhibited by 
body fluids, a fact that could limit their future use as antimicrobial and/or
immunomodulatory agents. In the present study, we evaluated the effects of human 
serum components on bactericidal activity of the human beta-defensin 3 (hBD-3), a
CAP considered particularly promising for future therapeutic employment. Human
serum diluted to 20% strongly inhibited the bactericidal activity of the peptide 
against both the Gram-positive species Staphylococcus aureus and the
Gram-negative species Acinetobacter baumannii. Such activity was not restored in 
serum devoid of salts (dialyzed), pre-treated with protease inhibitors, or
subjected to both of these treatments. The addition of physiological
concentrations of NaCl, CaCl2, and human albumin in the bactericidal assay
abolished bactericidal activity of hBD-3 against S. aureus, while it only
partially inhibited the activity of the peptide against A. baumannii. Although a 
proteolytic activity of serum on hBD-3 was demonstrated at the protein level by
Western blot, addition of physiological concentrations of trypsin to the
bactericidal assay only partially affected the antibacterial properties of the
peptide. Altogether, these results demonstrate a major role of mono-divalent
cations and serum proteins on inhibition of hBD-3 antibacterial properties and
indicate a relative lack in sensitivity of the bactericidal activity of this
peptide to trypsin and trypsin-like proteases.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2007.10.013 
PMID: 18045738  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

