
1. ISME J. 2007 Aug;1(4):331-40. Epub 2007 Jul 5.

Sequence-based analysis of pQBR103; a representative of a unique,
transfer-proficient mega plasmid resident in the microbial community of sugar
beet.

Tett A(1), Spiers AJ, Crossman LC, Ager D, Ciric L, Dow JM, Fry JC, Harris D,
Lilley A, Oliver A, Parkhill J, Quail MA, Rainey PB, Saunders NJ, Seeger K,
Snyder LA, Squares R, Thomas CM, Turner SL, Zhang XX, Field D, Bailey MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Ecology and Hydrology-Oxford, Oxford, UK.

The plasmid pQBR103 was found within Pseudomonas populations colonizing the leaf 
and root surfaces of sugar beet plants growing at Wytham, Oxfordshire, UK. At 425
kb it is the largest self-transmissible plasmid yet sequenced from the
phytosphere. It is known to enhance the competitive fitness of its host, and
parts of the plasmid are known to be actively transcribed in the plant
environment. Analysis of the complete sequence of this plasmid predicts a coding 
sequence (CDS)-rich genome containing 478 CDSs and an exceptional degree of
genetic novelty; 80% of predicted coding sequences cannot be ascribed a function 
and 60% are orphans. Of those to which function could be assigned, 40% bore
greatest similarity to sequences from Pseudomonas spp, and the majority of the
remainder showed similarity to other gamma-proteobacterial genera and plasmids.
pQBR103 has identifiable regions presumed responsible for replication and
partitioning, but despite being tra+ lacks the full complement of any previously 
described conjugal transfer functions. The DNA sequence provided few insights
into the functional significance of plant-induced transcriptional regions, but
suggests that 14% of CDSs may be expressed (11 CDSs with functional annotation
and 54 without), further highlighting the ecological importance of these novel
CDSs. Comparative analysis indicates that pQBR103 shares significant regions of
sequence with other plasmids isolated from sugar beet plants grown at the same
geographic location. These plasmid sequences indicate there is more novelty in
the mobile DNA pool accessible to phytosphere pseudomonas than is currently
appreciated or understood.

DOI: 10.1038/ismej.2007.47 
PMCID: PMC2656933
PMID: 18043644  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

