
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2008 Jan;77(6):1305-16. Epub 2007 Dec 1.

Expression of Clostridium acetobutylicum butanol synthetic genes in Escherichia
coli.

Inui M(1), Suda M, Kimura S, Yasuda K, Suzuki H, Toda H, Yamamoto S, Okino S,
Suzuki N, Yukawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Innovative Technology for the Earth, Kizugawa, Kyoto,
Japan.

A recombinant butanol pathway composed of Clostridium acetobutylicum ATCC 824
genes, thiL, hbd, crt, bcd-etfB-etfA, and adhe1 (or adhe) coding for acetyl-CoA
acetyltransferase (THL), beta-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase (HBD),
3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydratase (CRT), butyryl-CoA dehydrogenase (BCD),
butyraldehyde dehydrogenase (BYDH), and butanol dehydrogenase (BDH), under the
tac promoter control was constructed and was introduced into Escherichia coli.
The functional expression of these six enzymes was proved by demonstrating the
corresponding enzyme activities using spectrophotometric, high performance liquid
chromatography and gas chromatography analyses. The BCD activity, which was not
detected in E. coli previously, was shown in the present study by performing the 
procedure from cell extract preparation to activity measurement under anaerobic
condition. Moreover, the etfA and etfB co-expression was found to be essential
for the BCD activity. In the case of BYDH activity, the adhe gene product was
shown to have higher specificity towards butyryl-CoA compared to the adhe1
product. Butanol production from glucose was achieved by the highly concentrated 
cells of the butanologenic E. coli strains, BUT1 with adhe1 and BUT2 with adhe,
under anaerobic condition, and the BUT1 and BUT2 strains were shown to produce 4 
and 16-mM butanol with 6- and 1-mM butyrate as a byproduct, respectively. This
study reports the novel butanol production by an aerobically pregrown
microorganism possessing the genes of a strict anaerobe, Clostridium
acetobutylicum.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-007-1257-5 
PMID: 18060402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

