
1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2007 Nov;14(7):470-6.

Bioremediation process on Brazil shoreline. Laboratory experiments.

Rosa AP(1), Triguis JA.

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense, Laboratório de Engenharia e
Exploração de Petróleo, Av. Brenand s/n, Imboacica, Macaé/RJ, Brazil CEP:
27925-310. anabela@lenep.uenf.br

GOAL, SCOPE AND BACKGROUND: Bioremediation technique can be considered a
promising alternative to clean oil spills using microbial processes to reduce the
concentration and/or the toxicity of pollutants. To understand the importance of 
this work we must know that there is only little research performed to date using
bioremediation techniques to clean oil spills in tropical countries. So, the main
objective of this work is to analyze the behavior of a laboratory's
bioremediation test using nutrients on coastal sediments.
METHODS: The bioremediation process is followed through geochemical analysis
during the tests. This organic material is analyzed by medium pressure liquid
chromatography (MPLC), gas chromatography/flame ionization detection (GC/FID) and
gas chromatography/ mass spectrometry. By microbial counting, the number of total
bacteria and degrading bacteria is determined during the experiments, in order to
confirm the effectiveness of the bioremediation process. The seawater obtained
throughout the bioremediation process is analyzed for nutrients grade (phosphate 
and ammonium ions) and also for its toxicity (Microtox tests) due the presence of
hydrocarbons and fertilizer.
RESULTS: The results from the geochemical analyses of the oil show a relative
decrease in the saturated hydrocarbon fraction that is compensated by a relative 
enrichment on polar compounds. It's confirmed by the fingerprint evaluation where
it is possible to see a complete reduction of the normal alkanes followed by
isoprenoids. Seawater analysis done by toxicity and nutrients analysis, such as
microbial counting (total and degrading bacteria), confirm the fertilizer
effectiveness during the bioremediation process.
DISCUSSION: Results from simulating test using NPK, a low-price plant fertilizer,
suggest that it's able to stimulate the degradation process. Results from medium 
pressure liquid chromatography (MPLC), done at two different depths (surface and 
subsurface), show different behavior during the biodegradation process where the 
later is seen to be more susceptible to microbial attack. Data from
bioremediation unit shows a bigger reduction of the saturated fraction, followed 
by some smaller reduction of aromatic fractions, compensated by a relative
increase from polar compounds (NSO). n-C17/pristane, n-C18/ fitane and
pristane/fitane rates show constant values for the unity control, different from 
bioremediation samples which have a significant reduction, especially on
subsurface areas, where a strong fall in the rates, seen to be reduced to zero
over twenty days, had occurred during the first ten days. However, sample
surfaces are reduced to zero in thirty days of experiments, proving that
biodegradation is better on subsurfaces. Gaseous chromatography/mass spectrometry
(CG/MS) analysis shows constant values to cyclic biomarker rates and aromatic
compounds, suggesting that the biodegradation process is not strong enough to
reduce these composites. Microbial analysis shows a reduction on heterotrophic
(total bacteria) number from control unit, probably because the bacteria uses the
spill oil like carbon source and energy. However, the number increases on
bioremediation unit, because it uses NPK like a biostimulator. The
hydrocarbonoclastic number isn't enough on the first moment, but it's detected
after 30 days and quantified in all units, showing big values especially in
bioremediation. Toxicity tests confirm that NPK fertilizer does not intoxicate
the shoreline during the application of the bioremediation technique. Some
nutrient concentration shows high values of ammonium and phosphate per
bioremediation unit, reducing by the end of the experiment.
CONCLUSIONS: Results reached the goal, finding a proper nutrient (NPK fertilizer)
to stimulate the biodegradation process, growing bacteria responsible for
reducing impact-contaminated coast ambient by oil spills. Chemical analysis of
oil shows a reduction in the saturated fraction with a relative enrichment in
polar composites (NSO) and the aromatic fraction from oil remaining constant.
Subsurface samples show more biodegradation than surface samples, probably
because the first one has higher humidity. Linear alcanes are more biodegraded
than isoprenoids, confirming the biodegradation susceptibility order. Saturated
cyclic biomarkers and aromatic compounds show constant behavior maybe because the
nutrients or time was not enough for microorganismic attack. Fertilizer does not 
demonstrate any toxic effects in local biota so that it does not compromise the
technique applicability and the environment is not saturated by nutrients during 
the simulation, especially since the coastal environment is an open system
affected daily by tides. Therefore, bioremediation tests can be classified as
moderate, reaching level 5 in the classification scale by Peters & Moldowan
(1993).
RECOMMENDATIONS AND PERSPECTIVES: The use of marine environment by the petroleum 
industry on exploration, production and transportation operation, transform this 
oil to become the most important pollutant in the oceans. Bioremediation is an
important technique used to clean spilled oil impacting on shorelines,
accelerating the biodegradation process by using fertilizer growing the
microorganisms responsible for decontaminating the environment. We recommend
confirming the efficiency of NPK nutrient used on bioremediation simulating
experiments on beaches, while monitoring the chemical changes long-term. NPK
fertilizer can be used to stimulate the biodegradation process on shoreline
impacted by spilled oil.

DOI: 10.1065/espr2007.02.377 
PMID: 18062478  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

