
1. Cell Microbiol. 2008 Apr;10(4):930-44. Epub 2007 Dec 5.

The mannose cap of mycobacterial lipoarabinomannan does not dominate the
Mycobacterium-host interaction.

Appelmelk BJ(1), den Dunnen J, Driessen NN, Ummels R, Pak M, Nigou J,
Larrouy-Maumus G, Gurcha SS, Movahedzadeh F, Geurtsen J, Brown EJ, Eysink Smeets 
MM, Besra GS, Willemsen PT, Lowary TL, van Kooyk Y, Maaskant JJ, Stoker NG, van
der Ley P, Puzo G, Vandenbroucke-Grauls CM, Wieland CW, van der Poll T,
Geijtenbeek TB, van der Sar AM, Bitter W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infection Control, VU University
Medical Center, 1081 BT Amsterdam, The Netherlands. bj.appelmelk@vumc.nl

Pathogenic mycobacteria have the ability to persist in phagocytic cells and to
suppress the immune system. The glycolipid lipoarabinomannan (LAM), in particular
its mannose cap, has been shown to inhibit phagolysosome fusion and to induce
immunosuppressive IL-10 production via interaction with the mannose receptor or
DC-SIGN. Hence, the current paradigm is that the mannose cap of LAM is a crucial 
factor in mycobacterial virulence. However, the above studies were performed with
purified LAM, never with live bacteria. Here we evaluate the biological
properties of capless mutants of Mycobacterium marinum and M. bovis BCG, made by 
inactivating homologues of Rv1635c. We show that its gene product is an
undecaprenyl phosphomannose-dependent mannosyltransferase. Compared with parent
strain, capless M. marinum induced slightly less uptake by and slightly more
phagolysosome fusion in infected macrophages but this did not lead to decreased
survival of the bacteria in vitro, nor in vivo in zebra fish. Loss of caps in M. 
bovis BCG resulted in a sometimes decreased binding to human dendritic cells or
DC-SIGN-transfected Raji cells, but no differences in IL-10 induction were
observed. In mice, capless M. bovis BCG did not survive less well in lung, spleen
or liver and induced a similar cytokine profile. Our data contradict the current 
paradigm and demonstrate that mannose-capped LAM does not dominate the
Mycobacterium-host interaction.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2007.01097.x 
PMID: 18070119  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

