
1. Dev Biol. 2008 Jan 15;313(2):725-38. Epub 2007 Nov 19.

Potential role of Nanos3 in maintaining the undifferentiated spermatogonia
population.

Lolicato F(1), Marino R, Paronetto MP, Pellegrini M, Dolci S, Geremia R, Grimaldi
P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Cell Biology, University of Rome Tor Vergata, 
Via Montpellier, 1, 00133, Rome, Italy.

Nanos gene encodes for zinc-finger protein with putative RNA-binding activity
which shows an evolutionary conserved function in germ cell development. In the
mouse, three Nanos homologs have been identified: Nanos1, Nanos2 and Nanos3. The 
Nanos3 ortholog is expressed in both male and female gonads of early embryo and, 
after birth, it is found only in the testis. Nanos3 targeted disruption results
in the complete loss of germ cells in both sexes; however the role of Nanos3 in
the testis during the postnatal period has not been explored yet. In this study, 
we show that, in prepuberal testis, Nanos3 is expressed in undifferentiated
spermatogonia and that its up-regulation causes accumulation of cells in the G1
phase, indicating that this protein is able to delay the cell cycle progression
of spermatogonial cells. This is in line with the observation that the cell cycle
length of the undifferentiated germ cells is longer than in differentiating
spermatogonia. We also demonstrate a conserved mechanism of action of Nanos3,
involving the interaction with the murine RNA-binding protein Pumilio2 and
consisting of a potential translational repressor activity. According to the
possible role of Nanos3 in inhibiting spermatogonia cell differentiation, we show
that treatment with the differentiating factor all-trans retinoic acid induces a 
dramatic down-regulation of its expression. These results allow to conclude that,
in the prepuberal testis, Nanos3 is important to maintain undifferentiated
spermatogonia via the regulation of their cell cycle.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.11.011 
PMID: 18089289  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

