
1. Vox Sang. 2008 Apr;94(3):193-201. Epub 2007 Dec 11.

Propionibacterium acnes lacks the capability to proliferate in platelet
concentrates.

Störmer M(1), Kleesiek K, Dreier J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Laboratoriums- und Transfusionsmedizin, Herz- und Diabeteszentrum
Nordrhein-Westfalen, Universitätsklinik der Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bad
Oeynhausen, Germany.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Propionibacterium acnes is considered to be one of the
most frequent contaminants of platelet concentrates (PCs) when anaerobic
culture-based detection methods are used. But Propionibacteria are often detected
too late when blood products have already been transfused. Therefore, its
transfusion relevance is still demanding clarification because studies of the
outcome of patients transfused with P. acnes-contaminated PCs are still uncommon.
In this study, we monitored clinical effects in patients after transfusion of
PCs, which were detected too late in sterility testing. Furthermore, we assessed 
the bacterial proliferation of Propionibacterium species seeded into PCs to
clarify their significance for platelet bacteria screening.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In the look-back process, we followed the route of the
putative contaminated PC units from storage to transfusion. In the in vitro
study, PCs were inoculated with 1-100 colony-forming unit (CFU)/ml of clinical
isolates of Propionibacteria (n = 10). Sampling was performed during 10-day
aerobic storage at 22 degrees C. The presence of bacteria was assessed by plating
culture and automated BacT/Alert culture system.
RESULTS: Propionibacterium acnes shows slow or no growth under PC storage
conditions. Clinical signs of adverse events after transfusion of potentially
contaminated PC units were not reported.
CONCLUSION: Propionibacteria do not proliferate under PC storage conditions and
therefore may be missed or detected too late when blood products have already
been transfused.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1423-0410.2007.01019.x 
PMID: 18086288  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

