
1. Crit Care Med. 2008 Feb;36(2):580-7.

Acute phase response impairs host defense against Pseudomonas aeruginosa
pneumonia in mice.

Renckens R(1), van Westerloo DJ, Roelofs JJ, Pater JM, Schultz MJ, Florquin S,
van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, University of Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. r.renckens@amc.uva.nl

Comment in
    Crit Care Med. 2008 Feb;36(2):646-7.

OBJECTIVE: Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a common pathogen in hospital-acquired
pneumonia. Especially trauma and postsurgical patients display a profound acute
phase protein response and are susceptible to acquiring pneumonia. The objective 
was to study the influence of the acute phase response induced by sterile tissue 
injury on pulmonary host defense.
DESIGN: Laboratory investigation.
SETTING: Academic medical center.
SUBJECTS: Female C57Bl/6 wild-type mice, 8-10 wks old.
INTERVENTIONS: Mice were injected subcutaneously with either turpentine or
sterile saline (control) in both hind limbs 1 day before intranasal infection
with P. aeruginosa.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: The turpentine-induced acute phase response was
associated with 100% lethality after induction of pneumonia, whereas control mice
all survived the Pseudomonas infection. In addition, turpentine-injected mice
demonstrated much higher bacterial loads in their lungs and an increased
dissemination of the infection. The acute phase reaction attenuated lung
inflammation during pneumonia, as reflected by histopathology, reduced pulmonary 
levels of proinflammatory cytokines, and a strongly diminished recruitment of
neutrophils to the site of infection. Blood neutrophils harvested from turpentine
injected mice displayed a reduced capacity to up-regulate their CD11b/CD18
expression upon stimulation with Pseudomonas ex vivo and during Pseudomonas
pneumonia in vivo. Administration of a blocking anti-CD11b antibody to
turpentine-injected and control mice almost completely abrogated the difference
in bacterial outgrowth, whereas inhibition of the sympathetic nervous system did 
not affect the impaired pulmonary host defense in mice with an acute phase
response.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that a systemic acute phase response might impair
host defense against P. aeruginosa pneumonia, possibly in part by inhibition of
CD11b/CD18-dependent neutrophil recruitment.

DOI: 10.1097/01.CCM.0B013E3181620652 
PMID: 18091542  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

