
1. Environ Int. 2008 May;34(4):499-508. Epub 2007 Dec 21.

Levels and trends of persistent organic pollutants in ringed seals (Phoca
hispida) from Central West Greenland, with particular focus on polybrominated
diphenyl ethers (PBDEs).

Vorkamp K(1), Rigét FF, Glasius M, Muir DC, Dietz R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Chemistry and Microbiology, National Environmental
Research Institute, Aarhus University, Frederiksborgvej 399, 4000 Roskilde,
Denmark. kvo@dmu.dk

Polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) and the organochlorine compounds
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), DDTs, HCB, chlordane-related pesticides, HCH
and toxaphene were analysed in blubber of juvenile ringed seals from Central West
Greenland collected between 1982 and 2006. The longest time series could be
established for PBDEs, partly based on archived material, while PCBs and DDTs
covered a study period from 1994-2006. All organochlorines showed decreasing
trends, most pronounced for DDT and HCH with an annual change of 8%. BDE-47 had a
significantly increasing trend of 5% annually. It was the only BDE congener
consistently above the detection limit, with annual median concentrations between
0.78 ng/g lw to 3.54 ng/g lw, i.e. about 10 times lower than values from East
Greenland observed in a similar time trend study on ringed seal blubber [Rigét F,
Vorkamp K, Dietz R, Rastogi SC. Temporal trend studies on polybrominated diphenyl
ethers (PBDEs) and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in ringed seals from East
Greenland. J Environ Monit 2006; 8: 1000-5]. A clear East>West difference was
also found for PCBs and DDTs, but not for chlordanes, toxaphene or HCHs. Sigma
10-PCB, Sigma DDT and Sigma Chlordanes had similar annual median concentrations, 
typically exceeding SigmaPBDE by two orders of magnitude. The concentrations of
HCH and toxaphene were in an intermediate group, with highest annual median
concentrations of 135 ng/g lw and 20 ng/g lw, respectively. For most compound
groups, the circumpolar trend previously established under for example the Arctic
Monitoring and Assessment Programme was confirmed, but apparently, more data are 
needed for chlordane-related compounds and toxaphene. Statistical analyses of the
compound patterns in the ringed seal samples revealed significantly greater
differences between seals from East and West than between different sampling
years. Higher proportions of PCBs and DDTs and lower proportions of chlordanes
and HCHs were found in seals from East Greenland than in those from West
Greenland. Based on principal component analysis of individual congener and
compounds, seals from East Greenland were found to contain higher proportions of 
the higher chlorinated CB congeners. Varying patterns between sampling locations 
may be caused by different exposure situations related to contaminant emissions
and transport, but different feeding habits may also affect the contaminant
composition.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envint.2007.11.004 
PMID: 18155150  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

