
1. Prostate. 2008 Mar 1;68(4):427-41. doi: 10.1002/pros.20716.

Critical roles for JNK, c-Jun, and Fas/FasL-Signaling in vitamin E analog-induced
apoptosis in human prostate cancer cells.

Jia L(1), Yu W, Wang P, Li J, Sanders BG, Kline K.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, School of Biological Sciences,
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, USA.

BACKGROUND: Alpha-tocopherol ether-linked acetic acid (alpha-TEA), an analog of
vitamin E (RRR-alpha-tocopherol), is a potent pro-apoptotic agent for human
cancer cells in vivo and in vitro.
METHODS: alpha-TEA-induced apoptosis was investigated in LNCaP and PC-3 human
prostate cancer cells. Apoptosis was measured by DAPI-staining and FACS analyses 
of the sub-G1 fraction. Signaling molecules involved in apoptosis were measured
by Western immunoblot analyses with or without prior immunoprecipitation, FACS
analyses of cell surface membrane expression, RT-PCR analyses of mRNA levels, and
chromatin immunoprecipitation. Functional significance was determined using
siRNAs, dominant negative mutant, chemical inhibitor, or neutralizing antibody.
RESULTS: Alpha-TEA treatment increased Fas and Fas ligand mRNA and protein
levels; as well as, levels of cell surface membrane Fas in both cell lines.
Blockage of Fas signaling attenuated alpha-TEA-induced apoptosis. alpha-TEA
treatment also produced prolonged, elevated levels of activated (phosphorylated) 
c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and its substrate c-Jun, both of which were
demonstrated to be necessary for alpha-TEA-induced apoptosis. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation results showed binding of c-Jun to the promoters of both Fas 
and FasL in alpha-TEA treated cells. Investigations of alpha-TEA-triggered
apoptosis showed dual signaling from Fas with essential roles for both FADD and
Daxx with FADD initiating the classical pathway mediated by caspase-8 activation 
and Daxx initiating an alternate pathway involving activation of JNK, c-Jun, and 
increased levels of Fas and FasL.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, data support critical roles for JNK, c-Jun, and dual
signaling from Fas/FasL via FADD and Daxx in alpha-TEA-induced apoptosis of human
prostate cancer cells.

Copyright 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/pros.20716 
PMID: 18196534  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

