
1. Diabetes Metab. 2008 Apr;34(2):87-95. doi: 10.1016/j.diabet.2007.09.005. Epub
2008 Jan 31.

Diabetic foot osteomyelitis.

Hartemann-Heurtier A(1), Senneville E.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases Department, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, AP-HP,
université Pierre-et-Marie-Curie-Paris-6, 75013 Paris, France.
agnes.heurtier@psl.ap-hop-paris.fr <agnes.heurtier@psl.ap-hop-paris.fr>

Bone infection in the diabetic foot is always a complication of a preexisting
infected foot wound. Prevalence can be as high as 66%. Diagnosis can be suspected
in two mains conditions: no healing (or no depth decrease) in spite of
appropriate care and off-loading, and/or a visible or palpated bone with a metal 
probe. The first recommended diagnostic step is to perform (and if necessary to
repeat) plain radiographs. After a four-week treatment period, if plain
radiographs are still normal, suspicion for bone infection will persist in case
of bad evolution despite optimized management of off-loading and arterial
disease. It is only in such cases that other diagnosis methods than plain
radiographs must be used. Staphylococcus aureus is the most common pathogen
cultured from bone samples, followed by Staphylococcus epidermidis. Among
enterobacteriaceae, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumonia and Proteus sp. are
the most common, followed by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Surprisingly, bacteria
usually considered contaminant (as coagulase negative staphylococci (CNS) and
Corynebacterium sp.) have been documented to be pathogens in the osteomyelitis of
diabetic foot. Traditional approach to treatment of chronic osteomyelitis was by 
surgical resection of infected and necrotic bone. But new classes of antibiotics 
have both the required spectrum of activity and the capacity to penetrate and
concentrate in the infected bone. Recently, several observations of osteomyelitis
remission following non-surgical management with a prolonged course of
antibiotics have been published. Lastly, combined approach with local bone
excision and antibiotics has been proposed. Prospective trials should be
undertaken to determine the relative roles of surgery and antibiotics in managing
diabetic foot osteomyelitis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.diabet.2007.09.005 
PMID: 18242114  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

