
1. J Immunol. 2008 Mar 1;180(5):3399-405.

Human lymphatic endothelial cells express multiple functional TLRs.

Pegu A(1), Qin S, Fallert Junecko BA, Nisato RE, Pepper MS, Reinhart TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Microbiology, Graduate School of Public 
Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

The lymphatic endothelium is the preferred route for the drainage of interstitial
fluid from tissues and also serves as a conduit for peripheral dendritic cells
(DCs) to reach draining lymph nodes. Lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs) are known
to produce chemokines that recruit Ag-loaded DCs to lymphatic vessels and
therefore are likely to regulate the migration of DCs to lymph nodes. TLRs are
immune receptors that recognize pathogen associated molecular patterns and then
signal and stimulate production of inflammatory chemokines and cytokines that
contribute to innate and adaptive immune responses. TLRs are known to be
expressed by a wide variety of cell types including leukocytes, epithelial cells,
and endothelial cells. Because the TLR expression profile of LECs remains largely
unexamined, we have undertaken a comprehensive study of the expression of TLR1-10
mRNAs and protein in primary human dermal (HD) and lung LECs as well as in
htert-HDLECs, which display a longer life-span than HDLECs. We found that all
three cell types expressed TLR1-6 and TLR9. The responsiveness of these LECs to a
panel of ligands for TLR1-9 was measured by real-time RT-PCR, ELISA, and flow
cytometry, and revealed that the LECs responded to most but not all TLR ligands
by increasing expression of inflammatory chemokines, cytokines, and adhesion
molecules. These findings provide insight into the ability of cells of the
lymphatic vasculature to respond to pathogens and potential vaccine adjuvants and
shape peripheral environments in which DCs will acquire Ag and environmental
cues.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.180.5.3399 
PMID: 18292566  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

