
1. Cell Biol Int. 2008 Apr;32(4):417-26. doi: 10.1016/j.cellbi.2007.12.013. Epub
2008 Jan 11.

Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans lipopolysaccharide affects human gingival
fibroblast cytoskeletal organization.

Gutiérrez-Venegas G(1), Contreras-Marmolejo LA, Román-Alvárez P, Barajas-Torres
C.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, División de Estudios de Posgrado e Investigación, 
Facultad de Odontología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), Mexico
City, Mexico. gloria@fo.odonto.unam.mx

The cytoskeleton is a dynamic structure that plays a key role in maintaining cell
morphology and function. This study investigates the effect of bacterial wall
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a strong inflammatory agent, on the dynamics and
organization of actin, tubulin, vimentin, and vinculin proteins in human gingival
fibroblasts (HGF). A time-dependent study showed a noticeable change in actin
architecture after 1.5 h of incubation with LPS (1 microg/ml) with the formation 
of orthogonal fibers and further accumulation of actin filament at the cell
periphery by 24 h. When 0.01-10 microg/ml of LPS was added to human gingival
fibroblast cultures, cells acquired a round, flat shape and gradually developed
cytoplasmic ruffling. Lipopolysaccharides extracted from Aggregatibacter
actinomycetemcomitans periodontopathogenic bacteria promoted alterations in
F-actin stress fibres of human gingival cells. Normally, human gingival cells
have F-actin fibres that are organized in linear distribution throughout the
cells, extending along the cell's length. LPS-treated cells exhibited changes in 
cytoskeletal protein organization, and F-actin was reorganized by the formation
of bundles underneath and parallel to the cell membrane. We also found the
reorganization of the vimentin network into vimentin bundling after 1.5 h of
treatment. HGF cells exhibited diffuse and granular gamma-tubulin stain. There
was no change in LPS-treated HGF. However, vinculin plaques distributed in the
cell body diminished after LPS treatment. We conclude that the dynamic and
structured organization of cytoskeletal filaments and actin assembly in human
gingival fibroblasts is altered by LPS treatment and is accompanied by a decrease
in F-actin pools.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellbi.2007.12.013 
PMID: 18291687  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

