
1. Int Immunol. 2008 Apr;20(4):543-53. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxn012. Epub 2008 Feb 27.

Evaluation of the effect of human beta-defensins on neutrophil apoptosis.

Nagaoka I(1), Niyonsaba F, Tsutsumi-Ishii Y, Tamura H, Hirata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Host Defense and Biochemical Research, Juntendo University
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. nagaokai@med.juntendo.ac.jp

Peptide antibiotics possess the potent antimicrobial activities against invading 
microorganisms and contribute to the innate host defense. Antimicrobial human
beta-defensins (hBDs) not only exhibit potent bactericidal activities against
Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria but also function as immunomodulatory
molecules by inducing cytokine and chemokine production and inflammatory and
immune cell activation. Neutrophil is a critical effector cell in host defense
against microbial infection, and its lifespan is regulated by various pathogen-
and host-derived substances. Here, to further evaluate the role of hBDs in innate
immunity, we investigated the action of hBD-1 to -4 on neutrophil apoptosis.
Neutrophil apoptosis was assessed using human blood neutrophils based on the
morphological changes. Of note, hBD-3 most potently suppressed neutrophil
apoptosis among hBD-1 to -4, accompanied with the down-regulation of truncated
Bid (a pro-apoptotic protein), up-regulation of Bcl-x(L) (an anti-apoptotic
protein) and inhibition of mitochondrial membrane potential change and caspase 3 
activity. Furthermore, we revealed that neutrophils expressed CC chemokine
receptor (CCR) 6, and the action of hBD-3 was completely abrogated by a
neutralizing anti-CCR6 mAb. Collectively, these observations suggest that hBDs,
especially hBD-3, can not only kill bacteria but also modulate (suppress)
neutrophil apoptosis via the action on CCR6. Suppression of neutrophil apoptosis 
results in the prolongation of their lifespan and may be advantageous for the
host defense against bacterial invasion.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxn012 
PMID: 18308714  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

