
1. Mol Plant Microbe Interact. 2008 May;21(5):646-57. doi: 10.1094/MPMI-21-5-0646.

Discovery of ADP-ribosylation and other plant defense pathway elements through
expression profiling of four different Arabidopsis-Pseudomonas R-avr
interactions.

Adams-Phillips L(1), Wan J, Tan X, Dunning FM, Meyers BC, Michelmore RW, Bent AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
53706, USA.

A dissection of plant defense pathways was initiated through gene expression
profiling of the responses of a single Arabidopsis thaliana genotype to isogenic 
Pseudomonas syringae strains expressing one of four different cloned avirulence
(avr) genes. Differences in the expression profiles elicited by different
resistance (R)-avr interactions were observed. A role for poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation 
in plant defense responses was suggested initially by the upregulated expression 
of genes encoding NUDT7 and poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase in multiple R-avr
interactions. Gene knockout plant lines were tested for 20 candidate genes
identified by the expression profiling, and Arabidopsis NUDT7 mutants allowed
less growth of virulent P. syringae (as previously reported) but also exhibited a
reduced hypersensitive-response phenotype. Inhibitors of poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase (PARP) disrupted FLS2-mediated basal defense responses such as callose
deposition. EIN2 (ethylene response) and IXR1 and IXR2 (cellulose synthase)
mutants impacted the FLS2-mediated responses that occur during PARP inhibition,
whereas no impacts were observed for NPR1, PAD4, or NDR1 mutants. In the
expression profiling work, false-positive selection and grouping of genes was
reduced by requiring simultaneous satisfaction of statistical significance
criteria for each of three separate analysis methods, and by clustering genes
based on statistical confidence values for each gene rather than on average
fold-change of transcript abundance.

DOI: 10.1094/MPMI-21-5-0646 
PMID: 18393624  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

