
1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Jul 1;178(1):34-41. doi:
10.1164/rccm.200708-1261OC. Epub 2008 Apr 10.

Lung inflammation induced by lipoteichoic acid or lipopolysaccharide in humans.

Hoogerwerf JJ(1), de Vos AF, Bresser P, van der Zee JS, Pater JM, de Boer A,
Tanck M, Lundell DL, Her-Jenh C, Draing C, von Aulock S, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. j.j.hoogerwerf@amc.uva.nl.

RATIONALE: Recognition of pathogen-associated molecular patterns by Toll-like
receptors (TLRs) is considered to be important for an appropriate immune response
against pathogens that enter the lower airways.
OBJECTIVES: We studied the effects of two different TLR agonists relevant for
respiratory infections in the human lung: lipoteichoic acid (LTA; TLR2 agonist,
component of gram-positive bacteria) and lipopolysaccharide (LPS; TLR4-agonist,
component of gram-negative bacteria).
METHODS: Fifteen healthy subjects were given LPS or LTA: by bronchoscope, sterile
saline was instilled into a lung segment followed by instillation of LTA or LPS
into the contralateral lung. After 6 hours, a bronchoalveolar lavage was
performed and inflammatory parameters were determined. Isolated RNA from purified
alveolar macrophages was analyzed by multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification. In addition, spontaneous cytokine release by alveolar macrophages 
was measured.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Marked differences were detected between LTA- and 
LPS-induced lung inflammation. Whereas both elicited neutrophil recruitment, only
LPS instillation was associated with activation of neutrophils (CD11b surface
expression, degranulation product levels) and consistent rises of chemo-/cytokine
levels. Moreover, LPS but not LTA activated alveolar macrophages, as reflected by
enhanced expression of 10 different mRNAs encoding proinflammatory mediators and 
increased spontaneous cytokine release upon incubation ex vivo. Remarkably, only 
LTA induced C5a release.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to report the in vivo effects of LTA in men 
and to compare inflammation induced by LTA and LPS in the human lung. Our data
suggest that stimulation of TLR2 or TLR4 results in differential pulmonary
inflammation, which may be of relevance for understanding pathogenic mechanisms
at play during gram-positive and gram-negative respiratory tract infection.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200708-1261OC 
PMID: 18403723  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

