
1. Stem Cells. 2008 Jul;26(7):1858-64. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2008-0050. Epub 2008
Apr 24.

Promotion of feeder-independent self-renewal of embryonic stem cells by retinol
(vitamin A).

Chen L(1), Khillan JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, 200 Lothrop Street,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

Retinol, the alcohol form of vitamin A, maintains pluripotency of mouse embryonic
stem cells (ESCs) by the overexpression of Nanog, which is a key transcription
factor for their self-renewal. ESCs represent the most promising source of all
types of cells for regenerative medicine and drug discovery. These cells maintain
pluripotency through a complex interplay of different signaling pathways and
transcription factors including leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), homeodomain
protein Nanog, and Oct3/4. Nanog, however, plays a key role in maintaining the
pluripotency of mouse and human ESCs. Overexpression of nanog by heterologous
promoters can maintain pluripotency of ESCs in the absence of LIF. Also, Nanog
alone is sufficient for the self-renewal of ESCs while maintaining the Oct4
levels. Normally, mouse and human ESCs are cultured over mouse embryonic
fibroblasts as feeders to maintain pluripotency. Although feeder cells provide
important growth(-)promoting factors, their use involves several cumbersome and
time-consuming steps. Here we demonstrate that retinol can support
feeder-independent self-renewal of ESCs in long-term cultures without affecting
their pluripotency. The effect of retinol is independent of the strain
background, and the cells maintain complete potential to differentiate into all
the primary germ layers in embryoid bodies and in chimeric animals. Self-renewal 
of ESCs by retinol is not mediated by retinoic acid. The studies demonstrate for 
the first time that a physiologically relevant small molecule has
growth-promoting effect on the self-renewal of ESCs by activating the endogenous 
machinery to overexpress a critical gene for pluripotency.

DOI: 10.1634/stemcells.2008-0050 
PMID: 18436859  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

