
1. J Hosp Infect. 2008 Jul;69(3):249-57. doi: 10.1016/j.jhin.2008.04.021. Epub 2008 
Jun 11.

Four country healthcare associated infection prevalence survey 2006: risk factor 
analysis.

Humphreys H(1), Newcombe RG, Enstone J, Smyth ET, McIlvenny G, Fitzpatrick F, Fry
C, Spencer RC; Hospital Infection Society Steering Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland,
Ireland. hhumphreys@rcsi.ie

Point prevalence surveys are useful in detecting changes in the pattern of
healthcare-associated infection (HCAI). In 2004 the Hospital Infection Society
was asked to conduct a third national prevalence survey, which included England, 
Wales, Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland. A similar but not identical 
survey was carried out in Scotland. Data were collected on standardised forms
using Centres for Disease Control and Prevention definitions. This report
considers associations with a wide range of risk factors for all HCAI and for
four main categories. The overall prevalence rate of HCAI was 7.6% and increased 
significantly with age. All risk factors considered were associated with highly
significantly increased risk of HCAI, except recent peripheral IV catheter and
other bladder instrumentation use. Primary bloodstream infection (PBSI) was
associated with antibiotic, central intravenous catheter and parenteral nutrition
use. Pneumonia was associated with antibiotic, central catheter, parenteral
nutrition use, mechanical ventilation and current peripheral catheter use.
Surgical site infection was associated with recent surgery, antibiotic and
central catheter use, mechanical ventilation and parenteral nutrition. Urinary
instrumentation and antibiotic use were associated with urinary tract infection. 
Patients under a critical care medicine consultant had the highest prevalence of 
HCAI (23.2%). This report highlights those areas requiring attention to prevent
HCAI, i.e. device-related infections such as PBSI (e.g. central catheters) and
pneumonia (e.g. mechanical ventilation) and should influence protocols for future
prevalence surveys of HCAI, e.g. the recording of risk factors at the time of
assessment only is sufficient.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhin.2008.04.021 
PMID: 18550214  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

