
1. J Nutr. 2008 Jul;138(7):1355-9.

The probiotic Lactobacillus acidophilus stimulates chloride/hydroxyl exchange
activity in human intestinal epithelial cells.

Borthakur A(1), Gill RK, Tyagi S, Koutsouris A, Alrefai WA, Hecht GA, Ramaswamy
K, Dudeja PK.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Digestive Diseases and Nutrition, Department of Medicine,
University of Illinois at Chicago, and Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Probiotics are viable nonpathogenic microorganisms that are considered to confer 
health benefits to the host. Recent studies indicated that some Lactobacillus
species function as probiotics and have been used as alternative treatments for
diarrhea, which occurs due to increased secretion, decreased absorption, or both.
However, the direct effects of probiotics on intestinal electrolyte absorption
are not known. Therefore, we examined the effects of Lactobacillus on luminal
chloride/hydroxyl (Cl(-)/OH(-)) exchange activity in human intestinal epithelial 
cells. Postconfluent Caco-2 cells were treated with the Lactobacillus species
Lactobacillus acidophilus (LA), Lactobacillus casei, Lactobacillus plantarum, or 
Lactobacillus rhamnosus (LR) for 3 h at a multiplicity of infection of 50.
Cl(-)/OH(-) exchange activity was measured as 4,4'-diisothiocyanostilbene-2,
2'-disulfonic acid-sensitive (36)Cl uptake in base-loaded cells. Treatment with
live, but not heat-killed, LA and LR significantly increased Cl(-)/OH(-) exchange
activity (approximately 50%), whereas other species were ineffective. Similarly, 
the conditioned medium (supernatant) of live LA increased Cl(-)/OH(-) exchange.
The ability of LA or its conditioned culture medium to enhance Cl(-)/OH(-)
exchange activity was blocked by PI-3 kinase inhibition but was unaffected by
inhibition of mitogen-activated protein kinases. Corresponding to the increased
Cl(-)/OH(-) exchange activity, LA treatment increased the surface expression of
the apical anion exchanger, SLC26A3 [Down Regulated in Adenoma (DRA)]. The
increased DRA membrane localization might contribute to the increased Cl(-)
absorption by LA. Our results suggest that LA secretes soluble effector
molecule(s) into the culture medium that stimulate apical Cl(-)/OH(-) exchange
activity via phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase mediated mechanism.

DOI: 10.1093/jn/138.7.1355 
PMCID: PMC2705118
PMID: 18567760  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

