
1. Indian J Med Res. 2008 Apr;127(4):388-94.

Expression of co-stimulatory molecules B7.1 & B7.2 on macrophages infected with
various strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis & its influence on T-cell
apoptosis.

Rajavelu P(1), Das SD.

Author information: 
(1)Tuberculosis Research Centre ICMR, Chennai, India.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: Activation of T cells is mediated through two critical
signals provided by activated macrophages. The first signal is triggered when T
cell receptor (TCR) binds to the major histocompatibility antigen (MHC/Ag)
complex. The second signal is the interaction of co-stimulatory molecules with
their respective ligands on T cells for their activation and proliferation. We
undertook this study to observe the modulation in B7.1 (CD80) and B7.2 (CD86)
co-stimulatory molecules on Mycobacterium tuberculosis infected monocyte derived 
macrophages (MDM) and their role in T helper (Th1) cell apoptosis.
METHODS: M. tuberculosis clinical strains (S7 and S10) and laboratory strains
(H37Ra and H37Rv) were used to infect the MDMs. The modulation of apoptosis was
assessed by treating T cells with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies. The infected
MDMs were co-cultured with autologous PPD pulsed T cells to ascertain the role of
co-stimulatory molecules during infection.
RESULTS: In infected MDMs, all strains on day 1 but only S7 on day 2 showed
significant decrease (P<0.05) in B7.1 expression compared to uninfected. The
expression levels of B7.2 were also low on day 1 in S7, S10 and H37Ra infected
MDMs. The anit-CD3 induced apoptosis in PPD pulsed Tcells showed further
reduction with anti-CD28 antibodies. However, the modulation observed in B7.1
expression in infected MDMs was not reflected in T cell apoptosis in co-culture
experiments.
INTERPRETATION & CONCLUSION: Our results confirmed the role of B7.1 in rescuing
the activated Tcells from undergoing apoptosis. During infection when the
expression of B7.1 is downregulated, other co-stimulatory molecules may take over
its crucial role to confer protective immune response against M. tuberculosis.


PMID: 18577795  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

