
1. Arch Microbiol. 1976 Sep 1;109(3):307-13.

The effect of transfer from low to high light intensity on electron transport in 
Rhodospirillum rubrum membranes.

Irschik H, Oelze J.

The effects of transfer from low to high light intensity on membrane bound
electrontransport reactions of Rhodospirillum rubrum were investigated. The
experiments were performed with cultures which did not form bacteriochlorophyll
(Bchl) for about two cell mass doublings during the initial phase of adaptation
to high light intensity. Lack of Bchl synthesis causes a decrease of Bchl
contents of cells and membranes. Also, the cellular amounts of photosynthetically
active intracytoplasmic membranes decrease. In crude membrane fractions
containing both cytoplasmic and intracytoplasmic membranes the initial activities
of NADH oxidizing reactions increase only slightly (about 1.2 times) per protein,
but the initial activities of succinate oxidizing reactions decrease (multiplied 
by a factor of 0.7). On a Bchl basis activities of NADH oxidizing reactions
increase 3.4 times while activities of succinate dependent reactions increase 1.9
times. With isolated intracytoplasmic membranes activities of NADH as well as
succinate dependent reactions increase to a comparable extent on a Bchl basis
(about 1.8 times) and stay nearly constant on a protein basis. Cyochrome c
oxidase responds like succinate dependent reactions. The data indicate that in
cells growing under the conditions applied NADH oxidizing electrontransport
systems are incorporated into both, cytoplasmic and intracytoplasmic membranes,
while incorporation of succinate oxidizing systems is confined to
intracytoplasmic membranes only. Activities of photophosphorylation and succinate
dependent NAD+ reduction in the light increase per Bchl about 1.8 times. On a
Bchl basis increases of the fast light induced "on" reactions at 422 nm and
increases of soluble cytochrome c2 levels are comparable to increases of
photophosphorylations and succinate dependent activities. But increases of slow
light "off" reactions at 428 nm and of beta-type cytochrome levels become three
times greater then increases of cytochrome c2 reactions and levels. These results
infer that although electrontransport reactions of intracytoplasmic membranes
change correlated to each other, Bchl, cytochrome c2 and beta-type cytochromes
cellular levels are independent of each other. Furthermore, the data indicate
that cytochrome c2 rather than beta-type cytochrome is involved with steps rate
limiting for photophosphorylation.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00446643 
PMID: 185976  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

