
1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2008 Sep;8(9):1239-47. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2008.04.015.
Epub 2008 May 22.

Modulation of cytokine and beta-defensin 2 expressions in human gingival
fibroblasts infected with Chlamydia pneumoniae.

Rizzo A(1), Paolillo R, Buommino E, Lanza AG, Guida L, Annunziata M, Carratelli
CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Surgery -Second
University of Naples, Naples, Italy. antonietta.rizzo@unina2.it

Human beta-defensin 2 is an antimicrobial peptide that is produced by several
epithelial cells after stimulation with micro-organisms and inflammatory
mediators. Gram-negative bacteria, which are typically detected in periodontal
pockets in periodontitis, elicit a stronger antibacterial peptide response of
human beta-defensin 2 by epithelial cells. In this study, we investigated whether
Chlamydia pneumoniae is able both to enter and grow in human gingival fibroblasts
(HGF), to modify the production of cytokines, and is involved in regulation of
beta-defensin 2 expression. Gingival fibroblasts discarded from periodontal
procedures on healthy young individuals were infected with viable C. pneumoniae
or with heat- or ultraviolet-inactivated organisms at a multiplicity of infection
of 4 inclusion-forming units per cell. Our results demonstrate that after 48 h of
incubation with viable C. pneumoniae, gingival fibroblasts showed a proliferative
response as seen by both colorimetric assay and direct cell count (40% and 45%,
respectively). Moreover, cells incubated with viable or ultraviolet
light-inactivated C. pneumoniae organisms showed an increase in the levels of
interleukin-6, interleukin-10 and human beta-defensin 2 in a time-dependent
fashion, while the cells infected with heat-killed bacteria did not show a
significant production either of the cytokines or beta-defensin 2 at any time. In
conclusion, we demonstrate the correlation between multiplication of C.
pneumoniae in human gingival fibroblasts and release of interleukin-6,
interleukin-10 and up-regulation of beta-defensin 2, suggesting that gingival
fibroblasts may be a periodontium niche for obligate intracellular C. pneumoniae 
and may play a role in innate gingival immune system and inflammatory response
mechanisms of periodontitis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2008.04.015 
PMID: 18602070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

