
1. J Mol Biol. 2008 Oct 31;383(1):1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.06.058. Epub 2008 Jun
28.

Down-regulation of outer membrane proteins by noncoding RNAs: unraveling the
cAMP-CRP- and sigmaE-dependent CyaR-ompX regulatory case.

Johansen J(1), Eriksen M, Kallipolitis B, Valentin-Hansen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern
Denmark, Odense M, Denmark.

The sigma(E) (extracytoplasmic stress response sigma factor in Escherichia coli) 
signaling system of Gram-negative bacteria plays an essential role in the
maintenance of the extracytoplasmic compartment. Upon induction of this system,
approximately 100 genes are up-regulated. The majority of these genes encode
proteins that participate in the synthesis, assembly, and homeostasis of outer
membrane proteins and lipopolysaccharides. A second aspect of the sigma(E)
response is a regulatory loop that prevents expression of the major porins.
Misfolding or overproduction of most of these porins is sufficient to trigger the
envelope stress response. Recent work indicates that small Hfq-binding RNAs play 
a major role in maintaining envelope homeostasis and, so far, two
sigma(E)-dependent small noncoding RNAs (sRNAs), MicA and RybB, have been shown
to facilitate rapid removal of multiple omp transcripts in response to elevated
activity of the alternative sigma factor. Here we report the identification of
the sRNA (CyaR, cyclic AMP-activated RNA) that promotes decay of the ompX mRNA.
The transcription of the cyaR gene is stringently controlled by cAMP-cAMP
receptor protein and, unexpectedly, cyaR expression is also up-regulated,
directly or indirectly, by sigma(E). In addition, this work identified MicA as a 
factor that cooperates in the negative control of ompX expression. The
conservation of CyaR, MicA, RybB, and their targets suggests that the omp
mRNA-sRNA regulatory network is an integral part of the envelope stress response 
in many enterobacteria.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.06.058 
PMID: 18619465  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

