
1. Stem Cells. 2008 Oct;26(10):2552-63. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2008-0328. Epub 2008 
Jul 31.

Ex vivo-expanded bone marrow CD34+ derived neutrophils have limited bactericidal 
ability.

Dick EP(1), Prince LR, Sabroe I.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Respiratory Medicine, Section of Infection, Inflammation and 
Immunity, School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Royal Hallamshire Hospital,
Sheffield, United Kingdom. i.sabroe@sheffield.ac.uk

Neutropenia as a consequence of bone marrow failure, severe infections, or
intensive chemotherapy is frequently associated with life-threatening sepsis. Ex 
vivo expansion of CD34(+) stem cells has been shown to generate apparently
functional neutrophils, and the use of autologous ex vivo-expanded cells can
reduce the duration of neutropenia. Nonetheless, the principal antimicrobial
capabilities of such cells, and thus their true therapeutic potential, is
unknown. Using established protocols, we derived mature neutrophils from normal
human adult bone marrow (BM) CD34(+) cells and compared them with freshly
isolated peripheral blood neutrophils (PBN). Despite functional similarities
between ex vivo-differentiated neutrophils (EDN) and PBN in assays of respiratory
burst and phagocytosis, EDN showed marked impairment in their ability to kill
both Escherichia coli and Streptococcus pneumoniae compared with PBN. We found
that EDN were able to detect (through Toll-like receptor 2 [TLR2], TLR4, and CD14
expression), phagocytose, and mount a respiratory burst to microorganisms. EDN,
however, were unable to release neutrophil elastase in response to
formyl-met-leu-phe and showed a significantly reduced expression of neutrophil
elastase, cathepsin G myeloperoxidase, and LL-37/human cathelicidin protein 18
(hCAP18) as determined by Western blotting. Ultrastructural analysis was
consistent with a failure of normal granule development in EDN. Neutrophils
derived from BM CD34(+) cells may therefore provide apparently functional cells
as assessed by common methodologies; however, important deficiencies may still
limit their therapeutic potential. The results presented here suggest additional 
key tests that such cells may need to undergo prior to clinical use and highlight
the potential challenges of using ex vivo modified stem cells in therapeutic
settings. Disclosure of potential conflicts of interest is found at the end of
this article.

DOI: 10.1634/stemcells.2008-0328 
PMID: 18669908  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

