
1. Stem Cells Dev. 2008 Aug;17(4):681-93. doi: 10.1089/scd.2007.0153.

Soluble factors-mediated immunomodulatory effects of canine adipose
tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells.

Kang JW(1), Kang KS, Koo HC, Park JR, Choi EW, Park YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine and Adult Stem Cell
Research Center, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells (AD-MSCs), which can differentiate 
into several lineages, have immunomodulatory properties similar to those of bone 
marrow-derived MSCs. However, the specific mechanism by which the
immunomodulatory effect of MSCs occurs is not clear. In this study, we isolated
canine AD-MSCs (cAD-MSCs) and induced their development into adipocyte,
osteocyte, and neuron-like cells. We then investigated their phenotype and
cytokine expression to determine whether they were able to exert an
immunomodulatory effect and what the underlying mechanisms of this effect were.
cAD-MSCs expressed CD44, CD90, and MHC class I and were also partially positive
for the expression of CD34; however, they did not express CD14 and CD45. In
addition, they expressed the mRNA of transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta), 
IL-6, IL-8, CCL2, CCL5, vascular endothelial growth factor, hepatocyte growth
factor (HGF), tissue inhibitor metalloproteinase-1/2, and cyclooxygenase-2 but
not that of IL-10. Further, leukocyte proliferation induced by mitogens was
suppressed when they were cocultured with irradiated cAD-MSCs, as well as with
culture supernatants of cAD-MSCs alone. Moreover, TNF-alpha production
significantly decreased, whereas TGF-beta, IL-6, and interferon-gamma production 
significantly increased in cAD-MSCs that were cocultured with leukocytes.
Finally, immonomodulatory factors of MSCs, such as TGF-beta, HGF, prostaglandin
E2 (PGE2), and indoleamine 2, 3 dioxygenase (IDO), increased significantly in
cAD-MSCs that were cocultured with leukocytes; however, the production of PGE2
and IDO showed different kinetics, and leukocyte proliferation was effectively
restored by PGE2 and IDO inhibitors. Taken together, these results indicate that 
the immunomodulatory effects of cAD-MSCs are associated with soluble factors
(TGF-beta, HGF, PGE2, and IDO). Therefore, it is suggested that cAD-MSCs have a
potential therapeutic use in the treatment of immune-mediated disease.

DOI: 10.1089/scd.2007.0153 
PMID: 18717642  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

