
1. PLoS One. 2008 Aug 22;3(8):e3042. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003042.

Detection of large numbers of novel sequences in the metatranscriptomes of
complex marine microbial communities.

Gilbert JA(1), Field D, Huang Y, Edwards R, Li W, Gilna P, Joint I.

Author information: 
(1)Plymouth Marine Laboratory, Prospect Place, Plymouth, United Kingdom.
jagi@pml.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Sequencing the expressed genetic information of an ecosystem
(metatranscriptome) can provide information about the response of organisms to
varying environmental conditions. Until recently, metatranscriptomics has been
limited to microarray technology and random cloning methodologies. The
application of high-throughput sequencing technology is now enabling access to
both known and previously unknown transcripts in natural communities.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We present a study of a complex marine
metatranscriptome obtained from random whole-community mRNA using the GS-FLX
Pyrosequencing technology. Eight samples, four DNA and four mRNA, were processed 
from two time points in a controlled coastal ocean mesocosm study (Bergen,
Norway) involving an induced phytoplankton bloom producing a total of 323,161,989
base pairs. Our study confirms the finding of the first published
metatranscriptomic studies of marine and soil environments that
metatranscriptomics targets highly expressed sequences which are frequently
novel. Our alternative methodology increases the range of experimental options
available for conducting such studies and is characterized by an exceptional
enrichment of mRNA (99.92%) versus ribosomal RNA. Analysis of corresponding
metagenomes confirms much higher levels of assembly in the metatranscriptomic
samples and a far higher yield of large gene families with >100 members,
approximately 91% of which were novel.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study provides further evidence that
metatranscriptomic studies of natural microbial communities are not only
feasible, but when paired with metagenomic data sets, offer an unprecedented
opportunity to explore both structure and function of microbial communities--if
we can overcome the challenges of elucidating the functions of so many
never-seen-before gene families.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003042 
PMCID: PMC2518522
PMID: 18725995  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

