
1. Can J Microbiol. 2008 Aug;54(8):619-29. doi: 10.1139/w08-058.

Phenotypic and genotypic analysis of Flavobacterium psychrophilum isolates from
Ontario salmonids with bacterial coldwater disease.

Hesami S(1), Allen KJ, Metcalf D, Ostland VE, MacInnes JI, Lumsden JS.

Author information: 
(1)Fish Pathology Laboratory, Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary
College, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON N1G 2W1, Canada.

Flavobacterium psychrophilum is the causative agent of bacterial coldwater
disease (BCWD) and rainbow trout fry syndrome. BCWD has a considerable economic
impact on aquaculture operations in Ontario, Canada, and our limited
understanding of the population structure and epidemiology of F. psychrophilum
isolates is an impediment to the development of improved management strategies.
Seventy-five 16S rRNA gene and gyr polymerase chain reaction positive isolates of
F. psychrophilum that had been collected over a 16-year period from farmed
salmonids with tail rot, necrotic myositis, and osteochondrosis were
characterized morphologically, biochemically, and genotypically. Although the
isolates were homogeneous by preliminary biochemical and phenotypic
characterization, two distinct biovars were found by API ZYM testing. As well,
four restriction pattern types were detected by 16S rRNA polymerase chain
reaction -- restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis and there was a
significant (P < 0.001) correlation between biovar I and digestion with MaeIII
and between biovar II and digestion with MnlI or no site (P < 0.05). Further
heterogenity was detected by sequence analysis of a 194 bp stem loop 3 region of 
rRNA. Nine sequence types were identified; 40/46 biovar I isolates were sequence 
type "a", while 21/32 biovar II isolates belonged to either sequence type "c" or 
"d". More than one biovar and genotype was identified among the strains recovered
from separate fish sampled from three groups of rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus
mykiss) experiencing BCWD mortality events. No association was found between
genotype or biovar and type of disease. Taken together, these data suggest that
F. psychrophilum from Ontario can be grouped into two major lineages based on
biovar and 16S rRNA polymorphisms, and although three major strain types were
most frequently isolated in this study, it appears that the population of F.
psychrophilum with pathogenic potential is quite heterogeneous.

DOI: 10.1139/w08-058 
PMID: 18772924  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

