
1. Infect Immun. 2008 Dec;76(12):5615-23. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00480-08. Epub 2008 Sep
15.

More than one tandem repeat domain of the extracellular adherence protein of
Staphylococcus aureus is required for aggregation, adherence, and host cell
invasion but not for leukocyte activation.

Hussain M(1), Haggar A, Peters G, Chhatwal GS, Herrmann M, Flock JI, Sinha B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology, University Hospital of Münster, Münster,
Germany.

The extracellular adherence protein (Eap) is a multifunctional Staphylococcus
aureus protein and broad-spectrum adhesin for several host matrix and plasma
proteins. We investigated the interactions of full-length Eap and five
recombinant tandem repeat domains with host proteins by use of surface plasmon
resonance (BIAcore) and ligand overlay assays. In addition, agglutination and
host cell interaction, namely, adherence, invasion, and stimulation of
proliferation, were determined. With plasmon resonance, the interaction of
full-length Eap isoforms (from strains Newman and Wood 46) with fibrinogen,
fibronectin, vitronectin, and thrombospondin-1 was found to be specific but with 
different affinities for the ligands tested. In the ligand overlay assay, the
interactions of five single tandem repeat domains (D1 to D5) of Eap-7 (from
strain CI-7) with fibronectin, fibrinogen, vitronectin, thrombospondin-1, and
collagen I differed substantially. Most prominently, D3 bound most strongly to
fibronectin and fibrinogen. Full-length Eap, but none of the single tandem repeat
domains, agglutinated S. aureus and enhanced adherence to and invasion of host
cells by S. aureus. Constructs D3-4 and D1-3 (in cis) increased adherence and
invasiveness compared to what was seen for single Eap tandem repeat domains. By
contrast, single Eap tandem repeat domains and full-length Eap similarly
modulated the proliferation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs): low
concentrations stimulated, whereas high concentrations inhibited, proliferation. 
Taken together, the data indicate that Eap tandem repeat domains appear to have
distinct characteristics for the binding of soluble ligands, despite a high
degree of sequence similarity. In addition, more than one Eap tandem repeat
domain is required for S. aureus agglutination, adherence, and cellular invasion 
but not for the stimulation of PBMC proliferation.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00480-08 
PMCID: PMC2583574
PMID: 18794290  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

