
1. Nature. 2008 Nov 27;456(7221):502-6. doi: 10.1038/nature07384. Epub 2008 Sep 17.

Self-renewal and expansion of single transplanted muscle stem cells.

Sacco A(1), Doyonnas R, Kraft P, Vitorovic S, Blau HM.

Author information: 
(1)Baxter Laboratory in Genetic Pharmacology, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Stem Cell Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California 94305-5175, USA.

Adult muscle satellite cells have a principal role in postnatal skeletal muscle
growth and regeneration. Satellite cells reside as quiescent cells underneath the
basal lamina that surrounds muscle fibres and respond to damage by giving rise to
transient amplifying cells (progenitors) and myoblasts that fuse with myofibres. 
Recent experiments showed that, in contrast to cultured myoblasts, satellite
cells freshly isolated or satellite cells derived from the transplantation of one
intact myofibre contribute robustly to muscle repair. However, because satellite 
cells are known to be heterogeneous, clonal analysis is required to demonstrate
stem cell function. Here we show that when a single luciferase-expressing muscle 
stem cell is transplanted into the muscle of mice it is capable of extensive
proliferation, contributes to muscle fibres, and Pax7(+)luciferase(+)
mononucleated cells can be readily re-isolated, providing evidence of muscle stem
cell self-renewal. In addition, we show using in vivo bioluminescence imaging
that the dynamics of muscle stem cell behaviour during muscle repair can be
followed in a manner not possible using traditional retrospective histological
analyses. By imaging luciferase activity, real-time quantitative and kinetic
analyses show that donor-derived muscle stem cells proliferate and engraft
rapidly after injection until homeostasis is reached. On injury, donor-derived
mononucleated cells generate massive waves of cell proliferation. Together, these
results show that the progeny of a single luciferase-expressing muscle stem cell 
can both self-renew and differentiate after transplantation in mice, providing
new evidence at the clonal level that self-renewal is an autonomous property of a
single adult muscle stem cell.

DOI: 10.1038/nature07384 
PMCID: PMC2919355
PMID: 18806774  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

