
1. Histochem Cell Biol. 2009 Feb;131(2):207-18. doi: 10.1007/s00418-008-0522-8. Epub
2008 Oct 17.

Osteoblasts participate in the innate immunity of the bone by producing human
beta defensin-3.

Varoga D(1), Wruck CJ, Tohidnezhad M, Brandenburg L, Paulsen F, Mentlein R,
Seekamp A, Besch L, Pufe T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel, Germany.

Gram-positive bacterial bone infections are an important cause of morbidity
particularly in immunocompromised patients. Antimicrobial peptides (AP) are
effectors of the innate immune system and directly kill microorganisms in the
first hours after microbial infection. The aim of the present investigation was
to study the expression and regulation of gram-positive specialized human
beta-defensin-3 (HBD-3) in bone. Samples of healthy and osteomyelitic human bone 
were assessed for the expression of HBD-3. Using primary and immortalized
osteoblasts (SAOS-2 cells), release and regulation of HBD-3 was evaluated after
exposure to Staphylococcus aureus supernatant and/or corticosteroids using PCR,
immunohistochemistry, Western blot and ELISA. To determine the role of
toll-like-receptors-2 and -4 (TLR-2/-4), shRNA was used to downregulate TLRs. An 
osteomyelitis mouse model was created performed to investigate the release of
murine beta-defensins using immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR. Cultured osteoblasts
and human bone produce HBD-3 under standard conditions. The release increases
within hours of bacterial supernatant exposure in cultured osteoblasts. This
observation was not made in chronically infected bone samples. The
shRNA-technology revealed the necessity of TLR-2 and -4 in HBD-3 induction in
osteoblasts. Blocking protein synthesis with cycloheximide showed that the rapid 
release of HBD-3 is not dependent on a translational de novo synthesis and is not
affected by glucocorticoids. The murine osteomyelitis model confirmed the in vivo
release uptake of mouse beta-defensins-4 (MBD-4) in bone. This report shows the
bacterial induction of HBD-3 via TLR-2 and -4 in osteoblasts and suggests a
central role of antimicrobial peptides in the prevention of bacterial bone
infection. The rapid and effective induction of HBD-3 in osteoblasts incubated
with conditioned media from bacteria is more likely a result of a rapid secretion
of preformed HBD-3 by osteoblasts rather than a result of enhanced biosynthesis. 
The increased incidence of gram-positive bacterial bone infection in patients
with regular intake of glucocorticoids does not seem to be caused by a deranged
HBD-3 release in osteoblasts.

DOI: 10.1007/s00418-008-0522-8 
PMID: 18925411  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

