
1. Ig Sanita Pubbl. 2008 May-Jun;64(3):377-90.

[Outlook and problems of microbiological sampling in public catering
establishments in light of the new European regulations].

[Article in Italian]

Amadei P(1), Biondi A, Tarsitani G, Antonini A.

Author information: 
(1)ASL Roma A.

Modern society is structured in such a way that more food is eaten outside the
home and therefore the hygienic standards of food production and organoleptic
characteristics of foods provided by catering establishments is of increasing
importance. In order to obtain a complete view of the hygienic standards of the
food production cycle, however, it is not sufficient to show that pathogenic
microroganisms are absent, but it is also useful to measure the number of
microroganisms which do not constitute a hazard to health but whose presence may 
alter the quality of food products or be an index of inadequate hygienic
practices. Microbiological testing plays a fundamental role in the evaluation of 
the quality of a food product and according to the Codex Alimentarius, limits
should be set based on absolute criteria, according to legislation requirements
or on relative criteria based on contamination trends over time within the
production process The new European food hygiene regulations CE 852/04 e 2073/05 
promote a more advanced and correct view of microbiological controls, with
respect to pre-existing national legislation, placing emphasis also on the
production process of foodstuffs and not only on the final product. In addition, 
controls are explicitly considered as a tool to verify that food business
operators comply with hygiene requirements. The aim of evaluating microbiological
data should be to assess trends in the various analytical parameters and search
for possible contamination indicators, in order to perform a thorough analysis
based on inspections that evaluate the efficacy of food safety procedures put in 
place by food business operators, with sampling aimed at verifying quick simple
and low cost index parameters Regarding the interpretation of collected data it
should be underscored that the presence of a large variability points to presence
of inadequate hygiene procedures, considering that the main obligation of each
food business operator is to put in place, implement and maintain procedures
based on the HACCP principles.


PMID: 18936800  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

