
1. Microbiol Immunol. 2008 Sep;52(9):447-54.

Chlamydia pneumoniae induces interleukin-6 and interleukin-10 in human gingival
fibroblasts.

Rizzo A(1), Paolillo R, Lanza AG, Guida L, Annunziata M, Carratelli CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of Microbiology and Clinical
Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine and Surgery, Second University of Naples,
Naples, Italy.

Chlamydia pneumoniae is an obligate intracellular Gram-negative bacterium with a 
unique biphasic developmental cycle that can cause persistent infections. In
humans, Chlamydia causes airway infection and has been implicated in chronic
inflammatory diseases, such as asthma and atherosclerosis. In addition, recent
studies demonstrated that patients with severe periodontitis can harbor C.
pneumoniae, which can increase the risk for a host inflammatory response with
weighty clinical sequelae. Previous studies have established that periodontal
pathogenic bacteria (i.e. Gram-negative bacteria) can induce the synthesis and
release of cytokines and other inflammatory mediators in human gingival
fibroblasts. HGF are resident cells of the periodontium that respond to receptor 
stimulation by producing a variety of substances including cytokines and growth
factors. Our results demonstrate that after 48 hr of incubation with viable C.
pneumoniae HGF showed a proliferative response, as seen by both colorimetric MTT 
assay and direct cell count (30% and 35%, respectively). In addition, HGF
incubated with viable or UV light-inactivated C. pneumoniae organisms showed an
increase in the levels of IL-6 and IL-10, but not IL-4; on the contrary, HGF
infected with heat-killed bacteria did not show a significant production of any
of the cytokines considered. In conclusion, the present study suggests that C.
pneumoniae may modulate the expression of IL-6 and IL-10 by human gingival
fibroblasts. Further studies are warranted to clarify the molecular mechanisms of
C. pneumoniae in the regulation of cytokine expression by host cells and to
elaborate the relevant clinical implications.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1348-0421.2008.00059.x 
PMID: 19039953  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

