
1. BMC Microbiol. 2008 Nov 26;8:205. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-8-205.

Antimicrobial peptides effectively kill a broad spectrum of Listeria
monocytogenes and Staphylococcus aureus strains independently of origin,
sub-type, or virulence factor expression.

Gottlieb CT(1), Thomsen LE, Ingmer H, Mygind PH, Kristensen HH, Gram L.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Aquatic Resources, Technical University of Denmark,
Søltofts Plads, Bldg, 221, DK-2800 Kgs,, Lyngby, Denmark. ctg@aqua.dtu.dk

BACKGROUND: Host defense peptides (HDPs), or antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), are
important components of the innate immune system that bacterial pathogens must
overcome to establish an infection and HDPs have been suggested as novel
antimicrobial therapeutics in treatment of infectious diseases. Hence it is
important to determine the natural variation in susceptibility to HDPs to ensure 
a successful use in clinical treatment regimes.
RESULTS: Strains of two human bacterial pathogens, Listeria monocytogenes and
Staphylococcus aureus, were selected to cover a wide range of origin, sub-type,
and phenotypic behavior. Strains within each species were equally sensitive to
HDPs and oxidative stress representing important components of the innate immune 
defense system. Four non-human peptides (protamine, plectasin, novicidin, and
novispirin G10) were similar in activity profile (MIC value spectrum) to the
human beta-defensin 3 (HBD-3). All strains were inhibited by concentrations of
hydrogen peroxide between 0.1% - 1.0%. Sub-selections of both species differed in
expression of several virulence-related factors and in their ability to survive
in human whole blood and kill the nematode virulence model Caenorhabditis
elegans. For L. monocytogenes, proliferation in whole blood was paralleled by
high invasion in Caco-2 cells and fast killing of C. elegans, however, no such
pattern in phenotypic behavior was observed for S. aureus and none of the
phenotypic differences were correlated to sensitivity to HDPs.
CONCLUSION: Strains of L. monocytogenes and S. aureus were within each species
equally sensitive to a range of HDPs despite variations in subtype, origin, and
phenotypic behavior. Our results suggest that therapeutic use of HDPs will not be
hampered by occurrence of naturally tolerant strains of the two species
investigated in the present study.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-8-205 
PMCID: PMC2639596
PMID: 19036162  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

