
1. BMC Genomics. 2008 Nov 28;9:568. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-9-568.

Genome-wide transcriptional response of an avian pathogenic Escherichia coli
(APEC) pst mutant.

Crépin S(1), Lamarche MG, Garneau P, Séguin J, Proulx J, Dozois CM, Harel J.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe de Recherche sur les Maladies Infectieuses du Porc (GREMIP), Université
de Montréal, Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire, Saint-Hyacinthe, Québec, Canada.
sebastien.crepin@iaf.inrs.ca

BACKGROUND: Avian pathogenic E. coli (APEC) are associated with extraintestinal
diseases in poultry. The pstSCAB-phoU operon belongs to the Pho regulon and
encodes the phosphate specific transport (Pst) system. A functional Pst system is
required for full virulence in APEC and other bacteria and contributes to
resistance of APEC to serum, to cationic antimicrobial peptides and acid shock.
The global mechanisms contributing to the attenuation and decreased resistance of
the APEC pst mutant to environmental stresses have not been investigated at the
transcriptional level. To determine the global effect of a pst mutation on gene
expression, we compared the transcriptomes of APEC strain chi7122 and its
isogenic pst mutant (K3) grown in phosphate-rich medium.
RESULTS: Overall, 470 genes were differentially expressed by at least 1.5-fold.
Interestingly, the pst mutant not only induced systems involved in phosphate
acquisition and metabolism, despite phosphate availability, but also modulated
stress response mechanisms. Indeed, transcriptional changes in genes associated
with the general stress responses, including the oxidative stress response were
among the major differences observed. Accordingly, the K3 strain was less
resistant to reactive oxygen species (ROS) than the wild-type strain. In
addition, the pst mutant demonstrated reduced expression of genes involved in
lipopolysaccharide modifications and coding for cell surface components such as
type 1 and F9 fimbriae. Phenotypic tests also established that the pst mutant was
impaired in its capacity to produce type 1 fimbriae, as demonstrated by western
blotting and agglutination of yeast cells, when compared to wild-type APEC strain
chi7122.
CONCLUSION: Overall, our data elucidated the effects of a pst mutation on the
transcriptional response, and further support the role of the Pho regulon as part
of a complex network contributing to phosphate homeostasis, adaptive stress
responses, and E. coli virulence.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-9-568 
PMCID: PMC2648988
PMID: 19038054  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

