
1. J Immunol. 2008 Dec 15;181(12):8258-66.

A novel ICOS-independent, but CD28- and SAP-dependent, pathway of T
cell-dependent, polysaccharide-specific humoral immunity in response to intact
Streptococcus pneumoniae versus pneumococcal conjugate vaccine.

Chen Q(1), Cannons JL, Paton JC, Akiba H, Schwartzberg PL, Snapper CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.

Polysaccharide (PS)- and protein-specific murine IgG responses to intact
Streptococcus pneumoniae (Pn) are both dependent on CD4(+) T cell help,
B7-dependent costimulation, and CD40/CD40 ligand interactions. However, the
primary PS-specific, relative to protein-specific, IgG response terminates more
rapidly, requires a shorter period of T cell help and B7-dependent costimulation,
and fails to generate memory. In light of the critical role for ICOS/ICOS ligand 
interactions in sustaining T cell-dependent Ig responses and promoting germinal
center reactions, we hypothesized that this interaction was nonessential for
PS-specific IgG responses to Pn. We now demonstrate that ICOS(-/-), relative to
wild-type, mice elicit a normal PS-specific IgG isotype response to Pn, despite
marked inhibition of both the primary and secondary IgG anti-protein (i.e., PspA,
PspC, and PsaA) response. A blocking anti-ICOS ligand mAb injected during primary
Pn immunization inhibits both the primary anti-protein response and the
generation of protein-specific memory, but has no effect when injected during
secondary immunization. In contrast to Pn, both PS- and protein-specific IgG
responses to a pneumococcal conjugate vaccine are inhibited in ICOS(-/-) mice.
ICOS(-/-) mice immunized with intact Pn or conjugate exhibit nearly complete
abrogation in germinal center formation. Finally, although mice that lack the
adaptor molecule SAP (SLAM-associated protein) resemble ICOS(-/-) mice (and can
exhibit decreased ICOS expression), we observe that the PS-specific, as well as
protein-specific, IgG responses to both Pn and conjugate are markedly defective
in SAP(-/-) mice. These data define a novel T cell-, SAP-, and B7-dependent, but 
ICOS-independent, extrafollicular pathway of Ig induction.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.181.12.8258 
PMCID: PMC2893027
PMID: 19050242  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

