
1. Infect Immun. 2009 Mar;77(3):1071-82. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00693-08. Epub 2008 Dec
22.

Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium strains with regulated delayed
attenuation in vivo.

Curtiss R 3rd(1), Wanda SY, Gunn BM, Zhang X, Tinge SA, Ananthnarayan V, Mo H,
Wang S, Kong W.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology, Biodesign Institute and School
of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 85287-5401, USA.
rcurtiss@asu.edu

Recombinant bacterial vaccines must be fully attenuated for animal or human hosts
to avoid inducing disease symptoms while exhibiting a high degree of
immunogenicity. Unfortunately, many well-studied means for attenuating Salmonella
render strains more susceptible to host defense stresses encountered following
oral vaccination than wild-type virulent strains and/or impair their ability to
effectively colonize the gut-associated and internal lymphoid tissues. This thus 
impairs the ability of recombinant vaccines to serve as factories to produce
recombinant antigens to induce the desired protective immunity. To address these 
problems, we designed strains that display features of wild-type virulent strains
of Salmonella at the time of immunization to enable strains first to effectively 
colonize lymphoid tissues and then to exhibit a regulated delayed attenuation in 
vivo to preclude inducing disease symptoms. We recently described one means to
achieve this based on a reversible smooth-rough synthesis of lipopolysaccharide O
antigen. We report here a second means to achieve regulated delayed attenuation
in vivo that is based on the substitution of a tightly regulated araC P(BAD)
cassette for the promoters of the fur, crp, phoPQ, and rpoS genes such that
expression of these genes is dependent on arabinose provided during growth. Thus,
following colonization of lymphoid tissues, the Fur, Crp, PhoPQ, and/or RpoS
proteins cease to be synthesized due to the absence of arabinose such that
attenuation is gradually manifest in vivo to preclude induction of diseases
symptoms. Means for achieving regulated delayed attenuation can be combined with 
other mutations, which together may yield safe efficacious recombinant attenuated
Salmonella vaccines.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00693-08 
PMCID: PMC2643627
PMID: 19103774  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

