
1. Crit Care Med. 2009 Feb;37(2):619-25. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e31819584f9.

Activation of coagulation and inhibition of fibrinolysis in the human lung on
bronchial instillation of lipoteichoic acid and lipopolysaccharide.

Hoogerwerf JJ(1), de Vos AF, Levi M, Bresser P, van der Zee JS, Draing C, von
Aulock S, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. j.j.hoogerwerf@amc.uva.nl

Comment in
    Crit Care Med. 2009 Feb;37(2):774-5.

OBJECTIVE: Pneumonia is characterized by an acute inflammatory response in the
lung, which is frequently associated with changes in coagulation and fibrinolysis
in the bronchoalveolar space. Here, we compared the effects of lipoteichoic acid 
(LTA), a major cell wall component of Gram-positive bacteria, and
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), in the human bronchoalveolar space.
DESIGN: Controlled in vivo volunteer study.
SETTING: Clinical research unit.
SUBJECTS: Twenty-three healthy nonsmoking male volunteers.
INTERVENTIONS: Sterile saline was instilled into a lung subsegment followed by
bronchoscopic instillation of either LTA (Staphylococcus aureus, at a dose of 4, 
20, or 100 ng/kg body weight) or LPS (Escherichia coli, 4 ng/kg body weight) into
the contralateral lung. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid was obtained 6 hours
thereafter.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Bronchial instillation of LTA- or LPS-activated
bronchoalveolar coagulation, as reflected by increases in the levels of
thrombin-antithrombin complexes, d-dimer, and soluble tissue factor.
Concurrently, LTA and LPS inhibited anticoagulant mechanisms, as indicated by
reductions in antithrombin, Protein C, and Activated Protein C concentrations
together with elevated levels of soluble thrombomodulin. Both LTA and LPS
administration was associated with an inhibition of pulmonary fibrinolysis, as
measured by a reduction in plasminogen activator activity and elevated levels of 
plasminogen activator inhibitor type I.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first to describe the effects of LTA on hemostasis
in humans, demonstrating that LTA induces similar changes in the human
bronchoalveolar space as LPS, characterized by activation of coagulation with
concurrent inhibition of anticoagulant and fibrinolytic pathways.

DOI: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e31819584f9 
PMID: 19114879  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

