
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Apr;1794(4):642-54. doi: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2008.11.021.
Epub 2008 Dec 7.

Elucidation of the substrate specificity, kinetic and catalytic mechanism of
adenylosuccinate lyase from Plasmodium falciparum.

Bulusu V(1), Srinivasan B, Bopanna MP, Balaram H.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology and Genetics Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced
Scientific Research, Jakkur, Bangalore 560 064, India.

Adenylosuccinate lyase (ASL) catalyzes two distinct but chemically similar
reactions in purine biosynthesis. The first, exclusive to the de novo pathway
involves the cleavage of 5-aminoimidazole-4-(N-succinylcarboxamide)
ribonucleotide (SAICAR) to 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide (AICAR) 
and fumarate and the second common to both de novo and the salvage pathways
involves the cleavage of succinyl-adenosine monophosphate (SAMP) to AMP and
fumarate. A detailed kinetic and catalytic mechanism of the recombinant
His-tagged ASL from Plasmodium falciparum (PfASL) is presented here. Initial
velocity kinetics, product inhibition studies and transient kinetics indicate a
Uni-Bi rapid equilibrium ordered mechanism. Substrate and solvent isotope effect 
studies implicate the process of C(gamma)-N bond cleavage to be rate limiting.
Interestingly, the effect of pH on k(cat) and k(cat)/K(m) highlight ionization of
the base only in the enzyme substrate complex and not in the enzyme alone,
thereby implicating the pivotal role of the substrate in the activation of the
catalytic base. Site-directed mutagenesis implicates a key role for the conserved
serine (S298) in catalysis. Despite the absence of a de novo pathway for purine
synthesis and most importantly, the absence of other enzymes that can metabolise 
AICAR in P. falciparum, PfASL catalyzes the SAICAR cleavage reaction with kinetic
parameters similar to those of SAMP reaction and binds AICAR with affinity
similar to that of AMP. The presence of this catalytic feature allows the use of 
AICAR or its analogues as inhibitors of PfASL and hence, as novel putative
anti-parasitic agents. In support of this, we do see a dose dependent inhibition 
of parasite growth in the presence of 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide
ribonucleoside (AICAriboside) with half-maximal inhibition at 167+/-5 microM.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2008.11.021 
PMID: 19111634  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

