
1. BMC Microbiol. 2009 Jan 8;9:4. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-9-4.

Genes involved in arsenic transformation and resistance associated with different
levels of arsenic-contaminated soils.

Cai L(1), Liu G, Rensing C, Wang G.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Life Science and
Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, PR China.
cl811022@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Arsenic is known as a toxic metalloid, which primarily exists in
inorganic form [As(III) and As(V)] and can be transformed by microbial redox
processes in the natural environment. As(III) is much more toxic and mobile than 
As(V), hence microbial arsenic redox transformation has a major impact on arsenic
toxicity and mobility which can greatly influence the human health. Our main
purpose was to investigate the distribution and diversity of microbial
arsenite-resistant species in three different arsenic-contaminated soils, and
further study the As(III) resistance levels and related functional genes of these
species.
RESULTS: A total of 58 arsenite-resistant bacteria were identified from soils
with three different arsenic-contaminated levels. Highly arsenite-resistant
bacteria (MIC > 20 mM) were only isolated from the highly arsenic-contaminated
site and belonged to Acinetobacter, Agrobacterium, Arthrobacter, Comamonas,
Rhodococcus, Stenotrophomonas and Pseudomonas. Five arsenite-oxidizing bacteria
that belonged to Achromobacter, Agrobacterium and Pseudomonas were identified and
displayed a higher average arsenite resistance level than the non-arsenite
oxidizers. 5 aoxB genes encoding arsenite oxidase and 51 arsenite transporter
genes [18 arsB, 12 ACR3(1) and 21 ACR3(2)] were successfully amplified from these
strains using PCR with degenerate primers. The aoxB genes were specific for the
arsenite-oxidizing bacteria. Strains containing both an arsenite oxidase gene
(aoxB) and an arsenite transporter gene (ACR3 or arsB) displayed a higher average
arsenite resistance level than those possessing an arsenite transporter gene
only. Horizontal transfer of ACR3(2) and arsB appeared to have occurred in
strains that were primarily isolated from the highly arsenic-contaminated soil.
CONCLUSION: Soils with long-term arsenic contamination may result in the
evolution of highly diverse arsenite-resistant bacteria and such diversity was
probably caused in part by horizontal gene transfer events. Bacteria capable of
both arsenite oxidation and arsenite efflux mechanisms had an elevated arsenite
resistance level.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-9-4 
PMCID: PMC2631446
PMID: 19128515  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

