
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2009 Mar;75(5):1373-80. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01253-08. Epub
2009 Jan 9.

Associations between antimicrobial resistance phenotypes, antimicrobial
resistance genes, and virulence genes of fecal Escherichia coli isolates from
healthy grow-finish pigs.

Rosengren LB(1), Waldner CL, Reid-Smith RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Large Animal Clinical Sciences, Western College of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Saskatchewan, 52 Campus Drive, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan
S7N 5B4, Canada. leigh.rosengren@vetepi.com

Escherichia coli often carries linked antimicrobial resistance genes on
transmissible genetic elements. Through coselection, antimicrobial use may select
for unrelated but linked resistance or virulence genes. This study used
unconditional statistical associations to investigate the relationships between
antimicrobial resistance phenotypes and antimicrobial resistance genes in 151 E. 
coli isolates from healthy pigs. Phenotypic resistance to each drug was
significantly associated with phenotypic resistance to at least one other drug,
and every association found that the probability of observing the outcome
resistance was increased by the presence of the predictor resistance. With one
exception, each statistical association that was identified between a pair of
resistance genes had a corresponding significant association identified between
the phenotypes mediated by those genes. This suggests that associations between
resistance phenotypes might predict coselection. If this hypothesis is confirmed,
evaluation of the associations between resistance phenotypes could improve our
knowledge of coselection dynamics and provide a cost-effective way to evaluate
existing data until large-scale genotypic data collection becomes feasible. This 
could enable policy makers and users of antimicrobials to consider coselection in
antimicrobial use decisions. This study also considered the unconditional
relationships between resistance and virulence genes in E. coli from healthy pigs
(aidA-1, eae, elt, estA, estB, fedA1, stx1, and stx2). Positive statistical
associations would suggest that antimicrobial use may select for virulence in
bacteria that may contaminate food or cause diarrhea in pigs. Fortunately, the
odds of detecting a virulence gene were rarely increased by the presence of an
antimicrobial resistance gene. This suggests that on-farm antimicrobial use did
not select for the examined virulence factors in E. coli carried by this
population of healthy pigs.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01253-08 
PMCID: PMC2648170
PMID: 19139228  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

