
1. Curr Mol Med. 2009 Feb;9(1):4-14.

Natural killer T cells and autoimmune disease.

Wu L(1), Van Kaer L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Natural killer T (NKT) cells are an unusual subset of innate immune cells that
express a surface receptor generated by somatic DNA rearrangement, a hallmark of 
cells of the adaptive immune system. NKT cells express a highly restricted
repertoire of T cell receptors that recognize glycolipid antigens bound with the 
antigen-presenting molecule CD1d. A hallmark of NKT cells is their capacity to
produce copious amounts of immunomodulatory cytokines upon antigenic stimulation,
which endows these cells with potent immunoregulatory properties. Consequently,
NKT cells have been implicated in regulating a wide variety of immune responses, 
including immune responses against autoantigens. In patients and mice with a
variety of autoimmune diseases, numbers and functions of NKT cells are disturbed,
but the relevance of these findings to the etiology of autoimmunity remains to be
fully established. Nevertheless, in some mouse models of autoimmunity, NKT
cell-deficiency exacerbates disease, suggesting that NKT cells play a role in
suppressing autoimmunity. Conversely, specific activation of NKT cells with
glycolipid antigens generally protects mice against the development of
autoimmunity. Most of these studies have employed the potent sponge-derived NKT
cell antigen alpha-galactosylceramide (alpha-GalCer). However, alpha-GalCer
treatment in mice was associated with detrimental side effects and treatment
efficacy was influenced by a variety of parameters, resulting sometimes in
disease exacerbation rather than protection. Recent efforts have focused on
developing NKT cell agonists with superior treatment efficacy than alpha-GalCer. 
Collectively, these studies have identified NKT cells as attractive targets for
treatment of human autoimmune diseases.

DOI: 10.2174/156652409787314534 
PMID: 19199937  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

