
1. BMC Microbiol. 2009 Feb 11;9:33. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-9-33.

Inducible expression of beta defensins by human respiratory epithelial cells
exposed to Aspergillus fumigatus organisms.

Alekseeva L(1), Huet D, Féménia F, Mouyna I, Abdelouahab M, Cagna A, Guerrier D, 
Tichanné-Seltzer V, Baeza-Squiban A, Chermette R, Latgé JP, Berkova N.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 956, INRA, AFSSA, ENVA, Maisons Alfort Cedex, France.
luda.alekseeva@mail.ru

BACKGROUND: Aspergillus fumigatus, a saprophytic mould, is responsible for
life-threatening, invasive pulmonary diseases in immunocompromised hosts. The
role of the airway epithelium involves a complex interaction with the inhaled
pathogen. Antimicrobial peptides with direct antifungal and chemotactic
activities may boost antifungal immune response.
RESULTS: The inducible expression of defensins by human bronchial epithelial
16HBE cells and A549 pneumocyte cells exposed to A. fumigatus was investigated.
Using RT-PCR and real time PCR, we showed an activation of hBD2 and hBD9 defensin
genes: the expression was higher in cells exposed to swollen conidia (SC),
compared to resting conidia (RC) or hyphal fragments (HF). The kinetics of
defensin expression was different for each one, evoking a putative distinct
function for each investigated defensin. The decrease of defensin expression in
the presence of heat-inactivated serum indicated a possible link between
defensins and the proteins of the host complement system. The presence of
defensin peptide hBD2 was revealed using immunofluorescence that showed a
punctual cytoplasmic and perinuclear staining. Quantification of the cells
stained with anti hBD2 antibody demonstrated that SC induced a greater number of 
cells that synthesized hBD2, compared to RC or HF. Labelling of the cells with
anti-hBD-2 antibody showed a positive immunofluorescence signal around RC or SC
in contrast to HF. This suggests co-localisation of hBD2 and digested conidia.
The HBD2 level was highest in the supernatants of cells exposed to SC, as was
determined by sandwich ELISA. Experiments using neutralising
anti-interleukine-1beta antibody reflect the autocrine mechanism of defensin
expression induced by SC. Investigation of defensin expression at transcriptional
and post-transcriptional levels demonstrated the requirement of transcription as 
well as new protein synthesis during A. fumigatus defensin induction. Finally,
induced defensin expression in primary culture of human respiratory cells exposed
to A. fumigatus points to the biological significance of described phenomena.
CONCLUSION: Our findings provide evidence that respiratory epithelium might play 
an important role in the immune response during Aspergillus infection.
Understanding the mechanisms of regulation of defensin expression may thus lead
to new approaches that could enhance expression of antimicrobial peptides for
potential therapeutic use during aspergillosis treatment.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-9-33 
PMCID: PMC2653505
PMID: 19208266  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

