
1. Int J Mol Med. 2009 Mar;23(3):331-5.

Roles of SEA-expressing Staphylococcus aureus, isolated from an atopic dermatitis
patient, on expressions of human beta-defensin-2 and inflammatory cytokines in
HaCaT cells.

Cho JW(1), Cho SY, Lee KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine, Keimyung University, Daegu
700-712, South Korea.

Atopic dermatitis (AD) shows an increased susceptibility to Staphylococcus aureus
infection partly due to decreased expression of human beta-defensin-2 (HBD-2).
Interestingly, it was reported that the nasal carrier S. aureus down-regulates
the expression of HBD-2 and -3, thereby the carrier strains of S. aureus retain
an advantage to epithelial colonization and infection. In this study, we tried to
isolate and characterize S. aureus from an AD patient, with recurrent oozing on
his face. We studied the increased expression of inflammatory cytokines, such as 
IL-1beta, -6, -8, and TNF-alpha in S. aureus treated-HaCaT cells, which are
mediated by secreting superantigens (SAgs), structural component, or both. In
addition, we investigated whether the SAgs from S. aureus can down-regulate the
expression of HBD-2 in HaCaT cells making favorable conditions for colonization
on skin. Our data showed that the isolated S. aureus has the exotoxin gene, sea
exotoxin. The SEA producing-S. aureus induced the expression of IL-1beta, -6, -8 
cytokines, and TNF-alpha in HaCaT cells. The expression of HBD-2 was increased in
S. aureus-treated HaCaT cells. Furthermore IL-8 was also induced by the structure
component of S. aureus. Taken together, the SEA producing S. aureus induced the
up-regulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines as well as HBD-2, thereby resulting
in induction of the persistent eczematous skin lesions in AD. Thus, our data may 
give insight into understanding the pathogenesis by which S. aureus induces and
aggravates eczematous skin lesions in AD.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm_00000135 
PMID: 19212650  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

