
1. J Periodontol. 2009 Jan;80(1):114-21. doi: 10.1902/jop.2009.080315 .

Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase expression and regulation in chronic periodontitis.

Nisapakultorn K(1), Makrudthong J, Sa-Ard-Iam N, Rerkyen P, Mahanonda R, Takikawa
O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) is an intracellular
tryptophan-oxidizing enzyme with immunosuppressive characteristics. Its
expression and regulation in periodontal tissues are unknown. The aim of this
study was to determine IDO expression in healthy gingiva and chronic
periodontitis lesions. In addition, the effect of inflammatory cytokines and
bacterial products on the expression and activity of DOI in human gingival
fibroblasts (HGFs) was assessed.
METHODS: Human gingival tissue samples were obtained from patients who underwent 
periodontal surgery. IDO expression in healthy gingiva and periodontitis lesions 
was determined by immunohistochemistry. HGF cells were treated with
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), interleukin (IL)-1beta, tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-alpha), and lipopolysaccharides from Porphyromonas gingivalis (PgLPS). IDO
mRNA expression was determined by reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction. The IDO enzymatic activity was determined by measuring the kynurenine
level using a colorimetric method.
RESULTS: In gingival tissues, IDO expression was detected in epithelial cells,
fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and inflammatory mononuclear cells. IDO
expression was higher in periodontitis lesions than in healthy gingiva. HGFs did 
not constitutively express IDO. IFN-gamma strongly induced IDO expression and
activity in HGFs, in a dose-dependent manner. IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, and PgLPS were
also able to induce IDO expression in HGF cells. IFN-gamma in combination with
IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, or PgLPS showed enhanced IDO expression.
CONCLUSIONS: IDO was expressed in human gingiva, and the expression was
upregulated in chronic periodontitis. The increased IDO expression in
periodontitis lesions may be due, in part, to the activation of HGFs by
inflammatory cytokines and bacterial products.

DOI: 10.1902/jop.2009.080315 
PMID: 19228097  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

