
1. Yeast. 2009 Feb;26(2):95-110. doi: 10.1002/yea.1655.

Rsf1p is required for an efficient metabolic shift from fermentative to
glycerol-based respiratory growth in S. cerevisiae.

Roberts GG 3rd(1), Hudson AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

Previous studies from this laboratory indicated that the product of the RSF1 gene
of S. cerevisiae is present in both nucleus and mitochondria, and they suggested 
that Rsf1p acts as a transcriptional modulator. To investigate this latter
question, we performed transcriptome profiling of an rsf1 mutant strain and its
wild-type parent during a shift from glucose-based fermentative to glycerol-based
respiratory growth to identify genes whose expression is regulated by Rsf1p. Loss
of Rsf1p engendered a decrease in transcript levels from many genes encoding
components of the electron transport chain and various other
mitochondrially-localized products. The earlier studies further showed that rsf1 
cells exhibit a growth defect on medium containing glycerol, but not ethanol, as 
sole carbon source. Importantly, transcriptome profiling of the rsf1 mutant
during shift from glucose- to glycerol-based medium revealed that the product of 
this gene plays a major role in both orchestration of the transition to, and
maintenance of, efficient growth on glycerol as sole carbon source. An increase
in transcript levels from genes encoding products that function in the stress
response, and an imbalance between expression of genes encoding glycerol anabolic
and catabolic enzymes, was observed in the rsf1 mutant during steady-state growth
on glycerol- but not ethanol-based medium; this suggests the presence of
partially separate transcriptional regulatory systems for transition to
respiratory growth on each of these two carbon sources. Genes whose expression is
affected by loss of Rsf1p, which lacks a known DNA-binding motif, lack a common
DNA sequence motif in their upstream regions. These and other data presented here
strongly suggest that the transcriptional effects exerted by Rsf1p are mediated
via interaction with other transcription factors.

DOI: 10.1002/yea.1655 
PMID: 19235764  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

