
1. J Fish Dis. 2008 Nov;31(11):799-810.

Water recirculation and good management: potential methods to avoid disease
outbreaks with Flavobacterium psychrophilum.

Madsen L(1), Dalsgaard I.

Author information: 
(1)Fish Disease Laboratory, National Institute of Aquatic Resources, Technical
University of Denmark, Frederiksberg, Denmark. lm@aqua.dtu.dk

Flavobacterium psychrophilum infections cause high mortality among rainbow trout,
Oncorhynchus mykiss, fry in Danish fish farms and hatcheries. Hatcheries based
entirely on bore-hole water recirculation systems have been suggested as a
possibility for eliminating F. psychrophilum or at least keeping the amount of
this bacterium low. The occurrence of the bacterium in a bore-hole water
recirculation system was compared with a combined bore-hole water and stream
water flow-through system in a hatchery where outbreaks of rainbow trout fry
syndrome caused by F. psychrophilum often occurred. Broodfish, unfertilized and
fertilized eggs, eyed eggs and fry, as well as water samples from the
tanks/troughs with broodfish/fry, were examined. Suspect yellow bacterial
colonies were either confirmed or rejected as F. psychrophilum by growth
characteristics and by PCR. As both virulent and less virulent F. psychrophilum
isolates are known, isolates were characterized. The isolates were ribotyped and 
grouped according to ribotyping patterns. Representatives of the groups were
serotyped. Fry isolates were very homogeneous whereas isolates from broodfish
were heterogeneous, whether the isolates originated from external surfaces of the
fish (mucus from skin and gills, haemorrhages and ulcers) or internal organs.
Flavobacterium psychrophilum was isolated from broodfish in both water systems;
56% of investigated broodfish from the borehole/flowthrough system and 36% from
the recirculation facility harboured the bacterium. In the recirculation system, 
the bacterium was isolated from fish (ulcers, milt, liver, abdominal cavity) kept
in the system for 11 months. Flavobacterium psychrophilum was found in milt and
ovarian fluid as well as on the surface of fertilized eggs, but not inside the
eggs. Fry also harboured F. psychrophilum, but in the water recirculation system 
the bacterium was first isolated from the fry after they had been graded.
Flavobacterium psychrophilum was found regularly in other parts of the hatchery
(outside the recirculation facility), including at the time of grading,
suggesting that the occurrence of F. psychrophilum in the fry recirculation
facility was due to contamination from the borehole/flow-through hatchery. It is 
suggested that the combination of bore-hole water recirculation systems and good 
management procedures (including egg disinfection) is a possible method for
hatcheries to avoid disease outbreaks due to F. psychrophilum.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2761.2008.00971.x 
PMID: 19238756  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

