
1. J Environ Biol. 2008 Sep;29(5):641-53.

Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) transgenic crop: an environment friendly insect-pest 
management strategy.

Kumar S(1), Chandra A, Pandey KC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Crop Improvement, Indian Grassland and Fodder Research Institute, 
Jhansi-284 003, India. suresh_kumar33@rediffmail.com

Introduction of DDT (dichloro-diphenyl-trichloroethane) and following move
towards indiscriminate use of synthetic chemical insecticides led to the
contamination of water and food sources, poisoning of non-target beneficial
insects and development of insect-pests resistant to the chemical insecticides.
Increased public concems about the adverse environmental effects of
indiscriminate use of chemical insecticides prompted search of altemative methods
for insect-pest control. One of the promising alternatives has been the use of
biological control agents. There is well-documented history of safe application
of Bt (B. thuringiensis, a gram positive soil bacterium) as effective
biopesticides and a number of reports of expression of delta-endotoxin gene(s) in
crop plants are available. Only a few insecticidal sprays are required on Bt
transgenic crops, which not only save cost and time, but also reduce health
risks. Insects exhibit remarkable ability to develop resistance to different
insecticidal compounds, which raises concern about the unsystematic use of Bt
transgenic technology also. Though resistance to Bt products among insect species
under field conditions has been rare, laboratory studies show that insects are
capable of developing high levels of resistance to one ormore Cry proteins. Now
it is generally agreed that 'high-dose/refuge strategy' is the most promising and
practical approach to prolong the effectiveness of Bt toxins. Although
manybiosafety concerns, ethical and moral issues exist, area under Bt transgenic 
crops is rapidly increasing and they are cultivated on more than 32 million
hectares world over Even after reservation of European Union (EU) for acceptance 
of geneticaly modified (GM) crops, 6 out of 25 countries have already adopted Bt 
crops and many otherindustrial countries will adopt Bt transgenic crops in near
future. While the modem biotechnology has been recognized to have a great
potential for the promotion of human well-being, adoption of biosafety protocol
is necessary to protect human health and environment from the possible adverse
effects of the products of genetic engineering. The debate between proponents and
opponents of GM technology has created major obstacles in hamessing benefits of
the technology It has now become clear that transgenics willbe accepted by the
public only when doubts related with general risks and environmental safety are
adequately dispelled. Thus, there is need to organize public awareness and
present the benefits of Bt transgenic crops to improve social attitude for their 
rational deployment. In this review, an attempt has been made to discuss social
and environmental safety issues of Bt transgenic crops.


PMID: 19295059  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

