
1. J Immunol. 2009 Apr 1;182(7):4349-56. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0801199.

The receptor for advanced glycation end products impairs host defense in
pneumococcal pneumonia.

van Zoelen MA(1), Schouten M, de Vos AF, Florquin S, Meijers JC, Nawroth PP,
Bierhaus A, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, Germany. M.A.vanZoelen@amc.uva.nl

Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most common cause of community-acquired
pneumonia. The receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) is a
multiligand receptor that is expressed ubiquitously in the lungs. Engagement of
RAGE leads to activation of multiple intracellular signaling pathways, including 
NF-kappaB and subsequent transcription of several proinflammatory mediators. To
determine the role of RAGE in the innate immune response to S. pneumoniae
pneumonia, RAGE-deficient (RAGE(-/-)) and wild-type mice were intranasally
inoculated with S. pneumoniae. S. pneumoniae pneumonia resulted in an
up-regulation of constitutively present RAGE expression in lung tissue,
especially in the interalveolar septae. RAGE(-/-) mice showed an improved
survival, which was accompanied by a lower bacterial load in the lungs at 16 h
and a decreased dissemination of the bacteria to blood and spleen at 16 and 48 h 
after inoculation. RAGE(-/-) macrophages showed an improved killing capacity of
S. pneumoniae in vitro. Lung inflammation was attenuated in RAGE(-/-) mice at 48 
h after inoculation, as indicated by histopathology and cytokine/chemokine
levels. Neutrophil migration to the lungs was mitigated in the RAGE(-/-) mice. In
addition, in RAGE(-/-) mice, activation of coagulation was diminished. Additional
studies examining the effect of RAGE deficiency on the early (6-h) inflammatory
response to S. pneumoniae did not reveal an early accelerated or enhanced immune 
response. These data suggest that RAGE plays a detrimental role in the host
response to S. pneumoniae pneumonia by facilitating the bacterial growth and
dissemination and concurrently enhancing the pulmonary inflammatory and
procoagulant response.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0801199 
PMID: 19299735  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

