
1. J Carcinog. 2009;8:7. doi: 10.4103/1477-3163.50892.

Helicobacter pylori induces cancer cell motility independent of the c-Met
receptor.

Snider JL(1), Cardelli JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and the Feist-Weiller Cancer Center,
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center-Shreveport, Shreveport, LA,
71130, USA.

BACKGROUND: The hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) receptor, c-Met, is strongly
implicated in late-stage cancer progression and poor patient prognosis. The
stomach pathogen, Helicobacter pylori ( H. pylori ), was recently proposed to
stimulate c-Met phosphorylation dependent upon interaction of c-Met with the
bacterial CagA protein required for H. pylori -induced cancer cell motility and
invasion.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this report, we employed short hairpin RNA (shRNA),
western blot analysis using antibodies recognizing phosphorylation at discrete
c-Met residues, and immunofluorescence microscopy to investigate the CagA-c-Met
interaction.
RESULTS: The data showed that shRNA-mediated c-Met knockdown did not reduce H.
pylori -induced cell motility, suggesting that c-Met was not required for
motility. Surprisingly, c-Met knockdown did not reduce the level of an H. pylori 
-induced protein recognized by a phospho-c-Met antibody. This 125 kD protein was 
10 kD smaller than c-Met, suggesting that H. pylori did not phosphorylate c-Met
but cross-reacted with another protein. This hypothesis was confirmed when c-Met 
phosphorylation inhibitors did not lower the levels of the bacteria-induced 125
kD protein, and c-Met immunoprecipitation (IP) did not detect this 125 kD protein
from H. pylori -treated lysates. This protein was identified as a product of
antibody cross reactivity with phosphorylated CagA. We also confirmed that CagA
interacts with c-Met, but this interaction may have caused previous authors to
misinterpret phosphorylated CagA as c-Met phosphorylation. Finally, pretreatment 
with the proteasomal inhibitor, lactacystin, caused prolonged HGF-induced c-Met
phosphorylation and facilitated a CagA-negative H. pylori to stimulate AGS cell
motility, suggesting that sustained c-Met phosphorylation compensates for the
loss of CagA-dependent signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate that H. pylori stimulates cancer cell
motility independent of the c-Met receptor. We further hypothesize that although 
H. pylori does not target c-Met, the bacteria may still utilize c-Met effector
signaling to stimulate CagA-independent cancer cell motility, which may provide a
further mechanism of H. pylori -dependent gastric cancer progression.

DOI: 10.4103/1477-3163.50892 
PMCID: PMC2687142
PMID: 19439912 

