
1. PLoS Pathog. 2009 May;5(5):e1000447. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000447. Epub 2009
May 22.

The urokinase receptor (uPAR) facilitates clearance of Borrelia burgdorferi.

Hovius JW(1), Bijlsma MF, van der Windt GJ, Wiersinga WJ, Boukens BJ, Coumou J,
Oei A, de Beer R, de Vos AF, van 't Veer C, van Dam AP, Wang P, Fikrig E, Levi
MM, Roelofs JJ, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine (CEMM), Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, AMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
j.w.hovius@amc.uva.nl

The causative agent of Lyme borreliosis, the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi, has
been shown to induce expression of the urokinase receptor (uPAR); however, the
role of uPAR in the immune response against Borrelia has never been investigated.
uPAR not only acts as a proteinase receptor, but can also, dependently or
independently of ligation to uPA, directly affect leukocyte function. We here
demonstrate that uPAR is upregulated on murine and human leukocytes upon exposure
to B. burgdorferi both in vitro as well as in vivo. Notably, B.
burgdorferi-inoculated C57BL/6 uPAR knock-out mice harbored significantly higher 
Borrelia numbers compared to WT controls. This was associated with impaired
phagocytotic capacity of B. burgdorferi by uPAR knock-out leukocytes in vitro. B.
burgdorferi numbers in vivo, and phagocytotic capacity in vitro, were unaltered
in uPA, tPA (low fibrinolytic activity) and PAI-1 (high fibrinolytic activity)
knock-out mice compared to WT controls. Strikingly, in uPAR knock-out mice
partially backcrossed to a B. burgdorferi susceptible C3H/HeN background, higher 
B. burgdorferi numbers were associated with more severe carditis and increased
local TLR2 and IL-1beta mRNA expression. In conclusion, in B. burgdorferi
infection, uPAR is required for phagocytosis and adequate eradication of the
spirochete from the heart by a mechanism that is independent of binding of uPAR
to uPA or its role in the fibrinolytic system.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000447 
PMCID: PMC2678258
PMID: 19461880  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

