
1. J Pept Sci. 2009 Sep;15(9):595-600. doi: 10.1002/psc.1142.

Activity of antimicrobial peptides in the presence of polysaccharides produced by
pulmonary pathogens.

Benincasa M(1), Mattiuzzo M, Herasimenka Y, Cescutti P, Rizzo R, Gennaro R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, University of Trieste, I-34127 Trieste, Italy.

Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are secreted in the airway and contribute to
initial defence against inhaled pathogens. Infections of the respiratory tract
are a major cause of morbidity and mortality in preterm newborns and in patients 
with cystic fibrosis (CF). In this latter group, the state of chronic lung
infection is due to the ability of bacteria to grow as mucoid biofilm, a
condition characterised by overproduction and release of polysaccharides (PSs).
In this study, we investigate the effect of PSs produced by lung pathogens such
as Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Klebsiella pneumoniae and members of the Burkholderia 
cepacia complex on the antibacterial activity of structurally different peptides.
The AMPs tested in this study include the cathelicidin LL-37 and the
beta-defensin hBD-3 from humans, both released at the alveolar level, as well as 
peptides from other mammals, i.e. SMAP-29, PG-1 and Bac7(1-35). Susceptibility
assays, time killing and membrane permeabilization kinetics experiments were
carried out to establish whether PSs produced by lung pathogens may be involved
in the poor defence reaction of infected lungs and thus explain infection
persistence. All the PSs investigated inhibited, albeit to a different extent,
the antibacterial activity of the peptides tested, suggesting that their presence
in the lungs of patients with CF may contribute to the decreased defence response
of this district upon infection by PS-producing microorganisms. The results also 
show that inhibition of the antibacterial activity is not simply due to ionic
interaction between the negatively charged PSs and the cationic AMPs, but it also
involves other structural features of both interactors.

Copyright 2009 European Peptide Society and John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/psc.1142 
PMID: 19466693  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

