
1. Int Immunol. 2009 Jul;21(7):859-70. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxp052. Epub 2009 May 28.

Activation of invariant NKT cells confers protection against Chlamydia
trachomatis-induced arthritis.

Bharhani MS(1), Chiu B, Na KS, Inman RD.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Immunology, Toronto Western Research Institute,
University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The role of invariant NKT (iNKT) cells in reactive arthritis is unknown. We
explored the functional role of NKT cells in reactive arthritis using an
established murine model of Chlamydia trachomatis-induced arthritis (CtIA). CtIA 
in wild-type and CD1d knockout (KO) mice was induced by intra-articular injection
of C. trachomatis. The effect of alpha-galactosylceramide (alpha-GalCer)
activation of iNKT cells was investigated by intra-peritoneal administration of
alpha-GalCer. Histopathological and phenotypic changes, chlamydial clearance and 
cytokine and chemokine production in synovial tissue of the knee joint were
investigated after onset of the arthritis. The severity of CtIA was significantly
increased in CD1d KO mice, which was associated with decrease in bactericidal
cytokine IFN-gamma, regulatory cytokines IL-4 and IL-10 and increase in
pro-inflammatory chemokines macrophage inflammatory protein-2 (MIP-2) and
IFN-gamma-inducible protein-10 (IP-10). Local clearance of the pathogen from the 
joint was also decreased. Prior treatment of mice with alpha-GalCer, a potent
activator of iNKT cells, significantly reduced the severity of CtIA in mice. The 
amelioration of CtIA was associated with decrease in chlamydial load and
induction of cytokines IFN-gamma, IL-4 and IL-10 and significant suppression of
MIP-2 and IP-10. Treatment of established CtIA with alpha-GalCer also
demonstrated modulation of CtIA and decrease in chlamydial load. These results
suggest that iNKT cells are protective against CtIA and alpha-GalCer-activated
iNKT cells have an immunoregulatory role not only in preventing the induction of 
reactive arthritis but also in modulating established disease.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxp052 
PMID: 19477915  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

