
1. IUBMB Life. 2009 Jun;61(6):579-90. doi: 10.1002/iub.208.

Structural immunology and crystallography help immunologists see the immune
system in action: how T and NK cells touch their ligands.

Chen Y(1), Shi Y, Cheng H, An YQ, Gao GF.

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology (CASPMI),
Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, People's
Republic of China.

Host immune system is an important and sophisticated system, maintaining the
balance of host response to "foreign" antigens and ignorance to the normal-self. 
To fulfill this achievement the system manipulates a cell-cell interaction
through appropriate interactions between cell-surface receptors and cell-surface 
ligands, or cell-secreted soluble effector molecules to their
ligands/receptors/counter-receptors on the cell surface, triggering further
downstream signaling for response effects. T cells and NK cells are important
components of the immune system for defending the infections and malignancies and
maintaining the proper response against over-reaction to the host. Receptors on
the surface of T cells and NK cells include a number of important protein
molecules, for example, T cell receptor (TCR), co-receptor CD8 or CD4,
co-stimulator CD28, CTLA4, KIR, CD94/NKG2, LILR (ILT/LIR/CD85), Ly49, and so
forth. These receptor molecules interact with their ligands on the target cells, 
including major histocompatibility complex (MHC) (or human leukocyte antigen,
HLA), CD80, CD86, and so forth. Detailed understanding of these receptor-ligand
pair interactions is crucial for our full knowledge of the immune system,
ultimately for us to manipulate the T cell and NK cell functions. Accumulations
of the receptor-ligand complex crystal structures in the recent years have
provided us a unique angel to see how the immune cells interacting with their
partner cells. In this review, we discussed binding specificity, plasticity, and 
flexibility of the T cell and NK cell receptor/ligand interaction, fitting the
structural data with their functions. Structural immunology indeed helps us see
how T and NK cells "touch" their target cells in our immune system.

(c) 2009 IUBMB.

DOI: 10.1002/iub.208 
PMID: 19472182  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

