
1. J Clin Invest. 2009 Jul;119(7):1910-20. doi: 10.1172/JCI35412.

Type I IFNs mediate development of postinfluenza bacterial pneumonia in mice.

Shahangian A(1), Chow EK, Tian X, Kang JR, Ghaffari A, Liu SY, Belperio JA, Cheng
G, Deng JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, David Geffen
School of Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.
jdeng@mednet.ucla.edu

Influenza-related complications continue to be a major cause of mortality
worldwide. Due to unclear mechanisms, a substantial number of influenza-related
deaths result from bacterial superinfections, particularly secondary pneumococcal
pneumonia. Here, we report what we believe to be a novel mechanism by which
influenza-induced type I IFNs sensitize hosts to secondary bacterial infections. 
Influenza-infected mice deficient for type I IFN-alpha/beta receptor signaling
(Ifnar-/- mice) had improved survival and clearance of secondary Streptococcus
pneumoniae infection from the lungs and blood, as compared with similarly
infected wild-type animals. The less effective response in wild-type mice seemed 
to be attributable to impaired production of neutrophil chemoattractants KC (also
known as Cxcl1) and Mip2 (also known as Cxcl2) following secondary challenge with
S. pneumoniae. This resulted in inadequate neutrophil responses during the early 
phase of host defense against secondary bacterial infection. Indeed,
influenza-infected wild-type mice cleared secondary pneumococcal pneumonia after 
pulmonary administration of exogenous KC and Mip2, whereas neutralization of
Cxcr2, the common receptor for KC and Mip2, reversed the protective phenotype
observed in Ifnar-/- mice. These data may underscore the importance of the type I
IFN inhibitory pathway on CXC chemokine production. Collectively, these findings 
highlight what we believe to be a novel mechanism by which the antiviral response
to influenza sensitizes hosts to secondary bacterial pneumonia.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI35412 
PMCID: PMC2701856
PMID: 19487810  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

