
1. J Immunol. 2009 Jun 15;182(12):7855-64. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0804008.

Crucial role of TNF receptors 1 and 2 in the control of polymicrobial sepsis.

Secher T(1), Vasseur V, Poisson DM, Mitchell JA, Cunha FQ, Alves-Filho JC, Ryffel
B.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology and Embryology, University of Orleans and Centre National
de la Recherche Scientifique, France.

Sepsis is still a major cause of mortality in the intensive critical care unit
and results from an overwhelming immune response to the infection. TNF signaling 
pathway plays a central role in the activation of innate immunity in response to 
pathogens. Using a model of polymicrobial sepsis by i.p. injection of cecal
microflora, we demonstrate a critical role of TNFR1 and R2 activation in the
deregulated immune responses and death associated with sepsis. A large and
persistent production of TNF was found in wild-type (B6) mice. TNFR1/R2-deficient
mice, compared with B6 mice, survive lethal polymicrobial infection with enhanced
neutrophil recruitment and bacterial clearance in the peritoneal cavity. Absence 
of TNFR signaling leads to a decreased local and systemic inflammatory response
with diminished organ injury. Furthermore, using TNFR1/R2-deficient mice, TNF was
found to be responsible for a decrease in CXCR2 expression, explaining reduced
neutrophil extravasation and migration to the infectious site, and in neutrophil 
apoptosis. In line with the clinical experience, administration of Enbrel, a
TNF-neutralizing protein, induced however only a partial protection in B6 mice,
with no improvement of clinical settings, suggesting that future TNF
immunomodulatory strategies should target TNFR1 and R2. In conclusion, the
present data suggest that the endogenous TNFR1/R2 signaling pathway in
polymicrobial sepsis reduces neutrophil recruitment contributing to mortality and
as opposed to pan-TNF blockade is an important therapeutic target for the
treatment of polymicrobial sepsis.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0804008 
PMID: 19494310  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

