
1. J Toxicol Sci. 2009;34 Suppl 2:SP321-5.

Essentials for starting a pediatric clinical study (3): Dynamic changes in early 
development of immune system in macaque monkeys--the significance from standpoint
of preclinical toxicity test using nonhuman primates.

Terao K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tsukuba Primate Research Center, National Institute of Biomedical Innovation, 
Ibaragi, Japan. terao@nibio.go.jp

Macaque monkeys are essential laboratory animals in preclinical safety assessment
for human-specific biological products including humanized antibody drug. In most
case, investigators are leaving their ages out of consideration, and young
individuals aged around 3 years are mainly used because of their small individual
differences in biological responses to various stimulations. Since the immune
system starts to develop just after birth and remarkable phenotypic and
functional changes occur in various kinds of immunocompetent cells during the
first few years of life in macaque monkeys, their actual immunological condition 
must be carefully considered in case of safety assessment of novel drugs which
modulate human immune function. The early development of major immune functions
of macaque monkeys is summarized as follows. These findings suggest that
immunocompetent cells drastically differentiate into activated ones during early 
development. 1) The serum immunoglobulin contents gradually rise with increasing 
age up to sexual maturity. 2) The blood group-associated antibodies, anti-A and
anti-B antibody, are detected around 40-days of age and antibody levels rapidly
increase after one year old. 3) Infant cynomolgus monkeys obviously produce the
significant levels of IgG antibody against Campylobacter jejuni within 4 weeks
after infection when maternal antibody becomes undetectable (8 weeks of age). 4) 
The frequency of lymphocyte subpopulations expressing the resting surface
phenotypes is much higher than that having activated phenotypes in neonates, and 
the relative population of lymphocyte subsets with resting phenotype decrease
with increasing age, while the subpopulation associated with activation gradually
increase with age.

DOI: 10.2131/jts.34.sp321 
PMID: 19571486  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

