
1. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2009 Oct;28(10):2052-60. doi: 10.1897/09-027.1.

Contamination and screening level toxicity of sediments from remediated and
unremediated wetlands near Sydney, Australia.

Ying GG(1), Rawson CA, Kookana RS, Peng PA, Warne MS, Tremblay LA, Laginestra E, 
Chapman JC, Lim RP.

Author information: 
(1)Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, Land and Water
Division, Centre for Environmental Contaminants Research, Private Mail Bag 2,
Glen Osmond, South Australia 5064, Australia. guangguo.ying@gmail.com

The present study assessed contamination and toxicity of sediments from seven
remediated and remnant wetland sites within Sydney Olympic Park, Australia, and
four unremediated sites adjacent to its boundary using chemical analysis and a
luminescent bacterial biosensor assay (Escherichia coli). Concentrations of
metals (Pb, Cr, Cu, Ni, Zn, Cd, and As) and persistent organic chemicals (DDT and
its metabolites, dichlorodiphenyldichloroethane and
dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene; polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons;
polychlorinated biphenyls; and polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and
dibenzofurans) in sediments and their pore-water samples were determined. Zinc
concentrations were the highest of the metals in the sediments (84-618 mg/kg),
and at eight sites, metal concentrations in sediments exceeded the Australian
ecological trigger values for Pb, Zn, and Ni. Concentrations of organic
contaminants in the sediments exceeded the trigger values at all 11 sites for
DDTs, at 6 sites for polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, and 5 sites for
polychlorinated biphenyls. Sediment samples from the four unremediated sites
outside the Sydney Olympic Park had dioxin concentrations greater than 200 pg
(toxic equivalency per gram). The same four sites were identified as contaminated
in pore-water toxicity tests with the luminescent biosensor, generally consistent
with the bioavailable fractions of the contaminants (pore-water and Tenax
extraction data), as well as dioxin levels, in the sediments. Preliminary
toxicity identification and evaluation tests of the pore water from the four
sites outside the park demonstrated that organic contaminants were the main cause
of toxicity to E. coli, with no evidence that metals contributed to the toxicity 
of the pore water.

DOI: 10.1897/09-027.1 
PMID: 19589001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

