
1. J Infect Dis. 2009 Sep 1;200(5):735-44. doi: 10.1086/603542.

Intestinal Enterococcus faecium colonization improves host defense during
polymicrobial peritonitis.

Leendertse M(1), Willems RJ, Oei GA, Florquin S, Bonten MJ, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. m.leendertse@amc.uva.nl

Comment in
    J Infect Dis. 2009 Sep 1;200(5):679-81.

BACKGROUND: Vancomycin-resistant (VR) Enterococcus faecium is increasingly found 
to colonize and infect hospitalized patients. Enterococci are frequently isolated
from polymicrobial infections originating from the intestines. The impact of VR
E. faecium on these infections and vice versa is not clear.
METHODS: Mice were intestinally colonized with VR E. faecium during oral
vancomycin treatment; control mice received oral vancomycin only. Fourteen days
later, cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) was performed in all mice to induce
polymicrobial peritonitis in the presence or absence of VR E. faecium
colonization.
RESULTS: VR E. faecium colonization per se was not associated with systemic
dissemination of VR E. faecium. CLP resulted in systemic VR E. faecium infection 
in all VR E. faecium-colonized mice, with high VR E. faecium loads in peritoneal 
lavage fluid, blood, liver, and lungs. Forty-eight hours after CLP, mice infected
with VR E. faecium had significantly lower bacterial loads in all organs tested
than mice not infected with VR E. faecium. Additionally, lower inflammatory
parameters were measured in VR E. faecium-infected mice. CLP induced transient
liver and kidney damage, with a faster recovery in VR E. faecium-colonized mice.
CONCLUSIONS: VR E. faecium infection, originating from a natural source (the
intestinal tract), does not worsen the outcome of CLP-induced polymicrobial
peritonitis and sepsis but rather facilitates bacterial clearance and attenuates 
host inflammatory responses.

DOI: 10.1086/603542 
PMID: 19604046  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

