
1. Gastroenterology. 2010 Jan;138(1):210-20. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2009.07.066. Epub
2009 Aug 5.

Impaired immune functions of monocytes and macrophages in Whipple's disease.

Moos V(1), Schmidt C, Geelhaar A, Kunkel D, Allers K, Schinnerling K,
Loddenkemper C, Fenollar F, Moter A, Raoult D, Ignatius R, Schneider T.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik I, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, CBF, Berlin,
Germany. verena.moos@charite.de

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Whipple's disease is a chronic multisystemic infection caused 
by Tropheryma whipplei. Host factors likely predispose for the establishment of
an infection, and macrophages seem to be involved in the pathogenesis of
Whipple's disease. However, macrophage activation in Whipple's disease has not
been studied systematically so far.
METHODS: Samples from 145 Whipple's disease patients and 166 control subjects
were investigated. We characterized duodenal macrophages and lymphocytes
immunohistochemically and peripheral monocytes by flow cytometry and quantified
mucosal and systemic cytokines and chemokines indicative for macrophage
activation. In addition, we determined duodenal nitrite production and oxidative 
burst induced by T whipplei and by other bacteria.
RESULTS: Reduced numbers of duodenal lymphocytes, increased numbers of CD163(+)
and stabilin-1(+), reduced numbers of inducible nitric synthase+ duodenal
macrophages, and increased percentages of CD163(+) peripheral monocytes indicated
a lack of inflammation and a M2/alternatively activated macrophage phenotype in
Whipple's disease. Incubation with T whipplei in vitro enhanced the expression of
CD163 on monocytes from Whipple's disease patients but not from control subjects.
Chemokines and cytokines associated with M2/alternative macrophage activation
were elevated in the duodenum and the peripheral blood from Whipple's disease
patients. Functionally, Whipple's disease patients showed a reduced duodenal
nitrite production and reduced oxidative burst upon incubation with T whipplei
compared with healthy subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: The lack of excessive local inflammation and alternative activation 
of macrophages, triggered in part by the agent T whipplei itself, may explain the
hallmark of Whipple's disease: invasion of the intestinal mucosa with macrophages
incompetent to degrade T whipplei.

Copyright 2010 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2009.07.066 
PMID: 19664628  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

