
1. PLoS One. 2009 Aug 13;4(8):e6625. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006625.

Identification of a putative Crf splice variant and generation of recombinant
antibodies for the specific detection of Aspergillus fumigatus.

Sch체tte M(1), Thullier P, Pelat T, Wezler X, Rosenstock P, Hinz D, Kirsch MI,
Hasenberg M, Frank R, Schirrmann T, Gunzer M, Hust M, D체bel S.

Author information: 
(1)Technische Universit채t Braunschweig, Institut f체r Biochemie und
Biotechnologie, Braunschweig, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Aspergillus fumigatus is a common airborne fungal pathogen for
humans. It frequently causes an invasive aspergillosis (IA) in immunocompromised 
patients with poor prognosis. Potent antifungal drugs are very expensive and
cause serious adverse effects. Their correct application requires an early and
specific diagnosis of IA, which is still not properly achievable. This work aims 
to a specific detection of A. fumigatus by immunofluorescence and the generation 
of recombinant antibodies for the detection of A. fumigatus by ELISA.
RESULTS: The A. fumigatus antigen Crf2 was isolated from a human patient with
proven IA. It is a novel variant of a group of surface proteins (Crf1, Asp f9,
Asp f16) which belong to the glycosylhydrolase family. Single chain fragment
variables (scFvs) were obtained by phage display from a human naive antibody gene
library and an immune antibody gene library generated from a macaque immunized
with recombinant Crf2. Two different selection strategies were performed and
shown to influence the selection of scFvs recognizing the Crf2 antigen in its
native conformation. Using these antibodies, Crf2 was localized in growing hyphae
of A. fumigatus but not in spores. In addition, the antibodies allowed
differentiation between A. fumigatus and related Aspergillus species or Candida
albicans by immunofluorescence microscopy. The scFv antibody clones were further 
characterized for their affinity, the nature of their epitope, their serum
stability and their detection limit of Crf2 in human serum.
CONCLUSION: Crf2 and the corresponding recombinant antibodies offer a novel
approach for the early diagnostics of IA caused by A. fumigatus.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006625 
PMCID: PMC2721682
PMID: 19675673  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

