
1. Mol Immunol. 2009 Oct;46(16):3261-8. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2009.08.005. Epub 2009
Aug 31.

Bacillus anthracis lethal toxin attenuates lipoteichoic acid-induced maturation
and activation of dendritic cells through a unique mechanism.

Yang J(1), Woo SS, Ryu YH, Yun CH, Cho MH, Rhie GE, Kim BS, Oh HB, Han SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Microbiology & Immunology, BK21 Program, and Dental
Research Institute, School of Dentistry, Seoul National University, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.

Lethal toxin (LT), produced by the gram-positive bacterium Bacillus anthracis,
was identified as a major etiologic agent causing anthrax due to its strong
immunotoxicity. Gram-positive bacteria express lipoteichoic acid (LTA), which is 
considered as a counterpart to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) of gram-negative
bacteria, but differs from LPS in the structure and function. Since dendritic
cells (DCs) are essential for the appropriate initiation of immune response, we
investigated the effect of LT on LTA-induced DC maturation using immature DCs
prepared by differentiation of C57BL/6 mouse bone marrow cells. When immature DCs
were matured with LTA in the presence of LT, the expression of representative
markers for DC maturation such as CD80, CD83, and CD86 together with MHC class I 
and II molecules was inhibited. LT ameliorated the attenuation of endocytic
capacity during DC maturation by LTA while such effect was not observed in
LPS-matured DCs. Furthermore, exposure to LT resulted in a decrease in the
expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines including IL-6, TNF-alpha, and IL-12p40 
in LTA-stimulated DCs as in LPS-stimulated DCs. Interestingly, LT showed a
minimal change in LTA-induced IL-1beta expression while LT highly enhanced the
LPS-induced IL-1beta expression. Those inhibitory effects might be associated
with LT interference of LTA-signaling pathways mediated through mitogen-activated
protein kinases (MAPKs) since LT suppressed phosphorylation of MAPK, which was
induced by LTA. Meanwhile, no change was observed in the expression of putative
anthrax toxin receptors, TEM8 and CMG2, or Toll-like receptor 2. These results
suggest that LT suppresses the maturation and activation of DCs stimulated with
LTA, similar to the suppression in the LPS-stimulated DCs, but via a distinct
mechanism.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2009.08.005 
PMID: 19720398  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

