
1. Crit Care. 2009;13(5):R145. doi: 10.1186/cc8040. Epub 2009 Sep 9.

Nebulized antithrombin limits bacterial outgrowth and lung injury in
Streptococcus pneumoniae pneumonia in rats.

Hofstra JJ(1), Cornet AD, de Rooy BF, Vlaar AP, van der Poll T, Levi M, Zaat SA, 
Schultz MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Intensive Care and Anesthesiology, Academic Medical
Centre, University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
j.j.hofstra@amc.uva.nl

Comment in
    Crit Care. 2010;14(5):440.

INTRODUCTION: Disturbed alveolar fibrin turnover is a cardinal feature of severe 
pneumonia. Clinical studies suggest that natural inhibitors of coagulation exert 
lung-protective effects via anticoagulant and possibly also anti-inflammatory
pathways. Intravenous infusion of the natural anticoagulants increases the risk
of bleeding. Local administration may allow for higher treatment dosages and
increased local efficacy while at the same time reducing the risk of bleeding. We
evaluated the effect of nebulized anticoagulants on pulmonary coagulopathy and
inflammation in a rat model of Streptococcus pneumoniae pneumonia.
METHODS: In this randomized controlled in vivo laboratory study rats were
challenged intratracheally with S. pneumoniae, inducing pneumonia, and randomized
to treatment with normal saline (placebo), recombinant human activated protein C 
(rh-APC), plasma-derived antithrombin (AT), heparin or danaparoid, by means of
nebulization.
RESULTS: S. pneumoniae infection increased pulmonary levels of
thrombin-antithrombin complexes and fibrin degradation products. All nebulized
anticoagulants significantly limited pulmonary coagulopathy. None of the agents
except danaparoid resulted in changes in systemic coagulopathy. Treatment with
plasma-derived AT reduced outgrowth of S. pneumoniae and histopathologic damage
in lungs. In vitro experiments confirmed outgrowth was reduced in bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid (BALF) from rats treated with plasma-derived AT compared with
placebo. Neutralizing of cationic components in BALF diminished the inhibitory
effects on bacterial outgrowth of BALF, suggesting a role for cationic
antimicrobial proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: Nebulization of anticoagulants attenuates pulmonary coagulopathy
during S. pneumoniae pneumonia in rats while only danaparoid affects systemic
coagulation. Nebulized plasma-derived AT reduces bacterial outgrowth and exerts
significant lung-protective effects.

DOI: 10.1186/cc8040 
PMCID: PMC2784363
PMID: 19740417  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

