
1. J Immunother. 2009 Oct;32(8):856-69. doi: 10.1097/CJI.0b013e3181b0b125.

Priming and activation of human ovarian and breast cancer-specific CD8+ T cells
by polyvalent Listeria monocytogenes-based vaccines.

Sinnathamby G(1), Lauer P, Zerfass J, Hanson B, Karabudak A, Krakover J, Secord
AA, Clay TM, Morse MA, Dubensky TW Jr, Brockstedt DG, Philip R, Giedlin M.

Author information: 
(1)Immunotope, Inc, The Pennsylvania Biotechnology Center, Doylestown, PA 18902, 
USA.

Immunotherapeutic vaccine is potentially an effective strategy to combat cancer. 
Essential components of an effective vaccine must include antigens that are
processed by the major histocompatibility complex class I pathway, presented by
the tumor major histocompatibility complex molecules, and an effective antigen
delivery platform that is capable of breaking self-tolerance. In this study, we
characterized a set of ovarian cancer-specific T-cell epitopes delivered by
live-attenuated recombinant Listeria monocytogenes (Lm DeltaactADeltainlB) as a
vaccine vector. We present data that peptide-specific T cells recognize the human
monocytic cell line THP-1 infected with recombinant Lm DeltaactADeltainlB
encoding the epitopes. Furthermore, we demonstrate that recombinant L.
monocytogenes (Lm)-infected antigen-presenting cells can prime and expand
epitope-specific CD8 T cells in vitro and such CD8 T cells recognize not only
peptide-loaded targets but also ovarian and breast tumor cells presenting
endogenous epitopes. Finally, peptide-specific T cells generated using peripheral
blood mononuclear cell from ovarian cancer patients recognize target cells
infected with recombinant Lm DeltaactADeltainlB encoding the epitopes. Our
results demonstrate that live-attenuated recombinant Lm can be used effectively
as a vehicle to deliver cancer peptide antigens singly or as a multiepitope
construct. Thus, the use of recombinant live-attenuated Lm strains encoding
endogenously processed and presented tumor epitopes/antigens represents an
attractive strategy for active cancer immunotherapy in a clinical setting.

DOI: 10.1097/CJI.0b013e3181b0b125 
PMID: 19752748  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

