
1. BMC Genomics. 2009 Sep 17;10:441. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-441.

Reciprocal regulation by the CepIR and CciIR quorum sensing systems in
Burkholderia cenocepacia.

O'Grady EP(1), Viteri DF, Malott RJ, Sokol PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Alberta, Canada. epogrady@ucalgary.ca

BACKGROUND: Burkholderia cenocepacia belongs to a group of closely related
organisms called the B. cepacia complex (Bcc) which are important opportunistic
human pathogens. B. cenocepacia utilizes a mechanism of cell-cell communication
called quorum sensing to control gene expression including genes involved in
virulence. The B. cenocepacia quorum sensing network includes the CepIR and CciIR
regulatory systems.
RESULTS: Global gene expression profiles during growth in stationary phase were
generated using microarrays of B. cenocepacia cepR, cciR and cepRcciIR mutants.
This is the first time CciR was shown to be a global regulator of quorum sensing 
gene expression. CepR was primarily responsible for positive regulation of gene
expression while CciR generally exerted negative gene regulation. Many of the
genes that were regulated by both quorum sensing systems were reciprocally
regulated by CepR and CciR. Microarray analysis of the cepRcciIR mutant suggested
that CepR is positioned upstream of CciR in the quorum sensing hierarchy in B.
cenocepacia. A comparison of CepIR-regulated genes identified in previous studies
and in the current study showed a substantial amount of overlap validating the
microarray approach. Several novel quorum sensing-controlled genes were confirmed
using qRT-PCR or promoter::lux fusions. CepR and CciR inversely regulated
flagellar-associated genes, the nematocidal protein AidA and a large gene cluster
on Chromosome 3. CepR and CciR also regulated genes required for iron transport, 
synthesis of extracellular enzymes and surface appendages, resistance to
oxidative stress, and phage-related genes.
CONCLUSION: For the first time, the influence of CciIR on global gene regulation 
in B. cenocepacia has been elucidated. Novel genes under the control of the CepIR
and CciIR quorum sensing systems in B. cenocepacia have been identified. The two 
quorum sensing systems exert reciprocal regulation of many genes likely enabling 
fine-tuned control of quorum sensing gene expression in B. cenocepacia strains
carrying the cenocepacia island.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-441 
PMCID: PMC2753556
PMID: 19761612  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

