
1. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Jan;222(1):209-18. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21939.

Candida famata modulates toll-like receptor, beta-defensin, and proinflammatory
cytokine expression by normal human epithelial cells.

Bahri R(1), Saidane-Mosbahi D, Rouabhia M.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe de Recherche en Ecologie Buccale, Faculté de Médecine Dentaire,
Pavillon de Médecine Dentaire, Université Laval, Québec, Canada.

Candida albicans is no longer the only yeast involved in infectious disorders, as
others, such as C. famata, commonly associated with foods as well as terrestrial 
and marine environments, are being recognized as potential emerging pathogens
that cause human candidiasis. We investigated the interaction between C. famata
and human epithelial cells using monolayer cultures and an engineered human oral 
mucosa (EHOM). C. famata was able to adhere to gingival epithelial cells but
failed to adopt the hyphal form in the presence/absence of proteins.
Interestingly, when cultured onto the engineered human oral mucosa (EHOM), C.
famata formed a biofilm and invaded the connective tissue. When normal human
gingival epithelial cells were put in contact with C. famata, they expressed high
levels of Toll-like receptors (TLR)-2, -4, and -6, but not TLR-9 mARN. The
upregulation of TLRs was paralleled by an increase of IL-1beta and TNFalpha, but 
not IFNgamma mARN expression, suggesting the involvement of specific
pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1beta and TNFalpha) in the defense against
infection with C. famata. The active role of epithelial cells in the innate
immunity against C. famata infection was enhanced by their capacity to express
high levels of human beta-defensin (HBD)-1, -2, and -3. The upregulation of
pro-inflammatory cytokines and antimicrobial peptide expression may explain the
growth inhibition of C. famata by the gingival epithelial cells. Overall results 
provide additional evidence of the involvement of C. famata in the activation of 
innate immunity and the contribution of human epithelial cells in local defenses 
against such exogenous stimulations as C. famata infections.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.21939 
PMID: 19780045  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

