
1. Indian J Med Res. 2009 Aug;130(2):185-92.

Phenotypic modulation in Mycobacterium tuberculosis infected neutrophil during
tuberculosis.

Pokkali S(1), Rajavelu P, Sudhakar R, Das SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Tuberculosis Research Centre (ICMR), Chennai, India.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: Polymorphonuclear leucocytes (PMN) or neutrophils
infiltrate to the inflammatory sites and phagocytose mycobacteria thereby
inhibiting the bacillary spread initially until the accumulated macrophages get
activated. The present study was carried out to highlight the interaction of
neutrophils with the two clinical isolates (S7 and S10) of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis and the subsequent morphological changes.
METHODS: Dextran purified neutrophils from normal and TB patients infected with
M. tuberculosis isolates were cultured for 3 and 18 h time points. At the end of 
termination, the cell surface expression of CD16, CD69, CXCR2 and induction of
apoptosis were analyzed using flow cytometry. Cytokines and chemokines were
estimated in supernatants by ELISA.
RESULTS: All infected PMN showed decrease in CD16 at both time points in normals 
while at 18 h in TB group. Interestingly, CD69 expression was significantly high 
at early time point in TB-PMN compared to normals. The high expression of CXCR2
was sustained in infected TB-PMN at both the time points. S7 and S10 infected
neutrophils showed high phagocytic indices compared to H37Rv in both the groups. 
A significant increase in apoptosis was observed at both the time points in
infected TB-PMN but only at 18 h in normals. Increased pro-inflammatory cytokine 
(TNF-alpha) and chemokine (IL-8) response was observed in infected neutrophils at
3 h in both the groups.
INTERPRETATION & CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates the varying degree of
modulation of neutrophil functions in both the groups. TB-PMN was more competent 
in amplifying the innate immune response and conferring protection at the early
phase of infection. However, the response was not strain specific in either of
these groups.


PMID: 19797817  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

