
1. Thromb Haemost. 2009 Oct;102(4):735-42. doi: 10.1160/TH09-01-0049.

Pneumococcal association to platelets is mediated by soluble fibrin and supported
by thrombospondin-1.

Niemann S(1), Kehrel BE, Heilmann C, Rennemeier C, Peters G, Hammerschmidt S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care, Experimental and Clinical
Haemostasis, University Hospital of Muenster, Muenster, Germany.

Comment in
    Thromb Haemost. 2009 Oct;102(4):613-4.

Platelets and coagulation are involved in bacterial colonisation of the host.
Streptocococcus pneumoniae (pneumococcus) are important etiologic agents of
respiratory tract infections in humans. The formation of pneumococci-platelet
associations may facilitate haematogenous dissemination of pneumococci by
providing an adhesive surface on damaged endothelium. However, the formation of
platelet-pneumococci associations and the factors involved in this process have
not been described so far. The formation of platelet-pneumococci associates was
analysed and quantified using flow cytometry. Binding of pneumococci to platelets
was significantly increased after activation of platelets with thrombin, while
platelet activation by ADP or collagen did not promote formation of
platelet-pneumococci associates. In addition to be a platelet agonist, thrombin
cleaves fibrinogen, which results in the generation of fibrin. The simultaneous
formation of fibrin and activation of platelets was shown to be a prerequisite
for a high number of platelet-pneumococci associates. Moreover, exogenously added
human thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1) significantly enhanced the association of
pneumococci with activated platelets. Soluble fibrin and TSP-1 are key co-factors
of platelet-pneumococci-association. Similar results were recently demonstrated
for S. aureus-platelet adhesion. Consequently, we hypothesise that the described 
mechanism of platelet-bacteria-association might represent a general and
important strategy of Gram-positive bacteria during development of invasive
diseases.

DOI: 10.1160/TH09-01-0049 
PMID: 19806260  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

