
1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2010 Jan;10(1):65-71. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2009.09.022.
Epub 2009 Oct 7.

Effects of esculentoside A on autoimmune syndrome induced by Campylobacterjejuni 
in mice and its modulation on T-lymphocyte proliferation and apoptosis.

Hu Z(1), Qiu L, Xiao Z, Wang J, Yu Q, Li J, Feng H, Guo C, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai, China.

Esculentoside A (EsA), a saponin isolated from the root of Phytolacca esculenta, 
has been reported to exert anti-inflammatory effects in several animal models of 
acute and chronic inflammation by inhibiting the production and activity of
pro-inflammatory cytokines in macrophages and epithelial cells. However, little
is known about its modulation on T cells. In the present study, we further
investigated its potential in treatment of autoimmune disease and its modulation 
on T cells, using an experimental autoimmune model established through immunizing
mice with Campylobacterjejuni strain CJ-S(131) in Freund's complete adjuvant. Our
results demonstrated that EsA administration markedly alleviated the inflammatory
injury in liver and kidney of model mice, decreased the anti-CD3/CD28-stimulated 
proliferation of splenocytes and lymph node cells, and reduced the percentage of 
CD3+, CD4+, and CD8+ lymphocytes in peripheral blood. Furthermore, we
demonstrated that EsA induced apoptosis in ConA-activated thymocytes but not in
non-activated thymocytes. Gene expression analysis revealed that EsA up-regulated
the expression of a group of pro-apoptotic genes more profoundly in Con
A-activated thymocytes than in non-activated thymocytes. EsA-affected
pro-apoptotic genes included those involved in Fas induction, p53 activation,
redox metabolism, calcium- and glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis signals,
suggesting that EsA may modulate multiple apoptotic signal pathways in activated 
T cells. Taken together, our findings suggest that EsA may be useful for the
treatment of autoimmune disease through modulation on T cell-mediated adaptive
immunity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2009.09.022 
PMID: 19818416  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

