
1. Braz Oral Res. 2009;23 Suppl 1:31-8.

The cariogenic dental biofilm: good, bad or just something to control?

Wolff MS(1), Larson C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cariology and Comprehensive Care, College of Dentistry, New York
University, New York, NY 10010, USA. mark.wolff@nyu.edu

This paper discusses the role of dental biofilm and adjunctive therapies in the
management of dental caries. Dental biofilm is a site of bacterial proliferation 
and growth, in addition to being a location of acid production. It also serves as
a reservoir for calcium exchange between the tooth and saliva. The salivary
pellicle, a protein-rich biofilm layer, regulates the reaction between tooth
surface, saliva and erosive acids. The protective effects of this pellicle on
enamel are well established. However, understanding the effects of the
pellicle/biofilm interaction in protecting dentin from erosive conditions
requires further research. Saliva interacts with the biofilm, and is important in
reducing the cariogenic effects of dental plaque as acidogenic bacteria consume
fermentable carbohydrates producing acids that may result in tooth
demineralization. Adequate supplies of healthy saliva can provide ingredients for
successful remineralization. Strategies for managing the cariogenic biofilm are
discussed with emphasis on the effectiveness of over-the-counter (OTC) products. 
However, since many toothpaste components have been altered recently, new
clinical trials may be required for true validation of product effectiveness. A
new generation of calcium-based remineralizing technologies may offer the ability
to reverse the effects of demineralization. Nevertheless, remineralization is a
microscopic subsurface phenomenon, and it will not macroscopically replace tooth 
structure lost in a cavitated lesion. Optimal management of cavitations requires 
early detection. This, coupled with advances in adhesive restorative materials
and microsurgical technique, will allow the tooth to be restored with minimal
destruction to nearby healthy tissue.

DOI: 10.1590/s1806-83242009000500006 
PMID: 19838556  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

