
1. Kansenshogaku Zasshi. 2009 Sep;83(5):544-8.

[A case of Streptococcus suis endocarditis, probably bovine-transmitted,
complicated by pulmonary embolism and spondylitis].

[Article in Japanese]

Ishigaki K(1), Nakamura A, Iwabuchi S, Kodera S, Ooe K, Kataoka Y, Aida Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Asahi General Hospital.

Streptococcus suis, a major global porcine pathogen, is an emerging zoonosis in
Southeast Asia that triggered a 2005 outbreak in China. S. suis causes
meningitis, sepsis, and endocarditis in both pigs and humans and involves
significant mortality. We report the case of a previously healthy 50-year-old
dairy farmer who developed S. suis type 2 endocarditis complicated by pulmonary
embolism and spondylitis. He experienced a high fever, chills, fatigue, and
worsening low back pain in the 6 weeks prior to admission. On physical
examination, he had lumbar spine tenderness and weakness of the left leg. Blood
culture identified penicillin-sensitive S. suis type 2. Echocardiography showed
vegetation on the tricuspid valve, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed
signs of spondylitis. The man reported sudden chest pain several days after
admission, which computed tomography (CT) showed what was diagnosed as a septic
pulmonary embolism. He was treated with penicillin G for 4 weeks and gentamicin
for the first 2 weeks, followed by 2 weeks of oral amoxicillin, after which his
symptoms gradually improved. The infection source was probably his dairy herd,
since calves often bit his fingers while feeding and S. suis was found in their
oral mucus. Over 400 cases of human S. suis infection have been reported
globally, but this is, to our knowledge, the first known case of bovine
transmission. All of Japan's 8 other cases involved occupational swine exposure, 
5 of whom had injuries to their fingers. This emerging situation should be made
known to all possibly involved in unprotected direct contact with swine and
cattle, particularly when the skin could be compromised by cuts or abrasions.

DOI: 10.11150/kansenshogakuzasshi.83.544 
PMID: 19860257  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

