
1. J Craniofac Surg. 2010 Jan;21(1):198-201. doi: 10.1097/SCS.0b013e3181c50fc2.

Antimicrobial Peptide immunity protects human nasal and auricular cartilage
against infection.

Warnke PH(1), Russo PA, Hopfenziz M, Kurz B, Becker ST, Sherry E, Springer I,
Sivananthan S.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences and Medicine, Bond University, Gold Coast,
Queensland, Australia. pwarnke@bond.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Despite being impervious to surveillance by the adaptive immune
system because of its lack of vascularity, infection of the nasal and auricular
cartilage after surgery such as rhinoplasty or otoplasty is rare. Why is this so?
Our goal was to determine whether the expression of antimicrobial peptides
provides a previously unrecognized nonepithelial layer of innate immune defense
within the nasal and auricular cartilage.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Seven samples of nasal septum cartilage and 2 biopsies
from auricular cartilage grafts were harvested during rhinoplasty and otoplasty
procedures. Ten cadaveric samples of auricular and 9 samples of nasal cartilage
were also obtained. Immunohistochemical staining was directed against the human
beta-defensin antimicrobial peptides (hBD) 1, 2, and 3. A semiquantitative
analysis was performed to measure immunoreactivity.
RESULTS: All 3 human beta-defensins were detected along the perichondral line and
within the cartilage matrix in the nasal and auricular samples. Areas with
positive immunohistochemical staining were also detected within chondrocyte
cytoplasm.
CONCLUSIONS: We provide the first evidence of antimicrobial peptide expression
(hBD-1, -2 and -3) within the perichondrium and cartilage matrix layers of the
nasal and auricular cartilage. This previously unrecognized innate immune
function of perichondrocytes and chondrocytes may explain the resistance of the
nasal and auricular cartilage to infection after surgical procedures despite the 
absence of a vascular system.

DOI: 10.1097/SCS.0b013e3181c50fc2 
PMID: 20098184  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

