
1. J Immunol. 2010 Mar 15;184(6):3079-86. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901008. Epub 2010
Feb 8.

Urokinase receptor is necessary for bacterial defense against pneumonia-derived
septic melioidosis by facilitating phagocytosis.

Wiersinga WJ(1), Kager LM, Hovius JW, van der Windt GJ, de Vos AF, Meijers JC,
Roelofs JJ, Dondorp A, Levi M, Day NP, Peacock SJ, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. w.j.wiersinga@amc.uva.nl

Urokinase receptor (urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor [uPAR], CD87), 
a GPI-anchored protein, is considered to play an important role in inflammation
and fibrinolysis. The Gram-negative bacterium Burkholderia pseudomallei is able
to survive and replicate within leukocytes and causes melioidosis, an important
cause of pneumonia-derived community-acquired sepsis in Southeast Asia. In this
study, we investigated the expression and function of uPAR both in patients with 
septic melioidosis and in a murine model of experimental melioidosis. uPAR mRNA
and surface expression was increased in patients with septic melioidosis in/on
both peripheral blood monocytes and granulocytes as well as in the pulmonary
compartment during experimental pneumonia-derived melioidosis in mice.
uPAR-deficient mice intranasally infected with B. pseudomallei showed an enhanced
growth and dissemination of B. pseudomallei when compared with wild-type mice,
corresponding with increased pulmonary and hepatic inflammation. uPAR knockout
mice demonstrated significantly reduced neutrophil migration toward the pulmonary
compartment after inoculation with B. pseudomallei. Further in vitro experiments 
showed that uPAR-deficient macrophages and granulocytes display a markedly
impaired phagocytosis of B. pseudomallei. Additional studies showed that uPAR
deficiency did not influence hemostatic and fibrinolytic responses during severe 
melioidosis. These data suggest that uPAR is crucially involved in the host
defense against sepsis caused by B. pseudomallei by facilitating the migration of
neutrophils toward the primary site of infection and subsequently facilitating
the phagocytosis of B. pseudomallei.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901008 
PMID: 20142364  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

