
1. Clin Nephrol. 2010 Mar;73(3):173-9.

The significance of atypical morphology in the changes of spectrum of
postinfectious glomerulonephritis.

Wen YK(1), Chen ML.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Changhua, Taiwan.
wensnake1100@yahoo.com.tw

BACKGROUND: The characteristics of post infectious glomerulonephritis (PIGN) now 
differ from what were described decades ago. After encountering several patients 
of PIGN with atypical morphology, we conducted this retrospective study to
determine the significance in the changes of clinicopathological spectrum of the 
disease.
METHODS: Between July 2000 and February 2009, 21 cases of PIGN were identified at
a medical center in Taiwan. The patients' records were reviewed with respect to
clinical presentation, microbiology, serology, morphology of renal biopsy, and
clinical course.
RESULTS: The mean age was 60.4 years. All patients developed acute renal failure 
and the majority (66.7%) required dialysis support. Hypocomplementemia was
present in 61.9% of patients. The most frequently identified infectious agent was
Staphylococcus (57.1%). Histological characteristics showed two distinct patterns
of PIGN. One was diffuse endocapillary proliferation typical of PIGN (61.9%) and 
the other was atypical pattern of focal mesangial proliferation (38.1%). In
comparison, glomerular neutrophil infiltration was more commonly present in
typical pattern (p = 0.018). Glomerular IgA dominant or co-dominant deposition
was more frequently seen in atypical pattern (p = 0.032). However, there were no 
statistically significant differences in the clinical presentation and outcome
between the two groups. Our data also showed that the percentage of patients with
atypical morphology PIGN significantly increased over time.
CONCLUSIONS: Atypical pattern of focal mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis
may represent a resolution stage of PIGN. The nature of subclinical infection
with a more protracted course may contribute to the increasing recognition of
this resolving PIGN at the time of renal biopsy. Another possible explanation is 
that the atypical morphology may be a peculiar pattern of poststaphylococcal
glomerulonephritis which was increasingly identified in PIGN over the past 10
years.

DOI: 10.5414/cnp73173 
PMID: 20178715  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

