
1. Amino Acids. 2011 Jun;41(1):91-102. doi: 10.1007/s00726-010-0518-2. Epub 2010 Mar
1.

Thiol dioxygenases: unique families of cupin proteins.

Stipanuk MH(1), Simmons CR, Karplus PA, Dominy JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.
mhs6@cornell.edu

Proteins in the cupin superfamily have a wide range of biological functions in
archaea, bacteria and eukaryotes. Although proteins in the cupin superfamily show
very low overall sequence similarity, they all contain two short but partially
conserved cupin sequence motifs separated by a less conserved intermotif region
that varies both in length and amino acid sequence. Furthermore, these proteins
all share a common architecture described as a six-stranded β-barrel core, and
this canonical cupin or "jelly roll" β-barrel is formed with cupin motif 1, the
intermotif region, and cupin motif 2 each forming two of the core six β-strands
in the folded protein structure. The recently obtained crystal structures of
cysteine dioxygenase (CDO), with contains conserved cupin motifs, show that it
has the predicted canonical cupin β-barrel fold. Although there had been no
reports of CDO activity in prokaryotes, we identified a number of bacterial cupin
proteins of unknown function that share low similarity with mammalian CDO and
that conserve many residues in the active-site pocket of CDO. Putative bacterial 
CDOs predicted to have CDO activity were shown to have similar substrate
specificity and kinetic parameters as eukaryotic CDOs. Information gleaned from
crystal structures of mammalian CDO along with sequence information for homologs 
shown to have CDO activity facilitated the identification of a CDO family
fingerprint motif. One key feature of the CDO fingerprint motif is that the
canonical metal-binding glutamate residue in cupin motif 1 is replaced by a
cysteine (in mammalian CDOs) or by a glycine (bacterial CDOs). The recent report 
that some putative bacterial CDO homologs are actually 3-mercaptopropionate
dioxygenases suggests that the CDO family may include proteins with specificities
for other thiol substrates. A paralog of CDO in mammals was also identified and
shown to be the other mammalian thiol dioxygenase, cysteamine dioxygenase (ADO). 
A tentative fingerprint motif for ADOs, or DUF1637 family members, is proposed.
In ADOs, the conserved glutamate residue in cupin motif 1 is replaced by either
glycine or valine. Both ADOs and CDOs appear to represent unique clades within
the cupin superfamily.

DOI: 10.1007/s00726-010-0518-2 
PMCID: PMC3136866
PMID: 20195658  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

