
1. PLoS One. 2010 May 5;5(5):e10496. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010496.

Spirulina promotes stem cell genesis and protects against LPS induced declines in
neural stem cell proliferation.

Bachstetter AD(1), Jernberg J, Schlunk A, Vila JL, Hudson C, Cole MJ, Shytle RD, 
Tan J, Sanberg PR, Sanberg CD, Borlongan C, Kaneko Y, Tajiri N, Gemma C, Bickford
PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology, College of Medicine,
University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, United States of America.

Adult stem cells are present in many tissues including, skin, muscle, adipose,
bone marrow, and in the brain. Neuroinflammation has been shown to be a potent
negative regulator of stem cell and progenitor cell proliferation in the
neurogenic regions of the brain. Recently we demonstrated that decreasing a key
neuroinflammatory cytokine IL-1beta in the hippocampus of aged rats reversed the 
age-related cognitive decline and increased neurogenesis in the age rats. We also
have found that nutraceuticals have the potential to reduce neuroinflammation,
and decrease oxidative stress. The objectives of this study were to determine if 
spirulina could protect the proliferative potential of hippocampal neural
progenitor cells from an acute systemic inflammatory insult of lipopolysaccharide
(LPS). To this end, young rats were fed for 30 days a control diet or a diet
supplemented with 0.1% spirulina. On day 28 the rats were given a single i.p.
injection of LPS (1 mg/kg). The following day the rats were injected with BrdU
(50 mg/kg b.i.d. i.p.) and were sacrificed 24 hours after the first injection of 
BrdU. Quantification of the BrdU positive cells in the subgranular zone of the
dentate gyrus demonstrated a decrease in proliferation of the stem/progenitor
cells in the hippocampus as a result of the LPS insult. Furthermore, the diet
supplemented with spirulina was able to negate the LPS induced decrease in
stem/progenitor cell proliferation. In a second set of studies we examined the
effects of spirulina either alone or in combination with a proprietary
formulation (NT-020) of blueberry, green tea, vitamin D3 and carnosine on the
function of bone marrow and CD34+ cells in vitro. Spirulina had small effects on 
its own and more than additive effects in combination with NT-020 to promote
mitochondrial respiration and/or proliferation of these cells in culture. When
examined on neural stem cells in culture spirulina increased proliferation at
baseline and protected against the negative influence of TNFalpha to reduce
neural stem cell proliferation. These results support the hypothesis that a diet 
enriched with spirulina and other nutraceuticals may help protect the
stem/progenitor cells from insults.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010496 
PMCID: PMC2864748
PMID: 20463965  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

