
1. PLoS One. 2010 May 10;5(5):e10553. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010553.

Disulfide bonds in the ectodomain of anthrax toxin receptor 2 are required for
the receptor-bound protective-antigen pore to function.

Sun J(1), Collier RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. jsun@utep.edu

BACKGROUND: Cell-surface receptors play essential roles in anthrax toxin action
by providing the toxin with a high-affinity anchor and self-assembly site on the 
plasma membrane, mediating the toxin entry into cells through endocytosis, and
shifting the pH threshold for prepore-to-pore conversion of anthrax toxin
protective antigen (PA) to a more acidic pH, thereby inhibiting premature pore
formation. Each of the two known anthrax toxin receptors, ANTXR1 and ANTXR2, has 
an ectodomain comprised of an N-terminal von Willebrand factor A domain (VWA),
which binds PA, and an uncharacterized immunoglobulin-like domain (Ig) that
connects VWA to the membrane-spanning domain. Potential roles of the receptor Ig 
domain in anthrax toxin action have not been investigated heretofore.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We expressed and purified the ANTXR2 ectodomain
(R2-VWA-Ig) in E. coli and showed that it contains three disulfide bonds: one in 
R2-VWA and two in R2-Ig. Reduction of the ectodomain inhibited functioning of the
pore, as measured by K(+) release from liposomes or Chinese hamster ovary cells
or by PA-mediated translocation of a model substrate across the plasma membrane. 
However, reduction did not affect binding of the ectodomain to PA or the
transition of ectodomain-bound PA prepore to the pore conformation. The
inhibitory effect depended specifically on reduction of the disulfides within
R2-Ig.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We conclude that disulfide integrity within R2-Ig is
essential for proper functioning of receptor-bound PA pore. This finding provides
a novel venue to investigate the mechanism of anthrax toxin action and suggests
new strategies for inhibiting toxin action.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010553 
PMCID: PMC2866654
PMID: 20479891  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

