
1. PLoS Pathog. 2010 May 13;6(5):e1000900. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000900.

Listeria monocytogenes internalin B activates junctional endocytosis to
accelerate intestinal invasion.

Pentecost M(1), Kumaran J, Ghosh P, Amieva MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University, Stanford,
California, United States of America.

Listeria monocytogenes (Lm) uses InlA to invade the tips of the intestinal villi,
a location at which cell extrusion generates a transient defect in epithelial
polarity that exposes the receptor for InlA, E-cadherin, on the cell surface. As 
the dying cell is removed from the epithelium, the surrounding cells reorganize
to form a multicellular junction (MCJ) that Lm exploits to find its basolateral
receptor and invade. By examining individual infected villi using 3D-confocal
imaging, we uncovered a novel role for the second major invasin, InlB, during
invasion of the intestine. We infected mice intragastrically with isogenic
strains of Lm that express or lack InlB and that have a modified InlA capable of 
binding murine E-cadherin and found that Lm lacking InlB invade the same number
of villi but have decreased numbers of bacteria within each infected villus tip. 
We studied the mechanism of InlB action at the MCJs of polarized MDCK monolayers 
and find that InlB does not act as an adhesin, but instead accelerates bacterial 
internalization after attachment. InlB locally activates its receptor, c-Met, and
increases endocytosis of junctional components, including E-cadherin. We show
that MCJs are naturally more endocytic than other sites of the apical membrane,
that endocytosis and Lm invasion of MCJs depends on functional dynamin, and that 
c-Met activation by soluble InlB or hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) increases MCJ 
endocytosis. Also, in vivo, InlB applied through the intestinal lumen increases
endocytosis at the villus tips. Our findings demonstrate a two-step mechanism of 
synergy between Lm's invasins: InlA provides the specificity of Lm adhesion to
MCJs at the villus tips and InlB locally activates c-Met to accelerate junctional
endocytosis and bacterial invasion of the intestine.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000900 
PMCID: PMC2869327
PMID: 20485518  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

