
1. Histochem Cell Biol. 2010 Jul;134(1):59-73. doi: 10.1007/s00418-010-0713-y. Epub 
2010 Jun 5.

Roles of human beta-defensins in innate immune defense at the ocular surface:
arming and alarming corneal and conjunctival epithelial cells.

Garreis F(1), Schlorf T, Worlitzsch D, Steven P, Bräuer L, Jäger K, Paulsen FP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Martin Luther University of
Halle-Wittenberg, Halle (Saale), Germany.
fabian.garreis@anatomie2.med.uni-erlangen.de

Human beta-defensins are cationic peptides produced by epithelial cells that have
been proposed to be an important component of immune function at mucosal
surfaces. In this study, the expression and inducibility of beta-defensins at the
ocular surface were investigated in vitro and in vivo. Expression of human
beta-defensins (hBD) was determined by RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry in tissues
of the ocular surface and lacrimal apparatus. Cultured corneal and conjunctival
epithelial cells were stimulated with proinflammatory cytokines and supernatants 
of different ocular pathogens. Real-time PCR and ELISA experiments were performed
to study the effect on the inducibility of hBD2 and 3. Expression and
inducibility of mouse beta-defensins-2, -3 and -4 (mBD2-4) were tested in a mouse
ocular surface scratch model with and without treatment of supernatants of a
clinical Staphylococcus aureus (SA) isolate by means of immunohistochemistry.
Here we show that hBD1, -2, -3 and -4 are constitutively expressed in
conjunctival epithelial cells and also partly in cornea. Healthy tissues of the
ocular surface, lacrimal apparatus and human tears contain measurable amounts of 
hBD2 and -3, with highest concentrations in cornea and much lower concentrations 
in all other tissues, especially tears, suggesting intraepithelial storage of
beta-defensins. Exposure of cultured human corneal and conjunctival epithelial
cells to proinflammatory cytokines and supernatants of various bacteria revealed 
that IL-1beta is a very strong inductor of hBD2 and Staphylococcus aureus
increases both hBD2 and hBD3 production in corneal and conjunctival epithelial
cells. A murine corneal scratch model demonstrated that beta-defensins are only
induced if microbial products within the tear film come into contact with a
defective epithelium. Our finding suggests that the tear film per se contains so 
much antimicrobial substances that epithelial induction of beta-defensins occurs 
only as a result of ocular surface damage. These findings widen our knowledge of 
the distribution, amount and inducibility of beta-defensins at the ocular surface
and lacrimal apparatus and show how beta-defensins are regulated specifically.

DOI: 10.1007/s00418-010-0713-y 
PMID: 20526610  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

