
1. ISME J. 2010 Dec;4(12):1531-44. doi: 10.1038/ismej.2010.86. Epub 2010 Jul 1.

Bioturbating shrimp alter the structure and diversity of bacterial communities in
coastal marine sediments.

Laverock B(1), Smith CJ, Tait K, Osborn AM, Widdicombe S, Gilbert JA.

Author information: 
(1)Plymouth Marine Laboratory, Plymouth, UK. bonver@pml.ac.uk

Bioturbation is a key process in coastal sediments, influencing microbially
driven cycling of nutrients as well as the physical characteristics of the
sediment. However, little is known about the distribution, diversity and function
of the microbial communities that inhabit the burrows of infaunal macroorganisms.
In this study, terminal-restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis was
used to investigate variation in the structure of bacterial communities in
sediment bioturbated by the burrowing shrimp Upogebia deltaura or Callianassa
subterranea. Analyses of 229 sediment samples revealed significant differences
between bacterial communities inhabiting shrimp burrows and those inhabiting
ambient surface and subsurface sediments. Bacterial communities in burrows from
both shrimp species were more similar to those in surface-ambient than
subsurface-ambient sediment (R=0.258, P<0.001). The presence of shrimp was also
associated with changes in bacterial community structure in surrounding surface
sediment, when compared with sediments uninhabited by shrimp. Bacterial community
structure varied with burrow depth, and also between individual burrows,
suggesting that the shrimp's burrow construction, irrigation and maintenance
behaviour affect the distribution of bacteria within shrimp burrows. Subsequent
sequence analysis of bacterial 16S rRNA genes from surface sediments revealed
differences in the relative abundance of bacterial taxa between shrimp-inhabited 
and uninhabited sediments; shrimp-inhabited sediment contained a higher
proportion of proteobacterial sequences, including in particular a twofold
increase in Gammaproteobacteria. Chao1 and ACE diversity estimates showed that
taxon richness within surface bacterial communities in shrimp-inhabited sediment 
was at least threefold higher than that in uninhabited sediment. This study shows
that bioturbation can result in significant structural and compositional changes 
in sediment bacterial communities, increasing bacterial diversity in surface
sediments and resulting in distinct bacterial communities even at depth within
the burrow. In an area of high macrofaunal abundance, this could lead to
alterations in the microbial transformations of important nutrients at the
sediment-water interface.

DOI: 10.1038/ismej.2010.86 
PMID: 20596074  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

