
1. Arch Oral Biol. 2010 Jul;55(7):515-22.

The role of Desulfovibrio desulfuricans lipopolysaccharides in modulation of
periodontal inflammation through stimulation of human gingival fibroblasts.

Dzierzewicz Z(1), Szczerba J, Lodowska J, Wolny D, Gruchlik A, Orchel A, Weglarz 
L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biopharmacy, Medical University of Silesia, Sosnowiec, Poland.

OBJECTIVE: Periodontitis is a destructive disease which is likely to be the
result of the activities of different microbial complexes. Recently,
sulphate-reducing bacteria (SRB) have been detected in the oral cavity, and they 
have been found to be common inhabitants of sites showing periodontal
destruction. The aim of study was to evaluate the influence of endotoxins of
Desulfovibrio desulfuricans bacteria on human gingival fibroblast HGF-1 line.
METHODS: The immunological response of gingival fibroblasts was evaluated by
determination of their IL-6 and IL-8 secretion upon treatment with D.
desulfuricans intestinal and type strain LPS, sodium butyrate (NaB) and IL-1beta.
The amounts of cytokines were estimated by ELISA immunoassay. The influence of
LPS and NaB on fibroblast proliferation was determined using the CyQUANT Cell
Proliferation Assay Kit.
RESULTS: No significant growth inhibition of cells exposed to LPS was observed,
except for the culture growing in the presence of intestinal strain endotoxin at 
the highest concentration (100 microg/ml). The secretion of IL-6 and IL-8 by
fibroblasts was increased by D. desulfuricans endotoxins. Cells stimulated with
proinflammatory cytokine 1L-1beta showed very high levels of both cytokines
secretion. The release of IL-6 and IL-8 by cells in response to LPS and 1L-1beta 
was modulated by butyric acid.
CONCLUSIONS: The observed response of gingival fibroblasts to stimulation by
endotoxin suggests that D. desulfuricans can be involved in the pathogenesis of
periodontitis. Moreover, butyrate present in the oral cavity seems to have
immunoregulatory effect on cytokine production by gingival fibroblasts under
physiological conditions and during microbe-induced inflammation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2010.05.001 
PMID: 20593542  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

