
1. Mol Carcinog. 2010 Aug;49(8):739-49. doi: 10.1002/mc.20649.

The polyphenol epigallocatechin-3-gallate affects lipid rafts to block activation
of the c-Met receptor in prostate cancer cells.

Duhon D(1), Bigelow RL, Coleman DT, Steffan JJ, Yu C, Langston W, Kevil CG,
Cardelli JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center, Shreveport, Louisiana 71130, USA.

The HGF/c-Met pathway is an important regulator of signaling pathways responsible
for invasion and metastasis of most human cancers, including prostate cancer.
Exposure of DU145 prostate tumor cells to HGF stimulates the PI3-kinase and MAPK 
pathways, leading to increased scattering, motility, and invasion, which was
prevented by the addition of EGCG. EGCG acted at the level of preventing
phosphorylation of tyrosines 1234/1235 in the kinase domain of the c-Met receptor
without effecting dimerization. HGF-induced changes were independent of the
formation of reactive oxygen species, suggesting that EGCG functioned independent
of its antioxidant ability. ECG, another tea polyphenol, was as effective as
EGCG, while EGC and EC were less effective. EGCG added up to 4 h after the
addition of HGF still blocked cell scattering and reduced the HGF-induced
phosphorylation of c-Met, Akt, and Erk, suggesting that EGCG could act both by
preventing activation of c-Met by HGF and by attenuating the activity of pathways
already induced by HGF. HGF did not activate the MAPK and PI3-K pathways in cells
treated with methyl-beta-cyclodextrin (mCD) to remove cholesterol. Furthermore,
subcellular fractionation approaches demonstrated that only phosphorylated c-Met 
accumulated in Triton X-100 membrane insoluble fractions, supporting a role for
lipid rafts in regulating c-Met signaling. Finally, EGCG treatment inhibited
DiIC16 incorporation into membrane lipid ordered domains, and cholesterol
partially inhibited the EGCG effects on signaling. Together, these results
suggest that green tea polyphenols with the R1 galloyl group prevent activation
of the c-Met receptor by altering the structure or function of lipid rafts.

Copyright (c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mc.20649 
PMID: 20623641  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

