
1. 99mTc-Human β-defensin-3.

Leung K(1).
In: Molecular Imaging and Contrast Agent Database (MICAD) [Internet]. Bethesda
(MD): National Center for Biotechnology Information (US); 2004-2013.
2009 Aug 25.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Biotechnology Information, NLM, NIH

Antimicrobial peptides are small, cationic, amphiphilic peptides of 12–50 amino
acids with microbicidal activity against both bacteria and fungi (1). The
mammalian defensins can be subdivided into three main classes according to their 
structural differences: α-defensins, β-defensins, and theta-defensins. Mammalian 
α-defensins are predominantly found in neutrophils and in small intestinal
epithelial cells, whereas mammalian β-defensins have been isolated from both
leukocytes and epithelial cells. Recently, two novel human β-defensins (human
β-defensin-3 (HBD-3) and human β-defensin-4 (HBD-4)) have been identified.
Similar to HBD-1 and HBD-2, HBD-3 has microbicidal activity toward the
Gram-negative bacteria (e.g., Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia coli) and
yeasts. In addition, HBD-3 kills Gram-positive bacteria such as Streptococcus
pyogenes or Staphylococcus aureus, including multi-resistant S. aureus strains.
In contrast to HBD-1 and HBD-2, significant expression of HBD-3 has been
demonstrated in non-epithelial tissues such as leukocytes, heart, and skeletal
muscle. HBD-4 is expressed in certain epithelial cells and in neutrophils. A
variety of radiolabeled compounds, including 67Ga-citrate, 99mTc-ciprofloxacin,
18F-FDG, and 111In- or 99mTc-labeled antibodies that interact with specific
receptors on the infiltrating leukocytes, and peptides have been evaluated for
the detection of infections (2, 3). However, because they accumulate in both
infected and inflamed areas of the body, these radiopharmaceuticals are
nonspecific and cannot distinguish between infection and inflammation. In an
effort to identify and develop radioactive compounds that are specific for the
detection of infections, various investigators have evaluated the use of
antimicrobial peptides that are found naturally in most multicellular organisms
(4). Such peptides bind specifically to microbes, presumably through cationic
domains that interact with anionic regions of the microbial membrane, and have
been shown to distinguish infected tissue from inflamed tissue (5). Liberatore et
al. (6) radiolabeled HBD-3 with 99mTc for single-photon emission computed
tomography imaging of infected tissue.

PMID: 20641183 

