
1. Molecules. 2010 Apr 30;15(5):3228-59. doi: 10.3390/molecules15053228.

Vitamin B12: unique metalorganic compounds and the most complex vitamins.

Randaccio L(1), Geremia S, Demitri N, Wuerges J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Excellence in Biocrystallography, Department of Chemical Sciences,
University of Trieste, Via L. Giorgieri 1, 34127 Trieste, Italy.
lrandaccio@units.it

The chemistry and biochemistry of the vitamin B(12) compounds (cobalamins, XCbl) 
are described, with particular emphasis on their structural aspects and their
relationships with properties and function. A brief history of B(12), reveals how
much the effort of chemists, biochemists and crystallographers have contributed
in the past to understand the basic properties of this very complex vitamin. The 
properties of the two cobalamins, the two important B(12) cofactors Ado- and
MeCbl are described, with particular emphasis on how the Co-C bond cleavage is
involved in the enzymatic mechanisms. The main structural features of cobalamins 
are described, with particular reference to the axial fragment. The
structure/property relationships in cobalamins are summarized. The recent studies
on base-off/base-on equilibrium are emphasized for their relevance to the mode of
binding of the cofactor to the protein scaffold. The absorption, transport and
cellular uptake of cobalamins and the structure of the B(12) transport proteins, 
IF and TC, in mammals are reviewed. The B(12) transport in bacteria and the
structure of the so far determined proteins are briefly described. The currently 
accepted mechanisms for the catalytic cycles of the AdoCbl and MeCbl enzymes are 
reported. The structure and function of B(12) enzymes, particularly the important
mammalian enzymes methyltransferase (MetH) and methyl-malonyl-coenzyme A mutase
(MMCM), are described and briefly discussed. Since fast proliferating cells
require higher amount of vitamin B(12) than that required by normal cells, the
study of B(12 )conjugates as targeting agents has recently gained importance.
Bioconjugates have been studied as potential agents for delivering radioisotopes 
and NMR probes or as various cytotoxic agents towards cancer cells in humans and 
the most recent studies are described. Specifically, functionalized bioconjugates
are used as "Trojan horses" to carry into the cell the appropriate antitumour or 
diagnostic label. Possible future developments of B(12) work are summarized.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules15053228 
PMCID: PMC6257451
PMID: 20657474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

