
1. J Infect Dis. 2010 Sep 1;202(5):770-81. doi: 10.1086/655663.

The role of mucoidy in virulence of bacteria from the Burkholderia cepacia
complex: a systematic proteomic and transcriptomic analysis.

Zlosnik JE(1), Speert DP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious and Immunological Diseases, Department of Paediatrics, 
and Centre for Understanding and Preventing Infection in Children, Faculty of
Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
jzlosnik@cw.bc.ca

Bacteria of the Burkholderia cepacia complex (BCC) are associated with severe
infection in cystic fibrosis. Recent evidence shows that the mucoid phenotype is 
common in BCC bacteria; however, during chronic infection, transitions from the
mucoid to nonmucoid morphology have been shown to take place. Here we use RNA
microarray and proteomic isobaric tagging relative and absolute quantitation
technologies to gain insight into a pair of mucoid and nonmucoid isolates of B.
cenocepacia obtained from a chronically infected patient with cystic fibrosis in 
the year prior to her death. During chronic infection, the mucoid isolate lost
the B. cepacia epidemic strain marker and acquired a mutation in the cepR gene.
In the nonmucoid isolate, we observed overexpression at both the RNA and protein 
level of several described putative virulence factors, including a nematocidal
protein AidA and the oxidative stress response protein AhpC. We show that this
translates into increased resistance to oxidative stress in the nonmucoid
isolate, a key microbial determinant for resistance against phagocytic cell
killing. These data illuminate the biological differences between mucoid and
nonmucoid BCC bacteria, provide targets for elucidating the genetic control of
exopolysaccharide production in the BCC, and highlight that chronic infection can
produce both genetically and phenotypically distinct microbial variants in the
cystic fibrosis lung.

DOI: 10.1086/655663 
PMID: 20670172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

