
1. J Immunol. 2010 Sep 1;185(5):2681-92. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000896. Epub 2010
Aug 4.

Reciprocal functional modulation of the activation of T lymphocytes and
fibroblasts derived from human solid tumors.

Barnas JL(1), Simpson-Abelson MR, Brooks SP, Kelleher RJ Jr, Bankert RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Witebsky Center for Microbial
Pathogenesis and Immunology, University at Buffalo, The State University of New
York, Buffalo, NY 14214, USA.

Fibroblasts are a dominant cell type in most human solid tumors. The possibility 
that fibroblasts have the capacity to interact with and modulate the function of 
tumor-associated T lymphocytes makes them a potential therapeutic target. To
address this question, primary cultures of fibroblasts derived from human lung
tumors were established and cultured with T cells derived from the same tumor.
The tumor fibroblasts significantly enhance the production of IFN-gamma and
IL-17A by the tumor-associated T cells following a CD3/CD28-induced activation of
the T cells. This enhancement was fibroblast cell dose-dependent and did not
require direct contact between the two cell types. Tumor-associated
fibroblast-conditioned media similarly enhanced both IFN-gamma and IL-17A in
activated T cells, and this enhancement was significantly reduced by Abs to IL-6.
Conditioned media derived from activated lymphocyte cultures significantly
enhanced IL-6 production by tumor fibroblasts. A similar enhancement of IFN-gamma
and IL-17A was observed when activated T cells from a normal donor were
cultivated with skin fibroblasts derived from the same donor. These results
establish that fibroblasts and autologous lymphocytes, whether derived from the
tumor microenvironment or from nonmalignant tissues, have the capacity to
reciprocally interact and modulate function. In contrast to other reports,
fibroblasts are shown to have an immunostimulatory effect upon activated T
lymphocytes. The ability of fibroblasts to enhance two T cell cytokines known to 
have an impact upon tumor progression suggests that fibroblasts play an important
role in tumor pathogenesis that could be exploited therapeutically.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000896 
PMID: 20686130  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

