
1. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 11;5(8):e12081. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012081.

Synergy in efficacy of fungal entomopathogens and permethrin against West African
insecticide-resistant Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes.

Farenhorst M(1), Knols BG, Thomas MB, Howard AF, Takken W, Rowland M, N'Guessan
R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Entomology, Wageningen University and Research Center,
Wageningen, The Netherlands. marit.farenhorst@wur.nl

BACKGROUND: Increasing incidences of insecticide resistance in malaria vectors
are threatening the sustainable use of contemporary chemical vector control
measures. Fungal entomopathogens provide a possible additional tool for the
control of insecticide-resistant malaria mosquitoes. This study investigated the 
compatibility of the pyrethroid insecticide permethrin and two
mosquito-pathogenic fungi, Beauveria bassiana and Metarhizium anisopliae, against
a laboratory colony and field population of West African insecticide-resistant
Anopheles gambiae s.s. mosquitoes.
METHODOLOGY/FINDINGS: A range of fungus-insecticide combinations was used to test
effects of timing and sequence of exposure. Both the laboratory-reared and
field-collected mosquitoes were highly resistant to permethrin but susceptible to
B. bassiana and M. anisopliae infection, inducing 100% mortality within nine
days. Combinations of insecticide and fungus showed synergistic effects on
mosquito survival. Fungal infection increased permethrin-induced mortality rates 
in wild An. gambiae s.s. mosquitoes and reciprocally, exposure to permethrin
increased subsequent fungal-induced mortality rates in both colonies.
Simultaneous co-exposure induced the highest mortality; up to 70.3+/-2% for a
combined Beauveria and permethrin exposure within a time range of one gonotrophic
cycle (4 days).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Combining fungi and permethrin induced a higher impact 
on mosquito survival than the use of these control agents alone. The observed
synergism in efficacy shows the potential for integrated fungus-insecticide
control measures to dramatically reduce malaria transmission and enable control
at more moderate levels of coverage even in areas where insecticide resistance
has rendered pyrethroids essentially ineffective.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012081 
PMCID: PMC2920335
PMID: 20711409  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

