
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Jan;1808(1):47-54. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2010.08.018. 
Epub 2010 Sep 8.

Monitoring glycolipid transfer protein activity and membrane interaction with the
surface plasmon resonance technique.

Ohvo-Rekilä H(1), Mattjus P.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry, Department of Biosciences, Åbo Akademi University, Turku,
Finland. hohvo@abo.fi

The glycolipid transfer protein (GLTP) is a protein capable of binding and
transferring glycolipids. GLTP is cytosolic and it can interact through its
FFAT-like (two phenylalanines in an acidic tract) motif with proteins localized
on the surface of the endoplasmic reticulum. Previous in vitro work with GLTP has
focused mainly on the complete transfer reaction of the protein, that is, binding
and subsequent removal of the glycolipid from the donor membrane, transfer
through the aqueous environment, and the final release of the glycolipid to an
acceptor membrane. Using bilayer vesicles and surface plasmon resonance
spectroscopy, we have now, for the first time, analyzed the binding and lipid
removal capacity of GLTP with a completely label-free technique. This technique
is focused on the initial steps in GLTP-mediated transfer and the parameters
affecting these steps can be more precisely determined. We used the new approach 
for detailed structure-function studies of GLTP by examining the glycolipid
transfer capacity of specific GLTP tryptophan mutants. Tryptophan 96 is crucial
for the transfer activity of the protein and tryptophan 142 is an important part 
of the proteins membrane interacting domain. Further, we varied the composition
of the used lipid vesicles and gained information on the effect of membrane
properties on GLTP activity. GLTP prefers to interact with more tightly packed
membranes, although GLTP-mediated transfer is faster from more fluid membranes.
This technique is very useful for the study of membrane-protein interactions and 
lipid-transfer rates and it can easily be adapted to other membrane-interacting
proteins.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2010.08.018 
PMID: 20804726  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

