
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2010 Aug 31;4(8). pii: e806. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0000806.

Osteopontin impairs host defense during established gram-negative sepsis caused
by Burkholderia pseudomallei (melioidosis).

van der Windt GJ(1), Wiersinga WJ, Wieland CW, Tjia IC, Day NP, Peacock SJ,
Florquin S, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Melioidosis, caused by infection with Burkholderia (B.) pseudomallei,
is a severe illness that is endemic in Southeast Asia. Osteopontin (OPN) is a
phosphorylated glycoprotein that is involved in several immune responses
including induction of T-helper 1 cytokines and recruitment of inflammatory
cells.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: OPN levels were determined in plasma from 33 
melioidosis patients and 31 healthy controls, and in wild-type (WT) mice
intranasally infected with B. pseudomallei. OPN function was studied in
experimental murine melioidosis using WT and OPN knockout (KO) mice. Plasma OPN
levels were elevated in patients with severe melioidosis, even more so in
patients who went on to die. In patients who recovered plasma OPN concentrations 
had decreased after treatment. In experimental melioidosis in mice plasma and
pulmonary OPN levels were also increased. Whereas WT and OPN KO mice were
indistinguishable during the first 24 hours after infection, after 72 hours OPN
KO mice demonstrated reduced bacterial numbers in their lungs, diminished
pulmonary tissue injury, especially due to less necrosis, and decreased
neutrophil infiltration. Moreover, OPN KO mice displayed a delayed mortality as
compared to WT mice. OPN deficiency did not influence the induction of
proinflammatory cytokines.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that sustained production of OPN impairs host
defense during established septic melioidosis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0000806 
PMCID: PMC2930856
PMID: 20824216  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

