
1. J Sports Sci. 1990 Winter;8(3):203-13.

Fine body movements and the cardiac cycle in archery.

Keast D(1), Elliott B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Western Australia, Nedlands.

This study examined the relationships between postural sway, aiming time, the
cardiac cycle time and the placement of the first finger movement within the
electrocardiac cycle, with the quality of the arrow shot. A small group of elite 
male and female archers who shot either the recurve or the compound bow,
freestyle or bare bow was used in this study. A total of 240 arrows were shot,
classified as being of good, average or bad quality and analysed in detail. The
analyses were undertaken over two occasions up to 100 days apart. The area of
postural sway, as measured by the movement of the centre of pressure coordinates,
varied significantly (P less than 0.05-0.001) both within and between trials for 
all archers and for all quality of arrows shot. There was a tendency for the area
of postural sway to increase as the quality of the arrow shot decreased. This
increase in postural sway exceeded, for arrows of bad quality, that exhibited as 
normal postural sway when standing relaxed and addressing the target with the
hands at the side. Aiming time was variable within the quality of arrow shot,
although it was consistent for each archer. In some cases the aiming time
increased as the quality of the arrow decreased, whereas in the case of bare bow 
archery the aiming time tended to decrease as the quality of the arrow
deteriorated. The cardiac cycle time increased significantly (P less than
0.05-0.01) as the archers approached the loose of the good quality arrows but
there was no significant increase in cardiac cycle time when arrows of average or
bad quality were shot. The most consistent parameter related to the quality of
the shot was the placement of the first finger movement within the ST phase or
the mid-cycle phase of the electrocardiogram for arrows of good quality (P less
than 0.0001).

DOI: 10.1080/02640419008732146 
PMID: 2084267  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

