
1. J Environ Sci Health A Tox Hazard Subst Environ Eng. 2010 Nov;45(13):1661-73.
doi: 10.1080/10934529.2010.513207.

The ecological complexity of the Thai-Laos Mekong River: I. Geology, seasonal
variation and human impact assessment on river quality.

Udomchoke V(1), Sunthornranun P, Songsasen A, Phanwichien K, Jiwapornkupt P,
Homchan U, Lauhachinda N, Sakultantimetha A, Bangkedphol S, Torrance K, Gibson
MD, Gaines AF, Booth PH, Keenan HE.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Science, Kasetsart University, Chatujak, Bangkok, Thailand.

The objective of this study is to assess the variation of pollution in the
Thai-Laos Mekong associated with seasonal dynamics concomitant with the natural
geological features and human activities that impact on the adverse quality of
the river. The complex ecology of the 1500 km stretch of the Thai-Laos Mekong
River has been studied in this paper to understand the relationship with the
geomorphology, with the sub-tropical monsoonal climate and the impact of human
activity. Sub-surface geology controls the nature and extent of the drainage
basin and of the river channel. The volume flow of the river varies naturally and
dynamically in phase with the rainfall; traditional models based on steady state 
hydraulics are inappropriate. Continuous erosion of the river banks and bed
generates a sediment load of impure silt, mica, quartz and clay minerals that
inhibits light penetration and limits the primary productivity of the river. The 
river separates two countries at different stages of development; it flows
through or close to eight non-industrial conurbations (Populations
350,000-2,000,000) but is otherwise sparsely populated. The river is used for
subsistence agriculture, village transport, fishing including aquaculture and as 
a source of domestic water. Hydroelectricity is generated from the Laos
tributaries. The river is a depository for partially treated urban waste and
untreated village waste, hence populations of E.coli bacteria sometimes render
the water unsuitable for drinking unless treated with the highest value of
240/100 ml found at station 7 during the summer season of 2003. Furthermore the
river is polluted by trace metals, notably cadmium and mercury, and by Polycyclic
Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs), which are particularly concentrated in the
sediments. Previous work has shown that cadmium and mercury exceed the Probable
Effect Level (PEL) values of Canadian Environmental Quality Guidelines and that
the PAH concentrations were also greater than the Interim Sediment Quality
Guidelines (ISQG). Consequently the fish stock, a vital source of protein for the
local human population maybe seriously affected. As conflict between the demands 
of human activities will be exacerbated by the continuing development of the
basin; monitoring must be continued and a better model of the river's ecology is 
needed to predict the impact of development.

DOI: 10.1080/10934529.2010.513207 
PMID: 20859820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

