
1. Indian J Dent Res. 2010 Jul-Sep;21(3):353-6. doi: 10.4103/0970-9290.70799.

A microbiological evaluation of the use of denture cleansers in combination with 
an oral rinse in complete denture patients.

Srinivasan M(1), Gulabani M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Advanced Dentistry and Implantology, Jebel Ali Hospital, Dubai, 
United Arab Emirates. murali@prodents.com

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Patients with complete dentures more occasionally neglect
their denture and oral health by improper maintenance of dentures, resulting in
bad oral and denture hygiene. This may lead to a host of multiple local and
systemic problems such as stomatitis, bacterial and fungal infections, reservoirs
for distant infections, denture stains and bad breath. Most denture wearers
maintain their dentures with simple manual cleansing methods, which are not
adequate to effectively sanitize the reservoir of microorganisms inhabiting the
denture surfaces. The aim of this study was to compare the efficacy of the use of
a denture cleanser and compare it with an adjunct use of chlorhexidine mouth
rinse along with the denture cleanser and possibly suggest it as a suitable
protocol.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Two groups of complete denture patients were selected for 
the study. The total number of patients in each group was 12 and the total period
of the study was 21 days. Three sets of microbiological samples were collected
from each patient: before the start of the study, on day 8 and on day 21 of the
study. The first sample was collected after an initial washover period (7 days)
with plain water before the start of the study and the second set after 1 week of
study initiation, where group-1 followed protocol-I (denture cleanser only) and
group-2 followed protocol-II (denture cleanser and mouth rinse). A second washout
period of 7 days followed and a crossover of the protocol was performed for the
groups and followed for 1 week. Then, a third set of samples were collected. The 
colony-forming units were calculated for each patient for each sample and
statistically analyzed. Friedman test for non-parametric analysis was employed
for the comparison within the groups and a Mann-Whitney test was used for the
statistical comparison between the groups.
RESULTS: There was a definite reduction in the bacterial numbers and a
significant statistical difference after administering the protocols in both the 
groups (P < 0.001). However, there was little significance on comparing the
samples between the groups (P=0.026) in the initial study period, and there was
no statistical significance when comparing the groups after the crossover
(P=0.140).
CONCLUSION: The use of denture cleansers definitely reduced the microbial numbers
as compared to plain manual cleansing methods in complete dentures. Although
there was a substantial decrease in the bacterial colonies after the use of the
mouthwash, it was not statistically significant.

DOI: 10.4103/0970-9290.70799 
PMID: 20930343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

