
1. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 18;5(10):e13449. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013449.

Transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation of the Escherichia coli luxS 
mRNA; involvement of the sRNA MicA.

Udekwu KI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of
America. Klas.udekwu@emory.edu

BACKGROUND: The small RNA (sRNA) MicA has been shown to post-transcriptionally
regulate translation of the outer membrane protein A (OmpA) in Escherichia coli. 
It uses an antisense mechanism to down-regulate OmpA protein synthesis and induce
mRNA degradation. MicA is genomically localized between the coding regions of the
gshA and luxS genes and is divergently transcribed from its neighbours.
Transcription of the luxS gene which originates within or upstream of the MicA
sequence would thus be complementary to the sRNA. LuxS regulation is as yet
unclear.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this report, I show that the luxS mRNA exists 
as three long (major) transcripts of sizes that suggest just such interaction.
The sRNA MicA's expression affects the abundance of each of these luxS
transcripts. The involvement of the ribonuclease, RNase III in the accumulation
of the shortest transcript is demonstrated. When MicA accumulates during growth, 
or is induced to be over-expressed, the cleaved mRNA species is observed to
increase in intensity. Using primer extension and 5'-RACE experiments in
combination with sRNA overexpression plasmids, I identify the exact origin of two
of the three luxS transcripts, one of which is seen to result from a previously
unidentified σ(S) dependent promoter.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The presented data provides strong evidence that MicA
functions in cis and in trans, targeting both luxS mRNA as well as the previously
established ompA and phoP regulation. The proposed luxS regulation by MicA would 
be in tandem with another sRNA CyaR, shown recently to be involved in inhibiting 
translation of the luxS mRNA. Regulation of luxS expression is additionally shown
to occur on a transcriptional level via σ(S) with variable transcript levels in
different growth phases unlike what was previously assumed. This is the first
known case of an sRNA in E. coli which targets both in cis (luxS mRNA) and in
trans (ompA and phoP mRNAs).

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013449 
PMCID: PMC2956633
PMID: 20976191  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

