
1. Yakugaku Zasshi. 2010 Nov;130(11):1463-9.

[Novel L-amino acid ligases catalyzing oligopeptide synthesis].

[Article in Japanese]

Kino K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, School of Advanced Science and Engineering,
Waseda University, Shinjuku-ku, Japan. kkino.@waseda,jp

L-Amino acid ligase (EC 6.3.2.28) is a microbial enzyme catalyzing formation of
an alpha-peptide bond from unprotected L-amino acids in an ATP-dependent manner. 
The YwfE protein from Bacillus subtilis 168 was the first reported L-amino acid
ligase, and it synthesizes various dipeptides. Thereafter, several L-amino acid
ligases were newly obtained by in silico analysis using the ATP-grasp motif. But 
these L-amino acid ligases synthesize only dipeptide and no longer peptide. A
novel L-amino acid ligase capable of catalyzing oligopeptide synthesis is
required to increase the variety of peptides. We have previously found a new
member of L-amino acid ligase, RizA, from B. subtilis NBRC3134, a microorganism
that produces the peptide-antibiotic rhizocticin. We newly found that a gene at
approximately 9 kbp upstream of rizA encoded a novel L-amino acid ligase RizB.
Recombinant RizB synthesized homo-oligomers of branched-chain amino acids
consisting of 2 to 5 amino acids, and also synthesized various heteropeptides.
RizB is the first reported L-amino acid ligase that catalyzes oligopeptide
synthesis. In addition, we obtained L-amino acid ligases showing oligopeptide
synthesis activities by in silico analysis using BLAST, which is a set of
similarity search programs. These L-amino acid ligases showed low similarity in
amino acid sequence, but commonly used branched-chain amino acids, such as RizB, 
as substrates. Furthermore, the spr0969 protein of Streptococcus pneumoniae
synthesized longer peptides than those synthesized by RizB, and the BAD_1200
protein of Bifidobacteria adolescentis showed higher activity toward aromatic
amino acids than toward branched-chain ones.

DOI: 10.1248/yakushi.130.1463 
PMID: 21048404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

