
1. Plant Cell. 2010 Dec;22(12):4142-57. doi: 10.1105/tpc.110.079137. Epub 2010 Dec
7.

A C subunit of the plant nuclear factor NF-Y required for rhizobial infection and
nodule development affects partner selection in the common bean-Rhizobium etli
symbiosis.

Zanetti ME(1), Blanco FA, Beker MP, Battaglia M, Aguilar OM.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biotecnología y Biología Molecular, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas,
Universidad Nacional de La Plata, Centro Científico y Tecnológico-La Plata,
Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Tecnológicas, 1900 La Plata,
Argentina.

Legume plants are able to interact symbiotically with soil bacteria to form
nitrogen-fixing root nodules. Although specific recognition between rhizobia and 
legume species has been extensively characterized, plant molecular determinants
that govern the preferential colonization by different strains within a single
rhizobium species have received little attention. We found that the C subunit of 
the heterotrimeric nuclear factor NF-Y from common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris)
NF-YC1 plays a key role in the improved nodulation seen by more efficient strains
of rhizobia. Reduction of NF-YC1 transcript levels by RNA interference (RNAi) in 
Agrobacterium rhizogenes-induced hairy roots leads to the arrest of nodule
development and defects in the infection process with either high or low
efficiency strains. Induction of three G2/M transition cell cycle genes in
response to rhizobia was impaired or attenuated in NF-YC1 RNAi roots, suggesting 
that this transcription factor might promote nodule development by activating
cortical cell divisions. Furthermore, overexpression of this gene has a positive 
impact on nodulation efficiency and selection of Rhizobium etli strains that are 
naturally less efficient and bad competitors. Our findings suggest that this
transcription factor might be part of a mechanism that links nodule organogenesis
with an early molecular dialogue that selectively discriminates between high- and
low-quality symbiotic partners, which holds important implications for optimizing
legume performance.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.110.079137 
PMCID: PMC3027164
PMID: 21139064  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

