
1. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2011 May 15;36(11):E747-51. doi:
10.1097/BRS.0b013e3181fab0e4.

Nontraumatic subluxation of the atlanto-axial joint as rare form of acquired
torticollis: diagnosis and clinical features of the Grisel's syndrome.

Pilge H(1), Prodinger PM, Bürklein D, Holzapfel BM, Lauen J.

Author information: 
(1)Klinikum Schwabing, Department of Pediatric Orthopedics, Clinic for Orthopedic
Surgery and Traumatology, Klinikum Rechtrs der Isar, Technical University Munich,
Koelner Platz 1, Munich, Germany. hakanpilge@web.de

STUDY DESIGN: Case report and review of the literature.
OBJECTIVE: We report a case of Grisel's syndrome with a delayed diagnosis. The
patient's first presentation in our pediatric orthopedics department was 2 month 
after surgery (cochlea implantation) with a persistent torticollis. Radiographs
revealed a subluxated atlantoaxial joint. We treated our patient with manual
repositioning and calculated antibiotics, which lead to a restitutio ad integrum 
within a short time.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: Grisel's syndrome is synonymous with rare
nontraumatic, rotational subluxation of the atlantoaxial joint (C1-C2). All
formerly reported cases showed a clear association to infection or were related
to head and neck surgery. Still, there is a lack of understanding about
pathogenetic features and causative agents. In 1977 Fielding proposed a
classification of the atlantoaxial subluxation and stage-related therapy was
recommended.
METHODS: Our patient was a 11-year-old girl with a torticollis after insertion of
a cochlea implant. After surgery, physiotherapy was performed because of her
wryneck. As the symptoms did not improve, she was presented in our clinic. Our
radiographs revealed a subluxated atlantoaxial joint.
RESULTS: In general anesthesia we performed a manual repositioning and she was
temporarily immobilized with a cervical collar for 2 weeks. In addition, we
administered calculated antibiotics, although CRP and leukocytes were not
elevated. The follow up showed a good repositioning within a short time.
CONCLUSION: At least in this case, our treatment led to shorter recovery and
avoidance of halo fixation. Our new therapeutic approach to patients with
Grisel's syndrome might lead to a shorter recovery.

DOI: 10.1097/BRS.0b013e3181fab0e4 
PMID: 21178843  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

