
1. ISME J. 2011 Jun;5(6):945-61. doi: 10.1038/ismej.2010.197. Epub 2011 Jan 6.

Contribution of crenarchaeal autotrophic ammonia oxidizers to the dark primary
production in Tyrrhenian deep waters (Central Mediterranean Sea).

Yakimov MM(1), Cono VL, Smedile F, DeLuca TH, Juárez S, Ciordia S, Fernández M,
Albar JP, Ferrer M, Golyshin PN, Giuliano L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Marine Molecular Microbiology, Institute for Coastal Marine
Environment, CNR, Messina, Italy. michail.yakimov@iamc.cnr.it

Mesophilic Crenarchaeota have recently been thought to be significant
contributors to nitrogen (N) and carbon (C) cycling. In this study, we examined
the vertical distribution of ammonia-oxidizing Crenarchaeota at offshore site in 
Southern Tyrrhenian Sea. The median value of the crenachaeal cell to amoA gene
ratio was close to one suggesting that virtually all deep-sea Crenarchaeota
possess the capacity to oxidize ammonia. Crenarchaea-specific genes, nirK and
ureC, for nitrite reductase and urease were identified and their affiliation
demonstrated the presence of 'deep-sea' clades distinct from 'shallow'
representatives. Measured deep-sea dark CO(2) fixation estimates were comparable 
to the median value of photosynthetic biomass production calculated for this area
of Tyrrhenian Sea, pointing to the significance of this process in the C cycle of
aphotic marine ecosystems. To elucidate the pivotal organisms in this process, we
targeted known marine crenarchaeal autotrophy-related genes, coding for
acetyl-CoA carboxylase (accA) and 4-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydratase (4-hbd). As in
case of nirK and ureC, these genes are grouped with deep-sea sequences being
distantly related to those retrieved from the epipelagic zone. To pair the
molecular data with specific functional attributes we performed [(14)C]HCO(3)
incorporation experiments followed by analyses of radiolabeled proteins using
shotgun proteomics approach. More than 100 oligopeptides were attributed to 40
marine crenarchaeal-specific proteins that are involved in 10 different metabolic
processes, including autotrophy. Obtained results provided a clear proof of
chemolithoautotrophic physiology of bathypelagic crenarchaeota and indicated that
this numerically predominant group of microorganisms facilitate a hitherto
unrecognized sink for inorganic C of a global importance.

DOI: 10.1038/ismej.2010.197 
PMCID: PMC3131861
PMID: 21209665  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

