
1. J Biol Chem. 1990 Nov 5;265(31):19035-9.

Inhibition of Bordetella pertussis and Bacillus anthracis adenylyl cyclases by
polyadenylate and "P"-site agonists.

Johnson RA(1), Shoshani I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, State University of New York, Stony
Brook 11794-8661.

Inhibition of adenylyl cyclases from Bacillus anthrasis and Bordetella pertussis 
by polyadenylate and by the most potent "P"-site agonists was investigated. These
bacterial adenylyl cyclases differed in their sensitivity to inhibition by
nominal "P"-site agents and in the effect of divalent cations on this inhibition.
The enzyme from Bordetella pertussis was relatively insensitive to inhibition by 
"P"-site agonists, exhibiting a rank order of potency of 2'd3'AMP greater than
3'-AMP greater than 2',5'-ddAdo approximately Ado approximately 2'-dAdo, with
IC50 values for 2'd3'AMP and 3'-AMP of 1-3 mM. Inhibition by 2'd3'AMP, however,
was not affected by divalent cation, making it distinct from "P"-site-mediated
inhibition of most mammalian adenylyl cyclases. The sensitivity to these
nucleosides was comparable with potency for inhibition of bovine sperm adenylyl
cyclase but was 3 orders of magnitude less potent than for activated enzyme from 
bovine or rat brain. The Bordetella pertussis enzyme was similarly insensitive to
inhibition by polyadenylate, with 16 microM inhibiting less than 20%. By
comparison, Bacillus anthrasis adenylyl cyclase was more potently inhibited by
2'd3'AMP (IC50 approximately 85 microM) but not by the other nucleosides (less
than 15% inhibition at 1 mM), and inhibition by 2'd3'AMP was optimally enhanced
by 5-10 mM Mg2+ or Mn2+, as is typical for inhibition by "P"-site agonists. The
Bacillus anthrasis enzyme was potently inhibited by polyadenylate (IC50
approximately 0.3 microM), comparable to inhibition of brain adenylyl cyclases.
Sensitivity of Bacillus anthrasis adenylyl cyclase to poly(A) was diminished
somewhat by Ca2+/calmodulin (to IC50 approximately 1 microM) although
Ca2+/calmodulin was without effect on inhibition by 2'd3'AMP. In contrast to
inhibition of mammalian adenylyl cyclases via the "P"-site, inhibition of both
bacterial adenylyl cyclases by 2'd3'AMP was competitive with respect to substrate
MgATP. The data indicate basic differences in susceptibilities of these bacterial
adenylyl cyclases to inhibition by poly(A), by adenosine analogs, and the effects
of divalent cations. Although the potency of 2'd3'AMP and the metal-dependent
nature of inhibition of Bacillus anthrasis adenylyl cyclase shared
characteristics of "P"-site-mediated inhibition, the fact that inhibition of both
bacterial adenylyl cyclases was competitive with respect to substrate strongly
suggests that this inhibition was at the catalytic site and that these bacterial 
enzymes do not contain a distinct "P"-site.


PMID: 2121733  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

