
1. Am J Hematol. 2011 Feb;86(2):155-62. doi: 10.1002/ajh.21933.

Mechanisms of erythropoiesis inhibition by malarial pigment and malaria-induced
proinflammatory mediators in an in vitro model.

Awandare GA(1), Kempaiah P, Ochiel DO, Piazza P, Keller CC, Perkins DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Microbiology, University of Pittsburgh
Graduate School of Public Health, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

One of the commonest complications of Plasmodium falciparum malaria is the
development of severe malarial anemia (SMA), which is, at least in part, due to
malaria-induced suppression of erythropoiesis. Factors associated with
suppression of erythropoiesis and development of SMA include accumulation of
malarial pigment (hemozoin, PfHz) in bone marrow and altered production of
inflammatory mediators, such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, and nitric oxide
(NO). However, studies investigating the specific mechanisms responsible for
inhibition of red blood cell development have been hampered by difficulties in
obtaining bone marrow aspirates from infants and young children, and the lack of 
reliable models for examining erythroid development. As such, an in vitro model
of erythropoiesis was developed using CD34+ stem cells derived from peripheral
blood to examine the effects of PfHz, PfHz-stimulated peripheral blood
mononuclear cell (PBMC)-conditioned media (CM-PfHz), TNF-α, and NO on erythroid
cell development. PfHz only slightly suppressed erythroid cell proliferation and 
maturation marked by decreased expression of glycophorin A (GPA). On the other
hand, CM-PfHz, TNF-α, and NO significantly inhibited erythroid cell
proliferation. Furthermore, decreased proliferation in cells treated with CM-PfHz
and NO was accompanied by increased apoptosis of erythropoietin-stimulated CD34+ 
cells. In addition, NO significantly inhibited erythroid cell maturation, whereas
TNF-α did not appear to be detrimental to maturation. Collectively, our results
demonstrate that PfHz suppresses erythropoiesis by acting both directly on
erythroid cells, and indirectly via inflammatory mediators produced from
PfHz-stimulated PBMC, including TNF-α and NO.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.21933 
PMCID: PMC4703402
PMID: 21264897  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

