
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Mar 18;406(3):341-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.02.040. Epub 2011 Feb 15.

Cloning and characterization of the biosynthetic gene cluster of the bacterial
RNA polymerase inhibitor tirandamycin from marine-derived Streptomyces sp.
SCSIO1666.

Mo X(1), Wang Z, Wang B, Ma J, Huang H, Tian X, Zhang S, Zhang C, Ju J.

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Marine Bio-resources Sustainable Utilization, Guangdong 
Key Laboratory of Marine Materia Medica, RNAM Center for Marine Microbiology,
South China Sea Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou
510301, PR China.

Tirandamycins are bacterial RNA polymerase inhibitors holding great potential for
antibacterial agent design. To elucidate the biosynthetic machinery and generate 
new derivatives, the tirandamycin biosynthetic gene cluster was cloned and
sequenced from marine-derived Streptomyces sp. SCSIO1666. The biosynthetic gene
cluster of tirandamycin spans a DNA region of ∼56kb and consists of 15 open
reading frames (ORFs) which encode three type I polyketide synthases (TrdAI, AII,
AIII), one non-ribosomal peptide synthetase (TrdD), one phosphopantetheinyl
transferase (TrdM), one Type II thioesterase (TrdB), one FAD-dependent
oxidoreductase (TrdL), one cytochrome P450 monooxygenase (TrdI), three proteins
related to resistance and regulations (TrdHJK), and four proteins with unknown
function (TrdCEFG). To investigate the roles of the genes played in the
biosynthetic machinery, seven genes (trdAI and trdBDFHIK) were inactivated via in
frame replacement with an apramycin gene cassette using λ-RED recombination
technology. The ΔtrdAI and ΔtrdD mutants targeting the ketosynthase and
adenylation domain of TrdAI and TrdD, respectively, abolished the production of
tirandamycins, confirming their involvement in the tirandamycin biosynthesis.
TrdH showed high homology to LuxR family transcriptional regulatory proteins,
disruption of which abolished the production of tirandamycins, indicating that
TrdH is a positive regulator for tirandamycin biosynthesis. On the other hand,
TrdK showed high homology to TetR-family transcriptional regulatory proteins,
disruption of which significantly increased the yields of tirandamycins almost
one-fold, implicating that TrdK is a negative regulator for tirandamycin
biosynthesis. Disruption of the gene trdI resulted in the accumulation of the
intermediate tirandamycin C (3) and a trace amount of new product tirandamycin C2
(5). A model of tirandamycin biosynthesis was proposed based on bioinformatics
analyses, gene inactivation experiments and intermediates isolated from the
mutants. These findings set the stage for further study of the tirandamycin
biosynthetic mechanism and rationally engineer new tirandamycin analogues.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.02.040 
PMID: 21329667  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

