
1. Arch Oral Biol. 2011 Jul;56(7):650-4. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2011.01.011.
Epub 2011 Feb 17.

Short- and medium-chain fatty acids exhibit antimicrobial activity for oral
microorganisms.

Huang CB(1), Alimova Y, Myers TM, Ebersole JL.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Oral Health Research, College of Dentistry, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, KY 40503, United States. chuan2@uky.edu

OBJECTIVES: This study assessed the antibacterial activity of short-, medium-,
and long-chain fatty acids against various oral microorganisms.
METHODS: The short-chain fatty acids [formic acid (C1), acetic acid (C2),
propionic acid (C3), butyric acid (C4), isobutyric acid (C4), isovaleric acid
(C5), hexanoic acid (C6)], medium-chain fatty acids [octanoic acid (C8), capric
acid (C10), lauric acid (12)], and long-chain fatty acids [myristic acid (C14),
palmitic acid (C16)], were investigated for antimicrobial activity against
Streptococcus mutans, Streptococcus gordonii, Streptococcus sanguis, Candida
albicans, Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans, Fusobacterium nucleatum, and
Porphyromonas gingivalis.
RESULTS: The data demonstrated that the fatty acids exhibited patterns of
inhibition against oral bacteria with some specificity that appeared related more
to the bacterial species that the general structural characteristics of the
microorganism. As a group the fatty acids were much less effective against C.
albicans than the oral bacteria, with effectiveness limited to hexanoic,
octanoic, and lauric acids. Formic acid, capric, and lauric acids were broadly
inhibitory for the bacteria. Interestingly, fatty acids that are produced at
metabolic end-products by a number of these bacteria, were specifically inactive 
against the producing species, whilst substantially inhibiting the growth of
other oral microorganisms.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that the antimicrobial activity of short-chain 
fatty acids (SCFAs), medium-chain fatty acids (MCFAs), long-chain fatty acids
(LCFAs) could influence the microbial ecology in the oral cavity via at least 2
potential pathways. First, the agents delivered exogenously as therapeutic
adjuncts could be packaged to enhance a microbial-regulatory environment in the
subgingival sulcus. Second, it would be the intrinsic nature of these fatty acid 
inhibitors in contributing to the characteristics of the microbial biofilms,
their evolution, and emergence of species within the biofilms. Further studies on
these functions are required to better understand the nature of these potential
microbial interactions in the biofilms.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2011.01.011 
PMCID: PMC3119748
PMID: 21333271  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

