
1. Haematologica. 2011 May;96(5):646-54. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2010.036343. Epub
2011 Feb 17.

T-lymphoid differentiation potential measured in vitro is higher in CD34+CD38-/lo
hematopoietic stem cells from umbilical cord blood than from bone marrow and is
an intrinsic property of the cells.

De Smedt M(1), Leclercq G, Vandekerckhove B, Kerre T, Taghon T, Plum J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Ghent
University, University Hospital Ghent, 4Blok A, De Pintelaan 185, 9000 Ghent,
Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Human bone marrow and umbilical cord blood are sources of allogeneic 
hematopoietic stem cells for transplantation, which is a life-saving treatment in
a variety of diseases but is burdened by delayed T-cell reconstitution.
Observational studies evaluating T-cell reconstitution in post-transplant
recipients suggest that cord blood hematopoietic stem cells have a more effective
capacity for T-cell reconstitution. This study focuses on the comparison of the
capacity of cord blood and bone marrow hematopoietic stem cells to generate T
cells in vitro.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Hematopoietic stem cells were cultured in OP9-delta-like-1
and OP9-green fluorescent protein co-cultures to estimate T and myeloid
generation capacity, respectively. Phenotypic markers of T-lineage or myeloid
differentiation were measured by flow cytometry and used to analyze their
kinetics as a function of culture time. Hematopoietic stem cells were labeled
with carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinamidyl ester and analyzed after culture
to track their phenotypic progression in consecutive generations. Mixed
OP9-delta-like-1 co-cultures were done with either carboxyfluorescein diacetate
succinamidyl ester-labeled bone marrow and unlabeled cord blood hematopoietic
stem cells, or vice versa, to evaluate their mutual influence on T-lineage
differentiation. The T-cell potential of hematopoietic stem cells was addressed
quantitatively by limiting dilution analysis.
RESULTS: Bulk cultures showed faster and more extensive T-cell differentiation by
cord blood hematopoietic stem cells. Furthermore, the T-lymphoid differentiation 
capacity of cord blood and bone marrow hematopoietic stem cells can be
discriminated very early based on the coordinated expression of CD34 and CD7.
Mixing experiments with cord blood hematopoietic stem cells and bone marrow
hematopoietic stem cells showed that these differences are cell intrinsic.
Quantitative clonal analyses demonstrated that CD34(+)CD38(-/lo) hematopoietic
stem cells from cord blood contained a two-fold higher T-lineage generation
capacity than CD34(+)CD38(-/lo) bone marrow hematopoietic stem cells, whereas the
myeloid differentiation was similar.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data shows that cord blood hematopoietic stem cells have higher 
T-lymphoid differentiation potential than bone marrow hematopoietic stem cells
and that this property is cell autonomous.

DOI: 10.3324/haematol.2010.036343 
PMCID: PMC3084910
PMID: 21330325  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

