
1. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 22;6(2):e17362. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017362.

Dramatic repositioning of c-Myb to different promoters during the cell cycle
observed by combining cell sorting with chromatin immunoprecipitation.

Quintana AM(1), Zhou YE, Pena JJ, O'Rourke JP, Ness SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of New Mexico
Health Sciences Center, Albuquerque, New Mexico, United States of America.

The c-Myb transcription factor is a critical regulator of proliferation and stem 
cell differentiation, and mutated alleles of c-Myb are oncogenic, but little is
known about changes in c-Myb activity during the cell cycle. To map the
association of c-Myb with specific target genes during the cell cycle, we
developed a novel Fix-Sort-ChIP approach, in which asynchronously growing cells
were fixed with formaldehyde, stained with Hoechst 33342 and separated into
different cell cycle fractions by flow sorting, then processed for chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays. We found that c-Myb actively repositions,
binding to some genes only in specific cell cycle phases. In addition, the
specificity of c-Myb is dramatically different in small subpopulations of cells, 
for example cells in the G2/M phase of the cell cycle, than in the bulk
population. The repositioning of c-Myb during the cell cycle is not due to
changes in its expression and also occurs with ectopically expressed,
epitope-tagged versions of c-Myb. The repositioning occurs in established cell
lines, in primary human CD34+ hematopoietic progenitors and in primary human
acute myeloid leukemia cells. The combination of fixation, sorting and ChIP
analysis sheds new light on the dynamic nature of gene regulation during the cell
cycle and provides a new type of tool for the analysis of gene regulation in
small subsets of cells, such as cells in a specific phase of the cell cycle.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017362 
PMCID: PMC3043100
PMID: 21364958  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

