
1. J Comp Pathol. 2011 Aug-Oct;145(2-3):251-60. doi: 10.1016/j.jcpa.2011.01.002.
Epub 2011 Mar 8.

Pathology, tissue metalloproteinase transcription and haptoglobin responses in
mice after experimental challenge with different isolates of Pasteurella
multocida obtained from cases of porcine pneumonia.

Pors SE(1), Chadfield MS, Sørensen DB, Offenberg H, Heegaard PM, Bisgaard M,
Jensen HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Disease Biology, Faculty of Life Sciences, University
of Copenhagen, Denmark. sup@life.ku.dk

Pasteurella multocida is a major cause of porcine pneumonia, but the pathogenesis
of the disease is poorly defined. The aim of this study was to further understand
the host response to infection by use of a mouse model of P. multocida pneumonia.
Twenty female mice were divided into four groups (n=5). Three groups were
infected with one of three isolates of P. multocida isolated from clinical cases 
of chronic porcine pneumonia with necrotizing, suppurative and non-suppurative
lesions, respectively. The fourth group served as uninfected controls. Mice were 
killed 24 h postinfection and samples were collected for bacteriology,
histopathology and in-situ hybridization for detection of P. multocida.
Measurements of expression of genes encoding matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9)
and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1 (TIMP1) in lung tissue and
quantification of serum haptoglobin concentration were performed. P. multocida
was found in the lung and spleen. Lung lesions were characterized by deposition
of fibrin in alveoli and bronchioles, perivascular oedema, suppuration and
necrosis. The cellular infiltration was mainly of neutrophils. Splenic
neutrophilic infiltration was also evident. Minor differences in the severity and
nature of lesions were seen according to the isolate of P. multocida used for
infection. Intranasal infection of mice can therefore be used to evaluate the
host response and lesions caused by P. multocida obtained from porcine pneumonic 
infections. The inflammatory response in this model is associated with increased 
tissue expression of genes encoding MMP9, TIMP1 and serum haptoglobin
concentration.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcpa.2011.01.002 
PMID: 21388634  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

