
1. Kekkaku. 2011 Feb;86(2):113-25.

[Non-tuberculous mycobacteriosis. What has been coming out].

[Article in Japanese]

Kajiki A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, National Hospital Organization Ohmuta
National Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan. kajikia@oomuta.hosp.go.jp

Diagnosis of non-tuberculous mycobacteriosis is relatively easy, because of
recent technological advances (HRCT, MGIT, PCR, DDH etc). Although many reports
of this disease have been published, there are many problems to resolve. (1)
Prevalence of non-tuberculous mycobacteriosis: Shigeki SATO (Department of
Medical Oncology and Immunology, Nagoya City University Graduate School of
Medical Sciences) Questionnaire surveys to determine the prevalence of
nontuberculous mycobacterial (NTM) disease were carried out in 2001, 2007, and
2009. The NTM disease rate was estimated at 5.9/100,000, confirming that Japan
has one of the world's highest NTM disease rates. Examination of the proportions 
of M. avium and M. intracellulare disease in Japan by region revealed that the M.
avium/M. intracellulare disease ratio increased in different regions since past
reports. In the 2007 survey, the M. avium disease rate had increased over the
2001 level. M. kansasii had a high disease rate in the Kinki and Kanto regions.
Disease rates tended to be high in regions that have a metropolis. However, the
disease rate was low in Aichi Prefecture, so that the presence in a region of a
metropolis is probably not of itself a factor causing a high disease rate. The
distributions of the bacteria causing NTM thus vary among different countries and
regions. (2) Polyclonal infection of Mycobacterium avium using variable numbers
of tandem repeats (VNTR) analysis: Tomoshige MATSUMOTO (Department of Clinical
Research and Development, Center for Infectious Diseases, Osaka Prefectural
Hospital Organization, Osaka Prefectural Medical Center for Respiratory and
Allergic Diseases) Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) is refractory to therapy,
containing rifampicin (RFP), ethambutol (EB), and clarithromycin (CAM). It was
widely accepted that therapeutic difficulties of pulmonary MAC treatment was
caused by highly resistance to antibiotics or repeated re-infection from
environment. Variable number of tandem repeats (VNTR) analysis of MAC is
available. So, we studied the MAC-VNTR of clinical isolates from 29 patients with
pulmonary MAC, refractory to the therapy. Compared the clinical isolates before
with after each therapy, clinical isolates derived from the all except one
patient showed the same VNTR patterns, before and after. According to MAC-VNTR
analysis of the clinical isolates we studied, frequency of polyclonal infection
was low (1/29). We concluded that the highly resistance to antibiotics or the
repeated same VNTR type infection from environment made refractory pulmonary MAC.
(3) An approach to identify susceptibility genes in patients with non-HIV-related
pulmonary Mycobaterium avium complex (MAC) infection: Naoto KEICHO (Department of
Respiratory Diseases, Research Institute, National Center for Global Health and
Medicine) Mycobacterium avium complex causes human pulmonary disease. Th1 T cells
play a role in protective immunity from mycobacterial infection. Genetic defect
of Interferon-gamma/ Interleukin-12 axis is known to cause familial
non-tuberculous mycobacterial infection. On the other hand, non-mendelian type of
genetic abnormalities such as polymorphisms of HLA, CFTR and SLC11A1 (NRAMP1)
genes has also been investigated as disease susceptibility genes. Recently our
group has reported disease association with MHC-class I related chain-A molecule 
(MICA), comparing 300 sporadic cases with 300 healthy controls. (4) Genetic
feature of Mycobacterium avium complex: Taku NAKAGAWA, Kenji OGAWA (Department of
Pulmonary Medicine, National Hospital Organization Higashinagoya National
Hospital) The bacterial factors contributing to the pathogenesis of M. avium
complex infection and diversity of disease progression remain unclear. MATR-VNTR 
typing is inexpensive and easy to perform and has an excellent discriminatory
power compared with MIRU-VNTR and IS1245-RFLP typing. MATR-VNTR typing revealed
that M. avium isolates from HIV-positive patients are analogous to the isolates
from pig enterically-transmitted rather than those from HIV-negative patients
with pulmonary diseases. M. avium comprises four subspecies. We performed genetic
analysis by using Insertion Sequence (IS) for 114 clinical isolates of M. avium. 
All clinical isolates were identified as M. avium subsp. hominissuis by sequence 
analysis of hsp65. PCR detection rate of IS901 was about 70%, while detection
rate in Europe and America was 0-8%. Compared with the original IS901, 60 point
mutations were found in the sequence of the insertion sequence detected from all 
PCR-positive clinical isolates. This new insertion sequence was designated
ISMav6. It became clear that M. avium strains in Japan are distinct from strains 
in Western countries in terms of the prevalence of ISMav6. We conducted genetic
analysis for M. avium isolates collected from 11 hospitals all over Japan, but
MATR-VNTR typing failed to show that distinct clusters correlate with disease
progression or region. Genetic typing for M. intracellulare using VNTR has not
yet been developed. We identified VNTR loci in the genome of M. intracellulare
ATCC1395 and applied them as a molecular epidemiological tool to clinical
isolates. (5) Infection source of pulmonary Mycobactrium avium complex (MAC)
disease: Yukiko NISHIUCHI (Toneyama Institute for Tuberculosis Research Osaka
City University Medical School), Ryoji MAEKURA (National Hospital Organization
Toneyama National Hospital) Pulmonary MAC disease is characterized as the
polyclonal infection and the recurrence, which suggest the presence of polyclonal
niche of MAC in environment surrounding patients. We revealed that MAC was
recovered from bathrooms but not from other sites of residences. The bathtub
inlet was the niche with polyclonal colonization of MAC in the bathrooms of MAC
patients. The identical/related genotypic profiles with isolates from patients
were revealed by pulsed field gel electrophoresis. These results implied that the
residential bathroom might be one of the infectious sources of pulmonary MAC
disease.


PMID: 21404655  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

