
1. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 9;6(3):e16953. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016953.

Probiotic sonicates selectively induce mucosal immune cells apoptosis through
ceramide generation via neutral sphingomyelinase.

Angulo S(1), Morales A, Danese S, Llacuna L, Masamunt MC, Pultz N, Cifone MG, De 
Simone C, Delgado S, Vila J, Panés J, Donskey C, Fernández-Checa JC, Fiocchi C,
Sans M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hospital Clinic, IDIBAPS, CIBER Enfermedades
Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd), Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Probiotics appear to be beneficial in inflammatory bowel disease, but
their mechanism of action is incompletely understood. We investigated whether
probiotic-derived sphingomyelinase mediates this beneficial effect.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Neutral sphingomyelinase (NSMase) activity was
measured in sonicates of the probiotic L. brevis (LB) and S. thermophilus (ST)
and the non-probiotic E. coli (EC) and E. faecalis (EF). Lamina propria
mononuclear cells (LPMC) were obtained from patients with Crohn's disease (CD)
and Ulcerative Colitis (UC), and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from
healthy volunteers, analysing LPMC and PBMC apoptosis susceptibility, reactive
oxygen species (ROS) generation and JNK activation. In some experiments,
sonicates were preincubated with GSH or GW4869, a specific NSMase inhibitor.
NSMase activity of LB and ST was 10-fold that of EC and EF sonicates. LB and ST
sonicates induced significantly more apoptosis of CD and UC than control LPMC,
whereas EC and EF sonicates failed to induce apoptosis. Pre-stimulation with
anti-CD3/CD28 induced a significant and time-dependent increase in LB-induced
apoptosis of LPMC and PBMC. Exposure to LB sonicates resulted in JNK activation
and ROS production by LPMC. NSMase activity of LB sonicates was completely
abrogated by GW4869, causing a dose-dependent reduction of LB-induced apoptosis. 
LB and ST selectively induced immune cell apoptosis, an effect dependent on the
degree of cell activation and mediated by bacterial NSMase.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that induction of immune cell apoptosis is a
mechanism of action of some probiotics, and that NSMase-mediated ceramide
generation contributes to the therapeutic effects of probiotics.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016953 
PMCID: PMC3052310
PMID: 21408067  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

