
1. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 11;6(3):e17852. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017852.

The Burkholderia pseudomallei type III secretion system and BopA are required for
evasion of LC3-associated phagocytosis.

Gong L(1), Cullinane M, Treerat P, Ramm G, Prescott M, Adler B, Boyce JD,
Devenish RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

Burkholderia pseudomallei is the causative agent of melioidosis, a fatal
infectious disease endemic in tropical regions worldwide, and especially
prevalent in southeast Asia and northern Australia. This intracellular pathogen
can escape from phagosomes into the host cytoplasm, where it replicates and
infects adjacent cells. We previously demonstrated that, in response to B.
pseudomallei infection of macrophage cell line RAW 264.7, a subset of bacteria
co-localized with the autophagy marker protein, microtubule-associated protein
light chain 3 (LC3), implicating autophagy in host cell defence against
infection. Recent reports have suggested that LC3 can be recruited to both
phagosomes and autophagosomes, thereby raising questions regarding the identity
of the LC3-positive compartments in which invading bacteria reside and the
mechanism of the autophagic response to B. pseudomallei infection. Electron
microscopy analysis of infected cells demonstrated that the invading bacteria
were either free in the cytosol, or sequestered in single-membrane phagosomes
rather than double-membrane autophagosomes, suggesting that LC3 is recruited to
B. pseudomallei-containing phagosomes. Partial or complete loss of function of
type III secretion system cluster 3 (TTSS3) in mutants lacking the BopA
(effector) or BipD (translocator) proteins respectively, resulted in delayed or
no escape from phagosomes. Consistent with these observations, bopA and bipD
mutants both showed a higher level of co-localization with LC3 and the lysosomal 
marker LAMP1, and impaired survival in RAW264.7 cells, suggesting enhanced
killing in phagolysosomes. We conclude that LC3 recruitment to phagosomes
stimulates killing of B. pseudomallei trapped in phagosomes. Furthermore, BopA
plays an important role in efficient escape of B. pseudomallei from phagosomes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017852 
PMCID: PMC3055895
PMID: 21412437  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

