
1. Neth J Med. 2011 Mar;69(3):101-11.

Tired of Lyme borreliosis. Lyme borreliosis in the Netherlands.

Coumou J(1), van der Poll T, Speelman P, Hovius JW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine (CEMM), Academic Medical Center
(AMC), University of Amsterdam (UvA), The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Neth J Med. 2011 Mar;69(3):98-100.

Lyme borreliosis has become the most common vector-borne illness in North Eastern
USA and Europe. It is a zoonotic disease, with well-defined symptoms, caused by
B. burgdorferi sensu lato, and transmitted by ticks. Lyme borreliosis is endemic 
in the Netherlands with a yearly incidence of approximately 133 cases/100,000
inhabitants. Similar to another spirochetal disease, syphilis, it can be divided 
into three stages; early, early disseminated and late disseminated manifestations
of disease, of which the specific clinical presentations will be discussed in
detail. The diagnosis of Lyme borreliosis is based on a history of potential
exposure to ticks and the risk of infection with B. burgdorferi s.l., development
of specific symptoms, exclusion of other causes, and when appropriate, combined
with serological and/or other diagnostic tests. The specific indications for, but
also the limitations of, serology and other diagnostic tests, including the
polymerase chain reaction (PCR), are detailed in this review. Lyme borreliosis is
treated with antibiotics, which are usually highly effective. Recent literature
discussing the indications for antibiotic treatment, the dosage, duration and
type of antibiotic, as well as indications to withhold antibiotic treatment, are 
reviewed. This review presents the most recent, and when available Dutch,
evidence-based information on the ecology, pathogenesis, clinical presentation,
diagnosis, treatment and prevention of Lyme borreliosis, argues against the many 
misconceptions that surround the disease, and provides a framework for the Dutch 
physician confronted with a patient with putative Lyme borreliosis.


PMID: 21444934  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

