
1. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 5;6(4):e18519. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018519.

Kinase activity profiling of pneumococcal pneumonia.

Hoogendijk AJ(1), Diks SH, van der Poll T, Peppelenbosch MP, Wieland CW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. a.j.hoogendijk@amc.uva.nl

BACKGROUND: Pneumonia represents a major health burden. Previous work
demonstrated that although the induction of inflammation is important for
adequate host defense against pneumonia, an inability to regulate the host's
inflammatory response within the lung later during infection can be detrimental. 
Intracellular signaling pathways commonly rely on activation of kinases, and
kinases play an essential role in the regulation of the inflammatory response of 
immune cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Pneumonia was induced in mice via intranasal
instillation of Streptococcus (S.) pneumoniae. Kinomics peptide arrays,
exhibiting 1024 specific consensus sequences for protein kinases, were used to
produce a systems biology analysis of cellular kinase activity during the course 
of pneumonia. Several differences in kinase activity revealed by the arrays were 
validated in lung homogenates of individual mice using western blot. We
identified cascades of activated kinases showing that chemotoxic stress and a T
helper 1 response were induced during the course of pneumococcal pneumonia. In
addition, our data point to a reduction in WNT activity in lungs of S. pneumoniae
infected mice. Moreover, this study demonstrated a reduction in overall CDK
activity implying alterations in cell cycle biology.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study utilizes systems biology to provide insight 
into the signaling events occurring during lung infection with the common cause
of community acquired pneumonia, and may assist in identifying novel therapeutic 
targets in the treatment of bacterial pneumonia.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018519 
PMCID: PMC3071703
PMID: 21483672  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

