
1. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 31;6(3):e18279. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018279.

Potent innate immune response to pathogenic leptospira in human whole blood.

Goris MG(1), Wagenaar JF, Hartskeerl RA, van Gorp EC, Schuller S, Monahan AM,
Nally JE, van der Poll T, van 't Veer C.

Author information: 
(1)Royal Tropical Institute (KIT), KIT Biomedical Research, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. m.goris@kit.nl

BACKGROUND: Leptospirosis is caused by pathogenic spirochetes of the genus
Leptospira. The bacteria enter the human body via abraded skin or mucous
membranes and may disseminate throughout. In general the clinical picture is mild
but some patients develop rapidly progressive, severe disease with a high case
fatality rate. Not much is known about the innate immune response to leptospires 
during haematogenous dissemination. Previous work showed that a human THP-1 cell 
line recognized heat-killed leptospires and leptospiral LPS through TLR2 instead 
of TLR4. The LPS of virulent leptospires displayed a lower potency to trigger TNF
production by THP-1 cells compared to LPS of non-virulent leptospires.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We investigated the host response and killing of 
virulent and non-virulent Leptospira of different serovars by human THP-1 cells, 
human PBMC's and human whole blood. Virulence of each leptospiral strain was
tested in a well accepted standard guinea pig model. Virulent leptospires
displayed complement resistance in human serum and whole blood while in-vitro
attenuated non-virulent leptospires were rapidly killed in a complement dependent
manner. In vitro stimulation of THP-1 and PBMC's with heat-killed and living
leptospires showed differential serovar and cell type dependence of cytokine
induction. However, at low, physiological, leptospiral dose, living virulent
complement resistant strains were consistently more potent in whole blood
stimulations than the corresponding non-virulent complement sensitive strains. At
higher dose living virulent and non-virulent leptospires were equipotent in whole
blood. Inhibition of different TLRs indicated that both TLR2 and TLR4 as well as 
TLR5 play a role in the whole blood cytokine response to living leptospires.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Thus, in a minimally altered system as human whole
blood, highly virulent Leptospira are potent inducers of the cytokine response.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018279 
PMCID: PMC3069077
PMID: 21483834  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

