
1. Diabetes. 2011 Jun;60(6):1726-33. doi: 10.2337/db10-1287. Epub 2011 Apr 26.

HLA-A2-matched peripheral blood mononuclear cells from type 1 diabetic patients, 
but not nondiabetic donors, transfer insulitis to NOD-scid/γc(null)/HLA-A2
transgenic mice concurrent with the expansion of islet-specific CD8+ T cells.

Whitfield-Larry F(1), Young EF, Talmage G, Fudge E, Azam A, Patel S, Largay J,
Byrd W, Buse J, Calikoglu AS, Shultz LD, Frelinger JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease characterized by the
destruction of insulin-producing β-cells. NOD mice provide a useful tool for
understanding disease pathogenesis and progression. Although much has been
learned from studies with NOD mice, increased understanding of human type 1
diabetes can be gained by evaluating the pathogenic potential of human
diabetogenic effector cells in vivo. Therefore, our objective in this study was
to develop a small-animal model using human effector cells to study type 1
diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We adoptively transferred HLA-A2-matched peripheral 
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from type 1 diabetic patients and nondiabetic
control subjects into transgenic NOD-scid/γc(null)/HLA-A*0201
(NOD-scid/γc(null)/A2) mice. At various times after adoptive transfer, we
determined the ability of these mice to support the survival and proliferation of
the human lymphoid cells. Human lymphocytes were isolated and assessed from the
blood, spleen, pancreatic lymph node and islets of NOD-scid/γc(null)/A2 mice
after transfer.
RESULTS: Human T and B cells proliferate and survive for at least 6 weeks and
were recovered from the blood, spleen, draining pancreatic lymph node, and most
importantly, islets of NOD-scid/γc(null)/A2 mice. Lymphocytes from type 1
diabetic patients preferentially infiltrate the islets of NOD-scid/γc(null)/A2
mice. In contrast, PBMCs from nondiabetic HLA-A2-matched donors showed
significantly less islet infiltration. Moreover, in mice that received PBMCs from
type 1 diabetic patients, we identified epitope-specific CD8(+) T cells among the
islet infiltrates.
CONCLUSIONS: We show that insulitis is transferred to NOD-scid/γc(null)/A2 mice
that received HLA-A2-matched PBMCs from type 1 diabetic patients. In addition,
many of the infiltrating CD8(+) T cells are epitope-specific and produce
interferon-γ after in vitro peptide stimulation. This indicates that
NOD-scid/γc(null)/A2 mice transferred with HLA-A2-matched PBMCs from type 1
diabetic patients may serve as a useful tool for studying epitope-specific
T-cell-mediated responses in patients with type 1 diabetes.

DOI: 10.2337/db10-1287 
PMCID: PMC3114397
PMID: 21521873  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

