
1. Asian Pac J Allergy Immunol. 2011 Mar;29(1):1-14.

Insight into the mechanisms regulating immune homeostasis in health and disease.

Sirisinha S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Rama 6
Road, Bangkok 10400, Thailand. scssr@mahidol.ac.th

Innate and adaptive immune systems consist of cells and molecules that work
together in concert to fight against microbial infection and maintain
homeostasis. Hosts encounter microbes / exogenous pathogen-associated molecular
patterns (PAMPs) and endogenous damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) all 
the time and they must have proper mechanisms to counteract the danger such that 
appropriate responses (e.g., degree of inflammation and types of mediators
induced) can be mounted in different scenarios. Increasing numbers of endogenous 
danger signals of host origin are being identified including, for example, uric
acid and cholesterol crystals, high mobility group box1 (HMGB1) protein, oxidized
LDL, vesicans, heat shock proteins (HSPs) and self DNA. Many of these endogenous 
ligands have been shown to be associated with inflammation-related diseases like 
atherosclerosis, gout and type 2 diabetes. Several DAMPs appear to have the
ability to interact with more than one receptor. We are now beginning to
understand how the immune system can distinguish infection from endogenous
ligands elaborated following cellular insults and tissue damage. Appropriate
responses to maintain the homeostatic state in health and disease depend largely 
on the recognition and response to these stimuli by germline encoded
pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs) present on both immune and non-immune cells.
These receptors are, for example, Toll-like receptors (TLRs), C-type lectin
receptors (CLRs) and cytosolic receptors (e.g., RLRs, NLRs and some intracellular
DNA sensors). Atypical PRR "danger" receptors, like the receptor for advanced
glycation end products (RAGE) and their ligands have been identified. A proper
response to maintain homeostasis relies on specific negative regulators and
regulatory pathways to dampen its response to tissue injury while maintaining the
capacity to eliminate infection and induce proper tissue repair. Moreover, some
PRRs (e.g., TLR2,TLR4 and NLRP3) and atypical PRRs can recognize both PAMPs and
DAMPs, either as single entities or after forming complexes (e.g., immune
complexes, or DNA- HMGB1 and DNA-LL37 complexes), so there must be a mechanism to
selectively depress or alleviate the inflammatory response to DAMPs, while
leaving that of PAMPs intact. Excessive inflammatory responses can induce
considerable tissue damage and can be highly detrimental to the host. For
example, CD24 reacting with HMGB1 and HSPs has been implicated to function as
negative regulator for RAGE. In this review, I will briefly overview the
information on various host and microbial components and bring together the
information to synthesize a model to explain how homeostasis can be maintained in
states of health and disease. Understanding the molecular mechanisms by which the
immune system functions under different scenarios will provide us with ways and
means to design appropriate approaches, for example, to prevent or treat
autoimmune and inflammatory diseases or the ability to design new drugs or
formulate safe chemicals for vaccine adjuvants.


PMID: 21560483  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

