
1. Saudi J Kidney Dis Transpl. 2011 May;22(3):576-80.

Effect of the quality of water used for dialysis on the efficacy of hemodialysis:
a single-center experience from Morocco.

Akhmouch I(1), Asserraji M, Bahadi A, Bouaiti E, Alayoude M, Aatif T, Hamzi MA,
Kawtar H, Allam M, Oualim Z.

Author information: 
(1)1st Medico-surgical Hospital, Agadir, Morocco. ismail315@gmail.com

The quality of the water used for dialysis has been suggested as a factor causing
inflammation in patients on hemodialysis (HD). We therefore conducted this study 
to identify the effect of quality of the water on nutritional state, inflammation
and need for human recombinant erythropoietin (EPO) in patients undergoing HD at 
Agadir, Morocco. This prospective study included patients on HD for at least one 
year. The water treatment was done according to the standard protocol, which was 
followed by additional enhancement of ultrafiltration using an additional
polysulfone filter (diasafe, Fresenius, Bad Homburg, Germany) before the
dialyser. Water was monitored regularly during the study period to ensure
acceptable levels of bacterial count as well as endotoxin levels. Various
parameters including dry weight, systolic and diastolic blood pressure (PA)
before and after an HD session, need for human recombinant EPO, levels of
hemoglobin (Hb), albumin, ferritin, C-reactive protein (CRP), and the dose of
dialysis delivered (Kt/V) were measured first at the beginning of the study and
thereafter, in the third, sixth and 12 th months of the study. The study involved
47 patients, and after 12 months of the study, an improvement in median dry
weight (1.2 kg, P = 0017) and a simultaneous median reduction of 20.7 IU/kg/week 
of EPO, with an in-crease of the median level of Hb, was noted. The results of
our study suggest that by improving the biocompatibility of HD with the use of
good quality water, patients acquire a better nutritional, inflammatory and
hematologic status.


PMID: 21566327  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

