
1. PLoS One. 2011 May 9;6(5):e19654. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019654.

Thrombospondin-1 contributes to mortality in murine sepsis through effects on
innate immunity.

McMaken S(1), Exline MC, Mehta P, Piper M, Wang Y, Fischer SN, Newland CA,
Schrader CA, Balser SR, Sarkar A, Baran CP, Marsh CB, Cook CH, Phillips GS, Ali
NA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Department 
of Internal Medicine, The Dorothy M. Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute,
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1) is involved in many biological processes,
including immune and tissue injury response, but its role in sepsis is unknown.
Cell surface expression of TSP-1 on platelets is increased in sepsis and could
activate the anti-inflammatory cytokine transforming growth factor beta (TGFβ1)
affecting outcome. Because of these observations we sought to determine the
importance of TSP-1 in sepsis.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We performed studies on TSP-1 null and wild type 
(WT) C57BL/6J mice to determine the importance of TSP-1 in sepsis. We utilized
the cecal ligation puncture (CLP) and intraperitoneal E. coli injection (i.p. E. 
coli) models of peritoneal sepsis. Additionally, bone-marrow-derived macrophages 
(BMMs) were used to determine phagocytic activity. TSP-1-/- animals experienced
lower mortality than WT mice after CLP. Tissue and peritoneal lavage TGFβ1 levels
were unchanged between animals of each genotype. In addition, there is no
difference between the levels of major innate cytokines between the two groups of
animals. PLF from WT mice contained a greater bacterial load than TSP-1-/- mice
after CLP. The survival advantage for TSP-1-/- animals persisted when i.p. E.
coli injections were performed. TSP-1-/- BMMs had increased phagocytic capacity
compared to WT.
CONCLUSIONS: TSP-1 deficiency was protective in two murine models of peritoneal
sepsis, independent of TGFβ1 activation. Our studies suggest TSP-1 expression is 
associated with decreased phagocytosis and possibly bacterial clearance, leading 
to increased peritoneal inflammation and mortality in WT mice. These data support
the contention that TSP-1 should be more fully explored in the human condition.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019654 
PMCID: PMC3090410
PMID: 21573017  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

