
1. Oncol Rep. 1997 Mar-Apr;4(2):289-95.

Mediterranean and immunodeficiency associated Kaposi's sarcoma - Does
micromorphology reflect clinical patterns?

Castelli E(1), Wollina U.

Author information: 
(1)UNIV JENA,DEPT DERMATOL,SCH MED,D-07740 JENA,GERMANY. UNIV PALERMO,CLIN
DERMOSIFILOPAT,PALERMO,ITALY.

Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) follows a different clinical course in Mediterranean and
immunodeficiency related cases and has a poorer prognosis in the latter. We
investigated 40 patients with Mediterranean and eight with immunodeficiency
related KS by histomorphology and immunohistology in comparision to the clinical 
presentation in order to identify characteristic patterns distinctive for each of
these KS forms. We also evaluated oncoprotein activation and phosphotyrosine
activity. Tissue sections were stained with hematoxylin-eosin (H&E), Mallory's
phosphotungstick acid hematoxylin (PTAH), Hotchkiss-McManus' periodic acid -
Schiff reaction (PAS), Masson's trichrome, Pinkus' orcein-Giemsa, Lapham's method
for myelin, Bielschowski-Gomori's silver impregnation for reticular fibres,
Bodian's silver impregnation for neurofibrils, and Wartin-Starry silver
impregnation for fungi and bacteria. Immunohistochemistry was performed on
deparaffinated sections using the microwave technique with avidin-peroxidase and 
3-amino-ethyl-carbazole for alpha smooth muscle actin, CD34, phosphotyrosine,
p53, and bcl-2. Mediterranean KS was characterized by pseudocapsule formation
around nodules, which has been lost in immunodeficiency related KS. The latter,
additionally, showed outstanding infiltrative growth with lace-like involvement
of subcutaneous fat, colonization of perineuronal-periadnexal adventitial dermis,
irregular vascular lacunae encircling vessels and/or adnexa, collections of
histiocytoid-like cells, intravascular papillary projections of atypical
endothelia cells. Both types could further be characterized by presence of alpha 
smooth muscle actin and CD34 expressing cells, high levels of phosphotyrosinase
in plump spindle cells and variable expression of p53, sometimes coexpressed with
phosphotyrosinase indicating cellular activation. The oncoprotein bcl-2 was not
detected in this tumor material. The particular clinical features of
Mediterranean and immunodeficiency related forms of KS may be reflected, at least
in part, in characteristic histomorphological findings.

DOI: 10.3892/or.4.2.289 
PMID: 21590045 

