
1. Curr Med Chem. 2011;18(18):2791-815.

Adenosine in the inflamed gut: a Janus faced compound.

Estrela AB(1), Abraham WR.

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz Center for Infection Research, Chemical Microbiology,
Inhoffenstrasse 7, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany.

The purine ribonucleoside adenosine (Ado) has been recognized for its regulatory 
functions in situations of cellular stress like ischemia, hypoxia and
inflammation. The importance of extracellular Ado as a modulator in the immune
system is a theme of great appreciation and the focus of recent increasing
interest in the field of gastrointestinal inflammation. In this review, the
different aspects of Ado signaling during inflammatory responses in the gut are
discussed, considering the contribution of the four known Ado receptors (ARs;
A(1), A(2A), A(2B), and A(3)), their mechanisms and expression patterns.
Activation of these receptors in epithelial cells as well as in immune cells
recruited to the inflamed intestinal mucosa determines the overall effect,
ranging from a protective, anti-inflammatory modulation to a strong
pro-inflammatory induction. Here we present the current advances in agonists and 
antagonists development and their potential therapeutic application studied in
animal models of intestinal inflammation. In addition, alternative complementary 
approaches to manipulate such a complex signaling system are discussed, for
example, the use of AR allosteric modulators or interference with Ado metabolism.
Special features of the gut environment are taken into account: the contribution 
of diet components; the involvement of Ado in intestinal infections; the
interactions with the gut microbiome, particularly, the recent exciting finding
that an intestinal bacterium can directly produce extracellular Ado in response
to host defense mechanisms in an inflammation scenario. Understanding each
component of this dynamic system will broaden the possibilities for applying Ado 
signaling as a therapeutic target in gut inflammation.

DOI: 10.2174/092986711796011274 
PMID: 21649583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

