
1. J Parasitol. 2011 Dec;97(6):1085-98. doi: 10.1645/GE-2757.1. Epub 2011 Jun 13.

Survey of parasites in threatened stocks of coho salmon (Oncorhynchus kisutch) in
Oregon by examination of wet tissues and histology.

Ferguson JA(1), St-Hilaire S, Peterson TS, Rodnick KJ, Kent ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Oregon State University, 220 Nash Hall, Corvallis,
Oregon 97331, USA. jayde.ferguson@alaska.gov

We are conducting studies on the impacts of parasites on Oregon coastal coho
salmon (Oncorhynchus kistuch). An essential first step is documenting the
geographic distribution of infections, which may be accomplished by using
different methods for parasite detection. Thus, the objectives of the current
study were to (1) identify parasite species infecting these stocks of coho salmon
and document their prevalence, density, and geographic distribution; (2) assess
the pathology of these infections; and (3) for the first time, determine the
sensitivity and specificity of histology for detecting parasites compared with
examining wet preparations for muscle and gill infections. We examined 576 fry,
parr, and smolt coho salmon in total by histology. The muscle and gills of 219 of
these fish also were examined by wet preparation. Fish were collected from 10
different locations in 2006-2007. We identified 21 different species of parasites
in these fish. Some parasites, such as Nanophyetus salmincola and Myxobolus
insidiosus, were common across all fish life stages from most basins. Other
parasites, such as Apophallus sp., were more common in underyearling fish than
smolts and had a more restricted geographic distribution. Additional parasites
commonly observed were as follows: Sanguinicola sp., Trichodina truttae ,
Epistylis sp., Capriniana piscium, and unidentified metacercariae in gills;
Myxobolus sp. in brain; Myxidium salvelini and Chloromyxum majori in kidney;
Pseudocapillaria salvelini and adult digenean spp. in the intestine. Only a few
parasites, such as the unidentified gill metacercariae, elicted overt pathologic 
changes. Histology had generally poor sensitivity for detecting parasites;
however, it had relatively good specificity. We recommend using both methods for 
studies or monitoring programs requiring a comprehensive assessment of parasite
identification, enumeration, and parasite-related pathology.

DOI: 10.1645/GE-2757.1 
PMID: 21668345  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

