
1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011 Aug 3;52(9):6154-61. doi: 10.1167/iovs.10-6943.

VIP and growth factors in the infected cornea.

Jiang X(1), McClellan SA, Barrett RP, Berger EA, Zhang Y, Hazlett LD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

PURPOSE: Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) is an anti-inflammatory neuropeptide
that downregulates proinflammatory cytokines and promotes healing in a
susceptible model of P. aeruginosa keratitis. Growth factors also play a role in 
corneal healing and restoration of tissue homeostasis after wounding. However,
whether VIP treatment modulates growth factors to promote healing in the infected
cornea remains untested and is the purpose of this study.
METHODS: C57BL/6 (B6) mice were injected with VIP and mRNA and protein levels,
and immunostaining for EGF, FGF, HGF, and VEGF-A were done. Exogenous treatment
with a mixture of the growth factors also was tested and levels of cytokines,
defensins, and bacterial counts were determined.
RESULTS: Real-time RT-PCR, immunostaining, and ELISA data demonstrated that
treatment with VIP enhanced levels of EGF, FGF, and HGF during disease, and that 
VEGF-A, and associated angiogenic molecules also were increased by VIP. Moreover,
immunohistochemical studies confirmed that both epithelial and stromal cells
participated in growth factor production. Most notably, treatment with a mixture 
of EGF, FGF, and HGF after disease onset, prevented corneal perforation when
compared with controls. This outcome was associated with downregulation of
proinflammatory cytokines such as macrophage inflammatory protein-2 (MIP-2),
upregulation of anti-inflammatory cytokines such as TGF-β, and antimicrobials
β-defensins 2 and 3, as well as decreased plate counts at 1 day postinfection
(p.i.) (P = 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, the data provide evidence that VIP treatment modulates
growth factors, angiogenic molecules, and defensins in the infected cornea and
that this in turn promotes healing and restoration of tissue homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.10-6943 
PMCID: PMC3176011
PMID: 21666233  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

