
1. Metallomics. 2011 Aug;3(8):765-74. doi: 10.1039/c1mt00034a. Epub 2011 Jun 20.

The effects of protein crowding in bacterial photosynthetic membranes on the flow
of quinone redox species between the photochemical reaction center and the
ubiquinol-cytochrome c2 oxidoreductase.

Woronowicz K(1), Sha D, Frese RN, Sturgis JN, Nanda V, Niederman RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Rutgers University, Busch
Campus, 604 Allison Road, Piscataway, NJ 08854-8082, USA.

Atomic force microscopy (AFM) of the native architecture of the intracytoplasmic 
membrane (ICM) of a variety of species of purple photosynthetic bacteria,
obtained at submolecular resolution, shows a tightly packed arrangement of light 
harvesting (LH) and reaction center (RC) complexes. Since there are no
unattributed structures or gaps with space sufficient for the cytochrome bc(1) or
ATPase complexes, they are localized in membrane domains distinct from the flat
regions imaged by AFM. This has generated a renewed interest in possible
long-range pathways for lateral diffusion of UQ redox species that functionally
link the RC and the bc(1) complexes. Recent proposals to account for UQ flow in
the membrane bilayer are reviewed, along with new experimental evidence provided 
from an analysis of intrinsic near-IR fluorescence emission that has served to
test these hypotheses. The results suggest that different mechanism of UQ flow
exist between species such as Rhodobacter sphaeroides, with a highly organized
arrangement of LH and RC complexes and fast RC electron transfer turnover, and
Phaeospirillum molischianum with a more random organization and slower RC
turnover. It is concluded that packing density of the peripheral LH2 antenna in
the Rba. sphaeroides ICM imposes constraints that significantly slow the
diffusion of UQ redox species between the RC and cytochrome bc(1) complex, while 
in Phs. molischianum, the crowding of the ICM with LH3 has little effect upon UQ 
diffusion. This supports the proposal that in this type of ICM, a network of
RC-LH1 core complexes observed in AFM provides a pathway for long-range quinone
diffusion that is unaffected by differences in LH complex composition or
organization.

DOI: 10.1039/c1mt00034a 
PMID: 21691621  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

