
1. Infect Immun. 2011 Oct;79(10):3913-21. doi: 10.1128/IAI.05372-11. Epub 2011 Jul
18.

Membrane translocation of binary actin-ADP-ribosylating toxins from Clostridium
difficile and Clostridium perfringens is facilitated by cyclophilin A and Hsp90.

Kaiser E(1), Kroll C, Ernst K, Schwan C, Popoff M, Fischer G, Buchner J, Aktories
K, Barth H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Ulm Medical Center,
Ulm, Germany.

Some hypervirulent strains of Clostridium difficile produce the binary
actin-ADP-ribosylating toxin C. difficile transferase (CDT) in addition to
Rho-glucosylating toxins A and B. It has been suggested that the presence of CDT 
increases the severity of C. difficile-associated diseases, including
pseudomembranous colitis. CDT contains a binding and translocation component,
CDTb, that mediates the transport of the separate enzyme component CDTa into the 
cytosol of target cells, where CDTa modifies actin. Here we investigated the
mechanism of cellular CDT uptake and found that bafilomycin A1 protects cultured 
epithelial cells from intoxication with CDT, implying that CDTa is translocated
from acidified endosomal vesicles into the cytosol. Consistently, CDTa is
translocated across the cytoplasmic membranes into the cytosol when cell-bound
CDT is exposed to acidic medium. Radicicol and cyclosporine A, inhibitors of the 
heat shock protein Hsp90 and cyclophilins, respectively, protected cells from
intoxication with CDT but not from intoxication with toxins A and B. Moreover,
both inhibitors blocked the pH-dependent membrane translocation of CDTa, strongly
suggesting that Hsp90 and cyclophilin are crucial for this process. In contrast, 
the inhibitors did not interfere with the ADP-ribosyltransferase activity,
receptor binding, or endocytosis of the toxin. We obtained comparable results
with the closely related iota-toxin from Clostridium perfringens. Moreover, CDTa 
and Ia, the enzyme component of iota-toxin, specifically bound to immobilized
Hsp90 and cyclophilin A in vitro. In combination with our recently obtained data 
on the C2 toxin from C. botulinum, these results imply a common Hsp90/cyclophilin
A-dependent translocation mechanism for the family of binary
actin-ADP-ribosylating toxins.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.05372-11 
PMCID: PMC3187244
PMID: 21768281  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

