
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e21480. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021480. Epub 2011 Jul 22.

Nanovesicles from Malassezia sympodialis and host exosomes induce cytokine
responses--novel mechanisms for host-microbe interactions in atopic eczema.

Gehrmann U(1), Qazi KR, Johansson C, Hultenby K, Karlsson M, Lundeberg L,
Gabrielsson S, Scheynius A.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Allergy Research Unit, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. ulf.gehrmann@ki.se

BACKGROUND: Intercellular communication can occur via the release of membrane
vesicles. Exosomes are nanovesicles released from the endosomal compartment of
cells. Depending on their cell of origin and their cargo they can exert different
immunoregulatory functions. Recently, fungi were found to produce extracellular
vesicles that can influence host-microbe interactions. The yeast Malassezia
sympodialis which belongs to our normal cutaneous microbial flora elicits
specific IgE- and T-cell reactivity in approximately 50% of adult patients with
atopic eczema (AE). Whether exosomes or other vesicles contribute to the
inflammation has not yet been investigated.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate if M. sympodialis can release nanovesicles and whether 
they or endogenous exosomes can activate PBMC from AE patients sensitized to M.
sympodialis.
METHODS: Extracellular nanovesicles isolated from M. sympodialis, co-cultures of 
M. sympodialis and dendritic cells, and from plasma of patients with AE and
healthy controls (HC) were characterised using flow cytometry, sucrose gradient
centrifugation, Western blot and electron microscopy. Their ability to stimulate 
IL-4 and TNF-alpha responses in autologous CD14, CD34 depleted PBMC was
determined using ELISPOT and ELISA, respectively.
RESULTS: We show for the first time that M. sympodialis releases extracellular
vesicles carrying allergen. These vesicles can induce IL-4 and TNF-α responses
with a significantly higher IL-4 production in patients compared to HC. Exosomes 
from dendritic cell and M. sympodialis co-cultures induced IL-4 and TNF-α
responses in autologous CD14, CD34 depleted PBMC of AE patients and HC while
plasma exosomes induced TNF-α but not IL-4 in undepleted PBMC.
CONCLUSIONS: Extracellular vesicles from M. sympodialis, dendritic cells and
plasma can contribute to cytokine responses in CD14, CD34 depleted and undepleted
PBMC of AE patients and HC. These novel observations have implications for
understanding host-microbe interactions in the pathogenesis of AE.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021480 
PMCID: PMC3142114
PMID: 21799736  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

