
1. Front Microbiol. 2011 Jul 13;2:149. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2011.00149. eCollection
2011.

Altered gut microbiota and endocannabinoid system tone in obese and diabetic
leptin-resistant mice: impact on apelin regulation in adipose tissue.

Geurts L(1), Lazarevic V, Derrien M, Everard A, Van Roye M, Knauf C, Valet P,
Girard M, Muccioli GG, François P, de Vos WM, Schrenzel J, Delzenne NM, Cani PD.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolism and Nutrition Research Group, Louvain Drug Research Institute,
Université Catholique de Louvain Brussels, Belgium.

Growing evidence supports the role of gut microbiota in the development of
obesity, type 2 diabetes, and low-grade inflammation. The endocrine activity of
adipose tissue has been found to contribute to the regulation of glucose
homeostasis and low-grade inflammation. Among the key hormones produced by this
tissue, apelin has been shown to regulate glucose homeostasis. Recently, it has
been proposed that gut microbiota participate in adipose tissue metabolism via
the endocannabinoid system (eCB) and gut microbiota-derived compounds, namely
lipopolysaccharide (LPS). We have investigated gut microbiota composition in
obese and diabetic leptin-resistant mice (db/db) by combining pyrosequencing and 
phylogenetic microarray analysis of 16S ribosomal RNA gene sequences. We observed
a significant higher abundance of Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, and Fibrobacteres
phyla in db/db mice compared to lean mice. The abundance of 10 genera was
significantly affected by the genotype. We identified the roles of the eCB and
LPS in the regulation of apelinergic system tone (apelin and APJ mRNA expression)
in genetic obese and diabetic mice. By using in vivo and in vitro models, we have
demonstrated that both the eCB and low-grade inflammation differentially regulate
apelin and APJ mRNA expression in adipose tissue. Finally, deep-gut microbiota
profiling revealed that the gut microbial community of type 2 diabetic mice is
significantly different from that of their lean counterparts. This indicates
specific relationships between the gut microbiota and the regulation of the
apelinergic system. However, the exact roles of specific bacteria in shaping the 
phenotype of db/db mice remain to be determined.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2011.00149 
PMCID: PMC3139240
PMID: 21808634 

