
1. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Nov 1;20(21):4175-86. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr344. Epub 2011 Aug 
10.

Repetitive disruptions of the nuclear envelope invoke temporary loss of cellular 
compartmentalization in laminopathies.

De Vos WH(1), Houben F, Kamps M, Malhas A, Verheyen F, Cox J, Manders EM,
Verstraeten VL, van Steensel MA, Marcelis CL, van den Wijngaard A, Vaux DJ,
Ramaekers FC, Broers JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, CARIM-School for Cardiovascular
Diseases, Maastricht University Medical Center, PO Box 616, NL-6200 MD
Maastricht, The Netherlands.

The nuclear lamina provides structural support to the nucleus and has a central
role in nuclear organization and gene regulation. Defects in its constituents,
the lamins, lead to a class of genetic diseases collectively referred to as
laminopathies. Using live cell imaging, we observed the occurrence of
intermittent, non-lethal ruptures of the nuclear envelope in dermal fibroblast
cultures of patients with different mutations of lamin A/C. These ruptures, which
were absent in normal fibroblasts, could be mimicked by selective knockdown as
well as knockout of LMNA and were accompanied by the loss of cellular
compartmentalization. This was demonstrated by the influx of cytoplasmic
transcription factor RelA and regulatory protein Cyclin B1 into the nucleus, and 
efflux of nuclear transcription factor OCT1 and nuclear structures containing the
promyelocytic leukemia (PML) tumour suppressor protein to the cytoplasm. While
recovery of enhanced yellow fluorescent protein-tagged nuclear localization
signal in the nucleus demonstrated restoration of nuclear membrane integrity,
part of the mobile PML structures became permanently translocated to the
cytoplasm. These satellite PML structures were devoid of the typical PML body
components, such as DAXX, SP100 or SUMO1. Our data suggest that nuclear rupture
and loss of compartmentalization may add to cellular dysfunction and disease
development in various laminopathies.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddr344 
PMID: 21831885  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

