
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e22880. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022880. Epub 2011 Aug 11.

Single molecule analysis of c-myb alternative splicing reveals novel classifiers 
for precursor B-ALL.

Zhou YE(1), O'Rourke JP, Edwards JS, Ness SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of New Mexico
Health Sciences Center, Albuquerque, New Mexico, United States of America.

The c-Myb transcription factor, a key regulator of proliferation and
differentiation in hematopoietic and other cell types, has an N-terminal DNA
binding domain and a large C-terminal domain responsible for transcriptional
activation, negative regulation and determining target gene specificity.
Overexpression and rearrangement of the c-myb gene (MYB) has been reported in
some patients with leukemias and other types of cancers, implicating activated
alleles of c-myb in the development of human tumors. Alternative RNA splicing can
produce variants of c-myb with qualitatively distinct transcriptional activities 
that may be involved in transformation and leukemogenesis. Here, by performing a 
detailed, single molecule assay we found that c-myb alternative RNA splicing was 
elevated and much more complex in leukemia samples than in cell lines or CD34+
hematopoietic progenitor cells from normal donors. The results revealed that
leukemia samples express more than 60 different c-myb splice variants, most of
which have multiple alternative splicing events and were not detectable by
conventional microarray or PCR approaches. For example, the single molecule assay
detected 21 and 22 splice variants containing the 9B and 9S exons, respectively, 
most of which encoded unexpected variant forms of c-Myb protein. Furthermore, the
detailed analysis identified some splice variants whose expression correlated
with poor survival in a small cohort of precursor B-ALL samples. Our findings
indicate that single molecule assays can reveal complexities in c-myb alternative
splicing that have potential as novel biomarkers and could help explain the role 
of c-Myb variants in the development of human leukemia.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022880 
PMCID: PMC3154906
PMID: 21853052  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

