
1. Adv Otorhinolaryngol. 2011;72:31-6. doi: 10.1159/000324591. Epub 2011 Aug 18.

Craniofacial mucosal immune system: importance of its unique organogenesis and
function in the development of a mucosal vaccine.

Okada K(1), Yamasoba T, Kiyono H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Mucosal Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Institute of Medical Science, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan.

Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues (MALT) play a critical role as inductive sites
for the initiation of antigen-specific protective immunity against pathogens
penetrating the mucus membranes. Nasopharynx-associated lymphoid tissue (NALT),
situated at the bottom of the rodent nasal cavity, is thought to be an important 
site for the induction of antigen-specific immune response to inhaled antigens.
In addition, we have recently shown that tear duct-associated lymphoid tissue
(TALT), present in the murine tear duct bridging the ocular and nasal cavities,
is involved in the induction and regulation of both nasal and ocular immunity.
Interestingly, cellular requirements for the organogenesis of NALT and TALT are
quite different from those of other MALT (e.g. Peyer's patches; PPs) and
peripheral lymphoid tissues. Moreover, mucosal imprinting molecules of NALT and
TALT inducer cells are totally independent of currently known chemokines and
adhesion molecules in PPs and lymph nodes, such as the CXCR5-CXCL13, α4β1
integrin-vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM1), and CCR9-CCL25 axes. NALT and
TALT lymphocytes are also independent of these tissue-specific migration
molecules. Together with already-characterized conjunctiva-associated lymphoid
tissue (CALT ), which has been demonstrated to play a critical role in ocular
defense, the MALT associated with the head region seems to be coordinately
organizing the unique craniofacial mucosal immune system of the ocular, nasal,
oral-pharynx mucus membranes. Clarification of the immunological network of this 
unique craniofacial immune system will facilitate the development of a safe and
effective mucosal vaccine against respiratory and ocular infections.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000324591 
PMID: 21865684  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

