
1. Malar J. 2011 Aug 31;10:254. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-254.

Efficacy of long-lasting insecticidal nets in use in Macha, Zambia, against the
local Anopheles arabiensis population.

Norris LC(1), Norris DE.

Author information: 
(1)W, Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns 
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 615 N, Wolfe St, Baltimore, MD 21218, 
USA. lnorris@jhsph.edu

BACKGROUND: The mosquito Anopheles arabiensis is the primary vector of Plasmodium
falciparum in Macha, Zambia. A major portion of Zambia's current malaria control 
programme relies on long-lasting insecticide-treated nets (LLINs) and indoor
residual spraying (IRS) with insecticides. Currently, the efficacy of these
measures against An. arabiensis in Macha is unknown, and previous data has shown 
that An. arabiensis has continued to feed on human hosts, despite high ITN
coverage. It is possible that this could be due to either decreased efficacy of
ITNs in used in Macha, or pyrethroid resistance in the vector.
METHODS: F1 offspring of field-collected adult An. arabiensis were tested for
insecticide resistance, using CDC bottle bioassays and deltamethrin ITN
susceptibility assays. The mosquitoes were characterized for the knock-down
resistance (kdr) allele by PCR. LLINs that had been in use for two years in
nearby villages were collected and tested for residual deltamethrin concentration
and net quality, and were used in bioassays against susceptible colonized
Anopheles gambiae s.s. Keele. Additionally, a survey on ITN use and care was
conducted among LLIN owners.
RESULTS: In the F1 An. arabiensis field population, low levels of resistance to
DDT and deltamethrin-treated net material were detected by bioassay, although the
knock-down resistance (kdr) allele not present in the population. ITN evaluations
revealed high variability in residual deltamethrin concentration, quality of the 
nets, and mosquito mortality in bioassays. Mortality against An. gambiae s.s. in 
bioassays was correlated with residual deltamethrin concentration, which was
dependent upon the number of washes each net had received.
CONCLUSIONS: Proper LLIN care was a strong determinant of LLIN efficacy,
indicating that education on the importance of LLIN use and care is key when
distributing nets. As there is little insecticide resistance in the local vector 
population, degradation of LLINs most likely allowed for continued human feeding 
by An. arabiensis. Continued monitoring and assessment of both the vector
population and the efficacy of LLINs in use is necessary in order to
appropriately modify vector control operations and prevent the development of
pyrethroid resistance.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-254 
PMCID: PMC3175477
PMID: 21880143  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

