
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23927. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023927. Epub 2011 Aug 22.

Tailored ß-cyclodextrin blocks the translocation pores of binary exotoxins from
C. botulinum and C. perfringens and protects cells from intoxication.

Nestorovich EM(1), Karginov VA, Popoff MR, Bezrukov SM, Barth H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, The Catholic University of America, Washington, DC,
United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin and Clostridium perfringens iota toxin
are binary exotoxins, which ADP-ribosylate actin in the cytosol of mammalian
cells and thereby destroy the cytoskeleton. C2 and iota toxin consists of two
individual proteins, an enzymatic active (A-) component and a separate receptor
binding and translocation (B-) component. The latter forms a complex with the
A-component on the surface of target cells and after receptor-mediated
endocytosis, it mediates the translocation of the A-component from acidified
endosomal vesicles into the cytosol. To this end, the B-components form
heptameric pores in endosomal membranes, which serve as translocation channels
for the A-components.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we demonstrate that a 7-fold symmetrical
positively charged ß-cyclodextrin derivative,
per-6-S-(3-aminomethyl)benzylthio-ß-cyclodextrin, protects cultured cells from
intoxication with C2 and iota toxins in a concentration-dependent manner starting
at low micromolar concentrations. We discovered that the compound inhibited the
pH-dependent membrane translocation of the A-components of both toxins in intact 
cells. Consistently, the compound strongly blocked transmembrane channels formed 
by the B-components of C2 and iota toxin in planar lipid bilayers in vitro. With 
C2 toxin, we consecutively ruled out all other possible inhibitory mechanisms
showing that the compound did not interfere with the binding of the toxin to the 
cells or with the enzyme activity of the A-component.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The described ß-cyclodextrin derivative was previously 
identified as one of the most potent inhibitors of the binary lethal toxin of
Bacillus anthracis both in vitro and in vivo, implying that it might represent a 
broad-spectrum inhibitor of binary pore-forming exotoxins from pathogenic
bacteria.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023927 
PMCID: PMC3161792
PMID: 21887348  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

