
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Sep 6;108(36):14944-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1100959108. Epub 2011 Sep 6.

Carcinogenic bacterial pathogen Helicobacter pylori triggers DNA double-strand
breaks and a DNA damage response in its host cells.

Toller IM(1), Neelsen KJ, Steger M, Hartung ML, Hottiger MO, Stucki M, Kalali B, 
Gerhard M, Sartori AA, Lopes M, Müller A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Cancer Research, University of Zürich, 8057 Zürich,
Switzerland.

The bacterial pathogen Helicobacter pylori chronically infects the human gastric 
mucosa and is the leading risk factor for the development of gastric cancer. The 
molecular mechanisms of H. pylori-associated gastric carcinogenesis remain ill
defined. In this study, we examined the possibility that H. pylori directly
compromises the genomic integrity of its host cells. We provide evidence that the
infection introduces DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) in primary and transformed
murine and human epithelial and mesenchymal cells. The induction of DSBs depends 
on the direct contact of live bacteria with mammalian cells. The
infection-associated DNA damage is evident upon separation of nuclear DNA by
pulse field gel electrophoresis and by high-magnification microscopy of metaphase
chromosomes. Bacterial adhesion (e.g., via blood group antigen-binding adhesin)
is required to induce DSBs; in contrast, the H. pylori virulence factors
vacuolating cytotoxin A, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase, and the cytotoxin-associated 
gene (Cag) pathogenicity island are dispensable for DSB induction. The DNA
discontinuities trigger a damage-signaling and repair response involving the
sequential ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM)-dependent recruitment of repair
factors--p53-binding protein (53BP1) and mediator of DNA damage checkpoint
protein 1 (MDC1)--and histone H2A variant X (H2AX) phosphorylation. Although most
breaks are repaired efficiently upon termination of the infection, we observe
that prolonged active infection leads to saturation of cellular repair
capabilities. In summary, we conclude that DNA damage followed by potentially
imprecise repair is consistent with the carcinogenic properties of H. pylori and 
with its mutagenic properties in vitro and in vivo and may contribute to the
genetic instability and frequent chromosomal aberrations that are a hallmark of
gastric cancer.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1100959108 
PMCID: PMC3169107
PMID: 21896770  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

