
1. Microb Cell Fact. 2011 Sep 14;10:72. doi: 10.1186/1475-2859-10-72.

Optimisation of surface expression using the AIDA autotransporter.

Gustavsson M(1), Bäcklund E, Larsson G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bioprocess Technology, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm,
Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Bacterial surface display is of interest in many applications,
including live vaccine development, screening of protein libraries and the
development of whole cell biocatalysts. The goal of this work was to understand
which parameters result in production of large quantities of cells that at the
same time express desired levels of the chosen protein on the cell surface. For
this purpose, staphylococcal protein Z was expressed using the AIDA
autotransporter in Escherichia coli.
RESULTS: The use of an OmpT-negative E. coli mutant resulted in successful
expression of the protein on the surface, while a clear degradation pattern was
found in the wild type. The expression in the mutant resulted also in a more
narrow distribution of the surface-anchored protein within the population. Medium
optimisation showed that minimal medium with glucose gave more than four times as
high expression as LB-medium. Glucose limited fed-batch was used to increase the 
cell productivity and the highest protein levels were found at the highest feed
rates. A maintained high surface expression up to cell dry weights of 18 g l-1
could also be achieved by repeated glucose additions in batch cultivation where
production was eventually reduced by low oxygen levels. In spite of this, the
distribution in the bacterial population of the surface protein was narrower
using the batch technique.
CONCLUSIONS: A number of parameters in recombinant protein production were seen
to influence the surface expression of the model protein with respect both to the
productivity and to the display on the individual cell. The choice of medium and 
the cell design to remove proteolytic cleavage were however the most important.
Both fed-batch and batch processing can be successfully used, but prolonged batch
processing is probably only possible if the chosen strain has a low acetic acid
production.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2859-10-72 
PMCID: PMC3192670
PMID: 21917130  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

