
1. J Immunol. 2011 Oct 15;187(8):4300-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1004179. Epub 2011
Sep 14.

Constitutive and inflammation-dependent antimicrobial peptides produced by
epithelium are differentially processed and inactivated by the commensal
Finegoldia magna and the pathogen Streptococcus pyogenes.

Frick IM(1), Nordin SL, Baumgarten M, Mörgelin M, Sørensen OE, Olin AI, Egesten
A.

Author information: 
(1)Section for Infection Medicine, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund
University, Skåne University Hospital, SE-221 85 Lund, Sweden.

Epithelial linings serve as physical barriers and produce antimicrobial peptides 
(AMPs) to maintain host integrity. Examples are the bactericidal proteins midkine
(MK) and BRAK/CXCL14 that are constitutively produced in the skin epidermal
layer, where the anaerobic Gram-positive coccoid commensal Finegoldia magna
resides. Consequently, this bacterium is likely to encounter both MK and
BRAK/CXCL14, making these molecules possible threats to its habitat. In this
study, we show that MK expression is upregulated during inflammation, concomitant
with a strong downregulation of BRAK/CXCL14, resulting in changed antibacterial
conditions. MK, BRAK/CXCL14, and the inflammation-dependent antimicrobial
β-defensins human β-defensin (hBD)-2 and hBD-3 all showed bactericidal activity
against both F. magna and the virulent pathogen Streptococcus pyogenes at similar
concentrations. SufA, a released protease of F. magna, degraded MK and
BRAK/CXCL14 but not hBD-2 nor hBD-3. Cleavage was seen at lysine and arginine
residues, amino acids characteristic of AMPs. Intermediate SufA-degraded
fragments of MK and BRAK/CXCL14 showed stronger bactericidal activity against S. 
pyogenes than F. magna, thus promoting survival of the latter. In contrast, the
cysteine-protease SpeB of S. pyogenes rapidly degraded all AMPs investigated. The
proteins FAF and SIC, released by F. magna and S. pyogenes, respectively,
neutralized the antibacterial activity of MK and BRAK/CXCL14, protein FAF being
the most efficient. Quantitation and colocalization by immunoelectron microscopy 
demonstrated significant levels and interactions of the molecules in in vivo and 
ex vivo samples. The findings reflect strategies used by a permanently residing
commensal and a virulent pathogen, the latter operating during the limited time
course of invasive disease.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1004179 
PMID: 21918193  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

