
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2012 Feb;36(2):463-74. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2011.08.014. Epub
2011 Sep 10.

Differential immune response of rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) at early
developmental stages (larvae and fry) against the bacterial pathogen Yersinia
ruckeri.

Chettri JK(1), Raida MK, Kania PW, Buchmann K.

Author information: 
(1)University of Copenhagen, Faculty of Life Sciences, Department of Veterinary
Disease Biology, Frederiksberg C, Denmark. jkc@life.ku.dk

Innate immune factors play a crucial role in survival of young fish especially
during early stages of life when adaptive immunity is not fully developed. In the
present study, we investigated the immune response of rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus
mykiss) larvae and fry at an early stage of development. We exposed 17 and 87°
days post hatch larvae and fry (152 and 1118 degree days post hatch; avg. wt. 70 
and 770 mg, respectively) to the bacterial pathogen, Yersinia ruckeri for 4h by
bath challenge. Samples were taken at 4, 24, 72 and 96 h post exposure for qPCR
and immunohistochemical analyses to elucidate the immune response mounted by
these young fish. Larvae showed no mortality although infected larvae at 48 h
post exposure showed hyperaemia in the mouth region and inflammation on the
dorsal side of the body. Gene expression studies showed an up-regulation of iNOS 
and IL-22 in infected larvae 24h post exposure but most of the investigated genes
did not show any difference between infected and uninfected larvae.
Immunohistochemical studies demonstrated a high expression of IgT molecules in
gills and CD8 positive cells in thymus of both infected and uninfected larvae.
Infection of rainbow trout fry with Y. ruckeri, in contrast, induced a cumulative
mortality of 74%. A high expression of cytokines (IL-1β, TNF-α, IL-22, IL-8 and
IL-10), acute phase proteins (SAA, hepcidin, transferrin and precerebellin),
complement factors (C3, C5 and factor B), antimicrobial peptide (cathelicidin-2) 
and iNOS was found in infected fry when compared to the uninfected control. IgT
molecules and mannose binding lectins in gills of both infected and uninfected
fry were detected by immunohistochemistry. The study indicated that early life
stages (yolk-sac larvae), merely up-regulate a few genes and suggests a limited
capacity of larvae to mount an immune response by gene regulation at the
transcriptional level. Based on the observed clearance of bacteria and lack of
mortality it could be speculated that larvae may be covered by protective shield 
of different immune factors providing protection against broad range of
pathogens. However, the increased susceptibility of older fry suggests that Y.
ruckeri may utilize some of the immune elements to enter the naive fish. The
up-regulation of iNOS and IL-22 in the infected larvae implicates an important
role of these molecules in immune response at early developmental stages. A dense
covering of surfaces of gill filaments by IgT antibody in the young fish suggest 
a role of this antibody as innate immune factor at early developmental stages.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2011.08.014 
PMID: 21945730  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

