
1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2007 Jan;14 Suppl 1:3-10. doi:
10.1065/espr2006.03.298. Epub 2006 Mar 28.

Biological Activity in a Heavily Organohalogen-Contaminated River Sediment (8
pp).

Lechner U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Ute Lechner Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-Wittenberg Institut für
Mikrobiologie Kurt-Mothes-Str. 3 06120 Halle Germany,  ,  ,  ,
ute.lechner@mikrobiologie.uni-halle.de.

BACKGROUND, AIMS AND SCOPE: Sediments of the Spittelwasser creek are highly
polluted with organic compounds and heavy metals due to the discharge of
untreated waste waters from the industrial region of Bitterfeld-Wolfen, Germany
over the course of more than one century. However, relatively few data have been 
published about the chloroorganic contamination of the sediment. This paper
reports on the content of different (chloro)organic compounds with special
emphasis on polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans (PCDD/F), and
chlorobenzenes. Existing concepts for the remediation of Spittelwasser sediment
include the investigation of natural attenuation processes, which largely depend 
on the presence of an intact microbial food web. In order to gain more insight in
terms of biological activity, we analyzed the capacity of sediment microflora to 
degrade organic matter by measuring the activities of extracellular hydrolytic
enzymes involved in the biogeochemical cycling of carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus
and sulfur. Furthermore, the detection of physiologically active bacteria in the 
sediment, particularly of those known for their capability to reductively
dehalogenate organochlorine compounds, illustrates the potential for intrinsic
bioremediation processes.
METHODS: PCDD/F and chlorobenzenes were analyzed by gas chromatography(GC)/mass
spectrometry and GC/flame ionization detection, respectively. The activities of
hydrolytic enzymes were determined from freshly sampled sediment layers using
4-methylumbelliferyl (MUF) or 7-amino-4-methylcoumarin-conjugated model compounds
and kinetic fluorescence measurements. Physiologically active bacteria from
different sediment layers were microscopically visualized by fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH). Specific bacteria were identified by 16S rRNA gene
amplification and sequencing.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: The PCDD/F congener profile was dominated by
dibenzofurans. In addition, the presence of specific tetra and pentachlorinated
dibenzofurans supported the assumption that extensive magnesium production was
one possible source for the high contamination. A range of other chloroorganic
compounds, including several isomers of chlorobenzenes, hexachlorocyclohexane and
1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis (p-chlorophenyl)ethane (DDT), was present in the
sediment. Activities of extracellular hydrolytic enzymes showed a strong decrease
in those sediment layers that were characterized by high contents of absorbable
organic halogen (AOX), indicating disturbed organic matter decay. Interestingly, 
an abnormal increase of cellulolytic enzyme activities below the
organochlorine-rich layers was observed, possibly caused by residual cellulose
from discharges of sulfite pulping wastes. FISH revealed physiologically active
bacteria in most sediment layers from the surface down to the depth of about 60
cm, including members of Desulfitobacterium (D.) and Sulfurospirillum. The
presence of D. dehalogenans was confirmed by its partial 16S rRNA gene sequence.
CONCLUSION: Results of chemical sediment analyses demonstrated high loads of
organochlorine compounds, particularly of PCDD/F. Several years after stopping
the waste water discharge to Spittelwasser creek, this sediment remains a main
source for pollution of the downstream river system by way of the ongoing
mobilization of sediment during high floods. As indicated by our enzyme activity 
measurements, the decomposition potential for organic matter is low in
organochlorine-rich sediment layers. In contrast, the comparably higher enzyme
activities in less organochlorine-polluted sediment layers as well as the
presence of physiologically active bacteria suggest a considerable potential for 
natural attenuation.
RECOMMENDATIONS AND PERSPECTIVE: . From our data we strongly recommend to explore
the degradative capacity of sediment microorganisms and the limits for in situ
activity towards specific sediment pollutants in more detail. This will give a
sound basis for the integration of bioremediation approaches into general
concepts to reduce the risk that permanently radiates from this highly
contaminated sediment.

DOI: 10.1065/espr2006.03.298 
PMID: 21959534 

