
1. Thromb Haemost. 2011 Dec;106(6):1139-48. doi: 10.1160/TH11-07-0504. Epub 2011 Oct
6.

Diabetes does not influence activation of coagulation, fibrinolysis or
anticoagulant pathways in Gram-negative sepsis (melioidosis).

Koh GC(1), Meijers JC, Maude RR, Limmathurotsakul D, Day NP, Peacock SJ, van der 
Poll T, Wiersinga WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Department of Infectious
Diseases, Tropical Medicine & AIDS, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. gavin.koh@gmail.com

Diabetes is associated with a disturbance of the haemostatic balance and is an
important risk factor for sepsis, but the influence of diabetes on the
pathogenesis of sepsis remains unclear. Melioidosis ( Burkholderia pseudomallei
infection) is a common cause of community-acquired sepsis in Southeast Asia and
northern Australia. We sought to investigate the impact of pre-existing diabetes 
on the coagulation and fibrinolytic systems during sepsis caused by
B.pseudomallei . We recruited a cohort of 44 patients (34 with diabetes and 10
without diabetes) with culture-proven melioidosis. Diabetes was defined as a
pre-admission diagnosis of diabetes or an HbA₁c>7.8% at enrolment. Thirty healthy
blood donors and 52 otherwise healthy diabetes patients served as controls.
Citrated plasma was collected from all subjects; additionally in melioidosis
patients follow-up specimens were collected seven and ≥ 28 days after enrolment
where possible. Relative to uninfected healthy controls, diabetes per se (i.e. in
the absence of infection) was characterised by a procoagulant effect. Melioidosis
was associated with activation of coagulation (thrombin-antithrombin complexes
(TAT), prothrombin fragment F₁+₂ and fibrinogen concentrations were elevated; PT 
and PTT prolonged), suppression of anti-coagulation (antithrombin, protein C,
total and free protein S levels were depressed) and abnormalities of fibrinolysis
(D-dimer and plasmin-antiplasmin complex [PAP] were elevated). Remarkably, none
of these haemostatic alterations were influenced by pre-existing diabetes. In
conclusion, although diabetes is associated with multiple abnormalities of
coagulation, anticoagulation and fibrinolysis, these changes are not detectable
when superimposed on the background of larger abnormalities attributable to B.
pseudomallei sepsis.

DOI: 10.1160/TH11-07-0504 
PMID: 21979378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

