
1. Genome Biol. 2011 Oct 21;12(10):R106. doi: 10.1186/gb-2011-12-10-r106.

Adaptation of Rhizobium leguminosarum to pea, alfalfa and sugar beet rhizospheres
investigated by comparative transcriptomics.

Ramachandran VK(1), East AK, Karunakaran R, Downie JA, Poole PS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Reading, Reading, RG6 6AJ, UK.

BACKGROUND: The rhizosphere is the microbe-rich zone around plant roots and is a 
key determinant of the biosphere's productivity. Comparative transcriptomics was 
used to investigate general and plant-specific adaptations during rhizosphere
colonization. Rhizobium leguminosarum biovar viciae was grown in the rhizospheres
of pea (its legume nodulation host), alfalfa (a non-host legume) and sugar beet
(non-legume). Gene expression data were compared to metabolic and transportome
maps to understand adaptation to the rhizosphere.
RESULTS: Carbon metabolism was dominated by organic acids, with a strong bias
towards aromatic amino acids, C1 and C2 compounds. This was confirmed by
induction of the glyoxylate cycle required for C2 metabolism and gluconeogenesis 
in all rhizospheres. Gluconeogenesis is repressed in R. leguminosarum by sugars, 
suggesting that although numerous sugar and putative complex carbohydrate
transport systems are induced in the rhizosphere, they are less important carbon 
sources than organic acids. A common core of rhizosphere-induced genes was
identified, of which 66% are of unknown function. Many genes were induced in the 
rhizosphere of the legumes, but not sugar beet, and several were plant specific. 
The plasmid pRL8 can be considered pea rhizosphere specific, enabling adaptation 
of R. leguminosarum to its host. Mutation of many of the up-regulated genes
reduced competitiveness for pea rhizosphere colonization, while two genes
specifically up-regulated in the pea rhizosphere reduced colonization of the pea 
but not alfalfa rhizosphere.
CONCLUSIONS: Comparative transcriptome analysis has enabled differentiation
between factors conserved across plants for rhizosphere colonization as well as
identification of exquisite specific adaptation to host plants.

DOI: 10.1186/gb-2011-12-10-r106 
PMCID: PMC3333776
PMID: 22018401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

