
1. Infect Immun. 2012 Jan;80(1):31-42. doi: 10.1128/IAI.06069-11. Epub 2011 Oct 24.

Perinuclear localization of internalized outer membrane vesicles carrying active 
cytolethal distending toxin from Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans.

Rompikuntal PK(1), Thay B, Khan MK, Alanko J, Penttinen AM, Asikainen S, Wai SN, 
Oscarsson J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Umeå Centre for Microbial Research, Umeå
University, Umeå, Sweden.

Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans is implicated in aggressive forms of
periodontitis. Similarly to several other Gram-negative species, this organism
produces and excretes a cytolethal distending toxin (CDT), a genotoxin associated
with cell distention, G2 cell cycle arrest, and/or apoptosis in many mammalian
cell types. In this study, we have identified A. actinomycetemcomitans outer
membrane vesicles (OMVs) as a vehicle for simultaneous delivery of multiple
proteins, including CDT, into human cells. The OMV proteins were internalized in 
both HeLa cells and human gingival fibroblasts (HGF) via a mechanism of OMV
fusion with lipid rafts in the plasma membrane. The active toxin unit, CdtB, was 
localized inside the nucleus of the intoxicated cells, whereas OmpA and proteins 
detected using an antibody specific to whole A. actinomycetemcomitans serotype a 
cells had a perinuclear distribution. In accordance with a tight association of
CdtB with OMVs, vesicles isolated from A. actinomycetemcomitans strain D7SS
(serotype a), in contrast to OMVs from a D7SS cdtABC mutant, induced a cytolethal
distending effect on HeLa and HGF cells, indicating that OMV-associated CDT was
biologically active. Association of CDT with OMVs was also observed in A.
actinomycetemcomitans isolates belonging to serotypes b and c, indicating that
OMV-mediated release of CDT may be conserved in A. actinomycetemcomitans.
Although the role of A. actinomycetemcomitans OMVs in periodontal disease has not
yet been elucidated, our present data suggest that OMVs could deliver
biologically active CDT and additional virulence factors into susceptible cells
of the periodontium.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.06069-11 
PMCID: PMC3255663
PMID: 22025516  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

