
1. Immunol Cell Biol. 2012 Aug;90(7):699-709. doi: 10.1038/icb.2011.90. Epub 2011
Nov 1.

CD1d-independent activation of mouse and human iNKT cells by bacterial
superantigens.

Hayworth JL(1), Mazzuca DM, Maleki Vareki S, Welch I, McCormick JK, Haeryfar SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Schulich School of Medicine and
Dentistry, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.

Invariant NKT (iNKT) cells are infrequent but important immunomodulatory
lymphocytes that exhibit CD1d-restricted reactivity with glycolipid Ags. iNKT
cells express a unique T-cell receptor (TCR) composed of an invariant α-chain,
paired with a limited range of β-chains. Superantigens (SAgs) are microbial
toxins defined by their ability to activate conventional T cells in a TCR β-chain
variable domain (Vβ)-specific manner. However, whether iNKT cells are directly
activated by bacterial SAgs remains an open question. Herein, we explored the
responsiveness of mouse and human iNKT cells to a panel of staphylococcal and
streptococcal SAgs and examined the contribution of major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) class II and CD1d to these responses. Bacterial SAgs that target
mouse Vβ8, such as staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB), were able to activate
mouse hybridoma and primary hepatic iNKT cells in the presence of mouse APCs
expressing human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DR4. iNKT cell-mediated cytokine
secretion in SEB-challenged HLA-DR4-transgenic mice was CD1d-independent and
accompanied by a high interferon-γ:interleukin-4 ratio consistent with an in vivo
Th1 bias. Furthermore, iNKT cells from SEB-injected HLA-DR4-transgenic mice, and 
iNKT cells from SEB-treated human PBMCs, showed early activation by intracellular
cytokine staining and CD69 expression. Unlike iNKT cell stimulation by
α-galactosylceramide, stimulation by SEB did not induce TCR downregulation of
either mouse or human iNKT cells. We conclude that Vβ8-targeting bacterial SAgs
can activate iNKT cells by utilizing a novel pathway that requires MHC class II
interactions, but not CD1d. Therefore, iNKT cells fulfill important effector
functions in response to bacterial SAgs and may provide attractive targets in the
management of SAg-induced illnesses.

DOI: 10.1038/icb.2011.90 
PMID: 22041925  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

