
1. PLoS Biol. 2011 Nov;9(11):e1001189. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001189. Epub 2011 
Nov 1.

Unique interplay between sugar and lipid in determining the antigenic potency of 
bacterial antigens for NKT cells.

Girardi E(1), Yu ED, Li Y, Tarumoto N, Pei B, Wang J, Illarionov P, Kinjo Y,
Kronenberg M, Zajonc DM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, La Jolla Institute for Allergy & Immunology, La
Jolla, California, United States of America.

Invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells are an evolutionary conserved T cell
population characterized by features of both the innate and adaptive immune
response. Studies have shown that iNKT cells are required for protective
responses to Gram-positive pathogens such as Streptococcus pneumoniae, and that
these cells recognize bacterial diacylglycerol antigens presented by CD1d, a
non-classical antigen-presenting molecule. The combination of a lipid backbone
containing an unusual fatty acid, vaccenic acid, as well as a glucose sugar that 
is weaker or not stimulatory when linked to other lipids, is required for iNKT
cell stimulation by these antigens. Here we have carried out structural and
biophysical studies that illuminate the reasons for the stringent requirement for
this unique combination. The data indicate that vaccenic acid bound to the CD1d
groove orients the protruding glucose sugar for TCR recognition, and it allows
for an additional hydrogen bond of the glucose with CD1d when in complex with the
TCR. Furthermore, TCR binding causes an induced fit in both the sugar and CD1d,
and we have identified the CD1d amino acids important for iNKT TCR recognition
and the stability of the ternary complex. The studies show also how hydrogen
bonds formed by the glucose sugar can account for the distinct binding kinetics
of the TCR for this CD1d-glycolipid complex. Therefore, our studies illuminate
the mechanism of glycolipid recognition for antigens from important pathogens.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001189 
PMCID: PMC3206013
PMID: 22069376  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

