
1. ISME J. 2012 Apr;6(4):724-32. doi: 10.1038/ismej.2011.140. Epub 2011 Nov 10.

The energy-diversity relationship of complex bacterial communities in Arctic
deep-sea sediments.

Bienhold C(1), Boetius A, Ramette A.

Author information: 
(1)HGF-MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Alfred Wegener Institute
for Polar and Marine Research, Bremerhaven, Germany.

The availability of nutrients and energy is a main driver of biodiversity for
plant and animal communities in terrestrial and marine ecosystems, but we are
only beginning to understand whether and how energy-diversity relationships may
be extended to complex natural bacterial communities. Here, we analyzed the link 
between phytodetritus input, diversity and activity of bacterial communities of
the Siberian continental margin (37-3427 m water depth). Community structure and 
functions, such as enzymatic activity, oxygen consumption and carbon
remineralization rates, were highly related to each other, and with energy
availability. Bacterial richness substantially increased with increasing sediment
pigment content, suggesting a positive energy-diversity relationship in
oligotrophic regions. Richness leveled off, forming a plateau, when mesotrophic
sites were included, suggesting that bacterial communities and other benthic
fauna may be structured by similar mechanisms. Dominant bacterial taxa showed
strong positive or negative relationships with phytodetritus input and allowed us
to identify candidate bioindicator taxa. Contrasting responses of individual taxa
to changes in phytodetritus input also suggest varying ecological strategies
among bacterial groups along the energy gradient. Our results imply that
environmental changes affecting primary productivity and particle export from the
surface ocean will not only affect bacterial community structure but also
bacterial functions in Arctic deep-sea sediment, and that sediment bacterial
communities can record shifts in the whole ocean ecosystem functioning.

DOI: 10.1038/ismej.2011.140 
PMCID: PMC3309351
PMID: 22071347  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

