
1. BMC Syst Biol. 2011 Nov 10;5:189. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-5-189.

Genome-scale reconstruction and system level investigation of the metabolic
network of Methylobacterium extorquens AM1.

Peyraud R(1), Schneider K, Kiefer P, Massou S, Vorholt JA, Portais JC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, ETH Zürich, 8093 Zürich, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Methylotrophic microorganisms are playing a key role in
biogeochemical processes - especially the global carbon cycle - and have gained
interest for biotechnological purposes. Significant progress was made in the
recent years in the biochemistry, genetics, genomics, and physiology of
methylotrophic bacteria, showing that methylotrophy is much more widespread and
versatile than initially assumed. Despite such progress, system-level description
of the methylotrophic metabolism is currently lacking, and much remains to
understand regarding the network-scale organization and properties of
methylotrophy, and how the methylotrophic capacity emerges from this
organization, especially in facultative organisms.
RESULTS: In this work, we report on the integrated, system-level investigation of
the metabolic network of the facultative methylotroph Methylobacterium extorquens
AM1, a valuable model of methylotrophic bacteria. The genome-scale metabolic
network of the bacterium was reconstructed and contains 1139 reactions and 977
metabolites. The sub-network operating upon methylotrophic growth was identified 
from both in silico and experimental investigations, and 13C-fluxomics was
applied to measure the distribution of metabolic fluxes under such conditions.
The core metabolism has a highly unusual topology, in which the unique enzymes
that catalyse the key steps of C1 assimilation are tightly connected by several, 
large metabolic cycles (serine cycle, ethylmalonyl-CoA pathway, TCA cycle,
anaplerotic processes). The entire set of reactions must operate as a unique
process to achieve C1 assimilation, but was shown to be structurally fragile
based on network analysis. This observation suggests that in nature a strong
pressure of selection must exist to maintain the methylotrophic capability.
Nevertheless, substantial substrate cycling could be measured within C2/C3/C4
inter-conversions, indicating that the metabolic network is highly versatile
around a flexible backbone of central reactions that allows rapid switching to
multi-carbon sources.
CONCLUSIONS: This work emphasizes that the metabolism of M. extorquens AM1 is
adapted to its lifestyle not only in terms of enzymatic equipment, but also in
terms of network-level structure and regulation. It suggests that the metabolism 
of the bacterium has evolved both structurally and functionally to an efficient
but transitory utilization of methanol. Besides, this work provides a basis for
metabolic engineering to convert methanol into value-added products.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-0509-5-189 
PMCID: PMC3227643
PMID: 22074569  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

