
1. Biol Reprod. 2012 Mar 8;86(3):65. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.094243. Print 2012 
Mar.

Probiotics can induce follicle maturational competence: the Danio rerio case.

Gioacchini G(1), Giorgini E, Merrifield DL, Hardiman G, Borini A, Vaccari L,
Carnevali O.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze del Mare, Università Politecnica delle Marche, Ancona,
Italy.

In the present study, the effects of the probiotic Lactobacillus rhamnosus IMC
501 on the acquisition of oocyte maturational competence was examined in
zebrafish (Danio rerio). L. rhamnosus administration induced the responsiveness
of incompetent follicles (stage IIIa) to 17,20-dihydroxy-4-pregnen-3-one and
their in vitro maturation. Acquisition of competence by the stage IIIa follicles 
was further validated by changes of lhr, mprb, inhbaa (activin betaA1), tgfb1,
and gdf9 gene expression, which have recently emerged as key regulators of oocyte
acquisition of maturational competence, and pou5f1 gene expression, which in
other models has been shown to govern the establishment of developmental
competence of oocytes. In addition, a DNA microarray experiment was conducted
using the same follicles, and with relative gene ontology (GO) data analysis, the
molecular effects of probiotic administration emerged. Molecular analysis using
PCR-DGGE (denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis) approach, providing
information about only the most abundant bacterial members of the microbial
community, revealed that the probiotic was able to populate the gastrointestinal 
tract and modulate the microbial communities, causing a clear shift in them and
specifically enhancing the presence of the lactic acid bacteria Streptococcus
thermophilus. At the same time, PCR-DGGE analysis revealed that the probiotic was
not directly associated with the ovaries. Finally, the effects of probiotic
treatment on zebrafish follicle development were also analyzed by FPA (focal
plane array) Fourier transform-infrared (FT-IR) imaging, a technique that
provides the overall biochemical composition of samples. Changes were found above
all in stage IIIa follicles from probiotic-exposed females; the modifications,
observed in protein secondary structures as well as in hydration and in bands
related to phosphate moieties, allowed us to hypothesize that probiotics act at
this follicle stage, affecting the maturation phase.

DOI: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.094243 
PMCID: PMC3316265
PMID: 22088919  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

