
1. Med Pregl. 2011 Sep-Oct;64(9-10):497-502.

[Contemporary methods and mobile denture cleansers and theirs significance for
older population].

[Article in Serbian]

Strajnić L(1), Dokić M, Vucinić P.

Author information: 
(1)Medicinski fakultet, Novi Sad, Klinika za stomatologiju Vojvodine.
ljstrajnic@neobee.net

A dramatic increase in the number of people living in their seventies, eighties
and nineties is associated with a loss of teeth and the use of mobile dentures.
The aim of this paper was to highlight the consequences of poor denture hygiene
on oral and general health in vulnerable elderly people, in long-term
hospitalized elderly patients and in long-term institutionalized elderly in
nursing homes. DENTURE DEPOSITS AND CONSEQUENCES OF POOR DENTURE HYGIENE: The
number of bacteria living in the mouth is getting larger after putting denture
on. Namely, a small "space" develops between jaw and denture, creating perfect
conditions for bacterial growth. Denture becomes a "reservoir" of
micro-organisms. Denture deposits such as bacterial plaque, fungi, tartar and
remnants could be responsible for stomatitis prothetica, cheilitis angularis,
inflammatory fibrous hyperplasia, halitosis (bad breath), dental caries in mobile
denture carriers, mucositis and periimplantitis in mobile implant over-dentures
carriers, accelerated destruction of denture materials for underlying, such as
denture base soft liners, respiratory airways diseases, bacterial endocarditis
and gastrointestinal infections. REMOVAL OF DENTURE DEPOSITS: It is recommendable
to combine mechanical and chemical denture cleaning. Denture submersion into a
commercial cleansing solution for less than one hour is an effective cleaning
method. Commercial cleanser: specifically intended for dentures with metal parts 
should be used for those dentures. Commercial cleansers with a new component of
silicon polymer, whose thin layer surrounds all denture surfaces and disables
oral bacteria to agglomerate, are effective and useful. Preventive hygienic
treatments are very important in hospitals and homes for the aged, bearing in
mind that old and ill persons reside here. Those institutions are recommended to 
get equipped with ultrasound denture cleaners. IMPORTANCE OF WRITTEN BROCHURE ON 
PROPER DENTURE HYGIENE: Patients should be verbally instructed and showed about
cleaning techniques, but also written instructions inform of brochure should be
distributed in order to achieve better effects.

DOI: 10.2298/mpns1110497s 
PMID: 22097118  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

