
1. Transplant Proc. 2011 Nov;43(9):3171-5. doi: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2011.09.059.

Characterization and functional assessment of Clostridium histolyticum class I
(C1) collagenases and the synergistic degradation of native collagen in enzyme
mixtures containing class II (C2) collagenase.

Breite AG(1), McCarthy RC, Dwulet FE.

Author information: 
(1)VitaCyte LLC, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA. abreite@vitacyte.com

OBJECTIVES: Clostridium histolyticum expresses two classes of collagenases, C1
and C2. However, degradation of these enzymes by proteases during the
fermentation or purification process may lead to numerous molecular forms that
lead to inconsistent release of islets from human pancreata. This report defines 
the amino acid sequence of the truncated forms of C1 (C1b or C1c) that contain a 
single collagen-binding domain (CBD) and investigates the synergy between the
different forms of C1 collagenase and C2 to degrade native collagen.
METHODS: Highly purified collagenase isoforms were purified from C. histolyticum 
culture supernatants using established column chromatography techniques and
analyzed using high-pressure liquid chromatograph (HPLC), sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and mass spectrometry (MS).
The collagen-degrading activity (CDA) assay was used to investigate the synergy
between different collagenase molecular forms.
RESULTS: MS was used to confirm the sequence of full-length C2 and C1 from the
reported gene sequence. These results were correlated with the molecular weights 
observed on the SDS- PAGE and elution after analytical anion-exchange HPLC. HPLC 
peaks designated as C1b and C1c were both confirmed to be C1 lacking the terminal
CBD. The only difference being the cleavage site leading to a 12 amino acid
difference between the two forms. A non-additive synergy in CDA relative to
activity of individual collagenases was observed for C2 with each of the three C1
molecular forms. The C1 molecular forms did not display this synergy in the
absence of C2.
CONCLUSIONS: These observations support earlier reports that suggest the two
collagenases bind to different portions of the collagen and have different
specificities to cut native collagen. Although the implications of this are not
yet understood, they are fundamental in advancing the understanding of how
collagenases work together along with the neutral protease to breakdown the
extracellular matrix for islet isolation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2011.09.059 
PMID: 22099748  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

