
1. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2011 Oct;45(4):581-91.

[Genotyping of nosocomial methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus strains
isolated from clinical specimens by rep-PCR].

[Article in Turkish]

Güler I(1), Kılıç H, Atalay MA, Perçin D, Erçal BD.

Author information: 
(1)Erciyes University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Microbiology,
Kayseri, Turkey.

Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infections are associated with
increased cost, mortality and length of hospital stay compared with the other
infections. Therefore, controlling the spread of this pathogen by screening
patients, personnel and the environment remains as a high priority in infection
control programs. The aim of this study was to detect the clonal relationship
between nosocomial MRSA strains by using repetitive-sequence-based polymerase
chain reaction (rep-PCR) method which has several advantages owing to its speed
and ease of use. A total of 100 MRSA stock strains that had been isolated from
various clinical samples of hospitalized patients in Erciyes University Medical
Faculty Hospitals between September 2008-October 2009, were included in the
study. Methicillin resistance of the strains were determined by cefoxitin disc
diffusion test according to CLSI guidelines. Rep-PCR (Diversilab, bioMerieux,
France) method was performed in the following four steps in order to determine
genetic proximity of MRSA strains: (1) Manual DNA extraction (UltraClean
Microbial DNA Isolation Kit; MoBio Laboratories, USA), (2) Rep-PCR by using
fingerprinting kits in the thermocycler (Diversilab DNA Fingerprinting Kit), (3) 
Automated microfluidic electrophoresis by bioanalyzer (Diversilab DNA LabChip
kit), (4) Analysis and rapid evaluation with the use of web-based DiversiLab
software (version 2.1.66). Rep-PCR analysis have shown the presence of a total 11
clones, including 3 major clones [A (4 subtypes), B (2 subtypes) and C (2
subtypes)] and 8 unique clones (DK). Clone A was found to be the dominant type.
Seventy-eight percent of the 100 MRSA isolates belonged to clone A (63 were A1; 9
were A2; 4 were A3, 2 were A4), 11% belonged to clone B (10 were B1, 1 was B2),
3% belonged to clone C (2 were C1, 1 was C2), and one of each belonged to the
other clones (D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K). Clone A was isolated from 93.3% (14/15) of
the samples sent from internal diseases intensive care unit (ICU), from 66.6%
(10/15) of the samples sent from infectious diseases ward and 91% (10/11) of
hematology-oncology ward samples. All MRSA strains isolated from anesthesiology
and newborn ICU were of clone A. The isolation dates of these strains were in
proximity. In conclusion, MRSA strains showed clonal dissemination in our
hospital, clone A being the predominant one during the study period. Rep-PCR
which is a rapid and reliable method, can easily be applied for molecular
epidemiological purposes and aid to infection control measures.


PMID: 22090288  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

