
1. Infect Immun. 2012 Feb;80(2):529-38. doi: 10.1128/IAI.05947-11. Epub 2011 Nov 21.

Anthrax edema toxin impairs clearance in mice.

Sastalla I(1), Tang S, Crown D, Liu S, Eckhaus MA, Hewlett IK, Leppla SH, Moayeri
M.

Author information: 
(1)Bacterial Toxins and Therapeutics Section, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

The anthrax edema toxin (ET) of Bacillus anthracis is composed of the
receptor-binding component protective antigen (PA) and of the adenylyl cyclase
catalytic moiety, edema factor (EF). Uptake of ET into cells raises intracellular
concentrations of the secondary messenger cyclic AMP, thereby impairing or
activating host cell functions. We report here on a new consequence of ET action 
in vivo. We show that in mouse models of toxemia and infection, serum PA
concentrations were significantly higher in the presence of enzymatically active 
EF. These higher concentrations were not caused by ET-induced inhibition of PA
endocytosis; on the contrary, ET induced increased PA binding and uptake of the
PA oligomer in vitro and in vivo through upregulation of the PA receptors TEM8
and CMG2 in both myeloid and nonmyeloid cells. ET effects on protein clearance
from circulation appeared to be global and were not limited to PA. ET also
impaired the clearance of ovalbumin, green fluorescent protein, and EF itself, as
well as the small molecule biotin when these molecules were coinjected with the
toxin. Effects on injected protein levels were not a result of general increase
in protein concentrations due to fluid loss. Functional markers for liver and
kidney were altered in response to ET. Concomitantly, ET caused phosphorylation
and activation of the aquaporin-2 water channel present in the principal cells of
the collecting ducts of the kidneys that are responsible for fluid homeostasis.
Our data suggest that in vivo, ET alters circulatory protein and small molecule
pharmacokinetics by an as-yet-undefined mechanism, thereby potentially allowing a
prolonged circulation of anthrax virulence factors such as EF during infection.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.05947-11 
PMCID: PMC3264307
PMID: 22104108  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

