
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27972. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027972. Epub 2011 Nov 18.

Interactions between naïve and infected macrophages reduce Mycobacterium
tuberculosis viability.

Hartman ML(1), Kornfeld H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
Massachusetts, United States of America.

A high intracellular bacillary load of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in macrophages 
induces an atypical lysosomal cell death with early features of apoptosis that
progress to necrosis within hours. Unlike classical apoptosis, this cell death
mode does not appear to diminish M. tuberculosis viability. We previously
reported that culturing heavily infected macrophages with naïve macrophages
produced an antimicrobial effect, but only if naïve macrophages were added during
the pre-necrotic phase of M. tuberculosis-induced cell death. In the present
study we investigated the mechanism of antimicrobial activity in co-cultures,
anticipating that efferocytosis of bacilli in apoptotic bodies would be required.
Confocal microscopy revealed frustrated phagocytosis of M. tuberculosis-infected 
macrophages with no evidence that significant numbers of bacilli were transferred
to the naïve macrophages. The antimicrobial effect of naïve macrophages was
retained when they were separated from infected macrophages in transwells, and
conditioned co-culture supernatants transferred antimicrobial activity to
cultures of infected macrophages alone. Antimicrobial activity in macrophage
co-cultures was abrogated when the naïve population was deficient in IL-1
receptor or when the infected population was deficient in inducible nitric oxide 
synthase. The participation of nitric oxide suggested a conventional
antimicrobial mechanism requiring delivery of bacilli to a late endosomal
compartment. Using macrophages expressing GFP-LC3 we observed the induction of
autophagy specifically by a high intracellular load of M. tuberculosis. Bacilli
were identified in LC3-positive compartments and LC3-positive compartments were
confirmed to be acidified and LAMP1 positive. Thus, the antimicrobial effect of
naïve macrophages acting on M. tuberculosis in heavily-infected macrophages is
contact-independent. Interleukin-1 provides an afferent signal that induces an as
yet unidentified small molecule which promotes nitric oxide-dependent
antimicrobial activity against bacilli in autolysosomes of heavily infected
macrophages. This cooperative, innate antimicrobial interaction may limit the
maximal growth rate of M. tuberculosis prior to the expression of adaptive
immunity in pulmonary tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027972 
PMCID: PMC3220711
PMID: 22125644  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

