
1. J Immunol. 1990 Oct 15;145(8):2730-6.

Rapid nonlysosomal degradation of assembled HLA class II glycoproteins
incorporating a mutant DR alpha-chain.

Koppelman B(1), Cresswell P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC 27710.

Gamma irradiation followed by antibody and complement selection was used to
isolate a human B-lymphoblastoid cell line that no longer expresses HLA-DR
molecules on its cell surface. Cell surface expression in the mutant (HMy2.DRN)
was restored by transfecting a wildtype DRA but not a DRB cDNA, suggesting that a
structural mutation in the DRA mRNA or protein was responsible for the lack of
cell surface expression. Nucleotide sequence analysis of the DRA mRNA from
HMy2.DRN revealed a 75 nucleotide deletion corresponding to the start of the
alpha 2 domain and involving one of two cysteines that are involved in the
formation of an intrachain disulfide bond. At the biochemical level, only minute 
quantities of HLA-DR could be precipitated from this cell line after a 4-h
continuous label with 35S-methionine. HLA-DR beta and the class II-associated
invariant chain could be seen coprecipitating with the mutant DR alpha-chain,
suggesting a limited accumulation of normally assembled molecules. However, by
carrying out the labeling at 16 degrees C instead of 37 degrees C, equivalent
amounts of HLA-DR could be precipitated from parent and mutant alike. The mutant 
DR alpha chain was found in association with the beta-chain, but with reduced
association with the invariant chain under these conditions. Pulse chase analysis
in the parent and mutant cell lines indicated that this mutant DR alpha beta I
complex undergoes a process of degradation at 37 degrees C. Inhibitors of
intracellular transport such as monensin were ineffective in blocking this
process of degradation. This work is consistent with published reports
implicating the involvement of a pre-Golgi or an early Golgi compartment in the
proteolysis of aberrantly folded or assembled multisubunit proteins.


PMID: 2212658  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

