
1. Chembiochem. 2012 Jan 2;13(1):120-8. doi: 10.1002/cbic.201100637. Epub 2011 Nov
25.

Identification of late-stage glycosylation steps in the biosynthetic pathway of
the anthracycline nogalamycin.

Siitonen V(1), Claesson M, Patrikainen P, Aromaa M, Mäntsälä P, Schneider G,
Metsä-Ketelä M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Food Chemistry, University of Turku, Turku,
Finland.

Nogalamycin is an anthracycline antibiotic that has been shown to exhibit
significant cytotoxicity. Its biological activity requires two deoxysugar
moieties: nogalose and nogalamine, which are attached at C7 and C1, respectively,
of the aromatic polyketide aglycone. Curiously, the aminosugar nogalamine is also
connected through a C-C bond between C2 and C5''. Despite extensive molecular
genetic characterization of early biosynthetic steps, nogalamycin glycosylation
has not been investigated in detail. Here we show that expression of the majority
of the gene cluster in Streptomyces albus led to accumulation of three new
anthracyclines, which unexpectedly included nogalamycin derivatives in which
nogalamine was replaced either by rhodosamine with the C-C bond intact
(nogalamycin R) or by 2-deoxyfucose without the C-C bond (nogalamycin F). In
addition, a monoglycosylated
intermediate-3',4'-demethoxynogalose-1-hydroxynogalamycinone-was isolated.
Importantly, when the remaining biosynthetic genes were introduced into the
heterologous host by using a two-plasmid system, nogalamycin could be isolated
from the cultures, thus indicating that the whole gene cluster had been
identified. We further show that one of the three glycosyltransferases (GTs)
residing in the cluster-snogZ-appears to be redundant, whereas gene inactivation 
experiments revealed that snogE and snogD act as nogalose and nogalamine
transferases, respectively. The substrate specificity of the nogalamine
transferase SnogD was demonstrated in vitro: the enzyme was able to remove
2deoxyfucose from nogalamycin F. All of the new compounds were found to inhibit
human topoisomerase I in activity measurements, whereas only nogalamycin R showed
minor activity against topoisomerase II.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/cbic.201100637 
PMID: 22120896  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

