
1. Rhinology. 2011 Dec;49(5):554-61. doi: 10.4193/Rhino10.072.

Antimicrobial peptides in nasal secretion and mucosa with respect to
Staphylococcus aureus colonization in chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps.

Thienhaus ML(1), Wohlers J, Podschun R, Hedderich J, Ambrosch P, Laudien M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of Kiel, 
Kiel, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Nasal carriage of Staphylococcus aureus in patients with chronic
rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps (NP) is hypothesized to have pathophysiological 
impact on the disease. Antimicrobial peptides (AMP), especially human
beta-defensin-3 (hBD-3) and LL-37, are an important part of the multifactorial
defence against microorganisms in barrier organs like the nasal mucosa. The
interaction of S. aureus colonization and AMP in nasal secretions and mucosa of
NP were investigated in this study.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: AMP were quantified in nasal secretions of 13 normal
controls (NC) and 12 NP patients, each with and without S. aureus colonization,
by ELISA. Immunohistochemistry was used to investigate the cellular sources of
AMP in the nasal mucosa. To explore the AMP response of primary nasal epithelial 
cell cultures (NEC) towards S. aureus stimulation, a functional assay was
established.
RESULTS: AMP could be demonstrated in nasal secretions of all groups without
differences in hBD-3 concentrations comparing S. aureus carriers vs.
non-carriers. In NC, higher LL-37 concentrations were observed in S. aureus
colonized as compared to non-colonized patients. This effect was not detectable
in NP patients. Epithelial cells, submucosal glands and cells of the connective
tissue could be identified as sources of AMP by immunohistochemistry. An AMP
response of NEC towards S. aureus stimulation was detected in all groups.
CONCLUSION: In NP patients, LL-37 response towards S. aureus colonization is
disturbed while the ability of NEC to respond on S. aureus challenge is
preserved. This deregulation of the nasal barrier could be involved in the
multifactorial pathophysiology of NP.

DOI: 10.4193/Rhino10.072 
PMID: 22125786  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

