
1. Langmuir. 2012 Jan 31;28(4):2211-6. doi: 10.1021/la203834d. Epub 2011 Dec 8.

Deciphering the nanometer-scale organization and assembly of Lactobacillus
rhamnosus GG pili using atomic force microscopy.

Tripathi P(1), Dupres V, Beaussart A, Lebeer S, Claes IJ, Vanderleyden J, Dufrêne
YF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Condensed Matter and Nanosciences, Université Catholique de
Louvain, Croix du Sud 2/18, B-1348 Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.

In living cells, sophisticated functional interfaces are generated through the
self-assembly of bioactive building blocks. Prominent examples of such
biofunctional surfaces are bacterial nanostructures referred to as pili. Although
these proteinaceous filaments exhibit remarkable structure and functions, their
potential to design bioinspired self-assembled systems has been overlooked. Here,
we used atomic force microscopy (AFM) to explore the supramolecular organization 
and self-assembly of pili from the Gram-positive probiotic bacterium
Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG (LGG). High-resolution AFM imaging of cell
preparations adsorbed on mica revealed pili not only all around the cells, but
also in the form of remarkable star-like structures assembled on the mica
surface. Next, we showed that two-step centrifugation is a simple procedure to
separate large amounts of pili, even though through their synthesis they are
covalently anchored to the cell wall. We also found that the centrifuged pili
assemble as long bundles. We suggest that these bundles originate from a complex 
interplay of mechanical effects (centrifugal force) and biomolecular interactions
involving the SpaC cell adhesion pilin subunit (lectin-glycan bonds, hydrophobic 
bonds). Supporting this view, we found that pili isolated from an LGG mutant
lacking hydrophilic exopolysaccharides show an increased tendency to form tight
bundles. These experiments demonstrate that AFM is a powerful platform for
visualizing individual pili on bacterial surfaces and for unravelling their
two-dimensional assembly on solid surfaces. Our data suggest that bacterial pili 
may provide a generic approach in nanobiotechnology for elaborating functional
supramolecular interfaces assembled from bioactive building blocks.

© 2011 American Chemical Society

DOI: 10.1021/la203834d 
PMID: 22149133  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

