
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2012 Mar;82(1):106-15. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2011.11.016. Epub
2011 Dec 8.

Efficient and versatile one-step affinity purification of in vivo biotinylated
proteins: expression, characterization and structure analysis of recombinant
human glutamate carboxypeptidase II.

Tykvart J(1), Sácha P, Bařinka C, Knedlík T, Starková J, Lubkowski J, Konvalinka 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Gilead Sciences and IOCB Research Centre, Institute of Organic Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Flemingovo n. 2, Prague 
6, Czech Republic.

Affinity purification is a useful approach for purification of recombinant
proteins. Eukaryotic expression systems have become more frequently used at the
expense of prokaryotic systems since they afford recombinant eukaryotic proteins 
with post-translational modifications similar or identical to the native ones.
Here, we present a one-step affinity purification set-up suitable for the
purification of secreted proteins. The set-up is based on the interaction between
biotin and mutated streptavidin. Drosophila Schneider 2 cells are chosen as the
expression host, and a biotin acceptor peptide is used as an affinity tag. This
tag is biotinylated by Escherichia coli biotin-protein ligase in vivo. We
determined that localization of the ligase within the ER led to the most
effective in vivo biotinylation of the secreted proteins. We optimized a protocol
for large-scale expression and purification of AviTEV-tagged recombinant human
glutamate carboxypeptidase II (Avi-GCPII) with milligram yields per liter of
culture. We also determined the 3D structure of Avi-GCPII by X-ray
crystallography and compared the enzymatic characteristics of the protein to
those of its non-tagged variant. These experiments confirmed that AviTEV tag does
not affect the biophysical properties of its fused partner. Purification
approach, developed here, provides not only a sufficient amount of highly
homogenous protein but also specifically and effectively biotinylates a target
protein and thus enables its subsequent visualization or immobilization.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2011.11.016 
PMCID: PMC3443621
PMID: 22178733  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

