
1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Dec;7(12):e1002410. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002410. Epub
2011 Dec 8.

Deficiency of a Niemann-Pick, type C1-related protein in toxoplasma is associated
with multiple lipidoses and increased pathogenicity.

Lige B(1), Romano JD, Bandaru VV, Ehrenman K, Levitskaya J, Sampels V, Haughey
NJ, Coppens I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns Hopkins University 
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Several proteins that play key roles in cholesterol synthesis, regulation,
trafficking and signaling are united by sharing the phylogenetically conserved
'sterol-sensing domain' (SSD). The intracellular parasite Toxoplasma possesses at
least one gene coding for a protein containing the canonical SSD. We investigated
the role of this protein to provide information on lipid regulatory mechanisms in
the parasite. The protein sequence predicts an uncharacterized Niemann-Pick, type
C1-related protein (NPC1) with significant identity to human NPC1, and it
contains many residues implicated in human NPC disease. We named this
NPC1-related protein, TgNCR1. Mammalian NPC1 localizes to endo-lysosomes and
promotes the movement of sterols and sphingolipids across the membranes of these 
organelles. Miscoding patient mutations in NPC1 cause overloading of these lipids
in endo-lysosomes. TgNCR1, however, lacks endosomal targeting signals, and
localizes to flattened vesicles beneath the plasma membrane of Toxoplasma. When
expressed in mammalian NPC1 mutant cells and properly addressed to
endo-lysosomes, TgNCR1 restores cholesterol and GM1 clearance from these
organelles. To clarify the role of TgNCR1 in the parasite, we genetically
disrupted NCR1; mutant parasites were viable. Quantitative lipidomic analyses on 
the ΔNCR1 strain reveal normal cholesterol levels but an overaccumulation of
several species of cholesteryl esters, sphingomyelins and ceramides. ΔNCR1
parasites are also characterized by abundant storage lipid bodies and long
membranous tubules derived from their parasitophorous vacuoles. Interestingly,
these mutants can generate multiple daughters per single mother cell at high
frequencies, allowing fast replication in vitro, and they are slightly more
virulent in mice than the parental strain. These data suggest that the ΔNCR1
strain has lost the ability to control the intracellular levels of several
lipids, which subsequently results in the stimulation of lipid storage, membrane 
biosynthesis and parasite division. Based on these observations, we ascribe a
role for TgNCR1 in lipid homeostasis in Toxoplasma.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002410 
PMCID: PMC3234224
PMID: 22174676  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

