
1. J Vet Med Sci. 2012 May;74(5):597-605. Epub 2011 Dec 22.

Alteration in the apoptosis process of rat esophageal epithelium with
hyperproliferation of indigenous bacteria under a physiological condition.

Udayanga KG(1), Yamamoto K, Miyata H, Yokoo Y, Mantani Y, Takahara EI, Kawano J, 
Yokoyama T, Hoshi N, Kitagawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Histophysiology, Department of Bioresource Science, Graduate
School of Agricultural Science, Kobe University, Kobe, Hyogo 657-8501, Japan.

The apoptosis process in rat esophageal epithelium was investigated using
enzyme-immunohistochemistry and transmission electron microscopy. As a result,
Fas and Fas-L were expressed in the epithelial cell membrane and cytoplasm from
the stratum spinosum (SS) to the stratum granulosum (SG). No TNF-R1 show
immunopositivity in the cell membranes. TNF-α and caspase-8 were not observed in 
any layer. Caspase-10, cleaved caspase-3, XIAP and DNase-1 were found in the
epithelial cytoplasm from the SS to the SG, whereas Bid, Apaf-1 and cleaved
caspase-9 were detected only in the SG. Cytochrome c was observed as cytoplasmic 
granular positivity from the stratum basale (SB) and altered into homogeneous
immunopositivity in the SG. Bcl-2 and Bcl-X immunopositivity was detected in
cytoplasm from the SB to the SG. Immunoreactions of Bak in the cytoplasm and Bax 
beneath the cell membrane were observed from the upper portion of the SS with
increasing intensity toward the SG. In the sites with the hyperproliferation of
indigenous bacteria, TNF-R1, TNF-α and caspase-8 were detected in the SG and the 
immunopositive intensities of Bid, Apaf-1 and cleaved caspase-9 were altered to
be strong. Prominently swollen cells and decreased mitochondria were
ultrastructurally confirmed in the uppermost layers of stratum corneum. These
findings suggest that the Fas-Fas-L-interaction initially induces apoptosis
through a mitochondria-independent pathway and secondarily through a
mitochondria-dependent pathway, leading to eventual epithelial cell death in the 
rat esophageal epithelium. The bacterial stimuli probably enhance the
mitochondria-dependent pathway through the TNF-R1-TNF-α interaction.

DOI: 10.1292/jvms.11-0516 
PMID: 22188996  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

