
1. Neurochem Int. 2012 Feb;60(3):318-26. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2011.12.006. Epub
2011 Dec 17.

Generating recombinant C-terminal prion protein fragments of exact native
sequence.

Johanssen VA(1), Barnham KJ, Masters CL, Hill AF, Collins SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

Transmissibility and distinctive neuropathology are hallmark features of prion
diseases differentiating them from other neurodegenerative disorders, with
pathogenesis and transmission appearing closely linked to misfolded conformers
(PrP(Sc)) of the ubiquitously expressed cellular form of the prion protein
(PrP(C)). Given the apparent pathogenic primacy of misfolded PrP, the utilisation
of peptides based on the prion protein has formed an integral approach for
providing insights into misfolding pathways and pathogenic mechanisms. In
parallel with studies employing prion peptides, similar approaches in other
neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer Disease, have demonstrated that
differential processing of parent proteins and quite minor variations in the
primary sequence of cognate peptides generated from the same constitutive
processing (such as Aβ1-40 versus Aβ1-42 produced from γ-secretase activity) can 
be associated with very different pathogenic consequences. PrP(C) also undergoes 
constitutive α- or β-cleavage yielding C1 (residues 112-231 human sequence) or C2
(residues 90-231), respectively, with the full cell biological significance of
such processing unresolved; however, it is noteworthy that in prion diseases,
such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) and murine models, the moderately
extended C2 fragment predominates in the brain suggesting that the two cleavage
events and the consequent C-terminal fragments may differ in their pathogenic
significance. Accordingly, studies characterising biologically relevant peptides 
like C1 and C2, would be most valid if undertaken using peptides completely free 
of any inherent non-native sequence that arises as a by-product of commonly
employed recombinant production techniques. To achieve this aim and thereby
facilitate more representative biophysical and neurotoxicity studies, we adapted 
the combination of high fidelity Taq TA cloning with a SUMO-Hexa-His tag-type
approach, incorporating the SUMO protease step. This technique consistently
produced sufficient yields (∼10 mg/L) of high purity peptides (>95%) equating to 
C1 and C2 of exact native primary sequence in the α-helical conformation suitable
for biological and biophysical investigations.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuint.2011.12.006 
PMID: 22197912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

