
1. Cell Commun Signal. 2011 Dec 28;9:32. doi: 10.1186/1478-811X-9-32.

The signaling pathway of Campylobacter jejuni-induced Cdc42 activation: Role of
fibronectin, integrin beta1, tyrosine kinases and guanine exchange factor Vav2.

Krause-Gruszczynska M(1), Boehm M, Rohde M, Tegtmeyer N, Takahashi S, Buday L,
Oyarzabal OA, Backert S.

Author information: 
(1)From the School for Biomedical and Biomolecular Science, University College
Dublin, Belfield Campus, Dublin-4, Ireland. Steffen.Backert@ucd.ie.

BACKGROUND: Host cell invasion by the foodborne pathogen Campylobacter jejuni is 
considered as one of the primary reasons of gut tissue damage, however,
mechanisms and key factors involved in this process are widely unclear. It was
reported that small Rho GTPases, including Cdc42, are activated and play a role
during invasion, but the involved signaling cascades remained unknown. Here we
utilised knockout cell lines derived from fibronectin-/-, integrin-beta1-/-,
focal adhesion kinase (FAK)-/- and Src/Yes/Fyn-/- deficient mice, and wild-type
control cells, to investigate C. jejuni-induced mechanisms leading to Cdc42
activation and bacterial uptake.
RESULTS: Using high-resolution scanning electron microscopy, GTPase pulldowns,
G-Lisa and gentamicin protection assays we found that each studied host factor is
necessary for induction of Cdc42-GTP and efficient invasion. Interestingly,
filopodia formation and associated membrane dynamics linked to invasion were only
seen during infection of wild-type but not in knockout cells. Infection of cells 
stably expressing integrin-beta1 variants with well-known defects in fibronectin 
fibril formation or FAK signaling also exhibited severe deficiencies in Cdc42
activation and bacterial invasion. We further demonstrated that infection of
wild-type cells induces increasing amounts of phosphorylated FAK and growth
factor receptors (EGFR and PDGFR) during the course of infection, correlating
with accumulating Cdc42-GTP levels and C. jejuni invasion over time. In studies
using pharmacological inhibitors, silencing RNA (siRNA) and dominant-negative
expression constructs, EGFR, PDGFR and PI3-kinase appeared to represent other
crucial components upstream of Cdc42 and invasion. siRNA and the use of Vav1/2-/-
knockout cells further showed that the guanine exchange factor Vav2 is required
for Cdc42 activation and maximal bacterial invasion. Overexpression of certain
mutant constructs indicated that Vav2 is a linker molecule between Cdc42 and
activated EGFR/PDGFR/PI3-kinase. Using C. jejuni mutant strains we further
demonstrated that the fibronectin-binding protein CadF and intact flagella are
involved in Cdc42-GTP induction, indicating that the bacteria may directly target
the fibronectin/integrin complex for inducing signaling leading to its host cell 
entry.
CONCLUSION: Collectively, our findings led us propose that C. jejuni infection
triggers a novel fibronectin→integrin-beta1→FAK/Src→EGFR/PDGFR→PI3-kinase→Vav2
signaling cascade, which plays a crucial role for Cdc42 GTPase activity
associated with filopodia formation and enhances bacterial invasion.

DOI: 10.1186/1478-811X-9-32 
PMCID: PMC3286397
PMID: 22204307 

