
1. Proteins. 2012 Apr;80(4):1095-109. doi: 10.1002/prot.24010. Epub 2012 Jan 7.

Altered nuclear cofactor switching in retinoic-resistant variants of the PML-RARα
oncoprotein of acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Farris M(1), Lague A, Manuelyan Z, Statnekov J, Francklyn C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Vermont,
Health Sciences Complex, Burlington, Vermont 05405, USA.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) results from a reciprocal translocation that
fuses the gene for the PML tumor suppressor to that encoding the retinoic acid
receptor alpha (RARα). The resulting PML-RARα oncogene product interferes with
multiple regulatory pathways associated with myeloid differentiation, including
normal PML and RARα functions. The standard treatment for APL includes
anthracycline-based chemotherapeutic agents plus the RARα agonist all-trans
retinoic acid (ATRA). Relapse, which is often accompanied by ATRA resistance,
occurs in an appreciable frequency of treated patients. One potential mechanism
suggested by model experiments featuring the selection of ATRA-resistant APL cell
lines involves ATRA-resistant versions of the PML-RARα oncogene, where the
relevant mutations localize to the RARα ligand-binding domain (LBD). Such
mutations may act by compromising agonist binding, but other mechanisms are
possible. Here, we studied the molecular consequence of ATRA resistance by use of
circular dichroism, protease resistance, and fluorescence anisotropy assays
employing peptides derived from the NCOR nuclear corepressor and the ACTR nuclear
coactivator. The consequences of the mutations on global structure and cofactor
interaction functions were assessed quantitatively, providing insights into the
basis of agonist resistance. Attenuated cofactor switching and increased protease
resistance represent features of the LBDs of ATRA-resistant PML-RARα, and these
properties may be recapitulated in the full-length oncoproteins.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.24010 
PMCID: PMC3294029
PMID: 22228505  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

