
1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2012 Feb 16;53(2):757-61. doi: 10.1167/iovs.11-8467.

Variable expression of human Beta defensins 3 and 9 at the human ocular surface
in infectious keratitis.

Otri AM(1), Mohammed I, Al-Aqaba MA, Fares U, Peng C, Hopkinson A, Dua HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, The University of Nottingham,
Nottingham, United Kingdom.

PURPOSE: The authors have previously reported the presence of the antimicrobial
peptides human beta defensin (hBD) 3 and hBD9 on the ocular surface (OS). These
play an important role in infection and inflammation. In the present study, the
authors studied the gene expression levels of hBD3 and hBD9 in healthy subjects
and during and after healing of infectious keratitis.
METHODS: Human OS specimens were obtained by impression cytology from healthy
controls and patients with Acanthamoeba and Gram-negative and -positive bacterial
keratitis (BK), both during active infection and after healing. The gene
expression levels of hBD3 and hBD9 were determined using quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: hBD3 and hBD9 were constitutively expressed in all healthy controls.
During acute Acanthamoeba keratitis (AK), hBD3 levels were markedly increased and
then returned close to normal levels after healing. In BK, hBD3 gene expression
was moderately increased and then decreased after healing. In contrast to hBD3,
hBD9 was significantly downregulated in both AK and Gram-positive BK, whereas it 
showed an insignificant decrease in Gram-negative BK. After healing, the
expression showed upregulation except in Gram-positive BK, where it continued to 
decline.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study that demonstrates the gene expression of
hBD3 and hBD9 in response to infection. It illustrates that not all antimicrobial
peptides (AMPs) behave in a similar manner. Some are upregulated and some are
downregulated, suggesting a diverse role of AMP in infection and inflammation.
The results point to a role of AMP-mediated host defense in Acanthamoeba
keratitis as well.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.11-8467 
PMID: 22232436  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

