
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e29943. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029943. Epub 2012 Jan 11.

Evidence for a common toolbox based on necrotrophy in a fungal lineage spanning
necrotrophs, biotrophs, endophytes, host generalists and specialists.

Andrew M(1), Barua R, Short SM, Kohn LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Toronto,
Mississauga, Ontario, Canada.

The Sclerotiniaceae (Ascomycotina, Leotiomycetes) is a relatively recently
evolved lineage of necrotrophic host generalists, and necrotrophic or biotrophic 
host specialists, some latent or symptomless. We hypothesized that they inherited
a basic toolbox of genes for plant symbiosis from their common ancestor.
Maintenance and evolutionary diversification of symbiosis could require selection
on toolbox genes or on timing and magnitude of gene expression. The genes studied
were chosen because their products have been previously investigated as
pathogenicity factors in the Sclerotiniaceae. They encode proteins associated
with cell wall degradation: acid protease 1 (acp1), aspartyl protease (asps), and
polygalacturonases (pg1, pg3, pg5, pg6), and the oxalic acid (OA) pathway: a zinc
finger transcription factor (pac1), and oxaloacetate acetylhydrolase (oah),
catalyst in OA production, essential for full symptom production in Sclerotinia
sclerotiorum. Site-specific likelihood analyses provided evidence for purifying
selection in all 8 pathogenicity-related genes. Consistent with an evolutionary
arms race model, positive selection was detected in 5 of 8 genes. Only
generalists produced large, proliferating disease lesions on excised Arabidopsis 
thaliana leaves and oxalic acid by 72 hours in vitro. In planta expression of oah
was 10-300 times greater among the necrotrophic host generalists than
necrotrophic and biotrophic host specialists; pac1 was not differentially
expressed. Ability to amplify 6/8 pathogenicity related genes and produce oxalic 
acid in all genera are consistent with the common toolbox hypothesis for this
gene sample. That our data did not distinguish biotrophs from necrotrophs is
consistent with 1) a common toolbox based on necrotrophy and 2) the most
conservative interpretation of the 3-locus housekeeping gene phylogeny--a
baseline of necrotrophy from which forms of biotrophy emerged at least twice.
Early oah overexpression likely expands the host range of necrotrophic
generalists in the Sclerotiniaceae, while specialists and biotrophs deploy oah,
or other as-yet-unknown toolbox genes, differently.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029943 
PMCID: PMC3256194
PMID: 22253834  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

