
1. J Thromb Haemost. 2012 Apr;10(4):647-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1538-7836.2012.04640.x.

Human neutrophil alpha-defensins induce formation of fibrinogen and
thrombospondin-1 amyloid-like structures and activate platelets via glycoprotein 
IIb/IIIa.

Horn M(1), Bertling A, Brodde MF, Müller A, Roth J, Van Aken H, Jurk K, Heilmann 
C, Peters G, Kehrel BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care, Experimental and Clinical
Haemostasis, University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Human neutrophil α-defensins (HNPs) are important constituents of the
innate immune system. Beyond their antimicrobial properties, HNPs also have
pro-inflammatory features. While HNPs in plasma from healthy individuals are
barely detectable, their level is strongly elevated in septic plasma and plasma
from patients with acute coronary syndromes.
OBJECTIVES: As thrombosis and inflammation are intertwined processes and
activation of human polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNL) and subsequent
degranulation is associated with full activation of surrounding platelets, we
studied the effect of HNPs on platelet function.
METHODS: The effect of HNPs on platelet activation parameters and apoptosis was
investigated via aggregometry, flow cytometry, confocal microscopy and the ELISA 
technique.
RESULTS: It was found that HNPs activate platelets in pathophysiologically
relevant doses, inducing fibrinogen and thrombospondin-1 binding, aggregation,
granule secretion, sCD40L shedding, and procoagulant activity. HNPs bound
directly to the platelet membrane, induced membrane pore formation, microparticle
formation, mitochondrial membrane depolarization and caspase-3-activity. Confocal
microscopy revealed the HNP-induced formation of polymeric fibrinogen and
thrombospondin-1 amyloid-like structures, which bound microorganisms. Platelets
adhered to these structures and formed aggregates. Blocking of glycoprotein
IIb/IIIa (GPIIb/IIIa) markedly inhibited HNP-induced platelet activation. In
addition, heparin, heparinoid, serpins and α(2)-macroglobulin, which all bind to 
HNPs, blocked HNP-1-induced platelet activation in contrast to direct thrombin
inhibitors such as hirudin.
CONCLUSIONS: HNPs activate platelets and induce platelet apoptosis by formation
of amyloid-like proteins. As these structures entrapped bacteria and fungi, they 
might reflect an additional function of HNPs in host defense. The described
mechanism links again thrombosis and infection.

© 2012 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1538-7836.2012.04640.x 
PMID: 22268819  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

