
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e29810. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029810. Epub 2012 Jan 17.

HspB2/myotonic dystrophy protein kinase binding protein (MKBP) as a novel
molecular chaperone: structural and functional aspects.

Prabhu S(1), Raman B, Ramakrishna T, Rao ChM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research, Hyderabad, India.

The small heat shock protein, human HspB2, also known as Myotonic Dystrophy
Kinase Binding Protein (MKBP), specifically associates with and activates
Myotonic Dystrophy Protein Kinase (DMPK), a serine/threonine protein kinase that 
plays an important role in maintaining muscle structure and function. The
structure and function of HspB2 are not well understood. We have cloned and
expressed the protein in E.coli and purified it to homogeneity. Far-UV circular
dichroic spectrum of the recombinant HspB2 shows a β-sheet structure.
Fluorescence spectroscopic studies show that the sole tryptophan residue at the
130(th) position is almost completely solvent-exposed. Bis-ANS binding shows that
though HspB2 exhibits accessible hydrophobic surfaces, it is significantly less
than that exhibited by another well characterized small HSP, αB-crystallin.
Sedimentation velocity measurements show that the protein exhibits
concentration-dependent oligomerization. Fluorescence resonance energy transfer
study shows that HspB2 oligomers exchange subunits. Interestingly, HspB2 exhibits
target protein-dependent chaperone-like activity: it exhibits significant
chaperone-like activity towards dithiothreitol (DTT)-induced aggregation of
insulin and heat-induced aggregation of alcohol dehydrogenase, but only partially
prevents the heat-induced aggregation of citrate synthase, co-precipitating with 
the target protein. It also significantly prevents the ordered amyloid fibril
formation of α-synuclein. Thus, our study, for the first time, provides
biophysical characterization on the structural aspects of HspB2, and shows that
it exhibits target protein-dependent chaperone-like activity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029810 
PMCID: PMC3260166
PMID: 22272249  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

