
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e30079. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030079. Epub 2012 Jan 12.

Biapenem inactivation by B2 metallo β-lactamases: energy landscape of the
post-hydrolysis reactions.

Gatti DL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan, United States of America.
dgatti@med.wayne.edu

BACKGROUND: The first line of defense by bacteria against β-lactam antibiotics is
the expression of β-lactamases, which cleave the amide bond of the β-lactam ring.
In the reaction of biapenem inactivation by B2 metallo β-lactamases (MβLs), after
the β-lactam ring is opened, the carboxyl group generated by the hydrolytic
process and the hydroxyethyl group (common to all carbapenems) rotate around the 
C5-C6 bond, assuming a new position that allows a proton transfer from the
hydroxyethyl group to C2, and a nucleophilic attack on C3 by the oxygen atom of
the same side-chain. This process leads to the formation of a bicyclic compound, 
as originally observed in the X-ray structure of the metallo β-lactamase CphA in 
complex with product.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: QM/MM and metadynamics simulations of the
post-hydrolysis steps in solution and in the enzyme reveal that while the
rotation of the hydroxyethyl group can occur in solution or in the enzyme active 
site, formation of the bicyclic compound occurs primarily in solution, after
which the final product binds back to the enzyme. The calculations also suggest
that the rotation and cyclization steps can occur at a rate comparable to that
observed experimentally for the enzymatic inactivation of biapenem only if the
hydrolysis reaction leaves the N4 nitrogen of the β-lactam ring unprotonated.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The calculations support the existence of a common
mechanism (in which ionized N4 is the leaving group) for carbapenems hydrolysis
in all MβLs, and suggest a possible revision of mechanisms for B2 MβLs in which
the cleavage of the β-lactam ring is associated with or immediately followed by
protonation of N4. The study also indicates that the bicyclic derivative of
biapenem has significant affinity for B2 MβLs, and that it may be possible to
obtain clinically effective inhibitors of these enzymes by modification of this
lead compound.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030079 
PMCID: PMC3260057
PMID: 22272276  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

