
1. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2012 Mar;402(9):2713-25. doi: 10.1007/s00216-012-5737-9. Epub 
2012 Feb 12.

A method for correcting standard-based real-time PCR DNA quantitation when the
standard's polymerase reaction efficiency is significantly different from that of
the unknown's.

Irwin PL(1), Nguyen LH, Chen CY, Uhlich GA, Paoli GC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Characterization of Foodborne Pathogens, Eastern Regional Research
Center, Agricultural Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture,
Wyndmoor, PA 19038, USA. peter.irwin@ars.usda.gov

Standard-based real-time or quantitative polymerase chain reaction quantitation
of an unknown sample's DNA concentration (i.e., [DNA](unk)) assumes that the
concentration dependence of the standard and unknown reactions (related to
reaction efficiency, E) are equivalent. In our work with background food-borne
organisms which can interfere with pathogen detection, we have found that it is
generally possible to achieve an acceptable E (1 ± 0.05) for standard solutions
by optimizing the PCR conditions, template purity, primer sequence, and amplicon 
lengths. However, this is frequently not true for the solutions containing
unknown amounts of target DNA inasmuch as cell extracts are more chemically
complex than the standards which have been amplified (2(30)-fold) as well as
undergone a purification process. When significant differences in E occur, it is 
not possible to accurately estimate unknown target DNA concentration from the
standard solution's slope and intercept (from threshold cycle number, or C(T),
versus Log[DNA] data). What is needed is a standard-mediated intercept which can 
be specifically coupled with an unknown solution's PCR concentration dependence. 
In this work, we develop a simple mathematical procedure to generate a new
standard curve with a slope (∂C(T)/∂Log[Dilution](unk)) derived from at least
three dilutions of the unknown target DNA solution ([DNA](unk)) and an intercept 
calculated from the unknown's C(T)s, DNA concentrations interpolated from the
standard curve (i.e., the traditional estimate of [DNA](unk)), and
∂C(T)/∂Log[Dilution](unk). We were able to achieve this due to our discovery of
the predictable way in which the observed and ideal C(T) versus Log[DNA] slopes
and intercepts deviate from one another. This "correction" in the standard-based 
[DNA](unk) determination is typically 20-60% when the difference in the standard 
and unknown E is >0.1.

DOI: 10.1007/s00216-012-5737-9 
PMID: 22327964  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

