
1. Mutagenesis. 2012 Jul;27(4):453-62. doi: 10.1093/mutage/ges004. Epub 2012 Feb 15.

Identification of human and murine sulfotransferases able to activate
hydroxylated metabolites of methyleugenol to mutagens in Salmonella typhimurium
and detection of associated DNA adducts using UPLC-MS/MS methods.

Herrmann K(1), Engst W, Appel KE, Monien BH, Glatt H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Toxicology, German Institute of Human Nutrition
(DIfE) Potsdam-Rehbrücke, 14558 Potsdam-Rehbrücke, Nuthetal, Germany.

Methyleugenol, a secondary metabolite present in many herbal spices, is
carcinogenic in various tissues of mice and rats but negative in standard in
vitro mutagenicity tests. Several observations indicate that hydroxylation
followed by sulfation is an important activation pathway in the carcinogenicity
and DNA adduct formation by methyleugenol and other alkenylbenzenes in animal
models. However, sulfation is not taken into account in standard in vitro tests. 
Therefore, we have studied whether expression of murine or human
sulfotransferases (SULTs) in the target strain, Salmonella typhimurium TA100,
leads to the activation of hydroxylated metabolites of methyleugenol
[(+)-1'-hydroxymethyleugenol, (-)-1'-hydroxymethyleugenol and
(E)-3'-hydroxymethylisoeugenol]. Human SULT1A1 (a form expressed at high levels
in many tissues) and SULT1C2 (expressed primarily in foetal tissues) activated
all three compounds even at very low substrate concentrations. At higher
concentrations, activation was also observed with human SULT1A2 and SULT1E1.
Murine Sult1a1 required higher substrate concentrations than its human
orthologue. Other SULT forms (human 1A3, 1C1, 1C3, 2A1 and 2B1b as well as murine
1d1) did not activate any methyleugenol metabolites studied. Furthermore, we
developed isotope-dilution mass-spectrometric methods for the sensitive and
specific detection of DNA adducts formed by methyleugenol metabolites. All three 
hydroxylated metabolites formed the same DNA adducts in S. typhimurium
TA100-hSULT1A1: high levels of N
(2)-(trans-methylisoeugenol-3'-yl)-2'-deoxyguanosine and modest levels of N
(6)-(trans-methylisoeugenol-3'-yl)-2'-deoxyadenosine. Adduct levels correlated
with the mutagenic effects induced. No adducts were formed by the test compounds 
in the SULT-deficient standard strain TA100. In conclusion, several methyleugenol
metabolites are activated to DNA-reactive mutagens in S. typhimurium upon
incorporation of appropriate sulfation capacity. We have identified human and
murine SULT forms able to catalyse this activation. Methods were developed that
may be utilised to analyse DNA samples from human tissues specifically for the
possible presence of methyleugenol adducts.

DOI: 10.1093/mutage/ges004 
PMID: 22337896  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

