
1. Arch Oral Biol. 2012 Jul;57(7):964-72. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2012.01.014.
Epub 2012 Feb 19.

Infection of human gingival fibroblasts with Aggregatibacter
actinomycetemcomitans: An in vitro study.

Arirachakaran P(1), Apinhasmit W, Paungmalit P, Jeramethakul P, Rerkyen P,
Mahanonda R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Medicine, Faculty of Dentistry, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, Thailand. Pratanporn.A@chula.ac.th

OBJECTIVE: Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans is known to be a major cause of 
localized aggressive periodontitis. Previous research has suggested that A.
actinomycetemcomitans can damage many types of host cells. There is evidence for 
the ability of this organism to invade endothelial and epithelial cells, but
information pertaining to its potential for invading gingival fibroblasts is very
limited. Internalization of bacteria is not only responsible for damaging host
tissue but also a means to evade the host immune response. It was hypothesized
that A. actinomycetemcomitans can invade and reside in human gingival fibroblasts
(HGF).
METHODS: Primary cultures of HGF were infected with A. actinomycetemcomitans at a
ratio of 1:100. Bacterial internalization was determined by an antibiotic
protection assay. Bacterial-fibroblast interaction was examined using
phase-contrast, scanning and transmission electron microscopy.
RESULTS: It was demonstrated that A. actinomycetemcomitans was internalized into 
HGF at an efficiency of 0.084%. Transmission electron microscopic study showed
the presence of A. actinomycetemcomitans in the cytoplasm of HGF without the
surrounding membrane. Scanning electron micrographs revealed the sloughing of HGF
surfaces on which A. actinomycetemcomitans adhered. Rounded cells, attachment
loss and damaged cells were also observed.
CONCLUSIONS: It is concluded that the attachment and invasion of A.
actinomycetemcomitans into human gingival fibroblasts play a role in periodontal 
tissue damage and may also be a means of immune evasion.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2012.01.014 
PMID: 22348592  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

