
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31171. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031171. Epub 2012 Feb 8.

Dietary supplementation with probiotics improves hematopoiesis in malnourished
mice.

Salva S(1), Merino MC, Agüero G, Gruppi A, Alvarez S.

Author information: 
(1)Reference Centre for Lactobacilli, CERELA-CONICET, Tucuman, Argentina.

BACKGROUND: Lactobacillus rhamnosus CRL1505 (Lr) administered during the
repletion of immunocompromised-malnourished mice improves the resistance against 
intestinal and respiratory infections. This effect is associated with an increase
in the number and functionality of immune cells, indicating that Lr could have
some influence on myeloid and lymphoid cell production and maturation.
OBJECTIVE: This study analyzed the extent of the damage caused by malnutrition on
myeloid and lymphoid cell development in the spleen and bone marrow (BM). We also
evaluated the impact of immunobiotics on the recovery of hematopoiesis affected
in malnourished mice.
METHODS: Protein malnourished mice were fed on a balanced conventional diet for 7
or 14 consecutive d with or without supplemental Lr or fermented goat's milk
(FGM). Malnourished mice and well-nourished mice were used as controls.
Histological and flow cytometry studies were carried out in BM and spleen to
study myeloid and lymphoid cells.
RESULTS: Malnutrition induced quantitative alterations in spleen B and T cells;
however, no alteration was observed in the ability of splenic B cells to produce 
immunoglobulins after challenge with LPS or CpG. The analysis of BM B cell
subsets based on B220, CD24, IgM and IgD expression showed that malnutrition
affected B cell development. In addition, BM myeloid cells decreased in
malnourished mice. On the contrary, protein deprivation increased BM T cell
number. These alterations were reverted with Lr or FGM repletion treatments since
normal numbers of BM myeloid, T and B cells were observed in these groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Protein malnutrition significantly alters B cell development in BM. 
The treatment of malnourished mice with L. rhamnosus CRL1505 was able to induce a
recovery of B cells that would explain its ability to increase immunity against
infections. This work highlights the possibility of using immunobiotics to
accelerate the recovery of lymphopoyesis in immunocompromised-malnourished hosts.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031171 
PMCID: PMC3275617
PMID: 22347448  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

