
1. Trop Biomed. 2011 Dec;28(3):651-60.

Characterization and antimicrobial activities of two Streptomyces isolates from
soil in the periphery of Universiti Putra Malaysia.

Zin NZ(1), Tasrip NA, Desa MN, Kqueen CY, Zakaria ZA, Hamat RA, Shamsudin MN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.

This study was to assess the identification and antimicrobial activities of two
actinomycete isolates. The two isolates designated as B8 and C2, were isolated
from a patch of soil in the peripheral area of Universiti Putra Malaysia by
streaking on starch casein agar after standard serial dilution procedures. Their 
antimicrobial activities were first evaluated against eight clinical laboratory
strains namely Bacillus sp., Enterococcus sp., Escherichia coli, Klebsiella sp., 
Pseudomonas sp., Salmonella sp., Staphylococcus aureus, and Staphylococcus
epidermidis by perpendicular streak method on Mueller Hinton and Tryptic Soy
agar. In both media, a broad-spectrum antibacterial activity was observed for
both isolates, with B8 against all the test bacteria and C2 against five of them 
(Bacillus sp., E. coli, Pseudomonas sp., S. aureus and S. epidermidis).
Re-assessment against E. coli ATCC 25922 and S. aureus ATCC 25923 strains by
similar method showed antibacterial activities by isolate B8 against both ATTC
strains while C2 only against S. aureus ATCC 25923. Streptomyces griseus ATCC
10137 was included in the later experiment and showed antibacterial activity
against both ATCC strains. Subsequently, the two isolates were identified by
PCR/sequencing techniques and phylogenetic analysis to be Streptomyces species
(>93% homology based on 16S rRNA and rpoB genes). Characterization on cultural
characteristic and viable count at different temperatures (37ºC and 28ºC), on
different microbiological media (AIA, ISP-2, MHA, NA, PDA and TSA), were
performed. More morphological features were observed on ISP-2 for both isolates. 
A higher growth yield was also observed at 28ºC in all media but in comparing
that between the two isolates, isolate B8 outnumbered C2 at all experimental
conditions. The observed variation in cultural traits and growth yield indicate
unique properties between the two antibiotic-producing isolates.


PMID: 22433896  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

