
1. Phytochem Anal. 2012 Nov-Dec;23(6):588-97. doi: 10.1002/pca.2359. Epub 2012 Mar
21.

Conversion of phenolic constituents in aqueous Hamamelis virginiana leaf extracts
during fermentation.

Duckstein SM(1), Lorenz P, Stintzing FC.

Author information: 
(1)WALA Heilmittel GmbH, Department of Research and Development, Dorfstrasse 1,
D-73087, Bad Boll/Eckwälden, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Hamamelis virginiana, known for its high level of tannins and other
phenolics is widely used for treatment of dermatological disorders. Although
reports on hydroalcoholic and aqueous extracts from Hamamelis leaf and bark
exist, knowledge on fermented leaf preparations and the underlying conversion
processes are still scant.
OBJECTIVE: Aqueous Hamamelis leaf extracts were monitored during fermentation and
maturation in order to obtain an insight into the bioconversion of tannins and
other phenolics.
METHODOLOGY: Aliquots taken during the production period were investigated by
HPLC-DAD-MS/MS as well as GC-MS after derivatisation into the corresponding
trimethylsilyl compounds.
RESULTS: In Hamamelis leaf extracts, the main constituents exhibited changes
during the observational period of 6 months. By successive depside bond cleavage,
the gallotannins were completely transformed into gallic acid after 1 month.
Although not completely, kaempferol and quercetin glycosides were also converted 
during 6 months to yield their corresponding aglycones. Following C-ring fission,
phloroglucinol was formed from the A-ring of both flavonols. The B-ring afforded 
3-hydroxybenzoic acid from quercetin and 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid as well as
2-(4-hydroxyphenyl)-ethanol from kaempferol. Interestingly, hydroxycinnamic acids
remained almost stable in the same time range.
CONCLUSION: The present study broadens the knowledge on conversion processes in
aqueous fermented extracts containing tannins, flavonol glycosides and
hydroxycinnamic acids. In particular, the analogy between the microbial
metabolism of phenolics from fermented Hamamelis extracts, fermented sourdough by
heterofermentative lactic acid bacteria or conversion of phenolics by the human
microbial flora is indicated.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pca.2359 
PMID: 22434718  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

