
1. Nat Immunol. 2012 Apr 1;13(5):511-8. doi: 10.1038/ni.2247.

Intrathymic programming of effector fates in three molecularly distinct γδ T cell
subtypes.

Narayan K(1), Sylvia KE, Malhotra N, Yin CC, Martens G, Vallerskog T, Kornfeld H,
Xiong N, Cohen NR, Brenner MB, Berg LJ, Kang J; Immunological Genome Project
Consortium.

Collaborators: Zhou Y, Shinton SA, Hardy RR, Bezman NA, Sun JC, Kim CC, Lanier
LL, Miller J, Brown B, Merad M, Fletcher A, Elpek K, Bellemare-Pelletier A,
Malhotra D, Turley S, Narayan K, Sylvia K, Kang J, Gazit R, Garrison B, Rossi DJ,
Jojic V, Koller D, Jianu R, Laidlaw D, Costello J, Collins J, Cohen N, Brennan P,
Brenner M, Shay T, Regev A, Kim F, Rao TN, Wagers A, Gautier EL, Jakubzick C,
Randolph GJ, Monach P, Best AJ, Knell J, Goldrath A, Heng T, Kreslavsky T,
Painter M, Mathis D, Benoist C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2012 May;13(5):431-3.

Innate γδ T cells function in the early phase of immune responses. Although
innate γδ T cells have often been studied as one homogenous population, they can 
be functionally classified into effector subsets on the basis of the production
of signature cytokines, analogous to adaptive helper T cell subsets. However,
unlike the function of adaptive T cells, γδ effector T cell function correlates
with genomically encoded T cell antigen receptor (TCR) chains, which suggests
that clonal TCR selection is not the main determinant of the differentiation of
γδ effector cells. A high-resolution transcriptome analysis of all emergent γδ
thymocyte subsets segregated on the basis of use of the TCR γ-chain or δ-chain
indicated the existence of three separate subtypes of γδ effector cells in the
thymus. The immature γδ subsets were distinguished by unique transcription-factor
modules that program effector function.

DOI: 10.1038/ni.2247 
PMCID: PMC3427768
PMID: 22473038  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

