
1. J Bacteriol. 2012 Jun;194(12):3144-55. doi: 10.1128/JB.00288-12. Epub 2012 Apr 6.

Oxalyl-coenzyme A reduction to glyoxylate is the preferred route of oxalate
assimilation in Methylobacterium extorquens AM1.

Schneider K(1), Skovran E, Vorholt JA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Oxalate catabolism is conducted by phylogenetically diverse organisms, including 
Methylobacterium extorquens AM1. Here, we investigate the central metabolism of
this alphaproteobacterium during growth on oxalate by using proteomics, mutant
characterization, and (13)C-labeling experiments. Our results confirm that energy
conservation proceeds as previously described for M. extorquens AM1 and other
characterized oxalotrophic bacteria via oxalyl-coenzyme A (oxalyl-CoA)
decarboxylase and formyl-CoA transferase and subsequent oxidation to carbon
dioxide via formate dehydrogenase. However, in contrast to other
oxalate-degrading organisms, the assimilation of this carbon compound in M.
extorquens AM1 occurs via the operation of a variant of the serine cycle as
follows: oxalyl-CoA reduction to glyoxylate and conversion to glycine and its
condensation with methylene-tetrahydrofolate derived from formate, resulting in
the formation of C3 units. The recently discovered ethylmalonyl-CoA pathway
operates during growth on oxalate but is nevertheless dispensable, indicating
that oxalyl-CoA reductase is sufficient to provide the glyoxylate required for
biosynthesis. Analysis of an oxalyl-CoA synthetase- and
oxalyl-CoA-reductase-deficient double mutant revealed an alternative, although
less efficient, strategy for oxalate assimilation via one-carbon intermediates.
The alternative process consists of formate assimilation via the tetrahydrofolate
pathway to fuel the serine cycle, and the ethylmalonyl-CoA pathway is used for
glyoxylate regeneration. Our results support the notion that M. extorquens AM1
has a plastic central metabolism featuring multiple assimilation routes for C1
and C2 substrates, which may contribute to the rapid adaptation of this organism 
to new substrates and the eventual coconsumption of substrates under
environmental conditions.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00288-12 
PMCID: PMC3370878
PMID: 22493020  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

