
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34722. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034722. Epub 2012 Apr 4.

Selective enrichment media bias the types of Salmonella enterica strains isolated
from mixed strain cultures and complex enrichment broths.

Gorski L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Produce Safety and Microbiology Research Unit, United States Department of
Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Albany, California, United States of 
America. lisa.gorski@ars.usda.gov

For foodborne outbreak investigations it can be difficult to isolate the relevant
strain from food and/or environmental sources. If the sample is contaminated by
more than one strain of the pathogen the relevant strain might be missed. In this
study mixed cultures of Salmonella enterica were grown in one set of standard
enrichment media to see if culture bias patterns emerged. Nineteen strains
representing four serogroups and ten serotypes were compared in four-strain
mixtures in Salmonella-only and in cattle fecal culture enrichment backgrounds
using Salmonella enrichment media. One or more strain(s) emerged as dominant in
each mixture. No serotype was most fit, but strains of serogroups C2 and E were
more likely to dominate enrichment culture mixtures than strains of serogroups B 
or C1. Different versions of Rappaport-Vassiliadis (RV) medium gave different
patterns of strain dominance in both Salmonella-only and fecal enrichment culture
backgrounds. The fittest strains belonged to serogroups C1, C2, and E, and
included strains of S. Infantis, S. Thompson S. Newport, S. 6,8:d:-, and S. Give.
Strains of serogroup B, which included serotypes often seen in outbreaks such as 
S. Typhimurium, S. Saintpaul, and S. Schwarzengrund were less likely to emerge as
dominant strains in the mixtures when using standard RV as part of the
enrichment. Using a more nutrient-rich version of RV as part of the protocol led 
to a different pattern of strains emerging, however some were still present in
very low numbers in the resulting population. These results indicate that
outbreak investigations of food and/or other environmental samples should include
multiple enrichment protocols to ensure isolation of target strains of
Salmonella.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034722 
PMCID: PMC3319605
PMID: 22496847  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

