
1. Molecules. 2012 Apr 17;17(4):4545-59. doi: 10.3390/molecules17044545.

Systematic evaluation of structure-activity relationships of the riminophenazine 
class and discovery of a C2 pyridylamino series for the treatment of
multidrug-resistant tuberculosis.

Liu B(1), Liu K, Lu Y, Zhang D, Yang T, Li X, Ma C, Zheng M, Wang B, Zhang G,
Wang F, Ma Z, Li C, Huang H, Yin D.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substances and Function of Natural Medicine 
& Beijing Key Laboratory of Active Substance Discovery and Druggability
Evaluation, Institute of Materia Medica, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100050, China.

Clofazimine, a member of the riminophenazine class of drugs, is the cornerstone
agent for the treatment of leprosy. This agent is currently being studied in
clinical trials for the treatment of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis to address 
the urgent need for new drugs that can overcome existing and emerging drug
resistance. However, the use of clofazimine in tuberculosis treatment is hampered
by its high lipophilicity and skin pigmentation side effects. To identify a new
generation of riminophenazines that is less lipophilic and skin staining, while
maintaining efficacy, we have performed a systematic structure-activity
relationship (SAR) investigation by synthesizing a variety of analogs of
clofazimine and evaluating their anti-tuberculosis activity. The study reveals
that the central tricyclic phenazine system and the pendant aromatic rings are
important for anti-tuberculosis activity. However, the phenyl groups attached to 
the C2 and N5 position of clofazimine can be replaced by a pyridyl group to
provide analogs with improved physicochemical properties and pharmacokinetic
characteristics. Replacement of the phenyl group attached to the C2 position by a
pyridyl group has led to a promising new series of compounds with improved
physicochemical properties, improved anti-tuberculosis potency, and reduced
pigmentation potential.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules17044545 
PMCID: PMC6269036
PMID: 22510605  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

