
1. Chest. 2012 Nov;142(5):1200-1210. doi: 10.1378/chest.11-2614.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa-catecholamine inotrope interactions: a contributory factor
in the development of ventilator-associated pneumonia?

Freestone PP(1), Hirst RA(2), Sandrini SM(1), Sharaff F(1), Fry H(1), Hyman S(3),
O'Callaghan C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, University of Leicester
School of Medicine, Leicester, England.
(2)Department of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, University of Leicester
School of Medicine, Leicester, England; Division of Child Health, Leicester,
England; Institute of Lung Health, Leicester, England.
(3)Electron Microscopy Laboratory, University of Leicester, Leicester, England.
(4)Department of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, University of Leicester
School of Medicine, Leicester, England; Division of Child Health, Leicester,
England; Institute of Lung Health, Leicester, England. Electronic address:
j.varma@ucl.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Ventilated patients receiving intensive care are at significant risk 
of acquiring a ventilator-associated pneumonia that is associated with
significant morbidity and mortality. Despite intensive research, it is still
unclear why Pseudomonas aeruginosa, a microbe that rarely causes pneumonia
outside of intensive care, is responsible for so many of these infections.
METHODS: We investigated whether medications frequently prescribed to patients in
the ICU, the catecholamine inotropes, were affecting the growth and virulence of 
P aeruginosa . Effects of clinically attainable concentrations of inotropes on P 
aeruginosa pathogenicity were explored using in vitro growth and virulence assays
and an ex vivo model of infection using ciliated human respiratory epithelium.
RESULTS: We found that inotropes were potent stimulators of P aeruginosa growth, 
producing upto 50-fold increases in bacterial numbers via a mechanism involving
inotrope delivery of transferrin-ron,internalization of the inotrope, and
upregulation of the key pseudomonal siderophore pyoverdine.Inotropes also
markedly increased biofilm formation on endotracheal tubing and enhanced the
biofilm production and toxicity of P aeruginosa in its interaction with
respiratory epithelium.Importantly, catecholamine inotropes also facilitated the 
rapid recovery of P aeruginosa from tobramycin antibiotic challenge. We also
tested out the effect of the inotropes vasopressin and phenylephrine on the
growth and virulence of P aeruginosa and found that, in contrast to the
catecholamines,these drugs had no stimulatory effect.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, our results suggest that catecholamine
inotrope-bacterial interactions may be an unexpected contributory factor to the
development of P aeruginosa -ventilator-associated pneumonia.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.11-2614 
PMID: 22556319  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

