
1. Exp Mol Pathol. 2012 Aug;93(1):116-28. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2012.04.017. Epub
2012 Apr 19.

Spiroplasma spp. biofilm formation is instrumental for their role in the
pathogenesis of plant, insect and animal diseases.

Bastian FO(1), Elzer PH, Wu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Science, Louisiana State University Agricultural
Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA. fbastian@agcenter.lsu.edu

Spiroplasma spp. are important phyto and insect pathogens, and candidate causal
agent/s of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSE) in man and animals.
These filterable wall-less bacteria are widely distributed in nature with an
unspecified environmental reservoir. In this study we showed by scanning electron
microscopy that spiroplasma form biofilm on an assortment of hard surfaces
including mica, nickel and stainless steel. Spiroplasma were stuck to the
surfaces by fibrillar threads consistent with curli fibers (an amyloid protein
found in bacterial biofilms). After a lengthy time in cultures (6 weeks),
spiroplasma in biofilm bound to mica disks lost their spiral shapes and formed
coccoid forms interconnected by long (>2 μm) branched membranous nanotubules,
therein representing direct conjugate connections between the cells. The affinity
of spiroplasma biofilms for mica and nickel, and the membrane communications
suggest that soil could be a reservoir for these bacteria. The persistence of
clay bound spiroplasma in soil could serve as the mechanism of lateral spread of 
TSEs by ingestion of soil by ruminants. Spiroplasma binding to stainless steel
wire supports bacterial contamination of surgical instruments following surgery
on dementia patients as a mechanism of iatrogenic transmission of TSEs,
especially with resistance of spiroplasma in biofilms to drying or exposure to
50% glutaraldehyde. The discovery of biofilm formation by spiroplasma addresses
questions regarding environmental persistence of these organisms in nature and
suggests novel mechanisms of intercellular communication and transmission.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2012.04.017 
PMID: 22552100  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

