
1. mBio. 2012 May 1;3(3). pii: e00088-12. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00088-12. Print 2012.

Changing the receptor specificity of anthrax toxin.

Mechaly A(1), McCluskey AJ, Collier RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.

The actions of many bacterial toxins depend on their ability to bind to one or
more cell-surface receptors. Anthrax toxin acts by a sequence of events that
begins when the protective-antigen (PA) moiety of the toxin binds to either one
of two cell-surface proteins, ANTXR1 and ANTXR2, and is proteolytically
activated. The activated PA self-associates to form oligomeric pore precursors,
which, in turn, bind the enzymatic moieties of the toxin and transport them to
the cytosol. We introduced a double mutation into domain 4 of PA to ablate its
native receptor-binding function and fused epidermal growth factor (EGF) to the C
terminus of the mutated protein. The resulting fusion protein transported
enzymatic effector proteins into a cell line that expressed the EGF receptor
(A431 cells), but not into a line lacking this receptor (CHO-K1 cells). Addition 
of excess free EGF blocked transport of effector proteins into A431 cells via the
fusion protein, but not via native PA. We also showed that fusing the diphtheria 
toxin receptor-binding domain to the C terminus of the mutated PA channeled
effector-protein transport through the diphtheria toxin receptor. PA fusion
proteins with altered receptor specificity may be useful in biological research
and could have practical applications, including ablation or perturbation of
selected populations of cells in vivo.IMPORTANCE: Bacterial toxins that act
within mammalian cells have receptor-dependent mechanisms to transport their
enzymatic components to the cytoplasmic compartment. By inactivating or otherwise
modifying their respective intracellular targets, these intracellular effectors
disrupt metabolic pathways and in some cases cause death of the cell. Our results
show that the receptor specificity of the transport protein of anthrax toxin may 
be readily changed, raising the possibility that receptor-redirected forms of
protective antigen (PA) and PA homologs may be useful for research and medical
applications requiring modification or ablation of designated populations of
cells.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00088-12 
PMCID: PMC3569862
PMID: 22550037  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

