
1. Gesundheitswesen. 2012 Oct;74(10):653-60. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1309014. Epub 2012 
May 7.

[Strategies to prevent the transmission of multidrug-resistant pathogens and
their practical implementation in oupatient care].

[Article in German]

Adler AC(1), Spegel H, Wilke J, Höller C, Herr C.

Author information: 
(1)Landratsamt Berchtesgadener Land, Bad Reichenhall. alexandra.adler@lra-bgl.de

BACKGROUND: Multidrugresistant pathogens which are highly relevant for infection 
control in hospitals and other health-care facilities are a serious public health
problem and a big challenge for all players in the health sector. In order to
prevent the spread of multi-resistant pathogens the Commission for Hospital
Hygiene of the Robert Koch-Institute (RKI) has published guidelines. These
recommendations refer to the consequent implementation of an infection control
management in all health care settings, including outpatient care. In Germany
there are only few data available concerning infection control management and the
implementation of preventive strategies in outpatient care.
SUBJECT: To what extent are national guidelines concerning infection control of
multidrugresistant pathogens (i.e. methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus,
MRSA) feasible and practicable in outpatient care? And what are the reasons not
to practice these strategies.
METHOD: In outpatient care the status of the infection control management and the
implementation of prevention strategies was surveyed and assessed. Data were
collected by structured interviews - a face to face method.
RESULT: Guidelines concerning infection control management are not always
sufficiently implemented in outpatient care. There are multiple reasons for this,
such as, e.g., lack of compliance with the recommendations as well as structural 
problems in the health-care system, and special challenges of outpatient care.
CONCLUSION: Implementation of an infection control management concerning
multidrug-resistant pathogens in outpatient care is problematic. Prevention
strategies are commonly not known or not adequately implemented into daily
practice. Actions to improve the situation should focus at the individual level
(e.g., trainings in the context of the initiative "clean hands" ), the
institutional level (improving networking, bonus schemes) and the social level
(financial and legal support for outpatient care centres to bear the expenses of 
infection control management, "search and destroy").

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0032-1309014 
PMID: 22566165  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

