
1. Int J Mass Spectrom. 2012 Apr 15;316-318:100-107.

Evaluation of ion activation strategies and mechanisms for the gas-phase
fragmentation of sulfoquinovosyldiacylglycerol lipids from Rhodobacter
sphaeroides.

Zhang X(1), Fhaner CJ, Ferguson-Miller SM, Reid GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824.

Sulfoquinovosyldiacylglycerol (SQDG) lipids, found in plants and photosynthetic
bacteria, can substitute for phospholipids under phosphate limiting conditions.
Here, various low-energy ion activation strategies have been evaluated for the
identification and characterization of deprotonated SQDG lipids from a crude
membrane lipid extract of Rhodobacter sphaeroides, using collision- induced
dissociation - tandem mass spectrometry (CID-MS/MS) in either a triple quadrupole
mass spectrometer or in a hybrid quadrupole ion trap-multipole mass spectrometer 
coupled with high resolution / accurate mass analysis capabilities. In the triple
quadrupole instrument, using energy resolved CID-MS/MS experiments, the SQDG head
group specific product ion at m/z 225 (C(6)H(9)O(7)S(-)), rather than m/z 81
(SO(3)H(-)), was determined to provide the greatest sensitivity for SQDG lipid
detection, and is therefore the preferred `fingerprint' ion for the
identification of this lipid class from within complex lipid mixtures when using 
precursor ion scan mode MS/MS experiments. A comparison of conventional ion trap 
CID-MS/MS and -MS(n), with `low Q' CID-MS/MS, pulsed Q dissociation (PQD)-MS/MS
and higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD)-MS/MS performed in an LTQ 
Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer, revealed that HCD-MS/MS coupled with high
resolution/accurate mass analysis represents the most sensitive, and perhaps most
importantly the most specific strategy, for ion trap based identification and
characterization of SQDG lipids, due to the ability to readily distinguish the
SQDG head group specific product ion at m/z 225.0069 from other products that may
be present at the same nominal m/z value. Finally, the mechanisms responsible for
formation of each of the major product ions observed by low-energy CID-MS/MS of
deprotonated SQDG lipids were elucidated using uniform H/D exchange, HCD-MS/MS
and high resolution mass analysis. Formation of the m/z 225 `fingerprint' ion
occurs via a charge-remote cis-elimination reaction, likely involving transfer of
a hydrogen from the hydroxyl group located on the C2 position of the sugar ring.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijms.2012.01.011 
PMCID: PMC3375827
PMID: 22712000 

