
1. Infect Immun. 2012 Sep;80(9):3065-76. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00358-12. Epub 2012 Jun
18.

Macrophage autophagy in immunity to Cryptococcus neoformans and Candida albicans.

Nicola AM(1), Albuquerque P, Martinez LR, Dal-Rosso RA, Saylor C, De Jesus M,
Nosanchuk JD, Casadevall A.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology and Immunology and Medicine, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.

Autophagy is used by eukaryotes in bulk cellular material recycling and in
immunity to intracellular pathogens. We evaluated the role of macrophage
autophagy in the response to Cryptococcus neoformans and Candida albicans, two
important opportunistic fungal pathogens. The autophagosome marker LC3
(microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 alpha) was present in most
macrophage vacuoles containing C. albicans. In contrast, LC3 was found in only a 
few vacuoles containing C. neoformans previously opsonized with antibody but
never after complement-mediated phagocytosis. Disruption of host autophagy in
vitro by RNA interference against ATG5 (autophagy-related 5) decreased the
phagocytosis of C. albicans and the fungistatic activity of J774.16
macrophage-like cells against both fungi, independent of the opsonin used.
ATG5-knockout bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMMs) also had decreased
fungistatic activity against C. neoformans when activated. In contrast,
nonactivated ATG5-knockout BMMs actually restricted C. neoformans growth more
efficiently, suggesting that macrophage autophagy plays different roles against
C. neoformans, depending on the macrophage type and activation. Interference with
autophagy in J774.16 cells also decreased nonlytic exocytosis of C. neoformans,
increased interleukin-6 secretion, and decreased gamma interferon-induced protein
10 secretion. Mice with a conditionally knocked out ATG5 gene in myeloid cells
showed increased susceptibility to intravenous C. albicans infection. In
contrast, these mice manifested no increased susceptibility to C. neoformans, as 
measured by survival, but had fewer alternatively activated macrophages and less 
inflammation in the lungs after intratracheal infection than control mice. These 
results demonstrate the complex roles of macrophage autophagy in restricting
intracellular parasitism by fungi and reveal connections with nonlytic
exocytosis, humoral immunity, and cytokine signaling.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00358-12 
PMCID: PMC3418760
PMID: 22710871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

