
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2012;6(6):e1684. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001684. Epub 2012
Jun 12.

Local increase of arginase activity in lesions of patients with cutaneous
leishmaniasis in Ethiopia.

Abebe T(1), Hailu A, Woldeyes M, Mekonen W, Bilcha K, Cloke T, Fry L, Seich Al
Basatena NK, Corware K, Modolell M, Munder M, Tacchini-Cottier F, Müller I, Kropf
P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, Addis Ababa
University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.

BACKGROUND: Cutaneous leishmaniasis is a vector-borne disease that is in Ethiopia
mainly caused by the parasite Leishmania aethiopica. This neglected tropical
disease is common in rural areas and causes serious morbidity. Persistent
nonhealing cutaneous leishmaniasis has been associated with poor T cell mediated 
responses; however, the underlying mechanisms are not well understood.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have recently shown in an experimental model
of cutaneous leishmaniasis that arginase-induced L-arginine metabolism suppresses
antigen-specific T cell responses at the site of pathology, but not in the
periphery. To test whether these results translate to human disease, we recruited
patients presenting with localized lesions of cutaneous leishmaniasis and
assessed the levels of arginase activity in cells isolated from peripheral blood 
and from skin biopsies. Arginase activity was similar in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from patients and healthy controls. In sharp contrast, 
arginase activity was significantly increased in lesion biopsies of patients with
localized cutaneous leishmaniasis as compared with controls. Furthermore, we
found that the expression levels of CD3ζ, CD4 and CD8 molecules were considerably
lower at the site of pathology as compared to those observed in paired PBMCs.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that increased arginase in lesions of patients
with cutaneous leishmaniasis might play a role in the pathogenesis of the disease
by impairing T cell effector functions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001684 
PMCID: PMC3373636
PMID: 22720104  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

