
1. Mol Med. 2012 Sep 25;18:1067-75. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2011.00450.

Interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase M-deficient mice demonstrate an improved
host defense during Gram-negative pneumonia.

Hoogerwerf JJ(1), van der Windt GJ, Blok DC, Hoogendijk AJ, De Vos AF, van 't
Veer C, Florquin S, Kobayashi KS, Flavell RA, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

Pneumonia is a common cause of morbidity and mortality and the most frequent
source of sepsis. Bacteria that try to invade normally sterile body sites are
recognized by innate immune cells through pattern recognition receptors, among
which toll-like receptors (TLRs) feature prominently. Interleukin-1 receptor
(IL-1R)-associated kinase (IRAK)-M is a proximal inhibitor of TLR signaling
expressed by epithelial cells and macrophages in the lung. To determine the role 
of IRAK-M in host defense against bacterial pneumonia, IRAK-M-deficient
(IRAK-M(-/-)) and normal wild-type (WT) mice were infected intranasally with
Klebsiella pneumoniae. IRAK-M mRNA was upregulated in lungs of WT mice with
Klebsiella pneumonia, and the absence of IRAK-M resulted in a strongly improved
host defense as reflected by reduced bacterial growth in the lungs, diminished
dissemination to distant body sites, less peripheral tissue injury and better
survival rates. Although IRAK-M(-/-) alveolar macrophages displayed enhanced
responsiveness toward intact K. pneumoniae and Klebsiella lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) in vitro, IRAK-M(-/-) mice did not show increased cytokine or chemokine
levels in their lungs after infection in vivo. The extent of lung inflammation
was increased in IRAK-M(-/-) mice shortly after K. pneumoniae infection, as
determined by semiquantitative scoring of specific components of the inflammatory
response in lung tissue slides. These data indicate that IRAK-M impairs host
defense during pneumonia caused by a common gram-negative respiratory pathogen.

DOI: 10.2119/molmed.2011.00450 
PMCID: PMC3475335
PMID: 22729155  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

