
1. Immunol Cell Biol. 2012 Nov;90(10):925-34. doi: 10.1038/icb.2012.32. Epub 2012
Jun 26.

Adoptive transfer of CD34(+) cells during murine sepsis rebalances macrophage
lipopolysaccharide responses.

Brudecki L(1), Ferguson DA, McCall CE, El Gazzar M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, East Tennessee State University College of
Medicine, Johnson City, TN 37614, USA.

Effective treatment of the acute systemic inflammatory response associated with
sepsis is lacking, but likely will require new ways to rebalance dysregulated
immune responses. One challenge is that human sepsis often is diagnosed too late 
to reduce the hyperinflammation of early sepsis. Another is that the sequential
response to sepsis inflammation rapidly generates an adaptive and
immunosuppressive state, which by epigenetic imprint may last for months or
years. Emerging data support that the immunosuppressive phase of sepsis can both 
directly reprogram gene expression of circulating and tissue cells, and disrupt
development and differentiation of myeloid precursor cells into competent
immunocytes. We recently reported that adoptive transfer of bone marrow CD34(+)
cells into mice after sepsis induction by cecal ligation and puncture
significantly improves late-sepsis survival by enhancing bacterial clearance
through improved neutrophil and macrophage phagocytosis. That study, however, did
not examine whether CD34(+) transfer can modify noninfectious acute systemic
inflammatory responses. Here, we report that CD34(+) cell transfer mice that have
survived late sepsis also resist lethal lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced
inflammatory shock (88% lived vs 0% of naive mice). The CD34(+) cell-recipient
survivor mice administered LPS had globally reduced levels of circulating
inflammatory mediators compared with naive mice, but their peritoneal and bone
marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs), unlike those from naïve mice, remained LPS
responsive ex vivo. We further found that CD34(+) cell transfer into
LPS-challenged naïve mice had diminished immunosuppression, as assessed by ex
vivo responses of peritoneal and BMDMs to LPS challenge. We conclude that CD34(+)
cell adoptive transfer rebalances dysregulated immune responses associated with
sepsis and endotoxin shock.

DOI: 10.1038/icb.2012.32 
PMID: 22732898  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

