
1. Plant Foods Hum Nutr. 2012 Sep;67(3):208-14.

Digested and fermented green kiwifruit increases human β-defensin 1 and 2
production in vitro.

Bentley-Hewitt KL(1), Blatchford PA, Parkar SG, Ansell J, Pernthaner A.

Author information: 
(1)Food and Nutrition, The New Zealand Institute for Plant & Food Research Ltd., 
Palmerston North, New Zealand. Kerry.Bentley-Hewitt@plantandfood.co.nz

The intestinal mucosa is constantly exposed to a variety of microbial species
including commensals and pathogens, the latter leaving the host susceptible to
infection. Antimicrobial peptides (AMP) are an important part of the first line
of defense at mucosal surfaces. Human β-defensins (HBD) are AMP expressed by
colonic epithelial cells, which act as broad spectrum antimicrobials. This study 
explored the direct and indirect effects of green kiwifruit (KF) on human
β-defensin 1 and 2 (HBD-1 and 2) production by epithelial cells. In vitro
digestion of KF pulp consisted of a simulated gastric and duodenal digestion,
followed by colonic microbial fermentation using nine human faecal donors.
Fermenta from individual donors was sterile filtered and independently added to
epithelial cells prior to analysis of HBD protein production. KF products
obtained from the gastric and duodenal digestion had no effect on the production 
of HBD-1 or 2 by epithelial cells, demonstrating that KF does not contain
substances that directly modulate defensin production. However, when the digested
KF products were further subjected to in vitro colonic fermentation, the
fermentation products significantly up-regulated HBD-1 and 2 production by the
same epithelial cells. We propose that this effect was predominantly mediated by 
the presence of short-chain fatty acids (SCFA) in the fermenta. Exposure of cells
to purified SCFA confirmed this and HBD-1 and 2 production was up-regulated with 
acetate, propionate and butyrate. In conclusion, in vitro colonic fermentation of
green kiwifruit digest appears to prime defense mechanisms in gut cells by
enhancing the production of antimicrobial defensins.

DOI: 10.1007/s11130-012-0305-1 
PMID: 22872469  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

