
1. Adv Anat Pathol. 2012 Sep;19(5):338-47. doi: 10.1097/PAP.0b013e31826663d9.

Postinfectious glomerulonephritis.

Kambham N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford, CA,
USA. nkambham@stanford.edu

Postinfectious glomerulonephritis (PIGN) is an immunologically mediated
glomerular injury triggered by an infection. Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
(PSGN) is a classic example of PIGN with diffuse proliferative and exudative
glomerular histology, dominant C3 staining and subepithelial "humps." Only the
nephritogenic streptococcal infections cause PSGN and susceptibility to develop
PSGN depends on both host and microbial factors. Over the last decade, two
nephritogenic antigens, "nephritis-associated plasmin receptor" and
"streptococcal pyrogenic exotoxin B" have been identified. PSGN is a self-limited
disease, especially in children, but long-term follow-up studies indicate
persistent low-grade renal abnormalities in a significant proportion of patients.
PSGN continues to be a serious public health concern in third world countries,
but the incidence of streptococcal infections has steadily declined in
industrialized nations. PIGN in the western world is now primarily because of
nonstreptococcal infections, often affecting older individuals with comorbidities
such as diabetes mellitus or alcoholism, and is associated with poor outcomes.
Although the acute PIGN has diffuse proliferative, focal segmental proliferative 
or mesangioproliferative patterns of glomerular injury, chronic or subacute
infection-associated glomerulonephritis typically results in
membranoproliferative appearance. PIGN has dominant C3 staining with frequent
occurrence of subepithelial "humps" as well as subendothelial deposits. The
immunoglobulin staining on immunofluorescence is typically weak, but
immunoglobulin A-dominant PIGN is a recently defined entity often associated with
staphylococcal infections. The wide spectrum of morphologic changes seen in PIGN 
poses a diagnostic challenge, especially if adequate clinical and serological
data are lacking.

DOI: 10.1097/PAP.0b013e31826663d9 
PMID: 22885383  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

