
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43197. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043197. Epub 2012 Aug 14.

Human intestinal dendritic cells decrease cytokine release against Salmonella
infection in the presence of Lactobacillus paracasei upon TLR activation.

Bermudez-Brito M(1), Muñoz-Quezada S, Gomez-Llorente C, Matencio E, Bernal MJ,
Romero F, Gil A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Nutrition and Food Technology José Mataix, Biomedical Research
Centre, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology II, University of
Granada, Granada, Spain.

Probiotic bacteria have been shown to modulate immune responses and could have
therapeutic effects in allergic and inflammatory disorders. However, little is
known about the signalling pathways that are engaged by probiotics. Dendritic
cells (DCs) are antigen-presenting cells that are involved in immunity and
tolerance. Monocyte-derived dendritic cells (MoDCs) and murine DCs are different 
from human gut DCs; therefore, in this study, we used human DCs generated from
CD34+ progenitor cells (hematopoietic stem cells) harvested from umbilical cord
blood; those DCs exhibited surface antigens of dendritic Langerhans cells,
similar to the lamina propria DCs in the gut. We report that both a novel
probiotic strain isolated from faeces of exclusively breast-fed newborn infants, 
Lactobacillus paracasei CNCM I-4034, and its cell-free culture supernatant (CFS) 
decreased pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines in human intestinal DCs
challenged with Salmonella. Interestingly, the supernatant was as effective as
the bacteria in reducing pro-inflammatory cytokine expression. In contrast, the
bacterium was a potent inducer of TGF-β2 secretion, whereas the supernatant
increased the secretion of TGF-β1 in response to Salmonella. We also showed that 
both the bacteria and its supernatant enhanced innate immunity through the
activation of Toll-like receptor (TLR) signalling. These treatments strongly
induced the transcription of the TLR9 gene. In addition, upregulation of the
CASP8 and TOLLIP genes was observed. This work demonstrates that L. paracasei
CNCM I-4034 enhanced innate immune responses, as evidenced by the activation of
TLR signalling and the downregulation of a broad array of pro-inflammatory
cytokines. The use of supernatants like the one described in this paper could be 
an effective and safe alternative to using live bacteria in functional foods.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043197 
PMCID: PMC3419202
PMID: 22905233  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

