
1. Euro Surveill. 2012 Aug 9;17(32). pii: 20239.

High heterogeneity in methods used for the laboratory confirmation of pertussis
diagnosis among European countries, 2010: integration of epidemiological and
laboratory surveillance must include standardisation of methodologies and quality
assurance.

He Q(1), Barkoff AM, Mertsola J, Glismann S, Bacci S; European Bordetella expert 
group (EUpertstrain); European surveillance network for vaccine-preventable
diseases (EUVAC.NET).

Collaborators: He Q, Mertsola J, Heinz Wirsing von König C, Riffelmann M, Guiso
N, Guillot S, Hallander H, Abdolreza A, Mooi FR, Berbers G, Lutyńska A, Krogfelt 
K, Dalby T, Fry N, Xing D, Locht C, Hot D, Ausiello CM, Stefanelli P, Carollo M, 
Sandven P, Storsaeter J, Mittermayer H, Kerschner H, Pierard D, Huygen K, Dufaux 
MF, Panaiotov S, Tomova I, Zarvou M, Hadjianastassiou C, Zavadilova J, Dalby T,
Fry N, Njunkova N, He Q, Guiso N, Giannaki-Psinakis M, Bognár C, Hauksdóttir GS, 
OSullivan N, Ausiello CM, Galajeva J, Storoženko J, Dauksiene S, Reichert P,
Haider J, Zasada AA, Ungureanu V, Klement C, Metka M, Advani A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Disease Surveillance and Control, National Institute 
for Health and Welfare, Turku, Finland.

Despite extensive childhood immunisation, pertussis remains one of the world’s
leading causes of vaccine preventable deaths. The current methods used for
laboratory diagnosis of pertussis include bacterial culture, polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) and enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) serology. We
conducted a questionnaire survey to identify variations in the laboratory methods
and protocols used among participating countries included in the European
surveillance network for vaccine-preventable diseases(EUVAC.NET). In February
2010, we performed the survey using a web-based questionnaire and sent it to the 
country experts of 25 European Union countries,and two European Economic Area
(EEA) countries,Norway and Iceland. The questionnaire consisted of 37 questions
which covered both general information on surveillance methods and detailed
laboratory methods used. A descriptive analysis was performed.Questionnaires were
answered by all 27 contacted countries. Nineteen countries had pertussis
reference laboratories at the national level; their functions varied from
performing diagnosis to providing technical advice for routine microbiology
laboratories. Culture,PCR and serology were used in 17, 18 and 20
countries,respectively. For PCR, nine laboratories used insertion sequence IS481 
as the target gene, which is present in multiple copies in the Bordetella
pertussis genome and thus has a greater sensitivity over single copy targets, but
has been proved not to be specific for B.pertussis. Antibodies directed against
pertussis toxin(PT) are specific for B. pertussis infections. For ELISA serology,
only 13 countries’ laboratories used purified PT as coating antigen and 10
included World Health Organization (WHO) or Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
reference sera in their tests. This present survey shows that methods used for
laboratory confirmation of pertussis differ widely among European countries and
that there is a great heterogeneity of the reference laboratories and functions. 
To evaluate the effects of different pertussis immunisation programmes in Europe,
standardisation and harmonisation of the laboratory methods are needed.

DOI: 10.2807/ese.17.32.20239-en 
PMID: 22913939  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

