
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2011 Oct 25;1:7. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2011.00007.
eCollection 2011.

Comparative genomics evidence that only protein toxins are tagging bad bugs.

Georgiades K(1), Raoult D.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherche en Maladies Infectieuses Tropical Emergentes (URMITE),
CNRS-IRD UMR 6236-198, Université de la Méditerranée Marseille, France.

The term toxin was introduced by Roux and Yersin and describes macromolecular
substances that, when produced during infection or when introduced parenterally
or orally, cause an impairment of physiological functions that lead to disease or
to the death of the infected organism. Long after the discovery of toxins, early 
genetic studies on bacterial virulence demonstrated that removing a certain
number of genes from pathogenic bacteria decreases their capacity to infect
hosts. Each of the removed factors was therefore referred to as a "virulence
factor," and it was speculated that non-pathogenic bacteria lack such
supplementary factors. However, many recent comparative studies demonstrate that 
the specialization of bacteria to eukaryotic hosts is associated with massive
gene loss. We recently demonstrated that the only features that seem to
characterize 12 epidemic bacteria are toxin-antitoxin (TA) modules, which are
addiction molecules in host bacteria. In this study, we investigated if protein
toxins are indeed the only molecules specific to pathogenic bacteria by comparing
14 epidemic bacterial killers ("bad bugs") with their 14 closest non-epidemic
relatives ("controls"). We found protein toxins in significantly more elevated
numbers in all of the "bad bugs." For the first time, statistical principal
components analysis, including genome size, GC%, TA modules, restriction enzymes,
and toxins, revealed that toxins are the only proteins other than TA modules that
are correlated with the pathogenic character of bacteria. Moreover, intracellular
toxins appear to be more correlated with the pathogenic character of bacteria
than secreted toxins. In conclusion, we hypothesize that the only truly
identifiable phenomena, witnessing the convergent evolution of the most
pathogenic bacteria for humans are the loss of metabolic activities, i.e., the
outcome of the loss of regulatory and transcription factors and the presence of
protein toxins, alone, or coupled as TA modules.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2011.00007 
PMCID: PMC3417374
PMID: 22919573  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

