
1. Front Immunol. 2012 Aug 22;3:273. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2012.00273. eCollection
2012.

PKC-theta-mediated signal delivery from the TCR/CD28 surface receptors.

Isakov N(1), Altman A.

Author information: 
(1)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Health 
Sciences and the Cancer Research Center, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev Beer 
Sheva, Israel.

Protein kinase C-theta (PKCθ) is a key enzyme in T lymphocytes, where it plays an
important role in signal transduction downstream of the activated T cell antigen 
receptor (TCR) and the CD28 costimulatory receptor. Interest in PKCθ as a
potential drug target has increased following recent findings that PKCθ is
essential for harmful inflammatory responses mediated by Th2 (allergies) and Th17
(autoimmunity) cells as well as for graft-versus-host disease (GvHD) and
allograft rejection, but is dispensable for beneficial responses such as
antiviral immunity and graft-versus-leukemia (GvL) response. TCR/CD28 engagement 
triggers the translocation of the cytosolic PKCθ to the plasma membrane (PM),
where it localizes at the center of the immunological synapse (IS), which forms
at the contact site between an antigen-specific T cell and antigen-presenting
cells (APC). However, the molecular basis for this unique localization, and
whether it is required for its proper function have remained unresolved issues
until recently. Our recent study resolved these questions by demonstrating that
the unique V3 (hinge) domain of PKCθ and, more specifically, a proline-rich motif
within this domain, is essential and sufficient for its localization at the IS,
where it is anchored to the cytoplasmic tail of CD28 via an indirect mechanism
involving Lck protein tyrosine kinase (PTK) as an intermediate. Importantly, the 
association of PKCθ with CD28 is essential not only for IS localization, but also
for PKCθ-mediated activation of downstream signaling pathways, including the
transcription factors NF-κB and NF-AT, which are essential for productive T cell 
activation. Hence, interference with formation of the PKCθ-Lck-CD28 complex
provides a promising basis for the design of novel, clinically useful allosteric 
PKCθ inhibitors. An additional recent study demonstrated that TCR triggering
activates the germinal center kinase (GSK)-like kinase (GLK) and induces its
association with the SLP-76 adaptor at the IS, where GLK phosphorylates the
activation loop of PKCθ, converting it into an active enzyme. This recent
progress, coupled with the need to study the biology of PKCθ in human T cells, is
likely to facilitate the development of PKCθ-based therapeutic modalities for T
cell-mediated diseases.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2012.00273 
PMCID: PMC3425079
PMID: 22936936 

