
1. Microb Cell Fact. 2012 Sep 3;11:118. doi: 10.1186/1475-2859-11-118.

A dual tag system for facilitated detection of surface expressed proteins in
Escherichia coli.

Jarmander J(1), Gustavsson M, Do TH, Samuelson P, Larsson G.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Division of Bioprocess Technology, Royal Institute of
Technology, KTH, Stockholm, SE, 106 91, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: The discovery of the autotransporter family has provided a mechanism 
for surface expression of proteins in laboratory strains of Escherichia coli. We 
have previously reported the use of the AIDA-I autotransport system to express
the Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis proteins SefA and H:gm. The SefA
protein was successfully exposed to the medium, but the orientation of H:gm in
the outer membrane could not be determined due to proteolytic cleavage of the
N-terminal detection-tag. The goal of the present work was therefore to construct
a vector containing elements that facilitates analysis of surface expression,
especially for proteins that are sensitive to proteolysis or otherwise difficult 
to express.
RESULTS: The surface expression system pAIDA1 was created with two detection tags
flanking the passenger protein. Successful expression of SefA and H:gm on the
surface of E. coli was confirmed with fluorescently labeled antibodies specific
for the N-terminal His6-tag and the C-terminal Myc-tag. While both tags were
detected during SefA expression, only the Myc-tag could be detected for H:gm. The
negative signal indicates a proteolytic cleavage of this protein that removes the
His6-tag facing the medium.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression levels from pAIDA1 were comparable to or higher than
those achieved with the formerly used vector. The presence of the Myc- but not of
the His6-tag on the cell surface during H:gm expression allowed us to confirm the
hypothesis that this fusion protein was present on the surface and oriented
towards the cell exterior. Western blot analysis revealed degradation products of
the same molecular weight for SefA and H:gm. The size of these fragments suggests
that both fusion proteins have been cleaved at a specific site close to the
C-terminal end of the passenger. This proteolysis was concluded to take place
either in the outer membrane or in the periplasm. Since H:gm was cleaved to a
much greater extent then the three times smaller SefA, it is proposed that the
longer translocation time for the larger H:gm makes it more susceptible to
proteolysis.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2859-11-118 
PMCID: PMC3511212
PMID: 22943700  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

