
1. Biophys J. 2012 Sep 19;103(6):1208-17. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2012.07.050.

Interactions of high-affinity cationic blockers with the translocation pores of
B. anthracis, C. botulinum, and C. perfringens binary toxins.

Bezrukov SM(1), Liu X, Karginov VA, Wein AN, Leppla SH, Popoff MR, Barth H,
Nestorovich EM.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Physical Biology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA. bezrukos@mail.nih.gov

Cationic β-cyclodextrin derivatives were recently introduced as highly effective,
potentially universal blockers of three binary bacterial toxins: anthrax toxin of
Bacillus anthracis, C2 toxin of Clostridium botulinum, and iota toxin of
Clostridium perfringens. The binary toxins are made of two separate components:
the enzymatic A component, which acts on certain intracellular targets, and the
binding/translocation B component, which forms oligomeric channels in the target 
cell membrane. Here we studied the voltage and salt dependence of the rate
constants of binding and dissociation reactions of two structurally different
β-cyclodextrins (AmPrβCD and AMBnTβCD) in the PA(63), C2IIa, and Ib channels (B
components of anthrax, C2, and iota toxins, respectively). With all three
channels, the blocker carrying extra hydrophobic aromatic groups on the
thio-alkyl linkers of positively charged amino groups, AMBnTβCD, demonstrated
significantly stronger binding compared with AmPrβCD. This effect is seen as an
increased residence time of the blocker in the channels, whereas the time between
blockages characterizing the binding reaction on-rate stays practically
unchanged. Surprisingly, the voltage sensitivity, expressed as a slope of the
logarithm of the blocker residence time as a function of voltage, turned out to
be practically the same for all six cases studied, suggesting structural
similarities among the three channels. Also, the more-effective AMBnTβCD blocker 
shows weaker salt dependence of the binding and dissociation rate constants
compared with AmPrβCD. By estimating the relative contributions of the applied
transmembrane field, long-range Coulomb, and salt-concentration-independent,
short-range forces, we found that the latter represent the leading interaction,
which accounts for the high efficiency of blockage. In a search for the putative 
groups in the channel lumen that are responsible for the short-range forces, we
performed measurements with the F427A mutant of PA(63), which lacks the
functionally important phenylalanine clamp. We found that the on-rates of the
blockage were virtually conserved, but the residence times and, correspondingly, 
the binding constants dropped by more than an order of magnitude, which also
reduced the difference between the efficiencies of the two blockers.

Copyright © 2012 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpj.2012.07.050 
PMCID: PMC3446695
PMID: 22995493  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

