
1. Front Immunol. 2012 Sep 28;3:305. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2012.00305. eCollection
2012.

Lymphatic endothelial cells - key players in regulation of tolerance and
immunity.

Tewalt EF(1), Cohen JN, Rouhani SJ, Engelhard VH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Cancer Biology, University of
Virginia School of Medicine Charlottesville, VA, USA ; Carter Immunology Center, 
University of Virginia School of Medicine Charlottesville, VA, USA.

The lymphatic vasculature provides routes for dendritic cell and lymphocyte
migration into and out of lymph nodes. Lymphatic endothelial cells (LEC) control 
these processes by expression of CCL21, sphingosine-1-phosphate, and adhesion
molecules. LEC express MHC-I and MHC-II, but not costimulatory molecules, and
present antigen on MHC-I via both direct and cross-presentation. Whether LEC
present to CD4 T cells on MHC-II is unknown. Interestingly, LEC express antigens 
otherwise restricted to a small number of peripheral tissues in an autoimmune
regulatory element-independent manner. Direct presentation of peripheral tissue
antigens (PTA) to CD8 T cells results in abortive proliferation and deletion, due
to both a lack of costimulation and active PD-L1 engagement. Autoimmunity
develops when deletion is subverted, suggesting that LEC presentation of PTA
could lead to human disease if PD-1 signaling were impaired by genetic
polymorphisms, or aberrant costimulation occurred during inflammation. The
expression of additional inhibitory molecules, which are not involved in
LEC-mediated deletion, suggests that LEC may have additional immunoregulatory
roles. LEC express receptors for several immunomodulatory molecules whose
engagement alters their phenotype and function. In this review we describe the
role of LEC in distinct anatomical locations in controlling immune cell
trafficking, as well as their emerging role in the regulation of T cell tolerance
and immunity.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2012.00305 
PMCID: PMC3460259
PMID: 23060883 

