
1. J Periodontol. 2013 Aug;84(8):1221-9. doi: 10.1902/jop.2012.120460. Epub 2012 Oct
29.

The effects of a novel botanical agent on lipopolysaccharide-induced alveolar
bone loss in rats.

Lee BA(1), Lee HS, Jung YS, Kim SW, Lee YW, Chang SH, Chung HJ, Kim OS, Kim YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Dental Research Institute, School of Dentistry, 2nd Stage of Brain Korea 21
Project for School of Dentistry, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic
of Korea.

BACKGROUND: The development of host-modulatory agents with low risk of adverse
effects has been needed to treat periodontitis, a chronic inflammatory disease. A
botanical mixture of extracts from two natural substances, Panax notoginseng and 
Rehmannia glutinosa Libosch, was developed as a novel botanical agent synthesized
with anti-inflammatory effect. The aim of this study is to evaluate the effects
of the botanical mixture on the release of inflammatory cytokines and its
inhibitory effect on lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced alveolar bone loss (ABL) in
a rat model.
METHODS: Cytotoxicity was assessed by
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2yl)-5(3-carboxymethoxyphenol)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetraz
olium assay using human gingival fibroblast (hGF) and human periodontal ligament 
(hPDL) cells. Human acute monocytic leukemia cell line and hGF cells were
cultured to assay tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α and interleukin (IL)-6,
respectively. Microcomputed tomography analysis and immunofluoresence analysis
were performed to evaluate the efficacy of the botanical mixture to inhibit the
destruction of alveolar bone and connective tissue in a rat model.
RESULTS: The botanical mixture is cytotoxic at concentrations exceeding 2.5 mg/mL
(P <0.05). Based on the results from cytotoxicity assay, it can be determined
that the pharmacologic ranges of the botanical mixture to be used in all
subsequent in vitro and in vivo experiments. The botanical mixture reduced the
release of TNF-α and IL-6 from human monocytic cells and hGF cells in a
dose-dependent manner (P <0.05). The administration of the botanical mixture
significantly reduced the alveolar bone loss in a rat model (P <0.05). In groups 
treated with the botanical mixture, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9 was detected
along the alveolar bone crest (ABC), but not around the gingival connective
tissue, while in the group with LPS-induced ABL, pronounced expression of MMP-9
around the ABC, periodontal ligament, and gingival connective tissue was found.
CONCLUSIONS: The botanical mixture showed a potential adjunctive effect in the
treatment of periodontitis. However, the present findings are obtained in vitro
and in a rat model, so further clinical study is needed for its clinical
application.

DOI: 10.1902/jop.2012.120460 
PMID: 23106504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

