
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2012 Nov 1;160(1):42-9. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2012.08.003. Epub 2012 Aug 11.

Yeasts in table olive processing: desirable or spoilage microorganisms?

Arroyo-López FN(1), Romero-Gil V, Bautista-Gallego J, Rodríguez-Gómez F,
Jiménez-Díaz R, García-García P, Querol A, Garrido-Fernández A.

Author information: 
(1)Food Biotechnology Department, Instituto de la Grasa (CSIC), Avda. Padre
García Tejero 4, 41012 Seville, Spain. fnarroyo@cica.es

Yeasts are unicellular eukaryotic microorganisms isolated from many foods, and
are commonly found in table olive processing where they can play a double role.
On one hand, these microorganisms can produce spoilage of fruits due to the
production of bad odours and flavours, the accumulation of CO(2) leading to
swollen containers, the clouding of brines, the softening of fruits and the
degradation of lactic acid, which is especially harmful during table olive
storage and packaging. But on the other hand, fortunately, yeasts also possess
desirable biochemical activities (lipase, esterase, β-glucosidase, catalase,
production of killer factors, etc.) with important technological applications in 
this fermented vegetable. Recently, the probiotic potential of olive yeasts has
begun to be evaluated because many species are able to resist the passage through
the gastrointestinal tract and show beneficial effects on the host. In this way, 
yeasts may improve consumers' health by decreasing cholesterol levels, inhibiting
pathogens, degrading non assimilated compounds, producing antioxidants and
vitamins, adhering to intestinal cells or by maintaining epithelial barrier
integrity. Many yeast species, usually also found in table olive processing, such
as Wicherhamomyces anomalus, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Pichia membranifaciens and
Kluyveromyces lactis, have been reported to exhibit some of these properties.
Thus, the selection of the most appropriate strains to be used as starters, alone
or in combination with lactic acid bacteria, is a promising research line to
develop in a near future which might improve the added value of the
commercialized product.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2012.08.003 
PMID: 23141644  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

