
1. J Pediatr Surg. 2012 Nov;47(11):2050-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2012.06.024.

Evaluation of omental inflammatory response with P-/E-selectin levels and
histopathologic findings in experimental model.

Aslan MK(1), Boybeyi O, Soyer T, Senyücel MF, Ayva S, Kısa U, Cesur O, Cakmak M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Kırıkkale University School of Medicine,
Kırıkkale 71100, Turkey. aslanmk@hotmail.com

AIM: The omentum plays a crucial role in abdominal defense mechanism by adhering 
to sites of inflammation and absorbing bacteria and debris from the peritoneal
cavity. An experimental study was conducted to evaluate the inflammatory response
of omentum in different abdominal events with omental P-/E-selectin levels and
histopathologic findings.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty Wistar rats were placed into 5 groups (n = 6),
including a control group (CG), sham group (SG), bladder perforation (BP) group, 
splenic laceration (SL) group, and cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) group.
Omental samples were obtained in CG after median laparotomy. In accordance with
described models, BP, SL, and CLP were performed in experimental groups.
Twenty-four hours after the first laparotomy, localization of the omental pad was
noted, and omental samples were obtained for biochemical analysis of levels and
histopathologic findings (no. of vessels in sections, polymorphic nuclear
leukocytes [PMLs], lymphocytes). The mean P-/E-selectin levels and
histopathologic findings of inflammation were compared between groups.
RESULTS: Although omentum was adhered to the cecum in all subjects after CLP,
similar findings were not detected in other groups. P-selectin and E-selectin
levels and number of PML were significantly increased in the CLP group when
compared with other groups (P < .05). The number of vessels in sections was
significantly increased in CLP group when compared with SG and BP groups (P <
.05), and the BP group had a decreased number of vessels than CG (P < .05). The
number of PML was significantly increased in SG and SL and BP groups with respect
to CG (P < .05).
CONCLUSION: Among different experimental intraabdominal catastrophes, only CLP
caused an inflammatory response and increased levels of adhesion molecules in the
omentum. These findings suggest that the nature of the inflammation is the main
determining factor for the omental function in intraabdominal events.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2012.06.024 
PMID: 23163997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

