
1. Mol Biol Evol. 2013 Mar;30(3):549-60. doi: 10.1093/molbev/mss273. Epub 2012 Dec
4.

Good codons, bad transcript: large reductions in gene expression and fitness
arising from synonymous mutations in a key enzyme.

Agashe D(1), Martinez-Gomez NC, Drummond DA, Marx CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Biological Laboratories,
Harvard University, MA, USA. dagashe@ncbs.res.in

Biased codon usage in protein-coding genes is pervasive, whereby amino acids are 
largely encoded by a specific subset of possible codons. Within individual genes,
codon bias is stronger at evolutionarily conserved residues, favoring codons
recognized by abundant tRNAs. Although this observation suggests an overall
pattern of selection for translation speed and/or accuracy, other work indicates 
that transcript structure or binding motifs drive codon usage. However, our
understanding of codon bias evolution is constrained by limited experimental data
on the fitness effects of altering codons in functional genes. To bridge this
gap, we generated synonymous variants of a key enzyme-coding gene in
Methylobacterium extorquens. We found that mutant gene expression, enzyme
production, enzyme activity, and fitness were all significantly lower than
wild-type. Surprisingly, encoding the gene using only rare codons decreased
fitness by 40%, whereas an allele coded entirely by frequent codons decreased
fitness by more than 90%. Increasing gene expression restored mutant fitness to
varying degrees, demonstrating that the fitness disadvantage of synonymous
mutants arose from a lack of beneficial protein rather than costs of protein
production. Protein production was negatively correlated with the frequency of
motifs with high affinity for the anti-Shine-Dalgarno sequence, suggesting
ribosome pausing as the dominant cause of low mutant fitness. Together, our data 
support the idea that, although a particular set of codons are favored on average
across a genome, in an individual gene selection can either act for or against
codons depending on their local context.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/mss273 
PMCID: PMC3563975
PMID: 23223712  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

