
1. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2013 Apr;48(4):456-64. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2012-0329OC.

Paired immunoglobulin-like receptor-B inhibits pulmonary fibrosis by suppressing 
profibrogenic properties of alveolar macrophages.

Karo-Atar D(1), Moshkovits I, Eickelberg O, Königshoff M, Munitz A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Clinical Immunology, Sackler Faculty of
Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Israel.

Macrophages are lung-resident cells that play key roles in fibrosis.
Surprisingly, pathways that inhibit macrophage functions, especially in
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), receive little attention. The cell-surface
molecule paired immunoglobulin-like receptor B (PIR-B) can suppress macrophage
activation. However, its role in pulmonary fibrosis remains unknown. We sought to
define the role of PIR-B in IPF. The expression of PIR-B was assessed (by
quantitative PCR and flow cytometry) after bleomycin treatment. Differential cell
counts, histopathology, and profibrogenic-mediator expression, for example,
collagen, α-smooth muscle actin, resistin-like molecule-α (Relm-α), matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP)-12, and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP)-1,
were determined (by ELISA quantitative PCR and flow cytometry) in the lungs of
wild-type and Pirb(-/-) mice after bleomycin or IL-4 treatment. Bone
marrow-derived wild-type and Pirb(-/-) macrophages were stimulated with IL-4 and 
assessed for Relm-α and MMP-12 expression. PIR-B was up-regulated in lung myeloid
cells after bleomycin administration. Bleomycin-treated Pirb(-/-) mice displayed 
increased lung histopathology and an increased expression of collagen and of the 
IL-4-associated profibrogenic markers Relm-α, MMP-12, TIMP-1, and osteopontin,
which were localized to alveolar macrophages. Increased profibrogenic mediator
expression in Pirb(-/-) mice was not attributable to increased IL-4/IL-13
concentrations, suggesting that PIR-B negatively regulates IL-4-induced
macrophage activation. Indeed, IL-4-treated Pirb(-/-) mice displayed increased
Relm-α expression and Relm-α(+) macrophage concentrations. IL-4-activated
Pirb(-/-) macrophages displayed increased Relm-α and MMP-12 induction. Finally,
leukocyte immunoglobulin-like receptor subfamily B member 3
(LILRB3)/immunoglobulin-like transcript-5, the human PIR-B orthologue, was
expressed and up-regulated in lung biopsies from patients with IPF. Our results
establish a key role for PIR-B in IPF, likely via the regulation of macrophage
activation. Therefore, PIR-B/LILRB3 may offer a possible target for suppressing
macrophage profibrogenic activity in IPF.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2012-0329OC 
PMID: 23258232  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

