
1. J Immunol. 2013 Feb 1;190(3):1227-38. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201404. Epub 2012
Dec 21.

Rescue of dysfunctional autophagy attenuates hyperinflammatory responses from
cystic fibrosis cells.

Mayer ML(1), Blohmke CJ, Falsafi R, Fjell CD, Madera L, Turvey SE, Hancock RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z4, Canada.

A hallmark feature of cystic fibrosis (CF) is progressive pulmonary obstruction
arising from exaggerated host proinflammatory responses to chronic bacterial
airway colonization. The mechanisms for these heightened inflammatory responses
have been only partially characterized, hampering development of effective
anti-inflammatory therapies. The aim of this study was to identify and validate
novel dysfunctional processes or pathways driving the hyperinflammatory phenotype
of CF cells using systems biology and network analysis to examine transcriptional
changes induced by innate defense regulator (IDR)-1018, an anti-inflammatory
peptide. IDR-1018 selectively attenuated hyperinflammatory cytokine production
from CF airway cells and PBMCs stimulated with multiple bacterial ligands,
including flagellin (FliC). Network analysis of CF cell transcriptional responses
to FliC and IDR-1018 identified dysfunctional autophagy as the target of the
peptide via modulation of upstream adenosine monophosphate-activated protein
kinase (AMPK)-Akt signaling. After treatment with FliC, CF cells were found to
have elevated levels of the autophagosome marker LC3-II, and GFP-LC3-transfected 
CF airway cells showed abnormal perinuclear accumulation of GFP(+) structures. In
both instances, treatment of CF cells with IDR-1018 abolished the accumulation of
LC3 induced by FliC. Furthermore, inhibition of autophagosome-lysosome fusion
with bafilomycinA1 attenuated the anti-inflammatory and autophagosome-clearing
effects of IDR-1018, as did a chemical inhibitor of Akt and an activator of AMPK.
These findings were consistent with hypotheses generated in silico, demonstrating
the utility of systems biology and network analysis approaches for providing
pathway-level insights into CF-associated inflammation. Collectively, these data 
suggest that dysfunctional autophagosome clearance contributes to heightened
inflammatory responses from CF transmembrane receptor mutant cells and highlight 
autophagy and AMPK-Akt signaling as novel anti-inflammatory targets in CF.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201404 
PMID: 23264659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

