
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53584. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053584. Epub 2013 Jan 2.

Candida albicans increases tumor cell adhesion to endothelial cells in vitro:
intraspecific differences and importance of the mannose receptor.

Ramirez-Garcia A(1), Arteta B, Abad-Diaz-de-Cerio A, Pellon A, Antoran A, Marquez
J, Rementeria A, Hernando FL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Science and Technology, University of the
Basque Country, UPV/EHU, Leioa, Spain. andoni.ramirez@ehu.es

The dimorphic fungus Candida albicans is able to trigger a cytokine-mediated
pro-inflammatory response that increases tumor cell adhesion to hepatic
endothelium and metastasis. To check the intraspecific differences in this
effect, we used an in vitro murine model of hepatic response against C. albicans,
which made clear that tumor cells adhered more to endothelium incubated with
blastoconidia, both live and killed, than germ tubes. This finding was related to
the higher carbohydrate/protein ratio found in blastoconidia. In fact,
destruction of mannose ligand residues on the cell surface by metaperiodate
treatment significantly reduced tumor cell adhesion induced. Moreover, we also
noticed that the effect of clinical strains was greater than that of the
reference one. This finding could not be explained by the carbohydrate/protein
data, but to explain these differences between strains, we analyzed the
expression level of ten genes (ADH1, APE3, IDH2, ENO1, FBA1, ILV5, PDI1, PGK1,
QCR2 and TUF1) that code for the proteins identified previously in a
mannoprotein-enriched pro-metastatic fraction of C. albicans. The results
corroborated that their expression was higher in clinical strains than the
reference one. To confirm the importance of the mannoprotein fraction, we also
demonstrate that blocking the mannose receptor decreases the effect of C.
albicans and its mannoproteins, inhibiting IL-18 synthesis and tumor cell
adhesion increase by around 60%. These findings could be the first step towards a
new treatment for solid organ cancers based on the role of the mannose receptor
in C. albicans-induced tumor progression and metastasis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053584 
PMCID: PMC3534674
PMID: 23301091  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

