
1. Oncogene. 2014 Jan 30;33(5):643-52. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.614. Epub 2013 Jan 14.

Induction of cells with cancer stem cell properties from nontumorigenic human
mammary epithelial cells by defined reprogramming factors.

Nishi M(1), Sakai Y(1), Akutsu H(2), Nagashima Y(3), Quinn G(1), Masui S(4),
Kimura H(5), Perrem K(6), Umezawa A(2), Yamamoto N(7), Lee SW(8), Ryo A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Yokohama City University School of Medicine,
Yokohama, Japan.
(2)Department of Reproductive Biology, National Research Institute for Child
Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Molecular Pathology, Yokohama City University School of
Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.
(4)Center for iPS Cell Research and Application (CiRA), Kyoto University, Kyoto, 
Japan.
(5)Infectious Disease Surveillance Center, National Institute of Infectious
Diseases, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)The Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO),
Dickson, Australian Capital Territory, Australia.
(7)Department of Microbiology, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(8)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Charlestown, MA, USA.

Cancer stem cells (CSCs), a small and elusive population of undifferentiated
cancer cells within tumors that drive tumor growth and recurrence, are believed
to resemble normal stem cells. Although surrogate markers have been identified
and compelling CSC theoretical models abound, actual proof for the existence of
CSCs can only be had retrospectively. Hence, great store has come to be placed in
isolating CSCs from cancers for in-depth analysis. On the other hand, although
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) hold great promise for regenerative
medicine, concern exists over the inadvertent co-transplantation of partially or 
undifferentiated stem cells with tumorigenic capacity. Here we demonstrate that
the introduction of defined reprogramming factors (OCT4, SOX2, Klf4 and c-Myc)
into MCF-10A nontumorigenic mammary epithelial cells, followed by partial
differentiation, transforms the bulk of cells into tumorigenic CD44(+)/CD24(low) 
cells with CSC properties, termed here as induced CSC-like-10A or iCSCL-10A
cells. These reprogrammed cells display a malignant phenotype in culture and form
tumors of multiple lineages when injected into immunocompromised mice. Compared
with other transformed cell lines, cultured iCSCL-10A cells exhibit increased
resistance to the chemotherapeutic compounds, Taxol and Actinomycin D, but higher
susceptibility to the CSC-selective agent Salinomycin and the Pin1 inhibitor
Juglone. Restored expression of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p16INK4a
abrogated the CSC properties of iCSCL-10A cells, by inducing cellular senescence.
This study provides some insight into the potential oncogenicity that may arise
via cellular reprogramming, and could represent a valuable in vitro model for
studying the phenotypic traits of CSCs per se.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2012.614 
PMCID: PMC4697746
PMID: 23318426  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

