
1. Oncogene. 2014 Jan 30;33(5):599-610. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.628. Epub 2013 Jan 21.

The mitotic kinase Aurora--a promotes distant metastases by inducing
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in ERα(+) breast cancer cells.

D'Assoro AB(1), Liu T(2), Quatraro C(2), Amato A(3), Opyrchal M(4), Leontovich
A(5), Ikeda Y(6), Ohmine S(6), Lingle W(7), Suman V(8), Ecsedy J(9), Iankov I(6),
Di Leonardo A(10), Ayers-Inglers J(2), Degnim A(11), Billadeau D(8), McCubrey
J(12), Ingle J(8), Salisbury JL(2), Galanis E(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA [2] Department of Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic
College of Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA.
(3)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA [2] Department of Cellular and Developmental
Biology, Palermo, Italy.
(4)1] Department of Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester,
MN, USA [2] Department of Molecular Medicine, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine,
Rochester, MN, USA.
(5)Department of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA.
(6)Department of Molecular Medicine, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, 
MN, USA.
(7)Department of Experimental Pathology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine,
Rochester, MN, USA.
(8)Department of Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester,
MN, USA.
(9)Department of Oncology, Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc., Cambridge, MA, USA.
(10)Department of Cellular and Developmental Biology, Palermo, Italy.
(11)Department of General Surgery, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester,
MN, USA.
(12)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Brody School of Medicine at East
Carolina University, Greenville, NC, USA.

In this study, we demonstrate that constitutive activation of Raf-1 oncogenic
signaling induces stabilization and accumulation of Aurora-A mitotic kinase that 
ultimately drives the transition from an epithelial to a highly invasive
mesenchymal phenotype in estrogen receptor α-positive (ERα(+)) breast cancer
cells. The transition from an epithelial- to a mesenchymal-like phenotype was
characterized by reduced expression of ERα, HER-2/Neu overexpression and loss of 
CD24 surface receptor (CD24(-/low)). Importantly, expression of key
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers and upregulation of the
stemness gene SOX2 was linked to acquisition of stem cell-like properties such as
the ability to form mammospheres in vitro and tumor self-renewal in vivo.
Moreover, aberrant Aurora-A kinase activity induced phosphorylation and nuclear
translocation of SMAD5, indicating a novel interplay between Aurora-A and SMAD5
signaling pathways in the development of EMT, stemness and ultimately tumor
progression. Importantly, pharmacological and molecular inhibition of Aurora-A
kinase activity restored a CD24(+) epithelial phenotype that was coupled to ERα
expression, downregulation of HER-2/Neu, inhibition of EMT and impaired
self-renewal ability, resulting in the suppression of distant metastases. Taken
together, our findings show for the first time the causal role of Aurora-A kinase
in the activation of EMT pathway responsible for the development of distant
metastases in ERα(+) breast cancer cells. Moreover, this study has important
translational implications because it highlights the mitotic kinase Aurora-A as a
novel promising therapeutic target to selectively eliminate highly invasive
cancer cells and improve the disease-free and overall survival of ERα(+) breast
cancer patients resistant to conventional endocrine therapy.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2012.628 
PMCID: PMC4058768
PMID: 23334326  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

