
1. Nature. 2013 Feb 14;494(7436):261-5. doi: 10.1038/nature11813. Epub 2013 Jan 16.

A T-bet gradient controls the fate and function of CCR6-RORγt+ innate lymphoid
cells.

Klose CS(1), Kiss EA, Schwierzeck V, Ebert K, Hoyler T, d'Hargues Y, Göppert N,
Croxford AL, Waisman A, Tanriver Y, Diefenbach A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Freiburg,
Hermann-Herder-Strasse 11, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2013 Feb;13(2):67.

At mucosal surfaces, the immune system should not initiate inflammatory immune
responses to the plethora of antigens constantly present in the environment, but 
should remain poised to unleash a potent assault on intestinal pathogens. The
transcriptional programs and regulatory factors required for immune cells to
switch from homeostatic (often tissue-protective) function to potent
antimicrobial immunity are poorly defined. Mucosal retinoic-acid-receptor-related
orphan receptor-γt-positive (RORγt(+)) innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) are emerging 
as an important innate lymphocyte population required for immunity to intestinal 
infections. Various subsets of RORγt(+) ILCs have been described but the
transcriptional programs controlling their specification and fate remain largely 
unknown. Here we provide evidence that the transcription factor T-bet determines 
the fate of a distinct lineage of CCR6(-)RORγt(+) ILCs. Postnatally emerging
CCR6(-)RORγt(+) ILCs upregulated T-bet and this was controlled by cues from the
commensal microbiota and interleukin-23 (IL-23). In contrast, CCR6(+)RORγt(+)
ILCs, which arise earlier during ontogeny, did not express T-bet. T-bet
instructed the expression of T-bet target genes such as interferon-γ (IFN-γ) and 
of the natural cytotoxicity receptor NKp46. Mice genetically lacking T-bet showed
normal development of CCR6(-)RORγt(+) ILCs, but they could not differentiate into
NKp46-expressing RORγt(+) ILCs (that is, IL-22-producing natural killer (NK-22)
cells) and failed to produce IFN-γ. The production of IFN-γ by T-bet-expressing
CCR6(-)RORγt(+) ILCs was essential for the release of mucus-forming glycoproteins
required to protect the epithelial barrier during Salmonella enterica infection. 
Salmonella infection also causes severe enterocolitis that is at least partly
driven by IFN-γ. Mice deficient for T-bet or depleted of ILCs developed only mild
enterocolitis. Thus, graded expression of T-bet in CCR6(-)RORγt(+) ILCs
facilitates the differentiation of IFN-γ-producing CCR6(-)RORγt(+) ILCs required 
to protect the epithelial barrier against Salmonella infections. Co-expression of
T-bet and RORγt, which is also found in subsets of IL-17-producing T-helper
(T(H)17) cells, may be an evolutionarily conserved transcriptional program that
originally developed as part of the innate defence against infections but that
also confers an increased risk of immune-mediated pathology.

DOI: 10.1038/nature11813 
PMID: 23334414  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

