
1. Thromb Haemost. 2013 Apr;109(4):726-37. doi: 10.1160/TH12-11-0859. Epub 2013 Jan 
24.

The endothelial protein C receptor and activated protein C play a limited role in
host defense during experimental tuberculosis.

Kager LM(1), Roelofs JJ, de Vos AF, Wieland CW, Schouten M, Meijers JC, Isermann 
B, Van't Veer C, Esmon CT, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine (CEMM), Center for Infection
and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, Room G2-130, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
l.m.kager@amc.uva.nl

The protein C (PC) system is an important regulator of both coagulation and
inflammation. Activated PC (APC), together with its receptor the endothelial
protein C receptor (EPCR), has anticoagulant and anti-inflammatory properties.
During tuberculosis (TB), a devastating chronic pulmonary disease caused by
Mycobacterium (M.) tuberculosis, both a local inflammatory reaction characterised
by the recruitment of mainly mononuclear cells and the formation of pulmonary
granulomas as well as activation of coagulation occurs as part of the host immune
response. We investigated the role of EPCR and APC in a mouse model of TBusing
mice overexpressing EPCR (Tie2-EPCR), mice deficient for EPCR (EPCR-/-), mice
treated with APC-inhibiting antibodies and mice overexpressing APC (APChigh) and 
compared them with wild-type (WT) mice. Blood and organs were harvested to
quantify bacterial loads, cellular influxes, cytokines, histopathology and
coagulation parameters. Additionally observation studies were performed. Lung
EPCR expression was upregulated during experimental TB. No significant
differences in bacterial growth were seen between WT and Tie2-EPCR mice. However,
Tie2-EPCR mice had decreased pulmonary coagulation activation, displayed an
increased influx of macrophages 2 and 6 weeks after infection, but no increase in
other proinflammatory markers. On the other hand, in EPCR-/--mice coagulation
activation was decreased 6 weeks post-infection, with little impact on other
inflammation markers. APC-overexpression or treatment with anti-(A)PC antibodies 
displayed minimal effects during experimental TB. In conclusion, EPCR and APC
play a limited role in the host response during experimental pulmonary TB.

DOI: 10.1160/TH12-11-0859 
PMID: 23348224  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

