
1. Ginekol Pol. 2012 Aug;83(8):633-8.

[Statement of the Polish Gynecological Society Expert Group on the use of ellen
probiotic tampon].

[Article in Polish]

Zespoł Ekspertów Polskiego Towarzystwa Ginekologicznego.

The group of experts representing the Polish Gynecologic Society has issued this 
Statement based on the review of available literature on the potential benefits
of the use of ellen probiotic tampon. It has been firmly proven that during
menstrual bleeding the vaginal flora undergoes profound changes prodisposing to
both bacterial and fungal infections. Safety of menstrual tampons has been
studied for over 60 years. According to the current state of knowledge, the use
of tampons does not lead to any clinically significant change in the vaginal
flora. The link between tampon use and Toxic Shock Syndrome (TTS) was revealed in
1978 after introduction of superabsorbent tampons to the United States market.
Following the replacement of carboxymethylcellulose and polyester based tampons
by the new generation of cotton based tampons, cases of tampon connected TSS are 
extremely rare in the US. The proper use of modern tampons is considered to be
safe. Ellen tampon features dioxin and chlorine free natural fibres treated with 
the acidic acid producing probiotic Lacto Naturel (LN), which contains a
combination of patented benevolent bacteria that can strengthen women's defense
against vaginal infections. Both in vivo and in vitro studied have shown that
ellen probiotic tampons are able to succesfully colonize vagina with the LN
probiotic bacteria which then coexist with endogenous Lactobacilli present in the
patients vaginal ecosystem. The ellen probiotic tampon constitutes an innovative 
solution of the vaginal probiotic application during menses. The use of this
product is aimed to maintain natural vaginal flora as well as its pH during
menstrual bleeding. According to the available clinical data, the potential
benefits of the probiotic tampon use include: prevention of the vaginal/vulval
discomfort as a result of frequent swimming poll use, maintaning of the
therapeutic effect of antibacterial/antifungal vaginal treatment and prevention
of the recurrent infections, prevention of iatrogenic vaginal flora imbalance
after an antibiotic treatment.


PMID: 23342891  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

