
1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2013 Jul;28(7):1743-50. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfs612. Epub
2013 Jan 25.

Suppression of pro-inflammatory T-cell responses by human mesothelial cells.

Lin CY(1), Kift-Morgan A, Moser B, Topley N, Eberl M.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff Institute of Infection and Immunity, School of Medicine, Cardiff
University, Cardiff, UK.

BACKGROUND: Human γδ T cells reactive to the microbial metabolite
(E)-4-hydroxy-3-methyl-but-2-enyl pyrophosphate (HMB-PP) contribute to acute
inflammatory responses. We have previously shown that peritoneal dialysis
(PD)-associated infections with HMB-PP producing bacteria are characterized by
locally elevated γδ T-cell frequencies and poorer clinical outcome compared with 
HMB-PP negative infections, implying that γδ T cells may be of diagnostic,
prognostic and therapeutic value in acute disease. The regulation by local tissue
cells of these potentially detrimental γδ T-cell responses remains to be
investigated.
METHODS: Freshly isolated γδ or αβ T cells were cultured with primary mesothelial
cells derived from omental tissue, or with mesothelial cell-conditioned medium.
Stimulation of cytokine production and proliferation by peripheral T cells in
response to HMB-PP or CD3/CD28 beads was assessed by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Resting mesothelial cells were potent suppressors of pro-inflammatory γδ
T cells as well as CD4+ and CD8+ αβ T cells. The suppression of γδ T-cell
responses was mediated through soluble factors released by primary mesothelial
cells and could be counteracted by SB-431542, a selective inhibitor of TGF-β and 
activin signalling. Recombinant TGF-β1 but not activin-A mimicked the mesothelial
cell-mediated suppression of γδ T-cell responses to HMB-PP.
CONCLUSIONS: The present findings indicate an important regulatory function of
mesothelial cells in the peritoneal cavity by dampening pro-inflammatory T-cell
responses, which may help preserve the tissue integrity of the peritoneal
membrane in the steady state and possibly during the resolution of acute
inflammation.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfs612 
PMID: 23355626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

