
1. J Tissue Eng Regen Med. 2015 Dec;9(12):E191-201. doi: 10.1002/term.1684. Epub
2013 Feb 4.

Mesenchymal stem cells from rat olfactory bulbs can differentiate into cells with
cardiomyocyte characteristics.

Huang YS(1), Li IH(2), Chueh SH(3), Hueng DY(4), Tai MC(5), Liang CM(5), Lien
SB(6), Sytwu HK(7), Ma KH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Anatomy, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei,
Taiwan, Republic of China.
(2)Department of Pharmacy Practice, Tri-Service General Hospital, National
Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan,
Republic of China.
(4)Department of Neurological Surgery, Tri-Service General Hospital, National
Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, School of Medicine, National Defense Medical
Center, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(6)Department of Orthopaedics, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan,
Republic of China.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, National Defense Medical Center,
Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Mesenchymal stromal/stem cells (MSCs) are widely distributed in different tissues
such as bone marrow, adipose tissues, peripheral blood, umbilical cord and
amnionic fluid. Recently, MSC-like cells were also found to exist in rat
olfactory bulb and are capable of inducing differentiation into mesenchymal
lineages - osteocytes, chondrocytes and adipocytes. However, whether these cells 
can differentiate into myocardial cells is not known. In this study, we examined 
whether olfactory bulb-derived MSCs could differentiate into myocardial cells in 
vitro. Fibroblast-like cells isolated from the olfactory bulb of neonatal rats
were grown under four conditions: no treatment; in the presence of growth factors
(neuregulin-1, bFGF and forskolin); co-cultured with cardiomyocytes; and
co-cultured with cardiomyocytes plus neuregulin-1, bFGF and forskolin. Cell
differentiation into myocardial cells was monitored by RT-PCR, light microscopy
immunofluorescence, western blot analysis and contractile response to
pharmacological treatments. The isolated olfactory bulb-derived fibroblast-like
cells expressed CD29, CD44, CD90, CD105, CD166 but not CD34 and CD45, consistent 
with the characteristics of MSCs. Long cylindical cells that spontaneously
contracted were only observed following 7 days of co-culture of MSCs with rat
cardiomyocytes plus neuregulin-1, bFGF and forskolin. RT-PCR and western blot
analysis indicated that the cylindrical cells expressed myocardial markers, such 
as Nkx2.5, GATA4, sarcomeric α-actinin, cardiac troponin I, cardiac myosin heavy 
chain, atrial natriuretic peptide and connexin 43. They also contained sarcomeres
and gap junction and were sensitive to pharmacological treatments (adrenal and
cholinergic agonists and antagonists). These findings indicate that rat olfactory
bulb-derived fibroblast-like cells with MSC characteristics can differentiate
into myocardial-like cells.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/term.1684 
PMID: 23378029  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

