
1. Langmuir. 2013 Mar 5;29(9):3000-11. doi: 10.1021/la304745s. Epub 2013 Feb 19.

Characterizing pilus-mediated adhesion of biofilm-forming E. coli to chemically
diverse surfaces using atomic force microscopy.

Xu H(1), Murdaugh AE, Chen W, Aidala KE, Ferguson MA, Spain EM, Núñez ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts
01075, USA.

Biofilms are complex communities of microorganisms living together at an
interface. Because biofilms are often associated with contamination and
infection, it is critical to understand how bacterial cells adhere to surfaces in
the early stages of biofilm formation. Even harmless commensal Escherichia coli
naturally forms biofilms in the human digestive tract by adhering to epithelial
cells, a trait that presents major concerns in the case of pathogenic E. coli
strains. The laboratory strain E. coli ZK1056 provides an intriguing model system
for pathogenic E. coli strains because it forms biofilms robustly on a wide range
of surfaces.E. coli ZK1056 cells spontaneously form living biofilms on
polylysine-coated AFM cantilevers, allowing us to measure quantitatively by AFM
the adhesion between native biofilm cells and substrates of our choice. We use
these biofilm-covered cantilevers to probe E. coli ZK1056 adhesion to five
substrates with distinct and well-characterized surface chemistries, including
fluorinated, amine-terminated, and PEG-like monolayers, as well as unmodified
silicon wafer and mica. Notably, after only 0-10 s of contact time, the biofilms 
adhere strongly to fluorinated and amine-terminated monolayers as well as to mica
and weakly to "antifouling" PEG monolayers, despite the wide variation in
hydrophobicity and charge of these substrates. In each case the AFM retraction
curves display distinct adhesion profiles in terms of both force and distance,
highlighting the cells' ability to adapt their adhesive properties to disparate
surfaces. Specific inhibition of the pilus protein FimH by a nonhydrolyzable
mannose analogue leads to diminished adhesion in all cases, demonstrating the
critical role of type I pili in adhesion by this strain to surfaces bearing
widely different functional groups. The strong and adaptable binding of FimH to
diverse surfaces has unexpected implications for the design of antifouling
surfaces and antiadhesion therapies.

DOI: 10.1021/la304745s 
PMCID: PMC3590879
PMID: 23421314  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

