
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56302. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056302. Epub 2013 Feb 20.

Probing the effector and suppressive functions of human T cell subsets using
antigen-specific engineered T cell receptors.

Wan Q(1), Kozhaya L, Imberg K, Mercer F, Zhong S, Krogsgaard M, Unutmaz D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
New York, USA.

Activation of T cells through the engagement of the T cell receptors (TCRs) with 
specific peptide-MHC complexes on antigen presenting cells (APCs) is the major
determinant for their proliferation, differentiation and display of effector
functions. To assess the role of quantity and quality of peptide-MHC presentation
in eliciting T cell activation and suppression functions, we genetically
engineered human T cells with two TCRs that recognize HLA-A*0201-restricted
peptides derived from either HIV or melanoma antigens. The engineered-TCRs are
highly functional in both CD8(+) and CD4(+) T cells as assessed by the
upregulation of activation markers, induction of cytokine secretion and
cytotoxicity. We further demonstrated that engineered-TCRs can also be expressed 
on naïve human T cells, which are stimulated through APCs presenting specific
peptides to induce T cell proliferation and acquire effector functions.
Furthermore, regulatory T cells (Tregs) ectopically expressing the
engineered-TCRs are activated in an antigen-specific fashion and suppress T cell 
proliferation. In this system, the inhibitory activity of peptide-stimulated
Tregs require the presence of dendritic cells (DCs) in the culture, either as
presenters or as bystander cells, pointing to a critical role for DCs in
suppression by Tregs. In conclusion, the engineered-TCR system reported here
advances our ability to understand the differentiation pathways of naïve T cells 
into antigen-specific effector cells and the role of antigen-specific signaling
in Treg-mediated immune suppression.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056302 
PMCID: PMC3577812
PMID: 23437112  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

