
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2013 Apr 1;162(3):297-307. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2013.01.013. Epub 2013 Jan 29.

Co-production of surfactin and a novel bacteriocin by Bacillus subtilis subsp.
subtilis H4 isolated from Bikalga, an African alkaline Hibiscus sabdariffa seed
fermented condiment.

Compaoré CS(1), Nielsen DS, Ouoba LI, Berner TS, Nielsen KF, Sawadogo-Lingani H, 
Diawara B, Ouédraogo GA, Jakobsen M, Thorsen L.

Author information: 
(1)Département Technologie Alimentaire (DTA/IRSAT/CNRST), Ouagadougou 03 BP 7047,
Burkina Faso. compaclara@yahoo.fr

Bikalga is a Hibiscus sabdariffa seed fermented condiment widely consumed in
Burkina Faso and neighboring countries. The fermentation is dominated by Bacillus
subtilis group species. Ten B. subtilis subsp. subtilis (six isolates) and
Bacillus licheniformis (four isolates) isolated from traditional Bikalga were
examined for their antimicrobial activity against a panel of 36 indicator
organisms including Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria and yeasts. The
Bacillus spp. isolates showed variable inhibitory abilities depending on the
method used. Both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria were inhibited in the 
agar spot assay while only Gram-positive pathogens were inhibited in the agar
well diffusion assay. Cell free supernatants (CFS) of pure cultures of 3 B.
subtilis subsp. subtilis (G2, H4 and F1) strains inhibited growth of Listeria
monocytogenes, Micrococcus luteus, Staphylococcus aureus and Bacillus cereus,
while CFS of 2 B. licheniformis (E3 and F9) strains only inhibited M. luteus. The
antimicrobial substance(s) produced by B. subtilis subsp. subtilis H4 was further
characterized. The antimicrobial substance(s) produced by H4 was detected from
mid-exponential growth phase. The activity was sensitive to protease and trypsin,
but resistant to the proteolytic action of proteinase K and papain. Treatment
with α-amylase and lipase II resulted in a complete loss of antimicrobial effect,
indicating that a sugar moiety and lipid moiety are necessary for the activity.
Treatment with mercapto-ethanol resulted in a significant loss, indicative of the
presence of disulfide bridges. The antimicrobial activity of H4 was heat
resistant and active at pH3-10. PCR detection of yiwB, sboA, spoX, albA and spaS,
etnS genes and genes coding for surfactins and plipastatins (fengycins) indicated
a potential for subtilosin, subtilin and lipopeptide production, respectively.
Sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) was carried 
out and a single band of approximately 4kDa had antimicrobial activity. Ultra
high performance liquid chromatography-time of flight mass spectrometry
(UHPLC-TOFMS) analysis of the 4kDa band allowed identification of surfactin and a
protein with a monoisotopic mass of 3346.59Da, which is dissimilar in size to
subtilosin and subtilin. Surfactin is a cyclic lipoheptapeptide, which contains a
β-hydroxy fatty acid, but no di-sulfide bridges or sugar residues. The complete
loss of activity upon amylase treatment indicates that surfactin was not
responsible for the observed antimicrobial effect. However, it cannot completely 
be ruled out that surfactin acts synergistically with the detected protein,
though further investigations are needed to confirm this.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2013.01.013 
PMID: 23466466  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

