
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e57673. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057673. Epub 2013 Feb 28.

Coal fly ash impairs airway antimicrobial peptides and increases bacterial
growth.

Borcherding JA(1), Chen H, Caraballo JC, Baltrusaitis J, Pezzulo AA, Zabner J,
Grassian VH, Comellas AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Carver College of Medicine, University of
Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, United States of America.

Air pollution is a risk factor for respiratory infections, and one of its main
components is particulate matter (PM), which is comprised of a number of
particles that contain iron, such as coal fly ash (CFA). Since free iron
concentrations are extremely low in airway surface liquid (ASL), we hypothesize
that CFA impairs antimicrobial peptides (AMP) function and can be a source of
iron to bacteria. We tested this hypothesis in vivo by instilling mice with
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA01) and CFA and determine the percentage of bacterial
clearance. In addition, we tested bacterial clearance in cell culture by exposing
primary human airway epithelial cells to PA01 and CFA and determining the AMP
activity and bacterial growth in vitro. We report that CFA is a bioavailable
source of iron for bacteria. We show that CFA interferes with bacterial clearance
in vivo and in primary human airway epithelial cultures. Also, we demonstrate
that CFA inhibits AMP activity in vitro, which we propose as a mechanism of our
cell culture and in vivo results. Furthermore, PA01 uses CFA as an iron source
with a direct correlation between CFA iron dissolution and bacterial growth. CFA 
concentrations used are very relevant to human daily exposures, thus posing a
potential public health risk for susceptible subjects. Although CFA provides a
source of bioavailable iron for bacteria, not all CFA particles have the same
biological effects, and their propensity for iron dissolution is an important
factor. CFA impairs lung innate immune mechanisms of bacterial clearance,
specifically AMP activity. We expect that identifying the PM mechanisms of
respiratory infections will translate into public health policies aimed at
controlling, not only concentration of PM exposure, but physicochemical
characteristics that will potentially cause respiratory infections in susceptible
individuals and populations.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057673 
PMCID: PMC3585163
PMID: 23469047  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

