
1. Front Genet. 2013 Mar 12;4:28. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2013.00028. eCollection 2013.

Maximal information component analysis: a novel non-linear network analysis
method.

Rau CD(1), Wisniewski N, Orozco LD, Bennett B, Weiss J, Lusis AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, CA, USA ; Department of
Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of California Los
Angeles, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Network construction and analysis algorithms provide scientists with 
the ability to sift through high-throughput biological outputs, such as
transcription microarrays, for small groups of genes (modules) that are relevant 
for further research. Most of these algorithms ignore the important role of
non-linear interactions in the data, and the ability for genes to operate in
multiple functional groups at once, despite clear evidence for both of these
phenomena in observed biological systems.
RESULTS: We have created a novel co-expression network analysis algorithm that
incorporates both of these principles by combining the information-theoretic
association measure of the maximal information coefficient (MIC) with an
Interaction Component Model. We evaluate the performance of this approach on two 
datasets collected from a large panel of mice, one from macrophages and the other
from liver by comparing the two measures based on a measure of module entropy,
Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment, and scale-free topology (SFT) fit. Our algorithm
outperforms a widely used co-expression analysis method, weighted gene
co-expression network analysis (WGCNA), in the macrophage data, while returning
comparable results in the liver dataset when using these criteria. We demonstrate
that the macrophage data has more non-linear interactions than the liver dataset,
which may explain the increased performance of our method, termed Maximal
Information Component Analysis (MICA) in that case.
CONCLUSIONS: In making our network algorithm more accurately reflect known
biological principles, we are able to generate modules with improved relevance,
particularly in networks with confounding factors such as gene by environment
interactions.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2013.00028 
PMCID: PMC3594742
PMID: 23487572 

