
1. Shock. 2013 Apr;39(4):389-96. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e31828bbcf9.

Heme oxygenase inhibition enhances neutrophil migration into the bronchoalveolar 
spaces and improves the outcome of murine pneumonia-induced sepsis.

Czaikoski PG(1), Nascimento DC, Sônego F, de Freitas A, Turato WM, de Carvalho
MA, Santos RS, de Oliveira GP, dos Santos Samary C, Tefe-Silva C, Alves-Filho JC,
Ferreira SH, Rossi MA, Rocco PR, Spiller F, Cunha FQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, University
of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil.

A reduction of the neutrophil migration into the site of infection during cecal
ligation and puncture-induced sepsis increases host mortality. Inhibition of heme
oxygenase (HO) prevents this neutrophil paralysis and improves host survival in
the cecal ligation and puncture model. Taking into account that almost 50% of all
sepsis cases are a consequence of pneumonia, we designed the present study to
determine the role of HO in an experimental model of pneumonia-induced sepsis.
The objective of this study was to evaluate whether the inhibition of HO improves
the outcome and pathophysiologic changes of sepsis induced by an intratracheal
instillation of Klebsiella pneumoniae. The pretreatment of mice subjected to
pneumonia-induced sepsis with ZnDPBG (zinc deuteroporphyrin 2,4-bis glycol), a
nonspecific HO inhibitor, increased the number of neutrophils in the
bronchoalveolar spaces, reduced the bacterial load at the site of infection, and 
prevented the upregulation of CD11b and the downregulation of CXCR2 on blood
neutrophils. Moreover, the pretreatment with ZnDPBG decreased alveolar collapse, 
attenuating the deleterious changes in pulmonary mechanics and gas exchanges and,
as a consequence, improved the survival rate of mice from 0% to ∼20%. These
results show that heme oxygenase is involved in the pathophysiology of
pneumonia-induced sepsis and suggest that HO inhibitors could be helpful for the 
management of this disease.

DOI: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e31828bbcf9 
PMID: 23481491  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

