
1. Invest New Drugs. 2013 Oct;31(5):1355-63. doi: 10.1007/s10637-013-9944-9. Epub
2013 Mar 13.

In silico analysis of the amido phosphoribosyltransferase inhibition by PY873,
PY899 and a derivative of isophthalic acid.

Batool S(1), Nawaz MS, Kamal MA.

Author information: 
(1)Functional Informatics Laboratory National Center for Bioinformatics,
Quaid-I-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan.

Selectively decreasing the availability of precursors for the de novo
biosynthesis of purine nucleotides is a valid approach towards seeking a cure for
leukaemia. Nucleotides and deoxynucleotides are required by living cells for
syntheses of RNA, DNA, and cofactors such as NADP(+), FAD(+), coenzyme A and ATP.
Nucleotides contain purine and pyrimidine bases, which can be synthesized through
salvage pathway as well. Amido phosphoribosyltransferase (APRT), also known as
glutamine phosphoribosylpyrophosphate amidotransferase (GPAT), is an enzyme that 
in humans is encoded by the PPAT (phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate amidotransferase) 
gene. APRT catalyzes the first committed step of the de novo pathway using its
substrate, phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate (PRPP). As APRT is inhibited by many
folate analogues, therefore, in this study we focused on the inhibitory effects
of three folate analogues on APRT activity. This is extension of our previous wet
lab work to analyze and dissect molecular interaction and inhibition mechanism
using molecular modeling and docking tools in the current study. Comparative
molecular docking studies were carried out for three diamino folate derivatives
employing a model of the human enzyme that was built using the 3D structure of
Bacillus subtilis APRT (PDB ID; 1GPH) as the template. Binding orientation of
interactome indicates that all compounds having nominal cluster RMSD in same
active site's deep narrow polar fissure. On the basis of comparative
conformational analysis, electrostatic interaction, binding free energy and
binding orientation of interactome, we support the possibility that these
molecules could behave as APRT inhibitors and therefore may block purine de novo 
biosynthesis. Consequently, we suggest that PY899 is the most active biological
compound that would be a more potent inhibitor for APRT inhibition than PY873 and
DIA, which also confirms previous wet lab report.

DOI: 10.1007/s10637-013-9944-9 
PMID: 23483322  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

