
1. Microb Ecol. 2013 May;65(4):889-900. doi: 10.1007/s00248-013-0204-5. Epub 2013
Mar 16.

Oceans and Human Health (OHH): a European perspective from the Marine Board of
the European Science Foundation (Marine Board-ESF).

Moore MN(1), Depledge MH, Fleming L, Hess P, Lees D, Leonard P, Madsen L, Owen R,
Pirlet H, Seys J, Vasconcelos V, Viarengo A; Marine Board-ESF Working Group on
Oceans and Human Health.

Author information: 
(1)Plymouth Marine Laboratory, Prospect Place, The Hoe, Plymouth, PL1 3DH, UK.
mnm@pml.ac.uk

The oceans and coastal seas provide mankind with many benefits including food for
around a third of the global population, the air that we breathe and our climate 
system which enables habitation of much of the planet. However, the converse is
that generation of natural events (such as hurricanes, severe storms and
tsunamis) can have devastating impacts on coastal populations, while pollution of
the seas by pathogens and toxic waste can cause illness and death in humans and
animals. Harmful effects from biogenic toxins produced by algal blooms (HABs) and
from the pathogens associated with microbial pollution are also a health hazard
in seafood and from direct contact with water. The overall global burden of human
disease caused by sewage pollution of coastal waters has been estimated at 4
million lost person-years annually. Finally, the impacts of all of these issues
will be exacerbated by climate change. A holistic systems approach is needed. It 
must consider whole ecosystems, and their sustainability, such as integrated
coastal zone management, is necessary to address the highly interconnected
scientific challenges of increased human population pressure, pollution and
over-exploitation of food (and other) resources as drivers of adverse ecological,
social and economic impacts. There is also an urgent and critical requirement for
effective and integrated public health solutions to be developed through the
formulation of politically and environmentally meaningful policies. The research 
community required to address "Oceans & Human Health" in Europe is currently very
fragmented, and recognition by policy makers of some of the problems, outlined in
the list of challenges above, is limited. Nevertheless, relevant key policy
issues for governments worldwide include the reduction of the burden of disease
(including the early detection of emerging pathogens and other threats) and
improving the quality of the global environment. Failure to effectively address
these issues will impact adversely on efforts to alleviate poverty, sustain the
availability of environmental goods and services and improve health and social
and economic stability; and thus, will impinge on many policy decisions, both
nationally and internationally. Knowledge exchange (KE) will be a key element of 
any ensuing research. KE will facilitate the integration of biological, medical, 
epidemiological, social and economic disciplines, as well as the emergence of
synergies between seemingly unconnected areas of science and socio-economic
issues, and will help to leverage knowledge transfer across the European Union
(EU) and beyond. An integrated interdisciplinary systems approach is an effective
way to bring together the appropriate groups of scientists, social scientists,
economists, industry and other stakeholders with the policy formulators in order 
to address the complexities of interfacial problems in the area of environment
and human health. The Marine Board of the European Science Foundation Working
Group on "Oceans and Human Health" has been charged with developing a position
paper on this topic with a view to identifying the scientific, social and
economic challenges and making recommendations to the EU on policy-relevant
research and development activities in this arena. This paper includes the
background to health-related issues linked to the coastal environment and
highlights the main arguments for an ecosystem-based whole systems approach.

DOI: 10.1007/s00248-013-0204-5 
PMID: 23503989  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

