
1. Plant Biol (Stuttg). 2013 Jul;15(4):759-68. doi: 10.1111/plb.12003. Epub 2013 Apr
2.

Does the Cyanophora paradoxa genome revise our view on the evolution of
photorespiratory enzymes?

Kern R(1), Eisenhut M, Bauwe H, Weber AP, Hagemann M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biowissenschaften, Abteilung Pflanzenphysiologie, Universität
Rostock, Rostock, Germany.

In the present-day O2 -rich atmosphere, the photorespiratory pathway is essential
for organisms performing oxygenic photosynthesis; i.e. cyanobacteria, algae and
land plants. The presence of enzymes for the plant-like 2-phosphoglycolate cycle 
in cyanobacteria indicates that, together with oxygenic photosynthesis, genes for
photorespiratory enzymes were endosymbiotically conveyed from ancient
cyanobacteria to photosynthetic eukaryotes. The genome information for Cyanophora
paradoxa, a member of the Glaucophyta representing the first branching group of
primary endosymbionts, and for many other eukaryotic algae was used to shed light
on the evolutionary relationship of photorespiratory enzymes among oxygenic
phototrophs. For example, it became possible to analyse the phylogenies of
2-phosphoglycolate phosphatase, serine:glyoxylate aminotransferase and
hydroxypyruvate reductase. Analysis of the Cyanophora genome provided clear
evidence that some photorespiratory enzymes originally acquired from
cyanobacteria were lost, e.g. glycerate 3-kinase, while others were replaced by
the corresponding enzymes from the α-proteobacterial endosymbiont, e.g.
serine:glyoxylate aminotransferase. Generally, our analysis supports the view
that many C2 cycle enzymes in eukaryotic phototrophs were obtained from the
cyanobacterial endosymbiont, but during the subsequent evolution of algae and
land plants multiple losses and replacements occurred, which resulted in a
reticulate provenance of photorespiratory enzymes with different origins in
different cellular compartments.

© 2013 German Botanical Society and The Royal Botanical Society of the
Netherlands.

DOI: 10.1111/plb.12003 
PMID: 23551942  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

