
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e60143. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060143. Epub 2013 Mar 21.

Characterisation of ATP-dependent Mur ligases involved in the biogenesis of cell 
wall peptidoglycan in Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Munshi T(1), Gupta A, Evangelopoulos D, Guzman JD, Gibbons S, Keep NH, Bhakta S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Institute of Structural and Molecular
Biology, Birkbeck, University of London, London, United Kingdom.

ATP-dependent Mur ligases (Mur synthetases) play essential roles in the
biosynthesis of cell wall peptidoglycan (PG) as they catalyze the ligation of key
amino acid residues to the stem peptide at the expense of ATP hydrolysis, thus
representing potential targets for antibacterial drug discovery. In this study we
characterized the division/cell wall (dcw) operon and identified a promoter
driving the co-transcription of mur synthetases along with key cell division
genes such as ftsQ and ftsW. Furthermore, we have extended our previous
investigations of MurE to MurC, MurD and MurF synthetases from Mycobacterium
tuberculosis. Functional analyses of the pure recombinant enzymes revealed that
the presence of divalent cations is an absolute requirement for their activities.
We also observed that higher concentrations of ATP and UDP-sugar substrates were 
inhibitory for the activities of all Mur synthetases suggesting stringent control
of the cytoplasmic steps of the peptidoglycan biosynthetic pathway. In line with 
the previous findings on the regulation of mycobacterial MurD and corynebacterial
MurC synthetases via phosphorylation, we found that all of the Mur synthetases
interacted with the Ser/Thr protein kinases, PknA and PknB. In addition, we
critically analyzed the interaction network of all of the Mur synthetases with
proteins involved in cell division and cell wall PG biosynthesis to re-evaluate
the importance of these key enzymes as novel therapeutic targets in
anti-tubercular drug discovery.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060143 
PMCID: PMC3605390
PMID: 23555903  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

