
1. J Periodontal Res. 2014 Feb;49(1):69-76. doi: 10.1111/jre.12080. Epub 2013 Apr
16.

Natural killer T cells mediate alveolar bone resorption and a systemic
inflammatory response in response to oral infection of mice with Porphyromonas
gingivalis.

Aoki-Nonaka Y(1), Nakajima T, Miyauchi S, Miyazawa H, Yamada H, Domon H, Tabeta
K, Yamazaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Transdisciplinary Research, Niigata University, Niigata, Japan;
Division of Oral Science for Health Promotion, Laboratory of Periodontology and
Immunology, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences,
Niigata, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: T and B cells are known to be involved in the disease
process of periodontitis. However, the role of natural killer T cells in the
pathogenesis of periodontitis has not been clarified.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To examine the role of these cells, C57BL/6J (wild-type), 
CD1d(-/-) and α-galactosylceramide (αGC)-stimulated wild-type mice were orally
infected with Porphyromonas gingivalis strain W83.
RESULTS: Apart from CD1d(-/-) mice, the level of alveolar bone resorption was
elevated by the infection and was further accelerated in αGC-stimulated mice. The
infection induced elevated levels of serum amyloid A and P. gingivalis-specific
IgG in the sera, although the degree of elevation was much smaller in the
CD1d(-/-) mice. Infection-induced RANKL elevation was only observed in
αGC-stimulated mice. Although the cytokines produced by splenocytes were mainly
T-helper 1 type in wild-type mice, those in αGC-stimulated mice were
predominantly T-helper 2 type. In the liver, the infection demonstrated no effect
on the gene expression for interferon-γ, interleukin-4 and RANKL except
αGC-stimulated mice in which the infection upregulated the gene expressions.
CONCLUSION: This study is the first to show that natural killer T cells
upregulated systemic and local inflammatory responses induced by oral infection
with P. gingivalis, thereby contributing to the progression of alveolar bone
resorption.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jre.12080 
PMID: 23586756  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

