
1. Mol Plant Microbe Interact. 2013 Jul;26(7):768-80. doi:
10.1094/MPMI-03-13-0075-R.

Peroxysomal carnitine acetyl transferase influences host colonization capacity in
Sclerotinia sclerotiorum.

Liberti D(1), Rollins JA, Dobinson KF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, University of Florida, Gainesville 32611, USA.

In lower eukaryotes, the glyoxylate cycle allows cells to utilize two-carbon
compounds when simple sugars are not available. In filamentous fungi, glyoxylate 
metabolism is coupled with β-oxidation of fatty acids, and both are localized to 
ubiquitous eukaryotic organelles called peroxisomes. Acetyl coenzyme A
(acetyl-CoA) produced during β-oxidation is transported via the cytosol into
mitochondria for further metabolism. A peroxisomal-specific pathway for
acetyl-CoA transport requiring peroxisomal carnitine acetyl transferase (CAT)
activity has been identified in Magnaporthe grisea peroxisomes. Here, we report
that a Sclerotinia sclerotiorum ortholog of the M. grisea peroxisomal
CAT-encoding gene Pth2 (herein designated Ss-pth2) is required for
virulence-associated host colonization. Null (ss-pth2) mutants, obtained by in
vitro transposon mutagenesis, failed to utilize fatty acids, acetate, or glycerol
as sole carbon sources for growth. Gene expression analysis of these mutants
showed altered levels of transcript accumulation for glyoxylate cycle enzymes.
Ss-pth2 disruption also affected sclerotial, apothecial, and appressorial
development and morphology, as well as oxalic acid accumulation when cultured
with acetate or oleic acid as sole carbon nutrient sources. Although mutants were
able to penetrate and initially colonize host tissue, subsequent colonization was
impaired. Genetic complementation with the wild-type Ss-pth2 restored wild-type
virulence phenotypes. These findings suggest an essential role in S. sclerotiorum
for the peroxisomal metabolic pathways for oxalic acid synthesis and host
colonization.

DOI: 10.1094/MPMI-03-13-0075-R 
PMID: 23581822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

