
1. Lett Appl Microbiol. 2013 Aug;57(2):151-6. doi: 10.1111/lam.12089. Epub 2013 May 
16.

Production of the bioinsecticide Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. israelensis with
deltamethrin increases toxicity towards mosquito larvae.

Tetreau G(1), Patil CD, Chandor-Proust A, Salunke BK, Patil SV, Després L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Ecologie Alpine, LECA-UMR 5553, Université de Grenoble 1,
Grenoble Cedex 09, France. guillaume.tetreau@gmail.com

Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. israelensis is a bioinsecticide used for larval
mosquito control and it represents a safe alternative to chemical insecticides.
Despite its environmental safety, it is less efficient and persistent than
chemical insecticides. To bypass these limitations, we propose to combine the
advantages of chemical and biological insecticides by producing Bti in a medium
supplemented with a chemical insecticide (DDT, deltamethrin, permethrin, propoxur
or temephos). Among the investigated insecticides, the addition of deltamethrin
in the medium induced a higher toxicity (over 6.72-fold) of the composite
deltamethrin-Bti towards mosquito larvae as compared to Bti alone. This was
mainly due to the insertion of deltamethrin into the membranes of Bti spores, as 
evidenced by a quantification of membrane-extracted deltamethrin by HPLC. This
composite larvicide is a promising tool to decrease the quantity of chemicals
dispersed in the environment, to increase the efficacy of Bti and to facilitate
its widespread use as a transition between chemical and biological insecticides. 
Further experiments are required to characterize the mechanisms that underline
the incorporation of deltamethrin into Bti to optimize the production and the
toxicity of this composite larvicide.SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: This
study is the first report of an increased efficacy of the mosquitocidal
bioinsecticide Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. israelensis (Bti) when produced with
a chemical insecticide. The results clearly demonstrate that deltamethrin is able
to synergize the insecticidal activity of Bti through inclusion into spore
membranes, reducing off-target and nonspecific toxicity occurring when the
chemical is used alone as sprays. This new composite chemical-biological
insecticide can become an invaluable tool as an intermediate between single
chemical usage and the widespread use of Bti, notably in developing countries
with limited financial resources for intensive mosquito control campaigns.

© 2013 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/lam.12089 
PMID: 23594143  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

