
1. Oncotarget. 2013 Apr;4(4):622-35.

Combinatorial drug screening identifies compensatory pathway interactions and
adaptive resistance mechanisms.

Axelrod M(1), Gordon VL, Conaway M, Tarcsafalvi A, Neitzke DJ, Gioeli D, Weber
MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Cancer Biology, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, USA.

Constitutively activated signaling molecules are often the primary drivers of
malignancy, and are favored targets for therapeutic intervention. However, the
effectiveness of targeted inhibition of cell signaling can be blunted by
compensatory signaling which generates adaptive resistance mechanisms and reduces
therapeutic responses. Therefore, it is important to identify and target these
compensatory pathways with combinations of targeted agents to achieve durable
clinical benefit. In this report, we demonstrate the use of high-throughput
combinatorial drug screening as a discovery tool to identify compensatory
pathways that generate resistance to the cytotoxic effects of targeted therapy.
We screened 420 drug combinations in 14 different cell lines representing three
cancer lineages, and assessed the ability of each combination to cause
synergistic cytotoxicity. Drug substitution studies were used to validate the
functionally important drug targets. Of the 84 combinations that caused robust
synergy in multiple cell lines, none were synergistic in more than half of the
lines tested, and we observed no pattern of lineage specificity in the observed
synergies. This reflects the plasticity of cell signaling networks, even among
cell lines of the same tissue of origin. Mechanistic analysis of one novel
synergistic combination identified in the screen, the multi-kinase inhibitor
Ro31-8220 and lapatinib, demonstrated compensatory crosstalk between the p70S6
kinase and EGF receptor pathways. In addition, we identified BAD as a node of
convergence between these two pathways that may be playing a role in the enhanced
apoptosis observed upon combination treatment.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.938 
PMCID: PMC3720609
PMID: 23599172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

