
1. Microb Cell Fact. 2013 May 4;12:44. doi: 10.1186/1475-2859-12-44.

Lactic acid fermentation as a tool to enhance the functional features of
Echinacea spp.

Rizzello CG(1), Coda R, Macías DS, Pinto D, Marzani B, Filannino P, Giuliani G,
Paradiso VM, Di Cagno R, Gobbetti M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze del Suolo, della Pianta e degli Alimenti, University
of Bari, Via G, Amendola 165/a, 70126 Bari, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Extracts and products (roots and/or aerial parts) from Echinacea ssp.
represent a profitable market sector for herbal medicines thanks to different
functional features. Alkamides and polyacetylenes, phenols like caffeic acid and 
its derivatives, polysaccharides and glycoproteins are the main bioactive
compounds of Echinacea spp. This study aimed at investigating the capacity of
selected lactic acid bacteria to enhance the antimicrobial, antioxidant and
immune-modulatory features of E. purpurea with the prospect of its application as
functional food, dietary supplement or pharmaceutical preparation.
RESULTS: Echinacea purpurea suspension (5%, wt/vol) in distilled water,
containing 0.4% (wt/vol) yeast extract, was fermented with Lactobacillus
plantarum POM1, 1MR20 or C2, previously selected from plant materials. Chemically
acidified suspension, without bacterial inoculum, was used as the control to
investigate functional features. Echinacea suspension fermented with Lb.
plantarum C2 exhibited a marked antimicrobial activity towards Gram-positive and 
-negative bacteria. Compared to control, the water-soluble extract from Echinacea
suspension fermented with Lactobacillus plantarum 1MR20 showed twice time higher 
radical scavenging activity on DPPH. Almost the same was found for the inhibition
of oleic acid peroxidation. The methanol extract from Echinacea suspension had
inherent antioxidant features but the activity of extract from the sample
fermented with strain 1MR20 was the highest. The antioxidant activities were
confirmed on Balb 3T3 mouse fibroblasts. Lactobacillus plantarum C2 and 1MR20
were used in association to ferment Echinacea suspension, and the water-soluble
extract was subjected to ultra-filtration and purification through RP-FPLC. The
antioxidant activity was distributed in a large number of fractions and
proportional to the peptide concentration. The antimicrobial activity was
detected only in one fraction, further subjected to nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS. A mixture 
of eight peptides was identified, corresponding to fragments of plantaricins PlnH
or PlnG. Treatments with fermented Echinacea suspension exerted immune-modulatory
effects on Caco-2 cells. The fermentation with Lb. plantarum 1MR20 or with the
association between strains C2 and 1MR20 had the highest effect on the expression
of TNF-α gene.
CONCLUSIONS: E. purpurea subjected to lactic acid fermentation could be suitable 
for novel applications as functional food dietary supplements or pharmaceutical
preparations.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2859-12-44 
PMCID: PMC3680048
PMID: 23642310  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

