
1. Toxicon. 2013 Aug;70:162-9. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2013.04.014. Epub 2013 May 3.

Toxic effects of pure anatoxin-a on biomarkers of rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus
mykiss.

Osswald J(1), Carvalho AP, Guimarães L, Guilhermino L.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Centre of Marine and Environmental Research-CIIMAR/CIMAR,
University of Porto, Rua dos Bragas 289, 4050-123 Porto, Portugal.

Anatoxin-a is a neurotoxin produced by various bloom-forming cyanobacteria.
Although it shows widespread occurrence and is highly toxic to rodents, its
mechanisms of action and biotransformation, and effects in fish species are still
poorly understood. The main aim of this study was, thus, to investigate
sub-lethal effects of anatoxin-a on selected biochemical markers in rainbow trout
fry in order to get information about the mechanisms of toxicity and
biotransformation of this toxin in fish. Trout fry were administered sub-lethal
doses of anatoxin-a (0.08-0.31 μg g⁻¹) intraperitoneally. Livers and muscle
tissue were collected 72 h later for quantification of key enzyme activities as
biochemical markers. Enzymes assessed in muscle tissues were related to
cholinergic transmission (acetylcholinesterase [AChE]), energy metabolism
(lactate dehydrogenase [LDH] and NADP⁺-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase [IDH]).
Enzymes assessed in the liver were involved in biotransformation
(ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase [EROD] and glutathione S-transferases [GST]). The
results indicated a significant increasing trend for AChE activity with the dose 
of anatoxin-a, possibly representing an attempt to cope with overstimulation of
muscle activity by the toxin, which competes with acetylcholine for nicotinic
receptors binding. Anatoxin-a was also found to significantly induce the
activities of liver EROD and GST, indicating the involvement of phase I and II
biotransformation in its detoxification. Likewise, lactate dehydrogenase activity
recorded in fry muscle increased significantly with the dose of anatoxin-a,
suggesting an induction of the anaerobic pathway of energy production to deal
with toxic stress induced by the exposure. Altogether, the results suggest that
under continued exposure in the wild fish may experience motor difficulties,
possibly becoming vulnerable to predators, and be at increased metabolic demand
to cope with energetic requirements imposed by anatoxin-a biotransformation
mechanisms.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2013.04.014 
PMID: 23648421  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

