
1. J Comput Chem. 2013 Jul 15;34(19):1620-35. doi: 10.1002/jcc.23305. Epub 2013 May 
13.

A simple but effective modeling strategy for structural properties of non-heme
Fe(II) sites in proteins: test of force field models and application to proteins 
in the AlkB family.

Pang X(1), Han K, Cui Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Reaction Dynamics, Dalian Institute of
Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian, Liaoning, 116023, People's
Republic of China.

To facilitate computational study of proteins in the AlkB family and related
α-ketoglutarate/Fe(II)-dependent dioxygenases, we have tested a simple modeling
strategy for the non-heme Fe(II) site in which the iron is represented by a
simple +2 point charge with Lennard-Jones parameters. Calculations for an AlkB
active site model in the gas phase and ∼150 ns molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations for two enzyme-dsDNA complexes (E. coli AlkB-dsDNA and ABH2-dsDNA)
suggest that this simple modeling strategy provides a satisfactory description of
structural properties of the Fe(II) site in AlkB enzymes, provided that care is
exercised to control the binding mode of carboxylate (Asp) to the iron. MD
simulations using the model for AlkB-dsDNA and ABH2-dsDNA systems find that
although the structural features for the latter are overall in good agreement
with the crystal structure, the dsDNA, and AlkB-dsDNA interface undergo
substantial changes during the MD simulations from the crystal structure. Even
for ABH2, new interactions form between a long loop region and dsDNA upon
structural relaxation of the loop, supporting the role of this loop in DNA
binding despite the lack of interactions between them in the crystal structure.
Analysis of DNA backbone torsional distributions helps identify regions that
adopt strained conformations. Collectively, the results highlight that crystal
packing may have a significant impact on the structure of protein-DNA complexes; 
the simulations also provide additional insights regarding why AlkB and ABH2
prefer single-strand and double-strand DNA, respectively, as substrate.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcc.23305 
PMID: 23666816  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

