
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2013 Aug;35(2):458-68. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2013.05.003.
Epub 2013 May 18.

Characterization of MIF family proteins: MIF and DDT from rock bream, Oplegnathus
fasciatus.

Oh M(1), Kasthuri SR, Wan Q, Bathige SD, Whang I, Lim BS, Jung HB, Oh MJ, Jung
SJ, Kim SY, Lee J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Marine Life Sciences, School of Marine Biomedical Sciences, Jeju
National University, Jeju Self-Governing Province 690-756, Republic of Korea.

Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) is a pleiotropic molecule playing
vital roles in various signaling cascades, including cell proliferation, and
activation of immune responses against infections. It is well known as a pivotal 
regulator of innate immunity. In this study, we have rescued and characterized
two members of the MIF family, macrophage migration inhibitory factor (OfMIF) and
D-Dopachrome tautomerase (OfDDT) from rock bream, Oplegnathus fasciatus. The
deduced OfMIF and OfDDT protein sequences revealed the presence of the catalytic 
oxidoreductase (CXXC), motif. They also possessed highly conserved proline (P(2))
and lysine residues (K(33)), responsible for their isomerase and tautomerase
functions. Rock bream MIF and DDT homologues shared higher identity with fish
homologues and also with mammals and occupied a distinct position in the
phylogenetic tree, depicting their evolutionary conservation. The spatial
expression analysis revealed the highest expression of both OfMIF and OfDDT in
liver, while portraying constitutive expression in other tissues. The recombinant
proteins purified using the Escherichia coli system revealed potent
oxidoreductase activity against insulin with both dithiothreitol and glutathione 
as reducing agents. Stimulation of rock bream head kidney cells with recombinant 
OfMIF and OfDDT proteins induced the expression of proinflammatory cytokines like
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), interleukin-8 (IL-8) and interleukin-1β
(IL-1β). These results together suggest their involvement in rock bream immune
defense and this study on the novel MIF family member DDT from rock bream will
pave the way for further studies of this homologue in other teleosts and
delineate its multiple functions.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2013.05.003 
PMID: 23688964  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

