
1. PLoS One. 2013 May 31;8(5):e65224. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065224. Print 2013.

The Enterococcus faecium enterococcal biofilm regulator, EbrB, regulates the esp 
operon and is implicated in biofilm formation and intestinal colonization.

Top J(1), Paganelli FL, Zhang X, van Schaik W, Leavis HL, van Luit-Asbroek M, van
der Poll T, Leendertse M, Bonten MJ, Willems RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands. j.top@umcutrecht.nl

Nowadays, Enterococcus faecium is one of the leading nosocomial pathogens
worldwide. Strains causing clinical infections or hospital outbreaks are enriched
in the enterococcal surface protein (Esp) encoding ICEEfm1 mobile genetic
element. Previous studies showed that Esp is involved in biofilm formation,
endocarditis and urinary tract infections. In this study, we characterized the
role of the putative AraC type of regulator (locus tag EfmE1162_2351), which we
renamed ebrB and which is, based on the currently available whole genome
sequences, always located upstream of the esp gene, and studied its role in Esp
surface exposure during growth. A markerless deletion mutant of ebrB resulted in 
reduced esp expression and complete abolishment of Esp surface exposure, while
Esp cell-surface exposure was restored when this mutant was complemented with an 
intact copy of ebrB. This demonstrates a role for EbrB in esp expression.
However, during growth, ebrB expression levels did not change over time, while an
increase in esp expression at both RNA and protein level was observed during
mid-log and late-log phase. These results indicate the existence of a secondary
regulation system for esp, which might be an unknown quorum sensing system as the
enhanced esp expression seems to be cell density dependent. Furthermore, we
determined that esp is part of an operon of at least 3 genes putatively involved 
in biofilm formation. A semi-static biofilm model revealed reduced biofilm
formation for the EbrB deficient mutant, while dynamics of biofilm formation
using a flow cell system revealed delayed biofilm formation in the ebrB mutant.
In a mouse intestinal colonization model the ebrB mutant was less able to
colonize the gut compared to wild-type strain, especially in the small intestine.
These data indicate that EbrB positively regulates the esp operon and is
implicated in biofilm formation and intestinal colonization.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065224 
PMCID: PMC3669262
PMID: 23741484  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

