
1. J Innate Immun. 2013;5(6):603-12. doi: 10.1159/000348739. Epub 2013 Jun 15.

Limited role of the receptor for advanced glycation end products during
Streptococcus pneumoniae bacteremia.

Achouiti A(1), de Vos AF, de Beer R, Florquin S, van 't Veer C, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Streptococcus pneumoniae is one of the most common causes of sepsis. Sepsis is
associated with the release of 'damage-associated molecular patterns' (DAMPs).
The receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) is a multiligand
receptor, abundantly expressed in the lungs, that recognizes several of these
DAMPs. Triggering of RAGE leads to activation of the NF-κB pathway and
perpetuation of inflammation. Earlier investigations have shown that the absence 
of RAGE reduces inflammation and bacterial dissemination and increases survival
in sepsis caused by S. pneumoniae pneumonia. We hypothesized that the detrimental
role of RAGE depends on the level of RAGE expression in the primary organ of
infection. By directly injecting S. pneumoniae intravenously, thereby
circumventing the extensive RAGE-expressing lung, we here determined whether RAGE
contributes to an adverse outcome of bacteremia or whether its role is restricted
to primary lung infection. During late-stage infection (48 h), rage(-/-) mice had
an attenuated systemic inflammatory response, as reflected by lower plasma levels
of proinflammatory cytokines, reduced endothelial cell activation (as measured by
E-selectin levels) and less neutrophil accumulation in lung tissue. However, RAGE
deficiency did not influence bacterial loads or survival in this model. In
accordance, plasma markers for cell injury were similar in both mouse strains.
These results demonstrate that while RAGE plays a harmful part in S. pneumoniae
sepsis originating from the respiratory tract, this receptor has a limited role
in the outcome of primary bloodstream infection by this pathogen.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000348739 
PMCID: PMC6741477
PMID: 23774862  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

