
1. Biochem J. 2013 Sep 15;454(3):459-66.

Structural basis for phosphorylation-triggered autophagic clearance of
Salmonella.

Rogov VV(1), Suzuki H, Fiskin E, Wild P, Kniss A, Rozenknop A, Kato R, Kawasaki
M, McEwan DG, Löhr F, Güntert P, Dikic I, Wakatsuki S, Dötsch V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biophysical Chemistry and Center for Biomolecular Magnetic
Resonance, Goethe University, Max-van-Laue Str. 9, 60438 Frankfurt am Main,
Germany.

Selective autophagy is mediated by the interaction of autophagy modifiers and
autophagy receptors that also bind to ubiquitinated cargo. Optineurin is an
autophagy receptor that plays a role in the clearance of cytosolic Salmonella.
The interaction between receptors and modifiers is often relatively weak, with
typical values for the dissociation constant in the low micromolar range. The
interaction of optineurin with autophagy modifiers is even weaker, but can be
significantly enhanced through phosphorylation by the TBK1 {TANK [TRAF
(tumour-necrosis-factor-receptor-associated factor)-associated nuclear factor κB 
activator]-binding kinase 1}. In the present study we describe the NMR and
crystal structures of the autophagy modifier LC3B (microtubule-associated protein
light chain 3 beta) in complex with the LC3 interaction region of optineurin
either phosphorylated or bearing phospho-mimicking mutations. The structures show
that the negative charge induced by phosphorylation is recognized by the side
chains of Arg¹¹ and Lys⁵¹ in LC3B. Further mutational analysis suggests that the 
replacement of the canonical tryptophan residue side chain of autophagy receptors
with the smaller phenylalanine side chain in optineurin significantly weakens its
interaction with the autophagy modifier LC3B. Through phosphorylation of serine
residues directly N-terminally located to the phenylalanine residue, the affinity
is increased to the level normally seen for receptor-modifier interactions.
Phosphorylation, therefore, acts as a switch for optineurin-based selective
autophagy.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20121907 
PMID: 23805866  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

