
1. Ginecol Obstet Mex. 2013 May;81(5):231-8.

[Clinical efficacy of fluconazole, tinidazole and clindamycin vs fluconazole,
tinidazole and azithromycin in the treatment of mixed cervical-vaginal
infections, included those caused by Mycoplasma and Chlamydia trachomatis].

[Article in Spanish]

Villagrana-Zesati JR(1), Guerra-Infante FM, Sosa-González IE.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Infectologia, Instituto Nacional de Perinatologia, México.
dr_robertovillagrana@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: In the United States 19 million people acquire a sexually transmitted
disease every year. Sexually transmitted diseases impact in gynecological terms
because they may cause sterility, infertility and ectopic pregnancy.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the effectiveness of two combinations of three oral
antimicrobial drugs in the treatment of mixed cervical-vaginal infections,
included those caused by Mycoplasma and Chlamydia trachomatis.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: Aclinical, random, comparative, double-blind study included 
50 patients assisting to infectology consult with diagnosis of mixed
cervical-vaginal infection. Patients were divided into two groups: Group A (n =
25): fluconazole 37.5 mg, tinidazole 500 mg and azithromycin 250 mg; group B (n =
25): fluconazole 37.5 mg, tinidazole 500 mg and clindamycin 312.5 mg. Patients of
both groups received two tablets twice p.o. for one day. Cultures were performed 
to corroborate the diagnosis and then to demonstrate effectiveness of the schemes
studied. For the analysis of the data we used measures of central tendency,
dispersion and inferential statistics for comparison of proportions by c2 and
Fisher's exact tests with a significance level of p < 0.05.
RESULTS: All patient got clinical cure; however, regarding the microbiologic
eradication a positive case was identified in group A, requiring rescue
treatment. The compliance in both groups was of 100%. In both groups, statistical
analysis did not show significant differences. Three patients in group A had mild
adverse effects. Patients mean age was 33.4 +/- 5.3 years.
CONCLUSIONS: Both treatments showed similar effectiveness against mixed
cervical-vaginal infections. Microbiological efficacy was of 96% and 100% in
group A and B, respectively, besides, scheme of group B was better tolerated.


PMID: 23819423  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

