
1. Curr Mol Med. 2013 Sep;13(8):1358-67.

Halitosis vaccines targeting FomA, a biofilm-bridging protein of fusobacteria
nucleatum.

Liu PF(1), Huang IF, Shu CW, Huang CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Education and Research, Kaohsiung Veterans General
Hospital, Taiwan.

Halitosis (bad breath) is estimated to influence more than half of the world's
population with varying degree of intensity. More than 85% of halitosis
originates from oral bacterial infections. Foul-smelling breath mainly results
from bacterial production of volatile sulfur compounds (VSCs) such as hydrogen
sulfide and methyl mercaptan. To date, major treatments for elimination of oral
malodor include periodontal therapy combined with antibiotics or antimicrobial
agents, and mechanical approaches including tooth and tongue cleaning. These
treatments may transiently reduce VSCs but carry risks of generating toxicity,
increasing resistant strains and misbalancing the resident human flora.
Therefore, there is a need to develop alternative therapeutic modalities for
halitosis. Plaque biofilms are the principal source for generating VSCs which are
originally metabolized from amino acids during co-aggregation of oral bacteria.
Blocking the bacterial coaggregation, therefore, may prevent various
biofilm-associated oral diseases such as periodontitis and halitosis.
Fusobacterium nucleatum (F. nucleatum), a Gram-negative anaerobe oral bacterium, 
is a main bacterial strain related to halitosis. Aggregation of F. nucleatum with
other bacteria to form plaque biofilms in oral cavity causes bad breath. FomA,
the major outer membrane protein of F. nucleatum, recruits other oral pathogenic 
bacteria such as Porphyromonas gingivalis (P. gingivalis) in the periodontal
pockets. A halitosis vaccine targeting F. bacterium FomA significantly abrogates 
the enhancement of bacterial co-aggregation, biofilms, production of VSCs, and
gum inflammation mediated by an inter-species interaction of F. nucleatum with P.
gingivalis, which suggests FomA of F. nucleatum to be a potential target for
development of vaccines or drugs against bacterial biofilm formation and its
associated pathogenicities.

DOI: 10.2174/15665240113139990063 
PMID: 23865430  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

