
1. Crit Care Med. 2013 Oct;41(10):e266-74. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e31828a4316.

Overexpression of activated protein C is detrimental during severe experimental
gram-negative sepsis (melioidosis).

Kager LM(1), Wiersinga WJ, Roelofs JJ, de Boer OJ, Meijers JC, Isermann B, van't 
Veer C, Van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)1Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical
Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. 2Center for Experimental and Molecular
Medicine (CEMM), Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. 3Department
of Internal Medicine, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
4Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
5Department of Experimental Vascular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands. 6Department of Vascular Medicine, Academic Medical
Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. 7Department of Clinical Chemistry and
Pathobiochemistry, Otto-von-Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany.

Comment in
    Crit Care Med. 2013 Oct;41(10):2463-4.

OBJECTIVE: The interplay between inflammation and blood coagulation is an
essential part of host defense during severe pneumosepsis. Melioidosis,
instigated by the Gram-negative bacterium Burkholderia pseudomallei, is a
frequent cause of pneumosepsis in Southeast Asia. Patients with severe
pneumosepsis, including melioidosis, have decreased circulating levels of protein
C. Activated protein C has anticoagulant and anti-inflammatory properties. In
this study, we aimed to investigate the effect of sustained elevated activated
protein C levels on the host response during melioidosis.
DESIGN: Animal study.
SETTING: University research laboratory.
SUBJECTS: Wild type and activated protein C overexpressing C57BL/6 mice.
INTERVENTIONS: Mice were intranasally infected with viable B. pseudomallei and
killed after 24, 48, or 72 hours for harvesting of lungs, liver, spleen, and
blood. Additionally, survival studies were performed.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Plasma activated protein C concentrations in
activated protein C overexpressing mice (median 18.1 ng/mL) were in the same
range as previously measured in patients treated with recombinant human activated
protein C. Activated protein C overexpressing mice demonstrated enhanced
susceptibility to B. pseudomallei infection compared with wild type mice as
evidenced by a strongly increased mortality accompanied by enhanced bacterial
loads in the lungs, blood, and distant organs 48 hours after infection.
Additionally, at this time point, activated protein C overexpressing mice showed 
elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines in lungs and plasma, together with
increased pulmonary histopathology scores and neutrophil influx. At 72 hours
postinfection, decreased levels of thrombin-antithrombin complexes, reflecting
inhibition of coagulation, were measured in lungs of activated protein C
overexpressing mice.
CONCLUSION: Constitutively enhanced expression of activated protein C impairs
host defense during severe Gram-negative sepsis caused by B. pseudomallei.

DOI: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e31828a4316 
PMID: 23887233  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

