
1. Benef Microbes. 2014 Mar;5(1):3-17. doi: 10.3920/BM2012.0065.

Gut microbiota controls adipose tissue expansion, gut barrier and glucose
metabolism: novel insights into molecular targets and interventions using
prebiotics.

Geurts L(1), Neyrinck AM(2), Delzenne NM(2), Knauf C(3), Cani PD(1).

Author information: 
(1)WELBIO, Walloon Excellence in Life Sciences and BIOtechnology Louvain Drug
Research Institute, Metabolism and Nutrition Research Group, Université
Catholique de Louvain, Av. E. Mounier, 73 Box B1.73.11, 1200 Brussels, Belgium.
(2)Louvain Drug Research Institute, Metabolism and Nutrition Research Group,
Université Catholique de Louvain, Av. E. Mounier, 73 Box B1.73.11, 1200 Brussels,
Belgium.
(3)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), U1048,
Team 3, 31432 Toulouse, France Institut des Maladies Métaboliques et
Cardiovasculaires (I2MC), Université Paul Sabatier, UPS, CHU Rangueil, 1 Avenue
Jean Poulhès, BP 84225, 31432 Toulouse Cedex 4, France.

Crosstalk between organs is crucial for controlling numerous homeostatic systems 
(e.g. energy balance, glucose metabolism and immunity). Several pathological
conditions, such as obesity and type 2 diabetes, are characterised by a loss of
or excessive inter-organ communication that contributes to the development of
disease. Recently, we and others have identified several mechanisms linking the
gut microbiota with the development of obesity and associated disorders (e.g.
insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes, hepatic steatosis). Among these, we
described the concept of metabolic endotoxaemia (increase in plasma
lipopolysaccharide levels) as one of the triggering factors leading to the
development of metabolic inflammation and insulin resistance. Growing evidence
suggests that gut microbes contribute to the onset of low-grade inflammation
characterising these metabolic disorders via mechanisms associated with gut
barrier dysfunctions. We have demonstrated that enteroendocrine cells (producing 
glucagon-like peptide-1, peptide YY and glucagon-like peptide-2) and the
endocannabinoid system control gut permeability and metabolic endotoxaemia.
Recently, we hypothesised that specific metabolic dysregulations occurring at the
level of numerous organs (e.g. gut, adipose tissue, muscles, liver and brain)
rely from gut microbiota modifications. In this review, we discuss the mechanisms
linking gut permeability, adipose tissue metabolism, and glucose homeostasis, and
recent findings that show interactions between the gut microbiota, the
endocannabinoid system and the apelinergic system. These specific systems are
discussed in the context of the gut-to-peripheral organ axis (intestine, adipose 
tissue and brain) and impacts on metabolic regulation. In the present review, we 
also briefly describe the impact of a variety of non-digestible nutrients (i.e.
inulin-type fructans, arabinoxylans, chitin glucans and polyphenols). Their
effects on the composition of the gut microbiota and activity are discussed in
the context of obesity and type 2 diabetes.

DOI: 10.3920/BM2012.0065 
PMID: 23886976  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

