
1. Cancer Immun. 2013 Jul 15;13:14. Print 2013.

Human ovarian tumor ascites fluids rapidly and reversibly inhibit T cell
receptor-induced NF-κB and NFAT signaling in tumor-associated T cells.

Simpson-Abelson MR(1), Loyall JL, Lehman HK, Barnas JL, Minderman H, O'Loughlin
KL, Wallace PK, George TC, Peng P, Kelleher RJ Jr, Odunsi K, Bankert RB.

Author information: 
(1)The State University of New York at Buffalo, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology and the Witebsky Center for Microbial Pathogenesis and Immunology,
University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA.

Human memory T cells present in ovarian tumor ascites fluids fail to respond
normally to stimulation via the T cell receptor (TCR). This immunosuppression is 
manifested by decreases in NF-κB and NFAT activation, IFN-γ production, and cell 
proliferation in response to TCR stimulation with immobilized antibodies to CD3
and CD28. The anergy of the tumor-associated T cells (TATs) is mediated by
soluble factors present in ovarian tumor ascites fluids. The non-responsiveness
of the T cells is quickly reversed when the cells are assayed in the absence of
the ascites fluid, and is rapidly reestablished when a cell-free ascites fluid is
added back to the T cells. Based upon the observed normal phosphorylation
patterns of the TCR proximal signaling molecules, the inhibition of NF-κB, and
NFAT activation in response to TCR stimulation, as well as the ability of the
diacylglycerol analog PMA and the ionophore ionomycin to bypass the ascites
fluid-induced TCR signaling arrest, the site of the arrest in the activation
cascade appears to be at or just upstream of PLC-γ. An identical TCR signaling
arrest pattern was observed when T cells derived from normal donor peripheral
blood were incubated with either malignant or nonmalignant (cirrhotic) ascites
fluids. The immunosuppressive activity of ascites fluids reported here suggests
that soluble factors acting directly or indirectly upon T cells present within
tumors contribute to the anergy that has previously been observed in T cells
derived from malignant and nonmalignant inflammatory microenvironments. The
soluble immunosuppressive factors represent potential therapeutic targets for
ovarian cancer.


PMCID: PMC3718770
PMID: 23882159  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

