
1. Front Microbiol. 2013 Jul 25;4:207. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2013.00207. eCollection
2013.

Microbial habitat connectivity across spatial scales and hydrothermal temperature
gradients at Guaymas Basin.

Meyer S(1), Wegener G, Lloyd KG, Teske A, Boetius A, Ramette A.

Author information: 
(1)HGF-MPG Joint Research Group on Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Alfred
Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research Bremerhaven, Germany ; HGF-MPG
Joint Research Group on Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck Institute for
Marine Microbiology Bremen, Germany.

The Guaymas Basin (Gulf of California) hydrothermal vent area is known as a
dynamic and hydrothermally vented sedimentary system, where the advection and
production of a variety of different metabolic substrates support a high
microbial diversity and activity in the seafloor. The main objective of our study
was to explore the role of temperature and other environmental factors on
community diversity, such as the presence of microbial mats and seafloor
bathymetry within one hydrothermally vented field of 200 × 250 m dimension. In
this field, temperature increased strongly with sediment depth reaching the known
limit of life within a few decimeters. Potential sulfate reduction rate as a key 
community activity parameter was strongly affected by in situ temperature and
sediment depth, declining from high rates of 1-5 μmol ml(-1) d(-1) at the surface
to the detection limit below 5 cm sediment depth, despite the presence of sulfate
and hydrocarbons. Automated Ribosomal Intergenic Spacer Analysis yielded a
high-resolution fingerprint of the dominant members of the bacterial community.
Our analyses showed strong temperature and sediment depth effects on bacterial
cell abundance and Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs) number, both declining by
more than one order of magnitude below the top 5 cm of the sediment surface.
Another fraction of the variation in diversity and community structure was
explained by differences in the local bathymetry and spatial position within the 
vent field. Nevertheless, more than 80% of all detected OTUs were shared among
the different temperature realms and sediment depths, after being classified as
cold (T < 10°C), medium (10°C ≤ T < 40°C) or hot (T ≥ 40°C) temperature
conditions, with significant OTU overlap with the richer surface communities.
Overall, this indicates a high connectivity of benthic bacterial habitats in this
dynamic and heterogeneous marine ecosystem influenced by strong hydrothermalism.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2013.00207 
PMCID: PMC3723108
PMID: 23898326 

