
1. Immunol Cell Biol. 2013 Sep;91(8):503-10. doi: 10.1038/icb.2013.35. Epub 2013 Jul
30.

A periodontal pathogen Treponema denticola hijacks the Fusobacterium
nucleatum-driven host response.

Shin JE(1), Baek KJ, Choi YS, Choi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Molecular Microbiology, BK21 CLS, School of
Dentistry and Dental Research Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.

Periodontitis is a polymicrobial disease that arises from the dysbiosis of the
plaque biofilm. To study polymicrobial interactions with gingival epithelial
cells, the oral commensal Fusobacterium nucleatum and the periodontal pathogen
Treponema denticola were chosen due to their opposing effects on the expression
of human beta-defensins (HBDs) and interleukin (IL)-8 in gingival epithelial
cells. Immortalized gingival epithelial HOK-16B cells were infected with either
F. nucleatum or T. denticola alone or together, and the expression of HBDs and
IL-8 was investigated. Coinfection with F. nucleatum and T. denticola neutralized
the stimulatory and suppressive effects on the expression of HBD-2 and -3, but
the suppressive effect of T. denticola on IL-8 expression remained. In
CHO/CD14/TLR2 reporter cells, T. denticola attenuated F. nucleatum-induced
activation of TLR2, a receptor that mediates HBD induction. Although F. nucleatum
facilitated the invasion of T. denticola into host cells, T. denticola interfered
with the fusion of internalized F. nucleatum with lysosomes, which may avert
TLR9-dependent IL-8 induction. Furthermore, T. denticola suppressed the F.
nucleatum-stimulated accumulation of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS),
a group of essential signaling molecules for the TLR2 and TLR9 pathways. The
elimination of ROS using N-acetyl cysteine completely blocked the inductions of
HBD-3 and IL-8 and significantly reduced HBD-2 induction by F. nucleatum,
confirming the importance of ROS in the host response. In sum, T. denticola
incapacitates the F. nucleatum-induced expression of HBDs and IL-8 in gingival
epithelial cells by interrupting endo-lysosomal maturation and ROS-dependent TLR 
activation. These results may provide new insights into polymicrobial
interactions in the gingival sulcus.

DOI: 10.1038/icb.2013.35 
PMID: 23897119  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

