
1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2013 Oct;19(11):2282-94. doi: 10.1097/MIB.0b013e31829c32dd.

Therapeutic evaluation of ex vivo-generated versus natural regulatory T-cells in 
a mouse model of chronic gut inflammation.

Karlsson F(1), Martinez NE, Gray L, Zhang S, Tsunoda I, Grisham MB.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, †Department of Microbiology 
and Immunology, and ‡Department of Pathology, Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center, Shreveport, Louisiana; and §Department of Immunology and
Molecular Microbiology, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock,
Texas.

The objectives of this study were to (a) evaluate and compare the ability of ex
vivo-generated induced regulatory T cells (iTregs) and freshly isolated natural
Tregs (nTregs) to reverse/attenuate preexisting intestinal inflammation in a
mouse model of chronic colitis and (b) quantify the Treg-targeted gene expression
profiles of these two Treg populations. We found that ex vivo-generated iTregs
were significantly more potent than nTregs at attenuating preexisting colitis.
This superior therapeutic activity was associated with increased accumulation of 
iTregs within the mesenteric lymph nodes and large and significant reductions in 
interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-17A expression in the colons of iTreg- versus
nTreg-treated mice. The enhanced immunosuppressive activity of iTregs was not
because of increased expression or stability of Foxp3 as iTregs and nTregs
obtained from the mesenteric lymph nodes, and colons of reconstituted mice
expressed similar levels of this important transcription factor. In addition, we 
observed a total of 27 genes that were either upregulated or downregulated in
iTregs when compared with nTregs. Although iTregs were found to be superior at
reversing established disease, their message levels of IL-10 and IL-35 and
surface expression of the gut-homing molecules CCR9 and α4β7 were significantly
reduced when compared with nTregs. Taken together, our data demonstrate that ex
vivo-generated iTregs are significantly more potent than nTregs at attenuating
preexisting gut inflammation despite reduced expression of classical regulatory
cytokines and gut-homing molecules. Our data suggest that the immunosuppressive
activity of iTregs may be because of their ability to directly or indirectly
decrease expression of IL-6 and IL-17A within the inflamed bowel.

DOI: 10.1097/MIB.0b013e31829c32dd 
PMCID: PMC3812251
PMID: 23893082  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

