
1. J Infect Dis. 2013 Nov 1;208(9):1474-81. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jit355. Epub 2013
Aug 6.

Immunomodulatory effects of vitamin D on innate and adaptive immune responses to 
Streptococcus pneumoniae.

Olliver M(1), Spelmink L, Hiew J, Meyer-Hoffert U, Henriques-Normark B, Bergman
P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Streptococcus pneumoniae forms part of the normal nasopharyngeal
flora but can also cause a broad spectrum of inflammatory diseases. Vitamin D has
potent effects on human immunity, including induction of antimicrobial peptides
and suppression of T-cell proliferation, but its ability to modulate the immune
response to pneumococci is unknown.
METHODS: Monocyte-derived dendritic cells (DCs) were stimulated with pneumococcal
peptidoglycan (PGN) in the presence or absence of vitamin D. Expression of
maturation markers, cytokines, pattern recognition receptors, and antimicrobial
peptides were measured with flow cytometry, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and
quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Stimulated DCs were cocultured with
autologous T-helper cells, and concentrations of T-helper (Th) 1-, Th17-, and
regulatory T-cell-related cytokines were measured with enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: Vitamin D enhanced DC maturation and expression of the migration marker 
C-C chemokine receptor type 7 (CCR7) in PGN-stimulated cells. It also enhanced
expression of key pattern recognition receptors (Toll-like receptor 2,
Nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing protein 2 [Nod2]) and
induced a synergistic up-regulation of the inflammatory mediator IL-1β and the
β-defensin Human Beta Defensin 3 (hBD-3). Furthermore, vitamin D skewed the
DC-mediated T-helper response to PGN from an inflammatory Th1/Th17 phenotype
toward a regulatory T-cell phenotype.
CONCLUSION: Vitamin D modulates key elements of innate immunity while dampening
adaptive immune responses in DCs after pneumococcal challenge, which may have
implications for prevention and treatment of pneumococcus-induced inflammation.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jit355 
PMID: 23922371  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

