
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2013 Oct;35(4):1260-71. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2013.07.046.
Epub 2013 Aug 9.

Recombinant TNFα as oral vaccine adjuvant protects European sea bass against
vibriosis: insights into the role of the CCL25/CCR9 axis.

Galindo-Villegas J(1), Mulero I, García-Alcazar A, Muñoz I, Peñalver-Mellado M,
Streitenberger S, Scapigliati G, Meseguer J, Mulero V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Histology, Faculty of Biology, University of
Murcia, 30100 Murcia, Spain. jorge-galindo@um.es

Vibrio anguillarum is the main causative agent of vibriosis in cultured sea bass.
Unfortunately, available vaccines against this disease do not achieve the desired
protection. In this study, to accomplish uptake, processing, and presentation of 
luminal antigens, a commercial sea bass oral vaccine against V. anguillarum was
improved with the addition of recombinant fish-self tumor necrosis factor α
(rTNFα), as adjuvant. To explore mechanisms, systemic and local responses were
analyzed through serum specific IgM titers, gene expression, lymphocytes spatial 
distribution in the gut, and in vitro functional assays. We found along the
trial, over expressed transcripts of genes encoding cytokines and antimicrobial
molecules at the gut of rTNFα supplied group. Orally immunized fish with vaccine 
alone confer protection against V. anguillarum challenge throughout a short time 
period. In contrast, adjuvant-treated group significantly extended the response. 
In both cases, achieved protection was independent of serum IgM. Yet, IgT
transcripts were found to increase in the gut of rTNFα-treated fish. More
importantly, fish treated with rTNFα showed a dramatic change of their T
lymphocytes distribution and localization in gut mucosal tissue, suggesting
specific antigen recognition and further intraepithelial T lymphocytes (IEL)
activation. To determine the mechanism behind IEL infiltration, we characterized 
the constitutive and activated pattern of chemokines in sea bass hematopoietic
tissues, identifying for the first time in fish gut, an intimate relation between
the chemokine ligand/receptor CCL25/CCR9. Ex-vivo, chemotaxis analyses confirmed 
these findings. Together, our results demonstrate that improved oral vaccines
targeting key cytokines may provide a means to selectively modulate fish immune
defence.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2013.07.046 
PMID: 23932985  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

