
1. mBio. 2013 Aug 13;4(4). pii: e00481-13. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00481-13.

CspA from Borrelia burgdorferi inhibits the terminal complement pathway.

Hallström T(1), Siegel C, Mörgelin M, Kraiczy P, Skerka C, Zipfel PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection Biology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product
Research and Infection Biology, Hans Knöll Institute, Jena, Germany.

In order to survive and persist in an immunocompetent human host, Borrelia
burgdorferi controls the human immune attack and blocks the damaging effects of
the activated complement system. These Gram-negative spirochetes use CspA
(CRASP-1) and four additional immune evasion proteins to bind combinations of
human plasma regulators, including factor H, factor H-like protein 1 (FHL-1),
complement factor H-related protein 1 (CFHR1), CFHR2, CFHR5, and plasminogen. As 
many microbial immune evasion proteins have multiple functions, we hypothesized
that CspA has additional roles in complement or immune control. Here, we identify
CspA as a terminal complement inhibitor. Borrelial CspA binds the human terminal 
complement components C7 and C9 and blocks assembly and membrane insertion of the
terminal complement complex (TCC). CspA inhibits TCC assembly at the level of C7,
as revealed by hemolytic assays, and inhibits polymerization of C9. CspA, when
ectopically expressed on the surface of serum-sensitive Borrelia garinii, blocks 
TCC assembly on the level of C7 and induces serum resistance in the transformed
bacteria. This CspA-mediated serum resistance and terminal complement pathway
inhibition allow B. burgdorferi to survive in the hostile environment of human
plasma.IMPORTANCE: The present study defines a new mechanism by which the
pathogenic bacterium Borrelia burgdorferi controls the terminal complement
pathway of the human host to survive in human serum. The borrelial CspA binds to 
terminal pathway proteins C7 and C9 and inhibits the terminal complement pathway 
at the step of C7 and thereby inhibits terminal complement complex (TCC) assembly
and membrane insertion. CspA blocks TCC assembly and insertion when expressed at 
the bacterial surface. CspA is the first TCC inhibitor cloned and functionally
characterized from a Gram-negative bacterium. This identification of a bacterial 
TCC inhibitor of pathogen origin expands our knowledge of complement evasion of
pathogenic bacteria and shows that pathogenic bacteria target the terminal
pathway of complement. Thus, CspA as a central microbial virulence factor can
represent an interesting biomarker and a target to develop new therapeutics and
vaccines against borreliae.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00481-13 
PMCID: PMC3747585
PMID: 23943762  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

