
1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 19;8(8):e71718. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071718. eCollection
2013.

Erythropoiesis suppression is associated with anthrax lethal toxin-mediated
pathogenic progression.

Chang HH(1), Wang TP, Chen PK, Lin YY, Liao CH, Lin TK, Chiang YW, Lin WB, Chiang
CY, Kau JH, Huang HH, Hsu HL, Liao CY, Sun DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Tzu-Chi University,
Hualien, Taiwan ; Institute of Medical Sciences, Tzu-Chi University, Hualien,
Taiwan.

Anthrax is a disease caused by the bacterium Bacillus anthracis, which results in
high mortality in animals and humans. Although some of the mechanisms are already
known such as asphyxia, extensive knowledge of molecular pathogenesis of this
disease is deficient and remains to be further investigated. Lethal toxin (LT) is
a major virulence factor of B. anthracis and a specific inhibitor/protease of
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinases (MAPKKs). Anthrax LT causes lethality
and induces certain anthrax-like symptoms, such as anemia and hypoxia, in
experimental mice. Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) are the downstream
pathways of MAPKKs, and are important for erythropoiesis. This prompted us to
hypothesize that anemia and hypoxia may in part be exacerbated by erythropoietic 
dysfunction. As revealed by colony-forming cell assays in this study, LT
challenges significantly reduced mouse erythroid progenitor cells. In addition,
in a proteolytic activity-dependent manner, LT suppressed cell survival and
differentiation of cord blood CD34(+)-derived erythroblasts in vitro. Suppression
of cell numbers and the percentage of erythroblasts in the bone marrow were
detected in LT-challenged C57BL/6J mice. In contrast, erythropoiesis was provoked
through treatments of erythropoietin, significantly ameliorating the anemia and
reducing the mortality of LT-treated mice. These data suggested that suppressed
erythropoiesis is part of the pathophysiology of LT-mediated intoxication.
Because specific treatments to overcome LT-mediated pathogenesis are still
lacking, these efforts may help the development of effective treatments against
anthrax.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071718 
PMCID: PMC3747219
PMID: 23977125  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

