
1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2013 Oct 15;188(8):967-75. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201307-1344OC.

Endogenous α2-antiplasmin is protective during severe gram-negative sepsis
(melioidosis).

Kager LM(1), Weehuizen TA, Wiersinga WJ, Roelofs JJ, Meijers JC, Dondorp AM, van 
't Veer C, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)1 Center of Experimental and Molecular Medicine (CEMM).

RATIONALE: α2-Antiplasmin (A2AP) is a major inhibitor of fibrinolysis by virtue
of its capacity to inhibit plasmin. Although the fibrinolytic system is strongly 
affected by infection, the functional role of A2AP in the host response to sepsis
is unknown.
OBJECTIVES: To study the role of A2AP in melioidosis, a common form of
community-acquired sepsis in Southeast Asia and Northern Australia caused by the 
gram-negative bacterium Burkholderia pseudomallei.
METHODS: In a single-center observational study A2AP was measured in patients
with culture-proven septic melioidosis. Wild-type and A2AP-deficient (A2AP(-/-)) 
mice were intranasally infected with B. pseudomallei to induce severe
pneumosepsis (melioidosis). Parameters of inflammation and coagulation were
measured, and survival studies were performed.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Patients with melioidosis showed elevated A2AP
plasma levels. Likewise, A2AP levels in plasma and lung homogenates were elevated
in mice infected with B. pseudomallei. A2AP-deficient (A2AP(-/-)) mice had a
strongly disturbed host response during experimental melioidosis as reflected by 
enhanced bacterial growth at the primary site of infection accompanied by
increased dissemination to distant organs. In addition, A2AP(-/-) mice showed
more severe lung pathology and injury together with an increased accumulation of 
neutrophils and higher cytokine levels in lung tissue. A2AP deficiency further
was associated with exaggerated systemic inflammation and coagulation, increased 
distant organ injury, and enhanced lethality.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first to identify A2AP as a protective mediator
during gram-negative (pneumo)sepsis by limiting bacterial growth, inflammation,
tissue injury, and coagulation.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201307-1344OC 
PMID: 23992406  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

