
1. J Pharm Biomed Anal. 2013 Dec;86:127-34. doi: 10.1016/j.jpba.2013.07.047. Epub
2013 Aug 14.

Development and validation of a UHPLC-MS/MS procedure for quantification of the
Pseudomonas Quinolone Signal in bacterial culture after acetylation for
characterization of new quorum sensing inhibitors.

Maurer CK(1), Steinbach A, Hartmann RW.

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz-Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland (HIPS), Campus C2.3, 
D-66123 Saarbrücken, Germany. Electronic address:
christine.maurer@helmholtz-hzi.de.

The appearance of antibiotic resistance requires novel therapeutic strategies.
One approach is to selectively attenuate bacterial pathogenicity by interfering
with bacterial cell-to-cell communication known as quorum sensing. The PQS quorum
sensing system of Pseudomonas aeruginosa employs as signal molecule the
Pseudomonas Quinolone Signal (PQS; 2-heptyl-3-hydroxy-4-(1H)-quinolone), a key
contributor to virulence and biofilm formation. Thus, interference with PQS
production is considered as promising approach for the development of novel
anti-infectives. Therefore, in this study, we developed and validated an
ultra-high performance liquid chromatographic-tandem mass spectrometric approach 
for reliable quantification of PQS in P. aeruginosa cultures for activity
determination of new quorum sensing inhibitors. The poor chromatographic
properties of PQS reported by others could be overcome by fast microwave-assisted
acetylation. The validation procedure including matrix effects, recovery, process
efficiency, selectivity, carry-over, accuracy and precision, stability of the
processed sample, and limit of quantification demonstrated that the method
fulfilled all requirements of common validation guidelines. Its applicability was
successfully proven in routine testing. In addition, two-point calibration was
shown to be applicable for fast and reliable PQS quantification saving time and
resources. In summary, the described method provides a powerful tool for the
discovery of new quorum sensing inhibitors as potential anti-infectives and
illustrated the usefulness of chemical derivatization, acetylation, in liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpba.2013.07.047 
PMID: 24001903  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

