
1. Biochemistry. 2013 Oct 1;52(39):6834-43. doi: 10.1021/bi4006545. Epub 2013 Sep
19.

The transfer of reduced flavin mononucleotide from LuxG oxidoreductase to
luciferase occurs via free diffusion.

Tinikul R(1), Pitsawong W, Sucharitakul J, Nijvipakul S, Ballou DP, Chaiyen P.

Author information: 
(1)Mahidol University , Nakhonsawan Campus, Nakhonsawan 60130, Thailand.

Bacterial luciferase (LuxAB) is a two-component flavin mononucleotide
(FMN)-dependent monooxygenase that catalyzes the oxidation of reduced FMN
(FMNH(-)) and a long-chain aliphatic aldehyde by molecular oxygen to generate
oxidized FMN, the corresponding aliphatic carboxylic acid, and concomitant
emission of light. The LuxAB reaction requires a flavin reductase to generate
FMNH(-) to serve as a luciferin in its reaction. However, FMNH(-) is unstable and
can react with oxygen to generate H2O2, so that it is important to transfer it
efficiently to LuxAB. Recently, LuxG has been identified as a NADH:FMN
oxidoreductase that supplies FMNH(-) to luciferase in vivo. In this report, the
mode of transfer of FMNH(-) between LuxG from Photobacterium leiognathi TH1 and
LuxABs from both P. leiognathi TH1 and Vibrio campbellii (PlLuxAB and VcLuxAB,
respectively) was investigated using single-mixing and double-mixing stopped-flow
spectrophotometry. The oxygenase component of p-hydroxyphenylacetate hydroxylase 
(C2) from Acinetobacter baumannii, which has no structural similarity to LuxAB,
was used to measure the kinetics of release of FMNH(-) from LuxG. With all
FMNH(-) acceptors used (C2, PlLuxAB, and VcLuxAB), the kinetics of FMN reduction 
on LuxG were the same, showing that LuxG releases FMNH(-) with a rate constant of
4.5-6 s(-1). Our data showed that the kinetics of binding of FMNH(-)to PlLuxAB
and VcLuxAB and the subsequent reactions with oxygen were the same with either
free FMNH(-) or FMNH(-) generated in situ by LuxG. These results strongly suggest
that no complexes between LuxG and the various species are necessary to transfer 
FMNH(-) to the acceptors. The kinetics of the overall reactions and the
individual rate constants correlate well with a free diffusion model for the
transfer of FMNH(-) from LuxG to either LuxAB.

DOI: 10.1021/bi4006545 
PMID: 24004065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

