
1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 5;8(9):e74271. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074271. eCollection 
2013.

Experimentally validated novel inhibitors of Helicobacter pylori
phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase discovered by virtual high-throughput
screening.

Cheng CS(1), Jia KF, Chen T, Chang SY, Lin MS, Yin HS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioinformatics and Structural Biology and College of Life
Sciences, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.

Helicobacter pylori is a major etiologic agent associated with the development
and maintenance of human gastritis. The goal of this study was to develop novel
antibiotics against H. pylori, and we thus targeted H. pylori phosphopantetheine 
adenylyltransferase (HpPPAT). PPAT catalyzes the penultimate step in coenzyme A
biosynthesis. Its inactivation effectively prevents bacterial viability, making
it an attractive target for antibacterial drug discovery. We employed virtual
high-throughput screening and the HpPPAT crystal structure to identify compounds 
in the PubChem database that might act as inhibitors of HpPPAT. d-amethopterin is
a potential inhibitor for blocking HpPPAT activity and suppressing H. pylori
viability. Following treatment with d-amethopterin, H. pylori exhibited
morphological characteristics associated with cell death. d-amethopterin is a
mixed inhibitor of HpPPAT activity; it simultaneously occupies the HpPPAT
4'-phosphopantetheine- and ATP-binding sites. Its binding affinity is in the
micromolar range, implying that it is sufficiently potent to serve as a lead
compound in subsequent drug development. Characterization of the d-amethopterin
and HpPPAT interaction network in a docked model will allow us to initiate
rational drug optimization to improve the inhibitory efficacy of d-amethopterin. 
We anticipate that novel, potent, and selective HpPPAT inhibitors will emerge for
the treatment of H. pylori infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074271 
PMCID: PMC3764209
PMID: 24040220  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

