
1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Nov 15;288(46):33439-48. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.508135. Epub
2013 Sep 24.

Specificity determinants for lysine incorporation in Staphylococcus aureus
peptidoglycan as revealed by the structure of a MurE enzyme ternary complex.

Ruane KM(1), Lloyd AJ, Fülöp V, Dowson CG, Barreteau H, Boniface A, Dementin S,
Blanot D, Mengin-Lecreulx D, Gobec S, Dessen A, Roper DI.

Author information: 
(1)From the School of Life Sciences, Gibbet Hill Road, University of Warwick,
Coventry CV4 7AL, United Kingdom.

Formation of the peptidoglycan stem pentapeptide requires the insertion of both L
and D amino acids by the ATP-dependent ligase enzymes MurC, -D, -E, and -F. The
stereochemical control of the third position amino acid in the pentapeptide is
crucial to maintain the fidelity of later biosynthetic steps contributing to cell
morphology, antibiotic resistance, and pathogenesis. Here we determined the x-ray
crystal structure of Staphylococcus aureus MurE
UDP-N-acetylmuramoyl-L-alanyl-D-glutamate:meso-2,6-diaminopimelate ligase (MurE) 
(E.C. 6.3.2.7) at 1.8 Å resolution in the presence of ADP and the reaction
product, UDP-MurNAc-L-Ala-γ-D-Glu-L-Lys. This structure provides for the first
time a molecular understanding of how this Gram-positive enzyme discriminates
between L-lysine and D,L-diaminopimelic acid, the predominant amino acid that
replaces L-lysine in Gram-negative peptidoglycan. Despite the presence of a
consensus sequence previously implicated in the selection of the third position
residue in the stem pentapeptide in S. aureus MurE, the structure shows that only
part of this sequence is involved in the selection of L-lysine. Instead, other
parts of the protein contribute substrate-selecting residues, resulting in a
lysine-binding pocket based on charge characteristics. Despite the absolute
specificity for L-lysine, S. aureus MurE binds this substrate relatively poorly. 
In vivo analysis and metabolomic data reveal that this is compensated for by high
cytoplasmic L-lysine concentrations. Therefore, both metabolic and structural
constraints maintain the structural integrity of the staphylococcal
peptidoglycan. This study provides a novel focus for S. aureus-directed
antimicrobials based on dual targeting of essential amino acid biogenesis and its
linkage to cell wall assembly.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.508135 
PMCID: PMC3829189
PMID: 24064214  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

