
1. Ann Agric Environ Med. 2013;20(3):431-5.

The evaluation of enamel matrix derivative on subgingival microbial environment
in non-surgical periodontal therapy.

Wyganowska-Świątkowska M(1), Szkaradkiewicz AK, Karpiński TM, Marcinkowski JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Conservative Dentistry and Periodontology, Poznan University of 
Medical Sciences, Poland.

INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVE: Recent in vitro studies indicate that enamel matrix
derivative (EMD) could modulate the growth of periodontopathogens. The aim of the
presented study was an analysis of the influence of EMD on the presence of
Porphyromonas and Prevotella bacteria in the periodontal pockets of patients with
chronic periodontitis in non-surgical periodontal therapy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The studies were conducted on 20 patients. The condition
of the periodontium was evaluated by clinical indexes: API. SBI. PD. CAL before
and 3 months after the therapy in two selected quadrants. The material was
collected for investigation. The periodontopathogens were cultured and
identified. Two days after EMD-scaling root planing (SRP) was applied into the
pockets.
RESULTS: In the group of patients under investigation before the EMD application 
the presence of P. gingivalis was found in 6 patients and P. intermedia in 8
patients. After root planing and EMD application no periodontopathogens were
identified in those patients either in the periodontal pockets treated with EMD
or in the periodontal pockets free from EMD (control). In the statistical
analysis of changes in clinical indexes, the application of SRP and SRP combined 
with EMD was proved to significantly influence the improvement of the clinical
state. However, no significant differences between the individual parameters were
found in either group.
CONCLUSIONS: The SRP is an effective method of limiting the development of
periopathogens in periodontal pockets. The non-surgical therapy with EMD does not
change the clinical parameters significantly, compared with the SRP.
Simultaneously, the application of EMD inhibits the development of
periopathogens, such as Porphyromonas gingivalis and Prevotella.


PMID: 24069844  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

