
1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 30;8(9):e72627. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072627. eCollection
2013.

Microbial communities of deep-sea methane seeps at Hikurangi continental margin
(New Zealand).

Ruff SE(1), Arnds J, Knittel K, Amann R, Wegener G, Ramette A, Boetius A.

Author information: 
(1)HGF MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck Institute for
Marine Microbiology, Bremen, Germany ; Department of Molecular Ecology, Max
Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology, Bremen, Germany.

The methane-emitting cold seeps of Hikurangi margin (New Zealand) are among the
few deep-sea chemosynthetic ecosystems of the Southern Hemisphere known to date. 
Here we compared the biogeochemistry and microbial communities of a variety of
Hikurangi cold seep ecosystems. These included highly reduced seep habitats
dominated by bacterial mats, partially oxidized habitats populated by
heterotrophic ampharetid polychaetes and deeply oxidized habitats dominated by
chemosynthetic frenulate tubeworms. The ampharetid habitats were characterized by
a thick oxic sediment layer that hosted a diverse and biomass-rich community of
aerobic methanotrophic Gammaproteobacteria. These bacteria consumed up to 25% of 
the emanating methane and clustered within three deep-branching groups named
Marine Methylotrophic Group (MMG) 1-3. MMG1 and MMG2 methylotrophs belong to the 
order Methylococcales, whereas MMG3 methylotrophs are related to the
Methylophaga. Organisms of the groups MMG1 and MMG3 are close relatives of
chemosynthetic endosymbionts of marine invertebrates. The anoxic sediment layers 
of all investigated seeps were dominated by anaerobic methanotrophic archaea
(ANME) of the ANME-2 clade and sulfate-reducing Deltaproteobacteria. Microbial
community analysis using Automated Ribosomal Intergenic Spacer Analysis (ARISA)
showed that the different seep habitats hosted distinct microbial communities,
which were strongly influenced by the seep-associated fauna and the geographic
location. Despite outstanding features of Hikurangi seep communities, the
organisms responsible for key ecosystem functions were similar to those found at 
seeps worldwide. This suggests that similar types of biogeochemical settings
select for similar community composition regardless of geographic distance.
Because ampharetid polychaetes are widespread at cold seeps the role of aerobic
methanotrophy may have been underestimated in seafloor methane budgets.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072627 
PMCID: PMC3787109
PMID: 24098632  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

