
1. ACS Chem Biol. 2013 Dec 20;8(12):2794-801. doi: 10.1021/cb400530d. Epub 2013 Oct 
25.

Biochemical and biophysical analysis of a chiral PqsD inhibitor revealing
tight-binding behavior and enantiomers with contrary thermodynamic signatures.

Storz MP(1), Brengel C, Weidel E, Hoffmann M, Hollemeyer K, Steinbach A, Müller
R, Empting M, Hartmann RW.

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz-Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland (HIPS) , Department
Drug Design and Optimization, Campus C2.3, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.

Antivirulence strategies addressing bacterial pathogenicity without exhibiting
growth inhibition effects represent a novel approach to overcome today's crisis
in antibiotic development. In recent studies, we examined various inhibitors of
PqsD, an enzyme involved in formation of Pseudomonas aeruginosa cell-to-cell
signaling molecules, and observed desired cellular effects for 2-nitrophenyl
derivatives. Herein, we investigated the binding characteristics of this
interesting compound class using several biochemical and biophysical methods. The
inhibitors showed time-dependent activity, tight-binding behavior, and
interactions with the catalytic center. Furthermore, isothermal titration
calorimetry (ITC) experiments with separated enantiomers revealed contrary
thermodynamic signatures showing either enthalpy- or entropy-driven affinity. A
combination of site-directed mutagenesis and thermodynamic profiling was used to 
identify key residues involved in inhibitor binding. This information allowed the
proposal of experimentally confirmed docking poses. Although originally designed 
as transition state analogs, our results suggest an altered position for both
enantiomers. Interestingly, the main difference between stereoisomers was found
in the orientation of the hydroxyl group at the stereogenic center. The predicted
binding modes are in accordance with experimental data and, thus, allow future
structure-guided optimization.

DOI: 10.1021/cb400530d 
PMID: 24099650  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

