
1. Cell Microbiol. 2014 Mar;16(3):378-95. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12223. Epub 2013 Nov 6.

Burkholderia cenocepacia J2315 escapes to the cytosol and actively subverts
autophagy in human macrophages.

Al-Khodor S(1), Marshall-Batty K, Nair V, Ding L, Greenberg DE, Fraser ID.

Author information: 
(1)Signaling Systems Unit, Laboratory of Systems Biology, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD,
20892, USA.

Selective autophagy functions to specifically degrade cellular cargo tagged by
ubiquitination, including bacteria. Strains of the Burkholderia cepacia complex
(Bcc) are opportunistic pathogens that cause life-threatening infections in
patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) and chronic granulomatous disease (CGD). While
there is evidence that defective macrophage autophagy in a mouse model of CF can 
influence B. cenocepacia susceptibility, there have been no comprehensive studies
on how this bacterium is sensed and targeted by the host autophagy response in
human macrophages. Here, we describe the intracellular life cycle of
B. cenocepacia J2315 and its interaction with the autophagy pathway in human
cells. Electron and confocal microscopy analyses demonstrate that the invading
bacteria interact transiently with the endocytic pathway before escaping to the
cytosol. This escape triggers theselective autophagy pathway, and the recruitment
of ubiquitin, the ubiquitin-binding adaptors p62 and NDP52 and the autophagosome 
membrane-associated protein LC3B, to the bacterial vicinity. However, despite
recruitment of these key autophagy pathway effectors, B. cenocepacia blocks
autophagosome completion and replicates in the host cytosol. We find that a
pre-infection increase in cellular autophagy flux can significantly inhibit
B. cenocepacia replication and that lower autophagy flux in macrophages from
immunocompromised CGD patients could contribute to increased B. cenocepacia
susceptibility, identifying autophagy manipulation as a potential therapeutic
approach to reduce bacterial burden in B. cenocepacia infections.

Published 2013. This article has been contributed to by U.S. Government employees
and their work is in the public domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12223 
PMCID: PMC3927784
PMID: 24119232  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

