
1. Exp Dermatol. 2013 Dec;22(12):800-6. doi: 10.1111/exd.12259.

Antimicrobial peptides and pro-inflammatory cytokines are differentially
regulated across epidermal layers following bacterial stimuli.

Percoco G(1), Merle C, Jaouen T, Ramdani Y, Bénard M, Hillion M, Mijouin L, Lati 
E, Feuilloley M, Lefeuvre L, Driouich A, Follet-Gueye ML.

Author information: 
(1)Glycobiology and Plant Extracellular Matrix (GlycoMEV) Laboratory, UPRES EA
4358, University of Rouen, Mont-Saint-Aignan, France; BIO-EC Laboratory,
Longjumeau, France.

Comment in
    Exp Dermatol. 2014 Apr;23(4):230-1.

The skin is a natural barrier between the body and the environment and is
colonised by a large number of microorganisms. Here, we report a complete
analysis of the response of human skin explants to microbial stimuli. Using this 
ex vivo model, we analysed at both the gene and protein level the response of
epidermal cells to Staphylococcus epidermidis (S. epidermidis) and Pseudomonas
fluorescens (P. fluorescens), which are present in the cutaneous microbiota. We
showed that both bacterial species affect the structure of skin explants without 
penetrating the living epidermis. We showed by real-time quantitative polymerase 
chain reaction (qPCR) that S. epidermidis and P. fluorescens increased the levels
of transcripts that encode antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), including human β
defensin (hBD)2 and hBD3, and the pro-inflammatory cytokines interleukin (IL)-1α 
and (IL)-1-β, as well as IL-6. In addition, we analysed the effects of bacterial 
stimuli on the expression profiles of genes related to innate immunity and the
inflammatory response across the epidermal layers, using laser capture
microdissection (LCM) coupled to qPCR. We showed that AMP transcripts were
principally upregulated in suprabasal keratinocytes. Conversely, the expression
of pro-inflammatory cytokines was upregulated in the lower epidermis. These
findings were confirmed by protein localisation using specific antibodies coupled
to optical or electron microscopy. This work underscores the potential value of
further studies that use LCM on human skin explants model to study the roles and 
effects of the epidermal microbiota on human skin physiology.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/exd.12259 
PMID: 24118337  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

