
1. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 4;8(10):e76283. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076283. eCollection
2013.

Elevated paracellular glucose flux across cystic fibrosis airway epithelial
monolayers is an important factor for Pseudomonas aeruginosa growth.

Garnett JP(1), Gray MA, Tarran R, Brodlie M, Ward C, Baker EH, Baines DL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biomedical Sciences, St George's University of London, London,
United Kingdom.

People with cystic fibrosis (CF) who develop related diabetes (CFRD) have
accelerated pulmonary decline, increased infection with antibiotic-resistant
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and increased pulmonary exacerbations. We have previously 
shown that glucose concentrations are elevated in airway surface liquid (ASL) of 
people with CF, particularly in those with CFRD. We therefore explored the
hypotheses that glucose homeostasis is altered in CF airway epithelia and that
elevation of glucose flux into ASL drives increased bacterial growth, with an
effect over and above other cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator
(CFTR)-related ASL abnormalities. The aim of this study was to compare the
mechanisms governing airway glucose homeostasis in CF and non-CF primary human
bronchial epithelial (HBE) monolayers, under normal conditions and in the
presence of Ps. aeruginosa filtrate. HBE-bacterial co-cultures were performed in 
the presence of 5 mM or 15 mM basolateral glucose to investigate how changes in
blood glucose, such as those seen in CFRD, affects luminal Ps. aeruginosa growth.
Calu-3 cell monolayers were used to evaluate the potential importance of glucose 
on Ps. aeruginosa growth, in comparison to other hallmarks of the CF ASL, namely 
mucus hyperviscosity and impaired CFTR-dependent fluid secretions. We show that
elevation of basolateral glucose promotes the apical growth of Ps. aeruginosa on 
CF airway epithelial monolayers more than non-CF monolayers. Ps. aeruginosa
secretions elicited more glucose flux across CF airway epithelial monolayers
compared to non-CF monolayers which we propose increases glucose availability in 
ASL for bacterial growth. In addition, elevating basolateral glucose increased
Ps. aeruginosa growth over and above any CFTR-dependent effects and the presence 
or absence of mucus in Calu-3 airway epithelia-bacteria co-cultures. Together
these studies highlight the importance of glucose as an additional factor in
promoting Ps. aeruginosa growth and respiratory infection in CF disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076283 
PMCID: PMC3790714
PMID: 24124542  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

