
1. J Periodontal Res. 2014 Aug;49(4):536-43. doi: 10.1111/jre.12134. Epub 2013 Oct
18.

Age-related alterations in gene expression of gingival fibroblasts stimulated
with Porphyromonas gingivalis.

Domon H(1), Tabeta K, Nakajima T, Yamazaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Periodontology and Immunology, Division of Oral Science for
Health Promotion, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Niigata, Japan; Division of Periodontology, Department of Oral
Biological Science, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Niigata, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Elderly people exhibit increased susceptibility to a
number of autoimmune and infectious diseases, such as periodontitis. Although
aging is reportedly associated with a decline in immune function, age-related
alterations in periodontal tissue have remained elusive. In the present study, we
comprehensively analyzed the effect of aging on the expression of selected genes 
using mouse gingival fibroblasts.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Gingival fibroblasts derived from young (8 wk of age) and
old (≥ 24 mo of age) C57BL/6 mice were stimulated with Porphyromonas gingivalis
lipopolysaccharide or live P. gingivalis strain W83. Expression of
cytokines/chemokines, innate immune receptors, growth factors, matrix
metalloproteinases, tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases and
osteoclastogenesis-related molecules were evaluated using real-time polymerase
chain reaction and ELISA for interleukin-6 and transforming growth factor-β1.
RESULTS: Gingival fibroblasts derived from old mice exhibited decreased gene
expression of Il-6, Cxcl1, Tlr2, Tlr4, Irak3 (IRAK-M), Kgf, Timp1, Timp3 and
Rankl under resting conditions, whereas the expression levels of Tgfβ1, Mmp3,
Mmp13 and Opg were increased. Age-related differences were also detected at the
protein level. Although P. gingivalis W83 upregulated Vegf, Fgf-2 and Bmp2
expression in both young and old gingival fibroblasts, the stimulatory effect on 
these genes was significantly lower in old gingival fibroblasts.
CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrated that aging altered the expression of a
number of genes in gingival fibroblasts. Thus, alterations in the balance of
these molecules could play a critical role in periodontitis progression in the
elderly.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jre.12134 
PMID: 24138068  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

