
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2013 Oct 17;7(10):e2500. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002500.
eCollection 2013.

Glyburide reduces bacterial dissemination in a mouse model of melioidosis.

Koh GC(1), Weehuizen TA, Breitbach K, Krause K, de Jong HK, Kager LM, Hoogendijk 
AJ, Bast A, Peacock SJ, van der Poll T, Steinmetz I, Wiersinga WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Division of Infectious
Diseases, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands ; Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, Coventry, United
Kingdom ; Department of Infection and Tropical Medicine, Heartlands Hospital,
Birmingham, United Kingdom ; Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom ; Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit,
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: Burkholderia pseudomallei infection (melioidosis) is an important
cause of community-acquired Gram-negative sepsis in Northeast Thailand, where it 
is associated with a ~40% mortality rate despite antimicrobial chemotherapy. We
showed in a previous cohort study that patients taking glyburide ( =
glibenclamide) prior to admission have lower mortality and attenuated
inflammatory responses compared to patients not taking glyburide. We sought to
define the mechanism underlying this observation in a murine model of
melioidosis.
METHODS: Mice (C57BL/6) with streptozocin-induced diabetes were inoculated with
~6 × 10(2) cfu B. pseudomallei intranasally, then treated with therapeutic
ceftazidime (600 mg/kg intraperitoneally twice daily starting 24 h after
inoculation) in order to mimic the clinical scenario. Glyburide (50 mg/kg) or
vehicle was started 7 d before inoculation and continued until sacrifice. The
minimum inhibitory concentration of glyburide for B. pseudomallei was determined 
by broth microdilution. We also examined the effect of glyburide on interleukin
(IL) 1β by bone-marrow-derived macrophages (BMDM).
RESULTS: Diabetic mice had increased susceptibility to melioidosis, with
increased bacterial dissemination but no effect was seen of diabetes on
inflammation compared to non-diabetic controls. Glyburide treatment did not
affect glucose levels but was associated with reduced pulmonary cellular influx, 
reduced bacterial dissemination to both liver and spleen and reduced IL1β
production when compared to untreated controls. Other cytokines were not
different in glyburide-treated animals. There was no direct effect of glyburide
on B. pseudomallei growth in vitro or in vivo. Glyburide directly reduced the
secretion of IL1β by BMDMs in a dose-dependent fashion.
CONCLUSIONS: Diabetes increases the susceptibility to melioidosis. We further
show, for the first time in any model of sepsis, that glyburide acts as an
anti-inflammatory agent by reducing IL1β secretion accompanied by diminished
cellular influx and reduced bacterial dissemination to distant organs. We found
no evidence for a direct effect of glyburide on the bacterium.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002500 
PMCID: PMC3798430
PMID: 24147174  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

