
1. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 14;8(10):e76235. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076235.
eCollection 2013.

Identification of novel predictor classifiers for inflammatory bowel disease by
gene expression profiling.

Montero-Meléndez T(1), Llor X, García-Planella E, Perretti M, Suárez A.

Author information: 
(1)The William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and The London School of
Medicine, Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Improvement of patient quality of life is the ultimate goal of
biomedical research, particularly when dealing with complex, chronic and
debilitating conditions such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). This is largely
dependent on receiving an accurate and rapid diagnose, an effective treatment and
in the prediction and prevention of side effects and complications. The low
sensitivity and specificity of current markers burden their general use in the
clinical practice. New biomarkers with accurate predictive ability are needed to 
achieve a personalized approach that take the inter-individual differences into
consideration.
METHODS: We performed a high throughput approach using microarray gene expression
profiling of colon pinch biopsies from IBD patients to identify predictive
transcriptional signatures associated with intestinal inflammation, differential 
diagnosis (Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis), response to glucocorticoids
(resistance and dependence) or prognosis (need for surgery). Class prediction was
performed with self-validating Prophet software package.
RESULTS: Transcriptional profiling divided patients in two subgroups that
associated with degree of inflammation. Class predictors were identified with
predictive accuracy ranging from 67 to 100%. The expression accuracy was
confirmed by real time-PCR quantification. Functional analysis of the predictor
genes showed that they play a role in immune responses to bacteria (PTN, OLFM4
and LILRA2), autophagy and endocytocis processes (ATG16L1, DNAJC6, VPS26B,
RABGEF1, ITSN1 and TMEM127) and glucocorticoid receptor degradation (STS and
MMD2).
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that using analytical algorithms for class prediction
discovery can be useful to uncover gene expression profiles and identify
classifier genes with potential stratification utility of IBD patients, a major
step towards personalized therapy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076235 
PMCID: PMC3796518
PMID: 24155895  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

