
1. Commun Dis Intell Q Rep. 2013 Jun 30;37(2):E144-8.

An outbreak of staphylococcal food poisoning in a commercially catered buffet.

Pillsbury A(1), Chiew M, Bates J, Sheppeard V.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Immunisation Research and Surveillance of Vaccine
Preventable Diseases (NCIRS), The Children's Hospital at Westmead and the
University of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia and National Centre for
Epidemiology and Population Health, Australian National University, Canberra,
Australia.

Staphylococcal food poisoning is a common cause of foodborne illness. In
Australia, since 2000, approximately 30% of foodborne Staphylococcus aureus
outbreaks reported to OzFoodNet have been associated with foods prepared by
commercial caterers. We conducted a retrospective cohort analysis of an outbreak 
of gastrointestinal illness among participants of an elite sporting event during 
which 22 individuals became ill after eating a commercially catered buffet dinner
in June 2012. All recalled eating fried rice which had been intended for lunch
service earlier that day and 20 of the 22 reported eating chicken stir-fry.
Though no food samples were available for analysis, laboratory analysis conducted
on four faecal specimens resulted in S. aureus being cultured from one specimen
and S. aureus enterotoxin detected in another. The known epidemiology of
staphylococcal food poisoning suggests a food contaminated by an infected food
handler which was subject to temperature abuse may have caused the outbreak. As
S. aureus foodborne outbreaks are often underreported, this investigation is a
valuable contribution to the evidence-base and understanding of foodborne illness
due to S. aureus and staphylococcal enterotoxin.

This work is copyright. Apart from any use as permitted under the Copyright Act
1968, no part may be reproduced by any process without prior written permission
from the Commonwealth. Requests and inquiries concerning reproduction and rights 
should be addressed to the Commonwealth Copyright Administration, Attorney
General's Department, Robert Garran Offices, National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600 or
posted at http://www.ag.gov.au/cca.


PMID: 24168088  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

