
1. Stroke. 2014 Jan;45(1):293-7. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.113.003578. Epub 2013 Nov 7.

MicroRNA-18a improves human cerebral arteriovenous malformation endothelial cell 
function.

Ferreira R(1), Santos T, Amar A, Tahara SM, Chen TC, Giannotta SL, Hofman FM.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Neurological Surgery (R.F., A.A., T.C.C., S.L.G.,
F.M.H.), Department of Pathology (T.S., T.C.C., F.M.H.), and Department of
Molecular Microbiology and Immunology (S.M.T.), Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Cerebral arteriovenous malformation (AVM) is a vascular
disease that disrupts normal blood flow and leads to serious neurological
impairment or death. Aberrant functions of AVM-derived brain endothelial cells
(AVM-BECs) are a disease hallmark. Our aim was to use microRNA-18a (miR-18a) as a
therapeutic agent to improve AVM-BEC function.
METHODS: Human AVM-BECs were tested for growth factor production and
proliferation under different shear flow conditions and evaluated for tubule
formation. Thrombospondin-1, inhibitor of DNA-binding protein 1, and vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) isotype mRNA levels were quantified by
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. Thrombospondin-1, VEGF-A, and
VEGF-D protein expression was measured using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
Proliferation and tubule formation were evaluated using bromodeoxyuridine
incorporation and growth factor-reduced Matrigel assays, respectively.
RESULTS: miR-18a increased thrombospondin-1 production but decreased inhibitor of
DNA-binding protein 1, a transcriptional repressor of thrombospondin-1. miR-18a
reduced VEGF-A and VEGF-D levels, both overexpressed in untreated AVM-BECs. This 
is the first study reporting VEGF-D overexpression in AVM. These effects were
most prominent under arterial shear flow conditions. miR-18a also reduced AVM-BEC
proliferation, improved tubule formation, and was effectively internalized by
AVM-BECs in the absence of extraneous transfection reagents.
CONCLUSIONS: We report VEGF-D overexpression in AVM and the capacity of miR-18a
to induce AVM-BECs to function more normally. This highlights the clinical
potential of microRNA as a treatment for AVM and other vascular diseases.

DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.113.003578 
PMID: 24203843  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

