
1. J Periodontal Res. 2014 Oct;49(5):615-23. doi: 10.1111/jre.12142. Epub 2013 Nov
9.

Green tea extract and its major constituent, epigallocatechin-3-gallate, induce
epithelial beta-defensin secretion and prevent beta-defensin degradation by
Porphyromonas gingivalis.

Lombardo Bedran TB(1), Feghali K, Zhao L, Palomari Spolidorio DM, Grenier D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Diagnosis and Surgery, Araraquara Dental School, State
University of São Paulo, Araraquara, SP, Brazil.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Antimicrobial peptides, such as beta-defensins,
secreted by gingival epithelial cells, are thought to play a major role in
preventing periodontal diseases. In the present study, we investigated the
ability of green tea polyphenols to induce human beta-defensin (hBD) secretion in
gingival epithelial cells and to protect hBDs from proteolytic degradation by
Porphyromonas gingivalis.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Gingival epithelial cells were treated with various amounts
(25-200 μg/mL) of green tea extract or epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG). The
secretion of hBD1 and hBD2 was measured using ELISAs, and gene expression was
quantified by real-time PCR. The treatments were also carried out in the presence
of specific kinase inhibitors to identify the signaling pathways involved in hBD 
secretion. The ability of green tea extract and EGCG to prevent hBD degradation
by proteases of P. gingivalis present in a bacterial culture supernatant was
evaluated by ELISA.
RESULTS: The secretion of hBD1 and hBD2 was up-regulated, in a dose-dependent
manner, following the stimulation of gingival epithelial cells with a green tea
extract or EGCG. Expression of the hBD gene in gingival epithelial cells treated 
with green tea polyphenols was also increased. EGCG-induced secretion of hBD1 and
hBD2 appeared to involve extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 and p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase. Lastly, green tea extract and EGCG prevented
the degradation of recombinant hBD1 and hBD2 by a culture supernatant of
P. gingivalis.
CONCLUSION: Green tea extract and EGCG, through their ability to induce hBD
secretion by epithelial cells and to protect hBDs from proteolytic degradation by
P. gingivalis, have the potential to strengthen the epithelial antimicrobial
barrier. Future clinical studies will indicate whether these polyphenols
represent a valuable therapeutic agent for treating/preventing periodontal
diseases.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jre.12142 
PMID: 24206194  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

