
1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 14;8(11):e79142. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079142.
eCollection 2013.

An improved method for surface immobilisation of RNA: application to small
non-coding RNA-mRNA pairing.

Vincent HA(1), Phillips JO, Henderson CA, Roberts AJ, Stone CM, Mardle CE, Butt
LE, Gowers DM, Pickford AR, Callaghan AJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences and Institute of Biomedical & Biomolecular
Sciences, University of Portsmouth, Portsmouth, United Kingdom.

Characterisation of RNA and its intermolecular interactions is increasing in
importance as the inventory of known RNA functions continues to expand. RNA-RNA
interactions are central to post-transcriptional gene regulation mechanisms in
bacteria, and the interactions of bacterial small non-coding RNAs (sRNAs) with
their mRNA targets are the subject of much current research. The technology of
surface plasmon resonance (SPR) is an attractive approach to studying these
interactions since it is highly sensitive, and allows interaction measurements to
be recorded in real-time. Whilst a number of approaches exist to label RNAs for
surface-immobilisation, the method documented here is simple, quick, efficient,
and utilises the high-affinity streptavidin-biotin interaction. Specifically, we 
ligate a biotinylated nucleotide to the 3' end of RNA using T4 RNA ligase.
Although this is a previously recognised approach, we have optimised the method
by our discovery that the incorporation of four or more adenine nucleotides at
the 3' end of the RNA (a poly-A-tail) is required in order to achieve high
ligation efficiencies. We use this method within the context of investigating
small non-coding RNA (sRNA)-mRNA interactions through the application of surface 
technologies, including quantitative SPR assays. We first focus on validating the
method using the recently characterised Escherichia coli sRNA-mRNA pair,
MicA-ompA, specifically demonstrating that the addition of the poly-A-tail to
either RNA does not affect its subsequent binding interactions with partner
molecules. We then apply this method to investigate the novel interactions of a
Vibrio cholerae Qrr sRNA with partner mRNAs, hapR and vca0939; RNA-RNA pairings
that are important in mediating pathogenic virulence. The calculated binding
parameters allow insights to be drawn regarding sRNA-mRNA interaction mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079142 
PMCID: PMC3828260
PMID: 24244437  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

