
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2014 Jan;80(2):777-87. doi: 10.1128/AEM.03224-13. Epub
2013 Nov 15.

Quorum-sensing regulation of constitutive plantaricin by Lactobacillus plantarum 
strains under a model system for vegetables and fruits.

Rizzello CG(1), Filannino P, Di Cagno R, Calasso M, Gobbetti M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Soil, Plant and Food Science, University of Bari Aldo Moro,
Bari, Italy.

This study aimed at investigating the regulatory system of bacteriocin synthesis 
by Lactobacillus plantarum strains in vegetables and fruits in a model system.
Sterile and neutralized cell-free supernatant (CFS) from L. plantarum strains
grown in MRS broth showed in vitro antimicrobial activities toward various
indicator strains. The highest activity was that of L. plantarum C2. The
antimicrobial activity was further assayed on vegetable and fruit agar plates
(solid conditions) and in juices (liquid conditions). A regulatory mechanism of
bacteriocin synthesis via quorum sensing was hypothesized. The synthesis of
antimicrobial compounds seemed to be constitutive under solid conditions of
growth on vegetable and fruit agar plates. In contrast, it depended on the size
of the inoculum when L. plantarum C2 was grown in carrot juice. Only the inoculum
of ca. 9.0 log CFU ml(-1) produced detectable activity. The genes plnA, plnEF,
plnG, and plnH were found in all L. plantarum strains. The genes plnJK and plnN
were detected in only three or four strains. Reverse-phase high-performance
liquid chromatography purification and mass spectrometry analysis revealed the
presence of a mixture of eight peptides in the most active fraction of the CFS
from L. plantarum C2. Active peptides were encrypted into bacteriocin precursors,
such as plantaricins PlnJ/K and PlnH and PlnG, which are involved in the ABC
transport system. A real-time PCR assay showed an increase in the expression of
plnJK and plnG during growth of L. plantarum C2 in carrot juice.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.03224-13 
PMCID: PMC3911083
PMID: 24242246  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

