
1. Am J Rhinol Allergy. 2013 Nov-Dec;27(6):467-72. doi: 10.2500/ajra.2013.27.3960.

Chronic rhinosinusitis and antibiotics: the good, the bad, and the ugly.

Kennedy JL(1), Borish L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Asthma and Allergic Disease Center, Carter Immunology 
Center, University of Virginia Health System, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.

BACKGROUND: Despite the recognition that bacteria are universally present in the 
sinuses of patients with chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) no compelling role for a
primary infectious etiology of CRS has been elucidated. CRS is a constellation of
inflammatory diseases that typically involve either noneosinophilic or
eosinophilic processes, distinct conditions that must be treated individually.
METHODS: The bacteria that are present in the sinuses may be innocuous bystanders
but alternatively may contribute to the presence and severity of the disease
through their ability to influence immune responses, function as immune
adjuvants, provide antigens or superantigens that contribute to adaptive immune
activation, or in forming the basis for the frequent acute superinfections.
However, those bacteria that do contribute to the persistence and severity of CRS
primarily reside in biofilms, and, as such, are not capable of being eradicated
with antibiotics at the doses at which they can be used, even when local
irrigation is considered.
RESULTS: Biofilms create an inhospitable environment for antibiotic potency by
down-regulating the metabolic activity of their "core" bacteria, decreasing the
oxygen concentration, and altering the pH at the core of the biofilm.
CONCLUSION: Ultimately, if topical antibiotics are considered, they should be
primarily focused on treating acute exacerbations and choices of antibiotics
should optimally be based on endoscopic culture. This should be done with the
recognition that while under certain circumstances antibiotics can ameliorate the
severity of CRS, even if bacterial eradication were possible, this would not
eliminate the underlying primary pathogenic mechanism or the natural history of
these conditions.

DOI: 10.2500/ajra.2013.27.3960 
PMCID: PMC3836217
PMID: 24274221  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

