
1. J Biosci. 2013 Nov;38(4):703-12.

Structural and gene expression analyses of uptake hydrogenases and other proteins
involved in nitrogenase protection in Frankia.

Richau KH(1), Kudahettige RL, Pujic P, Kudahettige NP, Sellstedt A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Physiology, UPSC, Umea University, S-90187 Umea, Sweden.

The actinorhizal bacterium Frankia expresses nitrogenase and can therefore
convert molecular nitrogen into ammonia and the by-product hydrogen. However,
nitrogenase is inhibited by oxygen. Consequently, Frankia and its actinorhizal
hosts have developed various mechanisms for excluding oxygen from their
nitrogen-containing compartments. These include the expression of
oxygen-scavenging uptake hydrogenases, the formation of hopanoid-rich vesicles,
enclosed by multi-layered hopanoid structures, the lignification of hyphal cell
walls, and the production of haemoglobins in the symbiotic nodule. In this work, 
we analysed the expression and structure of the so-called uptake hydrogenase
(Hup), which catalyses the in vivo dissociation of hydrogen to recycle the energy
locked up in this 'waste' product. Two uptake hydrogenase syntons have been
identified in Frankia: synton 1 is expressed under freeliving conditions while
synton 2 is expressed during symbiosis. We used qPCR to determine synton 1 hup
gene expression in two Frankia strains under aerobic and anaerobic conditions. We
also predicted the 3D structures of the Hup protein subunits based on multiple
sequence alignments and remote homology modelling. Finally, we performed BLAST
searches of genome and protein databases to identify genes that may contribute to
the protection of nitrogenase against oxygen in the two Frankia strains. Our
results show that in Frankia strain ACN14a, the expression patterns of the large 
(HupL1) and small (HupS1) uptake hydrogenase subunits depend on the abundance of 
oxygen in the external environment. Structural models of the membrane-bound
hydrogenase subunits of ACN14a showed that both subunits resemble the structures 
of known [NiFe] hydrogenases (Volbeda et al. 1995), but contain fewer cysteine
residues than the uptake hydrogenase of the Frankia DC12 and Eu1c strains.
Moreover, we show that all of the investigated Frankia strains have two squalene 
hopane cyclase genes (shc1 and shc2). The only exceptions were CcI3 and the
symbiont of Datisca glomerata, which possess shc1 but not shc2. Four truncated
haemoglobin genes were identified in Frankia ACN14a and Eu1f, three in CcI3, two 
in EANpec1 and one in the Datisca glomerata symbiont (Dg).

DOI: 10.1007/s12038-013-9372-1 
PMID: 24287649  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

