
1. Microbiol Res. 2014 May-Jun;169(5-6):337-47. doi: 10.1016/j.micres.2013.09.003.
Epub 2013 Dec 4.

Does a rhizospheric microorganism enhance K⁺ availability in agricultural soils?

Meena VS(1), Maurya BR(1), Verma JP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Soil Science and Agricultural Chemistry, Institute of
Agricultural Sciences, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi 221005, India.
(2)Institute of Environment and Sustainable Development, Banaras Hindu
University, Varanasi 221005, India. Electronic address: verma_bhu@yahoo.co.in.

The potassium solubilizing microorganisms (KSMs) are a rhizospheric microorganism
which solubilizes the insoluble potassium (K) to soluble forms of K for plant
growth and yield. K-solubilization is carried out by a large number of
saprophytic bacteria (Bacillus mucilaginosus, Bacillus edaphicus, Bacillus
circulans, Acidothiobacillus ferrooxidans, Paenibacillus spp.) and fungal strains
(Aspergillus spp. and Aspergillus terreus). Major amounts of K containing
minerals (muscovite, orthoclase, biotite, feldspar, illite, mica) are present in 
the soil as a fixed form which is not directly taken up by the plant. Nowadays
most of the farmers use injudicious application of chemical fertilizers for
achieving maximum productivity. However, the KSMs are most important
microorganisms for solubilizing of fixed form of K in soil system. The KSMs are
an indigenous rhizospheric microorganism which shows effective interaction
between soil and plant systems. The main mechanism of KSMs is acidolysis,
chelation, exchange reactions, complexolysis and production of organic acid.
According to literature, currently negligible use of potassium fertilizer as a
chemical form has been recorded in agriculture for enhancing crop yield. Most of 
the farmers use only nitrogen and phosphorus and not use the K fertilizer due to 
unawareness so that the problem of K deficiency occurs in rhizospheric soils. The
K fertilizer is also costly as compared to other chemical fertilizers. Therefore,
the efficient KSMs should be applied for solubilization of a fixed form of K to
an available form of K in the soils. This available K can be easily taken up by
the plant for growth and development. Our aim of this review is to elaborate on
the studies of indigenous K-solubilizing microbes to develop efficient microbial 
consortia for solubilization of K in soil which enhances the plant growth and
yield of crops. This review highlights the future need for research on potassium 
(K) in agriculture.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micres.2013.09.003 
PMID: 24315210  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

