
1. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2013;2013:109-17. doi:
10.1182/asheducation-2013.1.109.

Helicobacter pylori and mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue: what's new.

Kuo SH(1), Cheng AL.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of 1Oncology and.

Low-grade mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma of the stomach,
gastric MALT lymphoma, is associated with Helicobacter pylori infection. The
eradication of H pylori using antibiotics is successful in 60% to 80% of affected
patients. In contrast to the previous paradigm, we and other investigators have
shown that a certain proportion of patients with H pylori-positive early-stage
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) of the stomach with histological evidence
of MALT lymphoma, including high-grade transformed gastric MALT lymphoma and
gastric DLBCL(MALT), achieved long-term complete pathological remission (pCR)
after first-line H pylori eradication therapy, indicating that the loss of H
pylori dependence and high-grade transformation are separate events in the
progression of gastric lymphoma. In addition, patients with H pylori-positive
gastric DLBCL without histological evidence of MALT (gastric pure DLBCL) may also
respond to H pylori eradication therapy. A long-term follow-up study showed that 
patients who achieved pCR remained lymphoma free. Gastric MALT lymphoma is
indirectly influenced by H pylori infection through T-cell stimulation, and
recent studies have shown that H pylori-triggering chemokines and their
receptors, H pylori-associated epigenetic changes, H pylori-regulated miRNA
expression, and tumor infiltration by CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells contribute to 
lymphomagenesis of gastric MALT lymphoma. Recent studies have also demonstrated
that the translocation of CagA into B lymphocytes inhibits apoptosis through p53 
accumulation, BAD phosphorylation, and the up-regulation of Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL
expression. In gastric MALT lymphoma, CagA may stimulate lymphomagenesis
directly, through the regulation of signal transduction, and intracellular CagA
is associated with H pylori dependence. These findings represent a substantial
paradigm shift compared with the classical theory of H pylori-reactive T cells
contributing indirectly to the development of MALT lymphoma. In conclusion, a
wide range of H pylori-related gastric lymphomas have been identified. The use of
antibiotics as the sole first-line therapy for early-stage gastric pure DLBCL
requires validation in a prospective study. The clinical and biological
significance of the CagA oncoprotein in the lymphomagenesis of gastric MALT
lymphoma warrants further study.

DOI: 10.1182/asheducation-2013.1.109 
PMID: 24319171  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

