
1. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 4;8(12):e80597. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080597. eCollection
2013.

Simultaneous transcriptional profiling of bacteria and their host cells.

Humphrys MS(1), Creasy T, Sun Y, Shetty AC, Chibucos MC, Drabek EF, Fraser CM,
Farooq U, Sengamalay N, Ott S, Shou H, Bavoil PM, Mahurkar A, Myers GS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

We developed an RNA-Seq-based method to simultaneously capture prokaryotic and
eukaryotic expression profiles of cells infected with intracellular bacteria. As 
proof of principle, this method was applied to Chlamydia trachomatis-infected
epithelial cell monolayers in vitro, successfully obtaining transcriptomes of
both C. trachomatis and the host cells at 1 and 24 hours post-infection.
Chlamydiae are obligate intracellular bacterial pathogens that cause a range of
mammalian diseases. In humans chlamydiae are responsible for the most common
sexually transmitted bacterial infections and trachoma (infectious blindness).
Disease arises by adverse host inflammatory reactions that induce tissue damage &
scarring. However, little is known about the mechanisms underlying these
outcomes. Chlamydia are genetically intractable as replication outside of the
host cell is not yet possible and there are no practical tools for routine
genetic manipulation, making genome-scale approaches critical. The early
timeframe of infection is poorly understood and the host transcriptional response
to chlamydial infection is not well defined. Our simultaneous RNA-Seq method was 
applied to a simplified in vitro model of chlamydial infection. We discovered a
possible chlamydial strategy for early iron acquisition, putative immune
dampening effects of chlamydial infection on the host cell, and present a
hypothesis for Chlamydia-induced fibrotic scarring through runaway positive
feedback loops. In general, simultaneous RNA-Seq helps to reveal the complex
interplay between invading bacterial pathogens and their host mammalian cells and
is immediately applicable to any bacteria/host cell interaction.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080597 
PMCID: PMC3851178
PMID: 24324615  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

