
1. Sci Total Environ. 2014 Feb 15;472:1145-51. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.11.045.
Epub 2013 Dec 22.

Evidence of arsenic release promoted by disinfection by-products within
drinking-water distribution systems.

Andra SS(1), Makris KC(2), Botsaris G(3), Charisiadis P(4), Kalyvas H(4), Costa
CN(5).

Author information: 
(1)Water and Health Laboratory, Cyprus International Institute for Environmental 
and Public Health in association with Harvard School of Public Health, Cyprus
University of Technology, Limassol, Cyprus; Harvard-Cyprus Program, Department of
Environmental Health, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, United
States.
(2)Water and Health Laboratory, Cyprus International Institute for Environmental 
and Public Health in association with Harvard School of Public Health, Cyprus
University of Technology, Limassol, Cyprus. Electronic address:
konstantinos.makris@cut.ac.cy.
(3)Department of Agricultural Sciences, Biotechnology and Food Science, Cyprus
University of Technology, Limassol, Cyprus.
(4)Water and Health Laboratory, Cyprus International Institute for Environmental 
and Public Health in association with Harvard School of Public Health, Cyprus
University of Technology, Limassol, Cyprus.
(5)Department of Environmental Science and Technology, Cyprus University of
Technology, Limassol, Cyprus.

Changes in disinfectant type could trigger a cascade of reactions releasing
pipe-anchored metals/metalloids into finished water. However, the effect of
pre-formed disinfection by-products on the release of sorbed contaminants
(arsenic-As in particular) from drinking water distribution system pipe scales
remains unexplored. A bench-scale study using a factorial experimental design was
performed to evaluate the independent and interaction effects of trihalomethanes 
(TTHM) and haloacetic acids (HAA) on arsenic (As) release from either scales-only
or scale-biofilm conglomerates (SBC) both anchored on asbestos/cement pipe
coupons. A model biofilm (Pseudomonas aeruginosa) was allowed to grow on select
pipe coupons prior experimentation. Either TTHM or HAA individual dosing did not 
promote As release from either scales only or SBC, detecting <6 μg AsL(-1) in
finished water. In the case of scales-only coupons, the combination of the
highest spike level of TTHM and HAA significantly (p<0.001) increased dissolved
and total As concentrations to levels up to 16 and 95 μg L(-1), respectively.
Similar treatments in the presence of biofilm (SBC) resulted in significant
(p<0.001) increase in dissolved and total recoverable As up to 20 and 47 μg
L(-1), respectively, exceeding the regulatory As limit. Whether or not, our
laboratory-based results truly represent mechanisms operating in disinfected
finished water in pipe networks remains to be investigated in the field.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.11.045 
PMID: 24365518  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

