
1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2014 Feb;20(2):339-52. doi:
10.1097/01.MIB.0000438430.15553.90.

Infliximab restores the dysfunctional matrix remodeling protein and growth factor
gene expression in patients with inflammatory bowel disease.

de Bruyn M(1), Machiels K, Vandooren J, Lemmens B, Van Lommel L, Breynaert C, Van
der Goten J, Staelens D, Billiet T, De Hertogh G, Ferrante M, Van Assche G,
Vermeire S, Opdenakker G, Schuit F, Rutgeerts P, Arijs I.

Author information: 
(1)*Translational Research Center for Gastrointestinal Disorders (TARGID),
Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine; †Laboratory of Immunobiology
(Rega Institute for Medical Research), Department of Microbiology and Immunology;
‡Translational Cell and Tissue Research, Department of Imaging and Pathology;
§Gene Expression Unit, Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine; and ‖Leuven
Food Science and Nutrition Research Centre (LFoRCe), KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), tissue inhibitors of
metalloproteinases (TIMPs), a disintegrin and metalloprotease with thrombospondin
motifs [ADAM(TS)s] and growth factors are involved in inflammation and tissue
damage and repair, all occurring in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). We studied 
the impact of anti-inflammatory therapy with infliximab on mucosal expression of 
these tissue remodeling genes in patients with IBD.
METHODS: Mucosal gene expression of 23 MMPs, 4 TIMPs, 50 ADAM(TS)s, and 158
growth factors was investigated in 61 patients with IBD before and after the
first infliximab therapy and in 12 controls, with microarrays and quantitative
RT-PCR. Protein localization, mucosal gelatinase levels, and net gelatinolytic
activity were investigated by immunohistochemistry, zymography analysis, and
gelatin degradation assay, respectively.
RESULTS: In patients with active IBD before infliximab versus controls, gene
expression of many MMPs, TIMPs, ADAM(TS)s, and growth factors was upregulated,
whereas colonic expression of MMP28 and TGFA and ileal expression of ADAMDEC1 and
AGT were downregulated. After controlling inflammation with infliximab, most gene
dysregulations observed at baseline were restored in responders. Increased ratio 
of MMP1/TIMP1 expression at baseline in active IBD was restored in responders
with colonic mucosal healing. With immunohistochemistry, protein localization
differences of MMP1, MMP3, REG1A, and TIMP1 were shown between active IBD and
control mucosa. With zymography analysis and gelatin degradation assay, higher
gelatinase levels and net gelatinolytic activity were measured before infliximab 
and levels normalized after infliximab.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that suppression of inflammation results in the
arrest of epithelial damage and subsequent mucosal healing. Therefore, the
therapeutic potential of agents targeting MMPs or growth factors as primary
therapy seems rather complex.

DOI: 10.1097/01.MIB.0000438430.15553.90 
PMID: 24378596  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

