
1. Crit Care Med. 2014 Mar;42(3):e221-30. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000000134.

Mice lacking the lectin-like domain of thrombomodulin are protected against
melioidosis.

Kager LM(1), Wiersinga WJ, Roelofs JJ, Stroo I, Achouiti A, van 't Veer C, Conway
EM, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)1Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 2Center for Infection and
Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 3Division of Infectious Diseases, Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 4Department of
Pathology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. 5Department of Immunopathology, Sanquin, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
6Centre for Blood Research, Life Sciences Institute, Division of
Hematology-Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: Thrombomodulin is a multidomain receptor primarily expressed by
vascular endothelium. The lectin-like domain of thrombomodulin has
anti-inflammatory properties. In this study, we investigated the role of the
thrombomodulin lectin-like domain in the host response to Gram-negative sepsis
caused by Burkholderia pseudomallei, a "Tier 1" biothreat agent and the causative
agent of melioidosis, a common form of community-acquired sepsis in Southeast
Asia.
DESIGN: Animal study.
SETTING: University research laboratory.
SUBJECTS: Wild-type mice and mice lacking the lectin-like domain of
thrombomodulin.
INTERVENTIONS: Mice were intranasally infected with live B. pseudomallei and
killed after 24, 48, or 72 hours for harvesting of lungs, liver, spleen, and
blood. Additionally, survival studies were performed.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Following exposure to B. pseudomallei, mice
lacking the lectin-like domain of thrombomodulin showed a survival advantage,
accompanied by decreased bacterial loads in the blood, lungs, liver, and spleen. 
Although lung histopathology did not differ between groups, mice lacking the
lectin-like domain of thrombomodulin displayed strongly attenuated systemic
inflammation, as reflected by lower plasma cytokine levels, maintenance of normal
kidney and liver function, histologic evidence of reduced organ damage, and
damage to the spleen.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals for the first time a detrimental role for the
thrombomodulin lectin-like domain in the host response to sepsis caused by a
clinically relevant Gram-negative pathogen.

DOI: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000000134 
PMID: 24399241  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

