
1. Breast Cancer Res. 2014 Jan 7;16(1):R1. doi: 10.1186/bcr3593.

New insights into lineage restriction of mammary gland epithelium using
parity-identified mammary epithelial cells.

Chang TH, Kunasegaran K, Tarulli GA, De Silva D, Voorhoeve PM, Pietersen AM.

INTRODUCTION: Parity-identified mammary epithelial cells (PI-MECs) are an
interesting cellular subset because they survive involution and are a presumptive
target for transformation by human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)/neu 
in mammary tumors. Depending on the type of assay, PI-MECs have been designated
lobule-restricted progenitors or multipotent stem/progenitor cells. PI-MECs were 
reported to be part of the basal population of mammary epithelium based on flow
cytometry. We investigated the cellular identity and lineage potential of PI-MECs
in intact mammary glands.
METHODS: We performed a quantitative and qualitative analysis of the contribution
of PI-MECs to mammary epithelial cell lineages in pregnant and involuted mammary 
glands by immunohistochemistry, fluorescence-activated cells sorting (FACS), and 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction. PI-MECs were labeled by the activation of
Whey Acidic Protein (WAP)-Cre during pregnancy that results in permanent
expression of yellow fluorescent protein.
RESULTS: After involution, PI-MECs are present exclusively in the luminal layer
of mammary ducts. During pregnancy, PI-MECs contribute to the luminal layer but
not the basal layer of alveolar lobules. Strikingly, whereas all luminal estrogen
receptor (ER)-negative cells in an alveolus can be derived from PI-MECs, the
alveolar ER-positive cells are unlabeled and reminiscent of Notch2-traced L
cells. Notably, we observed a significant population of unlabeled alveolar
progenitors that resemble PI-MECs based on transcriptional and histological
analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our demonstration that PI-MECs are luminal cells underscores that
not only basal cells display multi-lineage potential in transplantation assays.
However, the lineage potential of PI-MECs in unperturbed mammary glands is
remarkably restricted to luminal ER-negative cells of the secretory alveolar
lineage. The identification of an unlabeled but functionally similar population
of luminal alveolar progenitor cells raises the question of whether PI-MECs are a
unique population or the result of stochastic labeling. Interestingly, even when 
all luminal ER-negative cells of an alveolus are PI-MEC-derived, the basal cells 
and hormone-sensing cells are derived from a different source, indicating that
cooperative outgrowth of cells from different lineages is common in
alveologenesis.

DOI: 10.1186/bcr3593 
PMCID: PMC3978646
PMID: 24398145  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

