
1. Toxicology. 2014 Feb 28;316:25-33. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2013.12.006. Epub 2014 Jan 
3.

Inhibitions of the translocation pore of Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin by
tailored azolopyridinium salts protects human cells from intoxication.

Bronnhuber A(1), Maier E(2), Riedl Z(3), Hajós G(3), Benz R(4), Barth H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Ulm Medical Center,
Ulm, Germany.
(2)Rudolf-Virchow-Center, DFG-Research Center for Experimental Biomedicine,
University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(3)Institute of Organic Chemistry, Research Centre for Natural Sciences,
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary.
(4)Rudolf-Virchow-Center, DFG-Research Center for Experimental Biomedicine,
University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany; School of Engineering and Science,
Jacobs University Bremen, Bremen, Germany. Electronic address:
r.benz@jacobs-university.de.
(5)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Ulm Medical Center,
Ulm, Germany. Electronic address: holger.barth@uni-ulm.de.

C2 toxin from Clostridium botulinum represents the prototype of clostridial
binary actin ADP-ribosylating toxins which destroy the actin-cytoskeleton of
mammalian cells and cause severe enteric diseases in humans and animals. After
receptor-mediated endocytosis of the C2 toxin complex, the binding/translocation 
component C2IIa forms a heptameric transmembrane pore in membranes of acidified
endosomal vesicles. The separate ADP-ribosyltransferase component C2I
translocates through this C2IIa-pore from the endosomal lumen into the cytosol.
Here we demonstrate that positively charged heterocyclic azolopyridinium salts
which were developed as pore blockers for the anthrax toxins, efficiently protect
cultured mammalian cells from intoxication with C2 toxin. The inhibitors had no
effects on enzyme activity of C2I or receptor binding of C2 toxin but inhibited
the pH-dependent membrane translocation of C2I in living cells, most likely by
blocking the C2IIa-translocation pores. In vitro, the substances blocked
C2IIa-pores in black lipid bilayer membranes when applied to the cis-side of the 
membrane which corresponds to the endosomal lumen of cells. Thus, heterocyclic
azolopyridinium salts could represent lead compounds for development of novel
therapeutics against binary clostridial toxins.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tox.2013.12.006 
PMID: 24394545  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

