
1. J Infect Dis. 2014 Jun 15;209(12):1989-99. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiu004. Epub 2014 
Jan 7.

Bacteria in the vaginal microbiome alter the innate immune response and barrier
properties of the human vaginal epithelia in a species-specific manner.

Doerflinger SY(1), Throop AL(2), Herbst-Kralovetz MM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Human and Molecular Biology Center, Saarland University, Saarbrucken, Germany 
Department of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine-Phoenix, University of 
Arizona.
(2)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine-Phoenix, University 
of Arizona.

BACKGROUND: Bacterial vaginosis increases the susceptibility to sexually
transmitted infections and negatively affects women's reproductive health.
METHODS: To investigate host-vaginal microbiota interactions and the impact on
immune barrier function, we colonized 3-dimensional (3-D) human vaginal
epithelial cells with 2 predominant species of vaginal microbiota (Lactobacillus 
iners and Lactobacillus crispatus) or 2 prevalent bacteria associated with
bacterial vaginosis (Atopobium vaginae and Prevotella bivia).
RESULTS: Colonization of 3-D vaginal epithelial cell aggregates with vaginal
microbiota was observed with direct attachment to host cell surface with no
cytotoxicity. A. vaginae infection yielded increased expression
membrane-associated mucins and evoked a robust proinflammatory, immune response
in 3-D vaginal epithelial cells (ie, expression of CCL20, hBD-2, interleukin 1β, 
interleukin 6, interleukin 8, and tumor necrosis factor α) that can negatively
affect barrier function. However, P. bivia and L. crispatus did not significantly
upregulate pattern-recognition receptor-signaling, mucin expression,
antimicrobial peptides/defensins, or proinflammatory cytokines in 3-D vaginal
epithelial cell aggregates. Notably, L. iners induced pattern-recognition
receptor-signaling activity, but no change was observed in mucin expression or
secretion of interleukin 6 and interleukin 8.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified unique species-specific immune signatures from vaginal
epithelial cells elicited by colonization with commensal and bacterial
vaginosis-associated bacteria. A. vaginae elicited a signature that is consistent
with significant disruption of immune barrier properties, potentially resulting
in enhanced susceptibility to sexually transmitted infections during bacterial
vaginosis.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiu004 
PMID: 24403560  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

