
1. Chem Soc Rev. 2014 Apr 21;43(8):2587-627. doi: 10.1039/c3cs60293a. Epub 2014 Jan 
3.

Valorization of industrial waste and by-product streams via fermentation for the 
production of chemicals and biopolymers.

Koutinas AA(1), Vlysidis A, Pleissner D, Kopsahelis N, Lopez Garcia I, Kookos IK,
Papanikolaou S, Kwan TH, Lin CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, Agricultural University of
Athens, Iera Odos 75, 118 55, Athens, Greece.

The transition from a fossil fuel-based economy to a bio-based economy
necessitates the exploitation of synergies, scientific innovations and
breakthroughs, and step changes in the infrastructure of chemical industry.
Sustainable production of chemicals and biopolymers should be dependent entirely 
on renewable carbon. White biotechnology could provide the necessary tools for
the evolution of microbial bioconversion into a key unit operation in future
biorefineries. Waste and by-product streams from existing industrial sectors
(e.g., food industry, pulp and paper industry, biodiesel and bioethanol
production) could be used as renewable resources for both biorefinery development
and production of nutrient-complete fermentation feedstocks. This review focuses 
on the potential of utilizing waste and by-product streams from current
industrial activities for the production of chemicals and biopolymers via
microbial bioconversion. The first part of this review presents the current
status and prospects on fermentative production of important platform chemicals
(i.e., selected C2-C6 metabolic products and single cell oil) and biopolymers
(i.e., polyhydroxyalkanoates and bacterial cellulose). In the second part, the
qualitative and quantitative characteristics of waste and by-product streams from
existing industrial sectors are presented. In the third part, the techno-economic
aspects of bioconversion processes are critically reviewed. Four case studies
showing the potential of case-specific waste and by-product streams for the
production of succinic acid and polyhydroxyalkanoates are presented. It is
evident that fermentative production of chemicals and biopolymers via refining of
waste and by-product streams is a highly important research area with significant
prospects for industrial applications.

DOI: 10.1039/c3cs60293a 
PMID: 24424298  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

