
1. Mol Genet Metab. 2014 Mar;111(3):331-341. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.12.011. Epub 
2013 Dec 27.

In vivo metabolic flux profiling with stable isotopes discriminates sites and
quantifies effects of mitochondrial dysfunction in C. elegans.

Vergano SS(#)(1)(2)(3), Rao M(#)(1), McCormack S(#)(4), Ostrovsky J(1), Clarke
C(1)(2), Preston J(1), Bennett MJ(5), Yudkoff M(2), Xiao R(6), Falk MJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, and
University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.
(2)Division of Metabolic Disease, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and
University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.
(3)Children's Hospital of The King's Daughters, Division of Medical Genetics and 
Metabolism, Norfolk, VA, USA.
(4)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital
of Philadelphia and University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia and University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(6)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, University of Pennsylvania
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Mitochondrial respiratory chain (RC) disease diagnosis is complicated both by an 
absence of biomarkers that sufficiently divulge all cases and limited capacity to
quantify adverse effects across intermediary metabolism. We applied high
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and mass spectrometry (MS) studies of
stable-isotope based precursor-product relationships in the nematode, C. elegans,
to interrogate in vivo differences in metabolic flux among distinct genetic
models of primary RC defects and closely related metabolic disorders.METHODS: C. 
elegans strains studied harbor single nuclear gene defects in complex I, II, or
III RC subunits (gas-1, mev-1, isp-1); enzymes involved in coenzyme Q
biosynthesis (clk-1), the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA, idh-1), or pyruvate
metabolism (pdha-1); and central nodes of the nutrient-sensing signaling network 
that involve insulin response (daf-2) or the sirtuin homologue (sir-2.1).
Synchronous populations of 2000 early larval stage worms were fed standard
Escherichia coli on nematode growth media plates containing 1,6-(13)C2-glucose
throughout their developmental period, with samples extracted on the first day of
adult life in 4% perchloric acid with an internal standard. Quantitation of whole
animal free amino acid concentrations and isotopic incorporation into amino and
organic acids throughout development was performed in all strains by HPLC and
isotope ratio MS, respectively. GC/MS analysis was also performed to quantify
absolute isotopic incorporation in all molecular species of key TCA cycle
intermediates in gas-1 and N2 adult worms.
RESULTS: Genetic mutations within different metabolic pathways displayed distinct
metabolic profiles. RC complex I (gas-1) and III (isp-1) subunit mutants,
together with the coenzyme Q biosynthetic mutant (clk-1), shared a similar amino 
acid profile of elevated alanine and decreased glutamate. The metabolic signature
of the complex II mutant (mev-1) was distinct from that of the other RC mutants
but resembled that of the TCA cycle mutant (idh-1) and both signaling mutants
(daf-2 and sir-2.1). All branched chain amino acid levels were significantly
increased in the complex I and III mutants but decreased in the PDH mutant
(pdha-1). The RC complex I, coenzyme Q, TCA cycle, and PDH mutants shared
significantly increased relative enrichment of lactate+1 and absolute
concentration of alanine+1, while glutamate+1 enrichment was significantly
decreased uniquely in the RC mutants. Relative intermediary flux analyses were
suggestive of proximal TCA cycle disruption in idh-1, completely reduced TCA
cycle flux in sir-2.1, and apparent distal TCA cycle alteration in daf-2. GC/MS
analysis with universally-labeled (13)C-glucose in adult worms further showed
significantly increased isotopic enrichment in lactate, citrate, and malate
species in the complex I (gas-1) mutant.
CONCLUSIONS: Stable isotopic/mass spectrometric analysis can sensitively
discriminate primary RC dysfunction from genetic deficiencies affecting either
the TCA cycle or pyruvate metabolism. These data are further suggestive that
metabolic flux analysis using stable isotopes may offer a robust means to
discriminate and quantify the secondary effects of primary RC dysfunction across 
intermediary metabolism.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.12.011 
PMCID: PMC3947636
PMID: 24445252  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

