
1. Autophagy. 2014 Apr;10(4):572-87. doi: 10.4161/auto.27649. Epub 2014 Jan 14.

Autophagy is essential for cardiac morphogenesis during vertebrate development.

Lee E(1), Koo Y(2), Ng A(3), Wei Y(4), Luby-Phelps K(5), Juraszek A(6), Xavier
RJ(3), Cleaver O(2), Levine B(7), Amatruda JF(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine; University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center; Dallas, TX USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology; University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center; Dallas, TX USA.
(3)Center for Computational & Integrative Biology; Massachusetts General
Hospital; Boston, MA USA; Gastrointestinal Unit; Massachusetts General Hospital; 
Boston, MA USA; Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT; Cambridge, MA USA.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine; University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center; Dallas, TX USA; Center for Autophagy Research; University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center; Dallas, TX USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute;
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center; Dallas, TX USA.
(5)Department of Cell Biology; UT Southwestern Medical Center; Dallas, TX USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics; University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center;
Dallas, TX USA.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine; University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center; Dallas, TX USA; Center for Autophagy Research; University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center; Dallas, TX USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute;
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center; Dallas, TX USA; Department of
Microbiology; University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center; Dallas, TX USA.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine; University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center; Dallas, TX USA; Department of Molecular Biology; University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center; Dallas, TX USA; Department of Pediatrics; University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center; Dallas, TX USA.

Genetic analyses indicate that autophagy, an evolutionarily conserved lysosomal
degradation pathway, is essential for eukaryotic differentiation and development.
However, little is known about whether autophagy contributes to morphogenesis
during embryogenesis. To address this question, we examined the role of autophagy
in the early development of zebrafish, a model organism for studying vertebrate
tissue and organ morphogenesis. Using zebrafish that transgenically express the
fluorescent autophagy reporter protein, GFP-LC3, we found that autophagy is
active in multiple tissues, including the heart, during the embryonic period.
Inhibition of autophagy by morpholino knockdown of essential autophagy genes
(including atg5, atg7, and becn1) resulted in defects in morphogenesis, increased
numbers of dead cells, abnormal heart structure, and reduced organismal survival.
Further analyses of cardiac development in autophagy-deficient zebrafish revealed
defects in cardiac looping, abnormal chamber morphology, aberrant valve
development, and ectopic expression of critical transcription factors including
foxn4, tbx5, and tbx2. Consistent with these results, Atg5-deficient mice
displayed abnormal Tbx2 expression and defects in valve development and chamber
septation. Thus, autophagy plays an essential, conserved role in cardiac
morphogenesis during vertebrate development.

DOI: 10.4161/auto.27649 
PMCID: PMC4091146
PMID: 24441423  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

