
1. J Immunol. 1987 Dec 1;139(11):3614-21.

The ability of cytotoxic T cells to recognize HLA-A2.1 or HLA-B7 antigens
expressed on murine cells correlates with their epitope specificity.

Bernhard EJ(1), Le AX, Yannelli JR, Holterman MJ, Hogan KT, Parham P, Engelhard
VH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Virginia School of Medicine,
Charlottesville 22908.

Two groups of human and murine cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) clones specific for
human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-A2 or -B7 can be distinguished based on their
ability to kill murine transfectants expressing these molecules. The clones which
do not recognize murine transfectants exhibited greatly reduced conjugate
formation with these cells, indicating that the inability to lyse these cells
occurs in recognition and binding. No systematic differences in inhibitory titer 
between the two types of CTL clones were seen with anti-CD8 (Lyt-2), anti-LFA-1, 
or monoclonal antibodies against HLA class I molecules. However, blocking with
anti-HLA class I monoclonal antibodies suggested that different CTL clones
recognized spatially separate epitopes on HLA-A2 and -B7. In addition, a
correlation between the inability to recognize murine transfectants and fine
specificity was seen. Eight of nine clones which did not lyse murine
transfectants also failed to recognize human cells expressing HLA-A2.2 or -A2.3. 
In contrast only 5 of 12 clones which lysed transfectants failed to recognize the
variant molecules. Analogous data were obtained with human CTL clones raised
against HLA-A2.1. These findings suggest that CTL clones that do not lyse murine 
cells expressing appropriate antigens recognize epitopes that have been altered
or lost as a consequence of expression on the murine cell surface. It is
suggested that the loss of HLA-associated epitopes on the murine cell surface may
be due to differences between mouse and human cells in the processing or
presentation of class I-associated peptides.


PMID: 2445816  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

