
1. Acta Oncol. 2014 Mar;53(3):297-306. doi: 10.3109/0284186X.2013.873140. Epub 2014 
Jan 27.

Acta Oncologica Lecture. Gastrointestinal consequences of cancer treatment and
the wider context: a bad gut feeling.

Muls AC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust , London , UK.

BACKGROUND: The percentage of people living with a diagnosis of cancer is rising 
globally. Between 20% and 25% of people treated for cancer experience a
consequence of cancer which has an adverse impact on the quality of their life.
Gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms are the most common of all consequences of cancer 
treatment and have the greatest impact on daily activity. PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF
LONG-TERM BOWEL DAMAGE AFTER PELVIC RADIOTHERAPY: Long-term damage to the bowel
after radiotherapy is mediated by ischaemic changes and fibrosis. Each fraction
of radiotherapy causes a series of repetitive injuries to the intestinal tissue
resulting in an altered healing process, which affects the integrity of the
repair and changes the architecture of the bowel wall. THE NATURE OF GI SYMPTOMS 
THAT DEVELOP: Patient-reported outcome measures show that diarrhoea, urgency,
increased bowel frequency, tenesmus and flatulence are the five most prevalent GI
symptoms with a moderate or severe impact on patients' daily lives after
treatment with pelvic radiotherapy. Many patients also experience fatigue,
urinary problems and have sexual concerns. SYSTEMATIC ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT: 
The complex nature of those symptoms warrants systematic assessment and
management. The use of a tested algorithm can assist in achieving this. The most 
common contributing factors to ongoing bowel problems after pelvic radiotherapy
are small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, bile acid malabsorption, pancreatic
insufficiency, rectal bleeding and its impact on bone health.
THE WIDER CONTEXT: Symptom burden, socio-psychosocial impact, memory and
cognitive function, fatigue, urinary problems and sexual concerns need to be
taken into account when thinking about consequences of cancer treatment.
CONCLUSION: As our understanding of consequences of cancer treatments continues
to emerge and encompass a wide variety of specialties, a holistic, multifaceted
and multidisciplinary approach is required to manage those consequences
long-term.

DOI: 10.3109/0284186X.2013.873140 
PMID: 24460087  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

