
1. Int J Circumpolar Health. 2013 Oct 23;72:21848. doi: 10.3402/ijch.v72i0.21848.
eCollection 2013.

Food and water security issues in Russia I: food security in the general
population of the Russian Arctic, Siberia and the Far East, 2000-2011.

Dudarev AA(1), Alloyarov PR(1), Chupakhin VS(1), Dushkina EV(1), Sladkova YN(1), 
Dorofeyev VM(2), Kolesnikova TA(1), Fridman KB(1), Nilsson LM(3), Evengård B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Northwest Public Health Research Center, St. Petersburg, Russia.
(2)Dubna City Hospital, Moscow oblast, Russia.
(3)Division of Nutritional Research, Department of Public Health and Clinical
Medicine, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden ; Arcum - Arctic Research Centre, Umeå
University, Umeå, Sweden.
(4)Arcum - Arctic Research Centre, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden ; Division of
Infectious Diseases, Department of Clinical Microbiology, Umeå University, Umeå, 
Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Problems related to food security in Russian Arctic (dietary
imbalance, predominance of carbohydrates, shortage of milk products, vegetables
and fruits, deficit of vitamins and microelements, chemical, infectious and
parasitic food contamination) have been defined in the literature. But no
standard protocol of food security assessment has been used in the majority of
studies.
OBJECTIVES: Our aim was to obtain food security indicators, identified within an 
Arctic collaboration, for selected regions of the Russian Arctic, Siberia and the
Far East, and to compare food safety in these territories.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: In 18 regions of the Russian Arctic, Siberia and the
Far East, the following indicators of food security were analyzed: food costs,
food consumption, and chemical and biological food contamination for the period
2000-2011.
RESULTS: Food costs in the regions are high, comprising 23-43% of household
income. Only 4 out of 10 food groups (fish products, cereals, sugar, plant oil)
are consumed in sufficient amounts. The consumption of milk products, eggs,
vegetables, potatoes, fruits (and berries) is severely low in a majority of the
selected regions. There are high levels of biological contamination of food in
many regions. The biological and chemical contamination situation is alarming,
especially in Chukotka. Only 7 food pollutants are under regular control; among
pesticides, only DDT. Evenki AO and Magadan Oblast have reached peak values in
food contaminants compared with other regions. Mercury in local fish has not been
analyzed in the majority of the regions. In 3 regions, no monitoring of DDT
occurs. Aflatoxins have not been analyzed in 5 regions. Nitrates had the highest 
percentage in excess of the hygienic threshold in all regions. Excesses of other 
pollutants in different regions were episodic and as a rule not high.
CONCLUSION: Improvement of the food supply and food accessibility in the regions 
of the Russian Arctic, Siberia and the Far East is of utmost importance. Both
quantitative and qualitative control of chemical and biological contaminants in
food is insufficient and demands radical enhancement aimed at improving food
security.

DOI: 10.3402/ijch.v72i0.21848 
PMCID: PMC3902219
PMID: 24471055  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

