
1. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 28;9(1):e86874. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086874. eCollection
2014.

The potential role of increasing the release of mouse β- defensin-14 in the
treatment of osteomyelitis in mice: a primary study.

Zhu C(1), Wang J(2), Cheng T(2), Li Q(3), Shen H(2), Qin H(2), Cheng M(2), Zhang 
X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China ; Department of
Orthopaedic Surgery, Anhui Provincial Hospital of Anhui Medical University,
Hefei, China.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Mammalian β-defensins are small cationic peptides that have been implicated in
mediating innate immune defenses against microbial infection. Mouse β-defensin-14
(MBD-14), based on structural and functional similarities, appears to be an
ortholog of human β-defensin-3 (HBD-3). Previous studies identified signaling
pathway p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) that contributed to the
expression of MBD-14 in mouse osteoblasts upon contacted with
methicillin-resistance Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) supernatant, which provided a
theoretical basis as a promising therapeutic target in the treatment of
intramedullary infection with MRSA in vivo. In this study, the medullary cavities
of tibiae were contaminated with MRSA 10(3) colony forming units and different
doses of p38 MAPK agonists anisomycin were followed as group III or IV in 30
mice. Fifteen animals that received phosphate- buffered saline served as group II
and 15 mice were not contaminated with MRSA and received phosphate-buffered
saline served as controls (group I). Follow-up was 7 days. In day 1, day 4 and
day 7 postoperatively, infection was evaluated by blood routine, microbiological 
and histological analyses after sacrifice. All animals of group II developed
microbiological and histological signs of infection. Histological signs of
infection, white blood counts and cultures of group III and IV showed
significantly reduced bacterial growth compared to cultures of group II.
Simultaneously, different doses of anisomycin significantly induced the
expression of osteoblast-associated genes, including alkaline phosphatase,
osteocalcin and collagen type I. In addition, the expression of HBD-3 in human
interfacial membranes around infected periprosthetic joint by staphylococcus
contaminated was evaluated, and the expression pattern changed with significant
induction of HBD-3 in infected periprosthetic joint compared with aseptic
loosening under inflammatory conditions. Our primary study indicated that the
potential antibacterial role of increased MBD-14 in the osteomyelitis mouse
model.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086874 
PMCID: PMC3904979
PMID: 24489798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

