
1. Infect Immun. 2014 Apr;82(4):1657-65. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01231-13. Epub 2014 Feb 3.

Suppression of antimicrobial peptide expression by ureaplasma species.

Xiao L(1), Crabb DM, Dai Y, Chen Y, Waites KB, Atkinson TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama, USA.

Ureaplasma species commonly colonize the adult urogenital tract and are
implicated in invasive diseases of adults and neonates. Factors that permit the
organisms to cause chronic colonization or infection are poorly understood. We
sought to investigate whether host innate immune responses, specifically,
antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), are involved in determining the outcome of
Ureaplasma infections. THP-1 cells, a human monocytoid tumor line, were
cocultured with Ureaplasma parvum and U. urealyticum. Gene expression levels of a
variety of host defense genes were quantified by real-time PCR. In vitro
antimicrobial activities of synthetic AMPs against Ureaplasma spp. were
determined using a flow cytometry-based assay. Chromosomal histone modifications 
in host defense gene promoters were tested by chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP). DNA methylation status in the AMP promoter regions was also investigated.
After stimulation with U. parvum and U. urealyticum, the expression of cell
defense genes, including the AMP genes (DEFB1, DEFA5, DEFA6, and CAMP), was
significantly downregulated compared to that of TNFA and IL-8, which were
upregulated. In vitro flow cytometry-based antimicrobial assay revealed that
synthetic peptides LL-37, hBD-3, and hBD-1 had activity against Ureaplasma spp.
Downregulation of the AMP genes was associated with chromatin modification
alterations, including the significantly decreased histone H3K9 acetylation with 
U. parvum infection. No DNA methylation status changes were detected upon
Ureaplasma infection. In conclusion, AMPs have in vitro activity against
Ureaplasma spp., and suppression of AMP expression might be important for the
organisms to avoid this aspect of the host innate immune response and to
establish chronic infection and colonization.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01231-13 
PMCID: PMC3993410
PMID: 24491573  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

