
1. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 5;9(2):e87959. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087959. eCollection 
2014.

Oxalate-metabolising genes of the white-rot fungus Dichomitus squalens are
differentially induced on wood and at high proton concentration.

Mäkelä MR(1), Sietiö OM(1), de Vries RP(2), Timonen S(1), Hildén K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food and Environmental Sciences, Division of Microbiology and
Biotechnology, Viikki Biocenter 1, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Oxalic acid is a prevalent fungal metabolite with versatile roles in growth and
nutrition, including degradation of plant biomass. However, the toxicity of
oxalic acid makes regulation of its intra- and extracellular concentration
crucial. To increase the knowledge of fungal oxalate metabolism, a
transcriptional level study on oxalate-catabolising genes was performed with an
effective lignin-degrading white-rot fungus Dichomitus squalens, which has
demonstrated particular abilities in production and degradation of oxalic acid.
The expression of oxalic-acid decomposing oxalate decarboxylase (ODC) and
formic-acid decomposing formate dehydrogenase (FDH) encoding genes was followed
during the growth of D. squalens on its natural spruce wood substrate. The effect
of high proton concentration on the regulation of the oxalate-catabolising genes 
was determined after addition of organic acid (oxalic acid) and inorganic acid
(hydrochloric acid) to the liquid cultures of D. squalens. In order to evaluate
the co-expression of oxalate-catabolising and manganese peroxidase (MnP) encoding
genes, the expression of one MnP encoding gene, mnp1, of D. squalens was also
surveyed in the solid state and liquid cultures. Sequential action of ODC and FDH
encoding genes was detected in the studied cultivations. The odc1, fdh2 and fdh3 
genes of D. squalens showed constitutive expression, whereas ODC2 and FHD1 most
likely are the main responsible enzymes for detoxification of high concentrations
of oxalic and formic acids. The results also confirmed the central role of ODC1
when D. squalens grows on coniferous wood. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that
fungal ODCs have evolved from at least two gene copies whereas FDHs have a single
ancestral gene. As a conclusion, the multiplicity of oxalate-catabolising genes
and their differential regulation on wood and in acid-amended cultures of D.
squalens point to divergent physiological roles for the corresponding enzymes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087959 
PMCID: PMC3914892
PMID: 24505339  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

