
1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 May;50:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.01.023. Epub
2014 Feb 6.

High-throughput molecular profiling of a P-cadherin overexpressing breast cancer 
model reveals new targets for the anti-cancer bacterial protein azurin.

Bernardes N(1), Ribeiro AS(2), Abreu S(3), Vieira AF(2), Carreto L(4), Santos
M(4), Seruca R(2), Paredes J(2), Fialho AM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Center for Biological and
Chemical Engineering, Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisbon, Portugal; Institute of 
Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto (IPATIMUP), Porto, 
Portugal.
(2)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto
(IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal.
(3)Institute for Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Center for Biological and
Chemical Engineering, Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisbon, Portugal.
(4)Department of Biology and CESAM, University of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal.
(5)Institute for Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Center for Biological and
Chemical Engineering, Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisbon, Portugal. Electronic
address: afialho@ist.utl.pt.

Azurin is a bacterial protein from Pseudomonas aeruginosa which exerts an
inhibitory activity in cancer cells. In P-cadherin-overexpressing models, a bad
prognosis marker in breast cancer increasing invasion and other malignant
features, azurin decreases the invasion of cancer cells. We performed a
microarray analysis to compare the expression profile of azurin treated cells
with different P-cadherin expression levels. Azurin up-regulated apoptosis
mediated by p53 protein, endocytosis and vesicle-mediated transport. In the
contrary, in invasive MCF-7/AZ.Pcad cells, azurin decreased the expression of
genes associated with cell surface receptors and signal transduction, as well as 
biological adhesion. Further, azurin decreased adhesion of cells to proteins from
the extracellular matrix (ECM) and altered protein expression of integrins α6, β4
and β1 and interfered with the ability of these cells to form mammospheres.
Altogether, our results further enlighten the anti-cancer effects mediated by
azurin in P-cadherin overexpression breast cancer models.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.01.023 
PMID: 24509127  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

