
1. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2014 Jan;48(1):151-9.

[The value of PCR method in the species-level identification of a mucoid
Salmonella sp. strain isolated from the urine culture of a case with asymptomatic
nephrolithiasis].

[Article in Turkish]

Bayındır Bilman F(1), Günaydın E, Turhanoğlu M, Akkoç A.

Author information: 
(1)Diyarbakir Training and Research Hospital, Microbiology Laboratory,
Diyarbakir, Turkey. f_bilman@hotmail.com.

Colonies of the Salmonella strains usually show a smooth (S) character.
Therefore, Salmonella strains producing mucoid colony are very rarely encountered
in the literature. Identification of the mucoid Salmonella strains to the species
level is difficult via conventional methods, since the mucus layer does not allow
the bacterium to respond to the antigenic reactions. In this study we aimed to
emphasize the identification of Salmonella serotypes by the polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) when rough (R) or mucoid (M) Salmonella isolates are encountered
in the laboratory. The urine culture of a 17-year-old female patient revealed
growth of 100.000 cfu/mL gram-negative bacilli in mucoid colony morphology. The
isolate was identified as Salmonella sp. by biochemical tests and Vitek 2
(bioMérieux, France) automated identification system. Agglutination tests showed 
negative reaction with the known antiserums. Absence of agglutination was
attributed to the mucoid character of the isolate. Identification of the
Salmonella sp. was confirmed by Vitek MS MALDI-TOF (bioMérieux, France) analysis 
method, however, the serotype of the strain could not be identified. In order to 
verify that the mucoid colony was Salmonella spp., species-specific PCR was
performed using invA primers, and Salmonella sp. identification was verified by
observing a 284 base-pair (bp) PCR amplicon. Subsequently, serogrouping was done 
by multiplex-PCR (mPCR), which could identify the O:B (O:4), O:C1 (O:7), O:C2-C3 
(O:8), O:D (O:9, O:9,46, O:9,46,27), and O:E (O:3,10, O:3,19) somatic antigens.
It was detected that the mucoid Salmonella sp. formed a band of approximately 615
bp in size and took place in group D. Another mPCR directed towards O:D1(O:9) and
O:E1(3,10) somatic antigens to detect subgroups of group D mucoid Salmonella
spp., revealed that the isolate formed a DNA band of approximately 624 bp in size
and took place in group D1 which is usually isolated from human. Modified version
of another mPCR was used to determine phase-1 flagellar antigen of common
Salmonella serovars, as well as to determine the phase-1 flagellar antigen of
mucoid Salmonella spp. in group D1. Thus, the isolate was serotyped as Salmonella
Enteritidis (1.9,12:g,m:-). Antibiotic susceptibility test performed by disc
diffusion method in line with the recommendations of CLSI, revealed that the
isolate was susceptible to ampicillin, ciprofloxacin, ceftriaxone,
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and chloramphenicol. In conclusion, PCR is a
reliable and rapid alternative method that contributes to the conventional
serotyping of Salmonella when rough or mucoid strains that lack somatic and
flagellar antigens, are isolated.


PMID: 24506726  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

