
1. Panminerva Med. 2014 Mar;56(1):73-83. Epub 2014 Feb 11.

Lymphogranuloma venereum: an old, forgotten re-emerging systemic disease.

Dal Conte I(1), Mistrangelo M, Cariti C, Chiriotto M, Lucchini A, Vigna M, Morino
M, Di Perri G.

Author information: 
(1)STI Clinic, Infectious Diseases Department Amedeo di Savoia Hospital, ASL TO2,
Turin, Italy - Ivano.dalconte@aslto2.piemonte.it.

Lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV) is a sexually transmitted infection endemic in
parts of Africa, Asia, South America, and the Caribbean, but once was rarely
observed in Western countries, where most cases were considered to be imported.
However, recent outbreaks have been reported in Europe, Australia, New Zealand,
the United States and Canada, mainly among HIV positive men who have sex with
men, signaling LGV re-emergence. The etiological agent of LGV is Chlamydia
trachomatis serotypes L1, L2 and L3, and current outbreaks are mostly sustained
by L2b type. The clinical course can be classically divided into three stages: an
initial papule, which may ulcerate at the site of inoculation, followed by
regional lymphoadenopathy (second stage, generally unilateral). In the tertiary
stage, lymphatic obstruction, with elephantiasis of genitalia, and rectal
involvement can lead to the formation of strictures and fistulae that may require
surgical treatment. Recent cases are observed mainly among HIV positive people,
often co-infected with HCV and others STIs, engaging in high-risk sexual
practices. The main clinical picture is a relative new entity characterized by
progressive ulcerative proctitis, the so called anorectal syndrome. Diagnosis is 
often delayed, requires a high index of clinical suspicion and must rely on the
use of nucleic acid amplification tests. The differential diagnosis of proctitis 
should include LGV infection. Gastroenterologists, coloproctologists,
dermatologists and other specialists need to be aware of LGV proctitis to avoid
diagnostic delay and progression of disease to the tertiary stage.


PMID: 24518282  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

