
1. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 10;9(2):e85458. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085458. eCollection
2014.

One-against-all weighted dynamic time warping for language-independent and
speaker-dependent speech recognition in adverse conditions.

Zhang X(1), Sun J(2), Luo Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Science and Technology on Parallel and Distributed Processing Laboratory,
School of Computer Science, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, 
Hunan, China ; State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, Beijing
Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, Fengtai District, Beijing, China ;
David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo,
Ontario, Canada.
(2)Voice Enabling Systems Technology, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Science and Technology on Parallel and Distributed Processing Laboratory,
School of Computer Science, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, 
Hunan, China.

Considering personal privacy and difficulty of obtaining training material for
many seldom used English words and (often non-English) names,
language-independent (LI) with lightweight speaker-dependent (SD) automatic
speech recognition (ASR) is a promising option to solve the problem. The dynamic 
time warping (DTW) algorithm is the state-of-the-art algorithm for small
foot-print SD ASR applications with limited storage space and small vocabulary,
such as voice dialing on mobile devices, menu-driven recognition, and voice
control on vehicles and robotics. Even though we have successfully developed two 
fast and accurate DTW variations for clean speech data, speech recognition for
adverse conditions is still a big challenge. In order to improve recognition
accuracy in noisy environment and bad recording conditions such as too high or
low volume, we introduce a novel one-against-all weighted DTW (OAWDTW). This
method defines a one-against-all index (OAI) for each time frame of training data
and applies the OAIs to the core DTW process. Given two speech signals, OAWDTW
tunes their final alignment score by using OAI in the DTW process. Our method
achieves better accuracies than DTW and merge-weighted DTW (MWDTW), as 6.97%
relative reduction of error rate (RRER) compared with DTW and 15.91% RRER
compared with MWDTW are observed in our extensive experiments on one
representative SD dataset of four speakers' recordings. To the best of our
knowledge, OAWDTW approach is the first weighted DTW specially designed for
speech data in adverse conditions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085458 
PMCID: PMC3919707
PMID: 24520317  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

