
1. Am J Pathol. 2014 Apr;184(4):985-995. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.12.025. Epub
2014 Feb 11.

Identification of three molecular and functional subtypes in canine
hemangiosarcoma through gene expression profiling and progenitor cell
characterization.

Gorden BH(1), Kim JH(1), Sarver AL(2), Frantz AM(1), Breen M(3), Lindblad-Toh
K(4), O'Brien TD(5), Sharkey LC(6), Modiano JF(7), Dickerson EB(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Minnesota, Saint Paul, Minnesota.
(2)Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(3)Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina; Center for Comparative 
Medicine and Translational Research, North Carolina State University, Raleigh,
North Carolina; Cancer Genetics Program, University of North Carolina, Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
(4)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts; Science for Life
Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala
University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(5)Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota;
Department of Veterinary Population Medicine, University of Minnesota, Saint
Paul, Minnesota; Stem Cell Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minnesota.
(6)Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Minnesota, Saint Paul, Minnesota; Masonic Cancer Center, University
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(7)Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Minnesota, Saint Paul, Minnesota; Masonic Cancer Center, University
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota; Stem Cell Institute, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(8)Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Minnesota, Saint Paul, Minnesota; Masonic Cancer Center, University
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Electronic address: edickers@umn.edu.

Erratum in
    Am J Pathol. 2019 Mar;189(3):699-700.

Canine hemangiosarcomas have been ascribed to an endothelial origin based on
histologic appearance; however, recent findings suggest that these tumors may
arise instead from hematopoietic progenitor cells. To clarify this ontogenetic
dilemma, we used genome-wide expression profiling of primary hemangiosarcomas and
identified three distinct tumor subtypes associated with angiogenesis (group 1), 
inflammation (group 2), and adipogenesis (group 3). Based on these findings, we
hypothesized that a common progenitor may differentiate into the three tumor
subtypes observed in our gene profiling experiment. To investigate this
possibility, we cultured hemangiosarcoma cell lines under normal and
sphere-forming culture conditions to enrich for tumor cell progenitors. Cells
from sphere-forming cultures displayed a robust self-renewal capacity and
exhibited genotypic, phenotypic, and functional properties consistent with each
of the three molecular subtypes seen in primary tumors, including expression of
endothelial progenitor cell (CD133 and CD34) and endothelial cell (CD105, CD146, 
and αvβ3 integrin) markers, expression of early hematopoietic (CD133, CD117, and 
CD34) and myeloid (CD115 and CD14) differentiation markers in parallel with
increased phagocytic capacity, and acquisition of adipogenic potential.
Collectively, these results suggest that canine hemangiosarcomas arise from
multipotent progenitors that differentiate into distinct subtypes. Improved
understanding of the mechanisms that determine the molecular and phenotypic
differentiation of tumor cells in vivo could change paradigms regarding the
origin and progression of endothelial sarcomas.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.12.025 
PMCID: PMC3969990
PMID: 24525151  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

