
1. BMC Biochem. 2014 Feb 14;15:4. doi: 10.1186/1471-2091-15-4.

Mammalian target of Rapamycin inhibition and mycobacterial survival are uncoupled
in murine macrophages.

Zullo AJ, Jurcic Smith KL, Lee S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Human Vaccine Institute and Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA. sunhee.lee@duke.edu.

BACKGROUND: Autophagy is a cellular response to intracellular pathogens including
mycobacteria and is induced by the direct inhibitors of mammalian target of
Rapamycin (mTOR), a major negative regulator of autophagy. Autophagy induction by
mTOR inhibition (mTOR dependent autophagy), through chemical means or starvation,
leads to mycobacterial killing in infected cells. However, previous work by our
group has shown that mycobacterial infection of macrophages naturally induces
both autophagy and mammalian target of Rapamycin (mTOR) activity (mTOR
independent autophagy). In the current work, we further explore the relationship 
between mTOR activity and mycobacterial killing in macrophages.
RESULTS: While low concentrations of the mTOR inhibitors, Rapamycin, Torin 1, and
Torin 2, can effectively reduce or block mTOR activity in response to
lipopolysaccharides (LPS) or mycobacteria, higher concentrations (10 uM) are
required to observe Mycobacterium smegmatis killing. The growth of M. smegmatis
was also inhibited by high concentrations of Rapamycin in LC3B and ATG5 deficient
bone marrow derived macrophages, suggesting that non-autophagic mechanisms might 
contribute to killing at high doses. Since mycobacterial killing could be
observed only at fairly high concentrations of the mTOR inhibitors, exceeding
doses necessary to inhibit mTOR, we hypothesized that high doses of Rapamycin,
the most commonly utilized mTOR inhibitor for inducing autophagic killing, may
exert a direct bactericidal effect on the mycobacteria. Although a short-term
treatment of mycobacteria with Rapamycin did not substantially affect
mycobacterial growth, a long-term exposure to Rapamycin could impact
mycobacterial growth in vitro in select species.
CONCLUSIONS: This data, coupled with previous work from our laboratory, further
indicates that autophagy induction by mTOR inhibition is an artificial means to
increase mycobacterial killing and masks more relevant endogenous autophagic
biochemistry that needs to be understood.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2091-15-4 
PMCID: PMC3937017
PMID: 24528777  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

