
1. J Periodontol. 2014 Jul;85(7):966-74. doi: 10.1902/jop.2014.130438. Epub 2014 Feb
18.

Identification of quercitrin as a potential therapeutic agent for periodontal
applications.

Gómez-Florit M(1), Monjo M, Ramis JM.

Author information: 
(1)Group of Cell Therapy and Tissue Engineering, Research Institute on Health
Sciences (IUNICS), University of Balearic Islands, Palma de Mallorca, Spain
(Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Palma, Palma, España).

BACKGROUND: Flavonoids are natural phenolic compounds with antioxidant,
anti-inflammatory, and antimicrobial capacity. This study aims to investigate the
effects of different flavonoids for potential use in periodontal applications.
METHODS: Cultures of Staphylococcus epidermidis or primary human gingival
fibroblasts (HGFs) were treated with different doses of chrysin, diosmetin,
galangin, quercitrin, and taxifolin. The effect of these molecules was evaluated 
on S. epidermidis growth rate and HGF viability, gene expression, collagen
production, reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels, wound healing, and production
of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1 and tissue inhibitor of MMP-1 (TIMP1).
RESULTS: Among all the screened flavonoids, quercitrin showed the most promising 
biologic effects, in both HGFs and S. epidermidis. Thus, quercitrin was not toxic
for HGFs; increased collagen IIIα1 and decorin levels; downregulated
interleukin-6 messenger RNA levels; decreased the expression of profibrotic
markers during wound healing; decreased ROS levels in basal and stimulated
conditions; and decreased the MMP1/TIMP1 ratio. Quercitrin also decreased the
bacterial growth rate.
CONCLUSIONS: RESULTS suggest that quercitrin could contribute to protect and
recover the integrity of gingival tissues, thus displaying a potential use for
periodontal disease treatment or to functionalize dental implant abutments to
improve soft tissue integration. Further studies are required to confirm the role
of quercitrin in gingival tissues.

DOI: 10.1902/jop.2014.130438 
PMID: 24548116  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

