
1. Med Mycol. 2014 Feb;52(2):131-139. doi: 10.1093/mmy/myt007. Epub 2013 Dec 22.

Paradoxical antifungal activity and structural observations in biofilms formed by
echinocandin-resistant Candida albicans clinical isolates.

Walraven CJ(#)(1)(2), Bernardo SM(#)(1)(2), Wiederhold NP(3)(4), Lee SA(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of New Mexico Health Science Center, Albuquerque, Albuquerque, New 
Mexico, USA.
(2)New Mexico Veterans Healthcare System, Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA.
(3)University of Texas at Austin College of Pharmacy, Austin, Texas and San
Antonio, Texas, USA.
(4)University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, Pharmacotherapy
Education and Research Center, San Antonio, Texas, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Echinocandin-resistant clinical isolates of Candida albicans have been reported, 
and key-hot spot mutations in the FKS1 gene, which encodes a major glucan
synthase subunit, have been identified in these (caspofungin-resistant [CAS-R])
strains. Although these mutations result in phenotypic resistance to
echinocandins in planktonic cells, there is little data on antifungal
susceptibilities of CAS-R C. albicans strains within biofilms. Thus, we analyzed 
biofilms formed by 12 C. albicans CAS-R clinical strains in which we previously
identified FKS1 hot-spot mutations and compared the sessile antifungal and
paradoxical activity of anidulafungin (ANID), caspofungin (CAS), and micafungin
(MICA). Biofilms were formed in a 96-well static microplate model and assayed
using both tetrazolium-salt reduction and crystal violet assays, as well as
examination by scanning electron microscopy. We first sought to assess biofilm
formation and structure in these fks1 mutants and found that the biofilm mass and
metabolic activities were reduced in most of the fks1 mutants as compared with
reference strain SC5314. Structural analyses revealed that the fks1 mutant
biofilms were generally less dense and had a clear predominance of yeast and
pseudohyphae, with unusual "pit"-like cell surface structures. We also noted that
sessile minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) to ANID, CAS, and MICA were
higher than planktonic MICs of all but one strain. The majority of strains
demonstrated a paradoxical effect (PE) to particular echinocandins, in either
planktonic or sessile forms. Overall, biofilms formed by echinocandin-resistant
clinical isolates demonstrated varied PEs to echinocandins and were structurally 
characterized by a preponderance of yeast, pseudohyphae, and pit-like structures.

DOI: 10.1093/mmy/myt007 
PMCID: PMC5189660
PMID: 24576999  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

