
1. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 26;9(2):e89379. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089379. eCollection
2014.

Premature CD4+ T cell aging and its contribution to lymphopenia-induced
proliferation of memory cells in autoimmune-prone non-obese diabetic mice.

Sheu TT(1), Chiang BL(2), Yen JH(3), Lin WC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan, Republic of
China ; Institute of Microbiology, Immunology and Biochemistry, Tzu Chi
University, Hualien, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(2)Graduate Institute of Immunology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, 
Republic of China ; Department of Medical Research, National Taiwan University
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Tzu Chi University,
Hualien, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(4)Institute of Microbiology, Immunology and Biochemistry, Tzu Chi University,
Hualien, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Lymphopenia-induced proliferation (LIP), a mechanism to maintain a constant
number of T cells in circulation, occurs in both normal aging and autoimmune
disease. The incidence of most autoimmune diseases increases with age, and
premature CD4(+) T cell aging has been reported in several autoimmune diseases.
In this study, we tested the hypothesis that premature CD4(+) T cell aging can
cause autoimmune disease by examining whether premature CD4(+) T cell aging
exists and causes LIP in our mouse model. Non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice were used
because, in addition to Treg defects, the LIP of T cells has been shown to plays 
a causative role in the development of insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM)
in these mice. We found that with advancing age, NOD mice exhibited an
accelerated decrease in the number of CD4(+) T cells due to the loss of naïve
cells. This was accompanied by an increase in the percentage of memory cells,
leading to a reduced naïve/memory ratio. In addition, both the percentage of
CD28(+) cells in CD4(+) T cells and IL-2 production decreased, while the
percentage of FAS(+)CD44(+) increased, suggesting that NOD mice exhibit premature
CD4(+) T cell aging. This process preferentially contributed to LIP of memory
cells. Therefore, our results suggest that premature CD4(+) T cell aging
underlies the development of IDDM in NOD mice. Given that CD28 and IL-2 play
important roles in Treg function, the relationships between premature CD4(+) T
cell aging and lymphopenia as well as Treg defects in autoimmune-prone NOD mice
are proposed.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089379 
PMCID: PMC3935863
PMID: 24586733  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

