
1. Autophagy. 2014 May;10(5):785-802. doi: 10.4161/auto.28072. Epub 2014 Feb 25.

The AMPK-PPARGC1A pathway is required for antimicrobial host defense through
activation of autophagy.

Yang CS(1), Kim JJ(1), Lee HM(1), Jin HS(1), Lee SH(2), Park JH(3), Kim SJ(4),
Kim JM(5), Han YM(6), Lee MS(7), Kweon GR(3), Shong M(4), Jo EK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology; Chungnam National University School of Medicine;
Daejeon, Korea; Infection Signaling Network Research Center; Chungnam National
University School of Medicine; Daejeon, Korea.
(2)BioMedical Research Center; Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology; Daejeon, Korea.
(3)Infection Signaling Network Research Center; Chungnam National University
School of Medicine; Daejeon, Korea; Department of Biochemistry; Chungnam National
University School of Medicine; Daejeon, Korea.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine and Research Center for Endocrine and
Metabolic Diseases; Chungnam National University School of Medicine; Daejeon,
Korea.
(5)Infection Signaling Network Research Center; Chungnam National University
School of Medicine; Daejeon, Korea; Department of Pathology; Chungnam National
University School of Medicine; Daejeon, Korea.
(6)Department of Biological Sciences and Center for Stem Cell Differentiation;
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology; Daejeon, Korea.
(7)Department of Medicine; Samsung Medical Center; Sungkyunkwan University School
of Medicine; Seoul, Korea.

AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a crucial energy sensor and plays a key
role in integration of cellular functions to maintain homeostasis. Despite this, 
it is largely unknown whether targeting the AMPK pathway can be used as a
therapeutic strategy for infectious diseases. Herein, we show that AMPK
activation robustly induces antibacterial autophagy, which contributes to
antimicrobial defense against Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb). AMPK activation
led to inhibition of Mtb-induced phosphorylation of the mechanistic target of
rapamycin (MTOR) in macrophages. In addition, AMPK activation increased the genes
involved in oxidative phosphorylation, mitochondrial ATP production, and
biogenesis in Mtb-infected macrophages. Notably, peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma, coactivator 1α (PPARGC1A) was required for
AMPK-mediated antimicrobial activity, as well as enhancement of mitochondrial
function and biogenesis, in macrophages. Further, the AMPK-PPARGC1A pathway was
involved in the upregulation of multiple autophagy-related genes via
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP), β (CEBPB). PPARGC1A knockdown inhibited
the AMPK-mediated induction of autophagy and impaired the fusion of phagosomes
with MAP1LC3B (LC3B) autophagosomes in Mtb-infected macrophages. The link between
autophagy, mitochondrial function, and antimicrobial activity was further
demonstrated by studying LysMCre-mediated knockout of atg7, demonstrating
mitochondrial ultrastructural defects and dysfunction, as well as blockade of
antimicrobial activity against mycobacteria. Collectively, our results identify
the AMPK-PPARGC1A axis as contributing to autophagy activation leading to an
antimicrobial response, as a novel host defense mechanism.

DOI: 10.4161/auto.28072 
PMCID: PMC5119058
PMID: 24598403  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

