
1. Biol Rev Camb Philos Soc. 2015 Feb;90(1):89-111. doi: 10.1111/brv.12098. Epub
2014 Mar 11.

Bad guys turned nice? A critical assessment of Wolbachia mutualisms in arthropod 
hosts.

Zug R(1), Hammerstein P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Theoretical Biology, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin,
Invalidenstr. 43, 10115, Berlin, Germany.

Wolbachia are the most abundant bacterial endosymbionts among arthropods.
Although maternally inherited, they do not conform to the widespread view that
vertical transmission inevitably selects for beneficial symbionts. Instead,
Wolbachia are notorious for their reproductive parasitism which, although
lowering host fitness, ensures their spread. However, even for reproductive
parasites it can pay to enhance host fitness. Indeed, there is a recent upsurge
of reports on Wolbachia-associated fitness benefits. Therefore, the question
arises how such instances of mutualism are related to the phenotypes of
reproductive parasitism. Here, we review the evidence of Wolbachia mutualisms in 
arthropods, including both facultative and obligate relationships, and critically
assess their biological relevance. Although many studies report anti-pathogenic
effects of Wolbachia, few actually prove these effects to be relevant to field
conditions. We further show that Wolbachia frequently have beneficial and
detrimental effects at the same time, and that reproductive manipulations and
obligate mutualisms may share common mechanisms. These findings undermine the
idea of a clear-cut distinction between Wolbachia mutualism and parasitism. In
general, both facultative and obligate mutualisms can have a strong, and
sometimes unforeseen, impact on the ecology and evolution of Wolbachia and their 
arthropod hosts. Acknowledging this mutualistic potential might be the key to a
better understanding of some unresolved issues in the study of Wolbachia-host
interactions.

© 2014 The Authors. Biological Reviews published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on
behalf of Cambridge Philosophical Society.

DOI: 10.1111/brv.12098 
PMID: 24618033  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

