
1. Transfusion. 2014 Sep;54(9):2353-60. doi: 10.1111/trf.12619. Epub 2014 Mar 24.

A policy for the disposal of autologous hematopoietic progenitor cells: report
from an Italian consensus panel.

Perseghin P(1), Marchetti M, Pierelli L, Olivieri A, Introna M, Lombardini L,
Accorsi P, Petrini C, Risso M, Bosi A; Società Italiana di Emaferesi e
Manipolazione Cellulare,; Gruppo Italiano Trapianto Midollo Osseo; Centro
Nazionale Trapianti.

Author information: 
(1)Servizio di Immunoematologia e Trasfusionale, UOS Aferesi e Nuove Tecnologie
Trasfusionali, A. O. San Gerardo, Monza, Italy.

Comment in
    Transfusion. 2014 Sep;54(9):2147-8.

BACKGROUND: Autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT) requires collection and
cryopreservation of hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs), which in turn may be
partially or never reinfused. Thus, HPC storage has become a logistic, ethical,
and economic issue. SIDEM, GITMO, and CNT/ISS endorsed a project aimed to define 
national criteria for HPC disposal aimed to guarantee appropriateness and equity.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: A multidisciplinary panel was convened including HPC
harvest and manipulation experts from apheresis units, hematologists with
clinical expertise in ASCT, a representative of the national health authority,
and a bioethicist. An analytic hierarchy process (AHP) was carried out to select 
disposal criteria.
RESULTS: The AHP selected two criteria for prompt disposal of freshly collected
HPCs: an abnormal freezing procedure causing highly reduced viability or major
microbiology contamination. Moreover, AHP selected six major criteria, each one
of them allowing for the disposal of stored HPC units: patient death, withdrawal 
of consent to ASCT, contraindications or loss of indications to ASCT, a damaged
label that prevents correct identification of the unit, and time elapsed since
harvest longer than 10 years. Three minor criteria were additionally identified
that allowed to anticipate disposal only provided that viability levels are below
the limit of acceptance: a documented cold chain interruption, loss of bag
integrity, and total amount of stored CD34+ cells lower than 1 × 10(6) /kg or
lower than 2 × 10(6)/kg in patients with a successfully completed stem cell
transplantation program.
CONCLUSIONS: A formal consensus process allowed SIDEM and GITMO to propose a
policy for autologous HPC disposal that fulfills clinical, ethical, and economic 
criteria.

© 2014 AABB.

DOI: 10.1111/trf.12619 
PMID: 24654567  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

