
1. Genes (Basel). 2010 Oct 26;1(3):371-84. doi: 10.3390/genes1030371.

Identification of carbohydrate metabolism genes in the metagenome of a marine
biofilm community shown to be dominated by gammaproteobacteria and bacteroidetes.

Edwards JL(1), Smith DL(2), Connolly J(3), McDonald JE(4), Cox MJ(5), Joint I(6),
Edwards C(7), McCarthy AJ(8).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Research Group, School of Biological Sciences, BioSciences
Building, University of Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool, L69 7ZB, UK.
jenedw@live.co.uk.
(2)Microbiology Research Group, School of Biological Sciences, BioSciences
Building, University of Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool, L69 7ZB, UK.
smithdx@liverpool.ac.uk.
(3)Microbiology Research Group, School of Biological Sciences, BioSciences
Building, University of Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool, L69 7ZB, UK.
john76@liverpool.ac.uk.
(4)Microbiology Research Group, School of Biological Sciences, BioSciences
Building, University of Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool, L69 7ZB, UK.
j.mcdonald@bangor.ac.uk.
(5)Microbiology Research Group, School of Biological Sciences, BioSciences
Building, University of Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool, L69 7ZB, UK.
mikeyj.cox@gmail.com.
(6)Plymouth Marine Laboratory, Prospect Place, The Hoe, Plymouth, PL1 3DH, UK.
irj@pml.ac.uk.
(7)Microbiology Research Group, School of Biological Sciences, BioSciences
Building, University of Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool, L69 7ZB, UK.
kj26@liverpool.ac.uk.
(8)Microbiology Research Group, School of Biological Sciences, BioSciences
Building, University of Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool, L69 7ZB, UK.
aj55m@liverpool.ac.uk.

Polysaccharides are an important source of organic carbon in the marine
environment and degradation of the insoluble and globally abundant cellulose is a
major component of the marine carbon cycle. Although a number of species of
cultured bacteria are known to degrade crystalline cellulose, little is known of 
the polysaccharide hydrolases expressed by cellulose-degrading microbial
communities, particularly in the marine environment. Next generation 454
Pyrosequencing was applied to analyze the microbial community that colonizes and 
degrades insoluble polysaccharides in situ in the Irish Sea. The bioinformatics
tool MG-RAST was used to examine the randomly sampled data for taxonomic markers 
and functional genes, and showed that the community was dominated by members of
the Gammaproteobacteria and Bacteroidetes. Furthermore, the identification of 211
gene sequences matched to a custom-made database comprising the members of nine
glycoside hydrolase families revealed an extensive repertoire of functional genes
predicted to be involved in cellulose utilization. This demonstrates that the use
of an in situ cellulose baiting method yielded a marine microbial metagenome
considerably enriched in functional genes involved in polysaccharide degradation.
The research reported here is the first designed to specifically address the
bacterial communities that colonize and degrade cellulose in the marine
environment and to evaluate the glycoside hydrolase (cellulase and chitinase)
gene repertoire of that community, in the absence of the biases associated with
PCR-based molecular techniques.

DOI: 10.3390/genes1030371 
PMCID: PMC3966224
PMID: 24710093 

