
1. Bull Tokyo Dent Coll. 2014;55(1):33-7.

An endodontic-periodontal lesion with primary periodontal disease: a case report 
on its bacterial profile.

Fujii R(1), Muramatsu T, Yamaguchi Y, Asai T, Aida N, Suehara M, Morinaga K,
Furusawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endodontics and Clinical Cariology, Tokyo Dental College.

The microflora in the periodontal pockets can affect the dental pulp and cause
endodontic-periodontal lesions or retrograde pulpitis. Here we report an
endodontic-periodontal lesion together with its bacterial profile. The lesion
occurred in the maxillary right first molar of a 40-year-old woman who presented 
at our hospital complaining of a violent toothache since the previous night.
Clinically, the tooth was caries-free and an electric pulp test showed it to be
vital. The tooth showed signs of advanced periodontitis and the periodontal
pocket was deep, reaching the apex of the palatal root. The clinical diagnosis
was an endodontic-periodontal lesion with primary periodontal disease. Subsequent
endodontic treatment comprised pulp extirpation and root canal filling, followed 
by periodontal treatment consisting of scaling and root planing. The tooth was
finally restored with a full metal crown. No further signs of periodontal disease
or periapical lesions have been observed to date. Bacteria were sampled from the 
root canal and periodontal pocket for a microbiological assessment using 16S rRNA
gene-based PCR. Microbiologically, the profile of the bacterial species from the 
palatal root canal was similar to that from the periodontal pocket of the palatal
root. Porphyromonas gingivalis, Fusobacterium nucleatum and Eikenella corrodens
were detected in both samples. The occurrence of bacteria common to both sites in
this patient further supports the proposition that periodontal disease is the
definitive source of root canal infections. The present results suggest that a
bacterial examination would be helpful in confirming and supporting the clinical 
diagnosis in such lesions.

DOI: 10.2209/tdcpublication.55.33 
PMID: 24717928  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

