
1. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 9;9(4):e94231. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094231. eCollection 
2014.

Rapid and efficient conversion of integration-free human induced pluripotent stem
cells to GMP-grade culture conditions.

Durruthy-Durruthy J(1), Briggs SF(1), Awe J(2), Ramathal CY(1), Karumbayaram
S(3), Lee PC(2), Heidmann JD(4), Clark A(5), Karakikes I(6), Loh KM(7), Wu JC(6),
Hoffman AR(4), Byrne J(2), Reijo Pera RA(1), Sebastiano V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology and Department of Genetics, Stanford University,
Stanford, California, United States of America.
(2)Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine & Stem Cell Research,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of
America; Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, University of
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(3)Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine & Stem Cell Research,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of
America; Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of
America.
(4)Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System, Stanford University, Palo Alto,
California, United States of America.
(5)Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine & Stem Cell Research,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of
America; Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Molecular 
Biology Institute, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California,
United States of America.
(6)Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, California, 
United States of America; Department of Cardiology, Department of Medicine,
Stanford University, Stanford, California, United States of America.
(7)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University, Stanford,
California, United States of America.

Data suggest that clinical applications of human induced pluripotent stem cells
(hiPSCs) will be realized. Nonetheless, clinical applications will require hiPSCs
that are free of exogenous DNA and that can be manufactured through Good
Manufacturing Practice (GMP). Optimally, derivation of hiPSCs should be rapid and
efficient in order to minimize manipulations, reduce potential for accumulation
of mutations and minimize financial costs. Previous studies reported the use of
modified synthetic mRNAs to reprogram fibroblasts to a pluripotent state. Here,
we provide an optimized, fully chemically defined and feeder-free protocol for
the derivation of hiPSCs using synthetic mRNAs. The protocol results in
derivation of fully reprogrammed hiPSC lines from adult dermal fibroblasts in
less than two weeks. The hiPSC lines were successfully tested for their identity,
purity, stability and safety at a GMP facility and cryopreserved. To our
knowledge, as a proof of principle, these are the first integration-free iPSCs
lines that were reproducibly generated through synthetic mRNA reprogramming that 
could be putatively used for clinical purposes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094231 
PMCID: PMC3981795
PMID: 24718618  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

