
1. J Chem Inf Model. 2014 May 27;54(5):1451-66. doi: 10.1021/ci500104m. Epub 2014
Apr 28.

Inhibitor design strategy based on an enzyme structural flexibility: a case of
bacterial MurD ligase.

Perdih A(1), Hrast M, Barreteau H, Gobec S, Wolber G, Solmajer T.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Chemistry, Hajdrihova 19, 1001 Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Increasing bacterial resistance to available antibiotics stimulated the discovery
of novel efficacious antibacterial agents. The biosynthesis of the bacterial
peptidoglycan, where the MurD enzyme is involved in the intracellular phase of
the UDP-MurNAc-pentapeptide formation, represents a collection of highly
selective targets for novel antibacterial drug design. In our previous
computational studies, the C-terminal domain motion of the MurD ligase was
investigated using Targeted Molecular Dynamic (TMD) simulation and the Off-Path
Simulation (OPS) technique. In this study, we present a drug design strategy
using multiple protein structures for the identification of novel MurD ligase
inhibitors. Our main focus was the ATP-binding site of the MurD enzyme. In the
first stage, three MurD protein conformations were selected based on the obtained
OPS/TMD data as the initial criterion. Subsequently, a two-stage virtual
screening approach was utilized combining derived structure-based pharmacophores 
with molecular docking calculations. Selected compounds were then assayed in the 
established enzyme binding assays, and compound 3 from the aminothiazole class
was discovered to act as a dual MurC/MurD inhibitor in the micomolar range. A
steady-state kinetic study was performed on the MurD enzyme to provide further
information about the mechanistic aspects of its inhibition. In the final stage, 
all used conformations of the MurD enzyme with compound 3 were simulated in
classical molecular dynamics (MD) simulations providing atomistic insights of the
experimental results. Overall, the study depicts several challenges that need to 
be addressed when trying to hit a flexible moving target such as the presently
studied bacterial MurD enzyme and show the possibilities of how computational
tools can be proficiently used at all stages of the drug discovery process.

DOI: 10.1021/ci500104m 
PMID: 24724969  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

