
1. J Pathol. 2014 Aug;233(4):357-67. doi: 10.1002/path.4361. Epub 2014 Jun 3.

Triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells-1 (TREM-1) improves host defence
in pneumococcal pneumonia.

Hommes TJ(1), Hoogendijk AJ, Dessing MC, Van't Veer C, Florquin S, Colonna M, de 
Vos AF, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Centre,
University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Centre for Infection and Immunity,
Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Streptococcus (S.) pneumoniae is a common Gram-positive pathogen in
community-acquired pneumonia and sepsis. Triggering receptor expressed on myeloid
cells-1 (TREM-1) is a receptor on phagocytes known to amplify inflammatory
responses. Previous studies showed that TREM-1 inhibition protects against
lethality during experimental Gram-negative sepsis. We here aimed to investigate 
the role of TREM-1 in an experimental model of pneumococcal pneumonia, using
TREM-1/3-deficient (Trem-1/3(-/-) ) and wild-type (Wt) mice. Additionally ex vivo
responsiveness of Trem-1/3(-/-) neutrophils and macrophages was examined. S.
pneumoniae infection resulted in a rapid recruitment of TREM-1-positive
neutrophils into the bronchoalveolar space, while high constitutive TREM-1
expression on alveolar macrophages remained unchanged. TREM-1/3 deficiency led to
increased lethality, accompanied by enhanced growth of S. pneumoniae at the
primary site of infection and increased dissemination to distant organs. Within
the first 3-6 h of infection, Trem-1/3(-/-) mice demonstrated a strongly impaired
innate immune response in the airways, as reflected by reduced local release of
cytokines and chemokines and a delayed influx of neutrophils. Trem-1/3(-/-)
alveolar macrophages produced fewer cytokines upon exposure to S. pneumoniae in
vitro and were less capable of phagocytosing this pathogen. TREM-1/3 deficiency
did not influence neutrophil responsiveness to S. pneumoniae. These results
identify TREM-1 as a key player in protective innate immunity during pneumococcal
pneumonia, most likely by enhancing the early immune response of alveolar
macrophages.

Copyright © 2014 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/path.4361 
PMID: 24752755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

