
1. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 22;9(4):e96065. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096065. eCollection
2014.

Seasonal patterns of nitrogen and phosphorus limitation in four German lakes and 
the predictability of limitation status from ambient nutrient concentrations.

Kolzau S(1), Wiedner C(1), Rücker J(1), Köhler J(2), Köhler A(3), Dolman AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Brandenburg University of Technology Cottbus - Senftenberg, Department of
Freshwater Conservation, Bad Saarow, Germany.
(2)Leibniz-Institute of Freshwater Ecology and Inland Fisheries, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Berlin Senate - Department for Urban Development and the Environment, Berlin, 
Germany.

To identify the seasonal pattern of nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) limitation of
phytoplankton in four different lakes, biweekly experiments were conducted from
the end of March to September 2011. Lake water samples were enriched with N, P or
both nutrients and incubated under two different light intensities. Chlorophyll a
fluorescence (Chla) was measured and a model selection procedure was used to
assign bioassay outcomes to different limitation categories. N and P were both
limiting at some point. For the shallow lakes there was a trend from P limitation
in spring to N or light limitation later in the year, while the deep lake
remained predominantly P limited. To determine the ability of in-lake N:P ratios 
to predict the relative strength of N vs. P limitation, three separate regression
models were fit with the log-transformed ratio of Chla of the P and N treatments 
(Response ratio = RR) as the response variable and those of ambient total
phosphorus:total nitrogen (TN:TP), dissolved inorganic nitrogen:soluble reactive 
phosphorus (DIN:SRP), TN:SRP and DIN:TP mass ratios as predictors. All four N:P
ratios had significant positive relationships with RR, such that high N:P ratios 
were associated with P limitation and low N:P ratios with N limitation. The TN:TP
and DIN:TP ratios performed better than the DIN:SRP and TN:SRP in terms of
misclassification rate and the DIN:TP ratio had the highest R₂ value. Nitrogen
limitation was predictable, frequent and persistent, suggesting that nitrogen
reduction could play a role in water quality management. However, there is still 
uncertainty about the efficacy of N restriction to control populations of N₂
fixing cyanobacteria.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096065 
PMCID: PMC3996004
PMID: 24755935  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

