
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014 Apr 24;8(4):e2819. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002819.
eCollection 2014 Apr.

A thrombomodulin mutation that impairs active protein C generation is detrimental
in severe pneumonia-derived gram-negative sepsis (melioidosis).

Kager LM(1), Wiersinga WJ(2), Roelofs JJ(3), de Boer OJ(3), Weiler H(4), van 't
Veer C(1), van der Poll T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical
Center-University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Center for Infection 
and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical Center-University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical
Center-University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Center for Infection 
and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical Center-University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Division of Infectious Diseases, Academic Medical
Center-University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center-University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Blood Research Institute, Blood Center of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin,
United States of America.

BACKGROUND: During severe (pneumo)sepsis inflammatory and coagulation pathways
become activated as part of the host immune response. Thrombomodulin (TM) is
involved in a range of host defense mechanisms during infection and plays a
pivotal role in activation of protein C (PC) into active protein C (APC). APC has
both anticoagulant and anti-inflammatory properties. In this study we
investigated the effects of impaired TM-mediated APC generation during
melioidosis, a common form of community-acquired Gram-negative (pneumo)sepsis in 
South-East Asia caused by Burkholderia (B.) pseudomallei.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: (WT) mice and mice with an impaired capacity to
activate protein C due to a point mutation in their Thbd gene (TMpro/pro mice)
were intranasally infected with B. pseudomallei and sacrificed after 24, 48 or 72
hours for analyses. Additionally, survival studies were performed. When compared 
to WT mice, TMpro/pro mice displayed a worse survival upon infection with B.
pseudomallei, accompanied by increased coagulation activation, enhanced lung
neutrophil influx and bronchoalveolar inflammation at late time points, together 
with increased hepatocellular injury. The TMpro/pro mutation had limited if any
impact on bacterial growth and dissemination.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: TM-mediated protein C activation contributes to
protective immunity after infection with B. pseudomallei. These results add to a 
better understanding of the regulation of the inflammatory and procoagulant
response during severe Gram-negative (pneumo)sepsis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002819 
PMCID: PMC3998929
PMID: 24762740  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

