
1. J Nephrol. 2014 Jun;27(3):229-39. doi: 10.1007/s40620-013-0018-z. Epub 2014 Jan
31.

New trends of an old disease: the acute post infectious glomerulonephritis at the
beginning of the new millenium.

Stratta P(1), Musetti C, Barreca A, Mazzucco G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Medicine, Nephrology and Transplantation,
University of Eastern Piedmont "Amedeo Avogadro", Novara, Italy,
piero.stratta@med.unipmn.it.

The association between acute renal disease and infection has been known since
the mid '800s: acute post-infectious glomerulonephritis (PIGN) is a reactive
immunological process against the kidney secondary to an infection, classically
caused by a Streptococcus. The typical clinical presentation of PIGN is an acute 
nephritic syndrome with macro- or microscopic hematuria, proteinuria,
hypertension, edema and renal function impairment of variable degree. The
histology is characterized by an intracapillary glomerular proliferation, but may
rarely be associated with an extracapillary proliferation. The classical
childhood form is still present nowadays, even with severe cases, in developing
countries, while in the last decades it almost disappeared in industrialized
countries, where post-infectious GN are often found in elderly patients with
multiple comorbidities. These clinical variants are usually related to other
infective agents, like Staphylococcus aureus, both methicillin resistant (MRSA)
and susceptible, and may be characterized by an IgA-dominant deposition. Kidney
biopsy is rarely needed, especially in the child, while in the adult or old
patient a biopsy is warranted if there is an atypical presentation or evolution, 
like rapidly progressive renal failure, absent or delayed function recovery,
persisting low C3, nephrotic range proteinuria and persisting high proteinuria.
Current therapy strategies rely on culture-guided systemic antibiotics,
especially in the old patient, in which MRSA are relatively frequent, support
therapy and only in very selected cases on steroids. These latter cases include
the rare PIGN with crescents and those with a severe interstitial inflammation.

DOI: 10.1007/s40620-013-0018-z 
PMID: 24777751  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

