
1. Bioengineered. 2014 May-Jun;5(3):180-5. doi: 10.4161/bioe.28996. Epub 2014 Apr
28.

Human leukemia inhibitory factor produced by the ExpressTec method from rice
(Oryza sativa L.) is active in human neural stem cells and mouse induced
pluripotent stem cells.

Alfano R(1), Youngblood BA(2), Zhang D(3), Huang N(3), MacDonald CC(2).

Author information: 
(1)InVitria; Fort Collins, CO USA.
(2)Department of Cell Biology & Biochemistry; Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center; Lubbock, TX USA.
(3)Ventria Bioscience Inc; Fort Collins, CO USA.

Stem cell-based therapy has the potential to treat an array of human diseases.
However, to study the therapeutic potential and safety of these cells, a scalable
cell culture medium is needed that is free of human or bovine-derived serum
proteins. Thus, cost-effective recombinant serum proteins and cytokines are
needed to produce such mediums. One such cytokine, leukemia inhibitory factor
(LIF), has been shown to be a critical paracrine factor that maintains stem cell 
pluripotency in murine embryonic stem cells and human naïve stem cells while
simultaneously inhibiting differentiation. We recently produced recombinant human
LIF (rhLIF) in a rice-based protein expression system known as ExpressTec. (12)
We described expression of rice-derived rhLIF and demonstrated its biological
equivalency to E. coli-derived rhLIF in traditional and embryonic mouse stem cell
systems. Here we describe the expression yield of rice-derived rhLIF and the
scale up production capacity. We provide further evidence of the efficacy of
rice-derived rhLIF in additional stem cell systems including human neural stem
cells and mouse induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells. The expression level,
biological activity, and potential for production at commercial scale of
rice-derived rhLIF provides a proof-of-principal for ExpressTec-derived proteins 
to produce regulatory-friendly, high performance, and dependable stem cell media.

DOI: 10.4161/bioe.28996 
PMCID: PMC4101010
PMID: 24776984  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

