
1. PLoS One. 2014 May 1;9(5):e94404. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094404. eCollection 
2014.

Host responses to sepsis vary in different low-lethality murine models.

Gentile LF(1), Nacionales DC(1), Lopez MC(2), Vanzant E(1), Cuenca A(1), Szpila
BE(1), Cuenca AG(1), Joseph A(3), Moore FA(1), Leeuwenburgh C(3), Baker HV(2),
Moldawer LL(1), Efron PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery, University of Florida College of Medicine,
Gainesville, Florida, United States of America.
(2)Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida College of
Medicine, Gainesville, Florida, United States of America.
(3)Institute on Aging, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville,
Florida, United States of America.

INTRODUCTION: Animal models for the study of sepsis are being increasingly
scrutinized, despite their essential role for early translational research. In
particular, recent studies have suggested that at the level of the leukocyte
transcriptome, murine models of burns, trauma and endotoxemia markedly differ
from their human equivalents, and are only weakly similar amongst themselves. We 
compared the plasma cytokine and leukocyte transcriptome responses between two
different low-lethality murine models of polymicrobial intra-abdominal sepsis.
METHODS: Six to ten week male C57BL/6j mice underwent either the 'gold standard' 
cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) model of intra-abdominal sepsis or
administration of a cecal slurry (CS), where cecal contents are injected
intraperitoneally. Surviving mice were euthanized at two hours, one or three days
after sepsis.
RESULTS: The murine leukocyte transcriptomic response to the CLP and CS models of
sepsis was surprisingly dissimilar at two hours, one, and three days after
sepsis. The Pearson correlation coefficient for the maximum change in expression 
for the entire leukocyte transcriptome that changed significantly over time
(n = 19,071) was R = 0.54 (R2 = 0.297). The CS model resulted in greater
magnitude of early inflammatory gene expression changes in response to sepsis
with associated increased production of inflammatory chemokines and cytokines.
Two hours after sepsis, CLP had more significant expression of genes associated
with IL-10 signaling pathways, whereas CS had greater expression of genes related
to CD28, apoptosis, IL-1 and T-cell receptor signaling. By three days, the
changes in gene expression in both sepsis models were returning to baseline in
surviving animals.
CONCLUSION: These analyses reveal that the murine blood leukocyte response to
sepsis is highly dependent on which model of intra-abdominal sepsis is employed, 
despite their similar lethality. It may be difficult to extrapolate findings from
one murine model to another, let alone to human sepsis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094404 
PMCID: PMC4006924
PMID: 24788351  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

