
1. Exp Hematol. 2014 Sep;42(9):741-52.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2014.04.009. Epub
2014 May 2.

Medium conditioned with mesenchymal stromal cell-derived osteoblasts improves the
expansion and engraftment properties of cord blood progenitors.

Dumont N(1), Boyer L(1), Émond H(1), Celebi-Saltik B(2), Pasha R(3), Bazin R(4), 
Mantovani D(5), Roy DC(6), Pineault N(7).

Author information: 
(1)Héma-Québec, Research and Development, Quebec City, Canada.
(2)Héma-Québec, Research and Development, Quebec City, Canada; Laboratory for
Biomaterials and Bioengineering, Department of Mining-Metallurgical and Materials
Engineering & University Hospital Research Center, Laval University, Quebec City,
Canada.
(3)Canadian Blood Services, Center for Innovation, Ottawa, Canada.
(4)Héma-Québec, Research and Development, Quebec City, Canada; Department of
Biochemistry, Microbiology and Bioinformatics, Laval University, Quebec City,
Canada.
(5)Laboratory for Biomaterials and Bioengineering, Department of
Mining-Metallurgical and Materials Engineering & University Hospital Research
Center, Laval University, Quebec City, Canada.
(6)Centre de Recherche Hôpital Maisonneuve-Rosemont, Montreal, Canada; Division
of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Montréal, Montreal,
Canada.
(7)Héma-Québec, Research and Development, Quebec City, Canada; Department of
Biochemistry, Microbiology and Bioinformatics, Laval University, Quebec City,
Canada; Canadian Blood Services, Center for Innovation, Ottawa, Canada.
Electronic address: nicolas.pineault@blood.ca.

Strategies to enhance the expansion of umbilical cord blood hematopoietic stem
and progenitor cells (HSPCs) are crucial to enable their widespread application
to adults and to overcome important limitations, such as delayed engraftment.
Osteoblasts regulate HSPCs under steady-state and also under stress conditions,
when HSPCs undergo numerous cycles of expansion. We hypothesized that osteoblasts
could provide better stimulation for the expansion of multipotent HSPCs and
subsequent hematopoietic recovery than mesenchymal stromal cells. Hence, we
assessed the growth and engraftment modulatory activities of mesenchymal stromal 
cell-derived osteoblasts (M-OSTs) on hematopoietic progenitors. Mesenchymal
stromal cells and M-OSTs favored the maintenance of CD34(+) cells. The expansion 
of cord blood CD34(+) cells and myeloid progenitors was highest in cultures
supplemented with unfiltered M-OST-conditioned medium (M-OST CM). In addition,
increased expression of cell surface receptors important for the homing of
progenitors to the bone marrow, C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4 and lymphocyte
function-associated antigen 1, was observed in CM-based cultures. Additionally,
M-OST CM positively modulated the engraftment properties of expanded progenitors.
Most notably, although human platelet levels remained steady in the first 2 weeks
in mice transplanted with HSPCs expanded in standard medium, levels in mice
transplanted with M-OST CM HSPCs rose continuously. Consistent with this,
short-term human progenitor reconstitution was consistently greater in M-OST
recipients. Finally, cytokine array-based profiling revealed increases in
insulin-like growth factor binding protein 2, chemokines, and myeloid stimulating
cytokines in M-OST CM. In conclusion, this study suggests that M-OSTs represent a
new underappreciated source of feeder cells for the expansion of HSPCs with
enhanced thrombopoietic activity.

Copyright © 2014 ISEH - International Society for Experimental Hematology.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exphem.2014.04.009 
PMID: 24793546  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

