
1. J Immunol. 1989 Dec 1;143(11):3853-7.

The alpha 1/alpha 2 domains of class I HLA molecules confer resistance to natural
killing.

Storkus WJ(1), Alexander J, Payne JA, Cresswell P, Dawson JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC 27710.

The expression of transfected HLA class I Ag has previously been shown to protect
human target cells from NK-mediated conjugation and cytolysis. In this same
system, transfected H-2 class I Ag fail to impart resistance to NK. In this
study, we have mapped the portion of the HLA class I molecule involved in this
protective effect by exploiting this HLA/H-2 dichotomy. Hybrid class I genes were
produced by exon-shuffling between the HLA-B7 and H-2Dp genes, and transfected
into the class I Ag-deficient B-lymphoblastoid cell line (B-LCL) C1R. Only those 
transfectants expressing class I Ag containing the alpha 1 and alpha 2 domains of
the HLA molecule are protected from NK, suggesting the "protective epitope" is
located within these domains. Since a glycosylation difference exists between HLA
and H-2 class I Ag within these domains (i.e., at amino acid residue 176), the
role of carbohydrate in the class I protective effect was examined. HLA-B7 mutant
genes encoding proteins which either lack the normal carbohydrate addition site
at amino acid residue 86 (B7M86-) or possess an additional site at residue 176
(B7M176+) were transfected into C1R. Transfectants expressing either mutant
HLA-B7 Ag were protected from NK. Thus, carbohydrate is probably not integral to 
a class I "protective epitope." The potential for allelic variation in the
ability of HLA class I Ag to protect C1R target cells from NK was examined in
HLA-A2, A3, B7, and Bw58 transfectants. Although no significant variation exists 
among the HLA-A3, B7, and Bw58 alleles, HLA-A2 appears unable to protect.
Comparison of amino acid sequences suggests a restricted number of residues which
may be relevant to the protective effect.


PMID: 2479694  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

