
1. Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2014 Dec;42(9):856-64. doi: 10.1111/ceo.12355. Epub 2014 May
30.

New MT-ND1 pathologic mutation for Leber hereditary optic neuropathy.

Martínez-Romero Í(1), Herrero-Martín MD, Llobet L, Emperador S, Martín-Navarro A,
Narberhaus B, Ascaso FJ, López-Gallardo E, Montoya J, Ruiz-Pesini E.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Biología Molecular y Celular and Centro de
Investigaciones Biomédicas en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Zaragoza,
Spain.

BACKGROUND: Mutations causing Leber hereditary optic neuropathy are usually
homoplasmic, show incomplete penetrance, and many of the affected positions are
not well conserved through evolution. A large percentage of patients harbouring
these mutations have no family history of disease. Moreover, the transfer of the 
mutation in the cybrid model is frequently not accompanied by the transfer of the
cellular, biochemical and molecular phenotype. All these features make difficult 
their classification as the etiologic factors for this disease. We report a
patient who exhibits typical clinical features of Leber hereditary optic
neuropathy but lacks all three of the most common mitochondrial DNA mutations.
METHODS: The diagnosis was made based on clinical studies. The mitochondrial DNA 
was completely sequenced, and the candidate mutation was analysed in more than
18 000 individuals around the world, its conservation index was estimated in more
than 3100 species from protists to mammals, its position was modelled in the
crystal structure of a bacteria ortholog subunit, and its functional consequences
were studied in a cybrid model.
RESULTS: Genetic analysis revealed an m.3472T>C transition in the MT-ND1 gene
that changes a phenylalanine to leucine at position 56. Bioinformatics,
molecular-genetic analysis and functional studies suggest that this transition is
the etiological factor for the disorder.
CONCLUSIONS: This mutation expands the spectrum of deleterious changes in
mitochondrial DNA-encoded complex I polypeptides associated with this pathology
and highlights the difficulties in assigning pathogenicity to new homoplasmic
mutations that show incomplete penetrance in sporadic Leber hereditary optic
neuropathy patients.

© 2014 Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Ophthalmologists.

DOI: 10.1111/ceo.12355 
PMID: 24800637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

