
1. J Infect Dis. 2014 Nov 1;210(9):1376-84. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiu285. Epub 2014
May 13.

Mast cells impair host defense during murine Streptococcus pneumoniae pneumonia.

van den Boogaard FE(1), Brands X(1), Roelofs JJ(2), de Beer R(1), de Boer OJ(2), 
van 't Veer C(1), van der Poll T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine Center for Infection and
Immunity Amsterdam.
(2)Department of Pathology.
(3)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine Center for Infection and
Immunity Amsterdam Division of Infectious Diseases, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most common causative pathogen in
community-acquired pneumonia. Mast cells (MCs) are located mainly at the
host-environment interface where they function as sentinels.
OBJECTIVE: Our goal was to study the role of MCs during pneumonia caused by S.
pneumoniae.
METHODS: Lung tissue of patients who had died from pneumococcal pneumonia or a
nonpulmonary cause was stained for MCs and tryptase. Wild-type (WT) and
MC-deficient (Kit(W-sh/W-sh)) mice were observed or sacrificed after induction of
pneumonia by intranasal inoculation of S. pneumoniae. In separate experiments, WT
mice were treated with doxantrazole or cromoglycate, which are MC stabilizing
agents.
RESULTS: The constitutive presence of tryptase-positive MCs was reduced in
affected lungs from pneumonia patients. Kit(W-sh/W-sh) mice showed a prolonged
survival during the first few days after median lethal dose (LD)100 and LD50
infection, while overall mortality did not differ from that in WT mice. Relative 
to WT mice, Kit(W-sh/W-sh) mice showed reduced bacterial counts with less
bacterial dissemination to distant organs and less inflammation. Neither
doxantrazole nor cromoglycate influenced antibacterial defense or inflammatory
responses after airway infection with S. pneumoniae.
CONCLUSIONS: MCs exhibit an unfavorable role in host defense during pneumococcal 
pneumonia by a mechanism independent of degranulation.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiu285 
PMID: 24823624  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

