
1. PLoS One. 2014 May 21;9(5):e95892. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095892. eCollection
2014.

The B lymphocyte differentiation factor (BAFF) is expressed in the airways of
children with CF and in lungs of mice infected with Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Neill DR(1), Saint GL(2), Bricio-Moreno L(1), Fothergill JL(1), Southern KW(2),
Winstanley C(1), Christmas SE(1), Slupsky JR(3), McNamara PS(2), Kadioglu A(1),
Flanagan BF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Infection, Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of
Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Institute of Translational
Medicine, University of Liverpool, Alder Hey Children's NHS Foundation Trust
Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(3)Molecular and Clinical Cancer Medicine, Institute of Translational Medicine,
University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Chronic lung infection with Pseudomonas aeruginosa remains a major
cause of mortality and morbidity among individuals with CF. Expression of
mediators promoting recruitment and differentiation of B cells, or supporting
antibody production is poorly understood yet could be key to controlling
infection.
METHODS: BAFF was measured in BAL from children with CF, both with and without P.
aeruginosa, and controls. Mice were intra-nasally infected with P. aeruginosa
strain LESB65 for up to 7 days. Cellular infiltration and expression of B cell
chemoattractants and B cell differentiation factor, BAFF were measured in lung
tissue.
RESULTS: BAFF expression was elevated in both P. aeruginosa negative and positive
CF patients and in P. aeruginosa infected mice post infection. Expression of the 
B cell chemoattractants CXCL13, CCL19 and CCL21 increased progressively post
infection.
CONCLUSIONS: In a mouse model, infection with P. aeruginosa was associated with
elevated expression of BAFF and other B cell chemoattractants suggesting a role
for airway B cell recruitment and differentiation in the local adaptive immune
response to P. aeruginosa. The paediatric CF airway, irrespective of pseudomonal 
infection, was found to be associated with an elevated level of BAFF implying
that BAFF expression is not specific to pseudomonas infection and may be a
feature of the CF airway. Despite the observed presence of a potent B cell
activator, chronic colonisation is common suggesting that this response is
ineffective.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095892 
PMCID: PMC4029587
PMID: 24847941  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

