
1. Biomacromolecules. 2014 Jul 14;15(7):2744-50. doi: 10.1021/bm500602w. Epub 2014
Jun 20.

Heparin-like properties of sulfated alginates with defined sequences and
sulfation degrees.

Arlov Ø(1), Aachmann FL, Sundan A, Espevik T, Skjåk-Bræk G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Norwegian University of Science and Technology , 
Sem Sælands vei 6/8, 7034 Trondheim, Norway.

Sulfated glycosaminoglycans have a vast range of protein interactions relevant to
the development of new biomaterials and pharmaceuticals, but their
characterization and application is complicated mainly due to a high structural
variability and the relative difficulty to isolate large quantities of
structurally homogeneous samples. Functional and versatile analogues of
heparin/heparan sulfate can potentially be created from sulfated alginates, which
offer structure customizability through targeted enzymatic epimerization and
precise tuning of the sulfation degree. Alginates are linear polysaccharides
consisting of β-D-mannuronic acid (M) and α-L-guluronic acid (G), derived from
brown algae and certain bacteria. The M/G ratio and distribution of blocks are
critical parameters for the physical properties of alginates and can be modified 
in vitro using mannuronic-C5-epimerases to introduce sequence patterns not found 
in nature. Alginates with homogeneous sequences (poly-M, poly-MG, and poly-G) and
similar molecular weights were chemically sulfated and structurally characterized
by the use of NMR and elemental analysis. These sulfated alginates were shown to 
bind and displace HGF from the surface of myeloma cells in a manner similar to
heparin. We observed dependence on the sulfation degree (DS) as well as variation
in efficacy based on the alginate monosaccharide sequence, relating to relative
flexibility and charge density in the polysaccharide chains. Co-incubation with
human plasma showed complement compatibility of the alginates and lowering of
soluble terminal complement complex levels by sulfated alginates. The sulfated
polyalternating (poly-MG) alginate proved to be the most reproducible in terms of
precise sulfation degrees and showed the greatest relative degree of complement
inhibition and HGF interaction, maintaining high activity at low DS values.

DOI: 10.1021/bm500602w 
PMID: 24844124  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

