
1. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2014 Jul 15;307(2):C180-9. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00013.2014. Epub 2014 May 21.

Indispensable functions of ABL and PDGF receptor kinases in epithelial adherence 
of attaching/effacing pathogens under physiological conditions.

Manthey CF(1), Calabio CB(1), Wosinski A(1), Hanson EM(1), Vallance BA(2),
Groisman A(3), Martín MG(4), Wang JY(5), Eckmann L(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
California;
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, British Columbia Children's Hospital, Child and 
Family Research Institute, and University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada; and.
(3)Department of Physics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
California;
(4)Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Department of Pediatrics, Mattel
Children's Hospital and David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
California; Moores Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
California;
(6)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
California; leckmann@ucsd.edu.

Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC) and Citrobacter rodentium are
attaching-and-effacing (A/E) pathogens that cause intestinal inflammation and
diarrhea. The bacteria adhere to the intestinal epithelium, destroy microvilli,
and induce actin-filled membranous pedestals but do not invade the mucosa.
Adherence leads to activation of several host cell kinases, including FYN, n-SRC,
YES, ABL, and ARG, phosphorylation of the bacterial translocated intimin
receptor, and actin polymerization and pedestal formation in cultured cells.
However, marked functional redundancy appears to exist between kinases, and their
physiological importance in A/E pathogen infections has remained unclear. To
address this question, we employed a novel dynamic in vitro infection model that 
mimics transient and short-term interactions in the intestinal tract. Screening
of a kinase inhibitor library and RNA interference experiments in vitro revealed 
that ABL and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) receptor (PDGFR) kinases, as
well as p38 MAP kinase, have unique, indispensable roles in early attachment of
EPEC to epithelial cells under dynamic infection conditions. Studies with mutant 
EPEC showed that the attachment functions of ABL and PDGFR were independent of
the intimin receptor but required bacterial bundle-forming pili. Furthermore,
inhibition of ABL and PDGFR with imatinib protected against infection of mice
with modest loads of C. rodentium, whereas the kinases were dispensable for high 
inocula or late after infection. These results indicate that ABL and PDGFR have
indispensable roles in early A/E pathogen attachment to intestinal epithelial
cells and for in vivo infection with limiting inocula but are not required for
late intimate bacterial attachment or high inoculum infections.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.00013.2014 
PMCID: PMC4101622
PMID: 24848114  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

