
1. PLoS One. 2014 May 27;9(5):e98285. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098285. eCollection
2014.

Phospholipase C-related catalytically inactive protein participates in the
autophagic elimination of Staphylococcus aureus infecting mouse embryonic
fibroblasts.

Harada-Hada K(1), Harada K(1), Kato F(2), Hisatsune J(2), Tanida I(3), Ogawa
M(4), Asano S(1), Sugai M(2), Hirata M(5), Kanematsu T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, Institute of Biomedical and
Health Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.
(2)Department of Bacteriology, Institute of Biomedical and Health Sciences,
Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, National Institute of Infectious 
Diseases, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Bacteriology I, National Institute of Infectious Diseases,
Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Faculty of Dental Science, 
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Autophagy is an intrinsic host defense system that recognizes and eliminates
invading bacterial pathogens. We have identified microtubule-associated protein 1
light chain 3 (LC3), a hallmark of autophagy, as a binding partner of
phospholipase C-related catalytically inactive protein (PRIP) that was originally
identified as an inositol trisphosphate-binding protein. Here, we investigated
the involvement of PRIP in the autophagic elimination of Staphylococcus aureus in
infected mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). We observed significantly more
LC3-positive autophagosome-like vacuoles enclosing an increased number of S.
aureus cells in PRIP-deficient MEFs than control MEFs, 3 h and 4.5 h post
infection, suggesting that S. aureus proliferates in LC3-positive
autophagosome-like vacuoles in PRIP-deficient MEFs. We performed autophagic flux 
analysis using an mRFP-GFP-tagged LC3 plasmid and found that autophagosome
maturation is significantly inhibited in PRIP-deficient MEFs. Furthermore,
acidification of autophagosomes was significantly inhibited in PRIP-deficient
MEFs compared to the wild-type MEFs, as determined by LysoTracker staining and
time-lapse image analysis performed using mRFP-GFP-tagged LC3. Taken together,
our data show that PRIP is required for the fusion of S. aureus-containing
autophagosome-like vacuoles with lysosomes, indicating that PRIP is a novel
modulator in the regulation of the innate immune system in non-professional
phagocytic host cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098285 
PMCID: PMC4035314
PMID: 24865216  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

