
1. Arch Oral Biol. 2014 Sep;59(9):887-96. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2014.05.006.
Epub 2014 May 13.

Antiadherent activity of Schinus terebinthifolius and Croton urucurana extracts
on in vitro biofilm formation of Candida albicans and Streptococcus mutans.

Barbieri DS(1), Tonial F(2), Lopez PV(3), Sales Maia BH(4), Santos GD(1), Ribas
MO(5), Glienke C(6), Vicente VA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Post-Graduation Program Microbiology, Parasitology and Pathology, Basic
Pathology Department, Federal University of Parana State, Paraná, Brazil.
(2)Post-Graduation Program Microbiology, Parasitology and Pathology, Basic
Pathology Department, Federal University of Parana State, Paraná, Brazil;
Department of Genetics, Federal University of Parana State, Paraná, Brazil.
(3)Post-Graduation Program Microbiology, Parasitology and Pathology, Basic
Pathology Department, Federal University of Parana State, Paraná, Brazil;
Tropical Medicine Institute, Assunção, Paraguay.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Federal University of Parana State, Paraná, Brazil.
(5)School of Health and Biological Sciences - Pontifícia Universidade Católica do
Paraná, Brazil.
(6)Department of Genetics, Federal University of Parana State, Paraná, Brazil.
Electronic address: cglienke@ufpr.br.
(7)Post-Graduation Program Microbiology, Parasitology and Pathology, Basic
Pathology Department, Federal University of Parana State, Paraná, Brazil;
Fellowship from Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico
(CNPq), Brasília, Brazil. Electronic address: vaniava63@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the antiadherent property of crude, methanol and acetate
methanol extract fractions from Schinus terebinthifolius and Croton urucurana in 
hydroalcoholic (HA) and dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) solvents on in vitro biofilms
formed by Streptococcus mutans and Candida albicans strains.
DESIGN: The minimal concentration of adherence (MICA) was determined to evaluate 
the antiadherent potential of extracts on the in vitro biofilm formation. The
extracts of plants were subjected to thin layer chromatography (TLC) in order to 
detect what class of compounds was responsible for the antiadherent activity.
Data were estimated by analysis of variance (ANOVA) complemented by Tukey test
level of significance set at 5%.
RESULTS: Both plants demonstrated inhibition of S. mutans and C. albicans on in
vitro biofilm formation. The biofilms of C. albicans were more efficiently
inhibited by the S. terebinthifolius fraction of acetate-methanol and methanol in
hydroalcoholic solvents (p<0.05). The S. mutans biofilms adherence was best
inhibited by the S. terebinthifolius crude extract and its methanolic fraction,
both in hydroalcoholic solvent (p<0.05). TLC of crude extracts and fractions of
S. terebinthifolius detected the presence of several active compounds, including 
phenolic compounds, anthraquinones, terpenoids, and alkaloids. C. urucurana
extracts confirmed activity for both microorganisms (p<0.05). However, higher
concentrations were needed to achieve antiadherent activity, mainly to inhibit in
vitro biofilm formation of C. albicans.
CONCLUSION: The antiadherent potential of both plants on in vitro biofilms formed
by C. albicans and S. mutans were confirmed, suggesting the importance of studies
about these extracts for therapeutic prevention of oral diseases associated with 
oral biofilms.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2014.05.006 
PMID: 24907518  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

