
1. J Biomed Mater Res B Appl Biomater. 2015 Feb;103(2):430-9. doi:
10.1002/jbm.b.33224. Epub 2014 Jun 7.

The (PrS/HGF-pDNA) multilayer films for gene-eluting stent coating:
Gene-protecting, anticoagulation, antibacterial properties, and in vivo
antirestenosis evaluation.

Chang H(1), Ren KF, Zhang H, Wang JL, Wang BL, Ji J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Polymer Science and Engineering, MOE Key Laboratory of
Macromolecular Synthesis and Functionalization, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
310027, China.

Vascular gene-eluting stents (GES) is a promising strategy for treatment of
cardiovascular disease. Very recently, we have proved that the (protamine
sulfate/plasmid DNA encoding hepatocyte growth factor) (PrS/HGF-pDNA) multilayer 
can serve as a powerful tool for enhancing competitiveness of endothelial cell
over smooth muscle cell, which opens perspectives for the regulation of
intercellular competitiveness in the field of interventional therapy. However,
before the gene multilayer films could be used in vascular stents for real
clinical application, the preservation of gene bioactivity during the industrial 
sterilization and the hemocompatibility of film should be taken into account.
Actually, both are long been ignored issues in the field of gene coating for GES.
In this study, we demonstrate that the (PrS/HGF-pDNA) multilayer film exhibits
the good gene-protecting abilities, which is confirmed by using the industrial
sterilizations (gamma irradiation and ethylene oxide) and a routine storage
condition (dry state at 4°C for 30 days). Furthermore, hemocompatible
measurements (such as platelet adhesion and whole blood coagulation) and
antibacterial assays (bacteria adhesion and growth inhibition) indicate the good 
anticoagulation and antibacterial properties of the (PrS/HGF-pDNA) multilayer
film. The in vivo preliminary data of angiography and histological analysis
suggest that the (PrS/HGF-pDNA) multilayer coated stent can reduce the in-stent
restenosis. This work reveals that the (PrS/HGF-pDNA) multilayer film could be a 
promising candidate as coating for GES, which is of great potential in future
clinic application.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jbm.b.33224 
PMID: 24909849  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

