
1. Biochimie. 2014 Sep;104:117-26. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2014.06.011. Epub 2014 Jun 
17.

Epidermal growth factor/heat shock protein 27 pathway regulates vasculogenic
mimicry activity of breast cancer stem/progenitor cells.

Lee CH(1), Wu YT(2), Hsieh HC(3), Yu Y(4), Yu AL(5), Chang WW(6).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Basic Medical Science, School of Medicine, China Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan; Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine,
China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. Electronic address:
chlee@mail.cmu.edu.tw.
(2)School of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medical Science and Technology,
Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. Electronic address:
e-spider80@hotmail.com.
(3)School of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medical Science and Technology,
Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. Electronic address:
enikids@hotmail.com.
(4)School of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medical Science and Technology,
Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. Electronic address:
yu801001@hotmail.com.
(5)Center of Stem Cells and Translational Cancer Research, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Linkou, Taoyuan County, Taiwan; Department of Pediatrics, University of
California in San Diego, San Diego, USA. Electronic address: a1yu@ucsd.edu.
(6)School of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medical Science and Technology,
Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan; Department of Medical Research, 
Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. Electronic address:
changww@csmu.edu.tw.

Tumor vascularization, which is mainly contributed by angiogenesis and
vascularization, is necessary for tumor maintenance and progression. Vasculogenic
mimicry (VM), vascular-like channels which are lack of the involvement of
endothelial cells, has been observed in aggressive cancers and also involves in
tumor vascularization. Breast cancer stem/progenitor cells (BCSCs) have been
identified as a subpopulation of breast cancer cells with markers of
CD24(-)CD44(+), high aldehyde dehydrogenase activity (ALDH(+)) or could be
enriched by mammosphere cultivation. These cells have been proven to be
associated with tumor vascularization. Here we investigated the molecular
mechanisms in VM activity of BCSCs. By periodic acid-Schiff or hematoxylin-eosin 
stain, we found that there were VM structures in two xenografted human breast
cancer tissues established from CD24(-)CD44(+) or ALDH(+) cells. Only ALDH(+) or 
mammosphere-forming BCSCs could form tube structures on matrigel-coated surface
as similar as microvascular endothelial cells. Inhibition of the phosphorylation 
of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) by gefitinib or knockdown of EGFR by
lentiviral shRNA abolished the in vitro VM activity of BCSCs. By quercetin
treatment, a plant flavonoid compound which is known to suppress heat shock
proteins, or siRNA-mediated gene silencing, both Hsp27 expression and VM
capability of BCSCs were suppressed. Forced expression of phosphor-mimic form of 
Hsp27 in ALDH(+) BCSCs could overcome the inhibitory effect of gefitinib. In
conclusion, our data demonstrate that VM activity of BCSCs is mediated by
EGF/Hsp27 signaling and targeting this pathway may benefit to breast cancer
therapy.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biochi.2014.06.011 
PMID: 24950183  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

