
1. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 23;9(6):e99412. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099412. eCollection
2014.

Identification of CD24 as a cancer stem cell marker in human nasopharyngeal
carcinoma.

Yang CH(1), Wang HL(2), Lin YS(2), Kumar KP(2), Lin HC(1), Chang CJ(3), Lu CC(4),
Huang TT(5), Martel J(6), Ojcius DM(7), Chang YS(8), Young JD(9), Lai HC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, Republic of China; Division of Applied Toxicology,
Taiwan Agricultural Chemicals and Toxic Substances Research Institute, Council of
Agriculture, Executive Yuan, Taichung, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(2)Department of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Sciences, College of
Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, Republic of China; Department
of Laboratory Medicine, Linkou Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan,
Republic of China.
(3)Department of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Sciences, College of
Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, Republic of China; Department
of Laboratory Medicine, Linkou Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan,
Republic of China; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of
Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(4)Department of Respiratory Therapy, Fu Jen Catholic University, Taipei, Taiwan,
Republic of China.
(5)Department of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Sciences, College of
Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, Republic of China; Department
of Laboratory Medicine, Linkou Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan,
Republic of China; Center for Molecular and Clinical Immunology, College of
Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, Republic of China; Research
Center of Bacterial Pathogenesis, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University,
Taoyuan, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(6)Center for Molecular and Clinical Immunology, College of Medicine, Chang Gung 
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(7)Center for Molecular and Clinical Immunology, College of Medicine, Chang Gung 
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, Republic of China; Department of Molecular Cell
Biology and Health Sciences Research Institute, University of California Merced, 
Merced, California, United States of America.
(8)Molecular Medicine Research Center, College of Medicine, Chang Gung
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(9)Center for Molecular and Clinical Immunology, College of Medicine, Chang Gung 
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, Republic of China; Laboratory of Cellular Physiology
and Immunology, Rockefeller University, New York, New York, United States of
America; Biochemical Engineering Research Center, Ming Chi University of
Technology, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(9):e109495.

Expression of concern in
    PLoS One. 2019 Jan 3;14(1):e0210304.

Cancer stem cells (CSCs) represent a unique sub-population of tumor cells with
the ability to initiate tumor growth and sustain self-renewal. Although CSC
biomarkers have been described for various tumors, only a few markers have been
identified for nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). In this study, we show that CD24+ 
cells isolated from human NPC cell lines express stem cell genes (Sox2, Oct4,
Nanog, Bmi-1, and Rex-1), and show activation of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling
pathway. CD24+ cells possess typical CSC characteristics that include enhanced
cell proliferation, increased colony and sphere formation, maintenance of cell
differentiation potential in prolonged culture, and enhanced resistance to
chemotherapeutic drugs. Notably, CD24+ cells produce tumors following inoculation
of as few as 500 cells in immunodeficient NOD/SCID mice. CD24+ cells further show
increased invasion ability in vitro, which correlates with enhanced expression of
matrix metalloproteinase 2 and 9. In summary, our results suggest that CD24
represents a novel CSC biomarker in NPC.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099412 
PMCID: PMC4067285
PMID: 24955581  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

