
1. Med Sci (Basel). 2014 Jun 1;2(2):82-97.

NKT Cell Responses to B Cell Lymphoma.

Li J(1), Sun W(1), Subrahmanyam PB(1), Page C(1), Younger KM(1), Tiper IV(1),
Frieman M(1), Kimball AS(2), Webb TJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine and the Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum Cancer Center,
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Natural killer T (NKT) cells are a unique subset of CD1d-restricted T lymphocytes
that express characteristics of both T cells and natural killer cells. NKT cells 
mediate tumor immune-surveillance; however, NKT cells are numerically reduced and
functionally impaired in lymphoma patients. Many hematologic malignancies express
CD1d molecules and co-stimulatory proteins needed to induce anti-tumor immunity
by NKT cells, yet most tumors are poorly immunogenic. In this study, we sought to
investigate NKT cell responses to B cell lymphoma. In the presence of exogenous
antigen, both mouse and human NKT cell lines produce cytokines following
stimulation by B cell lymphoma lines. NKT cell populations were examined ex vivo 
in mouse models of spontaneous B cell lymphoma, and it was found that during
early stages, NKT cell responses were enhanced in lymphoma-bearing animals
compared to disease-free animals. In contrast, in lymphoma-bearing animals with
splenomegaly and lymphadenopathy, NKT cells were functionally impaired. In a
mouse model of blastoid variant mantle cell lymphoma, treatment of tumor-bearing 
mice with a potent NKT cell agonist, α-galactosylceramide (α-GalCer), resulted in
a significant decrease in disease pathology. Ex vivo studies demonstrated that
NKT cells from α-GalCer treated mice produced IFN-γ following α-GalCer
restimulation, unlike NKT cells from vehicle-control treated mice. These data
demonstrate an important role for NKT cells in the immune response to an
aggressive hematologic malignancy like mantle cell lymphoma.

DOI: 10.3390/medsci2020082 
PMCID: PMC4063678
PMID: 24955247 

