
1. Eur Cytokine Netw. 2014 Mar 1;25(1):8-13. doi: 10.1684/ecn.2014.0348.

Cytokines, growth, and environment factors in bone marrow plasma of acute
lymphoblastic leukemia pediatric patients.

Kováč M(1), Vášková M(1), Petráčková D(2), Pelková V(1), Mejstříková E(1), Kalina
T(1), Žaliová M(1), Weiser J(2), Starý J(3), Hrušák O(1).

Author information: 
(1)CLIP - Childhood Leukemia Investigation Prague, Department of Pediatric
Hematology and Oncology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and
University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Institute of Microbiology v.v.i., Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech
Republic.
(3)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine,
Charles University and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cells depend on the microenvironment of the
host in vivo and do not survive in in vitro culture. Conversely, the suppression 
of non-malignant tissues is one of the leading characteristics of the course of
ALL. Both the non-malignant suppression and malignant cell survival may be partly
affected by soluble factors within the bone marrow (BM) environment. Here, we
aimed to identify proteins in BM plasma of children with ALL that may contribute 
to ALL aggressiveness and/or the microenvironment-mediated survival of ALL cells.
LBMp (leukemic bone marrow plasma) at the time of ALL diagnosis was compared to
control plasma of bone marrow (CBMp) or peripheral blood (CPBp) using a cytokine 
antibody array. The cytokine antibody array enabled simultaneous detection of 79 
proteins per sample. Candidate proteins exhibiting significantly different
profiles were further analyzed and confirmed by ELISA. mRNA expression of one of 
the candidate proteins (TIMP1) was studied using quantitative reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (qRTPCR). The cytokine antibody array
experiments identified 23 proteins that differed significantly (p<0.05); of
these, two proteins (TIMP1 and LIF) withstood the Bonferroni correction. In
contrast, little difference was observed between CBMp and CPBp. At the diagnosis 
of ALL, changes in the soluble microenvironment are detectable in BM plasma.
These changes probably participate in the pathogenesis and/or result from the
changes in the cell composition.

DOI: 10.1684/ecn.2014.0348 
PMID: 24998352  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

