
1. Infect Immun. 2014 Oct;82(10):4034-46. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01980-14. Epub 2014 Jul
14.

Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans outer membrane vesicles are internalized in
human host cells and trigger NOD1- and NOD2-dependent NF-κB activation.

Thay B(1), Damm A(2), Kufer TA(2), Wai SN(3), Oscarsson J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Oral Microbiology, Department of Odontology, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(2)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, University of
Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology and Umeå Centre for Microbial Research, Umeå
University, Umeå, Sweden.
(4)Oral Microbiology, Department of Odontology, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden
jan.oscarsson@odont.umu.se.

Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans is an oral and systemic pathogen associated
with aggressive forms of periodontitis and with endocarditis. We recently
demonstrated that outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) disseminated by A.
actinomycetemcomitans could deliver multiple proteins, including biologically
active cytolethal distending toxin (CDT), into the cytosol of HeLa cells and
human gingival fibroblasts (HGF). In the present work, we have used
immunoelectron and confocal microscopy analysis and fluorescently labeled
vesicles to further investigate mechanisms for A. actinomycetemcomitans
OMV-mediated delivery of bacterial antigens to these host cells. Our results
supported that OMVs were internalized into the perinuclear region of HeLa cells
and HGF. Colocalization analysis revealed that internalized OMVs colocalized with
the endoplasmic reticulum and carried antigens, detected using an antibody
specific to whole A. actinomycetemcomitans serotype a cells. Consistent with OMV 
internalization mediating intracellular antigen exposure, the vesicles acted as
strong inducers of cytoplasmic peptidoglycan sensor NOD1- and NOD2-dependent
NF-κB activation in human embryonic kidney cells. Moreover, NOD1 was the main
sensor of OMV-delivered peptidoglycan in myeloid THP1 cells, contributing to the 
overall inflammatory responses induced by the vesicles. This work reveals a role 
of A. actinomycetemcomitans OMVs as a trigger of innate immunity via carriage of 
NOD1- and NOD2-active pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs).

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01980-14 
PMCID: PMC4187862
PMID: 25024364  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

