
1. Asian-Australas J Anim Sci. 2013 Oct;26(10):1424-36. doi:
10.5713/ajas.2013.13153.

Using Plant Source as a Buffering Agent to Manipulating Rumen Fermentation in an 
In vitro Gas Production System.

Kang S(1), Wanapat M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tropical Feed Resources Research and Development Center (TROFREC), Department 
of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen 40002,
Thailand.

The objective of this study was to investigate the effect of banana flower powder
(BAFLOP) supplementation on gas production kinetics and rumen fermentation
efficiency in in vitro incubation with different ratios of roughage to
concentrate in swamp buffalo and cattle rumen fluid. Two male, rumen fistulated
dairy steers and swamp buffaloes were used as rumen fluid donors. The treatments 
were arranged according to a 2×2×3 factorial arrangement in a Completely
randomized design by using two ratios of roughage to concentrate (R:C; 75:25 and 
25:75) and 3 levels of BAFLOP supplementation (0, 2 and 4% of dietary substrate) 
into two different kinds of rumen fluid (beef cattle and swamp buffalo). Under
this investigation, the results revealed that the rumen ecology was affected by
R:C ratio. The pH declined as a result of using high concentrate ratio; however, 
supplementation of BAFLOP could buffer the pH which led to an improvement of
ruminal efficiency. BAFLOP supplementation affected acetic acid (C2) when the
proportion of concentrate was increased. However, there were no effect on total
volatile fatty acid (TVFA) and butyric acid (C4) by BAFLOP supplementation. The
microbial community was affected by BAFLOP supplementation, especially the
bacterial population. As revealed by real-time PCR, the populations of F.
succinogenes and R. albus were reduced by the high concentrate treatments while
that of R. flavafaciens were increased. The populations of three dominant
cellulolytic bacteria were enhanced by BAFLOP supplementation, especially on high
concentrate diet. BAFLOP supplementation did not influence the ammonia nitrogen
(NH3-N) concentration, while R:C did. In addition, the in vitro digestibility was
improved by either R:C or BAFLOP supplementation. The BAFLOP supplementation
showed an effect on gas production kinetics, except for the gas production rate
constant for the insoluble fraction (c), while treatments with high concentrate
ratio resulted in the highest values. In addition, BAFLOP tended to increase gas 
production. Based on this study, it could be concluded that R:C had an effect on 
rumen ecology both in buffalo and cattle rumen fluid and hence, BAFLOP could be
used as a rumen buffering agent for enhancing rumen ecology fed on high
concentrate diet. It is recommended that level of BAFLOP supplementation should
be at 2 to 4% of total dry matter of substrate. However, in vivo trials should be
subsequently conducted to investigate the effect of BAFLOP in high concentrate
diets on rumen ecology as well as ruminant production.

DOI: 10.5713/ajas.2013.13153 
PMCID: PMC4093070
PMID: 25049726 

