
1. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2014 Oct;66(10):2780-92. doi: 10.1002/art.38773.

ZAP-70 genotype disrupts the relationship between microbiota and host, leading to
spondyloarthritis and ileitis in SKG mice.

Rehaume LM(1), Mondot S, Aguirre de Cárcer D, Velasco J, Benham H, Hasnain SZ,
Bowman J, Ruutu M, Hansbro PM, McGuckin MA, Morrison M, Thomas R.

Author information: 
(1)University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Brisbane, Queensland,
Australia.

OBJECTIVE: The spondyloarthritides share genetic susceptibility, interleukin-23
(IL-23) dependence, and the involvement of microbiota. The aim of the current
study was to elucidate how host genetics influence gut microbiota and the
relationship between microbiota and organ inflammation in spondyloarthritides.
METHODS: BALB/c ZAP-70(W163C) -mutant (SKG) mice, Toll-like receptor 4
(TLR-4)-deficient SKG mice, and wild-type BALB/c mice were housed under specific 
pathogen-free conditions. SKG and wild-type BALB/c mice were maintained under
germ-free conditions, and some of these mice were recolonized with altered
Schaedler flora. All of the mice were injected intraperitoneally with microbial
β-1,3-glucan (curdlan). Arthritis, spondylitis, and ileitis were assessed
histologically. Microbiome composition was analyzed in serial fecal samples
obtained from mice that were co-housed beginning at the time of weaning, using
454 pyrosequencing. Infiltrating cells and cytokines in the peritoneal cavity
were measured by flow cytometry and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Cytokine, 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress marker, and tight junction protein
transcription was measured by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Microbiota content and response to curdlan varied according to whether T
cell receptor signal strength was normal or was impaired due to the ZAP-70(W163C)
mutation. Curdlan triggered acute inflammation regardless of the presence of the 
SKG allele or microbiota. However, no or limited microbiota content attenuated
the severity of arthritis. In contrast, ileal IL-23 expression, ER stress, lymph 
node IL-17A production, goblet cell loss, and ileitis development were
microbiota-dependent. Ileitis but not arthritis was suppressed by microbiota
transfer upon co-housing SKG mice with wild-type BALB/c mice, as well as by TLR-4
deficiency.
CONCLUSION: The interaction between immunogenetic background and host microbiota 
leads to an IL-23-dependent loss of mucosal function, triggering ileitis in
response to curdlan.

Copyright © 2014 by the American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/art.38773 
PMID: 25048686  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

