
1. Immunol Cell Biol. 2014 Nov;92(10):837-50. doi: 10.1038/icb.2014.60. Epub 2014
Jul 22.

Members of the novel UBASH3/STS/TULA family of cellular regulators suppress
T-cell-driven inflammatory responses in vivo.

Newman TN(1), Liverani E(2), Ivanova E(3), Russo GL(3), Carpino N(3), Ganea D(4),
Safadi F(5), Kunapuli SP(6), Tsygankov AY(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Temple University School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Sol Sherry Thrombosis Research Center, Temple University School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, NY, USA.
(4)1] Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Temple University School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA [2] Autoimmunity Center, Temple University School
of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)1] Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Temple University School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA [2] Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology,
Northeast Ohio Medical University, Rootstown, OH, USA.
(6)1] Sol Sherry Thrombosis Research Center, Temple University School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA [2] Department of Physiology, Temple University
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(7)1] Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Temple University School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA [2] Sol Sherry Thrombosis Research Center, Temple
University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA [3] Autoimmunity Center,
Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

The UBASH3/STS/TULA family consists of two members sharing substantial homology
and a similar multi-domain architecture, which includes a C-terminal histidine
phosphatase domain capable of dephosphorylating phosphotyrosine-containing
substrates. TULA-family proteins act as downregulators of receptor-induced
activation in several cell types, including T cells and platelets. Deletion of
both family members in mice has been shown to result in hyperresponsiveness of T 
cells to T-cell receptor (TCR)/CD3 complex engagement, but little is known about 
the biological consequences of double knockout (dKO) and especially of either
single KO (sKO). We elucidated the biological consequences of the lack of
TULA-family proteins in dKO and TULA and TULA-2 sKO animals. In order to do so,
we examined immune responses in Trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid (TNBS)-induced
colitis, a mouse model of human inflammatory bowel disease, which is
characterized by the involvement of multiple cell types, of which T cells have a 
crucial role, in the development of a pathological inflammatory condition. Our
data indicate that TNBS treatment upregulates T-cell responses in all KO mice
studied to a significantly higher degree than in wild-type mice. Although the
lack of either TULA-family member exacerbates inflammation and T-cell responses
in a specific fashion, the lack of both TULA and TULA-2 in dKO exerts a higher
effect than the lack of a single family member in TULA and TULA-2 sKO. Analysis
of T-cell responses and TCR-mediated signaling argues that the proteins
investigated affect T-cell signaling by regulating phosphorylation of Zap-70, a
key protein tyrosine kinase.

DOI: 10.1038/icb.2014.60 
PMID: 25047644  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

