
1. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2014 Aug;77(2):198-201. doi:
10.1097/TA.0000000000000330.

In vitro transfusion of red blood cells results in decreased cytokine production 
by human T cells.

Long K(1), Woodward J, Procter L, Ward M, Meier C, Williams D, Bernard A.

Author information: 
(1)From the Section on Trauma and Acute Care Surgery (L.P., C.M., A.B.), Division
of General Surgery (K.L.), Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular
Genetics (J.W., M.W.), and Department of Pathology (D.W.), University of
Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky.

BACKGROUND: Transfusion-related immunomodulation consists of both proinflammatory
and anti-inflammatory responses after transfusion of blood products. Stored red
blood cells (RBCs) suppress human T-cell proliferation in vitro, but the
mechanism remains unknown. We hypothesized that cytokine synthesis by T cells may
be inhibited when stored RBCs are present and that suppression between fresh and 
stored RBCs would be different.
METHODS: Purified human T cells were stimulated to proliferate with
anti-CD3/anti-CD28 and then exposed to stored or fresh RBCs. Cells were placed in
culture for 5 days. Cell culture supernatants were analyzed for the production of
typical T-cell cytokines using multianalyte ELISArray kits.
RESULTS: Stimulated T cells proliferated. RBC exposure markedly suppressed this
proliferation. Interleukin 10, interleukin 17a, interferon γ, tumor necrosis
factor α, and granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor were increased in 
response to stimulation but depressed in the presence of stored RBCs. The use of 
fresh RBCs also resulted in depression of these cytokines when compared with
stimulated T cells with no RBCs; however, this depression was less pronounced.
CONCLUSION: T-cell activation is associated with both proinflammatory and
anti-inflammatory cytokine release, comparable with patterns seen in trauma and
acute injury. All of these responses are depressed by an exposure to stored RBCs.
Decreased levels of these cytokines after RBC transfusion represents a potential 
contributor to the immunosuppressive complications seen in trauma patients after 
transfusion. This provides insight for future mechanistic studies to delineate
the role of RBC transfusion in transfusion-related immunomodulation.

DOI: 10.1097/TA.0000000000000330 
PMID: 25058241  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

