
1. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 22;9(7):e102236. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102236.
eCollection 2014.

Specific deletion of LDL receptor-related protein on macrophages has skewed in
vivo effects on cytokine production by invariant natural killer T cells.

Covarrubias R(1), Wilhelm AJ(2), Major AS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America.
(3)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America; Department of
Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America.

Expression of molecules involved in lipid homeostasis such as the low density
lipoprotein receptor (LDLr) on antigen presenting cells (APCs) has been shown to 
enhance invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cell function. However, the
contribution to iNKT cell activation by other lipoprotein receptors with shared
structural and ligand binding properties to the LDLr has not been described. In
this study, we investigated whether a structurally related receptor to the LDLr, 
known as LDL receptor-related protein (LRP), plays a role in iNKT cell
activation. We found that, unlike the LDLr which is highly expressed on all
immune cells, the LRP was preferentially expressed at high levels on F4/80+
macrophages (MΦ). We also show that CD169+ MΦs, known to present antigen to iNKT 
cells, exhibited increased expression of LRP compared to CD169- MΦs. To test the 
contribution of MΦ LRP to iNKT cell activation we used a mouse model of MΦ LRP
conditional knockout (LRP-cKO). LRP-cKO MΦs pulsed with glycolipid
alpha-galactosylceramide (αGC) elicited normal IL-2 secretion by iNKT hybridoma
and in vivo challenge of LRP-cKO mice led to normal IFN-γ, but blunted IL-4
response in both serum and intracellular expression by iNKT cells. Flow
cytometric analyses show similar levels of MHC class-I like molecule CD1d on
LRP-cKO MΦs and normal glycolipid uptake. Survey of the iNKT cell compartment in 
LRP-cKO mice revealed intact numbers and percentages and no homeostatic
disruption as evidenced by the absence of programmed death-1 and Ly-49 surface
receptors. Mixed bone marrow chimeras showed that the inability iNKT cells to
make IL-4 is cell extrinsic and can be rescued in the presence of wild type APCs.
Collectively, these data demonstrate that, although MΦ LRP may not be necessary
for IFN-γ responses, it can contribute to iNKT cell activation by enhancing early
IL-4 secretion.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102236 
PMCID: PMC4106787
PMID: 25050824  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

