
1. Infect Immun. 2014 Oct;82(10):4212-21. doi: 10.1128/IAI.02222-14. Epub 2014 Jul
28.

Epithelial anion transporter pendrin contributes to inflammatory lung pathology
in mouse models of Bordetella pertussis infection.

Scanlon KM(1), Gau Y(1), Zhu J(1), Skerry C(1), Wall SM(2), Soleimani M(3),
Carbonetti NH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland Medical
School, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Renal Division, Emory University School of Medicine,
Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Cincinnati, Research Services, Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland Medical
School, Baltimore, Maryland, USA ncarbonetti@som.umaryland.edu.

Pertussis disease, characterized by severe and prolonged coughing episodes, can
progress to a critical stage with pulmonary inflammation and death in young
infants. However, there are currently no effective treatments for pertussis. We
previously studied the role of pertussis toxin (PT), an important Bordetella
pertussis virulence factor, in lung transcriptional responses to B. pertussis
infection in mouse models. One of the genes most highly upregulated in a
PT-dependent manner encodes an epithelial transporter of bicarbonate, chloride,
and thiocyanate, named pendrin, that contributes to asthma pathology. In this
study, we found that pendrin expression is upregulated at both gene and protein
levels in the lungs of B. pertussis-infected mice. Pendrin upregulation is
associated with PT production by the bacteria and with interleukin-17A (IL-17A)
production by the host. B. pertussis-infected pendrin knockout (KO) mice had
higher lung bacterial loads than infected pendrin-expressing mice but had
significantly reduced levels of lung inflammatory pathology. However, reduced
pathology did not correlate with reduced inflammatory cytokine expression.
Infected pendrin KO mice had higher levels of inflammatory cytokines and
chemokines than infected pendrin-expressing mice, suggesting that these
inflammatory mediators are less active in the airways in the absence of pendrin. 
In addition, treatment of B. pertussis-infected mice with the carbonic anhydrase 
inhibitor acetazolamide reduced lung inflammatory pathology without affecting
pendrin synthesis or bacterial loads. Together these data suggest that PT
contributes to pertussis pathology through the upregulation of pendrin, which
promotes conditions favoring inflammatory pathology. Therefore, pendrin may
represent a novel therapeutic target for treatment of pertussis disease.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.02222-14 
PMCID: PMC4187853
PMID: 25069981  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

