
1. J Periodontal Res. 2015 Jun;50(3):403-10. doi: 10.1111/jre.12220. Epub 2014 Jul
28.

Periodontopathogens and human β-defensin-2 expression in gingival crevicular
fluid from patients with periodontal disease in Guangxi, China.

Yong X(1), Chen Y, Tao R, Zeng Q, Liu Z, Jiang L, Ye L, Lin X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics and Oral Medicine, College of Stomatology, Guangxi 
Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Periodontal diseases are often induced by
periodontopathogens, which are always exposed to certain innate immune factors in
gingival crevicular fluid, including human β-defensin-2 (hBD-2). This study aims 
to investigate the relationship among periodontopathogens, clinical parameters
and hBD-2 expression.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Thirty-two healthy controls, 42 patients with chronic
gingivitis and 95 patients with chronic periodontitis were recruited in Guangxi, 
China. Bleeding index, probing depth and clinical attachment level were measured 
for all teeth including mesiobuccal, buccal, disobuccal, mesiolingual, lingual,
disolingual six sites of all patient. Gingival crevicular fluid samples were
collected from the study sites. The prevalence and copy numbers (CN) of
Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans, Porphyromonas gingivalis, Prevotella
intermedia, Treponema denticola, Tannerella forsythia and total bacteria in
gingival crevicular fluid were quantified by real-time PCR. The hBD-2
concentration in gingival crevicular fluid was measured by ELISA.
RESULTS: Both the prevalence and the CN of A. actinomycetemcomitans, P.
gingivalis, T. denticola and T. forsythia were higher in patients with chronic
periodontitis than in healthy controls and patients with chronic gingivitis;
however, there was no significant difference in the prevalence of P. intermedia
among the three study groups, and the highest CN was found in patients with
chronic gingivitis, rather than in patients with chronic periodontitis. The loads
of P. gingivalis, P. intermedia, T. denticola and total bacteria were positively 
related to probing depth, bleeding index and clinical attachment level. The
concentration of hBD-2 in gingival crevicular fluid was higher in patients with
chronic gingivitis and in patients with chronic periodontitis than in healthy
controls. In addition, the hBD-2 concentration was positively related to the CN
of P. gingivalis, T. forsythia and total bacteria, as well as to bleeding index
and probing depth.
CONCLUSION: The prevalence, composition and CN of periodontopathogens were
closely related to the severity of periodontal disease, and the red complex was
related to the severity of clinical symptoms of periodontal diseases. The
concentration of hBD-2 in gingival crevicular fluid from periodontal disease
sites was higher than that in gingival crevicular fluid from healthy sites, which
suggests that hBD-2 expression might be up-regulated by periodontopathogens.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jre.12220 
PMID: 25065393  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

