
1. J Sci Food Agric. 2015 May;95(7):1482-90. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.6847. Epub 2014 Aug
26.

Identification of predictor parameters to determine agro-industrial compost
suppressiveness against Fusarium oxysporum and Phytophthora capsici diseases in
muskmelon and pepper seedlings.

Blaya J(1), Lloret E, Ros M, Pascual JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Soil and Water Conservation and Organic Wastes Management,
Centro de Edafología y Biología Aplicada del Segura (CEBAS-CSIC), 30100,
Espinardo, Murcia, Spain.

BACKGROUND: The lack of reliable prediction tools for evaluation of the level and
specificity of compost suppressiveness limits its application. In our study,
different chemical, biological and microbiological parameters were used to
evaluate their potential use as a predictor parameter for the suppressive effect 
of composts against Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. melonis (FOM) and Phytophthora
capsici (P. capsici) in muskmelon and pepper seedlings respectively. Composts
were obtained from artichoke sludge, chopped vineyard pruning waste and various
agro-industrial wastes (C1: blanched artichokes; C2: garlic waste; C3: dry olive 
cake).
RESULTS: Compost C3 proved to offer the highest level of resistance against FOM, 
and compost C2 the highest level of resistance against P. capsici. Analysis of
phospholipid fatty acids isolated from compost revealed that the three composts
showed different microbial community structures. Protease, NAGase and chitinase
activities were significantly higher in compost C3, as was dehydrogenase activity
in compost C2.
CONCLUSION: The use of specific parameters such as general (dehydrogenase
activity) and specific enzymatic activities (protease, NAGase and chitinase
activities) may be useful to predict compost suppressiveness against both
pathogens. The selection of raw materials for agro-industrial composts is
important in controlling Fusarium wilt and Phytophthora root rot.

© 2014 Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/jsfa.6847 
PMID: 25074864  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

