
1. Front Microbiol. 2014 Jul 8;5:353. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2014.00353. eCollection
2014.

Biofilm formation of mucosa-associated methanoarchaeal strains.

Bang C(1), Ehlers C(1), Orell A(2), Prasse D(1), Spinner M(3), Gorb SN(3), Albers
SV(4), Schmitz RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for General Microbiology, University of Kiel Kiel, Germany.
(2)Molecular Biology of Archaea, Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial
Microbiology Marburg, Germany ; Molecular Microbiology of Extremophiles Research 
Group, Centre for Genomics and Bioinformatics, Faculty of Sciences, Universidad
Mayor Santiago, Chile.
(3)Functional Morphology and Biomechanics, Zoological Institute, University of
Kiel Kiel, Germany.
(4)Molecular Biology of Archaea, Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial
Microbiology Marburg, Germany.

Although in nature most microorganisms are known to occur predominantly in
consortia or biofilms, data on archaeal biofilm formation are in general scarce. 
Here, the ability of three methanoarchaeal strains, Methanobrevibacter smithii
and Methanosphaera stadtmanae, which form part of the human gut microbiota, and
the Methanosarcina mazei strain Gö1 to grow on different surfaces and form
biofilms was investigated. All three strains adhered to the substrate mica and
grew predominantly as bilayers on its surface as demonstrated by confocal laser
scanning microscopy analyses, though the formation of multi-layered biofilms of
Methanosphaera stadtmanae and Methanobrevibacter smithii was observed as well.
Stable biofilm formation was further confirmed by scanning electron microscopy
analysis. Methanosarcina mazei and Methanobrevibacter smithii also formed
multi-layered biofilms in uncoated plastic μ-dishes(TM), which were very similar 
in morphology and reached a height of up to 40 μm. In contrast, biofilms formed
by Methanosphaera stadtmanae reached only a height of 2 μm. Staining with the two
lectins ConA and IB4 indicated that all three strains produced relatively low
amounts of extracellular polysaccharides most likely containing glucose, mannose,
and galactose. Taken together, this study provides the first evidence that
methanoarchaea can develop and form biofilms on different substrates and thus,
will contribute to our knowledge on the appearance and physiological role of
Methanobrevibacter smithii and Methanosphaera stadtmanae in the human intestine.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2014.00353 
PMCID: PMC4086402
PMID: 25071757 

