
1. Physiol Genomics. 2014 Oct 1;46(19):699-724. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00062.2014. Epub 2014 Aug 5.

Bioinformatic approaches to augment study of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
in lung cancer.

Beck TN(1), Chikwem AJ(2), Solanki NR(3), Golemis EA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Therapeutics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania; Program in Molecular and Cell Biology and Genetics, Drexel
University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; and.
(2)Developmental Therapeutics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania; Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania;
and.
(3)Immune Cell Development and Host Defense Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Program in Microbiology and Immunology, Drexel
University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(4)Developmental Therapeutics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania; Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania;
and Program in Molecular and Cell Biology and Genetics, Drexel University College
of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; and Erica.Golemis@fccc.edu.

Bioinformatic approaches are intended to provide systems level insight into the
complex biological processes that underlie serious diseases such as cancer. In
this review we describe current bioinformatic resources, and illustrate how they 
have been used to study a clinically important example: epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) in lung cancer. Lung cancer is the leading cause of
cancer-related deaths and is often diagnosed at advanced stages, leading to
limited therapeutic success. While EMT is essential during development and wound 
healing, pathological reactivation of this program by cancer cells contributes to
metastasis and drug resistance, both major causes of death from lung cancer.
Challenges of studying EMT include its transient nature, its molecular and
phenotypic heterogeneity, and the complicated networks of rewired signaling
cascades. Given the biology of lung cancer and the role of EMT, it is critical to
better align the two in order to advance the impact of precision oncology. This
task relies heavily on the application of bioinformatic resources. Besides
summarizing recent work in this area, we use four EMT-associated genes, TGF-β
(TGFB1), NEDD9/HEF1, β-catenin (CTNNB1) and E-cadherin (CDH1), as exemplars to
demonstrate the current capacities and limitations of probing bioinformatic
resources to inform hypothesis-driven studies with therapeutic goals.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/physiolgenomics.00062.2014 
PMCID: PMC4187119
PMID: 25096367  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

