
1. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Jul 25;13(3):5704-12. doi: 10.4238/2014.July.25.26.

Outbreaks and genetic diversity of Francisella noatunensis subsp orientalis
isolated from farm-raised Nile tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus) in Brazil.

Leal CA(1), Tavares GC(2), Figueiredo HC(2).

Author information: 
(1)AQUAVET, Laboratório de Doenças de Animais Aquáticos, Departamento de Medicina
Veterinária Preventiva, Escola de Veterinária, Universidade Federal de Minas
Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brasil carlosleal@vet.ufmg.br.
(2)AQUAVET, Laboratório de Doenças de Animais Aquáticos, Departamento de Medicina
Veterinária Preventiva, Escola de Veterinária, Universidade Federal de Minas
Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brasil.

Francisella noatunensis subsp orientalis (FNO) is an emerging pathogen of warm
water tilapia in a number of different countries. The disease caused by this
bacterium in fish is characterized by a systemic granulomatous infection that
causes high mortality rates during outbreaks. FNO has been previously described
in Asia, Europe, and Central and North America. Its occurrence in South America
has never been described. Since 2012, outbreaks of a granulomatous disease have
been recorded in cage farms of Nile tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus L.) in Brazil.
The current study aimed to identify the etiologic agent of recent francisellosis 
outbreaks at Brazilian tilapia farms, and to characterize the genetic diversity
of the pathogen from farms with distinct geographic origins and without
epidemiological connections. Bacteriological analysis of 44 diseased Nile tilapia
collected from five cage farms in Brazil was performed during 2012 and 2013. The 
farms were in different locations and had no recent history of animal or
biological material transport between each other. Sixty-two FNO isolates were
identified on the basis of FNO-specific qPCR. The main predisposing factors for
the occurrence of outbreaks on Brazilian farms were lower water temperature
(<22°C) and life stage of fish, affecting mainly fry, fingerlings and young
adults (live weight <100 g). The genetic diversity of the Brazilian FNO isolates 
was evaluated using repetitive extragenic palindromic-PCR. The isolates from
different origins were shown to be clonally related. This is the first report of 
the occurrence and genetic diversity of FNO in South America.

DOI: 10.4238/2014.July.25.26 
PMID: 25117328  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

