
1. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:436921. doi: 10.1155/2014/436921. Epub 2014 Jul 13.

Microbiota in healthy skin and in atopic eczema.

Baviera G(1), Leoni MC(2), Capra L(3), Cipriani F(4), Longo G(5), Maiello N(6),
Ricci G(4), Galli E(7).

Author information: 
(1)National Health System Pediatrician ASL RMC-D6, Rome, Italy ; Italian Society 
of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology (SIAIP), Atopic Dermatitis and Urticaria
Committee, Italy.
(2)Italian Society of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology (SIAIP), Atopic Dermatitis
and Urticaria Committee, Italy ; Pediatric Unit, Department of Clinical-Surgical,
Diagnostic and Pediatric Sciences, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(3)Italian Society of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology (SIAIP), Atopic Dermatitis
and Urticaria Committee, Italy ; Department of Reproduction and Pediatrics,
University Hospital S. Anna, Ferrara, Italy.
(4)Italian Society of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology (SIAIP), Atopic Dermatitis
and Urticaria Committee, Italy ; Pediatric Unit, Department of Medical and
Surgical Sciences, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(5)Italian Society of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology (SIAIP), Atopic Dermatitis
and Urticaria Committee, Italy ; University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy.
(6)Italian Society of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology (SIAIP), Atopic Dermatitis
and Urticaria Committee, Italy ; Department of Woman, Child and General and
Specialized Surgery, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy.
(7)Italian Society of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology (SIAIP), Atopic Dermatitis
and Urticaria Committee, Italy ; Pediatric Allergy Unit, Research Center, San
Pietro Hospital-Fatebenefratelli, Rome, Italy.

The Italian interest group (IG) on atopic eczema and urticaria is member of the
Italian Society of Allergology and Immunology. The aim of our IG is to provide a 
platform for scientists, clinicians, and experts. In this review we discuss the
role of skin microbiota not only in healthy skin but also in skin suffering from 
atopic dermatitis (AD). A Medline and Embase search was conducted for studies
evaluating the role of skin microbiota. We examine microbiota composition and its
development within days after birth; we describe the role of specific groups of
microorganisms that colonize distinct anatomical niches and the biology and
clinical relevance of antimicrobial peptides expressed in the skin. Specific AD
disease states are characterized by concurrent and anticorrelated shifts in
microbial diversity and proportion of Staphylococcus. These organisms may protect
the host, defining them not as simple symbiotic microbes but rather as
mutualistic microbes. These findings reveal links between microbial communities
and inflammatory diseases such as AD and provide novel insights into global
shifts of bacteria relevant to disease progression and treatment. This review
also highlights recent observations on the importance of innate immune systems
and the relationship with normal skin microflora for the maintenance of healthy
skin.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/436921 
PMCID: PMC4122000
PMID: 25126558  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

