
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2014 Dec;96(6):1119-29. doi: 10.1189/jlb.4A0713-363RR. Epub 2014
Aug 19.

NK cells kill mycobacteria directly by releasing perforin and granulysin.

Lu CC(1), Wu TS(2), Hsu YJ(3), Chang CJ(4), Lin CS(3), Chia JH(5), Wu TL(5),
Huang TT(6), Martel J(7), Ojcius DM(8), Young JD(9), Lai HC(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Therapy, College of Medicine, Fu Jen Catholic
University, Taipei, Taiwan;
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, and Graduate
Institute of Clinical Medical Sciences and.
(3)Departments of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Sciences and.
(4)Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine.
(5)Department of Clinical Pathology, Linkou Chang Gung Memorial Hospital,
Kweishan, Taiwan;
(6)Departments of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Sciences and Research
Center of Bacterial Pathogenesis, and Center for Molecular and Clinical
Immunology, Chang Gung University, Kweishan, Taiwan;
(7)Center for Molecular and Clinical Immunology, Chang Gung University, Kweishan,
Taiwan;
(8)Center for Molecular and Clinical Immunology, Chang Gung University, Kweishan,
Taiwan; Health Sciences Research Institute and Department of Molecular Cell
Biology, University of California, Merced, California, USA;
(9)Center for Molecular and Clinical Immunology, Chang Gung University, Kweishan,
Taiwan; Laboratory of Cellular Physiology and Immunology, The Rockefeller
University, New York, New York, USA; and Biochemical Engineering Research Center,
Ming Chi University of Technology, Taipei, Taiwan dingeyoung@hotmail.com
hclai@mail.cgu.edu.tw.
(10)Departments of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Sciences and Research
Center of Bacterial Pathogenesis, and Center for Molecular and Clinical
Immunology, Chang Gung University, Kweishan, Taiwan; dingeyoung@hotmail.com
hclai@mail.cgu.edu.tw.

Although the mechanisms underlying the cytotoxic effect of NK cells on tumor
cells and intracellular bacteria have been studied extensively, it remains
unclear how these cells kill extracellular bacterial pathogens. In this study, we
examine how human NK cells kill Mycobacterium kansasii and M.tb. The underlying
mechanism is contact dependent and requires two cytolytic proteins: perforin and 
granulysin. Mycobacteria induce enhanced expression of the cytolytic proteins via
activation of the NKG2D/NCR cell-surface receptors and intracellular signaling
pathways involving ERK, JNK, and p38 MAPKs. These results suggest that NK cells
use similar cellular mechanisms to kill both bacterial pathogens and target host 
cells. This report reveals a novel role for NK cells, perforin, and granulysin in
killing mycobacteria and highlights a potential alternative defense mechanism
that the immune system can use against mycobacterial infection.

© 2014 Society for Leukocyte Biology.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.4A0713-363RR 
PMID: 25139289  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

