
1. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 20;9(8):e103263. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103263.
eCollection 2014.

IL-17A induces Pendrin expression and chloride-bicarbonate exchange in human
bronchial epithelial cells.

Adams KM(1), Abraham V(2), Spielman D(3), Kolls JK(4), Rubenstein RC(1), Conner
GE(5), Cohen NA(6), Kreindler JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America; Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School
of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United
States of America.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(3)School of Arts and Sciences, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(4)Departments of Pediatrics and Immunology, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(5)Department of Cell Biology, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,
Miami, Florida, United States of America.
(6)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Perelman School of Medicine at the
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

The epithelium plays an active role in the response to inhaled pathogens in part 
by responding to signals from the immune system. Epithelial responses may include
changes in chemokine expression, increased mucin production and antimicrobial
peptide secretion, and changes in ion transport. We previously demonstrated that 
interleukin-17A (IL-17A), which is critical for lung host defense against
extracellular bacteria, significantly raised airway surface pH in vitro, a
finding that is common to a number of inflammatory diseases. Using microarray
analysis of normal human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells treated with IL-17A, we
identified the electroneutral chloride-bicarbonate exchanger Pendrin (SLC26A4) as
a potential mediator of this effect. These data were verified by real-time,
quantitative PCR that demonstrated a time-dependent increase in Pendrin mRNA
expression in HBE cells treated with IL-17A up to 48 h. Using immunoblotting and 
immunofluorescence, we confirmed that Pendrin protein expression is increased in 
IL-17 treated HBE cells and that it is primarily localized to the mucosal surface
of the cells. Functional studies using live-cell fluorescence to measure
intracellular pH demonstrated that IL-17A induced chloride-bicarbonate exchange
in HBE cells that was not present in the absence of IL-17A. Furthermore, HBE
cells treated with short interfering RNA against Pendrin showed substantially
reduced chloride-bicarbonate exchange. These data suggest that Pendrin is part of
IL-17A-dependent epithelial changes and that Pendrin may therefore be a
therapeutic target in IL-17A-dependent lung disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103263 
PMCID: PMC4139276
PMID: 25141009  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

