
1. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 21;9(8):e105629. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105629.
eCollection 2014.

Differential sensitivity of Src-family kinases to activation by SH3 domain
displacement.

Moroco JA(1), Craigo JK(2), Iacob RE(3), Wales TE(3), Engen JR(3), Smithgall
TE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America; Center
for Vaccine Research, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Northeastern University, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America.

Src-family kinases (SFKs) are non-receptor protein-tyrosine kinases involved in a
variety of signaling pathways in virtually every cell type. The SFKs share a
common negative regulatory mechanism that involves intramolecular interactions of
the SH3 domain with the PPII helix formed by the SH2-kinase linker as well as the
SH2 domain with a conserved phosphotyrosine residue in the C-terminal tail.
Growing evidence suggests that individual SFKs may exhibit distinct activation
mechanisms dictated by the relative strengths of these intramolecular
interactions. To elucidate the role of the SH3:linker interaction in the
regulation of individual SFKs, we used a synthetic SH3 domain-binding peptide
(VSL12) to probe the sensitivity of downregulated c-Src, Hck, Lyn and Fyn to
SH3-based activation in a kinetic kinase assay. All four SFKs responded to VSL12 
binding with enhanced kinase activity, demonstrating a conserved role for
SH3:linker interaction in the control of catalytic function. However, the
sensitivity and extent of SH3-based activation varied over a wide range. In
addition, autophosphorylation of the activation loops of c-Src and Hck did not
override regulatory control by SH3:linker displacement, demonstrating that these 
modes of activation are independent. Our results show that despite the similarity
of their downregulated conformations, individual Src-family members show diverse 
responses to activation by domain displacement which may reflect their adaptation
to specific signaling environments in vivo.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105629 
PMCID: PMC4140816
PMID: 25144189  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

