
1. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 25;9(8):e105952. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105952.
eCollection 2014.

Integration of apo-α-phycocyanin into phycobilisomes and its association with
FNRL in the absence of the phycocyanin α-subunit lyase (CpcF) in Synechocystis
sp. PCC 6803.

Zhang P(1), Frankel LK(1), Bricker TM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
Division, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, United States of
America.

Phycocyanin is an important component of the phycobilisome, which is the
principal light-harvesting complex in cyanobacteria. The covalent attachment of
the phycocyanobilin chromophore to phycocyanin is catalyzed by the enzyme
phycocyanin lyase. The photosynthetic properties and phycobilisome assembly state
were characterized in wild type and two mutants which lack holo-α-phycocyanin.
Insertional inactivation of the phycocyanin α-subunit lyase (ΔcpcF mutant)
prevents the ligation of phycocyanobilin to α-phycocyanin (CpcA), while
disruption of the cpcB/A/C2/C1 operon in the CK mutant prevents synthesis of both
apo-α-phycocyanin (apo-CpcA) and apo-β-phycocyanin (apo-CpcB). Both mutants
exhibited similar light saturation curves under white actinic light illumination 
conditions, indicating the phycobilisomes in the ΔcpcF mutant are not fully
functional in excitation energy transfer. Under red actinic light illumination,
wild type and both phycocyanin mutant strains exhibited similar light saturation 
characteristics. This indicates that all three strains contain functional
allophycocyanin cores associated with their phycobilisomes. Analysis of the
phycobilisome content of these strains indicated that, as expected, wild type
exhibited normal phycobilisome assembly and the CK mutant assembled only the
allophycocyanin core. However, the ΔcpcF mutant assembled phycobilisomes which,
while much larger than the allophycocyanin core observed in the CK mutant, were
significantly smaller than phycobilisomes observed in wild type. Interestingly,
the phycobilisomes from the ΔcpcF mutant contained holo-CpcB and apo-CpcA.
Additionally, we found that the large form of FNR (FNR(L)) accumulated to normal 
levels in wild type and the ΔcpcF mutant. In the CK mutant, however,
significantly less FNR(L) accumulated. FNRL has been reported to associate with
the phycocyanin rods in phycobilisomes via its N-terminal domain, which shares
sequence homology with a phycocyanin linker polypeptide. We suggest that the
assembly of apo-CpcA in the phycobilisomes of ΔcpcF can stabilize FNR(L) and
modulate its function. These phycobilisomes, however, inefficiently transfer
excitation energy to Photosystem II.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105952 
PMCID: PMC4143364
PMID: 25153076  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

