
1. Int J Surg. 2014;12 Suppl 2:S50-S55. doi: 10.1016/j.ijsu.2014.08.381. Epub 2014
Aug 26.

Assessment of bacterial infection in chronic wounds in the elderly: biopsy versus
VERSAJET.

Mattera E(1), Iovene MR(2), Rispoli C(3), Falco G(4), Rocco N(5), Accurso A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Internal Medicine "F. Magrassi and A. 
Lanzara", Second University of Naples, Italy. Electronic address:
edi.mattera@unina2.it.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, Second University of Naples, Italy.
Electronic address: mariarosaria.iovene@unina2.it.
(3)Department of General Surgery - ASL NA1, Cardinale Ascalesi Hospital, Naples, 
Italy. Electronic address: super_rbros@hotmail.com.
(4)Breast Unit, A.O. IRCCS Arcispedale S.M.N, Via Risorgimento 80, 42120 Reggio
Emilia, Italy. Electronic address: giuseppe.falco@asmn.re.it.
(5)Department of General, Geriatric, Oncologic Surgery and Advanced Technologies,
University Federico II of Naples, Italy; University of Milan, Italy. Electronic
address: nicolarocco2003@gmail.com.
(6)Department of General, Geriatric, Oncologic Surgery and Advanced Technologies,
University Federico II of Naples, Italy. Electronic address:
antonello.accurso@unina.it.

AIM: The aim of this study was to evaluate the hydro-surgery VERSAJET system as a
suitable alternative to the traditional invasive tissue sampling technique in
detecting bacteria and their load in chronic wounds in the elderly.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To investigate and evaluate bacterial incidence and load
in chronic wounds, we simultaneously performed on 19 affected patients a deep
tissue biopsy and tissue collections by the VERSAJET hydro-surgical system. After
local cleaning and anesthesia, a deep biopsy was performed with a punch of 3-4 mm
in diameter. Subsequently, three tissue samples were collected by the VERSAJET
system: one from the first washing in order to investigate the superficial
contamination; one from the second washing to investigate deep tissue infection
investigation and one from the third washing as a control procedure. After
treatment, all tissue samples were cultured in vitro for diagnostic and
micro-biological assessment.
RESULTS: Nineteen patients with chronic wounds of the lower limbs were enrolled
from February 2010 to May 2013. Concordance between deep tissue biopsy cultures
and tissue cultures collected by the VERSAJET system was examined. The deep
tissue biopsy cultures showed complete concordance with the VERSAJET as follows: 
2 patients (11%) for the first washing sample; 10 patients (53%) for the second
washing sample; 4 patients (21%) for the third washing sample. However, with
reference to only aerobic isolated strains, the concordance of the VERSAJET
second washing samples cultures with a biopsy of the deep tissue cultures was
very high (84%) and fairly high (63%) in the anaerobic isolated strains. The
second VERSAJET washing sample cultures seem to have the highest concordance with
the biopsy of the deep tissue cultures.
CONCLUSIONS: Tissue biopsy remains the leading technique for detecting bacteria
and their load in chronic wounds. However, this study shows that the
hydro-surgery VERSAJET system is sufficiently effective in detecting bacteria and
their load in chronic wounds and can be a potential alternative to a biopsy. In
particular, the second washing sample culture showed the best correlation with
the deep tissue biopsy culture. However, further studies are needed in order to
modify techniques of tissue collection in the VERSAJET system before drawing any 
conclusions.

Copyright © 2014 Surgical Associates Ltd. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijsu.2014.08.381 
PMID: 25167850  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

