
1. Helicobacter. 2014 Sep;19 Suppl 1:32-7. doi: 10.1111/hel.12164.

Gastric cancer--epidemiologic and clinical aspects.

Venerito M(1), Nardone G, Selgrad M, Rokkas T, Malfertheiner P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious Diseases,
Otto-von-Guericke University Hospital, Magdeburg, Germany.

Gastric cancer (GC) continues to be an important health threat as the third
leading cause of cancer related death in both sexes worldwide. In a recent
analysis, the mortality trends for the time period from 1980 till 2011 were
significantly downward in all countries, but the declines in the USA, EU and
several other major countries were of low magnitude when compared with the past. 
Furthermore, the relative contribution of cardia cancers compared with noncardia 
cancers increased among countries with higher GC rates. With respect to
preneoplastic changes of the gastric mucosa, a large population-based study
suggests that Helicobacter pylori infection and antigastric parietal cell
antibodies-mediated autoimmune response might, for the most part, be independent 
and follow distinct pathways rather than causally related pathways leading to
chronic atrophic gastritis. A large prospective, randomized, open-label Korean
trial questioned the role of H. pylori eradication for the prevention of
metachronous lesions after endoscopic resection of early GC. A review of 1258
Japanese cases undergoing curative endoscopic submucosa dissection for early GC
showed that scheduled follow-up endoscopy is mandatory for detecting metachronous
lesions at an early stage, where they can be treated by endoscopic resection.
Ramucirumab, a vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 antagonist, is the
first biological treatment that provides survival benefits to patients with
advanced GC in progress after first-line chemotherapy. The target agent
rilotumumab is currently being evaluated in patients with advanced GC
overexpressing the HGF/c-MET signaling pathway. In the near future, ipilimumab
and nivolumab, two immunostimulatory monoclonal antibodies with antineoplastic
effects, might offer new therapeutic options for patients with advanced GC.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/hel.12164 
PMID: 25167943  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

