
1. Clin Dermatol. 2014 Sep-Oct;32(5):592-8. doi: 10.1016/j.clindermatol.2014.04.006.

Alterations of skin innate immunity in lymphedematous limbs: Correlations with
opportunistic diseases.

Baroni A(1), Buommino E(2), Piccolo V(3), Chessa MA(3), Russo T(3), Cozza V(4),
Ruocco V(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy.
Electronic address: adone.baroni@unina2.it.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine-Section of Microbiology and Clinical
Microbiology, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy.
(4)Experimental Medicine Department, Second University of Naples-Campania
Regional Operating Center (COR) of the National Mesothelioma Register (ReNaM),
Naples, Italy.

Lymphedematous areas are sites of regional immune destabilization depicting a
typical example of an immunocompromised cutaneous district (ICD). This study
evaluates the expression of some components of the skin innate immunity on
lymphedematous limbs with the aim to clarify some facets of the ICD. Patients
selected underwent two skin biopsies: One was obtained from the limb affected by 
lymphedema, another from the contralateral healthy limb. Expression of some
components of the skin innate immunity was analyzed by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Stronger gene expression of Toll-like
receptor 2 (TLR-2), human β-defensin 2 (HBD-2), desmoglein 1, desmoglein 3,
matrix metallopeptidase 9 (MMP-9), and interleukin 10 (IL-10) was found in
keratinocytes derived from the affected limb compared with that of keratinocytes 
derived from contralateral healthy limb. Downregulation of survivin and
vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) gene expression was found in the affected
limbs. No induction of IL-1α and tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) was detectable
in keratinocyte cultures obtained from both lymphedematous and normal limbs.
Different phases and components of skin innate immunity turned out to be altered 
in the lymphedematous sites. Molecular alterations were similar in all patients
recruited in the study. These changes might favor the local appearance or
progression of opportunistic diseases such as tumors, infections, and
immune-mediated skin disorders.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clindermatol.2014.04.006 
PMID: 25160100  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

