
1. Thorax. 2014 Nov;69(11):1034-42. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2014-205668. Epub 2014
Sep 1.

Myeloid-related protein-8/14 facilitates bacterial growth during pneumococcal
pneumonia.

Achouiti A(1), Vogl T(2), Endeman H(3), Mortensen BL(4), Laterre PF(5), Wittebole
X(5), van Zoelen MA(6), Zhang Y(4), Hoogerwerf JJ(1), Florquin S(7), Schultz
MJ(8), Grutters JC(9), Biesma DH(10), Roth J(2), Skaar EP(4), van 't Veer C(1),
de Vos AF(1), van der Poll T(11).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands Center for Infection and Immunity, Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Institute of Immunology, University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany.
(3)Intensive Care Department, Onze Lieve Vrouwe Gasthuis, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(5)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Saint-Luc University Hospital,
Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine and Infectious Diseases, University Medical
Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands Laboratory of Experimental Intensive Care and Anesthesiology,
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(9)Department of Pulmonology, St. Antonius Hospital, Nieuwegein, The Netherlands 
Division of Heart & Lungs, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.
(10)Department of Internal Medicine, St. Antonius Hospital, Nieuwegein, The
Netherlands.
(11)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands Center for Infection and Immunity, Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands Division of
Infectious Diseases, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most commonly identified pathogen in 
community-acquired pneumonia (CAP). Myeloid-related protein (MRP) 8/14 is a major
component of neutrophils that is released upon infection or injury. MRP8/14 is
essential for protective immunity during infection by a variety of
micro-organisms through its capacity to chelate manganese and zinc. Here, we
aimed to determine the role of MRP8/14 in pneumococcal pneumonia.
METHODS: MRP8/14 was determined in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and serum 
of CAP patients, in lung tissue of patients who had succumbed to pneumococcal
pneumonia, and in BALF of healthy subjects challenged with lipoteichoic acid (a
component of the gram-positive bacterial cell wall) via the airways. Pneumonia
was induced in MRP14 deficient and normal wildtype mice. The effect of MRP8/14 on
S. pneumoniae growth was studied in vitro.
RESULTS: CAP patients displayed high MRP8/14 levels in BALF, lung tissue and
serum. Healthy subjects challenged with lipoteichoic acid demonstrated elevated
MRP8/14 in BALF. Likewise, mice with pneumococcal pneumonia had high MRP8/14
levels in lungs and the circulation. MRP14 deficiency, however, was associated
with reduced bacterial growth and lethality, in the absence of notable effects on
the inflammatory response. High zinc levels strongly inhibited growth of S.
pneumoniae in vitro, which was partially reversed by MRP8/14.
CONCLUSIONS: In sharp contrast to its previously reported host-protective role in
several infections, the present results reveal that in a model of CAP, MRP8/14 is
misused by S. pneumoniae, facilitating bacterial growth by attenuating zinc
toxicity toward the pathogen.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2014-205668 
PMID: 25179663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

