
1. PDA J Pharm Sci Technol. 2014 May-Jun;68(3):281-96. doi:
10.5731/pdajpst.2014.00976.

The Development of a Microbial Challenge Test with Acholeplasma laidlawii To Rate
Mycoplasma-Retentive Filters by Filter Manufacturers.

Folmsbee M(1), Lentine KR(2), Wright C(2), Haake G(3), Mcburnie L(4), Ashtekar
D(5), Beck B(6), Hutchison N(7), Okhio-Seaman L(8), Potts B(9), Pawar V(10),
Windsor H(11).

Author information: 
(1)Pall Corporation, Port Washington, NY; Martha_folmsbee@pall.com.
(2)EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA;
(3)Sartorius Stedim Biotech GmbH, Göttingen, Germany;
(4)Meissner Filtration Products, Inc. Camarillo, CA;
(5)PAREXEL International, Upland, CA;
(6)Microbiologics, St. Cloud, MN;
(7)Parker Hannifin Manufacturing Ltd, Durham, United Kingdom;
(8)Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Bohemia, NY;
(9)FDA, Silver Spring, MD; and.
(10)Mycoplasma Experience, Reigate, Surrey, United Kingdom.
(11)Pall Corporation, Port Washington, NY;

Mycoplasma are bacteria that can penetrate 0.2 and 0.22 μm rated
sterilizing-grade filters and even some 0.1 μm rated filters. Primary
applications for mycoplasma filtration include large scale mammalian and
bacterial cell culture media and serum filtration. The Parenteral Drug
Association recognized the absence of standard industry test parameters for
testing and classifying 0.1 μm rated filters for mycoplasma clearance and formed 
a task force to formulate consensus test parameters. The task force established
some test parameters by common agreement, based upon general industry practices, 
without the need for additional testing. However, the culture medium and
incubation conditions, for generating test mycoplasma cells, varied from filter
company to filter company and was recognized as a serious gap by the task force. 
Standardization of the culture medium and incubation conditions required
collaborative testing in both commercial filter company laboratories and in an
Independent laboratory (Table I). The use of consensus test parameters will
facilitate the ultimate cross-industry goal of standardization of 0.1 μm filter
claims for mycoplasma clearance. However, it is still important to recognize
filter performance will depend on the actual conditions of use. Therefore end
users should consider, using a risk-based approach, whether process-specific
evaluation of filter performance may be warranted for their application.LAY
ABSTRACT: Mycoplasma are small bacteria that have the ability to penetrate
sterilizing-grade filters. Filtration of large-scale mammalian and bacterial cell
culture media is an example of an industry process where effective filtration of 
mycoplasma is required. The Parenteral Drug Association recognized the absence of
industry standard test parameters for evaluating mycoplasma clearance filters by 
filter manufacturers and formed a task force to formulate such a consensus among 
manufacturers. The use of standardized test parameters by filter manufacturers,
including the preparation of the culture broth, will facilitate the end user's
evaluation of the mycoplasma clearance claims provided by filter vendors.
However, it is still important to recognize filter performance will depend on the
actual conditions of use; therefore end users should consider, using a risk-based
approach, whether process-specific evaluation of filter performance may be
warranted for their application.

© PDA, Inc. 2014.

DOI: 10.5731/pdajpst.2014.00976 
PMID: 25188349  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

