
1. Am J Rhinol Allergy. 2014 Sep-Oct;28(5):366-73. doi: 10.2500/ajra.2014.28.4077.

Sinonasal solitary chemosensory cells "taste" the upper respiratory environment
to regulate innate immunity.

Lee RJ(1), Cohen NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

BACKGROUND: It is not fully understood how sinonasal epithelial cells detect the 
presence of pathogens and activate innate defense responses necessary for
protecting the upper airway from infection. One mechanism is through bitter taste
receptors (T2Rs), which are expressed in the sinonasal cavity. One T2R isoform,
T2R38, is expressed in ciliated cells and detects quorum-sensing molecules from
gram-negative bacteria, activating antimicrobial nitric oxide production. More
recent studies have examined the role of T2Rs expressed in a sinonasal cell type 
that has only recently been identified in humans, the solitary chemosensory cell 
(SCC). We sought to provide an overview of SCCs and taste receptor function in
human sinonasal defense as well as implications for chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS).
METHODS: A literature review of the current knowledge of SCCs and taste receptors
in sinonasal physiology and CRS was conducted.
RESULTS: Human sinonasal SCCs express both bitter T2R and sweet T1R2/3 receptors.
Activation of SCC T2Rs activates a calcium signal that propagates to the
surrounding epithelial cells and causes secretion of antimicrobial peptides.
T1R2/3 sweet receptor activation by physiological airway surface liquid (ASL)
glucose concentrations attenuates the T2R response, likely as a mechanism to
prevent full activation of the T2R pathway except during times of infection, when
pathogens may consume ASL glucose and reduce its concentration.
CONCLUSION: SCCs appear to be important mediators of upper airway innate
immunity, as the SCC T2Rs regulate antimicrobial peptide secretion, but further
study is needed to determine the specific T2R isoforms involved as well as
whether polymorphisms in these isoforms affect susceptibility to infection or
patient outcomes in CRS. The inhibitory role of T1R2/3 sweet receptor suggests
that T1R2/3 blockers may have therapeutic potential in some CRS patients,
particularly those with diabetes mellitus. However, further clinical study of the
relationship between infection and T1R2/3 genotype is required.

DOI: 10.2500/ajra.2014.28.4077 
PMID: 25198020  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

