
1. J Microbiol Methods. 2014 Dec;107:8-12. doi: 10.1016/j.mimet.2014.08.024. Epub
2014 Sep 6.

Revelation of staphylococcal cassette chromosome mec types in
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus isolates from Thailand and Vietnam.

Lawung R(1), Chuong LV(2), Cherdtrakulkiat R(3), Srisarin A(4), Prachayasittikul 
V(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Applied Technology, Faculty of Medical
Technology, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand; Center of Medical Laboratory
Services, Faculty of Medical Technology, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Applied Technology, Faculty of Medical
Technology, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand; Department of Microbiology,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Ho Chi Minh City,
Vietnam.
(3)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Applied Technology, Faculty of Medical
Technology, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Department of Clinical Microscopy, Faculty of Medical Technology, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(5)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Applied Technology, Faculty of Medical
Technology, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. Electronic address:
virapong.pra@mahidol.ac.th.

Methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is highly prevalent, and its
typing plays a crucial role in epidemiology and evolution in both health and
community settings. Multiplex PCR and staphylococcal cassette chromosome mec
(SCCmec) typing based on mec complexes and cassette chromosome recombinase (ccr) 
allotypes have been developed for MRSA identification. The first of these
procedures can identify 4 mec classes (A, B, C1, and E) and 2 ccr allotypes (B2
and B4) in one tube, and the second can identify mecA, mec class C2, and 3
allotypes (A1, A3, and C). Our method offers a novel means to further
differentiate between the main SCCmec types I through XI and is both highly
sensitive (detectable up to 0.3ηg DNA) and specific (100%). Several SCCmec types 
(I, III, IV, V and a non-typeable group) were found in 66 MRSA isolates obtained 
from Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam and Nakhon Pathom, Thailand. SCCmec type III was
highly predominant in both regions. The designed assay is rapid, convenient,
flexible, and reliable. Therefore, this assay is suitable for the high-throughput
screening of the main SCCmec types of MRSA isolates.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mimet.2014.08.024 
PMID: 25205542  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

