
1. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 10;9(9):e107452. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107452.
eCollection 2014.

Composition, buoyancy regulation and fate of ice algal aggregates in the Central 
Arctic Ocean.

Fernández-Méndez M(1), Wenzhöfer F(1), Peeken I(2), Sørensen HL(3), Glud RN(4),
Boetius A(5).

Author information: 
(1)HGF-MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Alfred-Wegener-Institut
Helmholtz-Zentrum für Polar- und Meeresforschung, Bremerhaven, Germany; HGF-MPG
Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck Institute for Marine
Microbiology, Bremen, Germany.
(2)Polar Biological Oceanography, Alfred-Wegener-Institut Helmholtz-Zentrum für
Polar- und Meeresforschung, Bremerhaven, Germany; MARUM, Center for Marine
Environmental Sciences, University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany.
(3)Nordic Centre for Earth Evolution, University of Southern Denmark, Odense,
Denmark; Greenland Climate Research Centre, Nuuk, Greenland.
(4)Nordic Centre for Earth Evolution, University of Southern Denmark, Odense,
Denmark; Greenland Climate Research Centre, Nuuk, Greenland; Marine
Biogeochemistry, Scottish Association for Marine Science, Oban, United Kingdom;
Arctic Research Centre, University of Aarhus, Aarhus, Denmark.
(5)HGF-MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Alfred-Wegener-Institut
Helmholtz-Zentrum für Polar- und Meeresforschung, Bremerhaven, Germany; HGF-MPG
Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck Institute for Marine
Microbiology, Bremen, Germany; MARUM, Center for Marine Environmental Sciences,
University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany.

Sea-ice diatoms are known to accumulate in large aggregates in and under sea ice 
and in melt ponds. There is recent evidence from the Arctic that such aggregates 
can contribute substantially to particle export when sinking from the ice. The
role and regulation of microbial aggregation in the highly seasonal, nutrient-
and light-limited Arctic sea-ice ecosystem is not well understood. To elucidate
the mechanisms controlling the formation and export of algal aggregates from sea 
ice, we investigated samples taken in late summer 2011 and 2012, during two
cruises to the Eurasian Basin of the Central Arctic Ocean. Spherical aggregates
densely packed with pennate diatoms, as well as filamentous aggregates formed by 
Melosira arctica showed sign of different stages of degradation and physiological
stoichiometries, with carbon to chlorophyll a ratios ranging from 110 to 66700,
and carbon to nitrogen molar ratios of 8-35 and 9-40, respectively. Sub-ice algal
aggregate densities ranged between 1 and 17 aggregates m(-2), maintaining an
estimated net primary production of 0.4-40 mg C m(-2) d(-1), and accounted for
3-80% of total phototrophic biomass and up to 94% of local net primary
production. A potential factor controlling the buoyancy of the aggregates was
light intensity, regulating photosynthetic oxygen production and the amount of
gas bubbles trapped within the mucous matrix, even at low ambient nutrient
concentrations. Our data-set was used to evaluate the distribution and importance
of Arctic algal aggregates as carbon source for pelagic and benthic communities.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107452 
PMCID: PMC4160247
PMID: 25208058  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

