
1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015 Jan;135(1):81-91. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2014.07.046.
Epub 2014 Sep 13.

Identification of novel immune phenotypes for allergic and nonallergic childhood 
asthma.

Raedler D(1), Ballenberger N(1), Klucker E(1), Böck A(1), Otto R(1), Prazeres da 
Costa O(2), Holst O(3), Illig T(4), Buch T(2), von Mutius E(1), Schaub B(5).

Author information: 
(1)University Children's Hospital Munich, the Department of Pulmonary & Allergy, 
LMU Munich, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Munich, Germany.
(2)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, TUM Munich,
Munich, Germany.
(3)Division of Structural Biochemistry, Research Center Borstel, Leibniz-Center
for Medicine and Biosciences, Borstel, Germany.
(4)Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for
Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany; Hannover Unified Biobank, Hannover
Medical School, Hannover, Germany; German Center for Lung Research (DZL),
Hannover, Germany.
(5)University Children's Hospital Munich, the Department of Pulmonary & Allergy, 
LMU Munich, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Munich, Germany.
Electronic address: Bianca.Schaub@med.uni-muenchen.de.

BACKGROUND: Childhood asthma is classified into allergic asthma (AA) and
nonallergic asthma (NA), yet both are treated identically, with only partial
success.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to identify novel immune phenotypes for childhood AA and NA.
METHODS: The Clinical Asthma Research Association cohort study includes 275
steroid-naive 4- to 15-year-old German children (healthy control subjects [HCs], 
patients with AA, and patients with NA). In PBMCs both quantitative and
functional analysis of regulatory T (Treg) and TH17 cells (flow cytometry/Treg
cell suppression) before/after anti-CD3/CD28, lipid A, and peptidoglycan
stimulation were performed. Cytokines and gene expression, as assessed by using
Luminex or transcriptomics/quantitative real-time RT-PCR, were analyzed by means 
of regression analysis. Linear discriminant analysis was applied to discriminate 
between phenotypes.
RESULTS: The 3 phenotypes were immunologically well discriminated by means of
microarray and protein analysis with linear discriminant analysis. Patients with 
AA were characterized by increased Treg cells compared with those in HCs but not 
those in patients with NA. Treg cells from patients with AA, but not patients
with NA, significantly suppressed IL-5, IL-13, and IFN-γ secretion. Patients with
AA had decreased expression of chloride intracellular channel 4 (CLIC4) and
tuberous sclerosis 1 (TSC1), important innate immunity regulators. Patients with 
NA were characterized by increased proinflammatory IL-1β levels, neutrophil
counts, and IL-17-shifted immunity. In parallel, expressions of anti-inflammatory
IL37, proline-serine-threonine phosphatase-interacting protein 2 (PSTPIP2), and
the neutrophil-associated genes CD93, triggering receptor expressed on myeloid
cells 1 (TREM1), and regulator of G-protein signaling 13 (RGS13) were increased
in patients with NA. A shared TH2 immunity was present in both asthma phenotypes.
CONCLUSION: Novel immune-regulatory mechanisms in childhood asthma identified
increased Treg cells in patients with AA compared with those in HCs but not those
in NA and decreased innate immunity genes for patients with AA, the first
potentially indicating a counterregulatory mechanism to suppress cytokines yet
not sufficient to control allergic inflammation. Very distinctly, patients with
NA showed an IL-17-shifted proinflammatory immunity, promoting neutrophil
inflammation and less functional Treg cells. Identification of these unique
pathways provides a profound basis for future strategies for individualized
prediction of asthma development, disease course, and prevention.

Copyright © 2014 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2014.07.046 
PMID: 25226851  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

