
1. FEBS J. 2014 Nov;281(22):5120-31. doi: 10.1111/febs.13051. Epub 2014 Oct 4.

Glutaryl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase from Geobacter metallireducens - interaction
with electron transferring flavoprotein and kinetic basis of unidirectional
catalysis.

Estelmann S(1), Boll M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology II, University of Freiburg, Germany.

Glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenases (GDHs) are FAD containing acyl-CoA dehydrogenases
that usually catalyze the dehydrogenation and decarboxylation of glutaryl-CoA to 
crotonyl-CoA with an electron transferring flavoprotein (ETF) acting as natural
electron acceptor. In anaerobic bacteria, GDHs play an important role in the
benzoyl-CoA degradation pathway of monocyclic aromatic compounds. In the present 
study, we identified, purified and characterized the benzoate-induced BamOP as
the electron accepting ETF of GDH (BamM) from the Fe(III)-respiring Geobacter
metallireducens. The BamOP heterodimer contained FAD and AMP as cofactors. In the
absence of an artificial electron acceptor, at pH values above 8, the
BamMOP-components catalyzed the expected glutaryl-CoA oxidation to crotonyl-CoA
and CO2 ; however, at pH values below 7, the redox-neutral glutaryl-CoA
conversion to butyryl-CoA and CO2 became the dominant reaction. This previously
unknown, strictly ETF-dependent coupled glutaryl-CoA oxidation/crotonyl-CoA
reduction activity was facilitated by an unexpected two-electron transfer between
FAD(BamM) and FAD(BamOP) , as well as by the similar redox potentials of the two 
FAD cofactors in the substrate-bound state. The strict order of electron/proton
transfer and C-C-cleavage events including transient charge-transfer complexes
did not allow an energetic coupling of electron transfer and decarboxylation.
This explains why it was difficult to release the glutaconyl-CoA intermediate
from reduced GDH. Moreover, it provides a kinetic rational for the apparent
inability of BamM to catalyze the reverse reductive crotonyl-CoA carboxylation,
even under thermodynamically favourable conditions. For this reason reductive
crotonyl-CoA carboxylation, a key reaction in C2-assimilation via the
ethylmalonyl-CoA pathway, is accomplished by a different crotonyl-CoA
carboxylase/reductase via a covalent NADPH/ene-adduct.

© 2014 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.13051 
PMID: 25223645  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

