
1. Nestle Nutr Inst Workshop Ser. 2014;79:57-71. doi: 10.1159/000360685. Epub 2014
Sep 5.

Interplay of nutrients and microbial metabolites in intestinal immune
homeostasis: distinct and common mechanisms of immune regulation in the small
bowel and colon.

Perrigoue J(1), Das A, Mora JR.

Author information: 
(1)Disease Integrative Biology, Immunology Therapeutic Area, Janssen R&D, Spring 
House, PA, USA.

The intestinal mucosa is the largest body surface exposed to the environment.
While there are common features when comparing immune responses along the
intestinal mucosa, the small bowel and colon exhibit striking differences in
their mechanisms driving immune regulation. The vitamin A (VA) metabolite
all-trans retinoic acid (RA) signaling via RA nuclear receptors plays a key role 
in immune homeostasis in the small bowel, and recent work indicates that RA is
required for establishing immune tolerance to dietary antigens in the upper
intestinal tract by inducing α4β7(+)CCR9(+) gut-tropic TREG. In contrast,
microbiota-specific TREG in the colon do not appear to require RA, but can be
regulated by short-chain fatty acids (SCFA), microbial metabolites that signal
through the G protein-coupled receptor GPR43. Moreover, TREG do not need CCR9 to 
home to the colon, but utilize another G protein-coupled receptor, GPR15, which
is upregulated by SCFA. Thus, the mechanisms governing intestinal tolerance to
dietary antigens in the upper digestive tract differ from those controlling
tolerance to the microbiota in the colon, with RA and SCFA playing key
complementary roles in their respective compartments. In addition to VA and SCFA,
recent studies have highlighted the roles of other dietary and microbial
metabolites that influence immune cell homeostasis across the small and large
bowel including dietary ligands for aryl hydrocarbon receptor and
microbiota-modified bile acids. Understanding the complex and dynamic interplay
between dietary metabolites and commensal microbiota within the intestinal
microenvironment could therefore inform novel strategies for the treatment of
food allergies and inflammatory bowel diseases.

2014 Nestec Ltd., Vevey/S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000360685 
PMID: 25227295  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

