
1. Nat Chem Biol. 2014 Nov;10(11):950-6. doi: 10.1038/nchembio.1650. Epub 2014 Oct
5.

A semisynthetic carbohydrate-lipid vaccine that protects against S. pneumoniae in
mice.

Cavallari M(1), Stallforth P(2), Kalinichenko A(1), Rathwell DC(2), Gronewold
TM(3), Adibekian A(2), Mori L(4), Landmann R(5), Seeberger PH(2), De Libero G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel and
University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Biomolecular Systems, Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces,
Potsdam, Germany.
(3)SAW Instruments, Bonn, Germany.
(4)1] Experimental Immunology Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel and 
University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland. [2] SIgN (Singapore Immunology
Network), A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research) Biopolis,
Singapore.
(5)Infection Biology, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel and
University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Severe forms of pneumococcal meningitis, bacteraemia and pneumonia result in more
than 1 million deaths each year despite the widespread introduction of
carbohydrate-protein conjugate vaccines against Streptococcus pneumoniae. Here we
describe a new and highly efficient antipneumococcal vaccine design based on
synthetic conjugation of S. pneumoniae capsule polysaccharides to the potent
lipid antigen α-galactosylceramide, which stimulates invariant natural killer T
(iNKT) cells when presented by the nonpolymorphic antigen-presenting molecule
CD1d. Mice injected with the new lipid-carbohydrate conjugate vaccine produced
high-affinity IgG antibodies specific for pneumococcal polysaccharides.
Vaccination stimulated germinal center formation; accumulation of iNKT cells with
a T follicular helper cell phenotype; and increased frequency of
carbohydrate-specific, long-lived memory B cells and plasmablasts. This new
lipid-carbohydrate vaccination strategy induced potent antipolysaccharide
immunity that protected against pneumococcal disease in mice and may also prove
effective for the design of carbohydrate-based vaccines against other major
bacterial pathogens.

DOI: 10.1038/nchembio.1650 
PMID: 25282505  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

