
1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2015 Jan;70(1):279-85. doi: 10.1093/jac/dku328. Epub 2014
Oct 10.

Longitudinal trends and cross-sectional analysis of English national hospital
antibacterial use over 5 years (2008-13): working towards hospital prescribing
quality measures.

Cooke J(1), Stephens P(2), Ashiru-Oredope D(3), Charani E(4), Dryden M(5), Fry
C(6), Hand K(7), Holmes A(4), Howard P(8), Johnson AP(9), Livermore DM(10),
Mansell P(11), McNulty CA(12), Wellsteed S(6), Hopkins S(13), Sharland M(14).

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Infection Prevention and Management, Division of Infectious
Diseases, Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, London W12 0NN, UK
Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
j.cooke@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)IMS Health, 210 Pentonville Road, London, UK.
(3)Healthcare-Associated Infection, Antimicrobial Resistance and Stewardship and 
Healthcare-Associated Infections Programme, Public Health England, London, UK.
(4)The Centre for Infection Prevention and Management, Division of Infectious
Diseases, Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, London W12 0NN, UK.
(5)Royal Hampshire County Hospital, Winchester, UK.
(6)Infectious Diseases and Blood Policy Branch, Department of Health, London, UK.
(7)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(8)Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds, UK.
(9)Department of Healthcare-Associated Infections and Antimicrobial Resistance,
Centre for Infectious Disease Surveillance and Control, Public Health England,
London, UK.
(10)Antimicrobial Resistance and Healthcare-Associated Infections Reference Unit,
Public Health England, London, UK Norwich Medical School, University of East
Anglia, Norwich, UK.
(11)The Care Quality Commission, London, UK.
(12)Public Health England Primary Care Unit, Microbiology Department, Gloucester 
Royal Hospital, Gloucester, UK.
(13)Healthcare-Associated Infection, Antimicrobial Resistance and Stewardship and
Healthcare-Associated Infections Programme, Public Health England, London, UK
Royal Free London NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(14)Paediatric Infectious Diseases Unit, St George's Hospital, London, UK.

OBJECTIVES: There is global concern that antimicrobial resistance is a major
threat to healthcare. Antimicrobial use is a primary driver of resistance but
little information exists about the variation in antimicrobial use in individual 
hospitals in England over time or comparative use between hospitals. The
objective of this study was to collate, analyse and report issue data from
pharmacy records of 158 National Health Service (NHS) acute hospitals.
METHODS: This was a cohort study of inpatient antibacterial use in acute
hospitals in England analysed over 5 years through a data warehouse from IMS
Health, a leading provider of information, services and technology for the
healthcare industry. Around 98% of NHS hospitals were included in a country with 
a population of 50 million residents.
RESULTS: There was a dramatic change in the usage of different groups of
antibacterials between 2009 and 2013 with a marked reduction in the use of
first-generation cephalosporins by 24.7% and second-generation cephalosporins by 
41%, but little change in the use of third-generation cephalosporins (+5.7%) and 
fluoroquinolones (+1.6%). In contrast, use of co-amoxiclav, carbapenems and
piperacillin/tazobactam increased by 60.1%, 61.4% and 94.8%, respectively. There 
was wide variation in the total and relative amounts of antibacterials used
between individual hospitals.
CONCLUSIONS: Longitudinal analysis of antibacterial use demonstrated remarkable
changes in NHS hospitals, probably reflecting governmental and professional
guidance to mitigate the risk of Clostridium difficile infection. The wide
variation in usage between individual hospitals suggests potential for quality
improvement and benchmarking. Quality measures of optimal hospital antimicrobial 
prescribing need urgent development and validation to support antimicrobial
stewardship initiatives.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dku328 
PMID: 25304646  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

