
1. Elife. 2014 Oct 13;3. doi: 10.7554/eLife.03714.

A structural mechanism for bacterial autotransporter glycosylation by a
dodecameric heptosyltransferase family.

Yao Q(1), Lu Q(1), Wan X(2), Song F(3), Xu Y(1), Hu M(4), Zamyatina A(5), Liu
X(4), Huang N(2), Zhu P(3), Shao F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dr Feng Shao's Laboratory, National Institute of Biological Sciences, Beijing,
China.
(2)Dr Niu Huang's Laboratory, National Institute of Biological Sciences, Beijing,
China.
(3)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)Institute of Analytic Chemistry, College of Chemistry and Molecular
Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, China.
(5)Department of Chemistry, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences,
Vienna, Austria.

A large group of bacterial virulence autotransporters including AIDA-I from
diffusely adhering E. coli (DAEC) and TibA from enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC)
require hyperglycosylation for functioning. Here we demonstrate that TibC from
ETEC harbors a heptosyltransferase activity on TibA and AIDA-I, defining a large 
family of bacterial autotransporter heptosyltransferases (BAHTs). The crystal
structure of TibC reveals a characteristic ring-shape dodecamer. The protomer
features an N-terminal β-barrel, a catalytic domain, a β-hairpin thumb, and a
unique iron-finger motif. The iron-finger motif contributes to back-to-back
dimerization; six dimers form the ring through β-hairpin thumb-mediated
hand-in-hand contact. The structure of ADP-D-glycero-β-D-manno-heptose
(ADP-D,D-heptose)-bound TibC reveals a sugar transfer mechanism and also the
ligand stereoselectivity determinant. Electron-cryomicroscopy analyses uncover a 
TibC-TibA dodecamer/hexamer assembly with two enzyme molecules binding to one
TibA substrate. The complex structure also highlights a high efficient
hyperglycosylation of six autotransporter substrates simultaneously by the
dodecamer enzyme complex.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.03714 
PMCID: PMC4358343
PMID: 25310236  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

