
1. Immunology. 2015 Apr;144(4):598-610. doi: 10.1111/imm.12410.

Regulatory T cells in B-cell-deficient and wild-type mice differ functionally and
in expression of cell surface markers.

Ellis JS(1), Braley-Mullen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA; Department 
of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO,
USA.

NOD.H-2h4 mice develop spontaneous autoimmune thyroiditis (SAT) with chronic
inflammation of thyroids by T and B cells. B-cell deficient (B(-/-) ) mice are
resistant to SAT but develop SAT if regulatory T (Treg) cells are transiently
depleted. We established a transfer model using splenocytes from CD28(-/-)
 B(-/-) mice (effector cells and antigen-presenting cells) cultured with or
without sorted Treg cells from Foxp3-GFP wild-type (WT) or B(-/-) mice. After
transfer to mice lacking T cells, mice given Treg cells from B(-/-) mice had
significantly lower SAT severity scores than mice given Treg cells from WT mice, 
indicating that Treg cells in B(-/-) mice are more effective suppressors of SAT
than Treg cells in WT mice. Treg cells from B(-/-) mice differ from WT Treg cells
in expression of CD27, tumour necrosis factor receptor (TNFR) II p75, and
glucocorticoid-induced TNFR-related protein (GITR). After transient depletion
using anti-CD25 or diphtheria toxin, the repopulating Treg cells in B(-/-) mice
lack suppressor function, and expression of CD27, GITR and p75 is like that of WT
Treg cells. If B(-/-) Treg cells develop with B cells in bone marrow chimeras,
their phenotype is like that of WT Treg cells. Addition of B cells to cultures of
B(-/-) Treg and T effector cells abrogates their suppressive function and their
phenotype is like that of WT Treg cells. These results establish for the first
time that Treg cells in WT and B(-/-) mice differ both functionally and in
expression of particular cell surface markers. Both properties are altered after 
transient depletion and repopulation of B(-/-) Treg cells, and by the presence of
B cells during Treg cell development or during interaction with effector T cells.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/imm.12410 
PMCID: PMC4368166
PMID: 25318356  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

