
1. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 15;20(24):6452-64. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1236. 
Epub 2014 Oct 15.

Clever-1/stabilin-1 controls cancer growth and metastasis.

Karikoski M(1), Marttila-Ichihara F(1), Elima K(2), Rantakari P(3), Hollmén M(1),
Kelkka T(1), Gerke H(1), Huovinen V(1), Irjala H(4), Holmdahl R(1), Salmi M(5),
Jalkanen S(6).

Author information: 
(1)MediCity Research Laboratory, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku,
Turku, Finland.
(2)MediCity Research Laboratory, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku,
Turku, Finland. Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, Institute of
Biomedicine, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(3)MediCity Research Laboratory, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku,
Turku, Finland. Department of Physiology and Turku Center for Disease Modeling,
Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(4)MediCity Research Laboratory, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku,
Turku, Finland. Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Turku University Hospital,
Turku, Finland.
(5)MediCity Research Laboratory, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku,
Turku, Finland. National Institute for Health and Welfare, Turku, Finland.
Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Turku, Turku,
Finland.
(6)MediCity Research Laboratory, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku,
Turku, Finland. National Institute for Health and Welfare, Turku, Finland.
Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Turku, Turku,
Finland. sirpa.jalkanen@utu.fi.

PURPOSE: Immunosuppressive leukocytes and vasculature are important host cell
components regulating tumor progression. Clever-1/Stabilin-1, a multifunctional
scavenger and adhesion receptor, is constitutively present on a subset of type II
macrophages and lymphatic endothelium, but its functional role in cancer is
unknown.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Here, we generated full Clever-1 knockout mice and
cell-specific ones lacking Clever-1 either on macrophages or endothelium. We also
used anti-Clever-1 antibody therapy to treat B16 melanoma and EL-4 lymphoma.
RESULTS: Clever-1-deficient mice had smaller primary and metastatic tumors than
wild-type (WT) controls. Growth of primary tumors, but not of metastases, was
attenuated also in mice lacking Clever-1 selectively in macrophages or in
vascular endothelium. Anti-Clever-1 antibody treatment inhibited tumor
progression in WT mice. Both genetically and therapeutically induced absence of
functional Clever-1 led to diminished numbers of immunosuppressive leukocyte
types in tumors. Functionally Clever-1 mediated binding of immunosuppressive
leukocytes to the intratumoral blood vessels aberrantly expressing Clever-1, and 
tumor cell traffic via the lymphatics. The antibody therapy did not aggravate
autoimmunity.
CONCLUSION: This work identifies Clever-1 in type II macrophages and in tumor
vasculature as a new immunosuppressive molecule in cancer. Our finding that
Clever-1 supports binding of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes to tumor vasculature 
increases our understanding of leukocyte immigration to tumors. The ability of
anti-Clever-1 antibody treatment to attenuate tumor progression in WT mice in
vivo is therapeutically relevant. Thus, Clever-1 may be an emerging new target
for modulating immune evasion and lymphatic spread in cancer.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1236 
PMID: 25320356  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

