
1. Chemistry. 2015 Jan 7;21(2):836-50. doi: 10.1002/chem.201404812. Epub 2014 Oct
30.

Novel composite plastics containing silver(I) acylpyrazolonato additives display 
potent antimicrobial activity by contact.

Marchetti F(1), Palmucci J, Pettinari C, Pettinari R, Condello F, Ferraro S,
Marangoni M, Crispini A, Scuri S, Grappasonni I, Cocchioni M, Nabissi M,
Chierotti MR, Gobetto R.

Author information: 
(1)School of Science and Technology, Chemistry Section, University of Camerino,
Via S. Agostino 1, Camerino (MC) (Italy). fabio.marchetti@unicam.it.

New silver(I) acylpyrazolonato derivatives displaying a mononuclear, polynuclear,
or ionic nature, as a function of the ancillary azole ligands used in the
synthesis, have been fully characterized by thermal analysis, solution NMR
spectroscopy, solid-state IR and NMR spectroscopies, and X-ray diffraction
techniques. These derivatives have been embedded in polyethylene (PE) matrix, and
the antimicrobial activity of the composite materials has been tested against
three bacterial strains (E. coli, P. aeruginosa, and S. aureus): Most of the
composites show antimicrobial action comparable to PE embedded with AgNO3 . Tests
by contact and release tests for specific migration of silver from PE composites 
clearly indicate that, at least in the case of the PE, for composites containing 
polynuclear silver(I) additives, the antimicrobial action is exerted by contact, 
without release of silver ions. Moreover, PE composites can be re-used several
times, displaying the same antimicrobial activity. Membrane permeabilization
studies and induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation tests confirm the
disorganization of bacterial cell membranes. The cytotoxic effect, evaluated in
CD34(+) cells by MTT
(3-(4,5-dimethylthiazole-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazoliumbromide) and CFU (colony
forming units) assays, indicates that the PE composites do not induce
cytotoxicity in human cells. Studies of ecotoxicity, based on the test of Daphnia
magna, confirm tolerability of the PE composites by higher organisms and exclude 
the release of Ag(+) ions in sufficient amounts to affect water environment.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/chem.201404812 
PMID: 25358838  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

