
1. Clin Exp Allergy. 2014 Dec;44(12):1515-24. doi: 10.1111/cea.12443.

Reduced filaggrin expression is accompanied by increased Staphylococcus aureus
colonization of epidermal skin models.

van Drongelen V(1), Haisma EM, Out-Luiting JJ, Nibbering PH, El Ghalbzouri A.

Author information: 
(1)Gorlaeus Laboratories, Department of Drug Delivery Technology, Leiden Academy 
Centre for Drug Research, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands; Department 
of Dermatology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Atopic dermatitis is an inflammatory skin disease that is
characterized by a reduced skin barrier function, reduced filaggrin (FLG)
expression as well as increased colonization by Staphylococcus aureus.
OBJECTIVE: This study focused on the possible involvement of FLG in epidermal
colonization by S. aureus and/or whether it affects the epidermal defence
mechanisms, including the expression of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) and enzymes
involved in stratum corneum barrier lipid synthesis. Furthermore, IL-31 has been 
shown to reduce FLG expression, but its effects on bacterial colonization and on 
the expression of AMPs and enzymes involved in the barrier lipid synthesis are
not known.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We established N/TERT-based epidermal models (NEMs), after 
FLG knockdown (FLG-KD) and/or cultured with IL-31, that were colonized with S.
aureus for 24 h.
RESULTS: Both FLG-KD and IL-31 supplementation resulted in significantly
increased epidermal S. aureus colonization, as well as in an up-regulation of S. 
aureus-induced IL-8 expression. IL-31, but not FLG-KD, prevented S.
aureus-induced up-regulation of mRNA expression for the AMPs human β-defensin 2
and -3 and RNAse7, whereas psoriasin expression remained unchanged. Furthermore, 
the S. aureus colonization induced changes in mRNA expression of ELOVL4 was not
affected by FLG-KD, but was blocked by IL-31. Expression of SCD-1 and Gcase mRNA 
was reduced by IL-31, but not by FLG-KD.
CONCLUSION: This study shows that NEMs, with FLG-KD and/or cultured in the
presence of IL-31, mimic the skin of patients with atopic dermatitis in several
aspects, including enhanced bacterial colonization, increased inflammatory and
reduced protective responses.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cea.12443 
PMID: 25352374  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

