
1. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 4;9(11):e111759. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111759.
eCollection 2014.

Exogenous addition of arachidonic acid to the culture media enhances the
functionality of dendritic cells for their possible use in cancer immunotherapy.

Kumar J(1), Gurav R(1), Kale V(1), Limaye L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Lab., National Centre for Cell Science, Ganeshkhind, Pune, India.

The development of dendritic cell based vaccines is a promising approach in
cancer immunotherapy. For their successful use in the clinics, the propagation
and functionality of DCs is crucial. We earlier established a two-step method for
the large scale generation of DCs from umbilical cord blood derived MNCs/CD34(+) 
cells. This work aims at improving their functionality based on the following
observations: in vitro generated DCs can be less efficient in migration and other
functional activities due to lower eicosanoid levels. The production of
eicosanoids from Arachidonic Acid (AA) can be hampered due to suppression of the 
enzyme phospholipase A2 by IL-4, an essential cytokine required for the
differentiation of DCs. We hypothesized that exogenous addition of AA to the
culture media during DC generation may result in DCs with improved functionality.
DCs were generated with and without AA. The two DC sets were compared by
phenotypic analysis, morphology and functional assays like antigen uptake, MLR,
CTL assay and in vitro and in vivo migration. Though there were no differences
between the two types of DCs in terms of morphology, phenotype and antigen
uptake, AA(+) DCs exhibited an enhanced in vitro and in vivo migration, T cell
stimulatory capacity, CTL activity and significantly higher transcript levels of 
COX-2. AA(+) DCs also show a favorable Th1 cytokine profile than AA- DCs. Thus
addition of AA to the culture media is skewing the DCs towards the secretion of
more IL-12 and less of IL-10 along with the restoration of eicosanoids levels in 
a COX-2 mediated pathway thereby enhancing the functionality of these cells to be
used as a potent cellular vaccine. Taken together, these findings will be helpful
in the better contriving of DC based vaccines for cancer immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111759 
PMCID: PMC4219773
PMID: 25369453  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

