
1. Bundesgesundheitsblatt Gesundheitsforschung Gesundheitsschutz. 2014
Dec;57(12):1424-31. doi: 10.1007/s00103-014-2064-7.

[Preoperational study for the improvement of hygiene conditions in long-term care
facilities].

[Article in German]

Adler AC(1), Spegel H, Kolb S, Hierl W, Müller C, Höller C, Liebl B, Rudolph P,
Herr C.

Author information: 
(1)Landratsamt Berchtesgadener Land - Gesundheitsamt, Salzburger Str. 64, 83435, 
Bad Reichenhall, Deutschland, alexandra.adler@lgl.bayern.de.

Hygiene is becoming more and more important in long-term care facilities.
Long-term care facilities are subject to monitoring by the Public Health Service 
(PHS) and other authorities. For the PHS in Bavaria the Bavarian Health and Food 
Safety Authority (Landesamt für Gesundheit und Lebensmittelsicherheit, LGL)
published a hygiene monitoring concept and there exists an inspection guide
developed by a specialist department for nursing homes and institutions for the
handicapped (Fachstelle für Pflege und Behinderteneinrichtungen, FQA). Because
inspections are performed in multiprofessional teams, it makes sense to use a
coordinated inspection catalog. The aim was to integrate hygienic requirements
specified in the Bavarian guidelines for hygiene by the LGL into the inspection
guide published by the FQA to obtain a quality assured surveillance. The involved
parties were questioned about the inspection guide and their hygiene management
and then the hygiene criteria of the LGL were implemented into the inspection
guide. Questions dealing with hygiene requirements concerning intensive care,
management of multidrug resistant bacteria and interviews with the person
responsible for infection control in the facility itself were developed for the
first time and were integrated into the inspection guide. The revised inspection 
guide was tested for its applicability. With the revised inspection guide there
now exists a tool which allows not only comprehensive inspections of the
facilities including hygiene issues but also a good cooperation of the various
parties involved. There are many actions which have to be conveyed into the
future, especially programs to train staff to apply the inspection guide and to
enhance the ability of all participants to act in cooperation. The guide will
also allow the facilities to cooperate more easily and more closely, as the guide
takes the respective problems and challenges of the different facilities into
consideration. Additionally the development of legal guidelines regarding hygiene
can support general healthcare of residents.

DOI: 10.1007/s00103-014-2064-7 
PMID: 25367175  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

