
1. J Immunol. 1989 Mar 15;142(6):1986-94.

Regulation of human neutrophil functions by adenine nucleotides.

McGarrity ST(1), Stephenson AH, Webster RO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, St. Louis University School of Medicine, MO 63104.

Previous work has shown that platelet-derived adenine nucleotides modulate
neutrophil superoxide anion (O2-) generation. Additional studies were undertaken 
to characterize the effects of authentic adenosine (ADO) and its nucleotide
derivatives on the inflammatory functions of human neutrophils. Stimulus-specific
inhibition of neutrophil O2- generation by ADO in response to FMLP was verified. 
In addition, the ability of ATP, ADP, and AMP to limit neutrophil O2- generation 
induced by FMLP (0.2 to 0.5 microM) was demonstrated. The concentration producing
50% inhibition for nucleotide inhibition of neutrophil O2- generation was in the 
rank order of ADO (0.1 microM) less than AMP (0.5 microM) less than ADP less than
or equal to ATP (5 microM). Guanine and inosine nucleotides (0.01 to 100 microM) 
did not inhibit FMLP-stimulated neutrophil O2- generation. Neutrophil
degranulation in response to FMLP was only modestly inhibited by adenine
nucleotides and ADO. Adenosine and ADP failed to affect chemotaxis of neutrophils
stimulated with FMLP. The inability of non-metabolizable analogs to mimic the
inhibitory effects of authentic ATP or ADP on the neutrophil O2- response
suggested that metabolism of added nucleotides is necessary for their
effectiveness. Both TLC and HPLC confirmed that ATP and ADP were converted to AMP
and ADO after their incubation with unstimulated or FMLP-activated neutrophils.
The addition of adenosine deaminase to neutrophil reaction mixtures in which
conversion of added nucleotides was apparent removed detectable ADO but failed to
completely abrogate the inhibition of neutrophil O2- generation by accumulated
AMP. The kinetics of inhibition of FMLP-induced neutrophil O2- generation by ATP 
and ADP also indicated that conversion of these nucleotides to ADO and/or AMP may
be essential for their ability to reduce neutrophil responses.


PMID: 2537867  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

