
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2014 Oct 21;4:141. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2014.00141.
eCollection 2014.

Staphylococcus aureus small colony variants show common metabolic features in
central metabolism irrespective of the underlying auxotrophism.

Kriegeskorte A(1), Grubmüller S(2), Huber C(2), Kahl BC(1), von Eiff C(1),
Proctor RA(3), Peters G(1), Eisenreich W(2), Becker K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology, University of Münster Münster, Germany.
(2)Lehrstuhl für Biochemie, Technische Universität München Garching, Germany.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health Madison, WI, USA.

In addition to the classical phenotype, Staphylococcus aureus may exhibit the
small colony-variant (SCV) phenotype, which has been associated with chronic,
persistent and/or relapsing infections. SCVs are characterized by common
phenotypic features such as slow growth, altered susceptibility to antibiotic
agents and pathogenic traits based on increased internalization and intracellular
persistence. They show frequently auxotrophies mainly based on two different
mechanisms: (i) deficiencies in electron transport as shown for menadione- and/or
hemin-auxotrophs and (ii) thymidylate biosynthetic-defective SCVs. To get a
comprehensive overview of the metabolic differences between both phenotypes, we
compared sets of clinically derived menadione-, hemin- and thymidine-auxotrophic 
SCVs and stable site directed mutants exhibiting the SCV phenotype with their
corresponding isogenic parental strains displaying the normal phenotype.
Isotopologue profiling and transcriptional analysis of central genes involved in 
carbon metabolism, revealed large differences between both phenotypes. Labeling
experiments with [U-(13)C6]glucose showed reduced (13)C incorporation into
aspartate and glutamate from all SCVs irrespective of the underlying
auxotrophism. More specifically, these SCVs showed decreased fractions of
(13)C2-aspartate and glutamate; (13)C3-glutamate was not detected at all in the
SCVs. In comparison to the patterns in the corresponding experiment with the
classical S. aureus phenotype, this indicated a reduced carbon flux via the
citric acid cycle in all SCV phenotypes. Indeed, the aconitase-encoding gene
(acnA) was found down-regulated in all SCV phenotypes under study. In conclusion,
all SCV phenotypes including clinical isolates and site-directed mutants
displaying the SCV phenotype were characterized by down-regulation of citric acid
cycle activity. The common metabolic features in central carbon metabolism found 
in all SCVs may explain similar characteristics of the S. aureus SCVs
irrespective of their auxotrophism as well as the specific genetic and/or
regulatory backgrounds.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2014.00141 
PMCID: PMC4204524
PMID: 25374845  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

