
1. Glob Health Action. 2014 Nov 5;7:25908. doi: 10.3402/gha.v7.25908. eCollection
2014.

EMIRA: Ecologic Malaria Reduction for Africa--innovative tools for integrated
malaria control.

Dambach P(1), Traoré I(2), Becker N(3), Kaiser A(4), Sié A(2), Sauerborn R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Public Health, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany;
peter.dambach@web.de.
(2)Centre de Recherche en Santé de Nouna, Nouna, Burkina Faso.
(3)German Mosquito Control Association (KABS), Speyer, Germany; Centre for
Organismal Studies, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)German Mosquito Control Association (KABS), Speyer, Germany.
(5)Institute of Public Health, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Malaria control is based on early treatment of cases and on vector
control. The current measures for malaria vector control in Africa are mainly
based on long-lasting insecticide treated nets (LLINs) and to a much smaller
extent on indoor residual spraying (IRS). A third pillar in the fight against the
malaria vector, larval source management (LSM), has virtually not been used in
Africa since the ban of DDT in the 1960s. Within the light of recent WHO
recommendations for Bacillus thuringiensis israelensis (Bti) use against malaria 
and other vector species, larval source management could see a revival in the
upcoming years. In this project we analyze the ecologic and health impacts as
well as the cost effectiveness of larval source management under different
larviciding scenarios in a health district in Burkina Faso.
METHODS: The project is designed as prospective intervention study with duration 
of three years (2013-2015). Its spatial scale includes three arms of
interventions and control, comprising a total of 127 villages and the district
capital Nouna in the extended HDSS (Health Demographic Surveillance System) of
the Kossi province. Baseline data on mosquito abundance, parasitemia in U5
children, and malaria related morbidity and mortality are gathered over the
project duration. Besides the outcome on ecologic and health parameters, the
economic costs are seized and valued against the achieved health benefits.
CONCLUSIONS: Risk map based, guided larvicide application might be a possibility 
to further decrease economic cost of LSM and facilitate its faster incorporation 
to integrated malaria control programs. Given the limited resources in many
malaria endemic countries, it is of utmost importance to relate the costs of
novel strategies for malaria prevention to their effect on the burden of the
disease. Occurring costs and the impact on the health situation will be made
comparable to other, existing intervention strategies, allowing stakeholders and 
policymakers decision making.

DOI: 10.3402/gha.v7.25908 
PMCID: PMC4223283
PMID: 25377345  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

