
1. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 10;9(11):e112548. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112548.
eCollection 2014.

Evidence for SH2 domain-containing 5'-inositol phosphatase-2 (SHIP2) contributing
to a lymphatic dysfunction.

Agollah GD(1), Gonzalez-Garay ML(2), Rasmussen JC(3), Tan IC(3), Aldrich MB(3),
Darne C(3), Fife CE(4), Guilliod R(4), Maus EA(4), King PD(5), Sevick-Muraca
EM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Imaging, The Brown Foundation Institute of Molecular
Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, Texas, United
States of America; The University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences
at Houston, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas,
United States of America.
(2)Division of Genomics and Bioinformatics, Center for Molecular Imaging, The
Brown Foundation Institute of Molecular Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States
of America.
(3)Center for Molecular Imaging, The Brown Foundation Institute of Molecular
Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, Texas, United
States of America.
(4)Memorial Hermann Hospital Center for Lymphedema Management, Houston, Texas,
United States of America.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.

The lymphatic vasculature plays a critical role in a number of disease conditions
of increasing prevalence, such as autoimmune disorders, obesity, blood vascular
diseases, and cancer metastases. Yet, unlike the blood vasculature, the tools
available to interrogate the molecular basis of lymphatic dysfunction/disease
have been lacking. More recently, investigators have reported that dysregulation 
of the PI3K pathway is involved in syndromic human diseases that involve abnormal
lymphatic vasculatures, but there have been few compelling results that show the 
direct association of this molecular pathway with lymphatic dysfunction in
humans. Using near-infrared fluorescence lymphatic imaging (NIRFLI) to phenotype 
and next generation sequencing (NGS) for unbiased genetic discovery in a family
with non-syndromic lymphatic disease, we discovered a rare, novel mutation in
INPPL1 that encodes the protein SHIP2, which is a negative regulator of the PI3K 
pathway, to be associated with lymphatic dysfunction in the family. In vitro
interrogation shows that SHIP2 is directly associated with impairment of normal
lymphatic endothelial cell (LEC) behavior and that SHIP2 associates with
receptors that are associated in lymphedema, implicating its direct involvement
in the lymphatic vasculature.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112548 
PMCID: PMC4226566
PMID: 25383712  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

