
1. Chemistry. 2015 Jan 7;21(2):590-600. doi: 10.1002/chem.201404786. Epub 2014 Nov
7.

Photoinduced charge transfer in a conformational switching chlorin
dimer-azafulleroid in polar and nonpolar media.

Nikkonen T(1), Oliva MM, Kahnt A, Muuronen M, Helaja J, Guldi DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Laboratory of Organic Chemistry, University of
Helsinki, P. O. Box 55,00014,University of Helsinki (Finland).

In the present study, a biomimetic reaction center model, that is, a molecular
triad consisting of a chlorin dimer and an azafulleroid, is synthesized and its
photophysical properties are studied in comparison with the corresponding
molecular dyad, which consists only of a chlorin monomer and an azafulleroid. As 
evidenced by (1) H NMR, UV/Vis, and fluorescence spectroscopy, the chlorin
dimer-azafulleroid folds in nonpolar media into a C2 -symmetric geometry through 
hydrogen bonding, resulting in appreciable electronic interactions between the
chlorins, whereas in polar media the two chlorins diverge from contact.
Femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy studies reveal longer
charge-separated states for the chlorin dimer-azafulleroid; ≈1.6 ns in toluene,
compared with the lifetime of ≈0.9 ns for the corresponding chlorin
monomer-azafulleroid in toluene. In polar media, for example, benzonitrile,
similar charge-separated states are observed, but the lifetimes are inevitably
shorter: 65 and 73 ps for the dimeric and monomeric chlorin-azafulleroids,
respectively. Nanosecond transient absorption and singlet oxygen phosphorescence 
studies corroborate that in toluene, the charge-separated state decays indirectly
via the triplet excited state to the ground state, whereas in benzonitrile,
direct recombination to the ground state is observed. Complementary DFT studies
suggest two energy-minima conformations, that is, a folded chlorin
dimer-azafulleroid, which is present in nonpolar media, and another conformation 
in polar media, in which the two hydrophobic chlorins wrap the azafulleroid.
Inspection of the frontier molecular orbitals shows that in the folded
conformation, the HOMO on each chlorin is equivalent and is shared owing to
partial π-π overlap, resulting in delocalization of the conjugated π electrons,
whereas the wrapped conformation lacks this stabilization. As such, the longer
charge-separated lifetime for the dimer is rationalized by both the electron
donor-acceptor separation distance and the stabilization of the radical cation
through delocalization. The chlorin folding seems to change the photophysical
properties in a manner similar to that observed in the chlorophyll dimer in
natural photosynthetic reaction centers.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/chem.201404786 
PMID: 25381747  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

