
1. Methods Enzymol. 2014;546:273-95. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-801185-0.00013-1.

Genome editing for human gene therapy.

Meissner TB(1), Mandal PK(2), Ferreira LM(1), Rossi DJ(3), Cowan CA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA; Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine,
Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA; Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine,
Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Sherman Fairchild Biochemistry, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Sherman Fairchild
Biochemistry, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA; Center for Regenerative Medicine,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. Electronic address:
chad_cowan@harvard.edu.

The rapid advancement of genome-editing techniques holds much promise for the
field of human gene therapy. From bacteria to model organisms and human cells,
genome editing tools such as zinc-finger nucleases (ZNFs), TALENs, and
CRISPR/Cas9 have been successfully used to manipulate the respective genomes with
unprecedented precision. With regard to human gene therapy, it is of great
interest to test the feasibility of genome editing in primary human hematopoietic
cells that could potentially be used to treat a variety of human genetic
disorders such as hemoglobinopathies, primary immunodeficiencies, and cancer. In 
this chapter, we explore the use of the CRISPR/Cas9 system for the efficient
ablation of genes in two clinically relevant primary human cell types, CD4+ T
cells and CD34+ hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. By using two guide RNAs 
directed at a single locus, we achieve highly efficient and predictable deletions
that ablate gene function. The use of a Cas9-2A-GFP fusion protein allows
FACS-based enrichment of the transfected cells. The ease of designing,
constructing, and testing guide RNAs makes this dual guide strategy an attractive
approach for the efficient deletion of clinically relevant genes in primary human
hematopoietic stem and effector cells and enables the use of CRISPR/Cas9 for gene
therapy.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-801185-0.00013-1 
PMID: 25398345  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

