
1. Vet Res. 2014 Nov 27;45:104. doi: 10.1186/s13567-014-0104-9.

Biofilm formation by virulent and non-virulent strains of Haemophilus parasuis.

Bello-Ortí B, Deslandes V, Tremblay YD, Labrie J, Howell KJ, Tucker AW, Maskell
DJ, Aragon V, Jacques M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Groupe de recherche sur les maladies infectieuses du porc, Faculté de médecine
vétérinaire, Université de Montréal, St-Hyacinthe, Québec J2S 7C6, Canada.
mario.jacques@umontreal.ca.

Haemophilus parasuis is a commensal bacterium of the upper respiratory tract of
healthy pigs. It is also the etiological agent of Glässer's disease, a systemic
disease characterized by polyarthritis, fibrinous polyserositis and meningitis,
which causes high morbidity and mortality in piglets. The aim of this study was
to evaluate biofilm formation by well-characterized virulent and non-virulent
strains of H. parasuis. We observed that non-virulent strains isolated from the
nasal cavities of healthy pigs formed significantly (p < 0.05) more biofilms than
virulent strains isolated from lesions of pigs with Glässer's disease. These
differences were observed when biofilms were formed in microtiter plates under
static conditions or formed in the presence of shear force in a drip-flow
apparatus or a microfluidic system. Confocal laser scanning microscopy using
different fluorescent probes on a representative subset of strains indicated that
the biofilm matrix contains poly-N-acetylglucosamine, proteins and eDNA. The
biofilm matrix was highly sensitive to degradation by proteinase K. Comparison of
transcriptional profiles of biofilm and planktonic cells of the non-virulent H.
parasuis F9 strain revealed a significant number of up-regulated membrane-related
genes in biofilms, and genes previously identified in Actinobacillus
pleuropneumoniae biofilms. Our data indicate that non-virulent strains of H.
parasuis have the ability to form robust biofilms in contrast to virulent,
systemic strains. Biofilm formation might therefore allow the non-virulent
strains to colonize and persist in the upper respiratory tract of pigs.
Conversely, the planktonic state of the virulent strains might allow them to
disseminate within the host.

DOI: 10.1186/s13567-014-0104-9 
PMCID: PMC4245831
PMID: 25428823  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

