
1. J Infect. 2015 Apr;70(4):324-34. doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2014.10.006. Epub 2014 Oct
29.

Pulmonary tuberculosis induces a systemic hypercoagulable state.

Kager LM(1), Blok DC(2), Lede IO(3), Rahman W(4), Afroz R(4), Bresser P(5), van
der Zee JS(5), Ghose A(4), Visser CE(3), de Jong MD(3), Tanck MW(6), Zahed AS(4),
Alam KM(7), Hassan M(4), Hossain A(8), Lutter R(9), Veer CV(2), Dondorp AM(10),
Meijers JC(11), van der Poll T(12).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical
Center/University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Center for
Experimental and Molecular Medicine (CEMM), Academic Medical Center/University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: l.m.kager@amc.uva.nl.
(2)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical
Center/University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Center for
Experimental and Molecular Medicine (CEMM), Academic Medical Center/University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical
Center/University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Medical
Microbiology, Academic Medical Center/University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Chittagong Medical College & Hospital (CMCH),
Chittagong, Bangladesh.
(5)Department of Pulmonology, Academic Medical Center/University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Pulmonology, Onze Lieve Vrouwe
Gasthuis, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(6)Department Clinical Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Academic
Medical Center/University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Microbiology, Chittagong Medical College & Hospital (CMCH),
Chittagong, Bangladesh.
(8)Chest Disease Clinic Chittagong (CDCC), Chittagong, Bangladesh.
(9)Department of Pulmonology, Academic Medical Center/University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Experimental Immunology, Academic
Medical Center/University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(10)Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand; Centre
for Tropical Medicine, Churchill Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(11)Department of Experimental Vascular Medicine, Academic Medical
Center/University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Department of
Vascular Medicine, Academic Medical Center/University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.
(12)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical
Center/University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Center for
Experimental and Molecular Medicine (CEMM), Academic Medical Center/University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Division of Infectious Diseases, Academic 
Medical Center/University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVES: Human tuberculosis (TB) remains an important cause of death globally.
Bangladesh is one of the most affected countries. We aimed to investigate the
impact of pulmonary TB on pro- and anticoagulant mechanisms.
METHODS: This prospective study was conducted in Chittagong, Bangladesh. We
performed an in-depth analysis of coagulation activation and inhibition in plasma
obtained from 64 patients with primary lung TB and 11 patients with recurrent
lung TB and compared these with 37 healthy controls. Additionally, in nine
patients coagulation activation was studied in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid
(BALF) harvested from the site of infection and compared with BALF from a
contralateral unaffected lung subsegment.
RESULTS: Relative to uninfected controls, primary and recurrent TB were
associated with a systemic net procoagulant state, as indicated by enhanced
activation of coagulation (elevated plasma levels of thrombin-antithrombin
complexes, D-dimer and fibrinogen) together with impaired anticoagulant
mechanisms (reduced plasma levels of antithrombin, protein C activity, free
protein S, and protein C inhibitor). Activation of coagulation did not correlate 
with plasma concentrations of established TB biomarkers. Coagulation activation
could not be detected at the primary site of infection in a subset of TB
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Pulmonary TB is associated with a systemic hypercoagulable state.

Copyright © 2014 The British Infection Association. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinf.2014.10.006 
PMID: 25455017  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

