
1. Microbiol Insights. 2014 Nov 11;7:25-34. doi: 10.4137/MBI.S18076. eCollection
2014.

Evaluative profiling of arsenic sensing and regulatory systems in the human
microbiome project genomes.

Isokpehi RD(1), Udensi UK(2), Simmons SS(3), Hollman AL(4), Cain AE(5), Olofinsae
SA(6), Hassan OA(6), Kashim ZA(6), Enejoh OA(6), Fasesan DE(6), Nashiru O(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, FL, USA.
(2)RCMI Center for Environmental Health, College of Science, Engineering and
Technology, Jackson State University, Jackson, MS, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Jackson State University, Jackson, MS, USA. ;
Department of Computer Science, Jackson State University, Jackson, MS, USA.
(4)Jarvis Christian College, Hawkins, TX, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, USA.
(6)H3Africa Bioinformatics Network Node, National Biotechnology Development
Agency (NABDA), Abuja, Nigeria.

The influence of environmental chemicals including arsenic, a type 1 carcinogen, 
on the composition and function of the human-associated microbiota is of
significance in human health and disease. We have developed a suite of
bioinformatics and visual analytics methods to evaluate the availability
(presence or absence) and abundance of functional annotations in a microbial
genome for seven Pfam protein families: As(III)-responsive transcriptional
repressor (ArsR), anion-transporting ATPase (ArsA), arsenical pump membrane
protein (ArsB), arsenate reductase (ArsC), arsenical resistance operon
transacting repressor (ArsD), water/glycerol transport protein (aquaporins), and 
universal stress protein (USP). These genes encode function for sensing and/or
regulating arsenic content in the bacterial cell. The evaluative profiling
strategy was applied to 3,274 genomes from which 62 genomes from 18 genera were
identified to contain genes for the seven protein families. Our list included 12 
genomes in the Human Microbiome Project (HMP) from the following genera:
Citrobacter, Escherichia, Lactobacillus, Providencia, Rhodococcus, and
Staphylococcus. Gene neighborhood analysis of the arsenic resistance operon in
the genome of Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron VPI-5482, a human gut symbiont,
revealed the adjacent arrangement of genes for arsenite binding/transfer (ArsD)
and cytochrome c biosynthesis (DsbD_2). Visual analytics facilitated evaluation
of protein annotations in 367 genomes in the phylum Bacteroidetes identified
multiple genomes in which genes for ArsD and DsbD_2 were adjacently arranged.
Cytochrome c, produced by a posttranslational process, consists of
heme-containing proteins important for cellular energy production and signaling. 
Further research is desired to elucidate arsenic resistance and arsenic-mediated 
cellular energy production in the Bacteroidetes.

DOI: 10.4137/MBI.S18076 
PMCID: PMC4230230
PMID: 25452698 

