
1. J Hosp Infect. 2015 Jan;89(1):2-15. doi: 10.1016/j.jhin.2014.09.014. Epub 2014
Oct 24.

Development of a sporicidal test method for Clostridium difficile.

Fraise AP(1), Wilkinson MA(2), Bradley CR(2), Paton S(3), Walker J(3), Maillard
JY(4), Wesgate RL(4), Hoffman P(5), Coia J(6), Woodall C(7), Fry C(8), Wilcox
M(9).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Infection Research Laboratory, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, 
UK. Electronic address: adam.fraise@uhb.nhs.uk.
(2)Hospital Infection Research Laboratory, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, 
UK.
(3)Public Health England, Porton Down, Wiltshire, UK.
(4)School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff,
UK.
(5)Public Health England, Colindale, London, UK.
(6)Scottish Microbiology Reference Laboratories, Glasgow, UK.
(7)BluTest Laboratories Ltd, Glasgow, UK.
(8)Department of Health in England, London, UK.
(9)Department of Microbiology, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.

BACKGROUND: Disinfectants with claimed activity against Clostridium difficile
must be evaluated to ensure efficacy against the spores that comprise an
environmental source of patient infection. Unfortunately there is, at present, no
generally accepted method for evaluating these disinfectants. In the absence of
such a method, laboratories have to adapt protocols that were not designed for
products used in medical environments and consequently may use inappropriate test
organisms, exposure times, and pass criteria.
AIM: To develop and evaluate a method for testing the activity of disinfectants
against C. difficile spores using exposure times and pass criteria which are
relevant to clinical application.
METHODS: A Joint Working Party of the Healthcare Infection Society (HIS) and the 
Advisory Committee on Antimicrobial Resistance and Healthcare Associated
Infections (ARHAI) of the Department of Health in England was assembled. The
Working Party adapted a previously described enzyme-based method for spore
purification (the Clospore method) using an exposure time of 5 min and a 5 log10 
kill as a pass criterion.
FINDINGS: Evaluation of the method by three laboratories demonstrated that the
method is simple to follow and that the results are repeatable and reproducible.
CONCLUSION: The method described by the Working Party produces a clean suspension
with a high titre of spores. It is recommended that, for a disinfectant used in
the environment, the product should demonstrate a 5 log10 reduction in 5 min
under clean or dirty conditions to fulfil the requirements of the test.

Copyright © 2014 The Healthcare Infection Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhin.2014.09.014 
PMID: 25477061  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

