
1. BMC Cancer. 2014 Dec 3;14:910. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-910.

Modification of topoisomerases in mammospheres derived from breast cancer cell
line: clinical implications for combined treatments with tyrosine kinase
inhibitors.

Peleg R, Romzova M, Kogan-Zviagin I, Apte RN, Priel E(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology & Genetics, Faculty of
Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.
priel@bgu.ac.il.

BACKGROUND: Accumulating evidences suggest that tumors are driven by a small
population of cells, termed "cancer stem cells" (CSCs), which may be resistant to
current therapeutic approaches. In breast carcinoma, the CSCs have been
identified as a CD44+/CD24- cell population. These rare cells are able to grow as
non-adherent sphere-like structures, termed "mammospheres", which enables their
isolation and expansion in culture. To design efficient strategies for the
complete eradication of CSCs, it is important to identify enzymes and proteins
that are known as anti-cancer targets, and differ in their properties from those 
present in the none CSCs. Here we investigated the activity and expression of
type I and type II DNA topoisomerases (topo I and topo II) in CSCs and their
response to anti-topoisomerase inhibitors.
METHODS: MCF7 breast cancer cells, PC3 prostate cancer cells and 4
T1-Luc-Oct3/4pG mouse mammary carcinoma cells were grown on low-attachment dishes
in specific medium and allowed to form spheres. Enrichment of CSC population was 
verified by immunostaining, flow cytometry or fluorescent microscopy imaging.
Nuclear protein extracts were prepared and topoisomerases activity and protein
levels were determined. Cell viability was examined by the MTT and Neutral Red
assays.
RESULTS: Unlike the adherent MCF7 cell line, topo I activity is decreased and
topo II activity is increased in the CSCs. However, the relative levels of the
enzyme proteins were similar in both mammospheres and adherent cells. Topo I
activity in mammospheres is regulated, at least in part, by PARP-1, as observed
by the recovery of topo I activity after treatment with PARP-1 inhibitor
3-Aminobenzamide. Mammosphere-derived cells show reduced sensitivity to topo I
inhibitor, camptothecin, and increased sensitivity to topo II inhibitor
etoposide. Intact mammospheres show increased resistance to both drugs. A
combined treatment of intact mammospheres with either CPT and gefitinib, or
etoposide and erlotinib, increased the anti-cancer effect of both drugs.
CONCLUSIONS: The data of this study suggest that the understanding of biological 
behavior of essential enzymes such as topoisomerases, in CSCs' progression and
early stages of tumor development, is important for developing new strategies for
cancer treatment as well as new therapies for advanced disease.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-910 
PMCID: PMC4289278
PMID: 25472619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

