
1. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2015 Feb;8(1):40-9. doi: 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.113.000732. 
Epub 2014 Dec 5.

Mapping genetic contributions to cardiac pathology induced by Beta-adrenergic
stimulation in mice.

Rau CD(1), Wang J(1), Avetisyan R(1), Romay MC(1), Martin L(1), Ren S(1), Wang
Y(2), Lusis AJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics,
Department of Human Genetics (C.D.R., R.A., M.R., A.J.L.), Department of
Medicine, Division of Cardiology, David Geffen School of Medicine (J.W., L.M.,
A.J.L.), and Departments of Anesthesiology, Physiology, and Medicine,
Cardiovascular Research Laboratories, David Geffen School of Medicine (S.R.,
Y.W.), University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
(2)From the Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics,
Department of Human Genetics (C.D.R., R.A., M.R., A.J.L.), Department of
Medicine, Division of Cardiology, David Geffen School of Medicine (J.W., L.M.,
A.J.L.), and Departments of Anesthesiology, Physiology, and Medicine,
Cardiovascular Research Laboratories, David Geffen School of Medicine (S.R.,
Y.W.), University of California, Los Angeles, CA. jlusis@mednet.ucla.edu
yibinwang@mednet.ucla.edu.

BACKGROUND: Chronic stress-induced cardiac pathology exhibits both a wide range
in severity and a high degree of heterogeneity in clinical manifestation in human
patients. This variability is contributed to by complex genetic and environmental
etiologies within the human population. Genetic approaches to elucidate the
genetics underlying the acquired forms of cardiomyopathies, including genome-wide
association studies, have been largely unsuccessful, resulting in limited
knowledge as to the contribution of genetic variations for this important
disease.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using the β-adrenergic agonist isoproterenol as a specific
pathological stressor to circumvent the problem of etiologic heterogeneity, we
performed a genome-wide association study for genes influencing cardiac
hypertrophy and fibrosis in a large panel of inbred mice. Our analyses revealed 7
significant loci and 17 suggestive loci, containing an average of 14 genes,
affecting cardiac hypertrophy, fibrosis, and surrogate traits relevant to heart
failure. Several loci contained candidate genes which are known to contribute to 
Mendelian cardiomyopathies in humans or have established roles in cardiac
pathology based on molecular or genetic studies in mouse models. In particular,
we identify Abcc6 as a novel gene underlying a fibrosis locus by validating that 
an allele with a splice mutation of Abcc6 dramatically and rapidly promotes
isoproterenol-induced cardiac fibrosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic variants significantly contribute to the phenotypic
heterogeneity of stress-induced cardiomyopathy. Systems genetics is an effective 
approach to identify genes and pathways underlying the specific pathological
features of cardiomyopathies. Abcc6 is a previously unrecognized player in the
development of stress-induced cardiac fibrosis.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.113.000732 
PMCID: PMC4334708
PMID: 25480693  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

