
1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Sep;23(9):1207-15. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.266. Epub 2014
Dec 10.

Challenges and solutions for gene identification in the presence of familial
locus heterogeneity.

Rehman AU(1), Santos-Cortez RL(2), Drummond MC(1), Shahzad M(3), Lee K(2), Morell
RJ(1), Ansar M(4), Jan A(5), Wang X(2), Aziz A(5), Riazuddin S(3), Smith JD(6),
Wang GT(2), Ahmed ZM(7), Gul K(8), Shearer AE(9), Smith RJ(9), Shendure J(6),
Bamshad MJ(6), Nickerson DA(6); University of Washington Center for Mendelian
Genomics, Hinnant J(10), Khan SN(8), Fisher RA(11), Ahmad W(5), Friderici KH(12),
Riazuddin S(13), Friedman TB(1), Wilch ES(14), Leal SM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute on Deafness and Other
Communication Disorders, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Center for Statistical Genetics, Department of Molecular and Human Genetics,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)1] National Center of Excellence in Molecular Biology, University of the
Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan [2] Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck
Surgery, School of Medicine, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)1] Center for Statistical Genetics, Department of Molecular and Human
Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA [2] Department of
Biochemistry, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad,
Pakistan.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Quaid-i-Azam
University, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(6)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(7)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, School of Medicine,
University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(8)National Center of Excellence in Molecular Biology, University of the Punjab, 
Lahore, Pakistan.
(9)Molecular Otolaryngology and Renal Research Labs, Department of
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(10)Department of Religious Studies, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI,
USA.
(11)Department of Pediatrics and Human Development, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, MI, USA.
(12)1] Department of Pediatrics and Human Development, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, MI, USA [2] Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics,
Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA.
(13)1] National Center of Excellence in Molecular Biology, University of the
Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan [2] Allama Iqbal Medical College-Jinnah Hospital
Complex, University of Health Sciences, Lahore, Pakistan.
(14)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, Michigan, USA.

Next-generation sequencing (NGS) of exomes and genomes has accelerated the
identification of genes involved in Mendelian phenotypes. However, many NGS
studies fall short of identifying causal variants, with estimates for success
rates as low as 25% for uncovering the pathological variant underlying disease
etiology. An important reason for such failures is familial locus heterogeneity, 
where within a single pedigree causal variants in two or more genes underlie
Mendelian trait etiology. As examples of intra- and inter-sibship familial locus 
heterogeneity, we present 10 consanguineous Pakistani families segregating
hearing impairment due to homozygous variants in two different hearing impairment
genes and a European-American pedigree in which hearing impairment is caused by
four variants in three different genes. We have identified 41 additional
pedigrees with syndromic and nonsyndromic hearing impairment for which a single
previously reported hearing impairment gene has been identified but only
segregates with the phenotype in a subset of affected pedigree members. We
estimate that locus heterogeneity occurs in 15.3% (95% confidence interval:
11.9%, 19.9%) of the families in our collection. We demonstrate novel approaches 
to apply linkage analysis and homozygosity mapping (for autosomal recessive
consanguineous pedigrees), which can be used to detect locus heterogeneity using 
either NGS or SNP array data. Results from linkage analysis and homozygosity
mapping can also be used to group sibships or individuals most likely to be
segregating the same causal variants and thereby increase the success rate of
gene identification.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.266 
PMCID: PMC4538203
PMID: 25491636  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

