
1. Mucosal Immunol. 2015 Jul;8(4):896-905. doi: 10.1038/mi.2014.120. Epub 2014 Dec
10.

Thrombospondin-1 restrains neutrophil granule serine protease function and
regulates the innate immune response during Klebsiella pneumoniae infection.

Zhao Y(1), Olonisakin TF(1), Xiong Z(1), Hulver M(1), Sayeed S(1), Yu MT(1),
Gregory AD(1), Kochman EJ(1), Chen BB(1), Mallampalli RK(2), Sun M(3),
Silverstein RL(4), Stolz DB(3), Shapiro SD(1), Ray A(1), Ray P(1), Lee JS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)1] Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA [2] The Medical
Specialty Service Line, Veterans Affairs Pittsburgh Healthcare System,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Cell Biology and Center for Biologic Imaging, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Medical College of Wisconsin and Blood Research
Institute, Blood Center of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA.
(5)1] Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA [2] Vascular
Medicine Institute, Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, USA.

Neutrophil elastase (NE) and cathepsin G (CG) contribute to intracellular
microbial killing but, if left unchecked and released extracellularly, promote
tissue damage. Conversely, mechanisms that constrain neutrophil serine protease
activity protect against tissue damage but may have the untoward effect of
disabling the microbial killing arsenal. The host elaborates thrombospondin-1
(TSP-1), a matricellular protein released during inflammation, but its role
during neutrophil activation following microbial pathogen challenge remains
uncertain. Mice deficient in TSP-1 (thbs1(-/-)) showed enhanced lung bacterial
clearance, reduced splenic dissemination, and increased survival compared with
wild-type (WT) controls during intrapulmonary Klebsiella pneumoniae infection.
More effective pathogen containment was associated with reduced burden of
inflammation in thbs1(-/-) mouse lungs compared with WT controls. Lung NE
activity was increased in thbs1(-/-) mice following K. pneumoniae challenge, and 
thbs1(-/-) neutrophils showed enhanced intracellular microbial killing that was
abrogated with recombinant TSP-1 administration or WT serum. Thbs1(-/-)
neutrophils exhibited enhanced NE and CG enzymatic activity, and a peptide
corresponding to amino-acid residues 793-801 within the type-III repeat domain of
TSP-1 bridled neutrophil proteolytic function and microbial killing in vitro.
Thus, TSP-1 restrains proteolytic action during neutrophilic inflammation
elicited by K. pneumoniae, providing a mechanism that may regulate the microbial 
killing arsenal.

DOI: 10.1038/mi.2014.120 
PMCID: PMC4465063
PMID: 25492474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

