
1. ISME J. 2015 Jun;9(6):1306-18. doi: 10.1038/ismej.2014.217. Epub 2014 Dec 12.

Spatial scales of bacterial community diversity at cold seeps (Eastern
Mediterranean Sea).

Pop Ristova P(1), Wenzhöfer F(1), Ramette A(2), Felden J(1), Boetius A(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] HGF-MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Alfred-Wegener-Institut 
Helmholtz Zentrum für Polar und Meeresforschung, Bremerhaven, Germany [2] Max
Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology, Bremen, Germany [3] MARUM-Centre for
Marine Environmental Science, University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany.
(2)1] HGF-MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Alfred-Wegener-Institut 
Helmholtz Zentrum für Polar und Meeresforschung, Bremerhaven, Germany [2] Max
Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology, Bremen, Germany.

Cold seeps are highly productive, fragmented marine ecosystems that form at the
seafloor around hydrocarbon emission pathways. The products of microbial
utilization of methane and other hydrocarbons fuel rich chemosynthetic
communities at these sites, with much higher respiration rates compared with the 
surrounding deep-sea floor. Yet little is known as to the richness, composition
and spatial scaling of bacterial communities of cold seeps compared with non-seep
communities. Here we assessed the bacterial diversity across nine different cold 
seeps in the Eastern Mediterranean deep-sea and surrounding seafloor areas.
Community similarity analyses were carried out based on automated ribosomal
intergenic spacer analysis (ARISA) fingerprinting and high-throughput 454 tag
sequencing and were combined with in situ and ex situ geochemical analyses across
spatial scales of a few tens of meters to hundreds of kilometers. Seep
communities were dominated by Deltaproteobacteria, Epsilonproteobacteria and
Gammaproteobacteria and shared, on average, 36% of bacterial types (ARISA OTUs
(operational taxonomic units)) with communities from nearby non-seep deep-sea
sediments. Bacterial communities of seeps were significantly different from those
of non-seep sediments. Within cold seep regions on spatial scales of only tens to
hundreds of meters, the bacterial communities differed considerably, sharing <50%
of types at the ARISA OTU level. Their variations reflected differences in
porewater sulfide concentrations from anaerobic degradation of hydrocarbons. This
study shows that cold seep ecosystems contribute substantially to the microbial
diversity of the deep-sea.

DOI: 10.1038/ismej.2014.217 
PMCID: PMC4438319
PMID: 25500510  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

