
1. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014 Dec;29 Suppl 4:70-6. doi: 10.1111/jgh.12776.

Alteration of angiogenesis in Helicobacter heilmannii-induced mucosa-associated
lymphoid tissue lymphoma: interaction with c-Met and hepatocyte growth factor.

Nakamura M(1), Takahashi T, Matsui H, Baniwa Y, Takahashi S, Murayama SY,
Serizawa H, Suzuki H, Hibi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathophysiology, Research and Education Center for Clinical
Pharmacy, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kitasato University, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: The hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)/c-Met pathway has
attracted attention in the formation of malignant tumors, as HGF secreted from
the microcirculatory components as well as residing macrophages has been
suggested to act on the c-Met receptors of cancer cells to decrease apoptosis and
increase proliferation, invasion, and metastasis. The present study was
undertaken to elucidate the interaction of the gastric, hepatic, and pulmonary
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma induced by Helicobacter
heilmannii infection with c-Met and HGF.
METHODS: C57BL/6 female mice, infected with H. heilmannii for 3 months were used.
The localization of the HGF, c-Met, and HGF activator immunoreactivities was
observed by the indirect immunohistochemical methods. In addition, the effect of 
c-Met antibody and c-Met inhibitor, PHA-665752, was also investigated.
RESULTS: c-Met immunoreactivity was found in the lymphocytes composing the MALT
lymphoma, and HGF immunoreactivity was recognized mostly in the endothelial cells
and macrophages in the MALT lymphoma. HGFA was localized on mesenchymal cells
other than the lymphocytes. The administration of the antibody against c-Met or
the c-Met inhibitor to the infected mice induced the significant suppression of
hepatic and pulmonary MALT lymphoma, while the gastric MALT lymphoma showed only 
a tendency to decrease in size, while the active caspase 3 positive cells
markedly decreased in the gastric, hepatic, and pulmonary MALT lymphoma after the
treatment with the c-Met antibody or the c-Met antagonist.
CONCLUSIONS: HGF and c-Met pathway were suggested to contribute to the
lymphomagenesis in the MALT lymphoma after H. heilmannii infection.

© 2014 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and Wiley Publishing
Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jgh.12776 
PMID: 25521737  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

