
1. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 22;9(12):e115590. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115590.
eCollection 2014.

Enzymes from fungal and plant origin required for chemical diversification of
insecticidal loline alkaloids in grass-Epichloë symbiota.

Pan J(1), Bhardwaj M(2), Nagabhyru P(1), Grossman RB(2), Schardl CL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky,
United States of America.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, United
States of America.

The lolines are a class of bioprotective alkaloids that are produced by Epichloë 
species, fungal endophytes of grasses. These alkaloids are saturated
1-aminopyrrolizidines with a C2 to C7 ether bridge, and are structurally
differentiated by the various modifications of the 1-amino group: -NH2
(norloline), -NHCH3 (loline), -N(CH3)2 (N-methylloline), -N(CH3)Ac
(N-acetylloline), -NHAc (N-acetylnorloline), and -N(CH3)CHO (N-formylloline).
Other than the LolP cytochrome P450, which is required for conversion of
N-methylloline to N-formylloline, the enzymatic steps for loline diversification 
have not yet been established. Through isotopic labeling, we determined that
N-acetylnorloline is the first fully cyclized loline alkaloid, implying that
deacetylation, methylation, and acetylation steps are all involved in loline
alkaloid diversification. Two genes of the loline alkaloid biosynthesis (LOL)
gene cluster, lolN and lolM, were predicted to encode an N-acetamidase
(deacetylase) and a methyltransferase, respectively. A knockout strain lacking
both lolN and lolM stopped the biosynthesis at N-acetylnorloline, and
complementation with the two wild-type genes restored production of
N-formylloline and N-acetylloline. These results indicated that lolN and lolM are
required in the steps from N-acetylnorloline to other lolines. The function of
LolM as an N-methyltransferase was confirmed by its heterologous expression in
yeast resulting in conversion of norloline to loline, and of loline to
N-methylloline. One of the more abundant lolines, N-acetylloline, was observed in
some but not all plants with symbiotic Epichloë siegelii, and when provided with 
exogenous loline, asymbiotic meadow fescue (Lolium pratense) plants produced
N-acetylloline, suggesting that a plant acetyltransferase catalyzes
N-acetylloline formation. We conclude that although most loline alkaloid
biosynthesis reactions are catalyzed by fungal enzymes, both fungal and plant
enzymes are responsible for the chemical diversification steps in symbio.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115590 
PMCID: PMC4274035
PMID: 25531527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

