
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2015 Mar;81(6):2032-41. doi: 10.1128/AEM.03691-14. Epub
2015 Jan 9.

Genetic determinants of reutericyclin biosynthesis in Lactobacillus reuteri.

Lin XB(1), Lohans CT(2), Duar R(3), Zheng J(4), Vederas JC(2), Walter J(5),
Gänzle M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural, Food, and Nutritional Science, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(3)Department of Agricultural, Food, and Nutritional Science, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada Department of Food Science and Technology,
University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska, USA.
(4)State Key Lab of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural University, 
Wuhan, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Agricultural, Food, and Nutritional Science, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada Department of Biological Sciences, University 
of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada Department of Food Science and Technology, 
University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska, USA.
(6)Department of Agricultural, Food, and Nutritional Science, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada School of Food and Pharmaceutical Engineering,
Hubei University of Technology, Wuhan, People's Republic of China
mgaenzle@ualberta.ca.

Reutericyclin is a unique antimicrobial tetramic acid produced by some strains of
Lactobacillus reuteri. This study aimed to identify the genetic determinants of
reutericyclin biosynthesis. Comparisons of the genomes of reutericyclin-producing
L. reuteri strains with those of non-reutericyclin-producing strains identified a
genomic island of 14 open reading frames (ORFs) including genes coding for a
nonribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS), a polyketide synthase (PKS), homologues
of PhlA, PhlB, and PhlC, and putative transport and regulatory proteins. The
protein encoded by rtcN is composed of a condensation domain, an adenylation
domain likely specific for d-leucine, and a thiolation domain. rtcK codes for a
PKS that is composed of a ketosynthase domain, an acyl-carrier protein domain,
and a thioesterase domain. The products of rtcA, rtcB, and rtcC are homologous to
the diacetylphloroglucinol-biosynthetic proteins PhlABC and may acetylate the
tetramic acid moiety produced by RtcN and RtcK, forming reutericyclin. Deletion
of rtcN or rtcABC in L. reuteri TMW1.656 abrogated reutericyclin production but
did not affect resistance to reutericyclin. Genes coding for transport and
regulatory proteins could be deleted only in the reutericyclin-negative L.
reuteri strain TMW1.656ΔrtcN, and these deletions eliminated reutericyclin
resistance. The genomic analyses suggest that the reutericyclin genomic island
was horizontally acquired from an unknown source during a unique event. The
combination of PhlABC homologues with both an NRPS and a PKS has also been
identified in the lactic acid bacteria Streptococcus mutans and Lactobacillus
plantarum, suggesting that the genes in these organisms and those in L. reuteri
share an evolutionary origin.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.03691-14 
PMCID: PMC4345372
PMID: 25576609  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

