
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2015 Mar;81(6):1942-8. doi: 10.1128/AEM.03688-14. Epub
2015 Jan 9.

Inhibitory effects of C2 to C10 1-alkynes on ammonia oxidation in two
Nitrososphaera species.

Taylor AE(1), Taylor K(2), Tennigkeit B(2), Palatinszky M(3), Stieglmeier M(4),
Myrold DD(5), Schleper C(6), Wagner M(3), Bottomley PJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Crop and Soil Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis,
Oregon, USA anne.taylor@oregonstate.edu.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon, USA.
(3)Department of Microbial Ecology, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology, Archaea Biology and Ecogenomics
Division, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria Department of Biology I,
Biocenter LMU Munich, Planegg-Martinsried, Germany.
(5)Department of Crop and Soil Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis,
Oregon, USA.
(6)Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology, Archaea Biology and Ecogenomics
Division, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(7)Department of Crop and Soil Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis,
Oregon, USA Department of Microbiology, Oregon State University, Corvallis,
Oregon, USA.

A previous study showed that ammonia oxidation by the Thaumarchaeota
Nitrosopumilus maritimus (group 1.1a) was resistant to concentrations of the C8
1-alkyne, octyne, which completely inhibits activity by ammonia-oxidizing
bacteria. In this study, the inhibitory effects of octyne and other C2 to C10
1-alkynes were evaluated on the nitrite production activity of two pure culture
isolates from Thaumarchaeota group 1.1b, Nitrososphaera viennensis strain EN76
and Nitrososphaera gargensis. Both N. viennensis and N. gargensis were
insensitive to concentrations of octyne that cause complete and irreversible
inactivation of nitrite production by ammonia-oxidizing bacteria. However, octyne
concentrations (≥20 μM) that did not inhibit N. maritimus partially inhibited
nitrite production in N. viennensis and N. gargensis in a manner that did not
show the characteristics of irreversible inactivation. In contrast to previous
studies with an ammonia-oxidizing bacterium, Nitrosomonas europaea, octyne
inhibition of N. viennensis was: (i) fully and immediately reversible, (ii) not
competitive with NH4 (+), and (iii) without effect on the competitive interaction
between NH4 (+) and acetylene. Both N. viennensis and N. gargensis demonstrated
the same overall trend in regard to 1-alkyne inhibition as previously observed
for N. maritimus, being highly sensitive to ≤C5 alkynes and more resistant to
longer-chain length alkynes. Reproducible differences were observed among N.
maritimus, N. viennensis, and N. gargensis in regard to the extent of their
resistance/sensitivity to C6 and C7 1-alkynes, which may indicate differences in 
the ammonia monooxygenase binding and catalytic site(s) among the Thaumarchaeota.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.03688-14 
PMCID: PMC4345366
PMID: 25576608  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

