
1. Cell Death Differ. 2015 Jul;22(7):1219-30. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2014.225. Epub 2015
Jan 9.

Necrotic cell-derived high mobility group box 1 attracts antigen-presenting cells
but inhibits hepatocyte growth factor-mediated tropism of mesenchymal stem cells 
for apoptotic cell death.

Vogel S(1), Börger V(1), Peters C(1), Förster M(1), Liebfried P(2), Metzger K(3),
Meisel R(4), Däubener W(2), Trapp T(1), Fischer JC(1), Gawaz M(3), Sorg RV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Transplantation Diagnostics and Cell Therapeutics, Heinrich
Heine University Hospital, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(2)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hospital Hygiene, Heinrich Heine
University Hospital, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(3)Department of Cardiology and Cardiovascular Diseases, Eberhard Karls
University, Tübingen, Germany.
(4)Clinic of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical Immunology, Heinrich
Heine University Hospital, Düsseldorf, Germany.

Tissue damage due to apoptotic or necrotic cell death typically initiates
distinct cellular responses, leading either directly to tissue repair and
regeneration or to immunological processes first, to clear the site, for example,
of potentially damage-inducing agents. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) as well as
immature dendritic cells (iDC) and monocytes migrate to injured tissues. MSC have
regenerative capacity, whereas monocytes and iDC have a critical role in
inflammation and induction of immune responses, including autoimmunity after
tissue damage. Here, we investigated the influence of apoptotic and necrotic cell
death on recruitment of MSC, monocytes and iDC, and identified hepatocyte growth 
factor (HGF) and the alarmin high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) as key factors
differentially regulating these migratory responses. MSC, but not monocytes or
iDC, were attracted by apoptotic cardiomyocytic and neuronal cells, whereas
necrosis induced migration of monocytes and iDC, but not of MSC. Only apoptotic
cell death resulted in HGF production and HGF-mediated migration of MSC towards
the apoptotic targets. In contrast, HMGB1 was predominantly released by the
necrotic cells and mediated recruitment of monocytes and iDC via the receptor of 
advanced glycation end products. Moreover, necrotic cardiomyocytic and neuronal
cells caused an HMGB1/toll-like receptor-4-dependent inhibition of MSC migration 
towards apoptosis or HGF, while recruitment of monocytes and iDC by necrosis or
HMGB1 was not affected by apoptotic cells or HGF. Thus, the type of cell death
differentially regulates recruitment of either MSC or monocytes and iDC through
HGF and HMGB1, respectively, with a dominant, HMGB1-mediated role of necrosis in 
determining tropism after tissue injury.

DOI: 10.1038/cdd.2014.225 
PMCID: PMC4572869
PMID: 25571972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

