
1. Front Med. 2014 Dec 22;1(56). pii: 00056.

Inflammatory leukocyte phenotypes correlate with disease progression in
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.

Moore BB(1), Fry C(2), Zhou Y(3), Murray S(3), Han MK(2), Martinez FJ(4),
Flaherty KR(2); The COMET Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA ; Department of Microbiology
and Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical School, NewYork, NY,
USA.

Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is characterized by progressive deposition of
extracellular matrix, worsening dyspnea, and eventual mortality. Pathogenesis of 
IPF is poorly understood and the role inflammation and activated leukocytes play 
in the disease process is controversial. Previous studies demonstrated that
activated leukocyte subsets characterize IPF patients. We sought to validate this
observation in a well-defined cohort of 35 IPF patients and to correlate the
observed leukocyte phenotypes with robust parameters of disease progression. We
demonstrate that in univariate and multivariate analyses, increases in the
CD14hi, CD16hi subset of monocytes measured at baseline correlated with disease
progression, with a threshold value >0.5% of the total peripheral blood
mononuclear cells being a significant predictor for worse outcome. In addition,
several T cell subsets, including CD25 expressing CD4 cells, and CXCR3 expressing
CD4 and CD8 subsets correlated with disease progression when found in increased
percentages in the peripheral blood of IPF patients when sampled at baseline.
Somewhat surprising in comparison to previous literature, the CD4 T cells did not
appear to have lost expression of the co-stimulatory molecule, CD28, but the CD8 
T cells did. Taken together, these results are consistent with the presence of an
inflammatory process in IPF patients who eventually progress. However, when
longitudinal measurements of these same markers were examined, there was
significant heterogeneity of expression and these biomarkers did not necessarily 
remain elevated in IPF patients with progressive disease. We interpret this
heterogeneity to suggest that IPF patients experience episodic inflammatory
events that once triggered, may lead to disease progression. This longitudinal
heterogeneity in biomarker analyses may explain why such markers are not
consistently measured in all IPF cohorts.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2014.00056 
PMCID: PMC4286285
PMID: 25580363 

