
1. Mucosal Immunol. 2015 Sep;8(5):1031-46. doi: 10.1038/mi.2014.130. Epub 2015 Jan
14.

PPARγ activation following apoptotic cell instillation promotes resolution of
lung inflammation and fibrosis via regulation of efferocytosis and proresolving
cytokines.

Yoon YS(1), Kim SY(1), Kim MJ(1), Lim JH(2), Cho MS(3), Kang JL(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Ewha Womans University,
Yangcheon-ku, Seoul, Korea [2] Tissue Injury Defense Research Center, School of
Medicine, Ewha Womans University, Yangcheon-ku, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Ewha Womans University,
Yangcheon-ku, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Ewha Womans University,
Yangcheon-ku, Seoul, Korea.
(4)1] Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Ewha Womans University,
Yangcheon-ku, Seoul, Korea [2] Tissue Injury Defense Research Center, School of
Medicine, Ewha Womans University, Yangcheon-ku, Seoul, Korea [3] Global Top 5
Research Program, School of Medicine, Ewha Womans University, Yangcheon-ku,
Seoul, Korea.

Changes in macrophage phenotype have been implicated in apoptotic cell-mediated
immune modulation via induction of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ
(PPARγ). In this study, we characterized PPARγ induction by apoptotic cell
instillation over the course of bleomycin-induced lung injury in C57BL/6 mice.
Next, the role of PPARγ activation in resolving lung inflammation and fibrosis
was investigated. Our data demonstrate that apoptotic cell instillation after
bleomycin results in immediate and prolonged enhancement of PPARγ mRNA and
protein in alveolar macrophages and lung. Moreover, PPARγ activity and expression
of its target molecules, including CD36, macrophage mannose receptor, and
arginase 1, were persistently enhanced following apoptotic cell instillation.
Coadministration of the PPARγ antagonist, GW9662, reversed the enhanced
efferocytosis, and the reduced proinflammatory cytokine expression, neutrophil
recruitment, myeloperoxidase activity, hydroxyproline contents, and fibrosis
markers, including type 1 collagen α2, fibronectin and α-smooth muscle actin
(α-SMA), in the lung by apoptotic cell instillation. In addition, inhibition of
PPARγ activity reversed the expression of transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β),
interleukin (IL)-10, and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF). These findings indicate 
that one-time apoptotic cell instillation contributes to anti-inflammatory and
antifibrotic responses via upregulation of PPARγ expression and subsequent
activation, leading to regulation of efferocytosis and production of proresolving
cytokines.

DOI: 10.1038/mi.2014.130 
PMCID: PMC4762910
PMID: 25586556  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

