
1. Oncoscience. 2013 Dec 11;1(1):30-38. eCollection 2014.

Interplay Between HGF/SF-Met-Ras Signaling, Tumor Metabolism and Blood Flow as a 
Potential Target for Breast Cancer Therapy.

Natan S(#)(1)(2), Tsarfaty G(#)(3), Horev J(1), Haklai R(4), Kloog Y(4), Tsarfaty
I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology, Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel Aviv University.
(2)This work was done in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Ph.D.
degree of S.N.
(3)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan,
Israel.
(4)Department of Neurobiology, The George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel
Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(#)Contributed equally

High glucose uptake and increase blood flow is a characteristic of most
metastatic tumors. Activation of Ras signaling increases glycolytic flux into
lactate, de novo nucleic acid synthesis and uncoupling of ATP synthase from the
proton gradient. Met tyrosine kinase receptor signaling upon activation by its
ligand, hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor (HGF/SF), increases glycolysis,
oxidative phosporylation, oxygen consumption, and tumor blood volume. Ras is a
key factor in Met signaling. Using the Ras inhibitor
S-trans,trans-farnesylthiosalicylic acid (FTS), we investigated interplay between
HGF/SF-Met-Ras signaling, metabolism, and tumor blood-flow regulation. In vitro, 
HGF/SF-activated Met increased Ras activity, Erk phosphorylation, cell motility
and glucose uptake, but did not affect ATP. FTS inhibited basal and
HGF/SF-induced signaling and cell motility, while further increasing glucose
uptake and inhibiting ATP production. In vivo, HGF/SF rapidly increased tumor
blood volume. FTS did not affect basal blood-flow but abolished the HGF/SF
effect. Our results further demonstrate the complex interplay between
growth-factor-receptor signaling and cellular and tumor metabolism, as reflected 
in blood flow. Inhibition of Ras signaling does not affect glucose consumption or
basal tumor blood flow but dramatically decreases ATP synthesis and the HGF/SF
induced increase in tumor blood volume. These findings demonstrate that the
HGF/SF-Met-Ras pathway critically influences tumor-cell metabolism and tumor
blood-flow regulation. This pathway could potentially be used to individualize
tumor therapy based on functional molecular imaging, and for combined
signaling/anti-metabolic targeted therapy.

DOI: 10.18632/oncoscience.6 
PMCID: PMC4295761
PMID: 25593982 

