
1. Eye Contact Lens. 2015 Jul;41(4):204-9. doi: 10.1097/ICL.0000000000000114.

Contact Lens-Related Acanthamoeba Keratitis and Accompanying Dacryoadenitis.

Sengor T(1), Kurna SA, Altun A, Irkec M, Aki SF, Aksoy S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology (T.S.), Kadıköy Florence Nightingale Hospital,
Istanbul Bilim University, Istanbul, Turkey; Department of Ophthalmology (S.A.K.,
A.A., S.F.A., S.A.), Fatih Sultan Mehmet Training and Research Hospital,
Istanbul, Turkey; and Department of Ophthalmology (M.I.), Hacettepe University,
Ankara, Turkey.

OBJECTIVES: In this study, by presenting four cases, we aimed to discuss the
clinical presentation, diagnosis, therapy, and methods for prevention of
Acanthamoeba keratitis (AK) and to emphasize that inflammatory dacryoadenitis can
be seen together with it.
METHODS: This is a retrospective case series of four eyes of four wearers of
hydrophilic soft contact lenses who developed AK. The diagnosis was based on
clinical signs, disease course, and confocal microscopy results. In cases with
dacryoadenitis, in addition to clinical findings, magnetic resonance imaging was 
used to establish the diagnosis.
RESULTS: All of the cases were using their contact lenses without supervision of 
an ophthalmologist under inappropriate conditions such as swimming in a pool and 
during steam bath. The diagnosis was established, and the treatment was performed
within the standard protocol for AK. Two of the patients had low visual acuity at
the level of counting fingers with corneal scar, cataract, and glaucoma, whereas 
the other two healed with fewer complications and achieved better vision. Two of 
the 4 cases (50%) presented with dacryoadenitis accompanying the AK. Lacrimal
gland swelling improved in conjunction with symptoms of keratitis without
specific treatment for dacryoadenitis in these two cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the improvements in diagnostic tests and treatment
strategies for AK, the role of prevention becomes apparent because of the bad
prognosis of this serious complication; thus, contact lens wearers should be
aware of the importance of using lenses under ophthalmologist's supervision. In
addition, we would like to emphasize that AK may be frequently associated with
lacrimal gland inflammation.

DOI: 10.1097/ICL.0000000000000114 
PMID: 25603441  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

