
1. Crit Care Med. 2015 Mar;43(3):e75-83. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000000853.

Thrombocytopenia impairs host defense during murine Streptococcus pneumoniae
pneumonia.

van den Boogaard FE(1), Schouten M, de Stoppelaar SF, Roelofs JJ, Brands X,
Schultz MJ, van't Veer C, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)1Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine (CEMM), Academic Medical
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 2Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam 
(CINIMA), Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 3Department of
Pathology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 4Department of
Intensive Care Medicine, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
5Laboratory of Experimental Intensive Care and Anesthesiology (LEICA), Academic
Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 6Division of Infectious Diseases,
Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVES: Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most common causative pathogen in
community-acquired pneumonia. In patients, thrombocytopenia is correlated with an
adverse outcome of pneumonia. Platelets can modulate the host response to
infection in several ways, that is, by facilitating clot formation, production of
antimicrobial proteins, and interaction with neutrophils. We studied the effect
of thrombocytopenia during murine pneumococcal pneumonia.
DESIGN: Animal study.
SETTING: University research laboratory.
SUBJECTS: Mice.
INTERVENTIONS: Pneumonia was induced by intranasal inoculation of S. pneumoniae. 
Platelets were depleted by anti-mouse thrombocyte serum; controls received
nonimmunogenic serum. In separate studies, mice were treated with the platelet
P2Y12 receptor inhibitor clopidogrel or placebo.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Thrombocytopenic mice (platelet counts < 1% of
uninfected controls) showed a reduced survival during pneumococcal pneumonia (27%
vs 75% among controls; p = 0.003), which was associated with higher bacterial
loads in lungs, spleen, and blood. Thrombocytopenic mice showed enhanced
coagulation activation (thrombin-antithrombin complexes) in plasma.
Proinflammatory cytokine levels were higher in plasma but not in lungs of
thrombocytopenic mice. Although clopidogrel treatment strongly prolonged the
bleeding time, it did not impact on bacterial loads during pneumococcal
pneumonia.
CONCLUSIONS: Platelets play a protective role during pneumococcal pneumonia
independent of their aggregation.

DOI: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000000853 
PMID: 25627210  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

