
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2015 Apr;81(7):2534-43. doi: 10.1128/AEM.03240-14. Epub
2015 Jan 30.

Natural hot spots for gain of multiple resistances: arsenic and antibiotic
resistances in heterotrophic, aerobic bacteria from marine hydrothermal vent
fields.

Farias P(1), Espírito Santo C(2), Branco R(2), Francisco R(2), Santos S(2),
Hansen L(3), Sorensen S(3), Morais PV(4).

Author information: 
(1)IMAR-CMA and CEMUC, Coimbra, Portugal Instituto Piaget, Silves, Portugal.
(2)IMAR-CMA and CEMUC, Coimbra, Portugal.
(3)Department of Biology, Microbiology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
(4)IMAR-CMA and CEMUC, Coimbra, Portugal Department of Life Sciences, University 
of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal pvmorais@ci.uc.pt.

Microorganisms are responsible for multiple antibiotic resistances that have been
associated with resistance/tolerance to heavy metals, with consequences to public
health. Many genes conferring these resistances are located on mobile genetic
elements, easily exchanged among phylogenetically distant bacteria. The objective
of the present work was to isolate arsenic-, antimonite-, and
antibiotic-resistant strains and to determine the existence of plasmids harboring
antibiotic/arsenic/antimonite resistance traits in phenotypically resistant
strains, in a nonanthropogenically impacted environment. The hydrothermal Lucky
Strike field in the Azores archipelago (North Atlantic, between 11°N and 38°N),
at the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, protected under the OSPAR Convention, was sampled as a
metal-rich pristine environment. A total of 35 strains from 8 different species
were isolated in the presence of arsenate, arsenite, and antimonite. ACR3 and
arsB genes were amplified from the sediment's total DNA, and 4 isolates also
carried ACR3 genes. Phenotypic multiple resistances were found in all strains,
and 7 strains had recoverable plasmids. Purified plasmids were sequenced by
Illumina and assembled by EDENA V3, and contig annotation was performed using the
"Rapid Annotation using the Subsystems Technology" server. Determinants of
resistance to copper, zinc, cadmium, cobalt, and chromium as well as to the
antibiotics β-lactams and fluoroquinolones were found in the 3 sequenced
plasmids. Genes coding for heavy metal resistance and antibiotic resistance in
the same mobile element were found, suggesting the possibility of horizontal gene
transfer and distribution of theses resistances in the bacterial population.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.03240-14 
PMCID: PMC4357944
PMID: 25636836  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

