
1. mBio. 2015 Feb 10;6(1). pii: e02083-14. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02083-14.

Genomes of planktonic Acidimicrobiales: widening horizons for marine
Actinobacteria by metagenomics.

Mizuno CM(1), Rodriguez-Valera F(2), Ghai R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Evolutionary Genomics Group, Departamento de Producción Vegetal y
Microbiología, Universidad Miguel Hernández, San Juan de Alicante, Alicante,
Spain.
(2)Evolutionary Genomics Group, Departamento de Producción Vegetal y
Microbiología, Universidad Miguel Hernández, San Juan de Alicante, Alicante,
Spain frvalera@umh.es.

The genomes of four novel marine Actinobacteria have been assembled from large
metagenomic data sets derived from the Mediterranean deep chlorophyll maximum
(DCM). These are the first marine representatives belonging to the order
Acidimicrobiales and only the second group of planktonic marine Actinobacteria to
be described. Their streamlined genomes and photoheterotrophic lifestyle suggest 
that they are planktonic, free-living microbes. A novel rhodopsin clade,
acidirhodopsins, related to freshwater actinorhodopsins, was found in these
organisms. Their genomes suggest a capacity to assimilate C2 compounds, some
using the glyoxylate bypass and others with the ethylmalonyl-coenzyme A (CoA)
pathway. They are also able to derive energy from dimethylsulfopropionate (DMSP),
sulfonate, and carbon monoxide oxidation, all commonly available in the marine
habitat. These organisms appear to be prevalent in the deep photic zone at or
around the DCM. The presence of sister clades to the marine Acidimicrobiales in
freshwater aquatic habitats provides a new example of marine-freshwater
transitions with potential evolutionary insights.IMPORTANCE: Despite several
studies showing the importance and abundance of planktonic Actinobacteria in the 
marine habitat, a representative genome was only recently described. In order to 
expand the genomic repertoire of marine Actinobacteria, we describe here the
first Acidimicrobidae genomes of marine origin and provide insights about their
ecology. They display metabolic versatility in the acquisition of carbon and
appear capable of utilizing diverse sources of energy. One of the genomes harbors
a new kind of rhodopsin related to the actinorhodopsin clade of freshwater origin
that is widespread in the oceans. Our data also support their preference to
inhabit the deep chlorophyll maximum and the deep photic zone. This work
contributes to the perception of marine actinobacterial groups as important
players in the marine environment with distinct and important contributions to
nutrient cycling in the oceans.

Copyright © 2015 Mizuno et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02083-14 
PMCID: PMC4337565
PMID: 25670777  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

