
1. J Comput Biol. 2015 Feb;22(2):85-110. doi: 10.1089/cmb.2014.0274.

Computing smallest intervention strategies for multiple metabolic networks in a
boolean model.

Lu W(1), Tamura T, Song J, Akutsu T.

Author information: 
(1)1 Bioinformatics Center, Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University ,
Kyoto, Japan .

This article considers the problem whereby, given two metabolic networks N1 and
N2, a set of source compounds, and a set of target compounds, we must find the
minimum set of reactions whose removal (knockout) ensures that the target
compounds are not producible in N1 but are producible in N2. Similar studies
exist for the problem of finding the minimum knockout with the smallest side
effect for a single network. However, if technologies of external perturbations
are advanced in the near future, it may be important to develop methods of
computing the minimum knockout for multiple networks (MKMN). Flux balance
analysis (FBA) is efficient if a well-polished model is available. However, that 
is not always the case. Therefore, in this article, we study MKMN in Boolean
models and an elementary mode (EM)-based model. Integer linear programming
(ILP)-based methods are developed for these models, since MKMN is NP-complete for
both the Boolean model and the EM-based model. Computer experiments are conducted
with metabolic networks of clostridium perfringens SM101 and bifidobacterium
longum DJO10A, respectively known as bad bacteria and good bacteria for the human
intestine. The results show that larger networks are more likely to have MKMN
solutions. However, solving for these larger networks takes a very long time, and
often the computation cannot be completed. This is reasonable, because small
networks do not have many alternative pathways, making it difficult to satisfy
the MKMN condition, whereas in large networks the number of candidate solutions
explodes. Our developed software minFvskO is available online.

DOI: 10.1089/cmb.2014.0274 
PMCID: PMC4326032
PMID: 25684199  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

