
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2015 Apr;81(8):2827-40. doi: 10.1128/AEM.04208-14. Epub
2015 Feb 13.

High-throughput microfluidic method to study biofilm formation and host-pathogen 
interactions in pathogenic Escherichia coli.

Tremblay YD(1), Vogeleer P(1), Jacques M(1), Harel J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Département de Pathologie et Microbiologie, Groupe de Recherche sur les
Maladies Infectieuses du Porc, Centre de Recherche en Infectiologie Porcine et
Avicole, Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire, Université de Montréal, St-Hyacinthe,
Québec, Canada.
(2)Département de Pathologie et Microbiologie, Groupe de Recherche sur les
Maladies Infectieuses du Porc, Centre de Recherche en Infectiologie Porcine et
Avicole, Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire, Université de Montréal, St-Hyacinthe,
Québec, Canada josee.harel@umontreal.ca.

Biofilm formation and host-pathogen interactions are frequently studied using
multiwell plates; however, these closed systems lack shear force, which is
present at several sites in the host, such as the intestinal and urinary tracts. 
Recently, microfluidic systems that incorporate shear force and very small
volumes have been developed to provide cell biology models that resemble in vivo 
conditions. Therefore, the objective of this study was to determine if the
BioFlux 200 microfluidic system could be used to study host-pathogen interactions
and biofilm formation by pathogenic Escherichia coli. Strains of various
pathotypes were selected to establish the growth conditions for the formation of 
biofilms in the BioFlux 200 system on abiotic (glass) or biotic (eukaryotic-cell)
surfaces. Biofilm formation on glass was observed for the majority of strains
when they were grown in M9 medium at 30 °C but not in RPMI medium at 37 °C. In
contrast, HRT-18 cell monolayers enhanced binding and, in most cases, biofilm
formation by pathogenic E. coli in RPMI medium at 37 °C. As a proof of principle,
the biofilm-forming ability of a diffusely adherent E. coli mutant strain lacking
AIDA-I, a known mediator of attachment, was assessed in our models. In contrast
to the parental strain, which formed a strong biofilm, the mutant formed a thin
biofilm on glass or isolated clusters on HRT-18 monolayers. In conclusion, we
describe a microfluidic method for high-throughput screening that could be used
to identify novel factors involved in E. coli biofilm formation and host-pathogen
interactions under shear force.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.04208-14 
PMCID: PMC4375333
PMID: 25681176  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

