
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Apr;35(8):1462-76. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01084-14. Epub 2015 Feb
17.

ShcA regulates thymocyte proliferation through specific transcription factors and
a c-Abl-dependent signaling axis.

Trampont PC(1), Zhang L(1), Giles AJ(1), Walk SF(1), Gu JJ(2), Pendergast AM(2), 
Ravichandran KS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Cancer Biology and Center for Cell 
Clearance, University of Virginia Health System, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Cancer Biology and Center for Cell 
Clearance, University of Virginia Health System, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA
Ravi@virginia.edu.

Signaling via the pre-T-cell receptor (pre-TCR), along with associated signals
from Notch and chemokine receptors, regulates the β-selection checkpoint that
operates on CD4(-) CD8(-) doubly negative (DN) thymocytes. Since many
hematopoietic malignancies arise at the immature developmental stages of
lymphocytes, understanding the signal integration and how specific signaling
molecules and distal transcription factors regulate cellular outcomes is of
importance. Here, a series of molecular and genetic approaches revealed that the 
ShcA adapter protein critically influences proliferation and differentiation
during β-selection. We found that ShcA functions downstream of the pre-TCR and
p56(Lck) and show that ShcA is important for extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK)-dependent upregulation of transcription factors early growth factor 
1 (Egr1) and Egr3 in immature thymocytes and, in turn, of the expression and
function of the Id3 and E2A helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins. ShcA also
contributes to pre-TCR-mediated induction of c-Myc and additional cell cycle
regulators. Moreover, using an unbiased Saccharomyces cerevisiae (yeast) screen, 
we identified c-Abl as a binding partner of phosphorylated ShcA and demonstrated 
the relevance of the ShcA-c-Abl interaction in immature thymocytes. Collectively,
these data identify multiple modes by which ShcA can fine-tune the development of
early thymocytes, including a previously unappreciated ShcA-c-Abl axis that
regulates thymocyte proliferation.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.01084-14 
PMCID: PMC4372706
PMID: 25691660  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

