
1. Neuroscience. 2015 Apr 30;292:1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.02.015. Epub
2015 Feb 18.

Activity, but not mRNA expression of gelatinases correlates with susceptibility
to experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Petković F(1), Živanović J(2), Blaževski J(1), Timotijević G(3), Momčilović M(1),
Stanojević Ž(4), Stamenković V(5), Milošević V(2), Mostarica Stojković M(6),
Miljković Đ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute for Biological Research "Siniša
Stanković", University of Belgrade, Serbia.
(2)Department of Cytology, Institute for Biological Research "Siniša Stanković", 
University of Belgrade, Serbia.
(3)Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, University of
Belgrade, Serbia.
(4)Institute of Medical and Clinical Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University
of Belgrade, Serbia.
(5)Center for Laser Microscopy, Department of Physiology and Biochemistry,
Faculty of Biology, University of Belgrade, Serbia.
(6)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of
Belgrade, Serbia.
(7)Department of Immunology, Institute for Biological Research "Siniša
Stanković", University of Belgrade, Serbia. Electronic address:
georgije_zw@yahoo.com.

Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) is a model of multiple sclerosis 
(MS), inflammatory, demyelinating and neurodegenerative disease of the central
nervous system (CNS). Clinically manifested EAE can be induced in Dark Agouti
(DA) rats, but not in Albino Oxford (AO) rats by immunization with spinal cord
homogenate (SCH) and complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA). Matrix metalloproteinases 
(MMP) play important roles in various steps of MS and EAE pathogenesis.
Expression of gelatinases MMP2 and MMP9, their activator MMP14 and their
inhibitor tissue inhibitor of MMP (TIMP)1 in the CNS of AO and DA rats immunized 
with SCH+CFA was determined. Expression of mRNA for MMP2, MMP9 and MMP14 was
higher and expression of TIMP1 mRNA was lower in AO rats. However, gelatinase
activity in spinal cords was higher in samples obtained from DA rats. Further,
while there was no strain difference in MMP2 and MMP9 mRNA expression in lymph
nodes of the immunized rats, gelatinase activity was higher in DA rats. This
activity was reduced by antiinflammatory cytokines interleukin (IL)-10 and IL-4. 
Interestingly, gelatinase activity was detected in the nuclei of cells within the
CNS, but not of those in lymph nodes. Our results imply that posttranscriptional 
regulation of MMP2 and MMP9 expression and/or function determines low gelatinase 
activity within the CNS and in immune cells of EAE-resistant AO rats.

Copyright © 2015 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.02.015 
PMID: 25701126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

