
1. Biochemistry. 2015 Apr 14;54(14):2372-84. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.5b00013. Epub 
2015 Apr 2.

Conversion of aminodeoxychorismate synthase into anthranilate synthase with Janus
mutations: mechanism of pyruvate elimination catalyzed by chorismate enzymes.

Culbertson JE(1), Chung Dh(1), Ziebart KT(2), Espiritu E(3), Toney MD(1).

Author information: 
(1)†Department of Chemistry, University of California, Davis, Davis, California
95616, United States.
(2)‡Department of Chemistry, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon
97331-4003, United States.
(3)§Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Arizona State University, Tempe,
Arizona 85287, United States.

The central importance of chorismate enzymes in bacteria, fungi, parasites, and
plants combined with their absence in mammals makes them attractive targets for
antimicrobials and herbicides. Two of these enzymes, anthranilate synthase (AS)
and aminodeoxychorismate synthase (ADCS), are structurally and mechanistically
similar. The first catalytic step, amination at C2, is common between them, but
AS additionally catalyzes pyruvate elimination, aromatizing the aminated
intermediate to anthranilate. Despite prior attempts, the conversion of a
pyruvate elimination-deficient enzyme into an elimination-proficient one has not 
been reported. Janus, a bioinformatics method for predicting mutations required
to functionally interconvert homologous enzymes, was employed to predict
mutations to convert ADCS into AS. A genetic selection on a library of
Janus-predicted mutations was performed. Complementation of an AS-deficient
strain of Escherichia coli grown on minimal medium led to several ADCS mutants
that allow growth in 6 days compared to 2 days for wild-type AS. The purified
mutant enzymes catalyze the conversion of chorismate to anthranilate at rates
that are ∼50% of the rate of wild-type ADCS-catalyzed conversion of chorismate to
aminodeoxychorismate. The residues mutated do not contact the substrate.
Molecular dynamics studies suggest that pyruvate elimination is controlled by the
conformation of the C2-aminated intermediate. Enzymes that catalyze elimination
favor the equatorial conformation, which presents the C2-H to a conserved active 
site lysine (Lys424) for deprotonation and maximizes stereoelectronic activation.
Acid/base catalysis of pyruvate elimination was confirmed in AS and salicylate
synthase by showing incorporation of a solvent-derived proton into the pyruvate
methyl group and by solvent kinetic isotope effects on pyruvate elimination
catalyzed by AS.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.5b00013 
PMID: 25710100  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

