
1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2015;46(1):93-107. doi: 10.3233/JAD-143054.

NK Cells are Activated in Amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment but not in Mild
Alzheimer's Disease Patients.

Le Page A(1), Bourgade K(1), Lamoureux J(2), Frost E(3), Pawelec G(4), Larbi
A(5), Witkowski JM(6), Dupuis G(7), Fülöp T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center on Aging, Graduate Program in Immunology, Faculty of Medicine 
and Health Sciences, University of Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada.
(2)Graduate Program in Physiology-Biophysics, Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, University of Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Infectiology, Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, University of Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine II, Center for Medical Research University of 
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(5)Singapore Immunology Network (SIgN), Agency for Science Technology and
Research (A-Star), 8A Biomedical Grove, Immunos, Singapore, Singapore.
(6)Department of Pathophysiology, Medical University of Gdańsk, Gdańsk, Poland.
(7)Department of Biochemistry, Graduate Program in Immunology, Faculty of
Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada.

Alzheimerś disease (AD) is a progressive irreversible neurological brain disorder
characterized by accumulation of amyloid-β, amyloid plaques, and neurofibrillary 
tangles. Inflammation and immune alterations have been linked to AD, suggesting
that the peripheral immune system plays a role during the asymptomatic period of 
AD. NK cells participate in innate immune surveillance against intracellular
pathogens and malignancy but their role in AD remains controversial. We have
investigated changes in peripheral NK cell phenotypes and functions in amnestic
mild cognitive impairment (aMCI, n = 10), patients with mild AD (mAD, n = 11),
and healthy elderly controls (n = 10). Patients selected according to
NINCDS-ADRDA criteria were classified using neuropsychological assessment tests. 
Phenotype analysis revealed differences in expression of CD16 (increased in mAD),
NKG2A (decreased in aMCI), and TLR2 and TLR9 (both decreased in mAD). Functional 
assays revealed that NK cell killing activity and degranulation (CD107
expression) were unchanged in the three groups. In contrast, expression of the
CD95 receptor was increased in aMCI and mAD. Granzyme B expression and cytokine
production (TNFα, IFNγ) were increased in aMCI but not in mAD. CCL19- but not
CCL21-dependent chemotaxis was decreased in aMCI and mAD, despite the fact that
CCR7 expression was increased in aMCI. Our data suggest that the number of
alterations observed in peripheral NK cells in aMCI represent an activation state
compared to mAD patients and that may reflect an active immune response against a
still to be defined aggression.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-143054 
PMID: 25720398  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

