
1. Oncogene. 2015 Nov 12;34(46):5718-28. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.20. Epub 2015 Mar 2.

Regulation of MET receptor tyrosine kinase signaling by suppressor of cytokine
signaling 1 in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Gui Y(1), Yeganeh M(1), Donates YC(1), Tobelaim WS(2), Chababi W(2), Mayhue M(1),
Yoshimura A(3), Ramanathan S(1), Saucier C(2), Ilangumaran S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Division, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, University of Sherbrooke, Centre de Recherche Clinique Etienne-Le Bel, 
Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Cell biology, Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, University of Sherbrooke, Centre de Recherche Clinique Etienne-Le Bel, 
Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Keio University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

Suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS1) is considered as a tumor suppressor
protein in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but the underlying mechanisms remain
unclear. Previously, we have shown that SOCS1-deficient hepatocytes displayed
increased responsiveness to hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) due to enhanced
signaling via the MET receptor tyrosine kinase. As aberrant MET activation occurs
in many tumors including HCC, here we elucidated the mechanisms of SOCS1-mediated
regulation. SOCS1 attenuated HGF-induced proliferation of human and mouse HCC
cell lines and their growth as tumors in NOD.scid.gamma mice. Tumors formed by
SOCS1 expressing HCC cells showed significantly reduced MET expression,
indicating that SOCS1 not only attenuates MET signaling but also regulates MET
expression. Mechanistically, SOCS1 interacted with MET via the Src homology 2
domain and this interaction was promoted by MET tyrosine kinase activity. The
SOCS1-mediated reduction in MET expression does not require the juxtamembrane
Y1003 residue implicated in Cbl-mediated downmodulation. Moreover, the proteasome
inhibitor MG-132, but not the inhibitors of lysosomal degradation bafilomycin and
chloroquine, reversed the SOCS1-mediated reduction in MET expression, indicating 
that this process is distinct from Cbl-mediated downmodulation. Accordingly,
SOCS1 promoted polyubiquitination of MET via K48-dependent but not K63-mediated
ubiquitin chain elongation. Furthermore, siRNA-mediated downmodulation of Cbl did
not abolish SOCS1-mediated reduction in MET expression in HCC cells.
SOCS1-dependent ubiquitination of endogenous MET receptor occurred rapidly
following HGF stimulation in HCC cells, leading to proteasomal degradation of
phosphorylated MET receptor. These findings indicate that SOCS1 mediates its
tumor suppressor functions, at least partly, by binding to MET and interfering
with downstream signaling pathways as well as by promoting the turnover of the
activated MET receptor. We propose that loss of this control mechanism due to
epigenetic repression of SOCS1 could contribute to oncogenic MET signaling in HCC
and other cancers, and that MET inhibitors might be useful in treating these
patients.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2015.20 
PMID: 25728680  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

