
1. Int J Cancer. 1989 Nov 15;44(5):777-82.

Lymphocyte homing receptors and adhesion molecules in intravascular malignant
lymphomatosis.

Jalkanen S(1), Aho R, Kallajoki M, Ekfors T, Nortamo P, Gahmberg C, Duijvestijn
A, Kalimo H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Turku, Finland.

Intravascular malignant lymphomatosis (IML) is a highly malignant, recently
recognized form of lymphoma. It is characterized by multifocal proliferation of
malignant lymphocytes within small blood vessels, primarily in the central
nervous system and skin, frequently resulting in circulatory disturbances. The
cause of the impaired capability of the malignant lymphocytes to extravasate has 
remained unclear. We analyzed the presence of immunoreactivity for certain homing
receptor and adhesion molecules associated with lymphocyte extravasation in 3
patients with this disease. Compared with non-neoplastic leukocytes, large
malignant lymphocytes appeared either negative or only weakly positive for the
leukocyte surface glycoprotein, CD18 that is the beta chain of the CDIIa/CD18
complex (lymphocyte-function associated antigen-I, LFA-I), which mediates
cell-to-cell adhesion of lymphocytes. On the other hand, antibody to one of the
proposed ligands for this complex, intercellular adhesion molecule-I, gave
positive reactivity both on lymphocytes and on endothelial cells. Further, the
malignant lymphoid cells stained positively with Hermes-3 antibody, which
recognizes a common structure of CD44 class of molecules involved in lymphocyte
homing. It was also shown that HECA-452 antigen, a marker of high endothelial
venules (HEV) supporting lymphocyte extravasation, can be synthesized by an IML
patient even at the site of inflammation but it is not prerequisite for
extravasation of inflammatory lymphocytes. Our results suggest that the
deficiency or absence of the adhesion molecule CDIIa/CD18 may contribute to the
inability of the malignant lymphoid cells to extravasate in IML, and perhaps also
to the high malignancy of this form of lymphoma.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.2910440505 
PMID: 2573578  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

