
1. J Proteomics. 2015 Apr 29;120:21-34. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2015.02.019. Epub 2015 
Mar 6.

Proteomic profile of the skin mucus of farmed gilthead seabream (Sparus aurata).

Jurado J(1), Fuentes-Almagro CA(2), Guardiola FA(3), Cuesta A(3), Esteban MÁ(3), 
Prieto-Álamo MJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Agrifood Campus of
International Excellence (ceiA3), University of Córdoba, Severo Ochoa Building,
Rabanales Campus, 14071 Córdoba, Spain.
(2)Proteomics Facility, SCAI, University of Córdoba, Ramón y Cajal Building,
Rabanales Campus, 14071 Córdoba, Spain.
(3)Fish Innate Immune System Group, Department of Cell Biology and Histology,
Faculty of Biology, Campus Regional de Excelencia Internacional "Campus Mare
Nostrum", University of Murcia, 30100 Murcia, Spain.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Agrifood Campus of
International Excellence (ceiA3), University of Córdoba, Severo Ochoa Building,
Rabanales Campus, 14071 Córdoba, Spain. Electronic address: bb2pralm@uco.es.

Fish skin mucus is the first line of defense against infections and it
discriminates between pathogenic and commensal bacterial strains. Mucus
composition varies amongst fish species and is influenced by endogenous and
exogenous factors. This study describes the first proteome map of the epidermal
mucus of farmed gilthead seabream (Sparus aurata). We used an integrative
proteomic approach by combining a label-free procedure (LC-MS/MS) with the
classical 2-DE-PMF-MS/MS methodology. The identified mucosal proteins were
clustered in four groups according to their biological functions. Structural
proteins (actins, keratins, tubulins, tropomyosin, cofilin-2 and filamin-A) and
metabolic proteins (ribosomal proteins, proteasomal subunits, NACA, VCP,
histones, NDPK, transferrin, glycolytic enzymes, ATP synthase components,
beta-globin, Apo-A1 and FABP7) were the best represented functional categories.
We also found proteins involved in stress response (WAP65, HSPC70, Cu,Zn-SOD, and
PRDX1 and PRDX2) and signal transduction (PP2A 65kDa regulatory subunit, 14-3-3
protein beta/alpha, tyrosine 3-monooxygenase/tryptophan 5-monooxygenase
activation protein, RhoGDI and PEBP1). Most of the identified proteins address
different aspects of the innate immune response. Additionally, we analyzed
bacterial peptides identified in the skin mucus of healthy S. aurata. These
results revealed that genera belonging to the Lactobacillales order constitute
the most abundant microorganism populations in this habitat.BIOLOGICAL
SIGNIFICANCE: This work shows that proteomic methods can be used to characterize 
fish skin mucus. Using a coupled approach of LC-MS/MS and a 2-DE-PMF-MS/MS, we
have obtained the first comprehensive view of the skin mucosal proteome of S.
aurata, a fish species that is economically relevant for Mediterranean
aquaculture. We identified a panel of proteins involved in a variety of
biological functions, particularly in the innate immune response. Furthermore, to
our knowledge, this is the first time a proteomic approach has been used to
examine the microbiota in the skin mucus of a fish species. Overall, these
results support further immunological researches in S. aurata and are relevant
for the culture of this important fish species.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2015.02.019 
PMID: 25753121  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

