
1. J Thromb Haemost. 2015 Jun;13(6):1128-38. doi: 10.1111/jth.12893. Epub 2015 Apr
23.

Platelet and endothelial cell P-selectin are required for host defense against
Klebsiella pneumoniae-induced pneumosepsis.

de Stoppelaar SF(1)(2), Van't Veer C(1)(2), Roelofs JJ(3), Claushuis TA(1)(2), de
Boer OJ(3), Tanck MW(4), Hoogendijk AJ(1)(2), van der Poll T(1)(2)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Academic Medical Center, Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA),
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)Academic Medical Center, Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine
(CEMM), University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Bioinformatics,
Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Sepsis is associated with activation of platelets and endothelial
cells accompanied by enhanced P-selectin surface expression. Both platelet- and
endothelial P-selectin have been associated with leukocyte recruitment and
induction of inflammatory alterations. Klebsiella (K.) pneumoniae is a common
human sepsis pathogen, particularly in the context of pneumonia.
METHODS: Wild-type (WT) and P-selectin-deficient (Selp(-/-) ) mice or bone marrow
chimeric mice were infected with K. pneumoniae via the airways to induce
pneumosepsis. Mice were sacrificed during early (12 h after infection) or
late-stage (44 h) sepsis for analyses, or followed in a survival study.
RESULTS: Selp(-/-) mice displayed 10-1000-fold higher bacterial burdens in the
lungs, blood and distant organs during late-stage sepsis. P-selectin deficiency
did not influence leukocyte recruitment to the lungs, but was associated with
decreased platelet-monocyte complexes and increased cytokine release. Bone marrow
transfer studies revealed a role for both platelet and endothelial cell
P-selectin as mice deficient in platelet or endothelial cell P-selectin displayed
an intermediate phenotype in bacterial loads and survival compared with full
wild-type or full knockout control mice.
CONCLUSION: Both platelet and endothelial cell P-selectin contribute to host
defense during Klebsiella pneumosepsis.

© 2015 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

DOI: 10.1111/jth.12893 
PMID: 25773400  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

