
1. J Immunol Methods. 2015 Jul;422:13-21. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2015.02.007. Epub 2015 
Mar 14.

Evaluation of the efficiency of human immune system reconstitution in NSG mice
and NSG mice containing a human HLA.A2 transgene using hematopoietic stem cells
purified from different sources.

Patton J(1), Vuyyuru R(2), Siglin A(3), Root M(4), Manser T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. Electronic address: Michael.Root@jefferson.edu.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. Electronic address: timothy.manser@jefferson.edu.

Severely immunodeficient mice such as the NOD/SCID/IL2rγ(null) (NSG) strain can
be engrafted with human hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), resulting in chimeric
mice containing many components of the human immune system (Human Immune System
mice or HIS mice). HIS mice can both support the replication of and recapitulate 
much of the immunological response to a variety of pathogens, including ones with
strict human tropism, such as HIV-1. In an effort to develop a better mouse model
for human infectious pathogen infection and possible immune resolution, we
compared the human immune system reconstitution of NSG mice following injection
with human CD34(+) HSCs purified from either fetal liver (FL) or umbilical cord
blood (UCB). We analyzed reconstitution in standard NSG mice as well as a
derivative of these mice containing an HLA.A2 encoding transgene (NSG.A2). HSCs
from both sources effectively reconstituted hematopoietic lineages when injected 
into NSG mice. In marked contrast, total CD45(+) human hematopoietic cells in
NSG.A2 mice were well reconstituted by HSCs from UCB but very poorly by HSCs
purified from FL. Moreover, the reconstitution of T cell lineages in NSG.A2 mice 
by HSCs from UCB was inferior to that obtained using NSG mice. We also found that
FL CD34(+) HSCs contain a much higher percentage of cells with a phenotype
consistent with primitive progenitors than UCB HSCs. We discuss possible
explanations for the influence of the HLA.A2 transgene on hematopoietic
reconstitution using the two sources of HSCs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jim.2015.02.007 
PMCID: PMC4458417
PMID: 25776756  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

