
1. Hepatology. 2015 Jul;62(1):253-64. doi: 10.1002/hep.27791. Epub 2015 Apr 22.

Oral ampicillin inhibits liver regeneration by breaking hepatic innate immune
tolerance normally maintained by gut commensal bacteria.

Wu X(1), Sun R(1)(2), Chen Y(1), Zheng X(1), Bai L(1)(2), Lian Z(1)(2), Wei
H(1)(2), Tian Z(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology and The CAS Key Laboratory of Innate Immunity and
Chronic Disease, School of Life Sciences and Medical Center, University of
Science & Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, China.
(2)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, Hefei, Anhui,
China.
(3)Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious
Diseases, State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious
Diseases, First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.

Commensal bacteria have been proposed to play a role in liver repair after
partial (67%) hepatectomy. However, the underlying immune mechanisms remain
elusive. Here, we show that liver regeneration was impaired in antibiotic (Atb)
water-treated mice and this impairment strongly correlated with commensal
bacterial load. Among the various Atbs used in our cocktail, ampicillin-sensitive
commensal bacterial was associated with normal liver regeneration. The number of 
CD1d-dependent natural killer T (NKT) cells in Atb-treated hepatectomized mice
was markedly increased, and these NKT cells were functionally overactivated to
produce higher interferon-γ. Deficiency of NKT cells or antibody blockade of the 
CD1d-NKT interaction increased hepatocyte proliferation, which improved liver
regeneration. Importantly, an increased number of Kupffer cells were observed in 
Atb-treated mice, and these Kupffer cells produced higher interleukin-12, which
then functioned to activate hepatic NKT cells. Interleukin-12p40 deficiency or
treatment with an anti-interleukin-12 antibody significantly inhibited NKT cell
overactivation and recovered liver regeneration in Atb-treated mice.CONCLUSION:
Commensal bacteria play a critical role in maintaining Kupffer cells in a
tolerant state, preventing subsequent NKT cell overactivation during liver
regeneration. Moreover, our data suggest that long-term Atb use, which can impair
the gut microbiota, may influence liver function by retarding liver regeneration.

© 2015 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.27791 
PMID: 25783863  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

