
1. Peptides. 2015 Jun;68:190-6. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2015.03.001. Epub 2015 Mar
14.

Structure and antimicrobial activity relationship of royalisin, an antimicrobial 
peptide from royal jelly of Apis mellifera.

Bílikova K(1), Huang SC(2), Lin IP(3), Šimuth J(1), Peng CC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Forest Ecology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Zvolen, Detasched
workplace Department of Molecular Apidology, Bratislava, Slovakia.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, National Formosa University, Yunlin, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, National Formosa University, Yunlin, Taiwan;
Department of Research and Development, Challenge Bioproducts Co., Ltd., Yunlin, 
Taiwan.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, National Formosa University, Yunlin, Taiwan.
Electronic address: bocky@nfu.edu.tw.

Royalisin is a 5.5-kDa antibacterial peptide isolated from the royal jelly of the
honeybee (Apis mellifera). The antimicrobial activity of royalisin against fungi,
Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria has been revealed. Compared with another
insect antibacterial peptide, there is an extra stretch of 11 amino acid residues
at the C-terminus of royalisin. In this study, a recombinant shortened form of
royalisin named as royalisin-D, was constructed without the 11 amino acid
residues at the C-terminal of royalisin and linked to the C-terminal of oleosin
by an inteinS fragment. The recombinant protein was overexpressed in Escherichia 
coli, purified by artificial oil body system and subsequently released through
self-splicing of inteinS induced by the changes of temperature. The antibacterial
activity of royalisin-D was compared with royalisin via minimal inhibitory
concentration (MIC) assay, minimal bactericidal concentration (MBC) assay,
microbial adhesion to solvents (MATS) methods, and cell membrane permeability.
Furthermore, the recombinant royalisin and royalisin-D have also been treated
with the reducing agent of disulfide bonds, dithiothreitol (DTT), to investigate 
the importance of the intra-disulfide bond in royalisin. In our results,
royalisin-D exhibited similar antimicrobial activity to royalisin. Royalisin and 
royalisin D lost their antimicrobial activities when the intra-disulfide bonds
were reduced by DDT. The intra-disulfide bond plays a more important role than
the extra stretch of 11 amino acid residues at the C-terminus of royalisin in
terms of the antimicrobial properties of the native royalisin.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2015.03.001 
PMID: 25784287  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

