
1. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 20;10(3):e0119739. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119739.
eCollection 2015.

Restoration of responsiveness of phospholipase Cγ2-deficient platelets by
enforced expression of phospholipase Cγ1.

Zheng Y(1), Adams T(2), Zhi H(2), Yu M(2), Wen R(2), Newman PJ(3), Wang D(4),
Newman DK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Blood Research Institute, BloodCenter of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin,
United States of America; Key Laboratory of Developmental Genes and Human
Disease, Ministry of Education, Institute of Life Science, Southeast University, 
Nanjing, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.
(2)Blood Research Institute, BloodCenter of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin,
United States of America.
(3)Blood Research Institute, BloodCenter of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin,
United States of America; Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical
College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, United States of America; Department 
of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of Wisconsin,
Milwaukee, Wisconsin, United States of America.
(4)Blood Research Institute, BloodCenter of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin,
United States of America; Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics,
Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, United States of America.
(5)Blood Research Institute, BloodCenter of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin,
United States of America; Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical
College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, United States of America; Department 
of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin, United States of America.

Receptor-mediated platelet activation requires phospholipase C (PLC) activity to 
elevate intracellular calcium and induce actin cytoskeleton reorganization. PLCs 
are classified into structurally distinct β, γ, δ, ε, ζ, and η isoforms. There
are two PLCγ isoforms (PLCγ1, PLCγ2), which are critical for activation by
tyrosine kinase-dependent receptors. Platelets express both PLCγ1 and PLCγ2.
Although PLCγ2 has been shown to play a dominant role in platelet activation, the
extent to which PLCγ1 contributes has not been evaluated. To ascertain the
relative contributions of PLCγ1 and PLCγ2 to platelet activation, we generated
conditionally PLCγ1-deficient, wild-type (WT), PLCγ2-deficient, and PLCγ1/PLCγ2
double-deficient mice and measured the ability of platelets to respond to
different agonists. We found that PLCγ2 deficiency abrogated αIIbβ3-dependent
platelet spreading, GPVI-dependent platelet aggregation, and thrombus formation
on collagen-coated surfaces under shear conditions, which is dependent on both
GPVI and αIIbβ3. Addition of exogenous ADP overcame defective spreading of
PLCγ2-deficient platelets on immobilized fibrinogen, suggesting that PLCγ2 is
required for granule secretion in response to αIIbβ3 ligation. Consistently,
αIIbβ3-mediated release of granule contents was impaired in the absence of PLCγ2.
In contrast, PLCγ1-deficient platelets spread and released granule contents
normally on fibrinogen, exhibited normal levels of GPVI-dependent aggregation,
and formed thrombi normally on collagen-coated surfaces. Interestingly, enforced 
expression of PLCγ1 fully restored GPVI-dependent aggregation and
αIIbβ3-dependent spreading of PLCγ2-deficient platelets. We conclude that
platelet activation through GPVI and αIIbβ3 utilizes PLCγ2 because PLCγ1 levels
are insufficient to support responsiveness, but that PLCγ1 can restore
responsiveness if expressed at levels normally achieved by PLCγ2.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119739 
PMCID: PMC4368822
PMID: 25793864  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

