
1. DNA Repair (Amst). 2015 Jun;30:1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2015.02.021. Epub 2015
Mar 5.

Differential repair of etheno-DNA adducts by bacterial and human AlkB proteins.

Zdżalik D(1), Domańska A(2), Prorok P(3), Kosicki K(1), van den Born E(4), Falnes
PØ(4), Rizzo CJ(5), Guengerich FP(6), Tudek B(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, University of
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Institute of Genetics and Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, University of
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland; Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy 
of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, 
Poland.
(4)Department of Biosciences, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Department of Chemistry, Center in Molecular Toxicology, and Vanderbilt Ingram
Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, Center in Molecular Toxicology, and Vanderbilt
Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN,
USA.
(7)Institute of Genetics and Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, University of
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland; Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy 
of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address: tudek@ibb.waw.pl.

AlkB proteins are evolutionary conserved Fe(II)/2-oxoglutarate-dependent
dioxygenases, which remove alkyl and highly promutagenic etheno(ɛ)-DNA adducts,
but their substrate specificity has not been fully determined. We developed a
novel assay for the repair of ɛ-adducts by AlkB enzymes using
oligodeoxynucleotides with a single lesion and specific DNA glycosylases and
AP-endonuclease for identification of the repair products. We compared the repair
of three ɛ-adducts, 1,N(6)-ethenoadenine (ɛA), 3,N(4)-ethenocytosine (ɛC) and
1,N(2)-ethenoguanine (1,N(2)-ɛG) by nine bacterial and two human AlkBs,
representing four different structural groups defined on the basis of conserved
amino acids in the nucleotide recognition lid, engaged in the enzyme binding to
the substrate. Two bacterial AlkB proteins, MT-2B (from Mycobacterium
tuberculosis) and SC-2B (Streptomyces coelicolor) did not repair these lesions in
either double-stranded (ds) or single-stranded (ss) DNA. Three proteins, RE-2A
(Rhizobium etli), SA-2B (Streptomyces avermitilis), and XC-2B (Xanthomonas
campestris) efficiently removed all three lesions from the DNA substrates.
Interestingly, XC-2B and RE-2A are the first AlkB proteins shown to be
specialized for ɛ-adducts, since they do not repair methylated bases. Three other
proteins, EcAlkB (Escherichia coli), SA-1A, and XC-1B removed ɛA and ɛC from ds
and ssDNA but were inactive toward 1,N(2)-ɛG. SC-1A repaired only ɛA with the
preference for dsDNA. The human enzyme ALKBH2 repaired all three ɛ-adducts in
dsDNA, while only ɛA and ɛC in ssDNA and repair was less efficient in ssDNA.
ALKBH3 repaired only ɛC in ssDNA. Altogether, we have shown for the first time
that some AlkB proteins, namely ALKBH2, RE-2A, SA-2B and XC-2B can repair
1,N(2)-ɛG and that ALKBH3 removes only ɛC from ssDNA. Our results also suggest
that the nucleotide recognition lid is not the sole determinant of the substrate 
specificity of AlkB proteins.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2015.02.021 
PMCID: PMC4451939
PMID: 25797601  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

