
1. Zh Mikrobiol Epidemiol Immunobiol. 2014 Nov-Dec;(6):59-67.

[Effect of aluminium hydroxide on innate immunity and immunogenicity of bacterial
and synthetic antigens of Streptococcus pneumoniae].

[Article in Russian]

Kurbatova EA, Akhmatov ÉA, Akhmatova NK, Vorob'ev DS, Egorova NB, Baturo AP,
Romanenko ÉE, Tsvetkov IuE, Sukhova EV, Iashunskiĭ DV, Nifant'ev NÉ.

AIM: Study the effect of aluminium hydroxide on molecular-cell mechanisms of
innate immunity activation and its adjuvant effect on immunogenicity of natural
bacterial and synthetic pneumococci antigens.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Surface markers of dendritic cells (DC), mononuclear
leukocytes (ML) and cytokine levels were determined by flow cytometry; IgG
titers--by EIA. Protective activity was evaluated in experiments with active
protection of mice from infection with virulent pneumococci strains.
RESULTS: Aluminium hydroxide increased the ML content of mice spleen expressing
TLR2 and TLR4. Its addition into the culture of immature DC induced the
appearance of a population of cells with mature DC markers--CD83, CD80, CD86,
however, the level of undifferentiated cells (CD34) and cells with adhesion
molecules (CD11c, CD38) did not change. DC produced IL-1β, IL-5, IL-10, IFNγ into
the cultivation medium. An increase of cytokine production took place 2 hours
after the administration into mice and was retained for the observation period
(24 hours). Th1 (IFNγ, TNFα) and Th2 (IL-5, IL-10, GM-CSF) cytokine production
gave evidence on immune response polarization by Th1/Th2, type. After 2
administrations of aluminium hydroxide into mice the number of ML with CD19+,
CD5+, NK1.1+, CD25+, MHCII+ markers increased during decrease of CD3+, CD4+ and
CD8+ T-lymphocytes. Adaptive immunity activation was characterized by high IgG
titers to pneumococci capsule polysaccharide and protection of 90 - 100% of the
mice against infection with lethal doses of S. pneumoniae strains, was detected
during 2-fold immunization of mice with conjugates of synthetic pneumococci
oligosaccharides with BSA,sorbed onto aluminium hydroxide, whereas natural
bacterial antigens provided 90 - 100% survival of animals during immunization
without the adjuvant.
CONCLUSION: Data are provided on the effect of aluminium hydroxide on key
effectors of innate immunity: DC, ML, TLRs and cytokine production. A reasonable 
administration of this adjuvant was shown to be in association with conjugates of
pneumococci synthetic oligosaccharides with a carrier protein.


PMID: 25816515  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

