
1. Environ Res. 2015 Jul;140:65-75. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2015.03.015. Epub 2015 Mar
30.

Do airborne biogenic chemicals interact with the PI3K/Akt/mTOR cell signalling
pathway to benefit human health and wellbeing in rural and coastal environments?

Moore MN(1).

Author information: 
(1)European Centre for Environment & Human Health (ECEHH), University of Exeter
Medical School, Knowledge Spa, Royal Cornwall Hospital, Truro, Cornwall TR1 3HD, 
UK; Department of Science and Innovative Technology (DSIT), University of Eastern
Piedmont, Alessandria, Italy; Plymouth Marine Laboratory (PML), Prospect Place,
The Hoe, Plymouth PL1 3DH, UK; School of Biological Sciences, University of
Plymouth, Drake's Circus, Plymouth PL4 8DD, UK. Electronic address:
mnm@pml.ac.uk.

Living and taking recreation in rural and coastal environments promote health and
wellbeing, although the causal factors involved are unclear. It has been proposed
that such environments provide a counter to the stresses of everyday living,
leading to enhanced mental and physical health. Living in natural environments
will result in airborne exposure to a wide range of biogenic chemicals through
inhalation and ingestion of airborne microbiota and particles. The "biogenics"
hypothesis formulated here is that regular exposure to low concentrations of
mixtures of natural compounds and toxins in natural environments confers
pleiotropic health benefits by inhibiting the activities of interconnected cell
signalling systems, particularly PI3K/Akt/mTORC1. When overactive, Akt and mTOR
(mTORC1) can lead to many pathological processes including cancers, diabetes,
inflammation, immunosuppression, and neurodegenerative diseases. There is a
substantial body of evidence that many natural products (i.e., from bacteria,
algae, fungi and higher plants) inhibit the activities of these protein kinases. 
Other mTOR-related interconnected metabolic control "switches" (e.g., PTEN &
NF-κB), autophagy and other cytoprotective processes are also affected by natural
products. The "biogenics" hypothesis formulated here is that regular intermittent
exposure to a mixture of airborne biogenic compounds in natural environments
confers pleiotropic health benefits by inhibiting activities of the highly
interconnected PI3K/Akt/mTORC1 system. It is proposed that future experimental
exposures to biogenic aerosols in animal models coupled with epidemiology, should
target the activities of the various kinases in the PI3K/Akt/mTORC1 systems and
related physiological processes for selected urban, rural and coastal populations
in order to test this hypothesis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envres.2015.03.015 
PMID: 25825132  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

