
1. J Pharm Biomed Anal. 2015 Jun 10;110:100-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jpba.2015.02.050. Epub
2015 Mar 9.

Metabolic fate of cardiac glycosides and flavonoids upon fermentation of aqueous 
sea squill (Drimia maritima L.) extracts.

Knittel DN(1), Stintzing FC(1), Kammerer DR(2).

Author information: 
(1)WALA Heilmittel GmbH, Department of Analytical Development & Research, Section
Phytochemical Research, Dorfstr. 1, 73087 Bad Boll/Eckwälden, Germany.
(2)WALA Heilmittel GmbH, Department of Analytical Development & Research, Section
Phytochemical Research, Dorfstr. 1, 73087 Bad Boll/Eckwälden, Germany. Electronic
address: dietmar.kammerer@wala.de.

Sea squill (Drimia maritima L.) extracts have been used for centuries for the
medical treatment of heart diseases. A procedure for the preparation of Drimia
extracts applied for such purposes comprising a fermentation step is described in
the German Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia (GHP). However, little is known about the
secondary metabolite profile of such extracts and the fate of these components
upon processing and storage. Thus, in the present study sea squill extracts were 
monitored during fermentation and storage by HPLC-DAD-MS(n) and GC-MS to
characterise and quantitate individual cardiac glycosides and phenolic compounds.
For this purpose, a previously established HPLC method for the separation and
quantitation of pharmacologically relevant cardiac glycosides (bufadienolides)
was validated. Within 12 months of storage, total bufadienolide contents
decreased by about 50%, which was attributed to microbial and plant enzyme
activities. The metabolisation and degradation rates of individual bufadienolide 
glycosides significantly differed, which was attributed to differing structures
of the aglycones. Further degradation of bufadienolide aglycones was also
observed. Besides reactions well known from human metabolism studies, dehydration
of individual compounds was monitored. Quantitatively predominating flavonoids
were also metabolised throughout the fermentation process. The present study
provides valuable information about the profile and stability of individual
cardiac glycosides and phenolic compounds in fermented Drimia extracts prepared
for medical applications, and expands the knowledge of cardiac glycoside
conversion upon microbial fermentation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpba.2015.02.050 
PMID: 25841205  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

