
1. Immun Inflamm Dis. 2014 Dec;2(4):239-53. doi: 10.1002/iid3.40. Epub 2014 Dec 9.

CD24 activates the NLRP3 inflammasome through c-Src kinase activity in a model of
the lining epithelium of inflamed periodontal tissues.

Guo W(1), Ye P(2), Yu H(3), Liu Z(4), Yang P(5), Hunter N(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, School of Dentistry, Key Laboratory of Oral
Biomedicine, Shandong University Shandong Province, China ; Yantai Stomatological
Hospital Shandong Province, China.
(2)Institute of Dental Research, Westmead Millennium Institute and Westmead
Centre for Oral Health Westmead Hospital, Australia.
(3)Microscopy Laboratory, Westmead Millennium Institute Westmead Hospital,
Australia.
(4)Yantai Stomatological Hospital Shandong Province, China.
(5)Department of Periodontology, School of Dentistry, Key Laboratory of Oral
Biomedicine, Shandong University Shandong Province, China.
(6)Institute of Dental Research, Westmead Millennium Institute and Westmead
Centre for Oral Health Westmead Hospital, Australia ; Faculty of Dentistry, the
University of Sydney Sydney, Australia.

Chronic periodontitis is characterized by perturbation of the epithelial
attachment to the tooth with subsequent migration of the lining epithelium and
formation of a cleft or pocket. This non-keratinized lining epithelium provides
initial responses to bacterial products by signalling through receptors of innate
immunity to activate inflammasome pathways. These comprise an intracellular
network of regulatory and effector molecules leading to synthesis and activation 
of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Conversely, CD24 is characteristically strongly
expressed by the pocket epithelium and is reported to function as an important
negative regulator for danger signals, protecting tissues from excessive
leukocyte activity. The objective of the study was to determine the impact of
ligation of CD24 on expression of inflammasome components. An epithelial mimic of
pocket epithelium was used to evaluate activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome
pathway. Surprisingly, antibody ligation of CD24 enhanced expression of NLRP3
together with co-activators ASC and caspase-1 resulting in burst release of
activated interleukin (IL)-18. Potent product inhibition was detected with IL-18 
suppressing expression of NLRP3, ASC, and caspase-1. Scant distribution of these 
products within pocket epithelium compared with healthy gingival attachment
provided indication of potential cycling of NLRP3 inflammasome expression. As
subjects with mild chronic periodontitis have increased titres of serum
antibodies auto-reactive with CD24 compared with those of subjects with severe
periodontitis, a molecular mechanism for regulated expression of the NLRP3
inflammasome mediated by c-Src kinase activity, is proposed. This pathway could
be regionally disrupted by products of pathogenic bacteria with profound
downregulation in the dysbiosis associated with severe disease.

DOI: 10.1002/iid3.40 
PMCID: PMC4386918
PMID: 25866631 

