
1. Helicobacter. 2015 Dec;20(6):449-59. doi: 10.1111/hel.12223. Epub 2015 Apr 10.

Analysis of the Relative Contribution of Phagocytosis, LC3-Associated
Phagocytosis, and Canonical Autophagy During Helicobacter pylori Infection of
Macrophages.

Deen NS(1), Gong L(1), Naderer T(1), Devenish RJ(1), Kwok T(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton, 
Vic., Australia.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton, Vic., Australia.

BACKGROUND: Previous findings have suggested that Helicobacter pylori induces
autophagic processes and subsequently takes refuge in autophagosomes, thereby
contributing to persistent infection. Recently, a noncanonical form of autophagy,
LC3 (microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3)-associated phagocytosis
(LAP), has been shown to be required for efficient clearance of some
intracellular bacteria. Whether H. pylori infection induces LAP had not been
examined previously. In this study, we determined the extent to which H. pylori
infection induces canonical autophagy or LAP in macrophages, and the involvement 
of the H. pylori cag pathogenicity island (cagPAI) with these processes.
METHODS: Immunofluorescence confocal microscopy was used to analyze the formation
of GFP-LC3 puncta and their colocalization with H. pylori. Transmission electron 
microscopy was used to detect the ultrastructure of H. pylori-containing
compartments.
RESULTS: The majority of intracellular bacteria (85-95%) were found in phagosomes
that were LC3-negative, with a small proportion (4-14%) appearing "free" in the
cytosol. Only a very small percentage (0.5-6%) of intracellular H. pylori was
sequestered in autophagosomes. Furthermore, no statistically significant
difference in the relative distribution of H. pylori in the various compartments 
was observed between wild-type and cagPAI-mutant bacteria.
CONCLUSIONS: In macrophages, H. pylori infection does not induce LAP, but can
induce canonical autophagy, which entraps a very small fraction of intracellular 
bacteria. We propose that this subpopulation of intracellular H. pylori might
have escaped from phagosomes into the cytosol before being sequestered by
autophagosomes. The cagPAI of H. pylori has only minor influence, if any, on the 
extent of these processes.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/hel.12223 
PMID: 25864465  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

