
1. J Vis Exp. 2015 Feb 28;(96):e52385. doi: 10.3791/52385.

A multi-detection assay for malaria transmitting mosquitoes.

Lee Y(1), Weakley AM(2), Nieman CC(2), Malvick J(3), Lanzaro GC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of California - Davis; yoslee@ucdavis.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of California - Davis.
(3)Veterinary Genetics Laboratory, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
California, Davis.

The Anopheles gambiae species complex includes the major malaria transmitting
mosquitoes in Africa. Because these species are of such medical importance,
several traits are typically characterized using molecular assays to aid in
epidemiological studies. These traits include species identification, insecticide
resistance, parasite infection status, and host preference. Since populations of 
the Anopheles gambiae complex are morphologically indistinguishable, a polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) is traditionally used to identify species. Once the species 
is known, several downstream assays are routinely performed to elucidate further 
characteristics. For instance, mutations known as KDR in a para gene confer
resistance against DDT and pyrethroid insecticides. Additionally, enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) or Plasmodium parasite DNA detection PCR assays are
used to detect parasites present in mosquito tissues. Lastly, a combination of
PCR and restriction enzyme digests can be used to elucidate host preference
(e.g., human vs. animal blood) by screening the mosquito bloodmeal for
host-specific DNA. We have developed a multi-detection assay (MDA) that combines 
all of the aforementioned assays into a single multiplex reaction genotyping
33SNPs for 96 or 384 samples at a time. Because the MDA includes multiple markers
for species, Plasmodium detection, and host blood identification, the likelihood 
of generating false positives or negatives is greatly reduced from previous
assays that include only one marker per trait. This robust and simple assay can
detect these key mosquito traits cost-effectively and in a fraction of the time
of existing assays.

DOI: 10.3791/52385 
PMCID: PMC4401152
PMID: 25867057  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

