
1. J Dairy Sci. 2015 Jun;98(6):3665-78. doi: 10.3168/jds.2015-9411. Epub 2015 Apr 8.

Novel cellobiose 2-epimerases for the production of epilactose from milk
ultrafiltrate containing lactose.

Krewinkel M(1), Kaiser J(1), Merz M(1), Rentschler E(1), Kuschel B(1), Hinrichs
J(2), Fischer L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Enzyme Science, University of Hohenheim, 70599
Stuttgart, Germany.
(2)Department of Soft Matter Science and Dairy Technology, Institute of Food
Science and Biotechnology, University of Hohenheim, 70599 Stuttgart, Germany.
(3)Department of Biotechnology and Enzyme Science, University of Hohenheim, 70599
Stuttgart, Germany. Electronic address: Lutz.Fischer@uni-hohenheim.de.

A selected number of enzymes have recently been assigned to the emerging class of
cellobiose 2-epimerases (CE). All CE convert lactose to the rare sugar
epilactose, which is regarded as a new prebiotic. Within this study, the gene
products of 2 potential CE genes originating from the mesophilic bacteria
Cellulosilyticum lentocellum and Dysgonomonas gadei were recombinantly produced
in Escherichia coli and purified by chromatography. The enzymes have been
identified as novel CE by sequence analysis and biochemical characterizations.
The biochemical characterizations included the determination of the molecular
weight, the substrate spectrum, and the kinetic parameters, as well as the pH and
temperature profiles in buffer and food matrices. Both identified CE epimerize
cellobiose and lactose into the C2 epimerization products glucosylmannose and
epilactose, respectively. The epimerization activity for lactose was maximal at
pH 8.0 or 7.5 and 40°C in defined buffer systems for the CE from C. lentocellum
and the CE from D. gadei, respectively. In addition, biotransformations of the
foodstuff milk ultrafiltrate containing lactose were demonstrated. The CE from D.
gadei was produced in a stirred-tank reactor (12 L) and purified using an
automatic system. Enzyme production and purification in this scale indicates that
a future upscaling of CE production is possible. The bioconversions of lactose in
milk ultrafiltrate were carried out either in a batch process or in a
continuously operated enzyme membrane reactor (EMR) process. Both processes ran
at an industrially relevant low temperature of 8°C to reduce undesirable
microbial growth. The enzyme was reasonably active at the low process temperature
because the CE originated from a mesophilic organism. An epilactose yield of
29.9% was achieved in the batch process within 28 h of operation time. In the
continuous EMR process, the epilactose yield in the product stream was lower, at 
18.5%. However, the enzyme productivity was approximately 6 times higher because 
the continuous epilactose formation was carried out for about 6 d without further
addition of biocatalyst. Within this time, 24g of epilactose in 2.8 L of permeate
were produced. The batch and the EMR process showed that the milk ultrafiltrate, 
which is a sidestream of the milk protein production, might be upgraded to a
dairy product of higher value by the enzymatic in situ production of epilactose.

Copyright © 2015 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.3168/jds.2015-9411 
PMID: 25864053  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

