
1. Microb Cell Fact. 2015 Apr 9;14:47. doi: 10.1186/s12934-015-0227-3.

Improved cell surface display of Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis antigens
in Escherichia coli.

Gustavsson M(1), Do TH(2), Lüthje P(3), Tran NT(4), Brauner A(5), Samuelson P(6),
Truong NH(7), Larsson G(8).

Author information: 
(1)Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Division of Industrial Biotechnology,
AlbaNova University Center, SE 10691, Stockholm, Sweden. margu@kth.se.
(2)Institute of Biotechnology, Vietnam Academy of Science and Technology,
18-Hoang Quoc Viet, Cau Giay, Ha Noi, Vietnam. dohuyen@ibt.ac.vn.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Division of Clinical
Microbiology, Karolinska Institute and Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm,
Sweden. petra.luthje@karolinska.se.
(4)Institute of Biotechnology, Vietnam Academy of Science and Technology,
18-Hoang Quoc Viet, Cau Giay, Ha Noi, Vietnam. tranngoctan2003@yahoo.com.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Division of Clinical
Microbiology, Karolinska Institute and Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm,
Sweden. Annelie.Brauner@ki.se.
(6)Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Division of Industrial Biotechnology,
AlbaNova University Center, SE 10691, Stockholm, Sweden. patrik@biotech.kth.se.
(7)Institute of Biotechnology, Vietnam Academy of Science and Technology,
18-Hoang Quoc Viet, Cau Giay, Ha Noi, Vietnam. tnhai@ibt.ac.vn.
(8)Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Division of Industrial Biotechnology,
AlbaNova University Center, SE 10691, Stockholm, Sweden. gen@kth.se.

BACKGROUND: Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis (SE) is one of the most
potent pathogenic Salmonella serotypes causing food-borne diseases in humans. We 
have previously reported the use of the β-autotransporter AIDA-I to express the
Salmonella flagellar protein H:gm and the SE serotype-specific fimbrial protein
SefA at the surface of E. coli as live bacterial vaccine vehicles. While SefA was
successfully displayed at the cell surface, virtually no full-length H:gm was
exposed to the medium due to extensive proteolytic cleavage of the N-terminal
region. In the present study, we addressed this issue by expressing a truncated
H:gm variant (H:gmd) covering only the serotype-specific central region. This
protein was also expressed in fusion to SefA (H:gmdSefA) to understand if the
excellent translocation properties of SefA could be used to enhance the secretion
and immunogenicity.
RESULTS: H:gmd and H:gmdSefA were both successfully translocated to the E. coli
outer membrane as full-length proteins using the AIDA-I system. Whole-cell flow
cytometric analysis confirmed that both antigens were displayed and accessible
from the extracellular environment. In contrast to H:gm, the H:gmd protein was
not only expressed as full-length protein, but it also seemed to promote the
display of the protein fusion H:gmdSefA. Moreover, the epitopes appeared to be
recognized by HT-29 intestinal cells, as measured by induction of the
pro-inflammatory interleukin 8.
CONCLUSIONS: We believe this study to be an important step towards a live
bacterial vaccine against Salmonella due to the central role of the flagellar
antigen H:gm and SefA in Salmonella infections and the corresponding immune
responses against Salmonella.

DOI: 10.1186/s12934-015-0227-3 
PMCID: PMC4415288
PMID: 25889453  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

