
1. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Apr 24;11(4):e1004834. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004834.
eCollection 2015 Apr.

Genetic Analysis Using an Isogenic Mating Pair of Aspergillus fumigatus
Identifies Azole Resistance Genes and Lack of MAT Locus's Role in Virulence.

Losada L(1), Sugui JA(2), Eckhaus MA(3), Chang YC(2), Mounaud S(1), Figat A(2),
Joardar V(1), Pakala SB(1), Pakala S(1), Venepally P(1), Fedorova N(4), Nierman
WC(1), Kwon-Chung KJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, Maryland, United States of America.
(2)Molecular Microbiology Section, Laboratory of Clinical Infectious Diseases,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
(3)Division of Veterinary Resources, Office of Research Services, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
(4)National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, 
United States of America.

Invasive aspergillosis (IA) due to Aspergillus fumigatus is a major cause of
mortality in immunocompromised patients. The discovery of highly fertile strains 
of A. fumigatus opened the possibility to merge classical and contemporary
genetics to address key questions about this pathogen. The merger involves sexual
recombination, selection of desired traits, and genomics to identify any
associated loci. We constructed a highly fertile isogenic pair of A. fumigatus
strains with opposite mating types and used them to investigate whether mating
type is associated with virulence and to find the genetic loci involved in azole 
resistance. The pair was made isogenic by 9 successive backcross cycles of the
foundational strain AFB62 (MAT1-1) with a highly fertile (MAT1-2) progeny. Genome
sequencing showed that the F9 MAT1-2 progeny was essentially identical to the
AFB62. The survival curves of animals infected with either strain in three
different animal models showed no significant difference, suggesting that
virulence in A. fumigatus was not associated with mating type. We then employed a
relatively inexpensive, yet highly powerful strategy to identify genomic loci
associated with azole resistance. We used traditional in vitro drug selection
accompanied by classical sexual crosses of azole-sensitive with resistant
isogenic strains. The offspring were plated under varying drug concentrations and
pools of resulting colonies were analyzed by whole genome sequencing. We found
that variants in 5 genes contributed to azole resistance, including mutations in 
erg11A (cyp51A), as well as multi-drug transporters, erg25, and in HMG-CoA
reductase. The results demonstrated that with minimal investment into the
sequencing of three pools from a cross of interest, the variation(s) that
contribute any phenotype can be identified with nucleotide resolution. This
approach can be applied to multiple areas of interest in A. fumigatus or other
heterothallic pathogens, especially for virulence associated traits.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004834 
PMCID: PMC4409388
PMID: 25909486  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

