
1. JAMA Neurol. 2015 Jun;72(6):689-98. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2015.37.

Association of a Novel ACTA1 Mutation With a Dominant Progressive Scapuloperoneal
Myopathy in an Extended Family.

Zukosky K(1), Meilleur K(2), Traynor BJ(3), Dastgir J(4), Medne L(5), Devoto
M(6), Collins J(7), Rooney J(8), Zou Y(1), Yang ML(9), Gibbs JR(10), Meier M(11),
Stetefeld J(11), Finkel RS(12), Schessl J(13), Elman L(14), Felice K(15),
Ferguson TA(16), Ceyhan-Birsoy O(17), Beggs AH(17), Tennekoon G(5), Johnson
JO(3), Bönnemann CG(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(2)National Institute of Nursing Research, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland.
(3)Neuromuscular Diseases Research Section, Laboratory of Neurogenetics, Porter
Neuroscience Research Center, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(4)Division of Child Neurology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New
York.
(5)Department of Neurology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia7Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Perelman
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia8Department of
Molecular Medicine, Universit.
(7)Department of Neurology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, Ohio.
(8)National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland11Research Center for Genetic Medicine, Children's
National Medical Center, Washington, DC.
(9)Department of Pediatrics and Neurology, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora.
(10)Computational Biology Core, Laboratory of Neurogenetics, Porter Neuroscience 
Research Center, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland.
(11)Department of Chemistry, Microbiology, Biochemistry, and Medical Genetics,
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Nemours Children's Hospital, Orlando, Florida.
(13)Department of Neurology, Friedrich-Baur Institute, Ludwig-Maximillans
University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(14)Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
(15)Department of Neuromuscular Medicine, Hospital for Special Care, New Britain,
Connecticut.
(16)Shriners Pediatric Research Center, Department of Neurology, Temple
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(17)The Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, Division of Genetics and
Genomics, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts.

Erratum in
    JAMA Neurol. 2015 Aug;72(8):950.

IMPORTANCE: New genomic strategies can now be applied to identify a diagnosis in 
patients and families with previously undiagnosed rare genetic conditions. The
large family evaluated in the present study was described in 1966 and now expands
the phenotype of a known neuromuscular gene.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the genetic cause of a slowly progressive, autosomal
dominant, scapuloperoneal neuromuscular disorder by using linkage and exome
sequencing.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Fourteen affected individuals in a
6-generation family with a progressive scapuloperoneal disorder were evaluated.
Participants were examined at pediatric, neuromuscular, and research clinics from
March 1, 2005, to May 31, 2014. Exome and linkage were performed in genetics
laboratories of research institutions.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Examination and evaluation by magnetic resonance
imaging, ultrasonography, electrodiagnostic studies, and muscle biopsies (n = 3).
Genetic analysis included linkage analysis (n = 17) with exome sequencing (n =
7).
RESULTS: Clinical findings included progressive muscle weakness in an initially
scapuloperoneal and distal distribution, including wrist extensor weakness,
finger and foot drop, scapular winging, mild facial weakness, Achilles tendon
contractures, and diminished or absent deep tendon reflexes. Both age at onset
and progression of the disease showed clinical variability within the family.
Muscle biopsy specimens demonstrated type I fiber atrophy and trabeculated fibers
without nemaline rods. Analysis of exome sequences within the linkage region (4.8
megabases) revealed missense mutation c.591C>A p.Glu197Asp in a highly conserved 
residue in exon 4 of ACTA1. The mutation cosegregated with disease in all tested 
individuals and was not present in unaffected individuals.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This family defines a new scapuloperoneal phenotype
associated with an ACTA1 mutation. A highly conserved protein, ACTA1 is
implicated in multiple muscle diseases, including nemaline myopathy, actin
aggregate myopathy, fiber-type disproportion, and rod-core myopathy. To our
knowledge, mutations in Glu197 have not been reported previously. This residue is
highly conserved and located in an exposed position in the protein; the mutation 
affects the intermolecular and intramolecular electrostatic interactions as shown
by structural modeling. The mutation in this residue does not appear to lead to
rod formation or actin accumulation in vitro or in vivo, suggesting a different
molecular mechanism from that of other ACTA1 diseases.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2015.37 
PMCID: PMC4461456
PMID: 25938801  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

