
1. PLoS One. 2015 May 4;10(5):e0125797. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125797.
eCollection 2015.

Regulation of hepatocyte growth factor in mice with pneumonia by peptidases and
trans-alveolar flux.

Raymond WW(1), Xu X(2), Nimishakavi S(1), Le C(3), McDonald DM(4), Caughey GH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, School of Medicine, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America.
(3)Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America.
(4)Cardiovascular Research Institute, School of Medicine, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America;
Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America.
(5)Cardiovascular Research Institute, School of Medicine, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America;
Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America; Northern
California Institute for Research and Education, San Francisco, California,
United States of America; Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco,
California, United States of America.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) promotes lung epithelial repair after injury.
Because prior studies established that human neutrophil proteases inactivate HGF 
in vitro, we predicted that HGF levels decrease in lungs infiltrated with
neutrophils and that injury is less severe in lungs lacking HGF-inactivating
proteases. After establishing that mouse neutrophil elastase cleaves mouse HGF in
vitro, we tested our predictions in vivo by examining lung pathology and HGF in
mice infected with Mycoplasma pulmonis, which causes neutrophilic
tracheobronchitis and pneumonia. Unexpectedly, pneumonia severity was similar in 
wild type and dipeptidylpeptidase I-deficient (Dppi-/-) mice lacking neutrophil
serine protease activity. To assess how this finding related to our prediction
that Dppi-activated proteases regulate HGF levels, we measured HGF in serum,
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, and lung tissue from Dppi(+/+) and Dppi(-/-) mice. 
Contrary to prediction, HGF levels were higher in lavage fluid from infected
mice. However, serum and tissue concentrations were not different in infected and
uninfected mice, and HGF lung transcript levels did not change. Increased HGF
correlated with increased albumin in lavage fluid from infected mice, and
immunostaining failed to detect increased lung tissue expression of HGF in
infected mice. These findings are consistent with trans-alveolar flux rather than
local production as the source of increased HGF in lavage fluid. However, levels 
of intact HGF from infected mice, normalized for albumin concentration, were
two-fold higher in Dppi(-/-) versus Dppi(+/+) lavage fluid, suggesting regulation
by Dppi-activated proteases. Consistent with the presence of active HGF,
increased expression of activated receptor c-Met was observed in infected
tissues. These data suggest that HGF entering alveoli from the bloodstream during
pneumonia compensates for destruction by Dppi-activated inflammatory proteases to
allow HGF to contribute to epithelial repair.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125797 
PMCID: PMC4418689
PMID: 25938594  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

