
1. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol. 2015 Jul;42(7):1057-72. doi:
10.1007/s10295-015-1627-4. Epub 2015 May 7.

Engineering Escherichia coli for high-level production of propionate.

Akawi L(1), Srirangan K, Liu X, Moo-Young M, Perry Chou C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Waterloo, 200 University
Avenue West, Waterloo, ON, N2L 3G1, Canada.

Mounting environmental concerns associated with the use of petroleum-based
chemical manufacturing practices has generated significant interest in the
development of biological alternatives for the production of propionate. However,
biological platforms for propionate production have been limited to strict
anaerobes, such as Propionibacteria and select Clostridia. In this work, we
demonstrated high-level heterologous production of propionate under microaerobic 
conditions in engineered Escherichia coli. Activation of the native Sleeping
beauty mutase (Sbm) operon not only transformed E. coli to be propionogenic
(i.e., propionate-producing) but also introduced an intracellular "flux
competition" between the traditional C2-fermentative pathway and the novel
C3-fermentative pathway. Dissimilation of the major carbon source of glycerol was
identified to critically affect such "flux competition" and, therefore,
propionate synthesis. As a result, the propionogenic E. coli was further
engineered by inactivation or overexpression of various genes involved in the
glycerol dissimilation pathways and their individual genetic effects on
propionate production were investigated. Generally, knocking out genes involved
in glycerol dissimilation (except glpA) can minimize levels of solventogenesis
and shift more dissimilated carbon flux toward the C3-fermentative pathway. For
optimal propionate production with high C3:C2-fermentative product ratios,
glycerol dissimilation should be channeled through the respiratory pathway and,
upon suppressed solventogenesis with minimal production of highly reduced
alcohols, the alternative NADH-consuming route associated with propionate
synthesis can be critical for more flexible redox balancing. With the
implementation of various biochemical and genetic strategies, high propionate
titers of more than 11 g/L with high yields up to 0.4 g-propionate/g-glycerol
(accounting for ~50 % of dissimilated glycerol) were achieved, demonstrating the 
potential for industrial application. To our knowledge, this represents the most 
effective engineered microbial system for propionate production with titers and
yields comparable to those achieved by anaerobic batch cultivation of various
native propionate-producing strains of Propionibacteria.

DOI: 10.1007/s10295-015-1627-4 
PMID: 25948049  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

