
1. Exp Neurol. 2015 Sep;271:53-71. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.04.023. Epub 2015
May 7.

A novel closed-body model of spinal cord injury caused by high-pressure air
blasts produces extensive axonal injury and motor impairments.

del Mar N(1), von Buttlar X(1), Yu AS(1), Guley NH(1), Reiner A(1), Honig MG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, The University of Tennessee Health
Science Center, Memphis, TN, USA.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, The University of Tennessee Health
Science Center, Memphis, TN, USA. Electronic address: mhonig@uthsc.edu.

Diffuse axonal injury is thought to be the basis of the functional impairments
stemming from mild traumatic brain injury. To examine how axons are damaged by
traumatic events, such as motor vehicle accidents, falls, sports activities, or
explosive blasts, we have taken advantage of the spinal cord with its extensive
white matter tracts. We developed a closed-body model of spinal cord injury in
mice whereby high-pressure air blasts targeted to lower thoracic vertebral levels
produce tensile, compressive, and shear forces within the parenchyma of the
spinal cord and thereby cause extensive axonal injury. Markers of cytoskeletal
integrity showed that spinal cord axons exhibited three distinct pathologies:
microtubule breakage, neurofilament compaction, and calpain-mediated spectrin
breakdown. The dorsally situated axons of the corticospinal tract primarily
exhibited microtubule breakage, whereas all three pathologies were common in the 
lateral and ventral white matter. Individual axons typically demonstrated only
one of the three pathologies during the first 24h after blast injury, suggesting 
that the different perturbations are initiated independently of one another. For 
the first few days after blast, neurofilament compaction was frequently
accompanied by autophagy, and subsequent to that, by the fragmentation of
degenerating axons. TuJ1 immunolabeling and mice with YFP-reporter labeling each 
revealed more extensive microtubule breakage than did βAPP immunolabeling,
raising doubts about the sensitivity of this standard approach for assessing
axonal injury. Although motor deficits were mild and largely transient, some
aspects of motor function gradually worsened over several weeks, suggesting that 
a low level of axonal degeneration continued past the initial wave. Our model can
help provide further insight into how to intervene in the processes by which
initial axonal damage culminates in axonal degeneration, to improve outcomes
after traumatic injury. Importantly, our findings of extensive axonal injury also
caution that repeated trauma is likely to have cumulative adverse consequences
for both brain and spinal cord.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.04.023 
PMCID: PMC4586366
PMID: 25957630  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

