
1. BMC Microbiol. 2015 May 12;15:100. doi: 10.1186/s12866-015-0434-4.

Prevalence and antimicrobial susceptibility profile of listeria species from
ready-to-eat foods of animal origin in Gondar Town, Ethiopia.

Garedew L(1), Taddese A(2), Biru T(3), Nigatu S(4), Kebede E(5), Ejo M(6), Fikru 
A(7), Birhanu T(8).

Author information: 
(1)St. Paul's Hospital Millennium Medical College, Department of Microbiology,
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. legesse_lg@yahoo.com.
(2)Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Department III-Developmental
Genetics, Bad Nauheim, Germany. ayutadei@yahoo.com.
(3)University of Gondar, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Gondar, Ethiopia.
tigistadam@ymail.com.
(4)University of Gondar, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Gondar, Ethiopia.
seleshe2@yahoo.com.
(5)University of Gondar, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Gondar, Ethiopia.
elafeedom@gmail.com.
(6)University of Gondar, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Gondar, Ethiopia.
drmebrat@yahoo.com.
(7)Hawassa University, School of Veterinary Medicine, Awassa, Ethiopia.
abrahamfikru@yahoo.com.
(8)University of Montreal, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Montreal, Canada.
tamevet@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Listeriosis, mostly caused by Listeria monocytogenes species, has
become a major concern to public health authorities due to its clinical severity 
and high mortality rate, particularly in high risk groups. Currently, there is
limited information regarding the prevalence and antimicrobial susceptibility
profiles of listeria species in ready-to-eat foods of animal origin in Gondar
town, Ethiopia. The aim of this study was to determine the prevalence and
antimicrobial susceptibility pattern of Listeria species isolated from
ready-to-eat food of animal origin from public dinning places in Gondar town,
Ethiopia. A cross sectional study on ready-toeat foods of animal origin sampled
from major supermarkets, butcher shops, pastry shops, restaurants and hotels was 
carried out. Culture, biochemical and sugar tests were conducted for listeria
species identification and disc diffusion test was performed to study the
antimicrobial susceptibility profiles of the isolates.
RESULTS: Out of 384 food samples examined, 96 (25%) were positive for Listeria
species. Listeria monocytogenes was detected in 24 (6.25%) of the samples.
Listeria monocytogenes was isolated from cake, raw meat, ice cream, minced beef, 
fish, unpasteurized milk and pizza in that order from higher to lower rate.
Assessment of antimicrobial susceptibility profile of L. monocytogenes revealed
the presence of four multi-drug resistant isolates. The higher resistance rate
was recorded for penicillin, nalidixic acid, tetracycline and chloramphenicol, in
decreasing order. All L. monocytogenes identified in the current study were
sensitive to amoxicillin, cephalothin, cloxacillin, sulfamethoxazole, gentamicin 
and vancomycin.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of L. monocytogenes including drug resistant and
multidrug resistant isolates in some ready-to-eat food items is an indicator of
the presence of public health hazards to the consumer, particularly to the
high-risk groups. Hence awareness creation on food safety and implementation of
regulations about the use of drugs in humans and animals is strongly recommended.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-015-0434-4 
PMCID: PMC4427937
PMID: 25963134  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

