
1. Mol Med. 2015 May 12;21:430-41. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2014.00263.

Modular Transcriptional Networks of the Host Pulmonary Response during Early and 
Late Pneumococcal Pneumonia.

Scicluna BP(1), van Lieshout MH(1), Blok DC(1), Florquin S(2), van der Poll
T(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental Molecular Medicine and Center for Infection and
Immunity Amsterdam.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

Streptococcus pneumoniae (Spneu) remains the most lethal bacterial pathogen and
the dominant agent of community-acquired pneumonia. Treatment has perennially
focused on the use of antibiotics, albeit scrutinized due to the occurrence of
antibiotic-resistant Spneu strains. Immunomodulatory strategies have emerged as
potential treatment options. Although promising, immunomodulation can lead to
improper tissue functions either at steady state or upon infectious challenge.
This argues for the availability of tools to enable a detailed assessment of
whole pulmonary functions during the course of infection, not only those
functions biased to the defense response. Thus, through the use of an unbiased
tissue microarray and bioinformatics approach, we aimed to construct a
comprehensive map of whole-lung transcriptional activity and cellular pathways
during the course of pneumococcal pneumonia. We performed genome-wide
transcriptional analysis of whole lungs before and 6 and 48 h after Spneu
infection in mice. The 4,000 most variable transcripts across all samples were
used to assemble a gene coexpression network comprising 13 intercorrelating
modules (clusters of genes). Fifty-four percent of this whole-lung
transcriptional network was altered 6 and 48 h after Spneu infection. Canonical
signaling pathway analysis uncovered known pathways imparting protection,
including IL17A/IL17F signaling and previously undetected mechanisms that
included lipid metabolism. Through in silico prediction of cell types, pathways
were observed to enrich for distinct cell types such as a novel stromal cell
lipid metabolism pathway. These cellular mechanisms were furthermore anchored at 
functional hub genes of cellular fate, differentiation, growth and transcription.
Collectively, we provide a benchmark unsupervised map of whole-lung
transcriptional relationships and cellular activity during early and late
pneumococcal pneumonia.

DOI: 10.2119/molmed.2014.00263 
PMCID: PMC4559533
PMID: 25998510  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

