
1. PLoS One. 2015 May 18;10(5):e0127261. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127261.
eCollection 2015.

Feasibility and Safety of Local Treatment with Recombinant Human Tissue Factor
Pathway Inhibitor in a Rat Model of Streptococcus pneumoniae Pneumonia.

van den Boogaard FE(1), Hofstra JJ(2), van 't Veer C(3), Levi MM(4), Roelofs
JJ(5), van der Poll T(6), Schultz MJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Intensive Care and Anesthesiology (L·E·I·C·A),
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands;
Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine (CEMM), Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Center for Infection and
Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Laboratory of Experimental Intensive Care and Anesthesiology (L·E·I·C·A),
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine (CEMM), Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Center for Infection
and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(6)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine (CEMM), Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Center for Infection
and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Infectious Diseases,
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)Laboratory of Experimental Intensive Care and Anesthesiology (L·E·I·C·A),
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands;
Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Pulmonary coagulopathy is intrinsic to pulmonary injury including pneumonia.
Anticoagulant strategies could benefit patients with pneumonia, but systemic
administration of anticoagulant agents may lead to suboptimal local levels and
may cause systemic hemorrhage. We hypothesized nebulization to provide a safer
and more effective route for local administration of anticoagulants. Therefore,
we aimed to examine feasibility and safety of nebulization of recombinant human
tissue factor pathway inhibitor (rh-TFPI) in a well-established rat model of
Streptococcus (S.) pneumoniae pneumonia. Thirty minutes before and every 6 hours 
after intratracheal instillation of S. pneumonia causing pneumonia, rats were
subjected to local treatment with rh-TFPI or placebo, and sacrificed after 42
hours. Pneumonia was associated with local as well as systemic activation of
coagulation. Nebulization of rh-TFPI resulted in high levels of rh-TFPI in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, which was accompanied by an attenuation of
pulmonary coagulation. Systemic rh-TFPI levels remained undetectable, and
systemic TFPI activity and systemic coagulation were not affected. Histopathology
revealed no bleeding in the lungs. We conclude that nebulization of rh-TFPI seems
feasible and safe; local anticoagulant treatment with rh-TFPI attenuates
pulmonary coagulation, while not affecting systemic coagulation in a rat model of
S. pneumoniae pneumonia.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127261 
PMCID: PMC4436292
PMID: 25992779  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

