
1. J Infect Dis. 2015 Jun 15;211 Suppl 3:S83-95. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiv183.

Nonclinical models for antituberculosis drug development: a landscape analysis.

Gumbo T(1), Lenaerts AJ(2), Hanna D(3), Romero K(3), Nuermberger E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Diseases Research and Experimental Therapeutics, Baylor 
Research Institute, Baylor University Medical Center, Dallas, Texas Department of
Medicine, University of Cape Town, South Africa.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Pathology, Colorado State
University, Ft. Collins.
(3)Critical Path Institute, Tucson, Arizona.
(4)Center for Tuberculosis Research, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
Maryland.

BACKGROUND: Several nonclinical drug-development tools (DDTs) have been used for 
antituberculosis drug development over several decades. The role of the DDTs used
for evaluating the efficacy of antituberculosis drug combinations and the gaps in
the evidence base for which new tools or approaches are needed are as yet
undefined.
METHODS: We performed a landscape analysis based on a comprehensive literature
review to create evidence based guidelines.
RESULTS: There are 3 important questions that a DDT should answer with regard to 
antituberculosis drugs: What combination(s) of drugs will be most effective? What
dose(s) and schedule(s) of each drug should be administered? and What duration(s)
of treatment will be efficacious? Four DDTs were identified as having a track
record to answer these questions: in vitro susceptibility tests, the hollow fiber
system model of tuberculosis, mice, and guinea pigs. No single nonclinical in
vitro or animal model recapitulates all aspects of human tuberculosis. Therefore,
a combination of models is recommended for drug development. Gaps identified
include the need for standardization of nonclinical model experiments, evaluation
of animal models with pathology more similar to that in humans, and
identification of experimental quantitative output in the DDTs that correlates
with sterilizing effect in humans.
CONCLUSIONS: There is a need for formal quantitative analyses of how well DDTs
forecast clinical outcomes.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiv183 
PMID: 26009617  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

