
1. Transfusion. 2015 Oct;55(10):2358-68. doi: 10.1111/trf.13170. Epub 2015 May 28.

Blood graft cellular composition and posttransplant recovery in non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma patients mobilized with or without plerixafor: a prospective comparison.

Valtola J(1), Varmavuo V(1), Ropponen A(2), Nihtinen A(3), Partanen A(4), Vasala 
K(5), Lehtonen P(6), Penttilä K(7)(8), Pyörälä M(1), Kuittinen T(1), Silvennoinen
R(1), Nousiainen T(1), Pelkonen J(2)(9), Mäntymaa P(9), Jantunen E(1)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Kuopio University Hospital.
(2)Department of Clinical Microbiology, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio,
Finland.
(3)Department of Medicine, Central Hospital of Northern Carelia, Joensuu,
Finland.
(4)Department of Medicine, Mikkeli Central Hospital, Mikkeli, Finland.
(5)Department of Oncology, Central Hospital of Central Finland, Jyväskylä,
Finland.
(6)Department of Medicine, Central Hospital of South Carelia, Lappeenranta,
Finland.
(7)Department of Medicine, Savonlinna Central Hospital, Savonlinna, Finland.
(8)Finnish Medicines Agency.
(9)Laboratory of Eastern Finland.
(10)University of Eastern Finland/Clinical Medicine, Kuopio, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Autologous stem cell transplantation is commonly used to treat
non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (NHLs). Cellular composition of the blood grafts
apparently has a role in the posttransplant hematologic and immune recovery.
Plerixafor increases the mobilization of CD34+ cells and higher amounts of
various lymphocyte subsets have been reported in the grafts. Limited prospective 
data are available in regard to graft cellular composition, hematologic and
immune recovery, and patient outcomes in NHL patients who receive plerixafor
added to chemomobilization.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: Forty-one patients with NHL participated in this
prospective study. All patients received chemomobilization and 15 poor mobilizers
also received plerixafor. CD34+ cell subsets and lymphocyte subsets of cell
grafts, posttransplant hematologic and immune recovery, and outcome were
evaluated.
RESULTS: Blood grafts in the plerixafor group contained a significantly higher
proportion of CD34+133+CD38- cells and more lymphocytes of all major subsets
except B lymphocytes. Neutrophil engraftment was comparable and platelet recovery
slightly slower in the plerixafor group. Natural killer cell recovery was
significantly faster in patients mobilized with plerixafor. Otherwise hematologic
and immune recovery as well as short-time outcome were comparable even though
there was a trend for progression-free survival and overall survival benefit in
the plerixafor group.
CONCLUSIONS: In poorly mobilizing NHL patients, plerixafor added to
chemomobilization is safe and effective. It also modifies the blood graft
composition in many ways, some of which have been linked to better outcomes in
previous studies. Larger sets of patients and longer follow-up are needed to see 
whether plerixafor-mobilized grafts are associated with superior outcome of the
patients.

© 2015 AABB.

DOI: 10.1111/trf.13170 
PMID: 26018461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

