
1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2015 Apr 29;2:15015. doi: 10.1038/mtm.2015.15.
eCollection 2015.

Coherence analysis discriminates between retroviral integration patterns in
CD34(+) cells transduced under differing clinical trial conditions.

Hallwirth CV(1), Garg G(2), Peters TJ(3), Kramer BA(4), Malani NV(5), Hyman J(4),
Ruan X(6), Ginn SL(7), Hetherington NA(1), Veeravalli L(6), Shahab A(6),
Ranganathan S(8), Wei CL(6), Liddle C(9), Thrasher AJ(10), Bushman FD(5), Buckley
MJ(3), Alexander IE(11).

Author information: 
(1)Gene Therapy Research Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute and The
Children's Hospital at Westmead , Westmead, Australia.
(2)Gene Therapy Research Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute and The
Children's Hospital at Westmead , Westmead, Australia ; Department of Chemistry
and Biomolecular Sciences, Macquarie University , Macquarie Park, Australia.
(3)CSIRO Digital Productivity Flagship , North Ryde, Australia.
(4)Children's Cancer Research Unit, The Children's Hospital at Westmead ,
Westmead, Australia.
(5)University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Department of Microbiology ,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(6)Genome Institute of Singapore, Agency for Science, Technology and Research ,
Genome, Singapore.
(7)Gene Therapy Research Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute and The
Children's Hospital at Westmead , Westmead, Australia ; Sydney Medical School,
The University of Sydney , Sydney, Australia.
(8)Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, Macquarie University ,
Macquarie Park, Australia.
(9)Storr Liver Centre, Westmead Millennium Institute, Sydney Medical School, The 
University of Sydney , Sydney, Australia.
(10)Molecular Immunology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College
London , London, UK.
(11)Gene Therapy Research Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute and The
Children's Hospital at Westmead , Westmead, Australia ; The University of Sydney,
Discipline of Paediatrics and Child Health , Westmead, Australia.

Unequivocal demonstration of the therapeutic utility of γ-retroviral vectors for 
gene therapy applications targeting the hematopoietic system was accompanied by
instances of insertional mutagenesis. These events stimulated the ongoing
development of putatively safer integrating vector systems and analysis methods
to characterize and compare integration site (IS) biosafety profiles. Continuing 
advances in next-generation sequencing technologies are driving the generation of
ever-more complex IS datasets. Available bioinformatic tools to compare such
datasets focus on the association of integration sites (ISs) with selected
genomic and epigenetic features, and the choice of these features determines the 
ability to discriminate between datasets. We describe the scalable application of
point-process coherence analysis (CA) to compare patterns produced by vector ISs 
across genomic intervals, uncoupled from association with genomic features. To
explore the utility of CA in the context of an unresolved question, we asked
whether the differing transduction conditions used in the initial Paris and
London SCID-X1 gene therapy trials result in divergent genome-wide integration
profiles. We tested a transduction carried out under each condition, and showed
that CA could indeed resolve differences in IS distributions. Existence of these 
differences was confirmed by the application of established methods to compare
integration datasets.

DOI: 10.1038/mtm.2015.15 
PMCID: PMC4445430
PMID: 26029726 

