
1. Front Immunol. 2015 May 13;6:226. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2015.00226. eCollection
2015.

The Response of CD1d-Restricted Invariant NKT Cells to Microbial Pathogens and
Their Products.

Van Kaer L(1), Parekh VV(1), Wu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine , Nashville, TN , USA.

Invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells become activated during a wide variety of
infections. This includes organisms lacking cognate CD1d-binding glycolipid
antigens recognized by the semi-invariant T cell receptor of iNKT cells.
Additional studies have shown that iNKT cells also become activated in vivo in
response to microbial products such as bacterial lipopolysaccharide, a potent
inducer of cytokine production in antigen-presenting cells (APCs). Other studies 
have shown that iNKT cells are highly responsive to stimulation by cytokines such
as interleukin-12. These findings have led to the concept that microbial
pathogens can activate iNKT cells either directly via glycolipids or indirectly
by inducing cytokine production in APCs. iNKT cells activated in this manner
produce multiple cytokines that can influence the outcome of infection, usually
in favor of the host, although potent iNKT cell activation may contribute to an
uncontrolled cytokine storm and sepsis. One aspect of the response of iNKT cells 
to microbial pathogens is that it is short-lived and followed by an extended time
period of unresponsiveness to reactivation. This refractory period may represent 
a means to avoid chronic activation and cytokine production by iNKT cells, thus
protecting the host against some of the negative effects of iNKT cell activation,
but potentially putting the host at risk for secondary infections. These effects 
of microbial pathogens and their products on iNKT cells are not only important
for understanding the role of these cells in immune responses against infections 
but also for the development of iNKT cell-based therapies.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2015.00226 
PMCID: PMC4429631
PMID: 26029211 

