
1. Cytotherapy. 2015 Aug;17(8):1104-18. doi: 10.1016/j.jcyt.2015.04.008. Epub 2015
May 29.

Human adipose-derived stromal cells in a clinically applicable injectable
alginate hydrogel: Phenotypic and immunomodulatory evaluation.

Follin B(1), Juhl M(2), Cohen S(3), Pedersen AE(4), Gad M(5), Kastrup J(2),
Ekblond A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Stem Cell Centre, The Heart Centre, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen
University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark. Electronic address:
bjarke.follin.larsen@regionh.dk.
(2)Cardiology Stem Cell Centre, The Heart Centre, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen
University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research Center and the Avram and Stella
Goldstein-Goren Department of Biotechnology Engineering, Ben-Gurion University of
the Negev, Israel.
(4)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Bioneer A/S, Hørsholm, Denmark.

BACKGROUND AIMS: Clinical trials have documented beneficial effects of
mesenchymal stromal cells from bone marrow and adipose tissue (ASCs) as treatment
in patients with ischemic heart disease. However, retention of transplanted cells
is poor. One potential way to increase cell retention is to inject the cells in
an in situ cross-linked alginate hydrogel.
METHODS: ASCs from abdominal human tissue were embedded in alginate hydrogel and 
alginate hydrogel modified with Arg-Gly-Asp motifs (RGD-alginate) and cultured
for 1 week. Cell viability, phenotype, immunogenicity and paracrine activity were
determined by confocal microscopy, dendritic cell co-culture, flow cytometry,
reverse transcriptase quantitative polymerase chain reaction, Luminex multiplex, 
and lymphocyte proliferation experiments.
RESULTS: ASCs performed equally well in alginate and RGD-alginate. After 1 week
of alginate culture, cell viability was >93%. Mesenchymal markers CD90 and CD29
were reduced compared with International Society for Cellular Therapy criteria.
Cells sedimented from the alginates during cultivation regained the typical level
of these markers, and trilineage differentiation was performed by standard
protocols. Hepatocyte growth factor mRNA was increased in ASCs cultivated in
alginates compared with monolayer controls. Alginates and alginates containing
ASCs did not induce dendritic cell maturation. ASCs in alginate responded like
controls to interferon-gamma stimulation (licensing), and alginate culture
increased the ability of ASCs to inhibit lymphocyte proliferation.
DISCUSSION: ASCs remain viable in alginates; they transiently change phenotype in
alginate hydrogel but regain the phenotype of monolayer controls upon release.
Cells maintain their paracrine potential while in alginates; the combination of
ASCs and alginate is non-immunogenic and, in fact, immunosuppressive.

Copyright © 2015 International Society for Cellular Therapy. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcyt.2015.04.008 
PMID: 26031743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

