
1. J Proteomics. 2015 Aug 3;126:155-62. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2015.05.027. Epub 2015 
Jun 3.

Heat differentiated complement factor profiling.

Hamsten C(1), Skattum L(2), Truedsson L(2), von Döbeln U(3), Uhlén M(4), Schwenk 
JM(4), Hammarström L(5), Nilsson P(4), Neiman M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Immunology and Allergy Unit, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska
Institutet and University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden; Center for Inflammatory
Diseases, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Section of Microbiology, Immunology and
Glycobiology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(3)Division of Metabolic Diseases, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska 
Institutet at Karolinska University Hospital Solna, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Affinity Proteomics, SciLifeLab, School of Biotechnology, KTH - Royal
Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Division of Clinical Immunology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska
Institutet at Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Sweden.
(6)Affinity Proteomics, SciLifeLab, School of Biotechnology, KTH - Royal
Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address:
Maja.neiman@scilifelab.se.

Complement components and their cascade of reactions are important defense
mechanisms within both innate and adaptive immunity. Many complement deficient
patients still remain undiagnosed because of a lack of high throughput screening 
tools. Aiming towards neonatal proteome screening for immunodeficiencies, we used
a multiplex profiling approach with antibody bead arrays to measure 9 complement 
proteins in serum and dried blood spots. Several complement components have been 
described as heat sensitive, thus their heat-dependent detectability was
investigated. Using sera from 16 patients with complement deficiencies and 23
controls, we confirmed that the proteins C1q, C2, C3, C6, C9 and factor H were
positively affected by heating, thus the identification of deficient patients was
improved when preheating samples. Measurements of C7, C8 and factor I were
negatively affected by heating and non-heated samples should be used in analysis 
of these components. In addition, a proof of concept study demonstrated the
feasibility of labeling eluates from dried blood spots to perform a subsequent
correct classification of C2-deficiencies. Our study demonstrates the potential
of using multiplexed single binder assays for screening of complement components 
that open possibilities to expand such analysis to other forms of deficiencies.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2015.05.027 
PMID: 26047714  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

