
1. Oncotarget. 2015 Aug 7;6(22):19118-31.

MUC16-mediated activation of mTOR and c-Myc reprograms pancreatic cancer
metabolism.

Shukla SK(1), Gunda V(1), Abrego J(1), Haridas D(2), Mishra A(1), Souchek J(1),
Chaika NV(1), Yu F(3), Sasson AR(4), Lazenby AJ(5), Batra SK(2), Singh
PK(1)(2)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)The Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
Nebraska, USA.
(4)Department of Surgery, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska,
USA.
(5)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.
(6)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.

MUC16, a transmembrane mucin, facilitates pancreatic adenocarcinoma progression
and metastasis. In the current studies, we observed that MUC16 knockdown
pancreatic cancer cells exhibit reduced glucose uptake and lactate secretion
along with reduced migration and invasion potential, which can be restored by
supplementing the culture media with lactate, an end product of aerobic
glycolysis. MUC16 knockdown leads to inhibition of mTOR activity and reduced
expression of its downstream target c-MYC, a key player in cellular growth,
proliferation and metabolism. Ectopic expression of c-MYC in MUC16 knockdown
pancreatic cancer cells restores the altered cellular physiology. Our LC-MS/MS
based metabolomics studies indicate global metabolic alterations in MUC16
knockdown pancreatic cancer cells, as compared to the controls. Specifically,
glycolytic and nucleotide metabolite pools were significantly decreased. We
observed similar metabolic alterations that correlated with MUC16 expression in
primary tumor tissue specimens from human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cancer
patients. Overall, our results demonstrate that MUC16 plays an important role in 
metabolic reprogramming of pancreatic cancer cells by increasing glycolysis and
enhancing motility and invasiveness.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.4078 
PMCID: PMC4662479
PMID: 26046375  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

