
1. Arch Oral Biol. 2015 Sep;60(9):1196-202. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2015.04.009. 
Epub 2015 May 21.

In vitro effect of caffeic acid phenethyl ester on matrix metalloproteinases
(MMP-1 and MMP-9) and their inhibitor (TIMP-1) in lipopolysaccharide-activated
human monocytes.

Vilela Pd(1), de Oliveira JR(2), de Barros PP(3), Leão MV(4), de Oliveira LD(5), 
Jorge AO(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Microbiology and Immunology, Department of Biosciences and Oral 
Diagnosis, Institute of Science and Technology, Univ. Estadual Paulista, UNESP,
São José dos Campos, SP, Brazil. Electronic address: polyanafigueiredo@gmail.com.
(2)Laboratory of Microbiology and Immunology, Department of Biosciences and Oral 
Diagnosis, Institute of Science and Technology, Univ. Estadual Paulista, UNESP,
São José dos Campos, SP, Brazil. Electronic address: jroliveira16@hotmail.com.
(3)Laboratory of Microbiology and Immunology, Department of Biosciences and Oral 
Diagnosis, Institute of Science and Technology, Univ. Estadual Paulista, UNESP,
São José dos Campos, SP, Brazil. Electronic address: barrosdnapp@yahoo.com.br.
(4)Bioscience Basic Institute, University of Taubaté, Taubaté, SP, Brazil.
Electronic address: mariellaleao@yahoo.com.br.
(5)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, Department of Biosciences and
Oral Diagnosis, Institute of Science and Technology, Univ. Estadual Paulista,
UNESP, São José dos Campos, SP, Brazil. Electronic address:
luciane@fosjc.unesp.br.
(6)Laboratory of Microbiology and Immunology, Department of Biosciences and Oral 
Diagnosis, Institute of Science and Technology, Univ. Estadual Paulista, UNESP,
São José dos Campos, SP, Brazil. Electronic address: olavojorge@fosjc.unesp.br.

OBJECTIVE: The role of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) in tissue degradation has
become evident in many diseases and great interest therefore exists in the
pharmacological control of the activity of these enzymes. This study evaluated
the effect of caffeic acid phenethyl ester (CAPE) on the production of MMPs and
their inhibitor (TIMP) in monocytes activated by lipopolysaccharide (LPS).
DESIGN: The human monocytic cell line (THP-1) was treated with non-cytotoxic
concentrations of CAPE (10 and 60μM) combined with 1μg/mL of LPS. The gene
expression of MMP-1, MMP-9 and TIMP-1 was evaluated by quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction. The protein secretion into the culture medium was
assessed via enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and the gelatinolytic activity of 
MMP-9 by zymography.
RESULTS: CAPE, especially at the highest concentration, down-regulated MMP-1 and 
MMP-9 gene expression but up-regulated the gene expression of TIMP-1.
Furthermore, CAPE reduced the secreted protein level of MMP-1 and MMP-9 as well
as the gelatinolytic activity of MMP-9.
CONCLUSION: CAPE was able to inhibit the gene expression, production and the
activity of MMPs induced by LPS and also increased the gene expression of TIMP-1.
The present observations suggest that CAPE exerted a positive effect on the
regulatory mechanism between MMPs and TIMP, which is important for the control of
different diseases.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2015.04.009 
PMID: 26058005  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

