
1. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 29;10(6):e0131557. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131557.
eCollection 2015.

Polymorphonuclear Cell Functional Impairment in Relapsing Remitting Multiple
Sclerosis Patients: Preliminary Data.

Allizond V(1), Scutera S(2), Rossi S(2), Musso T(2), Crocillà C(3), Cavalla P(4),
Trebini C(4), Marra ES(1), Cuffini AM(1), Banche G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bacteriology and Mycology Laboratory, Department of Public Health and
Pediatrics, University of Torino, Turin, Italy.
(2)Immunology Laboratory, Department of Public Health and Pediatrics, University 
of Torino, Turin, Italy.
(3)ASL TO3 Rivoli Hospital, Rivoli (Turin), Italy.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, University of Torino, Turin, Italy.

Multiple Sclerosis patients run an increased risk of microbial infections, which 
leads to high rates of hospitalization and infection-related mortality. Although 
immunotherapy may increase infection risk in some cases, data as to the
relationship among microbial factors, immunotherapy and alterations in the innate
immunity of these patients are still scanty. On these grounds, this
interdisciplinary study aims at investigating the role the functional activity of
polymorphonuclear cells (PMNs) play in relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis at 
different stages. The in vitro ability of PMNs from patients, either untreated or
treated with immunosuppressant or immunomodulatory drugs to kill Klebsiella
pneumonia or Candida albicans, were investigated and compared to PMNs from
healthy subjects. The release of various cytokines was also assessed, as was the 
production of reactive oxygen species and their ability to regulate apoptosis
after microbial stimulation. Our results indicate that although patients have a
normal number of PMNs, they have a statistically significant (p<0.05) reduction
in intracellular killing activity. Although variations are strongly related to
the therapeutic management of patients, they are independent from their disease
stage. As no statistically significant differences were observed between patients
and controls in cytokine release values, reactive oxygen species production or
apoptosis, we came to the conclusion that other factors may be involved.
Supportive validation of these results from further studies might well help in
identifying a subset of patients at high risk of infection who could benefit from
a closer follow-up and/or antibiotic prophylaxis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131557 
PMCID: PMC4488035
PMID: 26121651  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

