
1. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 1;10(7):e0131177. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131177.
eCollection 2015.

Sortase Enzyme-Mediated Generation of Site-Specifically Conjugated Antibody Drug 
Conjugates with High In Vitro and In Vivo Potency.

Beerli RR(1), Hell T(1), Merkel AS(1), Grawunder U(1).

Author information: 
(1)NBE-Therapeutics AG, Hochbergerstrasse, Basel, Switzerland.

Antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) have recently been proven to be highly potent
anti-tumor drugs, typically exceeding the efficacy of conventional monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs). ADCs are currently produced by chemical conjugation of a
small-molecule toxin to the mAb through lysine or cysteine side chains. This
leads to heterogeneous mixtures of ADCs in which variable numbers of drugs are
conjugated to individual antibodies and in which the site of conjugation cannot
be defined. Consequently, there is currently significant interest in further
development of drug conjugation technologies, with a particular focus on
site-specific payload conjugation. Here, we present an enzymatic conjugation
platform based on the S. aureus sortase A-mediated transpeptidation reaction,
allowing the efficient generation of ADCs with toxins conjugated to pre-defined
sites at pre-defined drug-to-antibody ratios. For this, two modifications were
introduced: first, immunoglobulin heavy (IgH) and light (IgL) chains were
modified at their C-termini by addition of the sortase A recognition motif LPETG,
and second, the small molecule tubulin polymerization inhibitors
monomethylauristatin E (MMAE) and maytansine were modified by addition of a
pentaglycine peptide, thus making them suitable substrates for sortase A-mediated
transpeptidation. We demonstrate efficient generation and characterization of the
anti-CD30 ADC Ac10-vcPAB-MMAE, an enzymatically conjugated counterpart of
brentuximab vedotin (Adcetris), as well as several anti-HER-2 ADCs including
trastuzumab-maytansine, the counterpart of trastuzumab emtansine (Kadcyla). ADCs 
generated in this manner were found to display in vitro cell killing activities
indistinguishable from the classic conjugates. Further, when tested in vivo in a 
HER-2-overexpressing ovarian cancer xenograft mouse model, enzymatically
generated trastuzumab-maytansine was found to lead to complete regression of
established tumors, similar to Kadcyla.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131177 
PMCID: PMC4488448
PMID: 26132162  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

