
1. PLoS Biol. 2015 Jul 9;13(7):e1002192. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002192.
eCollection 2015 Jul.

Single Turnover Autophosphorylation Cycle of the PKA RIIβ Holoenzyme.

Zhang P(1), Knape MJ(2), Ahuja LG(3), Keshwani MM(1), King CC(4), Sastri M(3),
Herberg FW(2), Taylor SS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla,
California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Kassel, Kassel, Germany.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla,
California, United States of America; Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, California, United States of
America.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla,
California, United States of America.

To provide tight spatiotemporal signaling control, the cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP)-dependent protein kinase (PKA) holoenzyme typically
nucleates a macromolecular complex or a "PKA signalosome." Using the RIIβ
holoenzyme as a prototype, we show how autophosphorylation/dephosphorylation of
the RIIβ subunit, as well as cAMP and metal ions, contribute to the dynamics of
PKA signaling. While we showed previously that the RIIβ holoenzyme could undergo 
a single turnover autophosphorylation with adenosine triphosphate and magnesium
(MgATP) and trap both products in the crystal lattice, we asked here whether
calcium could trap an ATP:RIIβ holoenzyme since the RIIβ holoenzyme is located
close to ion channels. The 2.8Å structure of an RIIβp2:C2:(Ca2ADP)2 holoenzyme,
supported by biochemical and biophysical data, reveals a trapped single
phosphorylation event similar to MgATP. Thus, calcium can mediate a single
turnover event with either ATP or adenosine-5'-(β,γ-imido)triphosphate (AMP-PNP),
even though it cannot support steady-state catalysis efficiently. The holoenzyme 
serves as a "product trap" because of the slow off-rate of the pRIIβ subunit,
which is controlled by cAMP, not by phosphorylation of the inhibitor site. By
quantitatively defining the RIIβ signaling cycle, we show that release of pRIIβ
in the presence of cAMP is reduced by calcium, whereas autophosphorylation at the
phosphorylation site (P-site) inhibits holoenzyme reassociation with the
catalytic subunit. Adding a single phosphoryl group to the preformed RIIβ
holoenzyme thus creates a signaling cycle in which phosphatases become an
essential partner. This previously unappreciated molecular mechanism is an
integral part of PKA signaling for type II holoenzymes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002192 
PMCID: PMC4497662
PMID: 26158466  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

