
1. Nat Genet. 2015 Aug;47(8):933-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.3355. Epub 2015 Jul 13.

Keratin-dependent regulation of Aire and gene expression in skin tumor
keratinocytes.

Hobbs RP(1), DePianto DJ(1), Jacob JT(1), Han MC(1), Chung BM(1), Batazzi AS(1), 
Poll BG(1), Guo Y(1), Han J(1), Ong S(2), Zheng W(1), Taube JM(3), Čiháková D(4),
Wan F(5), Coulombe PA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bloomberg School of Public
Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Bloomberg School of
Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(3)1] Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA. [2] Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(4)1] Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Bloomberg School of
Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. [2] Department
of Pathology, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, 
USA.
(5)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bloomberg School of
Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. [2] Department
of Oncology, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland,
USA. [3] Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(6)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bloomberg School of
Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. [2] Department
of Dermatology, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA. [3] Department of Oncology, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. [4] Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. [5] Department of
Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA.

Expression of the intermediate filament protein keratin 17 (K17) is robustly
upregulated in inflammatory skin diseases and in many tumors originating in
stratified and pseudostratified epithelia. We report that autoimmune regulator
(Aire), a transcriptional regulator, is inducibly expressed in human and mouse
tumor keratinocytes in a K17-dependent manner and is required for timely onset of
Gli2-induced skin tumorigenesis in mice. The induction of Aire mRNA in
keratinocytes depends on a functional interaction between K17 and the
heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein hnRNP K. Further, K17 colocalizes with
Aire protein in the nucleus of tumor-prone keratinocytes, and each factor is
bound to a specific promoter region featuring an NF-κB consensus sequence in a
relevant subset of K17- and Aire-dependent proinflammatory genes. These findings 
provide radically new insight into keratin intermediate filament and Aire
function, along with a molecular basis for the K17-dependent amplification of
inflammatory and immune responses in diseased epithelia.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.3355 
PMCID: PMC4520766
PMID: 26168014  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

