
1. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 10;10(7):e0129321. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129321.
eCollection 2015.

Transcriptomic-Wide Discovery of Direct and Indirect HuR RNA Targets in Activated
CD4+ T Cells.

Techasintana P(1), Davis JW(2), Gubin MM(3), Magee JD(4), Atasoy U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, United
States of America; Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology,
University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri,
United States of America.
(3)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(4)Dalton Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Missouri, Columbia,
Missouri, United States of America.

Due to poor correlation between steady state mRNA levels and protein product,
purely transcriptomic profiling methods may miss genes posttranscriptionally
regulated by RNA binding proteins (RBPs) and microRNAs (miRNAs). RNA
immunoprecipitation (RIP) methods developed to identify in vivo targets of RBPs
have greatly elucidated those mRNAs which may be regulated via transcript
stability and translation. The RBP HuR (ELAVL1) and family members are major
stabilizers of mRNA. Many labs have identified HuR mRNA targets; however, many of
these analyses have been performed in cell lines and oftentimes are not
independent biological replicates. Little is known about how HuR target mRNAs
behave in conditional knock-out models. In the present work, we performed HuR
RIP-Seq and RNA-Seq to investigate HuR direct and indirect targets using a novel 
conditional knock-out model of HuR genetic ablation during CD4+ T activation and 
Th2 differentiation. Using independent biological replicates, we generated a high
coverage RIP-Seq data set (>160 million reads) that was analyzed using
bioinformatics methods specifically designed to find direct mRNA targets in
RIP-Seq data. Simultaneously, another set of independent biological replicates
were sequenced by RNA-Seq (>425 million reads) to identify indirect HuR targets. 
These direct and indirect targets were combined to determine canonical pathways
in CD4+ T cell activation and differentiation for which HuR plays an important
role. We show that HuR may regulate genes in multiple canonical pathways involved
in T cell activation especially the CD28 family signaling pathway. These data
provide insights into potential HuR-regulated genes during T cell activation and 
immune mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129321 
PMCID: PMC4498740
PMID: 26162078  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

