
1. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2015 Oct;21(10):1739-45. doi:
10.1016/j.bbmt.2015.07.004. Epub 2015 Jul 11.

Biomarkers for Diagnosis and Prognosis of Sinusoidal Obstruction Syndrome after
Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation.

Akil A(1), Zhang Q(2), Mumaw CL(3), Raiker N(3), Yu J(3), Velez de Mendizabal
N(1), Haneline LS(4), Robertson KA(5), Skiles J(5), Diaz-Ricart M(6), Carreras
E(7), Renbarger J(8), Hanash S(9), Bies RR(1), Paczesny S(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, Indiana.
(2)Department of Genomics, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana; Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana; Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana; Indiana University 
Simon Cancer Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana; Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana; Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana; Indiana University 
Simon Cancer Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana; Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana.
(6)Hospital Clinic, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Hospital Clinic, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain; José Carreras Foundation &
Leukemia Research Institute, Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, Indiana; Department of Pediatrics, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana; Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana; Indiana University 
Simon Cancer Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana.
(9)Red and Charline McCombs Institute for the Early Detection and Treatment of
Cancer, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, Indiana; Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana; Department of Microbiology 
and Immunology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana;
Indiana University Simon Cancer Center, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, Indiana. Electronic address: sophpacz@iu.edu.

Reliable, noninvasive methods for diagnosing and prognosing sinusoidal
obstruction syndrome (SOS) early after hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT)
are needed. We used a quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics approach to
identify candidate biomarkers of SOS by comparing plasma pooled from 20 patients 
with and 20 patients without SOS. Of 494 proteins quantified, we selected 6
proteins (L-Ficolin, vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 [VCAM1], tissue inhibitor 
of metalloproteinase-1, von Willebrand factor, intercellular adhesion molecule-1,
and CD97) based on a differential heavy/light isotope ratio of at least 2 fold,
information from the literature, and immunoassay availability. Next, we evaluated
the diagnostic potential of these 6 proteins and 5 selected from the literature
(suppression of tumorigenicity-2 [ST2], angiopoietin-2 (ANG2), hyaluronic acid
[HA], thrombomodulin, and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1) in samples from 80
patients. The results demonstrate that together ST2, ANG2, L-Ficolin, HA, and
VCAM1 compose a biomarker panel for diagnosis of SOS. L-Ficolin, HA, and VCAM1
also stratified patients at risk for SOS as early as the day of HCT. Prognostic
Bayesian modeling for SOS onset based on L-Ficolin, HA, and VCAM1 levels on the
day of HCT and clinical characteristics showed >80% correct prognosis of SOS
onset. These biomarkers may provide opportunities for preemptive intervention to 
minimize SOS incidence and/or severity.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. Published
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbmt.2015.07.004 
PMCID: PMC4568166
PMID: 26172478  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

