
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2013 Oct;1(1). doi: 10.1128/microbiolspec.CM-0005-12.

The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: Tales of Mold-Ripened Cheese.

Marcellino O S B SN(1), Benson DR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Abbey of Regina Laudis, Bethlehem, CT 06751.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut, Storrs,
CT 06269-3125.

The history of cheese manufacture is a "natural history" in which animals,
microorganisms, and the environment interact to yield human food. Part of the
fascination with cheese, both scientifically and culturally, stems from its
ability to assume amazingly diverse flavors as a result of seemingly small
details in preparation. In this review, we trace the roots of cheesemaking and
its development by a variety of human cultures over centuries. Traditional
cheesemakers observed empirically that certain environments and processes
produced the best cheeses, unwittingly selecting for microorganisms with the best
biochemical properties for developing desirable aromas and textures. The focus of
this review is on the role of fungi in cheese ripening, with a particular
emphasis on the yeast-like fungus Geotrichum candidum. Conditions that encourage 
the growth of problematic fungi such as Mucor and Scopulariopsis as well as
Arachnida (cheese mites), and how such contaminants might be avoided, are
discussed. Bethlehem cheese, a pressed, uncooked, semihard, Saint-Nectaire-type
cheese manufactured in the United Sates without commercial strains of bacteria or
fungi, was used as a model for the study of stable microbial succession during
ripening in a natural environment. The appearance of fungi during a 60-day
ripening period was documented using light and scanning electron microscopy, and 
it was shown to be remarkably reproducible and parallel to the course of ripening
of authentic Saint-Nectaire cheese in the Auvergne region of France. Geotrichum
candidum, Mucor, and Trichothecium roseum predominate the microbiotas of both
cheese types. Geotrichum in particular was shown to have high diversity in
different traditional cheese ripening environments, suggesting that traditional
manufacturing techniques selected for particular fungi. This and other studies
suggest that strain diversity arises in relation to the lore and history of the
regions from which these types of cheeses arose.

DOI: 10.1128/microbiolspec.CM-0005-12 
PMID: 26184810 

