
1. Dan Med J. 2015 Jul;62(7). pii: B5126.

Recurrent invasive pneumococcal disease in children--host factors and vaccination
response.

Ingels HA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neisseria and Streptococcus Reference Centre Department of Microbiological
Surveillance and Research, Statens Serum Institut, Artillerivej 5, 2300
Copenhagen, Denmark. helene_ingels@yahoo.dk.

Streptococcus pneumoniae is still a leading cause of septicaemia, pneumonia and
meningitis in young children world-wide with over half a million children dying
annually from pneumococcal disease.  Some children are prone to repeated episodes
of invasive pneumococcal disease (IPD) because of an underlying predisposing
disease. Recurrent IPD (rIPD) is a rarity and published reports on rIPD are
limited by having few children included, selected groups of patients or short
follow-up periods. Deficiencies in the innate or adaptive immune system have been
described in children with rIPD, but the frequency of immunodeficiency among such
patients is unknown. The aim of this PhD thesis was to examine paediatric cases
of laboratory-confirmed rIPD, over a 33-year period in Denmark, to determine risk
factors and study aspects of the immunological background for this problem in
children. In October 2007, a seven-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV7)
was implemented in the Danish infant immunization programme. An additional aim of
the thesis was to examine the impact of vaccination on a population level,
following the first three years of general PCV7 vaccination in Denmark. The
thesis consists of three papers, which are all directly or indirectly based on
data retrieved from the National Streptococcus Pneumoniae Registry. This registry
is nationwide and dates back to 1938. The registry contains data from all
laboratory-confirmed cases of IPD in Denmark and is continually updated for
national surveillance. In Paper 1, we conducted a 33-year retrospective
nationwide study of paediatric rIPD. By using data from the National
Streptococcus Pneumoniae Registry combined with clinical data from hospital
records, we could describe one of the largest known cohorts of children (n:59)
with rIPD . We covered epidemiological, microbiological, and clinical features of
this clinical entity. Of all children experiencing rIPD, 47% had a known
predisposing underlying disease at the time of the rIPD. Most common was immune
deficiency due to transplantation. In 19% the episode of rIPD was the clinical
manifestation that subsequently led to a diagnosis of an underlying disease.
Finally, in 31% of the children no underlying disease was detected. Paper 2
covers data from a follow-up of the cohort of children described in Paper 1. Of
this unselected cohort of rIPD, all children without an obvious underlying
disease predisposing to pneumococcal disease (such as malignancy, HIV or
cerebrospinal-fluid leakage) were invited to participate in the study by
undergoing a thorough immunological evaluation. Basic immunological parameters
including activity of complement-pathways and T-, B-, NK-cell count were examined
in the children and their families. Furthermore, B-cell function including
antibody response to polysaccharide-based pneumococcal vaccination and somatic
hypermutation was evaluated. Toll like receptor (TLR) signalling function was
evaluated in a functional assay. When children with classical risk factors for
IPD were excluded, 15 individuals were eligible. Of whom, sex (40%) children with
complement C2 deficiency were identified. Moreover, impaired vaccination response
was found in six children: three with concurrent C2 deficiency and three with no 
other immune abnormality. One patient with a severe TLR signalling dysfunction
was diagnosed. In Paper 3, we aimed to assess the impact of PCV7 in Denmark
following the first three years of infant immunization. By comparing age-specific
disease incidences of IPD in the pre-PCV7 (years 2000-2007) and the PCV7 periods 
(years 2008-2010) we sought to assess direct and indirect effects on incidence of
IPD. In addition, changes in pneumococcal serotype distribution and IPD-related
mortality were assessed. We documented a marked decline in the incidence of IPD
in both vaccinated and non-vaccinated age groups. The overall incidence of IPD
among children aged 0-5 years declined from 26.7 to 16.3 cases per 100,000 (IRR
0.58; 95% confidence interval (CI) [0.48-0.69]). A minor but statistically
significant increase in the incidence of IPD due to non-vaccine type IPD was
observed in both vaccinated and non-vaccinated groups, but with predominance of
serotypes covered by the higher valence pneumococcal conjugate vaccines. This
thesis confirms the existing knowledge on underlying diseases predisposing
children to IPD, such as cerebrospinal fluid leakage, congenital heart disease
and malignant diseases. Our findings support the notion that rIPD in a child
should prompt a thorough search for an underlying disease. Moreover, our results 
underline that rIPD in a child without a known predisposing disease is a major
pointer towards primary immune deficiency, such as complement deficiency and B
cell dysfunction. This is in line with the guidelines put forward by various
specialist committees. Finally, we reported data from the first three years of
PCV7 vaccination in the Danish immunization programme, suggesting that the
vaccine is effective against all serotypes included in the vaccine when
administered in a 2+1 schedule.


PMID: 26183055  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

