
1. Integr Biol (Camb). 2015 Nov;7(11):1387-95. doi: 10.1039/c5ib00058k.

The influence of hypermodified nucleosides lysidine and t(6)A to recognize the
AUA codon instead of AUG: a molecular dynamics simulation study.

Sonawane KD(1), Sambhare SB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Structural Bioinformatics Unit, Department of Biochemistry, Shivaji
University, Kolhapur-416 004, Maharashtra, India. kds_biochem@unishivaji.ac.in
and Department of Microbiology, Shivaji University, Kolhapur- 416 004,
Maharashtra, India.
(2)Structural Bioinformatics Unit, Department of Biochemistry, Shivaji
University, Kolhapur-416 004, Maharashtra, India. kds_biochem@unishivaji.ac.in.

Hypermodified nucleosides lysidine (L) and N(6)-threonylcarbamoyladenosine
(t(6)A) influence codon-anticodon interactions during the protein biosynthesis
process. Lysidine prevents the misrecognition of the AUG codon as isoleucine and 
that of AUA as methionine. The structural significance of these modified bases
has not been studied in detail at the atomic level. Hence, in the present study
we performed multiple molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of anticodon stem loop 
(ASL) of tRNA(Ile) in the presence and absence of modified bases 'L' and 't(6)A' 
at the 34th and 37th positions respectively along with trinucleotide 'AUA' and
'AUG' codons. Hydrogen bonding interactions formed by the tautomeric form of
lysidine may assist in reading the third base adenine of the 'AUA' codon, unlike 
the guanine of the 'AUG' codon. Such interactions might be useful to restrict
codon specificity to recognize isoleucine tRNA instead of methionine tRNA. The
t(6)A side chain interacts with the purine ring of the first codon nucleotide
adenine, which might provide base stacking interactions and could be responsible 
for restricting extended codon-anticodon recognition. We found that ASL tRNA(Ile)
in the absence of modifications at the 34th and 37th positions cannot establish
proper hydrogen bonding interactions to recognize the isoleucine codon 'AUA' and 
subsequently disturbs the anticodon loop structure. The binding free energy
calculations revealed that tRNA(Ile) ASL with modified nucleosides prefers the
codon AUA over AUG. Thus, these findings might be useful to understand the role
of modified bases L and t(6)A to recognize the AUA codon instead of AUG.

DOI: 10.1039/c5ib00058k 
PMID: 26215455  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

