
1. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 31;10(7):e0134100. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134100.
eCollection 2015.

Unexpected Regulatory Role of CCR9 in Regulatory T Cell Development.

Evans-Marin HL(1), Cao AT(1), Yao S(1), Chen F(2), He C(3), Liu H(4), Wu W(3),
Gonzalez MG(5), Dann SM(6), Cong Y(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, Texas, United States of America.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas,
United States of America.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, Texas, United States of America; Department of Gastroenterology, The
Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, Texas, United States of America; Department of Gastroenterology, The
Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Shandong, China.
(5)School of Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas,
United States of America.
(6)Department of Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, 
United States of America.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, Texas, United States of America; Department of Pathology, University
of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, United States of America.

T cells reactive to microbiota regulate the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel
disease (IBD). As T cell trafficking to intestines is regulated through
interactions between highly specific chemokine-chemokine receptors, efforts have 
been made to develop intestine-specific immunosuppression based on blocking these
key processes. CCR9, a gut-trophic chemokine receptor expressed by lymphocytes
and dendritic cells, has been implicated in the regulation of IBD through
mediating recruitment of T cells to inflamed sites. However, the role of CCR9 in 
inducing and sustaining inflammation in the context of IBD is poorly understood. 
In this study, we demonstrate that CCR9 deficiency in effector T cells and Tregs 
does not affect the development of colitis in a microbiota antigen-specific, T
cell-mediated model. However, Treg cells express higher levels of CCR9 compared
to those in effector T cells. Interestingly, CCR9 inhibits Treg cell development,
in that CCR9-/- mice demonstrate a high level of Foxp3+ Tregs, and ligation of
CCR9 by its ligand CCL25 inhibits Treg cell differentiation in vitro.
Collectively, our data indicate that in addition to acting as a gut-homing
molecule, CCR9 signaling shapes immune responses by inhibiting Treg cell
development.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134100 
PMCID: PMC4521878
PMID: 26230654  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

