
1. Geoderma. 2015 Aug;251-252:92-104.

Decomposition of beech (Fagus sylvatica) and pine (Pinus nigra) litter along an
Alpine elevation gradient: Decay and nutrient release.

Berger TW(1), Duboc O(2), Djukic I(2), Tatzber M(2), Gerzabek MH(2), Zehetner
F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forest- and Soil Sciences, Institute of Forest Ecology,
University of Natural Resources and Live Sciences (BOKU), Peter Jordan-Straße 82,
1190 Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Forest- and Soil Sciences, Institute of Soil Research,
University of Natural Resources and Live Sciences (BOKU), Peter Jordan-Straße 82,
1190 Vienna, Austria.

Litter decomposition is an important process for cycling of nutrients in
terrestrial ecosystems. The objective of this study was to evaluate direct and
indirect effects of climate on litter decomposition along an altitudinal gradient
in a temperate Alpine region. Foliar litter of European beech (Fagus sylvatica)
and Black pine (Pinus nigra) was incubated in litterbags during two years in the 
Hochschwab massif of the Northern Limestone Alps of Austria. Eight incubation
sites were selected following an altitudinal/climatic transect from 1900 to
900 m asl. The average remaining mass after two years of decomposition amounted
to 54% (beech) and 50% (pine). Net release of N, P, Na, Al, Fe and Mn was higher 
in pine than in beech litter due to high immobilization (retention) rates of
beech litter. However, pine litter retained more Ca than beech litter. Altitude
retarded decay (mass loss and associated C release) in beech litter during the
first year only but had a longer lasting effect on decaying pine litter. Altitude
comprises a suite of highly auto-correlated characteristics (climate, vegetation,
litter, soil chemistry, soil microbiology, snow cover) that influence litter
decomposition. Hence, decay and nutrient release of incubated litter is difficult
to predict by altitude, except during the early stage of decomposition, which
seemed to be controlled by climate. Reciprocal litter transplant along the
elevation gradient yielded even relatively higher decay of pine litter on beech
forest sites after a two-year adaptation period of the microbial community.

DOI: 10.1016/j.geoderma.2015.03.024 
PMCID: PMC4418737
PMID: 26240437 

