
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2015 Oct;81(20):7187-200. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02028-15. Epub
2015 Aug 7.

Alcohol Selectivity in a Synthetic Thermophilic n-Butanol Pathway Is Driven by
Biocatalytic and Thermostability Characteristics of Constituent Enzymes.

Loder AJ(1), Zeldes BM(1), Garrison GD 2nd(1), Lipscomb GL(2), Adams MW(2), Kelly
RM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Georgia,
Athens, Georgia, USA.
(3)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA rmkelly@ncsu.edu.

n-Butanol is generated as a natural product of metabolism by several
microorganisms, but almost all grow at mesophilic temperatures. A synthetic
pathway for n-butanol production from acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) that
functioned at 70°C was assembled in vitro from enzymes recruited from
thermophilic bacteria to inform efforts for engineering butanol production into
thermophilic hosts. Recombinant versions of eight thermophilic enzymes
(β-ketothiolase [Thl], 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase [Hbd], and
3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydratase [Crt] from Caldanaerobacter subterraneus subsp. 
tengcongensis; trans-2-enoyl-CoA reductase [Ter] from Spirochaeta thermophila;
bifunctional acetaldehyde dehydrogenase/alcohol dehydrogenase [AdhE] from
Clostridium thermocellum; and AdhE, aldehyde dehydrogenase [Bad], and butanol
dehydrogenase [Bdh] from Thermoanaerobacter sp. strain X514) were utilized to
examine three possible pathways for n-butanol. These pathways differed in the two
steps required to convert butyryl-CoA to n-butanol: Thl-Hbd-Crt-Ter-AdhE (C.
thermocellum), Thl-Hbd-Crt-Ter-AdhE (Thermoanaerobacter X514), and
Thl-Hbd-Crt-Ter-Bad-Bdh. n-Butanol was produced at 70°C, but with different
amounts of ethanol as a coproduct, because of the broad substrate specificities
of AdhE, Bad, and Bdh. A reaction kinetics model, validated via comparison to in 
vitro experiments, was used to determine relative enzyme ratios needed to
maximize n-butanol production. By using large relative amounts of Thl and Hbd and
small amounts of Bad and Bdh, >70% conversion to n-butanol was observed in vitro,
but with a 60% decrease in the predicted pathway flux. With more-selective
hypothetical versions of Bad and Bdh, >70% conversion to n-butanol is predicted, 
with a 19% increase in pathway flux. Thus, more-selective thermophilic versions
of Bad, Bdh, and AdhE are needed to fully exploit biocatalytic n-butanol
production at elevated temperatures.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02028-15 
PMCID: PMC4579425
PMID: 26253677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

