
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Aug;94(32):e1303. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000001303.

An Attempt to Evaluate Selected Aspects of "Bone-Fat Axis" Function in Healthy
Individuals and Patients With Pancreatic Cancer.

Blogowski W(1), Dolegowska K, Deskur A, Dolegowska B, Starzyńska T.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Internal Medicine, University of Zielona Góra, Zielona 
Góra, Poland (WB); Department of Laboratory Diagnostics and Molecular Medicine,
Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland (KD); Department of
Gastroenterology, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland (AD);
Department of Microbiology and Immunological Diagnostics, Pomeranian Medical
University in Szczecin, Szczecin, Poland (BD); and Department of Gastroenterology
and Internal Medicine, Warsaw Medical University, Warsaw, Poland (TS).

Recently, much attention has been paid to a potential biochemical cross-talk
between the metabolism of the adipose tissue (AT) and bone (marrow), termed
"bone-fat axis." We hypothesized that selected substances, participating in this 
"dialog," are associated with body mass and peripheral trafficking of bone
marrow-derived stem cells (BMSCs) in both healthy individuals and patients with
obesity-associated malignancies such as pancreatic adenocarcinoma.We performed an
analysis of the systemic levels of selected substances involved in the regulation
of bone (marrow) homeostasis (parathormone, calcitonin, osteopontin, osteonectin,
stem cell factor [SCF], and fibroblast growth factor-23) in 35 generally healthy 
volunteers and 35 patients with pancreatic cancer. Results were correlated with
the absolute number of circulating BMSCs and body mass values. Additionally,
subcutaneous and visceral/omental AT levels of the aforementioned molecules were 
analyzed in lean and overweight/obese individuals.Intensified steady-state
trafficking of only Lin-CD45 + CD133 + hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells was
observed in overweight/obese individuals and this was associated with BMI values 
and elevated levels of both osteonectin and SCF, which also correlated with BMI. 
In comparison to healthy individuals, patients with cancer had significantly
higher osteopontin levels and lower values of both osteonectin and
osteonectin/osteopontin ratio. While no significant correlation was observed
between BMI and the number of circulating BMSCs in patients with cancer,
peripheral trafficking of CD34 + KDR + CD31 + CD45-endothelial progenitor cells
and CD105 + STRO-1 + CD45-mesenchymal stem cells was associated with the
osteonectin/osteopontin ratio, which also correlated with BMI (r = 0.52;
P < 0.05). AT levels of the examined substances were similar to those measured in
the plasma, except for osteonectin, which was about 10 times lower.Our study
highlights the potential role of osteonectin, osteopontin, and SCF as
communication signals between the bone (marrow) and AT in both healthy
individuals and patients with pancreatic cancer. We postulate that these
molecules may be overlooked biochemical players linking body mass and BMSCs with 
obesity-associated cancer development and/or progression in humans.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000001303 
PMCID: PMC4616689
PMID: 26266370  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

