
1. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 8;6(26):22890-904.

Deletion of the BMP receptor BMPR1a impairs mammary tumor formation and
metastasis.

Pickup MW(1), Hover LD(2), Guo Y(3)(4), Gorska AE(4), Chytil A(4), Novitskiy
SV(4), Moses HL(4), Owens P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Center for Bioengineering and Tissue Regeneration,
University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(3)Vanderbilt Ingram Cancer Center, Center for Quantitative Sciences, Nashville, 
TN, USA.
(4)Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt
University, Nashville, TN, USA.

Bone Morphogenetic Proteins (BMPs) are secreted cytokines/growth factors
belonging to the Transforming Growth Factor β (TGFβ) family. BMP ligands have
been shown to be overexpressed in human breast cancers. Normal and cancerous
breast tissue display active BMP signaling as indicated by phosphorylated Smads
1, 5 and 9. We combined mice expressing the MMTV.PyMT oncogene with mice having
conditional knockout (cKO) of BMP receptor type 1a (BMPR1a) using whey acidic
protein (WAP)-Cre and found this deletion resulted in delayed tumor onset and
significantly extended survival. Immunofluorescence staining revealed that cKO
tumors co-expressed Keratin 5 and mesenchymal cell markers such as Vimentin. This
indicates that epithelial-to-mesenchymal (EMT)-like transitions occurred in cKO
tumors. We performed microarray analysis on these tumors and found changes that
support EMT-like changes. We established primary tumor cell lines and found that 
BMPR1a cKO had slower growth in vitro and in vivo upon implantation. cKO tumor
cells had reduced migration in vitro. We analyzed human databases from TCGA and
survival data from microarrays to confirm BMPR1a tumor promoting functions, and
found that high BMPR1a gene expression correlates with decreased survival
regardless of molecular breast cancer subtype. In conclusion, the data indicate
that BMP signaling through BMPR1a functions as a tumor promoter.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.4413 
PMCID: PMC4673207
PMID: 26274893  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

