
1. Mol Biosyst. 2015 Nov;11(11):2964-77. doi: 10.1039/c5mb00325c.

Experimental and computational studies of fatty acid distribution networks.

Liu Y(1), Buendía-Rodríguez G, Peñuelas-Rívas CG, Tan Z, Rívas-Guevara M,
Tenorio-Borroto E, Munteanu CR, Pazos A, González-Díaz H.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Science, Autonomous University of
the State of Mexico, Toluca, 50090, Mexico.

Unbalanced uptake of Omega 6/Omega 3 (ω-6/ω-3) ratios could increase chronic
disease occurrences, such as inflammation, atherosclerosis, or tumor
proliferation, and methylation methods for measuring the ruminal microbiome fatty
acid (FA) composition/distribution play a vital role in discovering the
contribution of food components to ruminant products (e.g., meat and milk) when
pursuing a healthy diet. Hansch's models based on Linear Free Energy
Relationships (LFERs) using physicochemical parameters, such as partition
coefficients, molar refractivity, and polarizability, as input variables (Vk) are
advocated. In this work, a new combined experimental and theoretical strategy was
proposed to study the effect of ω-6/ω-3 ratios, FA chemical structure, and other 
factors over FA distribution networks in the ruminal microbiome. In step 1,
experiments were carried out to measure long chain fatty acid (LCFA) profiles in 
the rumen microbiome (bacterial and protozoan), and volatile fatty acids (VFAs)
in fermentation media. In step 2, the proportions and physicochemical parameter
values of LCFAs and VFAs were calculated under different boundary conditions (cj)
like c1 = acid and/or base methylation treatments, c2 = with/without
fermentation, c3 = FA distribution phase (media, bacterial, or protozoan
microbiome), etc. In step 3, Perturbation Theory (PT) and LFER ideas were
combined to develop a PT-LFER model of a FA distribution network using
physicochemical parameters (V(k)), the corresponding Box-Jenkins (ΔV(kj)) and PT 
operators (ΔΔV(kj)) in statistical analysis. The best PT-LFER model found
predicted the effects of perturbations over the FA distribution network with
sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy > 80% for 407 655 cases in training +
external validation series. In step 4, alternative PT-LFER and PT-NLFER models
were tested for training Linear and Non-Linear Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs).
PT-NLFER models based on ANNs presented better performance but are more
complicated than the PT-LFER model. Last, in step 5, the PT-LFER model based on
LDA was used to reconstruct the complex networks of perturbations in the FA
distribution and compared the giant components of the observed and predicted
networks with random Erdős-Rényi network models. In short, our new PT-LFER model 
is a useful tool for predicting a distribution network in terms of specific fatty
acid distribution.

DOI: 10.1039/c5mb00325c 
PMID: 26282280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

