
1. Arthritis Res Ther. 2015 Aug 19;17:218. doi: 10.1186/s13075-015-0725-z.

Investigation of the relationship between the onset of arthritis and uveitis in
genetically predisposed SKG mice.

Lee EJ(1)(2), Vance EE(3)(4), Brown BR(5)(6), Snow PS(7)(8), Clowers JS(9)(10),
Sakaguchi S(11), Rosenzweig HL(12)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR,
USA. leee@ohsu.edu.
(2)VA Portland Health Care System, Portland, OR, USA. leee@ohsu.edu.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR,
USA. vancee@ohsu.edu.
(4)VA Portland Health Care System, Portland, OR, USA. vancee@ohsu.edu.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR,
USA. brownbri@ohsu.edu.
(6)VA Portland Health Care System, Portland, OR, USA. brownbri@ohsu.edu.
(7)VA Portland Health Care System, Portland, OR, USA. snow@ohsu.edu.
(8)School of Medicine, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USA.
snow@ohsu.edu.
(9)Department of Ophthalmology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR,
USA. clowers@ohsu.edu.
(10)VA Portland Health Care System, Portland, OR, USA. clowers@ohsu.edu.
(11)Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan. Shimon@frontier.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(12)VA Portland Health Care System, Portland, OR, USA. rosenzwh@ohsu.edu.
(13)Department of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, OR, USA. rosenzwh@ohsu.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Systemic rheumatic conditions are often accompanied by intraocular 
inflammatory disease (termed uveitis). Despite the frequent manifestation of
uveitis with arthritis, very little is understood of the underlying mechanisms
that mediate the eye's susceptibility to disease. The genetically susceptible SKG
mouse strain develops arthritis that arises from an inherent mutation that
disrupts T-cell antigen receptor signal transduction and thymic selection. The
ensuing T-cell-mediated disease is further modulated through exposure to
microbial triggers. The purpose of this study was to elucidate how a genetically 
determined shift in the T-cell repertoire toward self-reactive T cells that drive
arthritis influences uveitis in SKG mice.
METHODS: SKG mice (BALB/c mice that harbor the W163C point mutation in
zeta-chain-associated protein kinase 70 [i.e., ZAP-70]) were housed under
arthritis-resistant, specific pathogen-free conditions. Arthritis was induced by 
intraperitoneal injection with fungal glucans (zymosan or curdlan). Arthritis
onset and severity were evaluated by clinical scoring, histopathology and
infrared imaging within the joints. Periocular traits involving
blepharoconjunctivitis were evaluated by clinical scoring and histology. Eyes
were evaluated for signs of anterior uveitis using intravital videomicroscopy to 
document cell-trafficking responses within the iris vasculature and stroma and by
histology to detect inflammatory infiltrate and tissue damage within the anterior
and posterior eye segments.
RESULTS: Exposure to zymosan resulted in the predicted arthritic, sexually
dimorphic phenotype in SKG mice. The eyes of SKG mice exhibited episodic
intravascular cellular responses to zymosan or curdlan as indicated by
significant increases in leukocyte-endothelium interactions akin to ocular
vasculitis. However, despite the significant increase in early cell-trafficking
responses, cellular infiltration into the iris stroma was not observed and
histopathological signs indicative of a sustained uveitis were absent. Instead,
eyes of SKG mice developed blepharoconjunctivitis that coincided with arthritis
and exhibited sexual dimorphism.
CONCLUSIONS: This study underscores the complexity surrounding the pathogenesis
of uveitis and its relationship with arthritis. The findings suggest that
distinct mechanisms exist by which pathogenic autoimmune T cells target the eyes 
versus joints, which likely involves the environmental context but nonetheless
should be taken into account in the identification and development of effective
therapies for each organ.

DOI: 10.1186/s13075-015-0725-z 
PMCID: PMC4544812
PMID: 26286534  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

