
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2015 Aug 28;9(8):e0003990. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003990.
eCollection 2015.

Increased Nucleosomes and Neutrophil Activation Link to Disease Progression in
Patients with Scrub Typhus but Not Murine Typhus in Laos.

Paris DH(1), Stephan F(2), Bulder I(2), Wouters D(2), van der Poll T(3), Newton
PN(4), Day NP(5), Zeerleder S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, 
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand; Centre for Tropical Medicine & Global
Health, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom; Lao-Oxford-Mahosot Hospital-Wellcome Trust Research Unit, Microbiology
Laboratory, Mahosot Hospital, Vientiane, Lao PDR.
(2)Sanquin Research, Department of Immunopathology, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Vascular Medicine and Centre for Experimental and Molecular
Medicine (CEMM), Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(4)Centre for Tropical Medicine & Global Health, Nuffield Department of Medicine,
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom; Lao-Oxford-Mahosot
Hospital-Wellcome Trust Research Unit, Microbiology Laboratory, Mahosot Hospital,
Vientiane, Lao PDR.
(5)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, 
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand; Centre for Tropical Medicine & Global
Health, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom.
(6)Sanquin Research, Department of Immunopathology, Amsterdam, The Netherlands;
Department of Hematology, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Cell-mediated immunity is essential in protection against rickettsial illnesses, 
but the role of neutrophils in these intracellular vasculotropic infections
remains unclear. This study analyzed the plasma levels of nucleosomes,
FSAP-activation (nucleosome-releasing factor), and neutrophil activation, as
evidenced by neutrophil-elastase (ELA) complexes, in sympatric Lao patients with 
scrub typhus and murine typhus. In acute scrub typhus elevated nucleosome levels 
correlated with lower GCS scores, raised respiratory rate, jaundice and impaired 
liver function, whereas neutrophil activation correlated with fibrinolysis and
high IL-8 plasma levels, a recently identified predictor of severe disease and
mortality. Nucleosome and ELA complex levels were associated with a 4.8-fold and 
4-fold increased risk of developing severe scrub typhus, beyond cut off values of
1,040 U/ml for nucleosomes and 275 U/ml for ELA complexes respectively. In murine
typhus, nucleosome levels associated with pro-inflammatory cytokines and the
duration of illness, while ELA complexes correlated strongly with inflammation
markers, jaundice and increased respiratory rates. This study found strong
correlations between circulating nucleosomes and neutrophil activation in
patients with scrub typhus, but not murine typhus, providing indirect evidence
that nucleosomes could originate from neutrophil extracellular trap (NET)
degradation. High circulating plasma nucleosomes and ELA complexes represent
independent risk factors for developing severe complications in scrub typhus. As 
nucleosomes and histones exposed on NETs are highly cytotoxic to endothelial
cells and are strongly pro-coagulant, neutrophil-derived nucleosomes could
contribute to vascular damage, the pro-coagulant state and exacerbation of
disease in scrub typhus, thus indicating a detrimental role of neutrophil
activation. The data suggest that increased neutrophil activation relates to
disease progression and severe complications, and increased plasma levels of
nucleosomes and ELA complexes represent independent risk factors for developing
severe scrub typhus.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003990 
PMCID: PMC4552835
PMID: 26317419  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

