
1. Blood Rev. 2016 Mar;30(2):89-100. doi: 10.1016/j.blre.2015.08.003. Epub 2015 Aug 
18.

Genomic signatures in T-cell lymphoma: How can these improve precision in
diagnosis and inform prognosis?

Iqbal J(1), Wilcox R(2), Naushad H(3), Rohr J(4), Heavican TB(3), Wang C(4),
Bouska A(3), Fu K(3), Chan WC(5), Vose JM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, Center for Lymphoma and Leukemia
Research, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA. Electronic
address: jiqbal@unmc.edu.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, Center for Lymphoma and Leukemia
Research, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, Center for Lymphoma and Leukemia
Research, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA; Department of
Pathology, City of Hope Medical Center, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, City of Hope Medical Center, CA, USA. Electronic
address: jochan@coh.org.
(6)Department of Hematology/Oncology, University of Nebraska Medical Center,
Omaha, NE, USA.

The novel genetic information gained from genome-wide high throughput techniques 
has greatly improved our understanding of peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL). PTCL
consists of numerous distinct entities and is currently diagnosed using a
combination of clinical and morphologic features and immunophenotyping together
with limited molecular assays leading to an often fragmented, complicated
diagnostic system. The diagnosis of many cases is challenging even for expert
hematopathologists and more than a third of the cases cannot be further
classified and thus put into the PTCL-NOS category. Gene expression profiling
(GEP) has significantly improved the molecular classification of PTCLs and
identified robust molecular signatures for common nodal subtypes of PTCL
including angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (AITL), anaplastic T-cell lymphoma
(ALCL), adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATLL) and extra-nodal NK/T cell lymphoma 
(ENKTL). These studies also led to identification of novel molecular subtypes
with distinct prognosis, that otherwise could not be identified by conventional
methods. Integration of massive sequencing strategies and gene expression has
characterized driver genetic alterations in common subtypes like AITL, ALCL,
ENKTL and other PTCLs. These studies have identified oncogenic pathways and genes
affected in specific disease subtypes that can be potentially targeted by
specific therapies. Novel treatment options with FDA approved drugs directed
towards mutant IDH2, the NF-κB, JAK/STAT, or mTOR pathways illustrate the
usefulness of genome-wide techniques to identify targets for therapy. In this
review, we highlight recent advances in the molecular diagnosis and prognosis of 
PTCL using these genome-wide techniques.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.blre.2015.08.003 
PMID: 26319391  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

