
1. Front Immunol. 2015 Aug 12;6:401. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2015.00401. eCollection
2015.

CD1d- and MR1-Restricted T Cells in Sepsis.

Szabo PA(1), Anantha RV(2), Shaler CR(1), McCormick JK(3), Haeryfar SM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Western University , London, ON ,
Canada.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Western University , London, ON ,
Canada ; Division of General Surgery, Department of Medicine, Western University 
, London, ON , Canada.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Western University , London, ON ,
Canada ; Centre for Human Immunology, Western University , London, ON , Canada ; 
Lawson Health Research Institute , London, ON , Canada.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Western University , London, ON ,
Canada ; Centre for Human Immunology, Western University , London, ON , Canada ; 
Lawson Health Research Institute , London, ON , Canada ; Division of Clinical
Immunology and Allergy, Department of Medicine, Western University , London, ON ,
Canada.

Dysregulated immune responses to infection, such as those encountered in sepsis, 
can be catastrophic. Sepsis is typically triggered by an overwhelming systemic
response to an infectious agent(s) and is associated with high morbidity and
mortality even under optimal critical care. Recent studies have implicated
unconventional, innate-like T lymphocytes, including CD1d- and MR1-restricted T
cells as effectors and/or regulators of inflammatory responses during sepsis.
These cell types are typified by invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells, variant
NKT (vNKT) cells, and mucosa-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells. iNKT and vNKT
cells are CD1d-restricted, lipid-reactive cells with remarkable immunoregulatory 
properties. MAIT cells participate in antimicrobial defense, and are restricted
by major histocompatibility complex-related protein 1 (MR1), which displays
microbe-derived vitamin B metabolites. Importantly, NKT and MAIT cells are rapid 
and potent producers of immunomodulatory cytokines. Therefore, they may be
considered attractive targets during the early hyperinflammatory phase of sepsis 
when immediate interventions are urgently needed, and also in later phases when
adjuvant immunotherapies could potentially reverse the dangerous state of
immunosuppression. We will highlight recent findings that point to the
significance or the therapeutic potentials of NKT and MAIT cells in sepsis and
will also discuss what lies ahead in research in this area.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2015.00401 
PMCID: PMC4533011
PMID: 26322041 

