
1. J Thromb Haemost. 2015 Nov;13(11):2076-86. doi: 10.1111/jth.13132. Epub 2015 Oct 
1.

Thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor influences disease severity in humans
and mice with pneumococcal meningitis.

Mook-Kanamori BB(1), Valls Serón M(1), Geldhoff M(1), Havik SR(1), van der Ende
A(2)(3), Baas F(4), van der Poll T(5), Meijers JC(6)(7), P Morgan B(8), Brouwer
MC(1), van de Beek D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neurology, Academic Medical Center, Center of Infection and
Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)Medical Microbiology, Academic Medical Center, Center of Infection and
Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Netherlands Reference Laboratory for Bacterial Meningitis, Academic Medical
Center, Center of Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Amsterdam, the
Netherlands.
(4)Laboratory for Genome Analysis, Academic Medical Center, Center of Infection
and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(5)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
Center of Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Experimental Vascular Medicine, Academic Medical Center, Center 
of Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(7)Department of Vascular Medicine, Academic Medical Center, Center of Infection 
and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(8)Institute of Infection and Immunity, Cardiff University School of Medicine,
Cardiff, UK.

BACKGROUND: Mortality and morbidity in patients with bacterial meningitis result 
from the proinflammatory response and dysregulation of coagulation and
fibrinolysis. Thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI) is activated by 
free thrombin or thrombin in complex with thrombomodulin, and plays an
antifibrinolytic role during fibrin clot degradation, but also has an
anti-inflammatory role by inactivating proinflammatory mediators, such as
complement activation products.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the role of TAFI in pneumococcal meningitis.
METHODS: We performed a prospective nationwide genetic association study in
patients with bacterial meningitis, determined TAFI and complement levels in
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and assessed the function of TAFI in a pneumococcal
meningitis mouse model by using Cpb2 (TAFI) knockout mice.
RESULTS: Polymorphisms (reference sequences: rs1926447 and rs3742264) in the CPB2
gene, coding for TAFI, were related to the development of systemic complications 
in patients with pneumococcal meningitis. Higher protein levels of TAFI in CSF
were significantly associated with CSF complement levels (C3a, iC3b, and C5b-9)
and with more systemic complications in patients with bacterial meningitis. The
risk allele of rs1926447 (TT) was associated with higher levels of TAFI in CSF.
In the murine model, consistent with the human data, Cpb2-deficient mice had
decreased disease severity, as reflected by lower mortality, and attenuated
cytokine levels and bacterial outgrowth in the systemic compartment during
disease, without differences in the brain compartment, as compared with wild-type
mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that TAFI plays an important role during
pneumococcal meningitis, which is likely to be mediated through inhibition of the
complement system, and influences the occurrence of systemic complications and
inflammation.

© 2015 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

DOI: 10.1111/jth.13132 
PMID: 26340319  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

