
1. Ann Parasitol. 2015;61(2):109-14.

The level of knowledge about parasitic diseases and the threats resulting from
their presence in the environment evaluated in a group of parents of preschool
children.

Gniadek A(1), Cepuch G(2), Ochender K(3), Salamon D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing Management and Epidemiology Nursing Faculty of Health
Sciences, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Kopernika 25, 31-501 Krakow.
(2)Department of Clinical Nursing Faculty of Health Sciences, Jagiellonian
University Medical College, Kopernika 25, 31-501 Krakow.
(3)Graduate Health Sciences, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Kopernika
25, 31-501 Krakow.
(4)Chair of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Jagiellonian University Medical
College, Czysta 18, 31-121 Krakow; Poland.

Despite a significant civilization advancement, parasitic diseases still pose a
serious diagnostic and therapeutic problem. Children's susceptibility to these
infections stems from their immature immune system and lack of basic hygiene
routines. The objective of the study was to evaluate the level of knowledge which
parents of preschool children's possess about parasitic diseases in their
children's environment. The study was carried out in the group of 151 parents of 
preschool children living both in the city and in the country. The survey was
carried out by means of a diagnostic poll with the application of a self-designed
research questionnaire. To make the evaluation even more objective, a special
scale was created in which parents could score points for their answers (0 -
wrong answer, 1 - correct answer). The total number of points ranging from 0 to 9
indicated an unsatisfactory level of knowledge, from 10 to 13 - satisfactory
level, from 14 to 16 - good level and from 17 to 20 - very good level of parents'
awareness. The results of the study reveal that the level of parents' knowledge
about parasitic diseases is only satisfactory. A statistically significant
relationship was observed between the variables such as education and sex. The
higher education, the higher level of knowledge. Moreover, women were more
knowledgeable in the field of parasitic diseases than men were. Financial status 
of the family did not influence the level of parents' awareness. Well-planned
educational programmes might have a positive influence on developing proper
hygiene routines in families, which, in turn, will limit the risk of spreading
parasitoses in the population of children.


PMID: 26342507  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

