
1. J Environ Manage. 2015 Dec 1;164:137-45. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2015.08.042. Epub
2015 Sep 9.

Immobilisation of lead and zinc in contaminated soil using compost derived from
industrial eggshell.

Soares MA(1), Quina MJ(2), Quinta-Ferreira RM(2).

Author information: 
(1)CIEPQPF - Research Centre on Chemical Processes Engineering and Forest
Products, Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Coimbra, Pólo II -
Rua Sílvio Lima, 3030-790, Coimbra, Portugal; CERNAS - Research Center for
Natural Resources, Environment and Society, Bencanta, 3040-316, Coimbra,
Portugal. Electronic address: soares.mica@gmail.com.
(2)CIEPQPF - Research Centre on Chemical Processes Engineering and Forest
Products, Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Coimbra, Pólo II -
Rua Sílvio Lima, 3030-790, Coimbra, Portugal.

This study aims to evaluate the capacity of a compost obtained by co-composting
of industrial eggshell (CES) to immobilise lead (Pb) and zinc (Zn) in an acidic
soil contaminated by mining activities. Mature compost without eggshell (CWES)
and natural eggshell (ES) were also tested as soil amendments for comparison
purposes. Three different application rates were used for each material, ensuring
the same quantity in terms of neutralizing capacity. Incubation experiments were 
conducted under controlled conditions and CO2 emissions monitored for 94 days.
The environmental availability of Pb and Zn in the amended soil was assessed and 
bioassays were performed at the end of the incubation period. When eggshells were
present, the CES compost raised the soil pH to values higher than 6 and reduced
the soil mobile fraction for both Pb and Zn, in more than 95%. Soil toxicity
towards Vibrio fischeri was also suppressed and environmental risk decreased to
"low level". However, the immobilisation in the acid insoluble soil component was
significantly achieved only for Zn. In addition, regarding soil carbon dynamics
the CO2-C emissions were enhanced, mainly in the case of the highest rate of
amendment. Both first order-E and parallel first order models may adequately
describe the kinetic data of CO2-C cumulative release. Without eggshells, the
CWES compost revealed limited effect on heavy metals immobilisation, likely due
to its small capacity to correct soil acidity, at lower application rates. Using 
solely eggshells, the ES waste had similar outcomes when compared with CES, but
at the higher application rate, CO2 emissions were enhanced with the eggshell
compost due to the contribution of biotic carbon present therein. Therefore, this
study points out that CES is an effective liming material and may be used for in 
situ remediation of contaminated soil with Pb and Zn.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2015.08.042 
PMID: 26363261  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

