
1. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 15;10(9):e0138033. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138033.
eCollection 2015.

Release of Periplasmic Nucleotidase Induced by Human Antimicrobial Peptide in E. 
coli Causes Accumulation of the Immunomodulator Adenosine.

Estrela AB(1), Türck P(1), Stutz E(1), Abraham WR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Microbiology, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research,
Inhoffenstrasse 7, 38124, Braunschweig, Germany.

Previous work by our group described that human β-defensin-2 induces accumulation
of extracellular adenosine (Ado) in E. coli cultures through a non-lytic
mechanism causing severe plasmolysis. Here, we investigate the presence of AMP as
a direct precursor and the involvement of a bacterial enzyme in the generation of
extracellular Ado by treated bacteria. Following hBD-2 treatment, metabolites
were quantified in the supernatants using targeted HPLC-MS/MS analysis. Microbial
growth was monitored by optical density and cell viability was determined by
colony forming units counts. Phosphatase activity was measured using chromogenic 
substrate pNPP. The results demonstrate that defensin-treated E. coli strain W
releases AMP in the extracellular space, where it is converted to Ado by a
bacterial soluble factor. An increase in phosphatase activity in the supernatant 
was observed after peptide treatment, similar to the effect of sucrose-induced
osmotic stress, suggesting that the periplasmic 5'nucleotidase (5'-NT) is
released following the plasmolysis event triggered by the peptide. Ado
accumulation was enhanced in the presence of Co2+ ion and inhibited by EDTA,
further supporting the involvement of a metallo-phosphatase such as 5'-NT in
extracellular AMP conversion into Ado. The comparative analysis of hBD-induced
Ado accumulation in different E. coli strains and in Pseudomonas aeruginosa
revealed that the response is not correlated to the peptide's effect on cell
viability, but indicates it might be dependent on the subcellular distribution of
the nucleotidase. Taken together, these data shed light on a yet undescribed
mechanism of host-microbial interaction: a human antimicrobial peptide inducing
selective release of a bacterial enzyme (E. coli 5'-NT), leading to the formation
of a potent immunomodulator metabolite (Ado).

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138033 
PMCID: PMC4570785
PMID: 26371472  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

