
1. mBio. 2015 Sep 22;6(5):e01403-15. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01403-15.

Blastomyces Virulence Adhesin-1 Protein Binding to Glycosaminoglycans Is Enhanced
by Protein Disulfide Isomerase.

Beaussart A(1), Brandhorst T(2), Dufrêne YF(3), Klein BS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Université catholique de Louvain, Institute of Life Sciences,
Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(3)Université catholique de Louvain, Institute of Life Sciences,
Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium bsklein@wisc.edu Yves.Dufrene@uclouvain.be.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA Department of Internal Medicine,
School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin, USA Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, School of
Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, 
USA bsklein@wisc.edu Yves.Dufrene@uclouvain.be.

Blastomyces adhesin-1 (BAD-1) protein mediates the virulence of the yeast
Blastomyces dermatitidis, in part by binding host lung tissue, the extracellular 
matrix, and cellular receptors via glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), such as heparan
sulfate. The tandem repeats that make up over 90% of BAD-1 appear in their native
state to be tightly folded into an inactive conformation, but recent work has
shown that they become activated and adhesive upon reduction of a disulfide
linkage. Here, atomic force microscopy (AFM) of a single BAD-1 molecule
interacting with immobilized heparin revealed that binding is enhanced upon
treatment with protein disulfide isomerase and dithiothreitol (PDI/DTT). PDI/DTT 
treatment of BAD-1 induced a plateau effect in atomic force signatures that was
consistent with sequential rupture of tandem binding domains. Inhibition of PDI
in murine macrophages blunted BAD-1 binding to heparin in vitro. Based on AFM, we
found that a short Cardin-Weintraub sequence paired with a WxxWxxW sequence in
the first, degenerate repeat at the N terminus of BAD-1 was sufficient to
initiate heparin binding. Removal of half of the 41 BAD-1 tandem repeats led to
weaker adhesion, illustrating their role in enhanced binding. Mass spectroscopy
of the tandem repeat revealed that the PDI-induced interaction with heparin is
characterized by ruptured disulfide bonds and that cysteine thiols remain
reduced. Further binding studies showed direct involvement of thiols in heparin
ligation. Thus, we propose that the N-terminal domain of BAD-1 governs the
initial association with host GAGs and that proximity to GAG-associated host PDI 
catalyzes activation of additional binding motifs conserved within the tandem
repeats, leading to enhanced avidity and availability of reduced
thiols.IMPORTANCE: Pathogenic fungi and other microbes must adhere to host tissue
to initiate infection. Surface adhesins promote this event and may be required
for disease pathogenesis. We studied a fungal adhesin essential for virulence
(BAD-1; Blastomyces adhesin-1) and found that host products induce its structural
reconfiguration and foster its optimal binding to tissue structures.

Copyright © 2015 Beaussart et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01403-15 
PMCID: PMC4600121
PMID: 26396244  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

