
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Nov 6;467(1):46-52. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.09.126. Epub 2015 Sep 28.

The role and regulation of Moraxella catarrhalis-induced human beta-defensin 3
expression in human pulmonary epithelial cells.

Haarmann H(1), Steiner T(2), Schreiber F(3), Heinrich A(3), Zweigner J(4),
N'Guessan PD(5), Slevogt H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for Cardiology and Pneumology, University Medical Center Göttingen,
Göttingen, Germany; Department of Internal Medicine/Infectious Diseases, Charité 
- Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine/Infectious Diseases, Charité -
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Neurological Rehabilitation Center
for Children and Adolescents, Helios Klinikum Hohenstücken, Brandenburg, Germany.
(3)ZIK Septomics, University Hospital Jena, Jena, Germany.
(4)Department of Infection Control and Hospital Hygiene, University Hospital
Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(5)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Red Cross Hospital,
Stuttgart, Germany.
(6)ZIK Septomics, University Hospital Jena, Jena, Germany. Electronic address:
hortense.slevogt@med.uni-jena.de.

BACKGROUND: Bacterial colonisation with Moraxella catarrhalis may partly sustain 
chronic inflammation in the lower airways of patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). In addition, this bacterium causes infectious
exacerbations of COPD, which often necessitate treatment with antibiotics.
Antimicrobial peptides are the body's own antibiotic substances with bactericidal
and bacteriostatic, as well as immunomodulatory function. In particular, human
beta-defensin 3 (hBD-3) exerts an antimicrobial effect against an extraordinarily
broad spectrum of pathogens. We therefore investigated the role of hBD-3 in
infections of pulmonary epithelial cells with M. catarrhalis.
METHODS: The antimicrobial activity of hBD-3 vs. M. catarrhalis was evaluated in 
an antimicrobial susceptibility assay. We analyzed hBD-3 secretion of
M. catarrhalis-infected pulmonary epithelial cells using ELISA. The role of
M. catarrhalis-specific virulence factors, toll-like receptors (TLR) 2 and 4,
MAPK pathways, and transcription factors AP-1 and NF-κB in the induction and
regulation of hBD-3 expression were explored with specific inhibitors, small
interference RNA, Western Blot, and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays.
RESULTS: HBD-3 exhibited a strong bactericidal effect against M. catarrhalis.
M. catarrhalis induced hBD-3 expression in pulmonary epithelial cells, which was 
dependent on M. catarrhalis membranous lipoolygosaccharide (LOS), while the
surface proteins UspA1 and UspA2 were not involved. Gene silencing of TLR2, but
not TLR4, led to a reduced hBD-3 secretion after stimulation with M. catarrhalis 
or M. catarrhalis LOS. Inhibition of MAPKs ERK1/2 and JNK, but not p38, reduced
hBD-3 secretion. HBD-3 expression was mediated through the recruitment of AP-1 to
the hBD-3 gene promoter and was independent of NF-κB.
CONCLUSION: The immune response of pulmonary epithelial cells towards
M. catarrhalis involves secretion of hBD-3, which has a bactericidal effect
against this pathogen. Binding of M. catarrhalis virulence factor LOS to TLR2
causes an ERK1/2- and JNK-dependent induction of AP-1-related transcription of
the hBD-3 gene, resulting in the production and secretion of hBD-3.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.09.126 
PMID: 26417692  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

