
1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2016 Jan;71(1):111-22. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkv299. Epub 2015
Oct 6.

Attenuation of in vitro host-pathogen interactions in quinolone-resistant
Salmonella Typhi mutants.

Ballesté-Delpierre C(1), Fàbrega A(1), Ferrer-Navarro M(1), Mathur R(2), Ghosh
S(2), Vila J(3).

Author information: 
(1)ISGlobal, Barcelona Ctr. Int. Health Res. (CRESIB), Hospital Clínic -
Universitat de Barcelona, Rosselló 149-153 Barcelona, 08036, Spain.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University, 701 West 168th Street, New York City, NY 10032, USA.
(3)ISGlobal, Barcelona Ctr. Int. Health Res. (CRESIB), Hospital Clínic -
Universitat de Barcelona, Rosselló 149-153 Barcelona, 08036, Spain jvila@ub.edu.

OBJECTIVES: The relationship between quinolone resistance acquisition and
invasion impairment has been studied in some Salmonella enterica serovars.
However, little information has been reported regarding the invasive
human-restricted pathogen Salmonella Typhi. The aim of this study was to
investigate the molecular mechanisms of quinolone resistance acquisition and its 
impact on virulence in this serovar.
METHODS: Two antibiotic-resistant mutants (Ty_c1 and Ty_c2) were generated from a
Salmonella Typhi clinical isolate (Ty_wt). The three strains were compared in
terms of antimicrobial susceptibility, molecular mechanisms of resistance, gene
expression of virulence-related factors, ability to invade eukaryotic cells
(human epithelial cells and macrophages) and cytokine production.
RESULTS: Multidrug resistance in Ty_c2 was attributed to AcrAB/TolC
overproduction, decreased OmpF (both mediated by the mar regulon) and decreased
OmpC. The two mutants showed a gradually reduced expression of virulence-related 
genes (invA, hilA, hilD, fliC and fimA), correlating with decreased motility,
reduced infection of HeLa cells and impaired uptake by and intracellular survival
in human macrophages. Moreover, Ty_c2 also showed reduced tviA expression.
Additionally, we revealed a significant reduction in TNF-α and IL-1β production
and decreased NF-κB activation.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we provide an in-depth characterization of the
molecular mechanisms of antibiotic resistance in the Salmonella Typhi serovar and
evidence that acquisition of antimicrobial resistance is concomitantly detected
with a loss of virulence (epithelial cell invasion, macrophage phagocytosis and
cytokine production). We suggest that the low prevalence of clinical isolates of 
Salmonella Typhi highly resistant to ciprofloxacin is due to poor immunogenicity 
and impaired dissemination ability of these isolates.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkv299 
PMID: 26446080  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

