
1. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2015 Dec 15;309(12):C835-46. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00107.2015. Epub 2015 Oct 7.

Mechanisms of DRA recycling in intestinal epithelial cells: effect of
enteropathogenic E. coli.

Gujral T(1), Kumar A(2), Priyamvada S(2), Saksena S(2), Gill RK(2), Hodges K(3), 
Alrefai WA(4), Hecht GA(3), Dudeja PK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois; Department of Physiology,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois;
(2)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois;
(3)Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Department of Medicine, Loyola University,
Maywood, Illinois.
(4)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois; Jesse Brown Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois; and.
(5)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois; Jesse Brown Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois; and pkdudeja@uic.edu.

Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC) is a food-borne pathogen that causes
infantile diarrhea worldwide. EPEC decreases the activity and surface expression 
of the key intestinal Cl(-)/HCO3(-) exchanger SLC26A3 [downregulated in adenoma
(DRA)], contributing to the pathophysiology of early diarrhea. Little is known
about the mechanisms governing membrane recycling of DRA. In the current study,
Caco-2 cells were used to investigate DRA trafficking under basal conditions and 
in response to EPEC. Apical Cl(-)/HCO3(-) exchange activity was measured as
DIDS-sensitive (125)I(-) uptake. Cell surface biotinylation was performed to
assess DRA endocytosis and exocytosis. Inhibition of clathrin-mediated
endocytosis by chlorpromazine (60 μM) increased apical Cl(-)/HCO3(-) exchange
activity. Dynasore, a dynamin inhibitor, also increased function and surface
levels of DRA via decreased endocytosis. Perturbation of microtubules by
nocodazole revealed that intact microtubules are essential for basal exocytic
(but not endocytic) DRA recycling. Mice treated with colchicine showed a decrease
in DRA surface levels as visualized by confocal microscopy. In response to EPEC
infection, DRA surface expression was reduced partly via an increase in DRA
endocytosis and a decrease in exocytosis. These effects were dependent on the
EPEC virulence genes espG1 and espG2. Intriguingly, the EPEC-induced decrease in 
DRA function was unaltered in the presence of dynasore, suggesting a
clathrin-independent internalization of surface DRA. In conclusion, these studies
establish the role of clathrin-mediated endocytosis and microtubules in the basal
surface expression of DRA and demonstrate that the EPEC-mediated decrease in DRA 
function and apical expression in Caco-2 cells involves decreased exocytosis.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.00107.2015 
PMCID: PMC4683211
PMID: 26447204  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

