
1. Front Immunol. 2015 Sep 16;6:472. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2015.00472. eCollection
2015.

The Fyn-ADAP Axis: Cytotoxicity Versus Cytokine Production in Killer Cells.

Gerbec ZJ(1), Thakar MS(2), Malarkannan S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology and Immunotherapy, Blood Research
Institute, Medical College of Wisconsin , Milwaukee, WI , USA ; Department of
Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, Medical College of Wisconsin ,
Milwaukee, WI , USA.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology and Immunotherapy, Blood Research
Institute, Medical College of Wisconsin , Milwaukee, WI , USA ; Department of
Pediatrics, Medical College of Wisconsin , Milwaukee, WI , USA ; Department of
Medicine, Medical College of Wisconsin , Milwaukee, WI , USA.
(3)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology and Immunotherapy, Blood Research
Institute, Medical College of Wisconsin , Milwaukee, WI , USA ; Department of
Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, Medical College of Wisconsin ,
Milwaukee, WI , USA ; Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of Wisconsin ,
Milwaukee, WI , USA ; Department of Medicine, Medical College of Wisconsin ,
Milwaukee, WI , USA.

Lymphocyte signaling cascades responsible for anti-tumor cytotoxicity and
inflammatory cytokine production must be tightly regulated in order to control an
immune response. Disruption of these cascades can cause immune suppression as
seen in a tumor microenvironment, and loss of signaling integrity can lead to
autoimmunity and other forms of host-tissue damage. Therefore, understanding the 
distinct signaling events that exclusively control specific effector functions of
"killer" lymphocytes (T and NK cells) is critical for understanding disease
progression and formulating successful immunotherapy. Elucidation of divergent
signaling pathways involved in receptor-mediated activation has provided insights
into the independent regulation of cytotoxicity and cytokine production in
lymphocytes. Specifically, the Fyn signaling axis represents a branch point for
killer cell effector functions and provides a model for how cytotoxicity and
cytokine production are differentially regulated. While the Fyn-PI(3)K pathway
controls multiple functions, including cytotoxicity, cell development, and
cytokine production, the Fyn-ADAP pathway preferentially regulates cytokine
production in NK and T cells. In this review, we discuss how the structure of Fyn
controls its function in lymphocytes and the role this plays in mediating two
facets of lymphocyte effector function, cytotoxicity and production of
inflammatory cytokines. This offers a model for using mechanistic and structural 
approaches to understand clinically relevant lymphocyte signaling.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2015.00472 
PMCID: PMC4584950
PMID: 26441977 

