
1. Med Mycol. 2016 Feb;54(2):169-76. doi: 10.1093/mmy/myv074. Epub 2015 Oct 18.

Human Invariant Natural Killer T cells possess immune-modulating functions during
Aspergillus infection.

Beitzen-Heineke A(1), Bouzani M(1), Schmitt AL(1), Kurzai O(2), Hünniger K(2),
Einsele H(1), Loeffler J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik II, University Hospital Wuerzburg,
Wuerzburg, Germany.
(2)Septomics Research Centre, Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena and
Leibniz-Institute for Natural Products Research and Infection Biology - Hans
Knoell Institute, Jena, Germany.
(3)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik II, University Hospital Wuerzburg,
Wuerzburg, Germany loeffler_j@ukw.de.

Aspergillus fumigatus is the most common cause for invasive fungal infections, a 
disease associated with high mortality in immune-compromised patients.
CD1d-restricted invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells compose a small subset of
T cells known to impact the immune response toward various infectious pathogens. 
To investigate the role of human iNKT cells during A. fumigatus infection, we
studied their activation as determined by CD69 expression and cytokine production
in response to distinct fungal morphotypes in the presence of different CD1d(+)
antigen presenting cells using flow cytometry and multiplex enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Among CD1d(+) subpopulations, CD1d(+)CD1c(+) mDCs
showed the highest potential to activate iNKT cells on a per cell basis. The
presence of A. fumigatus decreased this effect of CD1d(+)CD1c(+) mDCs on iNKT
cells and led to reduced secretion of TNF-α, G-CSF and RANTES. Production of
other Th1 and Th2 cytokines was not affected by the fungus, suggesting an
immune-modulating function for human iNKT cells during A. fumigatus infection.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The
International Society for Human and Animal Mycology. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/mmy/myv074 
PMID: 26483428  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

