
1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2016 Mar;23(5):4312-9. doi:
10.1007/s11356-015-5555-7. Epub 2015 Oct 21.

Bioavailability and mobility of organic contaminants in soil: new three-step
ecotoxicological evaluation.

Prokop Z(1), Nečasová A(1), Klánová J(1), Čupr P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Science, RECETOX-Research Centre for Toxic Compounds in the
Environment, Masaryk University, Kamenice753/5, 625 00, Brno, Czech Republic.
(2)Faculty of Science, RECETOX-Research Centre for Toxic Compounds in the
Environment, Masaryk University, Kamenice753/5, 625 00, Brno, Czech Republic.
cupr@recetox.muni.cz.

A novel approach was developed for rapid assessment of bioavailability and
potential mobility of contaminants in soil. The response of the same test
organism to the organic extract, water extract and solid phase of soil was
recorded and compared. This approach was designed to give an initial estimate of 
the total organic toxicity (response to organic extractable fraction), as well as
the mobile (response to water extract) and bioavailable fraction (response to
solid phase) of soil samples. Eighteen soil samples with different levels of
pollution and content of organic carbon were selected to validate the novel
three-step ecotoxicological evaluation approach. All samples were chemically
analysed for priority contaminants, including aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs),
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH) and
dichlordiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT). The ecotoxicological evaluation involved
determination of toxicity of the organic, mobile and bioavailable fractions of
soil to the test organism, bacterium Bacillus cereus. We found a good correlation
between the chemical analysis and the toxicity of organic extract. The low
toxicity of water extracts indicated low water solubility, and thus, low
potential mobility of toxic contaminants present in the soil samples. The
toxicity of the bioavailable fraction was significantly greater than the toxicity
of water-soluble (mobile) fraction of the contaminants as deduced from comparing 
untreated samples and water extracts. The bioavailability of the contaminants
decreased with increasing concentrations of organic carbon in evaluated soil
samples. In conclusion, the three-step ecotoxicological evaluation utilised in
this study can give a quick insight into soil contamination in context with
bioavailability and mobility of the contaminants present. This information can be
useful for hazard identification and risk assessment of soil-associated
contaminants. Graphical Abstract New three-step ecotoxicological evaluation by
using the same organism.

DOI: 10.1007/s11356-015-5555-7 
PMID: 26490898  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

