
1. Gut. 2016 Apr;65(4):575-83. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2015-309728. Epub 2015 Oct 28.

The gut microbiota plays a protective role in the host defence against
pneumococcal pneumonia.

Schuijt TJ(1), Lankelma JM(2), Scicluna BP(2), de Sousa e Melo F(2), Roelofs
JJ(3), de Boer JD(2), Hoogendijk AJ(2), de Beer R(2), de Vos A(2), Belzer C(4),
de Vos WM(5), van der Poll T(6), Wiersinga WJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands Department of Medicine,
Division of Infectious Diseases, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands Department of Clinical Chemistry,
Hematology and Immunology, Diakonessenhuis Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Laboratory of Microbiology, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The
Netherlands.
(5)Laboratory of Microbiology, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The Netherlands
Department of Bacteriology & Immunology, Helsinki University, Helsinki, Finland.
(6)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands Department of Medicine,
Division of Infectious Diseases, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Gut. 2017 Feb;66(2):384.
    Gut. 2017 Mar;66(3):556.

OBJECTIVE: Pneumonia accounts for more deaths than any other infectious disease
worldwide. The intestinal microbiota supports local mucosal immunity and is
increasingly recognised as an important modulator of the systemic immune system. 
The precise role of the gut microbiota in bacterial pneumonia, however, is
unknown. Here, we investigate the function of the gut microbiota in the host
defence against Streptococcus pneumoniae infections.
DESIGN: We depleted the gut microbiota in C57BL/6 mice and subsequently infected 
them intranasally with S. pneumoniae. We then performed survival and faecal
microbiota transplantation (FMT) experiments and measured parameters of
inflammation and alveolar macrophage whole-genome responses.
RESULTS: We found that the gut microbiota protects the host during pneumococcal
pneumonia, as reflected by increased bacterial dissemination, inflammation, organ
damage and mortality in microbiota-depleted mice compared with controls. FMT in
gut microbiota-depleted mice led to a normalisation of pulmonary bacterial counts
and tumour necrosis factor-α and interleukin-10 levels 6 h after pneumococcal
infection. Whole-genome mapping of alveolar macrophages showed upregulation of
metabolic pathways in the absence of a healthy gut microbiota. This upregulation 
correlated with an altered cellular responsiveness, reflected by a reduced
responsiveness to lipopolysaccharide and lipoteichoic acid. Compared with
controls, alveolar macrophages derived from gut microbiota-depleted mice showed a
diminished capacity to phagocytose S. pneumoniae.
CONCLUSIONS: This study identifies the intestinal microbiota as a protective
mediator during pneumococcal pneumonia. The gut microbiota enhances primary
alveolar macrophage function. Novel therapeutic strategies could exploit the
gut-lung axis in bacterial infections.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

DOI: 10.1136/gutjnl-2015-309728 
PMCID: PMC4819612
PMID: 26511795  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

