
1. Hepatology. 2016 Jun;63(6):2019-31. doi: 10.1002/hep.28330. Epub 2016 Jan 11.

Antibiotic prophylaxis in cirrhosis: Good and bad.

Fernández J(1)(2)(3), Tandon P(4), Mensa J(5), Garcia-Tsao G(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Liver Unit, Hospital Clinic, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August-Pi-Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona,
Spain.
(3)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y
Digestivas (CIBEREHED), Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Cirrhosis Care Clinic, Cirrhosis Care, Liver Unit, Division of
Gastroenterology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
(5)Infectious Disease Department, Hospital Clínic, University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Section of Digestive Diseases, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
CT.
(7)Section of Digestive Diseases, VA-CT Healthcare System, West Haven, CT.

Patients with cirrhosis, particularly those with decompensated cirrhosis, are at 
increased risk of bacterial infections that may further precipitate other liver
decompensations including acute-on-chronic liver failure. Infections constitute
the main cause of death in patients with advanced cirrhosis, and strategies to
prevent them are essential. The main current strategy is the use of prophylactic 
antibiotics targeted at specific subpopulations at high risk of infection: prior 
episode of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, upper gastrointestinal bleeding,
and low-protein ascites with associated poor liver function. Antibiotic
prophylaxis effectively prevents not only the development of bacterial infections
in all these indications but also further decompensation (variceal bleeding,
hepatorenal syndrome) and improves survival. However, antibiotic prophylaxis is
also associated with a clinically relevant and increasing drawback, the
development of infections due to multidrug-resistant organisms. Several
strategies have been suggested to balance the risks and benefits of antibiotic
prophylaxis.CONCLUSION: Antibiotic stewardship principles such as the restriction
of antibiotic prophylaxis to subpopulations at a very high risk for infection,
the avoidance of antibiotic overuse, and early deescalation policies are key to
achieve this balance; nonantibiotic prophylactic measures such as probiotics,
prokinetics, bile acids, statins, and hematopoietic growth factors could also
contribute to ameliorate the development and spread of multidrug-resistant
bacteria in cirrhosis. (Hepatology 2016;63:2019-2031).

© 2015 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases. This article 
has been contributed to by U.S. government employees, and their contribution is
in the public domain in the U.S.A.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.28330 
PMID: 26528864  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

