
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 May;1857(5):493-502. doi:
10.1016/j.bbabio.2015.11.003. Epub 2015 Nov 10.

A suite of de novo c-type cytochromes for functional oxidoreductase engineering.

Watkins DW(1), Armstrong CT(1), Beesley JL(2), Marsh JE(1), Jenkins JMX(1),
Sessions RB(1), Mann S(3), Ross Anderson JL(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry, University of Bristol, University Walk, Bristol BS8
1TD, UK.
(2)School of Biochemistry, University of Bristol, University Walk, Bristol BS8
1TD, UK; School of Chemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TS, UK.
(3)School of Chemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TS, UK.
(4)School of Biochemistry, University of Bristol, University Walk, Bristol BS8
1TD, UK. Electronic address: ross.anderson@bristol.ac.uk.

Central to the design of an efficient de novo enzyme is a robust yet mutable
protein scaffold. The maquette approach to protein design offers precisely this, 
employing simple four-α-helix bundle scaffolds devoid of evolutionary complexity 
and with proven tolerance towards iterative protein engineering. We recently
described the design of C2, a de novo designed c-type cytochrome maquette that
undergoes post-translational modification in E. coli to covalently graft heme
onto the protein backbone in vivo. This de novo cytochrome is capable of
reversible oxygen binding, an obligate step in the catalytic cycle of many
oxygen-activating oxidoreductases. Here we demonstrate the flexibility of both
the maquette platform and the post-translational machinery of E. coli by creating
a suite of functional de novo designed c-type cytochromes. We explore the
engineering tolerances of the maquette by selecting alternative binding sites for
heme C attachment and creating di-heme maquettes either by appending an
additional heme C binding motif to the maquette scaffold or by binding heme B
through simple bis-histidine ligation to a second binding site. The new designs
retain the essential properties of the parent design but with significant
improvements in structural stability. Molecular dynamics simulations aid the
rationalization of these functional improvements while providing insight into the
rules for engineering heme C binding sites in future iterations. This versatile, 
functional suite of de novo c-type cytochromes shows significant promise in
providing robust platforms for the future engineering of de novo
oxygen-activating oxidoreductases. This article is part of a Special Issue
entitled Biodesign for Bioenergetics--the design and engineering of electron
transfer cofactors, proteins and protein networks, edited by Ronald L. Koder and 
J.L. Ross Anderson.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbabio.2015.11.003 
PMID: 26556173  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

