
1. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2015 Nov 12;69:1222-7.

Analysis of nanomechanical properties of Borrelia burgdorferi spirochetes under
the influence of lytic factors in an in vitro model using atomic force
microscopy.

Tokarska-Rodak M(1), Kozioł-Montewka M(2), Skrzypiec K(3), Chmielewski T(4),
Mendyk E(3), Tylewska-Wierzbanowska S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Pope John Paul II State School of Higher Education in Biala Podlaska,Institute
of Health Sciences, Poland.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, Medical University, Lublin, Poland.
(3)Analytical Laboratory, Faculty of Chemistry, Maria Curie-Sklodowska
University, Lublin, Poland.
(4)National Institute of Public Health - National Institute of Hygiene,
Laboratory of Rickettsiae, Chlamydiae and Spirochaetes, Warszawa, Poland;
(5)National Institute of Public Health - National Institute of Hygiene,
Laboratory of Rickettsiae, Chlamydiae and Spirochaetes, Warszawa, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Atomic force microscopy (AFM) is an experimental technique which
recently has been used in biology, microbiology, and medicine to investigate the 
topography of surfaces and in the evaluation of mechanical properties of cells.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the influence of the complement system and 
specific anti-Borrelia antibodies in in vitro conditions on the modification of
nanomechanical features of B. burgdorferi B31 cells.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: In order to assess the influence of the complement system
and anti-Borrelia antibodies on B. burgdorferi s.s. B31 spirochetes, the bacteria
were incubated together with plasma of identified status. The samples were
applied on the surface of mica disks. Young's modulus and adhesive forces were
analyzed with a NanoScope V, MultiMode 8 AFM microscope (Bruker) by the PeakForce
QNM technique in air using NanoScope Analysis 1.40 software (Bruker).
RESULTS/CONCLUSION: The average value of flexibility of spirochetes' surface
expressed by Young's modulus was 10185.32 MPa, whereas the adhesion force was
3.68 nN. AFM is a modern tool with a broad spectrum of observational and
measurement abilities. Young's modulus and the adhesion force can be treated as
parameters in the evaluation of intensity and changes which take place in
pathogenic microorganisms under the influence of various lytic factors. The
visualization of the changes in association with nanomechanical features provides
a realistic portrayal of the lytic abilities of the elements of the innate and
adaptive human immune system.

DOI: 10.5604/17322693.1179650 
PMID: 26561849  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

