
1. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 13;10(11):e0142710. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142710.
eCollection 2015.

Spatial Targeting for Bovine Tuberculosis Control: Can the Locations of Infected 
Cattle Be Used to Find Infected Badgers?

Smith CM(1), Downs SH(2), Mitchell A(2), Hayward AC(1), Fry H(3), Le Comber
SC(4).

Author information: 
(1)UCL Department of Infectious Disease Informatics, Farr Institute of Health
Informatics Research, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Animal and Plant Health Agency, New Haw, Addlestone, Surrey, United Kingdom.
(3)Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis, University College London, London,
United Kingdom.
(4)School of Biological and Chemical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London,
London, United Kingdom.

Bovine tuberculosis is a disease of historical importance to human health in the 
UK that remains a major animal health and economic issue. Control of the disease 
in cattle is complicated by the presence of a reservoir species, the Eurasian
badger. In spite of uncertainty in the degree to which cattle disease results
from transmission from badgers, and opposition from environmental groups, culling
of badgers has been licenced in two large areas in England. Methods to limit
culls to smaller areas that target badgers infected with TB whilst minimising the
number of uninfected badgers culled is therefore of considerable interest. Here, 
we use historical data from a large-scale field trial of badger culling to assess
two alternative hypothetical methods of targeting TB-infected badgers based on
the distribution of cattle TB incidents: (i) a simple circular 'ring cull'; and
(ii) geographic profiling, a novel technique for spatial targeting of infectious 
disease control that predicts the locations of sources of infection based on the 
distribution of linked cases. Our results showed that both methods required
coverage of very large areas to ensure a substantial proportion of infected
badgers were removed, and would result in many uninfected badgers being culled.
Geographic profiling, which accounts for clustering of infections in badger and
cattle populations, produced a small but non-significant increase in the
proportion of setts with TB-infected compared to uninfected badgers included in a
cull. It also provided no overall improvement at targeting setts with infected
badgers compared to the ring cull. Cattle TB incidents in this study were
therefore insufficiently clustered around TB-infected badger setts to design an
efficient spatially targeted cull; and this analysis provided no evidence to
support a move towards spatially targeted badger culling policies for bovine TB
control.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142710 
PMCID: PMC4643894
PMID: 26565626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

