
1. BMC Res Notes. 2015 Nov 14;8:675. doi: 10.1186/s13104-015-1659-x.

Identification of putative adhesins of Actinobacillus suis and their homologues
in other members of the family Pasteurellaceae.

Bujold AR(1), MacInnes JI(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, 
Ontario, N1G 2W1, Canada. abujold@uoguelph.ca.
(2)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, 
Ontario, N1G 2W1, Canada. macinnes@uoguelph.ca.

BACKGROUND: Actinobacillus suis disease has been reported in a wide range of
vertebrate species, but is most commonly found in swine. A. suis is a commensal
of the tonsils of the soft palate of swine, but in the presence of unknown
stimuli it can invade the bloodstream, causing septicaemia and sequelae such as
meningitis, arthritis, and death. It is genotypically and phenotypically similar 
to A. pleuropneumoniae, the causative agent of pleuropneumonia, and to other
members of the family Pasteurellaceae that colonise tonsils. At present, very
little is known about the genes involved in attachment, colonisation, and
invasion by A. suis (or related members of the tonsil microbiota).
RESULTS: Bioinformatic analyses of the A. suis H91-0380 genome were done using
BASys and blastx in GenBank. Forty-seven putative adhesin-associated genes
predicted to encode 24 putative adhesins were discovered. Among these are 6
autotransporters, 25 fimbriae-associated genes (encoding 3 adhesins), 12 outer
membrane proteins, and 4 additional genes (encoding 3 adhesins). With the
exception of 2 autotransporter-encoding genes (aidA and ycgV), both with
described roles in virulence in other species, all of the putative
adhesin-associated genes had homologues in A. pleuropneumoniae. However, the
majority of the closest homologues of the A. suis adhesins are found in A. ureae 
and A. capsulatus--species not known to infect swine, but both of which can cause
systemic infections.
CONCLUSIONS: A. suis and A. pleuropneumoniae share many of the same putative
adhesins, suggesting that the different diseases, tissue tropism, and host range 
of these pathogens are due to subtle genetic differences, or perhaps differential
expression of virulence factors during infection. However, many of the putative
adhesins of A. suis share even greater homology with those of other pathogens
within the family Pasteurellaceae. Similar to A. suis, these pathogens (A.
capsulatus and A. ureae) cause systemic infections and it is tempting to
speculate that they employ similar strategies to invade the host, but more work
is needed before that assertion can be made. This work begins to examine
adhesin-associated factors that allow some members of the family Pasteurellaceae 
to invade the bloodstream while others cause a more localised infection.

DOI: 10.1186/s13104-015-1659-x 
PMCID: PMC4644294
PMID: 26567540  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

