
1. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Nov 30;11(11):e1005292. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005292.
eCollection 2015.

Increased Susceptibility of Humanized NSG Mice to Panton-Valentine Leukocidin and
Staphylococcus aureus Skin Infection.

Tseng CW(1)(2), Biancotti JC(3), Berg BL(1)(2), Gate D(3)(4), Kolar SL(1)(2),
Müller S(1)(2), Rodriguez MD(1)(2), Rezai-Zadeh K(4), Fan X(5), Beenhouwer
DO(6)(7), Town T(3), Liu GY(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases and the Immunobiology Research
Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, United States of
America.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(3)Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute, Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Keck
School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California,
United States of America.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles,
California, United States of America.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 
Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases, Veterans Affairs Greater Los Angeles
Healthcare System, Los Angeles, California; Department of Medicine, David Geffen 
School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, California, United
States of America.
(7)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

Staphylococcus aureus is a leading cause of skin and soft-tissue infections
worldwide. Mice are the most commonly used animals for modeling human
staphylococcal infections. However a supra-physiologic S. aureus inoculum is
required to establish gross murine skin pathology. Moreover, many staphylococcal 
factors, including Panton-Valentine leukocidin (PVL) elaborated by
community-associated methicillin-resistant S. aureus (CA-MRSA), exhibit selective
human tropism and cannot be adequately studied in mice. To overcome these
deficiencies, we investigated S. aureus infection in non-obese diabetic
(NOD)/severe combined immune deficiency (SCID)/IL2rγnull (NSG) mice engrafted
with human CD34+ umbilical cord blood cells. These "humanized" NSG mice require
one to two log lower inoculum to induce consistent skin lesions compared with
control mice, and exhibit larger cutaneous lesions upon infection with PVL+
versus isogenic PVL- S. aureus. Neutrophils appear important for PVL pathology as
adoptive transfer of human neutrophils alone to NSG mice was sufficient to induce
dermonecrosis following challenge with PVL+ S. aureus but not PVL- S. aureus.
PMX53, a human C5aR inhibitor, blocked PVL-induced cellular cytotoxicity in vitro
and reduced the size difference of lesions induced by the PVL+ and PVL- S.
aureus, but PMX53 also reduced recruitment of neutrophils and exacerbated the
infection. Overall, our findings establish humanized mice as an important
translational tool for the study of S. aureus infection and provide strong
evidence that PVL is a human virulence factor.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005292 
PMCID: PMC4664407
PMID: 26618545  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

