
1. Zentralbl Hyg Umweltmed. 1989 May;188(1-2):1-34.

[Ground water improvement in the Ruhr--then and now].

[Article in German]

Schmidt WD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gelsenwasser AG, Gelsenkirchen.

The waterworks founded during the second half of the last century obtained the
raw water exclusively from the Ruhr-valley; they were responsible for the water
supply of the industrial area situated on the right of the river Rhine. The
rapidly growing water demand, limited possibilities in water catchment, the very 
bad quality of the Ruhr-water and epidemic typhoid fever required new methods in 
the water supply. Consequently, the Hygiene-Institute of Gelsenkirchen was
founded and a new method of water production developed: the artificial ground
water recharge. In 1913 two associations were founded: the Ruhrtalsperrenverein
responsible for the provision of water quantity, and the Ruhrverband, responsible
for the improvement of water quality. These associations formed the essential
base for the rapid development of the so-called "Revier". In spite of the
excellent elimination of bacteria by artificial ground water recharge-operating
according to the principle of slow sand filtration-a disinfection of drinking
water with chlorine became necessary; this disinfection was started in 1910 by
the waterworks of the Ruhr. The construction of reservoirs and clarification
plants ameliorated temporary the overall situation in water resources management.
These improvements were, however, destroyed by consequences arising from the
rapid economical growth before the second world war and the following break-down.
After this period, great efforts were necessary to enlarge the reservoirs and
increase the capacity of sewage plants. The waterworks pre-purified the water
from the Ruhr before infiltration into the underground in order to increase the
quantity and quality of the recharged water. Downstream, the number of sewage
plants increased; a more and more refined method of analysis indicates now the
pollution load of the raw ater and signalized trends which lead to further
treatment measures or to the change of existing ones like substitution of
chlorine by chlorine-dioxide. The artificial ground water recharge-because of its
many advantages-should always be the nucleus of water treatment of the river
Ruhr. For the sake of the natural character of water catchment and in order not
to degrade the waterworks to mere "water-manufacturers", we are all requested to 
handle thoroughly and cautiously water-endangering substances.


PMID: 2667551  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

