
1. Swed Dent J Suppl. 2014;(233):9-94.

DENTINE CARIES: ACID-TOLERANT MICROORGANISMS AND ASPECTS ON COLLAGEN DEGRADATION.

Lager AH.

Dental caries is a common disease all over the world, despite the fact that it
can be both effectively prevented and treated. It is driven by acids produced by 
oral microorganisms as a consequence of their metabolism of dietary
carbohydrates. Given enough acid challenge, eventually the tooth enamel barrier
will be broken down, and the carious lesion will extend into underlying hard
tissue, forming a macroscopic cavity in the dentine. In comparison to biofilm on 
enamel, a dentine carious lesion provides a vastly different environment for the 
residing microorganisms. The environment influences the types and numbers of
microorganisms that can colonize the dentine caries lesion. The overall aims for 
this thesis are to enumerate and further study microorganisms found in
established dentine caries lesions and also to illuminate how host-derived
proteolytic enzymes might contribute to this degradation, not only to better
understand the caries process in dentine but also to find incitements for new
methods to influence the natural progression of caries lesions. In Paper I, the
numbers of remaining viable microorganisms after completed excavation using two
excavation methods were investigated. Samples of carious dentine tissue were
collected before and after excavation and cultivated on different agar media in
different atmospheres. Analysis was performed by counting the number of
colony-forming units (CFUs). Key findings: The number of remaining microorganisms
after excavation was low for both methods, but some microorganisms always
remained in the cavity floors even when the cavities were judged as caries free
using normal clinical criteria. In Paper II, the acid tolerant microbiota in
established dentine caries lesions was investigated. Samples were taken as in
Paper I, but on three levels (superficial, center of lesion, floor of lesion
after completed excavation). The samples were cultivated in anaerobic conditions 
on solid pH-selective agar media of different acidity. Key findings: Each
investigated lesion harbored a unique microbiota in terms of both species
composition and numbers of microorganisms. This indicates that various
combinations of aciduric microorganisms can colonize, survive in and probably
also propagate dentine carious lesions. We also found that solid pH-selective
agars can be used successfully to select acid-tolerant microorganisms in caries
lesions. This would preserve their phenotypic traits for further study. In Paper 
III, the relation between salivary levels of matrix metalloproteinase-8 (MMP-8), 
salivary levels of tissue inhibitor of MMP (TIMP-1), and the presence of manifest
caries lesions in a large number of subjects was investigated. Saliva samples
were collected and analyzed for concentrations of MMP-8, TIMP-1 and total protein
using immunofluorometric assays, enzyme linked immunosorbent assays and Bradford 
assays, respectively. Key findings: Subjects with manifest caries lesions had
significantly elevated levels of salivary MMP-8 compared to subjects without
caries lesions. TIMP-1 was not significant in any case. In Paper IV, a new method
for generating bioactive demineralized dentine matrix substrate (DDM) was
developed using a dialysis system and two different demineralization approaches
(acetic acid or EDTA). The generated DDM was subsequently analyzed for the
presence of type 1 collagen, active MMP-8 and hydroxyproline (HYP) levels using
SDS-PAGE, ELISA or immunofluorescence assay. Key findings: Both demineralization 
methods produced a substrate rich in collagen and with preserved MMP-8 activity. 
This report presents new knowledge on the composition of the acid tolerant
dentine caries microbiota from three levels in dentine carious lesions and on the
efficacy of operative caries removal on the numbers of viable microorganisms in
the caries free cavity using two operative methods. Moreover, the basic
mechanisms behind collagen degradation in the dentine caries process are studied 
from both a clinical and laboratory perspective. The report also provides a
reference for further studies on dentine caries microbiology and dentine caries
collagen degradation mechanisms, both of which are known only in part.


PMID: 26688982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

