
1. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Dec 18;11(12):e1005333. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005333.
eCollection 2015 Dec.

Intravital Imaging of Vascular Transmigration by the Lyme Spirochete: Requirement
for the Integrin Binding Residues of the B. burgdorferi P66 Protein.

Kumar D(1)(2)(3), Ristow LC(4)(5), Shi M(1)(2)(3), Mukherjee P(1)(2)(3), Caine
JA(4)(5), Lee WY(3)(6), Kubes P(3)(6), Coburn J(4)(5)(7), Chaconas G(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology & Infectious Diseases, University of
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(3)Calvin, Phoebe and Joan Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases, University of
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(4)Graduate Program in Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, Medical 
College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, United States of America.
(5)Center for Infectious Disease Research, Medical College of Wisconsin,
Milwaukee, Wisconsin, United States of America.
(6)Department of Physiology & Pharmacology, University of Calgary, Calgary,
Alberta, Canada.
(7)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, Unites States of America.

Vascular extravasation, a key step in systemic infection by hematogenous
microbial pathogens, is poorly understood, but has been postulated to encompass
features similar to vascular transmigration by leukocytes. The Lyme disease
spirochete can cause a variety of clinical manifestations, including arthritis,
upon hematogenous dissemination. This pathogen encodes numerous surface adhesive 
proteins (adhesins) that may promote extravasation, but none have yet been
implicated in this process. In this work we report the novel use of intravital
microscopy of the peripheral knee vasculature to study transmigration of the Lyme
spirochete in living Cd1d-/-mice. In the absence of iNKT cells, major immune
modulators in the mouse joint, spirochetes that have extravasated into
joint-proximal tissue remain in the local milieu and can be enumerated
accurately. We show that BBK32, a fibronectin and glycosaminoglycan adhesin of B.
burgdorferi involved in early steps of endothelial adhesion, is not required for 
extravasation from the peripheral knee vasculature. In contrast, almost no
transmigration occurs in the absence of P66, an outer membrane protein that has
porin and integrin adhesin functions. Importantly, P66 mutants specifically
defective in integrin binding were incapable of promoting extravasation. P66
itself does not promote detectable microvascular interactions, suggesting that
vascular adhesion of B. burgdorferi mediated by other adhesins, sets the stage
for P66-integrin interactions leading to transmigration. Although
integrin-binding proteins with diverse functions are encoded by a variety of
bacterial pathogens, P66 is the first to have a documented and direct role in
vascular transmigration. The emerging picture of vascular escape by the Lyme
spirochete shows similarities, but distinct differences from leukocyte
transmigration.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005333 
PMCID: PMC4686178
PMID: 26684456  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

