
1. Front Microbiol. 2015 Dec 10;6:1396. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2015.01396. eCollection
2015.

Metagenome-Based Metabolic Reconstruction Reveals the Ecophysiological Function
of Epsilonproteobacteria in a Hydrocarbon-Contaminated Sulfidic Aquifer.

Keller AH(1), Schleinitz KM(2), Starke R(3), Bertilsson S(4), Vogt C(5),
Kleinsteuber S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Isotope Biogeochemistry, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental
Research - UFZ Leipzig, Germany ; Department of Environmental Microbiology,
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Department of Environmental Microbiology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental
Research - UFZ Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Department of Proteomics, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ
Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Department of Ecology and Genetics, Limnology and Science for Life Laboratory,
Uppsala University Uppsala, Sweden.
(5)Department of Isotope Biogeochemistry, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental
Research - UFZ Leipzig, Germany.

The population genome of an uncultured bacterium assigned to the
Campylobacterales (Epsilonproteobacteria) was reconstructed from a metagenome
dataset obtained by whole-genome shotgun pyrosequencing. Genomic DNA was
extracted from a sulfate-reducing, m-xylene-mineralizing enrichment culture
isolated from groundwater of a benzene-contaminated sulfidic aquifer. The
identical epsilonproteobacterial phylotype has previously been detected in
toluene- or benzene-mineralizing, sulfate-reducing consortia enriched from the
same site. Previous stable isotope probing (SIP) experiments with (13)C6-labeled 
benzene suggested that this phylotype assimilates benzene-derived carbon in a
syntrophic benzene-mineralizing consortium that uses sulfate as terminal electron
acceptor. However, the type of energy metabolism and the ecophysiological
function of this epsilonproteobacterium within aromatic hydrocarbon-degrading
consortia and in the sulfidic aquifer are poorly understood. Annotation of the
epsilonproteobacterial population genome suggests that the bacterium plays a key 
role in sulfur cycling as indicated by the presence of an sqr gene encoding a
sulfide quinone oxidoreductase and psr genes encoding a polysulfide reductase. It
may gain energy by using sulfide or hydrogen/formate as electron donors.
Polysulfide, fumarate, as well as oxygen are potential electron acceptors. Auto- 
or mixotrophic carbon metabolism seems plausible since a complete reductive
citric acid cycle was detected. Thus the bacterium can thrive in pristine
groundwater as well as in hydrocarbon-contaminated aquifers. In
hydrocarbon-contaminated sulfidic habitats, the epsilonproteobacterium may
generate energy by coupling the oxidation of hydrogen or formate and highly
abundant sulfide with the reduction of fumarate and/or polysulfide, accompanied
by efficient assimilation of acetate produced during fermentation or incomplete
oxidation of hydrocarbons. The highly efficient assimilation of acetate was
recently demonstrated by a pulsed (13)C2-acetate protein SIP experiment. The
capability of nitrogen fixation as indicated by the presence of nif genes may
provide a selective advantage in nitrogen-depleted habitats. Based on this
metabolic reconstruction, we propose acetate capture and sulfur cycling as key
functions of Epsilonproteobacteria within the intermediary ecosystem metabolism
of hydrocarbon-rich sulfidic sediments.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2015.01396 
PMCID: PMC4674564
PMID: 26696999 

