
1. Environ Res. 2016 Apr;146:47-50. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2015.12.015. Epub 2015 Dec
21.

Serological and molecular identification of Legionella spp. isolated from water
and surrounding air samples in Italian healthcare facilities.

Montagna MT(1), Cristina ML(2), De Giglio O(3), Spagnolo AM(2), Napoli C(3),
Cannova L(4), Deriu MG(5), Delia SA(6), Giuliano A(7), Guida M(8), Laganà P(6),
Liguori G(9), Mura I(5), Pennino F(10), Rossini A(11), Tardivo S(12), Torre
I(10), Torregrossa MV(4), Villafrate MR(13), Albertini R(14), Pasquarella C(15).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science and Human Oncology - Hygiene Section,
University of Bari, Bari, Italy. Electronic address:
mariateresa.montagna@uniba.it.
(2)Department of Health Sciences, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical Science and Human Oncology - Hygiene Section,
University of Bari, Bari, Italy.
(4)Department of Sciences for Health Promotion - Hygiene Section, University of
Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(5)Department of Biomedical Science - Hygiene Section, University of Sassari,
Sassari, Italy.
(6)Department of Biomedical Science and Morphological and Functional Images,
University of Messina, Messina, Italy.
(7)Department of Prevention Services of Hygiene and Public Health, ASL Salerno,
Salerno, Italy.
(8)Department of Biology, University of Napoli "Federico II", Napoli, Italy.
(9)Department of Movement and Health Sciences, University "Parthenope", Napoli,
Italy.
(10)Department of Public Health, University of Napoli, Napoli, Italy.
(11)IRCCS Fondazione Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy.
(12)Department of Public Health and Community Medicine, University of Verona,
Verona, Italy.
(13)Unit "Control Hospital Hygiene" University Hospital Policlinico "P.
Giaccone", Palermo, Italy.
(14)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Parma, U.O.
Medical Immunology, University Hospital of Parma, Italy.
(15)Department of Biomedical, Biotechnological and Translation Sciences,
University of Parma, Parma, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Legionella is an intracellular microorganism living in natural and
artificial aquatic environments. Although its transmission to humans is linked to
the inhalation of contaminated aerosols, there is no validated air sampling
method for the control and prevention of the disease. The aim of the present
study was to provide more information on the distribution of Legionella spp. in
indoor environments and to determine whether the same Legionella strains are
isolated from air and water samples.
METHODS: Ten healthcare facilities located in seven regions of Italy were
enrolled. The serological typing of Legionella spp. from water samples and the
surrounding air by active and passive sampling was assessed using polyvalent and 
monovalent antisera. Subsequently, the strains identified as Legionella
pneumophila (Lpn) underwent molecular typing by sequence-based typing (SBT) using
seven genes (flaA, pilE, asd, mip, mompS, proA, and neuA). The allelic profile
number was assigned using the European Working Group for Legionella
Infections-SBT database.
RESULTS: Lpn serogroup 6 was the most prevalent serogroup; it was found
simultaneously in the air and water samples of three different healthcare
facilities. In the remaining seven hospitals, Lpn serogroups 1, 6, 7, 9, and 12
were isolated exclusively from water samples. The molecular investigation showed 
that Lpn strains in the water and air samples of each positive healthcare
facility had the same allelic profile. Strains, identified as sequence types
(STs) 728 and ST 1638+ST 1324, were isolated in two respective healthcare
facilities, and a new strain, identified as ST 1989, was obtained in one
healthcare facility.
CONCLUSION: The application of the SBT method allowed to verify the homology
among Legionella strains from water samples and the surrounding air. The results 
showed that the same Lpn strains were present in the air and water samples, and a
new Legionella strain was identified.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envres.2015.12.015 
PMID: 26717079  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

