
1. Oncogenesis. 2016 Jan 11;5:e182. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2015.45.

The CaSm (LSm1) oncogene promotes transformation, chemoresistance and metastasis 
of pancreatic cancer cells.

Little EC(1)(2), Camp ER(2)(3)(4), Wang C(2)(3), Watson PM(2)(5), Watson
DK(2)(5)(6), Cole DJ(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.
(2)Hollings Cancer Center, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, 
USA.
(3)Department of Surgery, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC,
USA.
(4)Ralph H Johnson VA Medical Center, Charleston, SC, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.

The cancer-associated Sm-like (CaSm) oncogene is overexpressed in 87% of human
pancreatic tumor samples and CaSm knockdown has demonstrated therapeutic efficacy
in murine models of pancreatic cancer. Evidence indicates that CaSm modulates
messenger RNA degradation; however, its target genes and the mechanisms by which 
CaSm promotes pancreatic cancer remain largely unknown. Here, we demonstrate that
the CaSm overexpression alters several hallmarks of cancer-including
transformation, proliferation, chemoresistance and metastasis.
Doxycycline-induced CaSm expression enhanced proliferation and both
anchorage-dependent and -independent growth of the human Panc-1 cells in vitro.
CaSm induction decreased gemcitabine-induced cytotoxicity and altered the
expression of apoptotic regulation genes, including Bad, E2F1 and Bcl-XL.
CaSm-overexpressing Panc-1 cells were twofold more migratory and fourfold more
invasive than the driver controls and demonstrated characteristics of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition such as morphological changes and decreased 
E-cadherin expression. CaSm induction resulted in changes in RNA expression of
metastasis-associated genes such as MMP1, SerpinB5, uPAR and Slug. Using a murine
model of metastatic pancreatic cancer, injection of CaSm-induced Panc-1 cells
resulted in a higher abundance of hepatic metastatic lesions. Overall, CaSm
overexpression contributed to a more aggressive cancer phenotype in Panc-1 cells,
further supporting the use of CaSm as a therapeutic target against pancreatic
cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/oncsis.2015.45 
PMCID: PMC4728675
PMID: 26751936 

