
1. J Microbiol Methods. 2016 Feb;121:59-65. doi: 10.1016/j.mimet.2015.12.017. Epub
2016 Jan 6.

Development and evaluation of multiplex PCR assays for rapid detection of
virulence-associated genes in Arcobacter species.

Whiteduck-Léveillée J(1), Cloutier M(1), Topp E(2), Lapen DR(1), Talbot G(3),
Villemur R(4), Khan IU(5).

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Research and Development Centre (ORDC), Agriculture and Agri-Food
Canada, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(2)London Research and Development Centre (LRDC), Agriculture and Agri-Food
Canada, London, ON, Canada.
(3)Sherbrooke Research and Development Centre (SRDC), Agriculture and Agri-Food
Canada, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada.
(4)INRS-Institute Armand-Frappier Research Centre, Laval, QC, Canada.
(5)Ottawa Research and Development Centre (ORDC), Agriculture and Agri-Food
Canada, Ottawa, ON, Canada. Electronic address: izhar.khan@agr.gc.ca.

As the pathogenicity of Arcobacter species might be associated with various
virulence factors, this study was aimed to develop and optimize three single-tube
multiplex PCR (mPCR) assays that can efficiently detect multiple
virulence-associated genes (VAGs) in Arcobacter spp. including the Arcobacter
butzleri, Arcobacter cryaerophilus and Arcobacter skirrowii, respectively. The
recognized target virulence factors used in the study were fibronectin binding
protein (cj1349), filamentous hemagglutinin (hecA), hemolysin activation protein 
(hecB), hemolysin (tlyA), integral membrane protein virulence factor (mviN),
invasin (ciaB), outer membrane protein (irgA) and phospholipase (pldA). Identical
results were obtained between singleplex PCR and mPCR assays and no cross- and/or
non-specific amplification products were obtained when tested against other
closely related bacterial species. The sensitivities of these three mPCR assays
were ranging from 1ngμL(-1) to 100ngμL(-1) DNA. The developed assays with
combinations of duplex or triplex PCR primer pairs of VAGs were further evaluated
and validated by applying them to isolates of the A. butzleri, A. cryaerophilus
and A. skirrowii recovered from fecal samples of human and animal origins. The
findings revealed that the distribution of the ciaB (90%), mviN (70%), tlyA (50%)
and pldA (45%) genes among these target species was significantly higher than the
hecA (16%), hecB (10%) and each of irgA and cj1349 (6%) genes, respectively. The 
newly developed mPCR assays can be used as rapid technique and useful markers for
the detection, prevalence and profiling of VAGs in the Arcobacter spp. Moreover, 
these assays can easily be performed with a high throughput to give a presumptive
identification of the causal pathogen in epidemiological investigation of human
infections.

Crown Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mimet.2015.12.017 
PMID: 26769558  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

