
1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Jan 7;6:1511. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2015.01511. eCollection
2015.

High Diversity of Anaerobic Alkane-Degrading Microbial Communities in Marine Seep
Sediments Based on (1-methylalkyl)succinate Synthase Genes.

Stagars MH(1), Ruff SE(2), Amann R(1), Knittel K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Ecology, Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology 
Bremen, Germany.
(2)Department of Molecular Ecology, Max Planck Institute for Marine
MicrobiologyBremen, Germany; HGF MPG Joint Research Group for Deep-Sea Ecology
and Technology, Max Planck Institute for Marine MicrobiologyBremen, Germany.

Alkanes comprise a substantial fraction of crude oil and are prevalent at marine 
seeps. These environments are typically anoxic and host diverse microbial
communities that grow on alkanes. The most widely distributed mechanism of
anaerobic alkane activation is the addition of alkanes to fumarate by
(1-methylalkyl)succinate synthase (Mas). Here we studied the diversity of MasD,
the catalytic subunit of the enzyme, in 12 marine sediments sampled at seven
seeps. We aimed to identify cosmopolitan species as well as to identify factors
structuring the alkane-degrading community. Using next generation sequencing we
obtained a total of 420 MasD species-level operational taxonomic units (OTU0.96) 
at 96% amino acid identity. Diversity analysis shows a high richness and evenness
of alkane-degrading bacteria. Sites with similar hydrocarbon composition harbored
similar alkane-degrading communities based on MasD genes; the MasD community
structure is clearly driven by the hydrocarbon source available at the various
seeps. Two of the detected OTU0.96 were cosmopolitan and abundant while 75% were 
locally restricted, suggesting the presence of few abundant and globally
distributed alkane degraders as well as specialized variants that have developed 
under specific conditions at the diverse seep environments. Of the three MasD
clades identified, the most diverse was affiliated with Deltaproteobacteria. A
second clade was affiliated with both Deltaproteobacteria and Firmicutes likely
indicating lateral gene transfer events. The third clade was only distantly
related to known alkane-degrading organisms and comprises new divergent lineages 
of MasD homologs, which might belong to an overlooked phylum of alkane-degrading 
bacteria. In addition, masD geneFISH allowed for the in situ identification and
quantification of the target guild in alkane-degrading enrichment cultures.
Altogether, these findings suggest an unexpectedly high number of yet unknown
groups of anaerobic alkane degraders and underline the need for comprehensive
surveys of microbial diversity based on metabolic genes in addition to ribosomal 
genes.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2015.01511 
PMCID: PMC4703814
PMID: 26779166 

