
1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Jan 8;6:1524. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2015.01524. eCollection
2015.

Expanding the World of Marine Bacterial and Archaeal Clades.

Yilmaz P(1), Yarza P(2), Rapp JZ(3), Glöckner FO(4).

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Genomics and Bioinformatics Research Group, Max Planck Institute for
Marine Microbiology Bremen, Germany.
(2)Ribocon GmbH Bremen, Germany.
(3)HGF-MPG Joint Research Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck
Institute for Marine Microbiology, Bremen and the Alfred Wegener Institute
Helmholtz Centre for Polar and Marine Research Bremerhaven, Germany.
(4)Microbial Genomics and Bioinformatics Research Group, Max Planck Institute for
Marine MicrobiologyBremen, Germany; Life Sciences and Chemistry, Jacobs
UniversityBremen, Germany.

Determining which microbial taxa are out there, where they live, and what they
are doing is a driving approach in marine microbial ecology. The importance of
these questions is underlined by concerted, large-scale, and global ocean
sampling initiatives, for example the International Census of Marine Microbes,
Ocean Sampling Day, or Tara Oceans. Given decades of effort, we know that the
large majority of marine Bacteria and Archaea belong to about a dozen phyla. In
addition to the classically culturable Bacteria and Archaea, at least 50
"clades," at different taxonomic depths, exist. These account for the majority of
marine microbial diversity, but there is still an underexplored and less abundant
portion remaining. We refer to these hitherto unrecognized clades as unknown, as 
their boundaries, names, and classifications are not available. In this work, we 
were able to characterize up to 92 of these unknown clades found within the
bacterial and archaeal phylogenetic diversity currently reported for marine water
column environments. We mined the SILVA 16S rRNA gene datasets for sequences
originating from the marine water column. Instead of the usual subjective taxa
delineation and nomenclature methods, we applied the candidate taxonomic unit
(CTU) circumscription system, along with a standardized nomenclature to the
sequences in newly constructed phylogenetic trees. With this new phylogenetic and
taxonomic framework, we performed an analysis of ICoMM rRNA gene amplicon
datasets to gain insights into the global distribution of the new marine clades, 
their ecology, biogeography, and interaction with oceanographic variables. Most
of the new clades we identified were interspersed by known taxa with cultivated
members, whose genome sequences are available. This result encouraged us to
perform metabolic predictions for the novel marine clades using the PICRUSt
approach. Our work also provides an update on the taxonomy of several phyla and
widely known marine clades as our CTU approach breaks down these randomly lumped 
clades into smaller objectively calculated subgroups. Finally, all taxa were
classified and named following standards compatible with the Bacteriological Code
rules, enhancing their digitization, and comparability with future microbial
ecological and taxonomy studies.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2015.01524 
PMCID: PMC4705458
PMID: 26779174 

