
1. Biochemistry. 2016 Feb 16;55(6):837-49. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.5b00965. Epub
2016 Feb 3.

Nuclease-Resistant c-di-AMP Derivatives That Differentially Recognize RNA and
Protein Receptors.

Meehan RE, Torgerson CD, Gaffney BL(1), Jones RA(1), Strobel SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Rutgers, The State University of
New Jersey , Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, United States.

The ability of bacteria to sense environmental cues and adapt is essential for
their survival. The use of second-messenger signaling molecules to translate
these cues into a physiological response is a common mechanism employed by
bacteria. The second messenger 3'-5'-cyclic diadenosine monophosphate (c-di-AMP) 
has been linked to a diverse set of biological processes involved in maintaining 
cell viability and homeostasis, as well as pathogenicity. A complex network of
both protein and RNA receptors inside the cell activates specific pathways and
mediates phenotypic outputs in response to c-di-AMP. Structural analysis of these
RNA and protein receptors has revealed the different recognition elements
employed by these effectors to bind the same small molecule. Herein, using a
series of c-di-AMP analogues, we probed the interactions made with a riboswitch
and a phosphodiesterase protein to identify the features important for c-di-AMP
binding and recognition. We found that the ydaO riboswitch binds c-di-AMP in two 
discrete sites with near identical affinity and a Hill coefficient of 1.6. The
ydaO riboswitch distinguishes between c-di-AMP and structurally related second
messengers by discriminating against an amine at the C2 position more than a
carbonyl at the C6 position. We also identified phosphate-modified analogues that
bind both the ydaO RNA and GdpP protein with high affinity, whereas symmetrically
modified ribose analogues exhibited a substantial decrease in ydaO affinity but
retained high affinity for GdpP. These ligand modifications resulted in increased
resistance to enzyme-catalyzed hydrolysis by the GdpP enzyme. Together, these
data suggest that these c-di-AMP analogues could be useful as chemical tools to
specifically target subsections of second-messenger signaling pathways.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.5b00965 
PMCID: PMC4755858
PMID: 26789423  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

