
1. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 19;11(1):e0146931. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0146931.
eCollection 2016.

A Novel High Content Imaging-Based Screen Identifies the Anti-Helminthic
Niclosamide as an Inhibitor of Lysosome Anterograde Trafficking and Prostate
Cancer Cell Invasion.

Circu ML(1), Dykes SS(1)(2), Carroll J(1), Kelly K(1), Galiano F(1), Greer A(1), 
Cardelli J(1)(2), El-Osta H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Feist-Weiller Cancer Center, Louisiana State University Health Sciences
Center, Shreveport, Louisiana, United States of America.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center, Shreveport, Louisiana, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2016;11(3):e0151718.

Lysosome trafficking plays a significant role in tumor invasion, a key event for 
the development of metastasis. Previous studies from our laboratory have
demonstrated that the anterograde (outward) movement of lysosomes to the cell
surface in response to certain tumor microenvironment stimulus, such as
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) or acidic extracellular pH (pHe), increases
cathepsin B secretion and tumor cell invasion. Anterograde lysosome trafficking
depends on sodium-proton exchanger activity and can be reversed by blocking these
ion pumps with Troglitazone or EIPA. Since these drugs cannot be advanced into
the clinic due to toxicity, we have designed a high-content assay to discover
drugs that block peripheral lysosome trafficking with the goal of identifying
novel drugs that inhibit tumor cell invasion. An automated high-content imaging
system (Cellomics) was used to measure the position of lysosomes relative to the 
nucleus. Among a total of 2210 repurposed and natural product drugs screened, 18 
"hits" were identified. One of the compounds identified as an anterograde
lysosome trafficking inhibitor was niclosamide, a marketed human anti-helminthic 
drug. Further studies revealed that niclosamide blocked acidic pHe, HGF, and
epidermal growth factor (EGF)-induced anterograde lysosome redistribution,
protease secretion, motility, and invasion of DU145 castrate resistant prostate
cancer cells at clinically relevant concentrations. In an effort to identify the 
mechanism by which niclosamide prevented anterograde lysosome movement, we found 
that this drug exhibited no significant effect on the level of ATP, microtubules 
or actin filaments, and had minimal effect on the PI3K and MAPK pathways.
Niclosamide collapsed intralysosomal pH without disruption of the lysosome
membrane, while bafilomycin, an agent that impairs lysosome acidification, was
also found to induce JLA in our model. Taken together, these data suggest that
niclosamide promotes juxtanuclear lysosome aggregation (JLA) via modulation of
pathways involved in lysosome acidification. In conclusion, we have designed a
validated reproducible high-content assay to screen for drugs that inhibit
lysosome trafficking and reduce tumor invasion and we summarize the action of one
of these drugs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0146931 
PMCID: PMC4718621
PMID: 26784896  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

