
1. Biomater Sci. 2016 Apr;4(4):639-51. doi: 10.1039/c5bm00534e. Epub 2016 Jan 25.

Bifunctional bioceramics stimulating osteogenic differentiation of a gingival
fibroblast and inhibiting plaque biofilm formation.

Shen Y(1), Wang Z, Wang J, Zhou Y, Chen H, Wu C, Haapasalo M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endodontics, Oral Biological & Medical Sciences, School of
Dentistry, University of British Columbia, 2199 Wesbrook Mall, Vancouver BC,
Canada V6T 1Z3. markush@dentistry.ubc.ca.

Gingival recession is a common clinical problem that results in esthetic
deficiencies and poor plaque control and predominantly occurs in aged patients.
In order to restore the cervical region, ideal biomaterials should possess the
ability to stimulate proliferation and osteogenesis/cementogenesis of human
gingival fibroblasts (HGF) and have a strong antibiofilm effect. The aim of the
present study was to investigate the interactions of HGF and oral multispecies
biofilms with Ca, Mg and Si-containing bredigite (BRT, Ca7MgSi4O16) bioceramics. 
BRT extract induced osteogenic/cementogenic differentiation of HGF and its
inhibition of plaque biofilm formation were systematically studied. BRT extract
in concentrations lower than <200 mg mL(-1) presented high biocompatibility to
HGF cells in 3 days. Ion extracts from BRT also stimulated a series of
bone-related gene and protein expressions in HGF cells. Furthermore, BRT extract 
significantly inhibited oral multispecies plaque biofilm growth on its surface
and contributed to over 30% bacterial cell death without additional antibacterial
agents in two weeks. A planktonic killing test showed that BRT suppressed 98%
plaque bacterial growth compared to blank control in 3 days. The results also
revealed that BRT extract has an osteostimulation effect on HGF. The suppression 
effect on plaque biofilms suggested that BRT might be used as a bioactive
material for cervical restoration and that the synergistic effect of bioactive
ions, such as Ca, Mg and Si ions, played an important role in the design and
construction of bifunctional biomaterials in combination with tissue regeneration
and antibiofilm activity.

DOI: 10.1039/c5bm00534e 
PMID: 26806408  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

