
1. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 29;11(1):e0141000. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141000.
eCollection 2016.

Receptor for Advanced Glycation End Products (RAGE) Serves a Protective Role
during Klebsiella pneumoniae - Induced Pneumonia.

Achouiti A(1)(2), de Vos AF(1)(2), van 't Veer C(1)(2), Florquin S(3), Tanck
MW(4), Nawroth PP(5), Bierhaus A(5), van der Poll T(1)(2), van Zoelen
MA(6)(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine (CEMM), Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Bioinformatics,
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Chemistry, University of
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(6)Laboratory of Biomedical Science, Feinstein Institute for Medical Research,
North Shore Long Island University Hospital, Manhassat, New York, United States
of America.
(7)Division of Internal Medicine and Infectious Diseases, University Medical
Center of Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(8)Laboratory of Translational Immunology (LTI), University Medical Center of
Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands.

Klebsiella species is the second most commonly isolated gram-negative organism in
sepsis and a frequent causative pathogen in pneumonia. The receptor for advanced 
glycation end products (RAGE) is expressed on different cell types and plays a
key role in diverse inflammatory responses. We here aimed to investigate the role
of RAGE in the host response to Klebsiella (K.) pneumoniae pneumonia and
intransally inoculated rage gene deficient (RAGE-/-) and normal wild-type (Wt)
mice with K. pneumoniae. Klebsiella pneumonia resulted in an increased pulmonary 
expression of RAGE. Furthermore, the high-affinity RAGE ligand high mobility
group box-1 was upregulated during K. pneumoniae pneumonia. RAGE deficiency
impaired host defense as reflected by a worsened survival, increased bacterial
outgrowth and dissemination in RAGE-/- mice. RAGE-/- neutrophils showed a
diminished phagocytosing capacity of live K. pneumoniae in vitro. Relative to Wt 
mice, RAGE-/- mice demonstrated similar lung inflammation, and slightly
elevated-if any-cytokine and chemokine levels and unchanged hepatocellular
injury. In addition, RAGE-/- mice displayed an unaltered response to intranasally
instilled Klebsiella lipopolysaccharide (LPS) with respect to pulmonary cell
recruitment and local release of cytokines and chemokines. These data suggest
that (endogenous) RAGE protects against K. pneumoniae pneumonia. Also, they
demonstrate that RAGE contributes to an effective antibacterial defense during K.
pneumoniae pneumonia, at least partly via its participation in the phagocytic
properties of professional granulocytes. Additionally, our results indicate that 
RAGE is not essential for the induction of a local and systemic inflammatory
response to either intact Klebsiella or Klebsiella LPS.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141000 
PMCID: PMC4732606
PMID: 26824892  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

