
1. Immunol Cell Biol. 2016 Apr;94(4):315-21. doi: 10.1038/icb.2016.6. Epub 2016 Feb 
2.

Two macrophage migration inhibitory factors regulate starfish larval immune cell 
chemotaxis.

Furukawa R(1), Tamaki K(2), Kaneko H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Research and Education Center for Natural Sciences,
Keio University, Kanagawa, Japan.
(2)School of Fundamental Science and Technology, Graduate School of Science and
Technology, Keio University, Kanagawa, Japan.

Comment in
    Immunol Cell Biol. 2016 Apr;94(4):313-4.

Immune cell recruitment is critical step in the inflammatory response and
associated diseases. However, the underlying regulatory mechanisms are poorly
understood in invertebrates. Mesenchyme cells of the starfish larvae, which
allowed Metchnikoff to complete his landmark experiments, are important model for
analysis of immune cell migration. The present study investigated the role of
macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF)--an evolutionarily conserved
cytokine that is functionally similar to chemokines--in the larvae of the
starfish Patiria (Asterina) pectinifera, which were found to possess two
orthologs, ApMIF1 and ApMIF2. ApMIF1 and ApMIF2 clustered with mammalian MIF and 
its homolog D-dopachrome tautomerase (DDT), respectively, in the phylogenetic
analysis. In contrast to the functional similarity between mammalian MIF and DDT,
ApMIF1 knockdown resulted in the excessive recruitment of mesenchyme cells in
vivo, whereas ApMIF2 deficiency inhibited the recruitment of these cells to
foreign bodies. Mesenchyme cells migrated along a gradient of recombinant ApMIF2 
in vitro, whereas recombinant ApMIF1 completely blocked ApMIF2-induced directed
migration. Moreover, the expression patterns of ApMIF1 and ApMIF2 messenger RNA
in bacteria-challenged mesenchyme cells were consistent with in vivo observations
of cell behaviors. These results indicate that ApMIF1 and ApMIF2 act as
chemotactic inhibitory and stimulatory factors, respectively, and coordinately
regulate mesenchyme cell recruitment during the immune response in starfish
larvae. This is the first report describing opposing functions for MIF- and
DDT-like molecules. Our findings provide novel insight into the mechanisms
underlying immune regulation in invertebrates.

DOI: 10.1038/icb.2016.6 
PMID: 26833025  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

