
1. Vox Sang. 2016 May;110(4):336-43. doi: 10.1111/vox.12384. Epub 2016 Feb 5.

Establishment of a proficiency panel for an external quality assessment programme
for the detection of bacterial contamination in platelet concentrates using rapid
and cultural detection methods.

Vollmer T(1), Schmidt M(2), Hourfar K(2), Schottstedt V(3), Pichl L(3), Gubbe
K(4), Knabbe C(1), Dreier J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Laboratoriums- und Transfusionsmedizin, Herz- und Diabeteszentrum
Nordrhein-Westfalen, Universitätsklinik der Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bad
Oeynhausen, Germany.
(2)Institute of Transfusion Medicine and Immunohematology, German Red Cross,
Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany.
(3)German Red Cross Blood Transfusion Service West, Central Laboratory, Hagen,
Germany.
(4)DRK Blutspendedienst Nord-Ost gemeinnützige GmbH, Plauen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Platelet concentrates (PCs) are the main focus regarding the residual
risk of transfusion-transmitted bacterial infections. Rapid screening methods for
bacterial detection in platelets have been optimized over the last decade, but
their external evaluation represents a complicated process. We developed a new
type of proficiency panel for bacterial detection in PCs using currently
available screening methods (especially rapid methods) suitable for external
quality assessment programmes (EQAP).
METHODS: PC samples were inoculated with different bacteria at two concentrations
(10E+03 CFU/ml, 10E+05 CFU/ml) and stored under temperature-controlled conditions
(1-5 days). Bacterial growth was further prevented by the addition of 0-20 μg/ml 
cotrimoxazole. Samples were analysed prior to and after storage using rapid
detection methods (Bactiflow (BF), bacteria-generic NAT) and cultural methods to 
determine the influence of storage and antibiotic treatment on bacterial counts
and the result outcome. A pilot EQAP was performed with four participants.
RESULTS: Testing under the evaluated conditions demonstrated that bacterial
counts remained constant prior to and after storage. The supplementation of 10
μg/ml cotrimoxazole did not influence bacterial detection using the two rapid
detection methods BF and NAT. Furthermore, the detection of bacteria using
cultural methods is still possible despite of antibiotic supplementation. The
pilot EQAP confirmed these results. A storage time of up to 3 days proved
practicable, showing no considerable influence on bacterial count and outcome of 
test results.
CONCLUSION: The established proficiency panel provided PC matrix-conform samples 
with stabilized bacterial counts which can be analysed in parallel by rapid and
cultural detection methods.

© 2016 International Society of Blood Transfusion.

DOI: 10.1111/vox.12384 
PMID: 26848941  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

