
1. Exp Dermatol. 2016 Jun;25(6):460-5. doi: 10.1111/exd.12966. Epub 2016 May 18.

Platelet-released growth factors induce the antimicrobial peptide human
beta-defensin-2 in primary keratinocytes.

Bayer A(1), Lammel J(2), Rademacher F(2), Groß J(1), Siggelkow M(3), Lippross
S(4), Klüter T(4), Varoga D(4), Tohidnezhad M(5), Pufe T(5), Cremer J(1), Gläser 
R(2), Harder J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Heart- and Vascular Surgery, University Hospital of
Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital of Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel,
Germany.
(3)Department of Vascular and Thoracic Surgery, Imland Clinic Rendsburg,
Rendsburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Traumatology, University Hospital of Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel,
Germany.
(5)Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, RWTH University of Aachen, Aachen,
Germany.

Platelet-released growth factors (PRGF) and its related clinically used
formulations [e.g. Vivostat platelet-rich fibrin (PRF(®) )] are thrombocyte
concentrate lysates that support healing of chronic, hard-to-heal and infected
wounds. Human beta-defensin-2 (hBD-2) is an antimicrobial peptide expressed in
human keratinocytes exhibiting potent antimicrobial activity against
wound-related bacteria. In this study, we analysed the influence of PRGF on hBD-2
expression in human primary keratinocytes and the influence of Vivostat PRF(®) on
hBD-2 expression in experimentally generated skin wounds in vivo. Treatment of
primary keratinocytes with PRGF caused a significant increase in hBD-2 gene and
protein expressions in a concentration- and time-dependent manner. The use of
blocking antibodies revealed that the PRGF-mediated hBD-2 induction was partially
mediated by the epidermal growth factor receptor and the interleukin-6 receptor
(IL-6R). Luciferase gene reporter assays indicated that the hBD-2 induction
through PRGF required activation of the transcription factor activator protein 1 
(AP-1), but not of NF-kappaB. In concordance with these cell culture data,
Vivostat PRF(®) induced hBD-2 expression when applied to experimentally generated
skin wounds. Together, our results indicate that the induction of hBD-2 by
thrombocyte concentrate lysates can contribute to the observed beneficial effects
in the treatment of chronic and infected wounds.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/exd.12966 
PMID: 26843467  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

