
1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Jan 29;7:17. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00017. eCollection
2016.

Microbial Communities in Methane- and Short Chain Alkane-Rich Hydrothermal
Sediments of Guaymas Basin.

Dowell F(1), Cardman Z(1), Dasarathy S(1), Kellermann MY(2), Lipp JS(3), Ruff
SE(4), Biddle JF(5), McKay LJ(1), MacGregor BJ(1), Lloyd KG(6), Albert DB(1),
Mendlovitz H(1), Hinrichs KU(3), Teske A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Marine Sciences, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(2)MARUM Center for Marine Environmental Sciences and Department of Geosciences, 
University of BremenBremen, Germany; Department of Earth Science and Marine
Science Institute, University of California at Santa BarbaraSanta Barbara, CA,
USA.
(3)MARUM Center for Marine Environmental Sciences and Department of Geosciences, 
University of Bremen Bremen, Germany.
(4)HGF-MPG Group for Deep-Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck Institute for
Marine Microbiology Bremen, Germany.
(5)School of Marine Science and Policy, University of Delaware Lewes, DE, USA.
(6)Department of Microbiology, The University of Tennessee Knoxville, TN, USA.

The hydrothermal sediments of Guaymas Basin, an active spreading center in the
Gulf of California (Mexico), are rich in porewater methane, short-chain alkanes, 
sulfate and sulfide, and provide a model system to explore habitat preferences of
microorganisms, including sulfate-dependent, methane- and short chain
alkane-oxidizing microbial communities. In this study, hot sediments (above 60°C)
covered with sulfur-oxidizing microbial mats surrounding a hydrothermal mound
(termed "Mat Mound") were characterized by porewater geochemistry of methane,
C2-C6 short-chain alkanes, sulfate, sulfide, sulfate reduction rate measurements,
in situ temperature gradients, bacterial and archaeal 16S rRNA gene clone
libraries and V6 tag pyrosequencing. The most abundantly detected groups in the
Mat mound sediments include anaerobic methane-oxidizing archaea of the ANME-1
lineage and its sister clade ANME-1Guaymas, the uncultured bacterial groups
SEEP-SRB2 within the Deltaproteobacteria and the separately branching HotSeep-1
Group; these uncultured bacteria are candidates for sulfate-reducing alkane
oxidation and for sulfate-reducing syntrophy with ANME archaea. The archaeal
dataset indicates distinct habitat preferences for ANME-1, ANME-1-Guaymas, and
ANME-2 archaea in Guaymas Basin hydrothermal sediments. The bacterial groups
SEEP-SRB2 and HotSeep-1 co-occur with ANME-1 and ANME-1Guaymas in hydrothermally 
active sediments underneath microbial mats in Guaymas Basin. We propose the
working hypothesis that this mixed bacterial and archaeal community catalyzes the
oxidation of both methane and short-chain alkanes, and constitutes a microbial
community signature that is characteristic for hydrothermal and/or cold seep
sediments containing both substrates.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00017 
PMCID: PMC4731509
PMID: 26858698 

