
1. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 1;7(9):10522-35. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7231.

Marked enhancement of lysosomal targeting and efficacy of ErbB2-targeted drug
delivery by HSP90 inhibition.

Raja SM(1)(2), Desale SS(3), Mohapatra B(1), Luan H(1), Soni K(3), Zhang J(3),
Storck MA(1), Feng D(1), Bielecki TA(1), Band V(4), Cohen SM(5), Bronich TK(3),
Band H(1)(3)(4)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, Omaha, Nebraska, 
USA.
(2)Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University, Chicago,
Illinois, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Center for Drug Delivery and
Nanomedicine, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.
(4)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Anatomy, College of Medicine,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.
(6)Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pathology and Microbiology 
and Pharmacology and Neuroscience, College of Medicine, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.

Targeted delivery of anticancer drugs to tumor cells using monoclonal antibodies 
against oncogenic cell surface receptors is an emerging therapeutic strategy.
These strategies include drugs directly conjugated to monoclonal antibodies
through chemical linkers (Antibody-Drug Conjugates, ADCs) or those encapsulated
within nanoparticles that in turn are conjugated to targeting antibodies
(Antibody-Nanoparticle Conjugates, ANPs). The recent FDA approval of the ADC
Trastuzumab-TDM1 (Kadcyla; Genentech; San Francisco) for the treatment of
ErbB2-overexpressing metastatic breast cancer patients has validated the strong
potential of these strategies. Even though the activity of ANPs and ADCs is
dependent on lysosomal traffic, the roles of the endocytic route traversed by the
targeted receptor and of cancer cell-specific alterations in receptor dynamics on
the efficiency of drug delivery have not been considered in these new targeted
therapies. For example, constitutive association with the molecular chaperone
HSP90 is thought to either retard ErbB2 endocytosis or to promote its recycling, 
traits undesirable for targeted therapy with ANPs and ADCs. HSP90 inhibitors are 
known to promote ErbB2 ubiquitination, targeting to lysosome and degradation. We 
therefore hypothesized that ErbB2-targeted drug delivery using
Trastuzumab-conjugated nanoparticles could be significantly improved by HSP90
inhibitor-promoted lysosomal traffic of ErbB2. Studies reported here validate
this hypothesis and demonstrate, both in vitro and in vivo, that HSP90 inhibition
facilitates the intracellular delivery of Trastuzumab-conjugated ANPs carrying a 
model chemotherapeutic agent, Doxorubicin, specifically into ErbB2-overexpressing
breast cancer cells, resulting in improved antitumor activity. These novel
findings highlight the need to consider oncogene-specific alterations in receptor
traffic in the design of targeted drug delivery strategies. We suggest that
combination of agents that enhance receptor endocytosis and lysosomal routing can
provide a novel strategy to significantly improve therapy with ANPs and ADCs.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.7231 
PMCID: PMC4891137
PMID: 26859680  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

