
1. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2016 Aug;113(8):1764-76. doi: 10.1002/bit.25947. Epub 2016 Feb
23.

Expanding the modular ester fermentative pathways for combinatorial biosynthesis 
of esters from volatile organic acids.

Layton DS(1)(2), Trinh CT(3)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Tennessee, 
Knoxville, Tennessee.
(2)BioEnergy Science Center (BESC), Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge,
Tennessee.
(3)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Tennessee, 
Knoxville, Tennessee. ctrinh@utk.edu.
(4)BioEnergy Science Center (BESC), Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge,
Tennessee. ctrinh@utk.edu.
(5)Bredesen Center for Interdisciplinary Research and Graduate Education,
University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee. ctrinh@utk.edu.

Volatile organic acids are byproducts of fermentative metabolism, for example,
anaerobic digestion of lignocellulosic biomass or organic wastes, and are often
times undesired inhibiting cell growth and reducing directed formation of the
desired products. Here, we devised a general framework for upgrading these
volatile organic acids to high-value esters that can be used as flavors,
fragrances, solvents, and biofuels. This framework employs the acid-to-ester
modules, consisting of an AAT (alcohol acyltransferase) plus ACT (acyl CoA
transferase) submodule and an alcohol submodule, for co-fermentation of sugars
and organic acids to acyl CoAs and alcohols to form a combinatorial library of
esters. By assembling these modules with the engineered Escherichia coli modular 
chassis cell, we developed microbial manufacturing platforms to perform the
following functions: (i) rapid in vivo screening of novel AATs for their
catalytic activities; (ii) expanding combinatorial biosynthesis of unique
fermentative esters; and (iii) upgrading volatile organic acids to esters using
single or mixed cell cultures. To demonstrate this framework, we screened for a
set of five unique and divergent AATs from multiple species, and were able to
determine their novel activities as well as produce a library of 12 out of the 13
expected esters from co-fermentation of sugars and (C2-C6) volatile organic
acids. We envision the developed framework to be valuable for in vivo
characterization of a repertoire of not-well-characterized natural AATs,
expanding the combinatorial biosynthesis of fermentative esters, and upgrading
volatile organic acids to high-value esters. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2016;113:
1764-1776. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bit.25947 
PMID: 26853081  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

