
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2016 Jun;99(6):1035-43. doi: 10.1189/jlb.3MA0915-418R. Epub 2016
Feb 11.

Macrophage migration inhibitory factor drives neutrophil accumulation by
facilitating IL-1β production in a murine model of acute gout.

Galvão I(1), Dias AC(1), Tavares LD(2), Rodrigues IP(1), Queiroz-Junior CM(3),
Costa VV(2), Reis AC(3), Ribeiro Oliveira RD(4), Louzada-Junior P(4), Souza
DG(2), Leng L(5), Bucala R(5), Sousa LP(6), Bozza MT(7), Teixeira MM(8), Amaral
FA(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, Institute of Biological Sciences,
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Biological Sciences, Universidade
Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(3)Department of Morphology, Institute of Biological Sciences, Universidade
Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(4)Division of Rheumatology, School of Medicine of Ribeirao Preto, Universidade
de São Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Department of Medicine/Rheumatology, Yale University School of Medicine, The
Anlyan Center, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(6)Department of Clinical Analysis and Toxicological, Faculty of Pharmacy,
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(7)Laboratory of Inflammation and Immunity, Department of Immunology, Institute
of Microbiology, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(8)Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, Institute of Biological Sciences,
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil
mmtex@icb.ufmg.br.
(9)Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, Institute of Biological Sciences,
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil
famaral@icb.ufmg.br.

This study evaluated the role of macrophage migration inhibitory factor in
inflammation caused by monosodium urate crystals. The concentration of macrophage
migration inhibitory factor was increased in synovial fluid of patients with
acute gout, and there was a positive correlation between intra-articular
macrophage migration inhibitory factor and IL-1β concentrations. In mice, the
injection of monosodium urate crystals into the knee joint increased the levels
of macrophage migration inhibitory factor in macrophages and in inflamed tissue. 
The injection of recombinant macrophage migration inhibitory factor into the
joint of mice reproduced the inflammatory response observed in acute gout,
including histologic changes, the recruitment of neutrophils, and increased
levels of IL-1β and CXCL1. Importantly, the accumulation of neutrophils and the
amount IL-1β in the joints were reduced in macrophage migration inhibitory
factor-deficient mice when injected with monosodium urate crystals. We observed a
similar effect when we blocked macrophage migration inhibitory factor with
(S,R)-3-(4-hydroxyphenyl)-4,5-dihydro-5-isoxazole acetic acid or anti-macrophage 
migration inhibitory factor. In addition, the blockade of IL-1R and CXCR2 reduced
recombinant macrophage migration inhibitory factor-induced neutrophil
recruitment. Mechanistically, recombinant macrophage migration inhibitory factor 
is important for the synthesis of il1β mRNA in vivo and in isolated macrophages. 
Altogether, macrophage migration inhibitory factor promotes neutrophil
accumulation and is important for IL-1β production, which are 2 crucial events
contributing to the pathogenesis of acute gout.

© Society for Leukocyte Biology.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.3MA0915-418R 
PMCID: PMC4952013
PMID: 26868525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

