
1. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 22;7(12):13917-31. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7285.

Acquisition of tumorigenic potential and enhancement of angiogenesis in pulmonary
stem/progenitor cells through Oct-4 hyperexpression.

Gu SY(1)(2), Ho CC(3), Huang YK(2), Chen HW(1), Wang YC(2), Kuo CY(2), Teng
SC(4), Fu WM(2), Yang PC(3), Wu CW(5), Peng FC(1), Ling TY(2)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Toxicology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Institute of Biomedical Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Research Center for Developmental Biology and Regenerative Medicine, National 
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Cancer stem cells, also known as cancer initiating cells (CICs), are considered
to be responsible for tumor growth and chemoresistance. Different hypotheses have
been proposed to explain the origin of CICs, including mutations in adult
stem/progenitor cells or the acquisition of stem-like characteristics in
differentiated cells; however, studies have yielded conflicting identification
for CICs and have little information for the origin to generate CICs. Part of the
difficulty in identifying CICs may stem from the fact that the CICs studied have 
been largely derived from cancer cell lines or well-developed tumors. In previous
studies, we have reported the enrichment of mouse pulmonary stem/progenitor cells
(mPSCs) by using serum-free primary selection culture followed by FACS isolation 
using the coxsackievirus/adenovirus receptor (CAR) as the positive selection
marker. Here, we demonstrated that overexpression of the pluripotent
transcription factor Oct-4 is sufficient to induce CAR+/mPSCs transformation,
which we name CAR+/mPSCsOct-4_hi. These transformed cells possess cancer
initiating and chemoresistance potential, as well as exhibiting remarkable
expression of certain proangiogenic factors, including angiopoietins (ANGs) and
VEGF, and enhanced angiogenic potential. Moreover, CAR+/mPSCsOct-4_hi actively
participated in tumor blood vessel formation and triggered a novel angiogenic
mechanism, the angiopoietins/Tie2 signaling pathway. These study provide critical
evidence supporting the possible origin to generate CICs, and help elucidate the 
pathways responsible for CICs-mediated blood vessel formation.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.7285 
PMCID: PMC4924688
PMID: 26871601  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

