
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1989 Nov;9(11):4882-8.

Arginine restriction induced by delta-N-(phosphonacetyl)-L-ornithine signals
increased expression of HIS3, TRP5, CPA1, and CPA2 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Kinney DM(1), Lusty CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Public Health Research Institute, New York, 
New York 10016.

delta-N-(Phosphonacetyl)-L-ornithine (PALO), a transition state analog inhibitor 
of ornithine transcarbamylase, induced arginine limitation in vivo in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Arginine restriction caused increased expression of
HIS3 and TRP5, measured by the beta-galactosidase activity in strains carrying
chromosomally integrated fusions of the promoter regions of each gene with the
lacZ gene of Escherichia coli. The increase in beta-galactosidase activity
induced by PALO was reversed by the addition of arginine and was dependent on
GCN4 protein. These results indicate that PALO, like 3-amino-1,2,4-triazole
DL-5-methyltryptophan, can be used to study the effect of limitation of a single 
amino acid, arginine, on the expression of genes under the general amino acid
control regulatory system. Arginine deprivation imposed by PALO also caused
increased expression of CPA1 and CPA2, coding respectively for the small and
large subunits of arginine-specific carbamyl-phosphate synthetase. The observed
increase was GCN4 dependent and was genetically separable from arginine-specific 
repression of CPA1 mRNA translation. The 5'-flanking regions of CPA1 (reported
previously) and CPA2 determined in this study each contained at least two copies 
of the sequence TGACTC, shown to bind GCN4 protein. The beta-galactosidase
activities expressed from CPA1- and CPA2-lacZ fusions integrated into the nuclear
DNA of gcn4 mutant strains were five to six times less than in the wild type,
when both strains were grown under depressed conditions. The gcn4 mutation
reduced basal expression of both CPA1 and CPA2. The addition of arginine to
strains containing the CPA1-lacZ fusion further reduced beta-galactosidase
activity of the gcn4 mutant, indicating independent regulation of the CPA1 gene
by the general amino acid control and by arginine-specific repression. In strains
overproducing GCN4 protein, the translational control completely overrode
transcriptional activation of CPA1 by general amino acid control.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.9.11.4882 
PMCID: PMC363638
PMID: 2689869  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

