
1. J Nutr Biochem. 2016 Mar;29:64-72. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2015.10.010. Epub 2015 
Nov 2.

Dysregulated expression of arginine metabolic enzymes in human intestinal tissues
of necrotizing enterocolitis and response of CaCO2 cells to bacterial components.

Leung KT(1), Chan KY(1), Ma TP(1), Yu JW(1), Tong JH(2), Tam YH(3), Cheung HM(1),
To KF(2), Lam HS(1), Lee KH(3), Li K(1), Ng PC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong.
(2)Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, Prince of Wales Hospital, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong.
(3)Department of Surgery, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong.
(4)Department of Paediatrics, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong. Electronic address: pakcheungng@cuhk.edu.hk.

The small intestine is the exclusive site of arginine synthesis in neonates. Low 
levels of circulating arginine have been associated with the occurrence of
necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) but the mechanism of arginine dysregulation has
not been fully elucidated. We aimed to investigate (i) expressional changes of
arginine synthesizing and catabolic enzymes in human intestinal tissues of NEC,
spontaneous intestinal perforation (SIP) and noninflammatory surgical conditions 
(Surg-CTL) and to investigate the (ii) mechanisms of arginine dysregulation and
enterocyte proliferation upon stimulation by bacterial components, arginine
depletion, ARG1 overexpression and nitric oxide (NO) supplementation. Our results
showed that expressions of arginine synthesizing enzymes ALDH18A1, ASL, ASS1,
CPS1, GLS, OAT and PRODH were significantly decreased in NEC compared with
Surg-CTL or SIP tissues. Catabolic enzyme ARG1 was increased (>100-fold) in NEC
tissues and histologically demonstrated to be expressed by infiltrating
neutrophils. No change in arginine metabolic enzymes was observed between SIP and
Surg-CTL tissues. In CaCO2 cells, arginine metabolic enzymes were differentially 
dysregulated by lipopolysaccharide or lipoteichoic acid. Depletion of arginine
reduced cell proliferation and this phenomenon could be partially rescued by NO. 
Overexpression of ARG1 also reduced enterocyte proliferation. We provided the
first expressional profile of arginine metabolic enzymes at the tissue level of
NEC. Our findings suggested that arginine homeostasis was severely disturbed and 
could be triggered by inflammatory responses of enterocytes and infiltrating
neutrophils as well as bacterial components. Such reactions could reduce arginine
and NO, resulting in mucosal damage. The benefit of arginine supplementation for 
NEC prophylaxis merits further clinical evaluation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2015.10.010 
PMID: 26895666  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

