
1. Thyroid. 2016 Apr;26(4):600-9. doi: 10.1089/thy.2015.0536. Epub 2016 Mar 16.

Differential Effects of Sepsis and Chronic Inflammation on Diaphragm Muscle Fiber
Type, Thyroid Hormone Metabolism, and Mitochondrial Function.

Bloise FF(1)(2), van der Spek AH(1), Surovtseva OV(1), Ortiga-Carvalho TM(2),
Fliers E(1), Boelen A(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Academic Medical Centre,
University of Amsterdam , Amsterdam, The Netherlands .
(2)2 Institute of Biophysics Carlos Chagas Filho, Federal University of Rio de
Janeiro , Rio de Janeiro, Brazil .

BACKGROUND: The diaphragm is the main respiratory muscle, and its function is
compromised during severe illness. Altered local thyroid hormone (TH) metabolism 
may be a determinant of impaired muscle function during illness.
METHODS: This study investigates the effects of bacterial sepsis and chronic
inflammation on muscle fiber type, local TH metabolism, and mitochondrial
function in the diaphragm. Two mouse models were used: sepsis induced by S.
pneumoniae infection or chronic inflammation induced by subcutaneous turpentine
injection. In vitro, the effect of bacterial endotoxin (LPS) on mitochondrial
function in C2C12 myotubes was studied.
RESULTS: Sepsis induced a transient increase in the fiber type I profile and
increased Dio3 expression while decreasing Dio2, Thra1, and Slc16a2 expression.
Triiodothyronine positively regulated genes Tnni2 and Myog were decreased,
indicating reduced TH signaling in the diaphragm. In contrast, chronic
inflammation increased the fiber type II profile in the diaphragm as well as
Thra1, Thrb1, and Myog expression while decreasing Dio3 expression, suggesting
increased TH responsiveness during chronic inflammation. LPS-stimulated C2C12
myotubes showed decreased Dio2 expression and reduced basal oxygen consumption as
well as non-mitochondrial respiration. The same respiratory profile was induced
by Dio2 knockdown in myotubes.
CONCLUSIONS: The in vivo results show differential effects of sepsis and chronic 
inflammation on diaphragm muscle fiber type, TH metabolism, and mitochondrial
function, while the in vitro results point to a causal role for altered TH
metabolism in functional muscle impairment. These findings may be relevant for
the pathogenesis of impaired respiratory function in critical illness.

DOI: 10.1089/thy.2015.0536 
PMID: 26892873  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

