
1. PLoS Genet. 2016 Feb 18;12(2):e1005846. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005846.
eCollection 2016 Feb.

Bovine Host Genetic Variation Influences Rumen Microbial Methane Production with 
Best Selection Criterion for Low Methane Emitting and Efficiently Feed Converting
Hosts Based on Metagenomic Gene Abundance.

Roehe R(1), Dewhurst RJ(1), Duthie CA(1), Rooke JA(1), McKain N(2), Ross DW(1),
Hyslop JJ(1), Waterhouse A(1), Freeman TC(3), Watson M(4), Wallace RJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)SRUC, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(2)Rowett Institute of Nutrition and Health, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen,
United Kingdom.
(3)Division of Genetics and Genomics, The Roslin Institute and R(D)SVS,
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(4)Edinburgh Genomics, The Roslin Institute and R(D)SVS, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

Methane produced by methanogenic archaea in ruminants contributes significantly
to anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions. The host genetic link controlling
microbial methane production is unknown and appropriate genetic selection
strategies are not developed. We used sire progeny group differences to estimate 
the host genetic influence on rumen microbial methane production in a factorial
experiment consisting of crossbred breed types and diets. Rumen metagenomic
profiling was undertaken to investigate links between microbial genes and methane
emissions or feed conversion efficiency. Sire progeny groups differed
significantly in their methane emissions measured in respiration chambers.
Ranking of the sire progeny groups based on methane emissions or relative
archaeal abundance was consistent overall and within diet, suggesting that
archaeal abundance in ruminal digesta is under host genetic control and can be
used to genetically select animals without measuring methane directly. In the
metagenomic analysis of rumen contents, we identified 3970 microbial genes of
which 20 and 49 genes were significantly associated with methane emissions and
feed conversion efficiency respectively. These explained 81% and 86% of the
respective variation and were clustered in distinct functional gene networks.
Methanogenesis genes (e.g. mcrA and fmdB) were associated with methane emissions,
whilst host-microbiome cross talk genes (e.g. TSTA3 and FucI) were associated
with feed conversion efficiency. These results strengthen the idea that the host 
animal controls its own microbiota to a significant extent and open up the
implementation of effective breeding strategies using rumen microbial gene
abundance as a predictor for difficult-to-measure traits on a large number of
hosts. Generally, the results provide a proof of principle to use the relative
abundance of microbial genes in the gastrointestinal tract of different species
to predict their influence on traits e.g. human metabolism, health and behaviour,
as well as to understand the genetic link between host and microbiome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005846 
PMCID: PMC4758630
PMID: 26891056  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

