
1. Oncotarget. 2016 Apr 5;7(14):17885-95. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7530.

CEACAM1 and MICA as novel serum biomarkers in patients with acute and recurrent
pericarditis.

Markel G(1)(2)(3), Imazio M(4), Koren-Morag N(5), Galore-Haskel G(1), Schachter
J(1), Besser M(1)(3), Cumetti D(6), Maestroni S(6), Altman A(7), Shoenfeld Y(8), 
Brucato A(6), Adler Y(2)(9)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Ella Lemelbaum Institute of Melanoma, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer,
Israel.
(2)Talpiot Medical Leadership Program, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer,
Israel.
(3)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology, Sackler Faculty of
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(4)Cardiology Department, Maria Vittoria Hospital, Torino, Italy.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, 
Tel Aviv, Israel.
(6)Internal Medicine, Ospedali Riuniti, Bergamo, Italy.
(7)Internal Medicine B, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel.
(8)Zabludowicz Center for Autoimmune Diseases, Sheba Medical Center, Tel
Hashomer, Israel.
(9)Cardiac Rehabilitation Institute, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel.
(10)Department of Internal Medicine, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

BACKGROUND: The immune response plays a significant role in pericarditis, but the
mechanisms of disease are poorly defined. Further, efficient monitoring and
predictive clinical tools are unavailable. Carcinoembryonic antigen cell adhesion
molecule 1 (CEACAM1) is an immune-inhibitory protein, while MHC class I chain
related protein A (MICA) and B (MICB) have an immune-stimulating function.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Serum CEACAM1, MICA and MICB concentrations were measured by
ELISA in ~50 subjects of each group: acute pericarditis (AP), recurrent
pericarditis (RP) and lupus (SLE) patients, metastatic melanoma patients as well 
as healthy donors. Serum CEACAM1 was dramatically elevated in AP and RP patients,
but not in SLE patients, and displayed a highly accurate profile in ROC curve
analyses. MICA and MICB were elevated in some pericarditis patients. All markers 
were enhanced in metastatic melanoma patients irrespective of neoplastic
pericardial involvement. Etiology-guided analysis of RP patients showed that very
low MICA levels were associated with idiopathic RP, while high MICA was
associated with autoimmune and post-operative RP. Importantly, MICA was
significantly associated with recurrences, independently of other potentially
confounding parameters such as age, time of follow up or treatment modality.
CONCLUSIONS: Here we report for the first time on CEACAM1 as a potentially novel 
biomarker for pericarditis, as well as on MICA as an innovative prognostic marker
in these patients. Determination of the roles of these immune factors, as well as
their diagnostic and prognostic values should be determined in future prospective
studies.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.7530 
PMCID: PMC4951257
PMID: 26909604  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

