
1. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis. 2016 Apr;16(4):223-8. doi: 10.1089/vbz.2015.1901. Epub
2016 Feb 22.

An Ixodes ricinus Tick Salivary Lectin Pathway Inhibitor Protects Borrelia
burgdorferi sensu lato from Human Complement.

Wagemakers A(1), Coumou J(1), Schuijt TJ(1), Oei A(2), Nijhof AM(3), van 't Veer 
C(1), van der Poll T(1), Bins AD(1), Hovius JW(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center ,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands .
(2)2 Department of Medical Microbiology, Academic Medical Center , Amsterdam, the
Netherlands .
(3)3 Institute of Parasitology and Tropical Veterinary Medicine , Berlin, Germany
.

INTRODUCTION: We previously identified tick salivary lectin pathway inhibitor
(TSLPI) in Ixodes scapularis, a vector for Borrelia burgdorferi sensu stricto
(s.s.) in North America. TSLPI is a salivary protein facilitating B. burgdorferi 
s.s. transmission and acquisition by inhibiting the host lectin complement
pathway through interference with mannose binding lectin (MBL) activity. Since
Ixodes ricinus is the predominant vector for Lyme borreliosis in Europe and
transmits several complement sensitive B. burgdorferi sensu lato (s.l.) strains, 
we aimed to identify, describe, and characterize the I. ricinus ortholog of
TSLPI.
METHODS: We performed (q)PCRs on I. ricinus salivary gland cDNA to identify a
TSLPI ortholog. Next, we generated recombinant (r)TSLPI in a Drosophila
expression system and examined inhibition of the MBL complement pathway and
complement-mediated killing of B. burgdorferi s.l. in vitro.
RESULTS: We identified a TSLPI ortholog in I. ricinus salivary glands with 93%
homology at the RNA and 89% at the protein level compared to I. scapularis TSLPI,
which was upregulated during tick feeding. In silico analysis revealed that TSLPI
appears to be part of a larger family of Ixodes salivary proteins among which I. 
persulcatus basic tail salivary proteins and I. scapularis TSLPI and Salp14. I.
ricinus rTSLPI inhibited the MBL complement pathway and protected B. burgdorferi 
s.s. and Borrelia garinii from complement-mediated killing.
CONCLUSION: We have identified a TSLPI ortholog, which protects B. burgdorferi
s.l. from complement-mediated killing in I. ricinus, the major vector for
tick-borne diseases in Europe.

DOI: 10.1089/vbz.2015.1901 
PMID: 26901751  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

