
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 23;6:21752. doi: 10.1038/srep21752.

SGLT1 activity in lung alveolar cells of diabetic rats modulates airway surface
liquid glucose concentration and bacterial proliferation.

Oliveira TL(1)(2), Candeia-Medeiros N(1), Cavalcante-Araújo PM(1), Melo IS(1),
Fávaro-Pípi E(3), Fátima LA(4), Rocha AA(2), Goulart LR(5)(6), Machado UF(4),
Campos RR(2), Sabino-Silva R(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biological Sciences and Health, Federal University of Alagoas,
Alagoas, Brazil.
(2)Department of Physiology, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)National Reference Center of Leprosy and Sanitary Dermatology, Federal
University of Uberlandia, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(4)Department of Physiology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sao 
Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Institute of Genetics and Biochemistry, Federal University of Uberlandia,
Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(6)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of California
Davis, California, USA.
(7)Department of Physiology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Federal University
of Uberlandia, Minas Gerais, Brazil.

High glucose concentration in the airway surface liquid (ASL) is an important
feature of diabetes that predisposes to respiratory infections. We investigated
the role of alveolar epithelial SGLT1 activity on ASL glucose concentration and
bacterial proliferation. Non-diabetic and diabetic rats were intranasally treated
with saline, isoproterenol (to increase SGLT1 activity) or phlorizin (to decrease
SGLT1 activity); 2 hours later, glucose concentration and bacterial proliferation
(methicillin-resistant Sthaphylococcus aureus, MRSA and Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
P. aeruginosa) were analyzed in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL); and alveolar SGLT1 
was analyzed by immunohistochemistry. BAL glucose concentration and bacterial
proliferation increased in diabetic animals: isoproterenol stimulated SGLT1
migration to luminal membrane, and reduced (50%) the BAL glucose concentration;
whereas phlorizin increased the BAL glucose concentration (100%). These
regulations were accompanied by parallel changes of in vitro MRSA and P.
aeruginosa proliferation in BAL (r = 0.9651 and r = 0.9613, respectively, Pearson
correlation). The same regulations were observed in in vivo P. aeruginosa
proliferation. In summary, the results indicate a relationship among SGLT1
activity, ASL glucose concentration and pulmonary bacterial proliferation.
Besides, the study highlights that, in situations of pulmonary infection risk,
such as in diabetic subjects, increased SGLT1 activity may prevent bacterial
proliferation whereas decreased SGLT1 activity can exacerbate it.

DOI: 10.1038/srep21752 
PMCID: PMC4763199
PMID: 26902517  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

