
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016 Mar 3;10(3):e0004308. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004308.
eCollection 2016 Mar.

Genetic Manipulation of Leishmania donovani to Explore the Involvement of
Argininosuccinate Synthase in Oxidative Stress Management.

Sardar AH(1), Jardim A(2), Ghosh AK(1), Mandal A(1), Das S(3), Saini S(4),
Abhishek K(1), Singh R(1), Verma S(1), Kumar A(1), Das P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Rajendra Memorial Research Institute of Medical
Sciences, Bihar, India.
(2)Institute of Parasitology and Centre for Host-Parasite Interactions, Macdonald
Campus, McGill University, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Department of Microbiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Bihar,
India.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education
and Research (NIPER), Bihar, India.

Reactive oxygen and nitrogen species (ROS and RNS) produced by the phagocytic
cells are the most common arsenals used to kill the intracellular pathogens.
However, Leishmania, an intracellular pathogen, has evolved mechanisms to survive
by counterbalancing the toxic oxygen metabolites produced during infection.
Polyamines, the major contributor in this anti-oxidant machinery, are largely
dependent on the availability of L-arginine in the intracellular milieu.
Argininosuccinate synthase (ASS) plays an important role as the rate-limiting
step required for converting L-citrulline to argininosuccinate to provide
arginine for an assortment of metabolic processes. Leishmania produce an active
ASS enzyme, yet it has an incomplete urea cycle as it lacks an argininosuccinate 
lyase (ASL). There is no evidence for endogenous synthesis of L-arginine in
Leishmania, which suggests that these parasites salvage L-arginine from
extracellular milieu and makes the biological function of ASS and the production 
of argininosuccinate in Leishmania unclear. Our previous quantitative proteomic
analysis of Leishmania promastigotes treated with sub-lethal doses of ROS, RNS,
or a combination of both, led to the identification of several differentially
expressed proteins which included ASS. To assess the involvement of ASS in stress
management, a mutant cell line with greatly reduced ASS activity was created by a
double-targeted gene replacement strategy in L. donovani promastigote.
Interestingly, LdASS is encoded by three copies of allele, but Western blot
analysis showed the third allele did not appear to express ASS. The free thiol
levels in the mutant LdASS-/-/+ cell line were decreased. Furthermore, the cell
viability in L-arginine depleted medium was greatly attenuated on exposure to
different stress environments and was adversely impacted in its ability to infect
mice. These findings suggest that ASS is important for Leishmania donovani to
counterbalance the stressed environments encountered during infection and can be 
targeted for chemotherapeutic purpose to treat visceral leishmaniasis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004308 
PMCID: PMC4777552
PMID: 26939071  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

