
1. J Exp Bot. 2016 May;67(10):2963-76. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erw063. Epub 2016 Mar 1.

Evolution of photorespiration from cyanobacteria to land plants, considering
protein phylogenies and acquisition of carbon concentrating mechanisms.

Hagemann M(1), Kern R(2), Maurino VG(3), Hanson DT(4), Weber AP(5), Sage RF(6),
Bauwe H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Universität Rostock, Institut für Biowissenschaften, Abteilung
Pflanzenphysiologie, A.- Einstein-Str. 3, D-18051 Rostock, Germany
martin.hagemann@uni-rostock.de.
(2)Universität Rostock, Institut für Biowissenschaften, Abteilung
Pflanzenphysiologie, A.- Einstein-Str. 3, D-18051 Rostock, Germany.
(3)University of Düsseldorf, Institute of Developmental and Molecular Biology of 
Plants and Biotechnology, Cluster of Excellence on Plant Science (CEPLAS),
Universitätsstraße 1, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.
(4)Department of Biology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA.
(5)Institute of Plant Biochemistry, Cluster of Excellence on Plant Science
(CEPLAS), Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.
(6)Department of Ecology & Evolutionary Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
ON M5S3B2, Canada.

Photorespiration and oxygenic photosynthesis are intimately linked processes. It 
has been shown that under the present day atmospheric conditions cyanobacteria
and all eukaryotic phototrophs need functional photorespiration to grow
autotrophically. The question arises as to when this essential partnership
evolved, i.e. can we assume a coevolution of both processes from the beginning or
did photorespiration evolve later to compensate for the generation of
2-phosphoglycolate (2PG) due to Rubisco's oxygenase reaction? This question is
mainly discussed here using phylogenetic analysis of proteins involved in the 2PG
metabolism and the acquisition of different carbon concentrating mechanisms
(CCMs). The phylogenies revealed that the enzymes involved in the
photorespiration of vascular plants have diverse origins, with some proteins
acquired from cyanobacteria as ancestors of the chloroplasts and others from
heterotrophic bacteria as ancestors of mitochondria in the plant cell. Only
phosphoglycolate phosphatase was found to originate from Archaea. Notably
glaucophyte algae, the earliest branching lineage of Archaeplastida, contain more
photorespiratory enzymes of cyanobacterial origin than other algal lineages or
land plants indicating a larger initial contribution of cyanobacterial-derived
proteins to eukaryotic photorespiration. The acquisition of CCMs is discussed as 
a proxy for assessing the timing of periods when photorespiratory activity may
have been enhanced. The existence of CCMs also had marked influence on the
structure and function of photorespiration. Here, we discuss evidence for an
early and continuous coevolution of photorespiration, CCMs and photosynthesis
starting from cyanobacteria via algae, to land plants.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erw063 
PMID: 26931168  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

