
1. Australas J Dermatol. 2017 Aug;58(3):200-204. doi: 10.1111/ajd.12456. Epub 2016
Mar 4.

The frequency of mucosal-associated invariant T cells is selectively increased in
dermatitis herpetiformis.

Li J(1)(2), Reantragoon R(1)(3), Kostenko L(1), Corbett AJ(1), Varigos G(4),
Carbone FR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Peter Doherty Institute for
Infection and Immunity, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Department of Medicine, St Vincent's Hospital, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Immunology Division, Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: Mucosal-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells are a novel
subset of innate-like T-cells that are enriched in mucosal tissues. Their
presence in human skin has only recently been recognised. We describe the
expression of skin-tropic molecules on human skin MAIT cells at steady state and 
investigate their contribution to various dermatoses with known T-cell
involvement.
METHODS: To examine the expression of skin-tropic molecules by MAIT cells at
steady state, we performed a flow cytometric analysis of blood and skin samples
from healthy donors. To investigate any potential wider contribution of MAIT
cells to skin disease, we examined psoriasis, alopecia areata and dermatitis
herpetiformis biopsies using immunofluorescent staining to identify the
proportion of T-cells expressing MAIT cell surface markers.
RESULTS: We found that MAIT cells constituted a small population of T-cells in
normal human skin, similar to the percentage found in peripheral blood. Like
other skin T-cells, skin MAIT cells expressed high levels of the skin-associated 
markers, cutaneous lymphocyte antigen and CD103. In psoriasis and alopecia areata
the proportion of MAIT cells was similar to that found in normal skin, but in
dermatitis herpetiformis it was significantly elevated.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of skin-tropic molecules by skin MAIT cells is
consistent with their resident status in normal human skin. Our results suggest
that MAIT cells may play a role in the pathogenesis of dermatitis herpetiformis.

© 2016 The Australasian College of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/ajd.12456 
PMID: 26940855  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

