
1. J Mol Microbiol Biotechnol. 2016;26(1-3):138-51. doi: 10.1159/000442160. Epub
2016 Mar 10.

Metabolism of Hydrocarbons in n-Alkane-Utilizing Anaerobic Bacteria.

Wilkes H(1), Buckel W, Golding BT, Rabus R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Chemistry and Biology of the Marine Environment (ICBM), Carl von
Ossietzky University Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany.

The glycyl radical enzyme-catalyzed addition of n-alkanes to fumarate creates a
C-C-bond between two concomitantly formed stereogenic carbon centers. The
configurations of the two diastereoisomers of the product resulting from n-hexane
activation by the n-alkane-utilizing denitrifying bacterium strain HxN1, i.e.
(1-methylpentyl)succinate, were assigned as (2S,1'R) and (2R,1'R). Experiments
with stereospecifically deuterated n-(2,5-2H2)hexanes revealed that exclusively
the pro-S hydrogen atom is abstracted from C2 of the n-alkane by the enzyme and
later transferred back to C3 of the alkylsuccinate formed. These results indicate
that the alkylsuccinate-forming reaction proceeds with an inversion of
configuration at the carbon atom (C2) of the n-alkane forming the new C-C-bond,
and thus stereochemically resembles a SN2-type reaction. Therefore, the reaction 
may occur in a concerted manner, which may avoid the highly energetic hex-2-yl
radical as an intermediate. The reaction is associated with a significant primary
kinetic isotope effect (kH/kD ≥3) for hydrogen, indicating that the homolytic
C-H-bond cleavage is involved in the first irreversible step of the reaction
mechanism. The (1-methylalkyl)succinate synthases of n-alkane-utilizing anaerobic
bacteria apparently have very broad substrate ranges enabling them to activate
not only aliphatic but also alkyl-aromatic hydrocarbons. Thus, two denitrifiers
and one sulfate reducer were shown to convert the nongrowth substrate toluene to 
benzylsuccinate and further to the dead-end product benzoyl-CoA. For this
purpose, however, the modified β-oxidation pathway known from
alkylbenzene-utilizing bacteria was not employed, but rather the pathway used for
n-alkane degradation involving CoA ligation, carbon skeleton rearrangement and
decarboxylation. Furthermore, various n-alkane- and alkylbenzene-utilizing
denitrifiers and sulfate reducers were found to be capable of forming benzyl
alcohols from diverse alkylbenzenes, putatively via dehydrogenases. The
thermophilic sulfate reducer strain TD3 forms n-alkylsuccinates during growth
with n-alkanes or crude oil, which, based on the observed patterns of homologs,
do not derive from a terminal activation of n-alkanes.

© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000442160 
PMID: 26959725  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

