
1. Hypertension. 2016 May;67(5):1020-8. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.115.06642. Epub
2016 Mar 7.

Leptin Induces Hypertension and Endothelial Dysfunction via Aldosterone-Dependent
Mechanisms in Obese Female Mice.

Huby AC(1), Otvos L Jr(1), Belin de Chantemèle EJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Physiology Department, Medical College of Georgia at Georgia Regents 
University, Augusta (A.-C.H., E.J.B.d.C.); Biology Department, Temple University,
Philadelphia, PA (L.O.); and Department of Medical Microbiology, Semmelweis
University, Budapest, Hungary (L.O.).
(2)From the Physiology Department, Medical College of Georgia at Georgia Regents 
University, Augusta (A.-C.H., E.J.B.d.C.); Biology Department, Temple University,
Philadelphia, PA (L.O.); and Department of Medical Microbiology, Semmelweis
University, Budapest, Hungary (L.O.). ebelindechanteme@gru.edu.

Obesity is a major risk factor for cardiovascular disease in males and females.
Whether obesity triggers cardiovascular disease via similar mechanisms in both
the sexes is, however, unknown. In males, the adipokine leptin highly contributes
to obesity-related cardiovascular disease by increasing sympathetic activity.
Females secrete 3× to 4× more leptin than males, but do not exhibit high
sympathetic tone with obesity. Nevertheless, females show inappropriately high
aldosterone levels that positively correlate with adiposity and blood pressure
(BP). We hypothesized that leptin induces hypertension and endothelial
dysfunction via aldosterone-dependent mechanisms in females. Leptin control of
the cardiovascular function was analyzed in female mice sensitized to leptin via 
the deletion of protein tyrosine phosphatase 1b (knockout) and in agouti yellow
obese hyperleptinemic mice (Ay). Hypersensitivity to leptin (wild-type, 115 ± 2; 
protein tyrosine phosphatase 1b knockout, 124 ± 2 mm Hg; P<0.05) and obesity
elevated BP (a/a, 113 ± 1; Ay, 128 ± 7 mm Hg; P<0.05) and impaired endothelial
function. Chronic leptin receptor antagonism restored BP and endothelial function
in protein tyrosine phosphatase 1b knockout and Ay mice. Hypersensitivity to
leptin and obesity reduced BP response to ganglionic blockade in both strains and
plasma catecholamine levels in protein tyrosine phosphatase 1b knockout mice.
Hypersensitivity to leptin and obesity significantly increased plasma aldosterone
levels and adrenal CYP11B2 expression. Chronic leptin receptor antagonism reduced
aldosterone levels. Furthermore, chronic leptin and mineralocorticoid receptor
blockade reduced BP and improved endothelial function in both leptin-sensitized
and obese hyperleptinemic female mice. Together, these data demonstrate that
leptin induces hypertension and endothelial dysfunction via aldosterone-dependent
mechanisms in female mice and suggest that obesity leads to cardiovascular
disease via sex-specific mechanisms.

© 2016 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.115.06642 
PMCID: PMC5088432
PMID: 26953321  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

