
1. Transplantation. 2016 May;100(5):1041-51. doi: 10.1097/TP.0000000000001154.

Quantification of Alloantibody-Mediated Cytotoxicity In Vivo.

Memarnejadian A(1), Meilleur CE, Mazzuca DM, Welch ID, Haeryfar SM.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Western University, London,
Ontario, Canada. 2 Animal Care and Veterinary Services, Western University,
London, Ontario, Canada. 3 Division of Clinical Immunology & Allergy, Department 
of Medicine, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada. 4 Centre for Human
Immunology, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada. 5 Lawson Health Research
Institute, London, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Preexisting, donor-specific antibodies (DSAs) are culprits of
hyperacute rejection. Donor-specific antibodies are also formed de novo, and
their role in acute and chronic rejection is increasingly appreciated. However,
it is difficult to assess damage inflicted exclusively by DSAs when alloreactive 
T cell and B cell responses coincide. We reasoned that allosensitization with
"costimulation-deficient" cells should induce DSA synthesis but not naive
cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) precursors' priming via direct allorecognition.
Accordingly, we have developed a novel model to quantify DSA-mediated
cytotoxicity in vivo.
METHODS: C57BL/6 (H-2b) mice were sensitized with H-2 kidney epithelial cells,
and a cytofluorimetric killing assay was tailored to the measurement of
allocytotoxicity. We took cell/complement depletion, costimulation blockade, and 
serum transfer approaches to reveal the mediators of cytotoxicity. "Third-party" 
controls and a skin allotransplantation model were used to confirm DSAs'
specificity for allo-major histocompatibility complex. We validated our
experimental approach in other mouse strains primed with different allogeneic
cell types, including endothelial cells. To demonstrate the usefulness of our
model/method for drug efficacy testing, we examined the effect of CTLA4-Ig and
rapamycin on DSA-mediated cytolysis.
RESULTS: Allosensitization of MHC-disparate mouse strains with
costimulation-deficient cells led to robust cytotoxicity mediated by
complement-fixing DSAs and phagocytic cells. This response was independent of
CTLs, natural killer or natural killer T cells. It required CD4 T cell help, CD40
signaling and CD28-based costimulation during allosensitization and could be
reversed by sustained rapamycin treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: The unique model described herein should enable mechanistic studies 
on sensitization and effector phases of humoral alloreactivity as well as
efficacy testing of future immunotherapies to prevent DSA-induced pathology.

DOI: 10.1097/TP.0000000000001154 
PMID: 26985743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

