
1. Dig Dis. 2016;34(1-2):51-7. doi: 10.1159/000442926. Epub 2016 Mar 16.

Dendritic Cell-T-Cell Circuitry in Health and Changes in Inflammatory Bowel
Disease and Its Treatment.

Knight SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Imperial College London, Antigen Presentation Research Group, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Dendritic, antigen-presenting cells (DCs) determine not only whether 
lymphocytes produce different types of immune response but also tissue-homing
profiles of lymphocytes they stimulate. For example, in health, mucosal DC
stimulate T cells focused to home to the mucosa; DC/T-cell circuitry thus targets
immune responses to specific tissue locations. Therapies being introduced for
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) include antibodies to gut-homing molecules such 
as α4β7 (Vedolizumab) used ostensibly to block gut-homing lymphocytes. However,
such lymphocytes are dependent on the tissue specificity of DC that stimulated
them.
KEY MESSAGES: In health, blood DCs have the potential to home to multiple tissues
including gut (α4β7+) and skin (CLA+). DCs have become gut-specific within the
intestinal microenvironment stimulated partially by local retinoid to express
α4β7 (mucosal homing marker) and/or CCR9 (ileal homing marker) in the absence of 
skin-specific indicators. They spread veiled extensions, sample their
environment, acquire/process antigens, produce cytokines and initiate innate
immunity. Myeloid DC also traffic to draining lymph nodes where
compartmentalization of adaptive immune responses is determined by DCs from the
site of antigen exposure which dictate the homing profiles of lymphocytes they
stimulate. In IBD, site and activity of disease are reflected in changes in
homing/activation of gut DCs and T-cells they stimulate and also, in greater gut 
specificity and activation of blood DC. Homing potential of DC can be modulated
toward mucosa or skin by vitamins A and D, respectively. Infliximab or
interleukin-6 can divert homing profiles toward skin, perhaps predisposing to
skin involvement in IBD. Probiotic bacteria or their products can also change
homing profiles of gut DC toward skin homing and away from gut.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, development of gut focused inflammation and its
treatment relies on changes in DC tissue specificity; therefore, removal or
diversion of gut-homing DC as well as T-cells is likely to be critical in
prevention of gut-focused inflammation in IBD.

© 2016 The Author(s) Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000442926 
PMCID: PMC5022659
PMID: 26982806  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

