
1. J Phycol. 2015 Apr;51(2):225-35. doi: 10.1111/jpy.12270. Epub 2015 Feb 12.

Mevalonosomes: specific vacuoles containing the mevalonate pathway in Plocamium
brasiliense cortical cells (Rhodophyta).

Paradas WC(1), Crespo TM(2), Salgado LT(2), de Andrade LR(3), Soares AR(4),
Hellio C(5), Paranhos RR(1), Hill LJ(2), de Souza GM(2), Kelecom AG(6), Da Gama
BA(1), Pereira RC(1), Amado-Filho GM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia Marinha, Universidade Federal Fluminense, Outeiro São
João Batista, s/no., Niterói, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)Diretoria de Pesquisas, Instituto de Pesquisas Jardim Botânico do Rio de
Janeiro, Rua Pacheco Leão, 915, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Centro de Ciências da Saúde, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Departamento de
Histologia e Embriologia, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Av.
Carlos Chagas Filho, 373, bloco: B, sala F2-27, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(4)Núcleo de Pesquisas em Ecologia e Desenvolvimento Social de Macaé,
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rua Rotary Club, s/no., São José do
Barreto, Macaé, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(5)Université de Bretagne Occidentale, LEMAR UMR 6539, IUEM - Technopole
Brest-Iroise, Rue Dumont d'Urville, Plouzané, France.
(6)Departamento de Biologia Geral, Universidade Federal Fluminense, Outeiro São
João Batista, s/no., Niterói, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

This paper has identified, for the first time in a member of the Rhodophyta, a
vacuolar organelle containing enzymes that are involved in the mevalonate
pathway-an important step in red algal isoprenoid biosynthesis. These organelles 
were named mevalonosomes (Mev) and were found in the cortical cells (CC) of
Plocamium brasiliense, a marine macroalgae that synthesizes several halogenated
monoterpenes. P. brasiliense specimens were submitted to a cytochemical analysis 
of the activity of the 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase (HMGS). Using
transmission electron microscopy (TEM), we confirmed the presence of HMGS
activity within the Mev. Because HMGS is necessary for the biosynthesis of
halogenated monoterpenes, we isolated a hexanic fraction (HF) rich in halogenated
monoterpenes from P. brasiliense that contained a pentachlorinated monoterpene as
a major metabolite. Because terpenes are often related to chemical defense, the
antifouling (AF) activity of pentachlorinated monoterpene was tested. We found
that the settlement of the mussel Perna perna was reduced by HF treatment (2.25
times less than control; 40% and 90% of fouled surface, respectively; P = 0.001; 
F9,9 = 1.13). The HF (at 10 μg · mL(-1) ) also inhibited three species of fouling
microalgae (Chlorarachnion reptans, Cylindrotheca cloisterium, and
Exanthemachrysis gayraliae), while at a higher concentration (50 μg · mL(-1) ),
it inhibited the bacteria Halomonas marina, Polaribacter irgensii,
Pseudoalteromonas elyakovii, Shewanella putrefaciens, and Vibrio aestuarianus.
The AF activity of P. brasiliense halogenated monoterpenes and the localization
of HMGS activity inside Mev suggest that this cellular structure found in CC may 
play a role in thallus protection against biofouling.

© 2015 Phycological Society of America.

DOI: 10.1111/jpy.12270 
PMID: 26986518 

