
1. J Phycol. 2015 Oct;51(5):943-62. doi: 10.1111/jpy.12334. Epub 2015 Sep 27.

The diversity of algal phospholipase D homologs revealed by biocomputational
analysis.

Beligni MV(1), Bagnato C(2), Prados MB(3), Bondino H(1), Laxalt AM(1), Munnik
T(4), Ten Have A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biológicas (IIB-CONICET-UNMdP), Facultad de
Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad Nacional de Mar del Plata, CC 1245, Mar
del Plata, 7600, Argentina.
(2)Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Universidad
Nacional de Río Negro, Mitre 630. S. C. de Bariloche 8400, Río Negro, Argentina.
(3)Instituto de Energía y Desarrollo Sustentable - Comisión Nacional de Energía
Atómica, Centro Atómico Bariloche, Av. Bustillo 9500, S. C. de Bariloche 8400,
Río Negro, Argentina.
(4)Department of Plant Physiology, Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences,
University of Amsterdam, Science Park 904, Amsterdam, NL-1098 XH, the
Netherlands.

Phospholipase D (PLD) participates in the formation of phosphatidic acid, a
precursor in glycerolipid biosynthesis and a second messenger. PLDs are part of a
superfamily of proteins that hydrolyze phosphodiesters and share a catalytic
motif, HxKxxxxD, and hence a mechanism of action. Although HKD-PLDs have been
thoroughly characterized in plants, animals and bacteria, very little is known
about these enzymes in algae. To fill this gap in knowledge, we performed a
biocomputational analysis by means of HMMER iterative profiling, using most
eukaryotic algae genomes available. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that algae
exhibit very few eukaryotic-type PLDs but possess, instead, many bacteria-like
PLDs. Among algae eukaryotic-type PLDs, we identified C2-PLDs and PXPH-like PLDs.
In addition, the dinoflagellate Alexandrium tamarense features several proteins
phylogenetically related to oomycete PLDs. Our phylogenetic analysis also showed 
that algae bacteria-like PLDs (proteins with putative PLD activity) fall into
five clades, three of which are novel lineages in eukaryotes, composed almost
entirely of algae. Specifically, Clade II is almost exclusive to diatoms, whereas
Clade I and IV are mainly represented by proteins from prasinophytes. The other
two clades are composed of mitochondrial PLDs (Clade V or Mito-PLDs), previously 
found in mammals, and a subfamily of potentially secreted proteins (Clade III or 
SP-PLDs), which includes a homolog formerly characterized in rice. In addition,
our phylogenetic analysis shows that algae have non-PLD members within the
bacteria-like HKD superfamily with putative cardiolipin synthase and
phosphatidylserine/phosphatidylglycerophosphate synthase activities. Altogether, 
our results show that eukaryotic algae possess a moderate number of PLDs that
belong to very diverse phylogenetic groups.

© 2015 Phycological Society of America.

DOI: 10.1111/jpy.12334 
PMID: 26986890 

