
1. Cell Microbiol. 2016 Oct;18(10):1339-48. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12592. Epub 2016 Apr
29.

Shiga toxin of enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli directly injures developing
human erythrocytes.

Betz J(1), Dorn I(2), Kouzel IU(1)(3), Bauwens A(1), Meisen I(1)(3), Kemper
B(4)(5), Bielaszewska M(1), Mormann M(1), Weymann L(1), Sibrowski W(6), Karch
H(1), Schlenke P(6)(7), Müthing J(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Hygiene, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(2)Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(3)Interdisciplinary Center for Clinical Research (IZKF), University of Münster, 
Münster, Germany.
(4)Center for Biomedical Optics, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(5)Biomedical Technology Center, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(6)Institute of Transfusion Medicine and Transplantation Immunology, University
of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(7)Department of Blood Group Serology and Transfusion Medicine, Medical
University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
(8)Institute for Hygiene, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
jm@uni-muenster.de.
(9)Interdisciplinary Center for Clinical Research (IZKF), University of Münster, 
Münster, Germany. jm@uni-muenster.de.

Haemolytic anaemia is one of the characteristics of life-threatening
extraintestinal complications in humans during infection with enterohaemorrhagic 
Escherichia coli (EHEC). Shiga toxins (Stxs) of EHEC preferentially damage
microvascular endothelial cells of the kidney and the brain, whereby occluded
small blood vessels may elicit anaemia through mechanical erythrocyte disruption.
Here we show for the first time that Stx2a, the major virulence factor of EHEC,
is also capable of direct targeting developing human erythrocytes. We employed an
ex vivo erythropoiesis model using mobilized CD34(+) haematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells from human blood and monitored expression of Stx receptors 
and Stx2a-mediated cellular injury of developing erythrocytes. CD34(+)
haematopoietic stem/progenitor cells were negative for Stx2a receptors and
resistant towards the toxin. Expression of Stx2a-binding glycosphingolipids and
toxin sensitivity was apparent immediately after initiation of erythropoietic
differentiation, peaked for basophilic and polychromatic erythroblast stages and 
declined during maturation into orthochromatic erythroblasts and reticulocytes,
which became highly refractory to Stx2a. The observed Stx-mediated toxicity
towards erythroblasts during the course of erythropoiesis might contribute,
although speculative at this stage of research, to the anaemia caused by
Stx-producing pathogens.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12592 
PMID: 26990252  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

