
1. World J Gastroenterol. 2016 Mar 21;22(11):3150-7. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v22.i11.3150.

Vaccine against Helicobacter pylori: Inevitable approach.

Talebi Bezmin Abadi A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Amin Talebi Bezmin Abadi, Department of Bacteriology, Faculty of Medical
Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran 14115-111, Iran.

Over three decades have passed since the discovery of Helicobacter pylori (H.
pylori), and yet many questions about its treatment remain unanswered. For
example, there is no certainty regarding continued use of current antibiotic
therapy against H. pylori. The bad news is that even combined regimens are also
unable to eradicate bacterial colonization. The worst problem with H. pylori
chemotherapy is that even if we identify the most successful regimen, it cannot
eliminate the risk of re-infection. This problem is further complicated by the
fact that clinicians have no information as to whether probiotics are useful or
not. Moreover, to date, we have no large scale produced vaccine effective against
H. pylori. Due to the relatively rapid and abundant dissemination of guidelines
globally reported concerning management of gastric cancer prevention and
therapeutic regimens, clinicians may choose a vaccine as better effective weapon 
against H. pylori. Therefore, a radical shift in adopted strategies is needed to 
guide ultimate decisions regarding H. pylori management. In light of failures in 
vaccine projects, we should identify better vaccine design targeting
conserved/essential genes. The unique character and persistence of H. pylori pose
obstacles to making an effective vaccine. Preferably, in developing countries,
the best reasonable and logical approach is to recommend prophylactic H. pylori
vaccine among children as an obligatory national program to limit primary
colonization. Trying to produce a therapeutic vaccine would be postponed until
later. In reality, we should not forget to prescribe narrow spectrum antibiotics.
In the current review, I draw a route to define the best adopted strategy against
this rogue bacterium.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v22.i11.3150 
PMCID: PMC4789989
PMID: 27003991  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

