
1. Oncotarget. 2016 Apr 26;7(17):24179-93. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8253.

Hedgehog pathway maintains cell survival under stress conditions, and drives drug
resistance in lung adenocarcinoma.

Lin EH(1)(2)(3)(4), Kao YR(1), Lin CA(5), Kuo TY(4), Yang SP(2), Hsu CF(1), Chou 
TY(3)(6), Ho CC(7), Wu CW(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Yang Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences and Medical Biotechnology, National
Taiwan University Medical College, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Taipei Veterans General
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital and
National Taiwan University Medical College, Taipei, Taiwan.

Hedgehog (HH) pathway plays an important role in embryonic development, but is
largely inactive in adult except for tissue repair. Aberrant activation of HH
pathway has been found in a variety of cancer types. In non-small cell lung
cancer, however, the role and importance of HH pathway remain controversial. In
the current study, we found that HH pathway was maintained in low activity in
lung adenocarcinoma (LAC) cells under normal culture condition, but was highly
induced in response to stress conditions. Activation of HH pathway promoted cell 
survival, growth, and invasion partially through HGF and MET signaling.
Hedgehog-Interacting Protein (HHIP), a cell-surface negative regulator of HH
pathway, was epigenetically silenced in LAC. Overexpression of HHIP blocked the
activation of HH and HGF/MET pathways, and made cells significantly more
susceptible to stress conditions. In LAC cells with acquired resistance to
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Tyrosin Kinase Inhibitor (EGFR-TKI), we found
that a part of tumor cells were much more sensitive to HH or HGF/MET inhibitors, 
suggesting an oncogenic addiction shift from EGFR to HH and HGF/MET pathways. In 
conclusion, this study showed that HH pathway is a survival signaling that drives
LAC cell growth under stress conditions, and HHIP is a key regulator to block the
induction of HH pathway. Targeting the HH pathway through inhibitors or HHIP thus
holds promise to address EGFR-TKI resistance in LAC in clinic.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.8253 
PMCID: PMC5029693
PMID: 27015549  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no conflicts of
interest exists.

