
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2016 May 16;82(11):3246-3255. doi: 10.1128/AEM.00411-16. 
Print 2016 Jun 1.

Genetic Diversity of Flavobacterium psychrophilum Isolates from Three
Oncorhynchus spp. in the United States, as Revealed by Multilocus Sequence
Typing.

Van Vliet D(1), Wiens GD(2), Loch TP(3), Nicolas P(4), Faisal M(5)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Fisheries and Wildlife, College of Agriculture and Natural
Resources, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA.
(2)National Center for Cool and Cold Water Aquaculture, United States Department 
of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Kearneysville, West Virginia, USA.
(3)Department of Pathobiology and Diagnostic Investigation, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA.
(4)MaIAGE, INRA, Université Paris-Saclay, Jouy-en-Josas, France.
(5)Department of Fisheries and Wildlife, College of Agriculture and Natural
Resources, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA
faisal@cvm.msu.edu.

The use of a multilocus sequence typing (MLST) technique has identified the
intraspecific genetic diversity of U.S. Flavobacterium psychrophilum, an
important pathogen of salmonids worldwide. Prior to this analysis, little U.S. F.
psychrophilum genetic information was known; this is of importance when
considering targeted control strategies, including vaccine development. Herein,
MLST was used to investigate the genetic diversity of 96 F. psychrophilum
isolates recovered from rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss), coho salmon
(Oncorhynchus kisutch), and Chinook salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha) that
originated from nine U.S. states. The isolates fell into 34 distinct sequence
types (STs) that clustered in 5 clonal complexes (CCs) (n = 63) or were
singletons (n = 33). The distribution of STs varied spatially, by host species,
and in association with mortality events. Several STs (i.e., ST9, ST10, ST30, and
ST78) were found in multiple states, whereas the remaining STs were localized to 
single states. With the exception of ST256, which was recovered from rainbow
trout and Chinook salmon, all STs were found to infect a single host species.
Isolates that were collected during bacterial cold water disease outbreaks most
frequently belonged to CC-ST10 (e.g., ST10 and ST78). Collectively, the results
of this study clearly demonstrate the genetic diversity of F. psychrophilum
within the United States and identify STs of clinical significance. Although the 
majority of STs described herein were novel, some (e.g., ST9, ST10, ST13, ST30,
and ST31) were previously recovered on other continents, which demonstrates the
transcontinental distribution of F. psychrophilum genotypes.IMPORTANCE:
Flavobacterium psychrophilum is the causative agent of bacterial cold water
disease (BCWD) and rainbow trout fry syndrome (RTFS) and is an important
bacterial pathogen of wild and farmed salmonids worldwide. These infections are
responsible for large economic losses globally, yet the genetic diversity of this
pathogen remains to be fully investigated. Previous studies have identified the
genetic diversity of this pathogen in other main aquaculture regions; however,
little effort has been focused on the United States. In this context, this study 
aims to examine the genetic diversity of F. psychrophilum from the United States,
as this region remains important in salmonid aquaculture.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00411-16 
PMCID: PMC4959235
PMID: 27016570  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

