
1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Mar 31;7:374. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00374. eCollection
2016.

Methane Seep in Shallow-Water Permeable Sediment Harbors High Diversity of
Anaerobic Methanotrophic Communities, Elba, Italy.

Ruff SE(1), Kuhfuss H(2), Wegener G(3), Lott C(4), Ramette A(5), Wiedling J(6),
Knittel K(2), Weber M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department for Molecular Ecology, Max Planck Institute for Marine
MicrobiologyBremen, Germany; HGF MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology,
Max Planck Institute for Marine MicrobiologyBremen, Germany.
(2)Department for Molecular Ecology, Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology
Bremen, Germany.
(3)HGF MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck Institute for
Marine MicrobiologyBremen, Germany; MARUM Center for Marine Environmental
Sciences, University of BremenBremen, Germany.
(4)HYDRA Institute for Marine Sciences, Elba Field Station Campo nell'Elba,
Italy.
(5)HGF MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck Institute for
Marine Microbiology Bremen, Germany.
(6)HYDRA Institute for Marine Sciences, Elba Field StationCampo nell'Elba, Italy;
Department of Biogeochemistry, Max Planck Institute for Marine
MicrobiologyBremen, Germany.

The anaerobic oxidation of methane (AOM) is a key biogeochemical process
regulating methane emission from marine sediments into the hydrosphere. AOM is
largely mediated by consortia of anaerobic methanotrophic archaea (ANME) and
sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB), and has mainly been investigated in deep-sea
sediments. Here we studied methane seepage at four spots located at 12 m water
depth in coastal, organic carbon depleted permeable sands off the Island of Elba 
(Italy). We combined biogeochemical measurements, sequencing-based community
analyses and in situ hybridization to investigate the microbial communities of
this environment. Increased alkalinity, formation of free sulfide and nearly
stoichiometric methane oxidation and sulfate reduction rates up to 200 nmol g(-1)
day(-1) indicated the predominance of sulfate-coupled AOM. With up to 40 cm
thickness the zones of AOM activity were unusually large and occurred in deeper
sediment horizons (20-50 cm below seafloor) as compared to diffusion-dominated
deep-sea seeps, which is likely caused by advective flow of pore water due to the
shallow water depth and permeability of the sands. Hydrodynamic forces also may
be responsible for the substantial phylogenetic and unprecedented morphological
diversity of AOM consortia inhabiting these sands, including the clades
ANME-1a/b, ANME-2a/b/c, ANME-3, and their partner bacteria SEEP-SRB1a and
SEEP-SRB2. High microbial dispersal, the availability of diverse energy sources
and high habitat heterogeneity might explain that the emission spots shared few
microbial taxa, despite their physical proximity. Although the biogeochemistry of
this shallow methane seep was very different to that of deep-sea seeps, their key
functional taxa were very closely related, which supports the global dispersal of
key taxa and underlines strong selection by methane as the predominant energy
source. Mesophilic, methane-fueled ecosystems in shallow-water permeable
sediments may comprise distinct microbial habitats due to their unique
biogeochemical and physical characteristics. To link AOM phylotypes with seep
habitats and to enable future meta-analyses we thus propose that seep environment
ontology needs to be further specified.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00374 
PMCID: PMC4814501
PMID: 27065954 

