
1. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2016 May;58:57-66. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2016.03.002. Epub
2016 Mar 3.

Fas-antisense long noncoding RNA is differentially expressed during maturation of
human erythrocytes and confers resistance to Fas-mediated cell death.

Villamizar O(1), Chambers CB(1), Mo YY(2), Torry DS(3), Hofstrand R(1), Riberdy
JM(4), Persons DA(4), Wilber A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Cell Biology, Southern
Illinois University School of Medicine, Springfield, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Cell Biology, Southern
Illinois University School of Medicine, Springfield, IL, USA; Department of
Pharmacology and Toxicology, Cancer Institute, University of Mississippi Medical 
Center, Jackson, MS, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Cell Biology, Southern
Illinois University School of Medicine, Springfield, IL, USA; Simmons Cancer
Institute at SIU, Springfield, IL, USA.
(4)Department of Hematology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 
USA.
(5)Department of Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Cell Biology, Southern
Illinois University School of Medicine, Springfield, IL, USA; Simmons Cancer
Institute at SIU, Springfield, IL, USA. Electronic address: awilber@siumed.edu.

Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) interact with other RNAs, DNA and/or proteins to
regulate gene expression during development. Erythropoiesis is one developmental 
process that is tightly controlled throughout life to ensure accurate red blood
cell production and oxygen transport to tissues. Thus, homeostasis is critical
and maintained by competitive outcomes of pro- and anti-apoptotic pathways.
LncRNAs are expressed during blood development; however, specific functions are
largely undefined. Here, a culture model of human erythropoiesis revealed that
lncRNA Fas-antisense 1 (Fas-AS1 or Saf) was induced during differentiation
through the activity of essential erythroid transcription factors GATA-1 and
KLF1. Saf was also negatively regulated by NF-κB, where decreasing NF-κB activity
levels tracked with increasing transcription of Saf. Furthermore, Saf
over-expression in erythroblasts derived from CD34(+) hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells of healthy donors reduced surface levels of Fas and
conferred protection against Fas-mediated cell death signals. These studies
reveal a novel lncRNA-regulated mechanism that modulates a critical cell death
program during human erythropoiesis.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2016.03.002 
PMID: 27067490  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

