
1. Oncotarget. 2016 May 17;7(20):29287-305. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8678.

Comparative proteomics of exosomes secreted by tumoral Jurkat T cells and normal 
human T cell blasts unravels a potential tumorigenic role for valosin-containing 
protein.

Bosque A(1)(2), Dietz L(3), Gallego-Lleyda A(1), Sanclemente M(1), Iturralde
M(1), Naval J(1), Alava MA(1), Martínez-Lostao L(1)(4)(5), Thierse HJ(3), Anel
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular y Celular, Facultad de
Ciencias, Universidad de Zaragoza, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Aragón
(IIS-Aragón), Zaragoza, Spain.
(2)Division of Microbiology and Immunology, Department of Pathology, University
of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(3)Research Group for Immunology & Proteomics, Department of Dermatology,
University Medical Center Mannheim, Ruprechts-Karls-University, Heidelberg,
Germany.
(4)Instituto de Nanociencia de Aragón (INA), Zaragoza, Spain.
(5)Servicio de Inmunología, Hospital Clínico Universitario Lozano Blesa,
Zaragoza, Spain.

We have previously characterized that FasL and Apo2L/TRAIL are stored in their
bioactive form inside human T cell blasts in intraluminal vesicles present in
multivesicular bodies. These vesicles are rapidly released to the supernatant in 
the form of exosomes upon re-activation of T cells. In this study we have
compared for the first time proteomics of exosomes produced by normal human T
cell blasts with those produced by tumoral Jurkat cells, with the objective of
identify proteins associated with tumoral exosomes that could have a previously
unrecognized role in malignancy. We have identified 359 and 418 proteins in
exosomes from T cell blasts and Jurkat cells, respectively. Interestingly, only
145 (around a 40%) are common. The major proteins in both cases are actin and
tubulin isoforms and the common interaction nodes correspond to these
cytoskeleton and related proteins, as well as to ribosomal and mRNA granule
proteins. We detected 14 membrane proteins that were especially enriched in
exosomes from Jurkat cells as compared with T cell blasts. The most abundant of
these proteins was valosin-containing protein (VCP), a membrane ATPase involved
in ER homeostasis and ubiquitination. In this work, we also show that leukemic
cells are more sensitive to cell death induced by the VCP inhibitor DBeQ than
normal T cells. Furthermore, VCP inhibition prevents functional exosome secretion
only in Jurkat cells, but not in T cell blasts. These results suggest VCP
targeting as a new selective pathway to exploit in cancer treatment to prevent
tumoral exosome secretion.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.8678 
PMCID: PMC5045396
PMID: 27086912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No conflict of interest to declare.

