
1. mBio. 2016 Apr 19;7(2):e02161-15. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02161-15.

Redox-Active Sensing by Bacterial DksA Transcription Factors Is Determined by
Cysteine and Zinc Content.

Crawford MA(1), Tapscott T(2), Fitzsimmons LF(1), Liu L(1), Reyes AM(3), Libby
SJ(4), Trujillo M(3), Fang FC(5), Radi R(3), Vázquez-Torres A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(2)Molecular Biology Program, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, 
Colorado, USA.
(3)Departamento de Bioquimica and Center for Free Radical and Biomedical
Research, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la República, Montevideo, Uruguay.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Washington School of
Medicine, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Washington School of
Medicine, Seattle, Washington, USA Department of Microbiology, University of
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(6)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA Molecular Biology Program, University of Colorado
School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA Veterans Affairs Eastern Colorado
Health Care System, Denver, Colorado, USA Andres.Vazquez-Torres@ucdenver.edu.

The four-cysteine zinc finger motif of the bacterial RNA polymerase regulator
DksA is essential for protein structure, canonical control of the stringent
response to nutritional limitation, and thiol-based sensing of oxidative and
nitrosative stress. This interdependent relationship has limited our
understanding of DksA-mediated functions in bacterial pathogenesis. Here, we have
addressed this challenge by complementing ΔdksA Salmonella with Pseudomonas
aeruginosa dksA paralogues that encode proteins differing in cysteine and zinc
content. We find that four-cysteine, zinc-bound (C4) and two-cysteine, zinc-free 
(C2) DksA proteins are able to mediate appropriate stringent control in
Salmonella and that thiol-based sensing of reactive species is conserved among C2
and C4 orthologues. However, variations in cysteine and zinc content determine
the threshold at which individual DksA proteins sense and respond to reactive
species. In particular, zinc acts as an antioxidant, dampening cysteine
reactivity and raising the threshold of posttranslational thiol modification with
reactive species. Consequently, C2 DksA triggers transcriptional responses in
Salmonella at levels of oxidative or nitrosative stress normally tolerated by
Salmonella expressing C4 orthologues. Inappropriate transcriptional regulation by
C2 DksA increases the susceptibility of Salmonella to the antimicrobial effects
of hydrogen peroxide and nitric oxide, and attenuates virulence in macrophages
and mice. Our findings suggest that the redox-active sensory function of DksA
proteins is finely tuned to optimize bacterial fitness according to the levels of
oxidative and nitrosative stress encountered by bacterial species in their
natural and host environments.IMPORTANCE: In order to cause disease, pathogenic
bacteria must rapidly sense and respond to antimicrobial pressures encountered
within the host. Prominent among these stresses, and of particular relevance to
intracellular pathogens such as Salmonella, are nutritional restriction and the
enzymatic generation of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species. The conserved
transcriptional regulator DksA controls adaptive responses to nutritional
limitation, as well as to oxidative and nitrosative stress. Here, we demonstrate 
that each of these functions contributes to bacterial pathogenesis. Our
observations highlight the importance of metabolic adaptation in bacterial
pathogenesis and show the mechanism by which DksA orthologues are optimized to
sense the levels of oxidative and nitrosative stress encountered in their natural
habitats. An improved understanding of the conserved processes used by bacteria
to sense, respond to, and limit host defense will inform the development of novel
strategies to treat infections caused by pathogenic, potentially
multidrug-resistant bacteria.

Copyright © 2016 Crawford et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02161-15 
PMCID: PMC4850274
PMID: 27094335  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

