
1. Am J Pathol. 2016 Jun;186(6):1568-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2016.02.008. Epub
2016 Apr 18.

Treatment with ActRIIB-mFc Produces Myofiber Growth and Improves Lifespan in the 
Acta1 H40Y Murine Model of Nemaline Myopathy.

Tinklenberg J(1), Meng H(2), Yang L(3), Liu F(3), Hoffmann RG(4), Dasgupta M(4), 
Allen KP(5), Beggs AH(6), Hardeman EC(7), Pearsall RS(8), Fitts RH(9), Lawlor
MW(10).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Pathology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin; Neuroscience
Research Center, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
(2)Division of Pediatric Pathology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida.
(4)Quantitative Health Sciences Section, Department of Pediatrics, Medical
College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
(5)Biomedical Resource Center, Office of Research, Department of Microbiology and
Molecular Genetics, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
(6)Division of Genetics and Genomics, The Manton Center for Orphan Disease
Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts.
(7)Neuromuscular and Regenerative Medicine Unity, Department of Anatomy,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.
(8)Acceleron Pharma Inc., Boston, Massachusetts.
(9)Department of Biological Sciences, Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
(10)Division of Pediatric Pathology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin; Neuroscience
Research Center, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Electronic
address: mlawlor@mcw.edu.

Nemaline myopathies (NMs) are a group of congenital muscle diseases caused by
mutations in at least 10 genes and associated with a range of clinical symptoms. 
NM is defined on muscle biopsy by the presence of cytoplasmic rod-like structures
(nemaline rods) composed of cytoskeletal material. Myofiber smallness is also
found in many cases of NM and may represent a cause of weakness that can be
counteracted by treatment. We have used i.p. injection of activin type IIB
receptor (ActRIIB)-mFc (an inhibitor of myostatin signaling) to promote
hypertrophy and increase strength in our prior murine work; we therefore tested
whether ActRIIB-mFc could improve weakness in NM mice through myofiber
hypertrophy. We report a study of ActRIIB-mFc treatment in the Acta1 H40Y mouse
model of NM. Treatment of Acta1 H40Y mice produced significant increases in body 
mass, muscle mass, quadriceps myofiber size, and survival, but other measurements
of strength (forelimb grip strength, ex vivo measurements of contractile
function) did not improve. Our studies also identified that the complications of 
urethral obstruction are associated with mortality in male hemizygote Acta1 H40Y 
mice. The incidence of urethral obstruction and histologic evidence of chronic
obstruction (inflammation) were significantly lower in Acta1 H40Y mice that had
been treated with ActRIIB-mFc. ActRIIB-mFc treatment produces a mild benefit to
the disease phenotype in Acta1 H40Y mice.

Copyright © 2016 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2016.02.008 
PMCID: PMC4901141
PMID: 27102768  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

