
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2016 Sep;62:48-57. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2016.04.014. Epub 2016
Apr 20.

Hepcidin, Cathelicidin-1 and IL-8 as immunological markers of responsiveness in
early developmental stages of rainbow trout.

Santana PA(1), Guzmán F(2), Forero JC(3), Luna OF(4), Mercado L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Marcadores Inmunológicos, Laboratorio de Genética e Inmunología
Molecular, Instituto de Biología, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparaíso, 
Valparaíso, Chile; Programa de Doctorado en Biotecnología Pontificia Universidad 
Católica de Valparaíso/Universidad Técnica Federico Santa María, Valparaíso,
Chile; Núcleo Biotecnológico de Curauma (NBC), Pontificia Universidad Católica de
Valparaíso, Valparaíso, Chile. Electronic address: paula.santana@ucv.cl.
(2)Núcleo Biotecnológico de Curauma (NBC), Pontificia Universidad Católica de
Valparaíso, Valparaíso, Chile. Electronic address: fanny.guzman@ucv.cl.
(3)Programa de Doctorado en Biotecnología Pontificia Universidad Católica de
Valparaíso/Universidad Técnica Federico Santa María, Valparaíso, Chile.
Electronic address: jcarlosforero@gmail.com.
(4)Grupo de Marcadores Inmunológicos, Laboratorio de Genética e Inmunología
Molecular, Instituto de Biología, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparaíso, 
Valparaíso, Chile; Núcleo Biotecnológico de Curauma (NBC), Pontificia Universidad
Católica de Valparaíso, Valparaíso, Chile. Electronic address:
omar.luna.g@gmail.com.
(5)Grupo de Marcadores Inmunológicos, Laboratorio de Genética e Inmunología
Molecular, Instituto de Biología, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparaíso, 
Valparaíso, Chile. Electronic address: luis.mercado@pucv.cl.

During the early developmental stage of salmonids, high mortality occurs largely 
as a result of pathogens. These cause low immune competence in fry, producing
disease, decreasing production and finally leading to economic losses. Therefore,
the aim of this study was to characterise the developmental stages in which
rainbow trout acquires immune response capability when challenged with LPS from
Pseudomona aeruginosa for 8 h, studying the hepcidin, cathelicidin-1 and IL-8.
Total RNA was extracted from fry at 34, 42, 56 and 66 days post hatching (dph).
Hepcidin and cathelicidin-1 transcripts were detected only at days 34 and 42,
whereas the IL-8 transcript was detected from day 34 to day 66. To analyse the
protein expression in the fry, polyclonal anti-peptide antibodies were generated 
in rabbit. These three immune sera demonstrated the ability to recognise the
whole molecule in biological samples. Immunofluorescence showed that skin, gills 
and intestine mainly responded to the LPS challenge, indicating that these
portals of pathogen entry are capturing LPS. This study constitutes a valuable
approach, since it has the potential to identify molecules with biological
activity that can be used to evaluate the status of fry in culture.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2016.04.014 
PMID: 27106706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

