
1. NPJ Parkinsons Dis. 2015;1. pii: 15002. Epub 2015 Apr 22.

Common Genetic Variant Association with Altered HLA Expression, Synergy with
Pyrethroid Exposure, and Risk for Parkinson's Disease: An Observational and
Case-Control Study.

Kannarkat GT(1), Cook DA(1), Lee JK(1), Chang J(1), Chung J(1), Sandy E(1), Paul 
KC(2), Ritz B(2), Bronstein J(3), Factor SA(4), Boss JM(5), Tansey MG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA.
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Center for Occupational and Environmental
Health, Fielding School of Public Health, University of California at Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA.
(3)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, University of California at Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA.
(4)Department of Neurology and Movement Disorders Center, Emory University School
of Medicine, Atlanta, GA.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: The common non-coding single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
rs3129882 in HLA-DRA is associated with risk for idiopathic Parkinson's disease
(PD). The location of the SNP in the major histocompatibility complex class II
(MHC-II) locus implicates regulation of antigen presentation as a potential
mechanism by which immune responses link genetic susceptibility to environmental 
factors in conferring lifetime risk for PD.
METHODS: For immunophenotyping, blood cells from 81 subjects were analyzed by
qRT-PCR and flow cytometry. A case-control study was performed on a separate
cohort of 962 subjects to determine association of pesticide exposure and the SNP
with risk of PD.
RESULTS: Homozygosity for G at this SNP was associated with heightened baseline
expression and inducibility of MHC class II molecules in B cells and monocytes
from peripheral blood of healthy controls and PD patients. In addition, exposure 
to a commonly used class of insecticide, pyrethroids, synergized with the risk
conferred by this SNP (OR = 2.48, p = 0.007), thereby identifying a novel
gene-environment interaction that promotes risk for PD via alterations in immune 
responses.
CONCLUSIONS: In sum, these novel findings suggest that the MHC-II locus may
increase susceptibility to PD through presentation of pathogenic, immunodominant 
antigens and/or a shift toward a more pro-inflammatory CD4+ T cell response in
response to specific environmental exposures, such as pyrethroid exposure through
genetic or epigenetic mechanisms that modulate MHC-II gene expression.

DOI: 10.1038/npjparkd.2015.2 
PMCID: PMC4853162
PMID: 27148593 

