
1. PeerJ. 2016 May 2;4:e1965. doi: 10.7717/peerj.1965. eCollection 2016.

Cytokine response during non-cerebral and cerebral malaria: evidence of a failure
to control inflammation as a cause of death in African adults.

Dieye Y(1), Mbengue B(2), Dagamajalu S(3), Fall MM(4), Loke MF(3), Nguer CM(5),
Thiam A(6), Vadivelu J(3), Dieye A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Vice-Chancellor's Office, University of Malaya , Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia.
(2)Département d'Immunologie, Faculté de Médicine, de Pharmacie et
d'Odontostomatologie, Université Cheikh Anta Diop de Dakar, Dakar, Sénégal; Unité
d'Immunogénétique, Institut Pasteur de Dakar, Dakar, Sénégal.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya 
, Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia.
(4)Service de Réanimation, Hôpital Principal de Dakar , Dakar , Sénégal.
(5)Département Génie Chimique et Biologie Appliquée, École Supérieure
Polytechnique, Université Cheikh Anta Diop de Dakar , Dakar , Sénégal.
(6)Unité d'Immunogénétique, Institut Pasteur de Dakar , Dakar , Sénégal.

Background. With 214 million cases and 438,000 deaths in 2015, malaria remains
one of the deadliest infectious diseases in tropical countries. Several species
of the protozoan Plasmodium cause malaria. However, almost all the fatalities are
due to Plasmodium falciparum, a species responsible for the severest cases
including cerebral malaria. Immune response to Plasmodium falciparum infection is
mediated by the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines and growth
factors whose actions are crucial for the control of the parasites. Following
this response, the induction of anti-inflammatory immune mediators downregulates 
the inflammation thus preventing its adverse effects such as damages to various
organs and death. Methods. We performed a retrospective, nonprobability sampling 
study using clinical data and sera samples from patients, mainly adults,
suffering of non-cerebral or cerebral malaria in Dakar, Sénégal. Healthy
individuals residing in the same area were included as controls. We measured the 
serum levels of 29 biomarkers including growth factors, chemokines, inflammatory 
and anti-inflammatory cytokines. Results. We found an induction of both pro- and 
anti-inflammatory immune mediators during malaria. The levels of pro-inflammatory
biomarkers were higher in the cerebral malaria than in the non-cerebral malaria
patients. In contrast, the concentrations of anti-inflammatory cytokines were
comparable in these two groups or lower in CM patients. Additionally, four
pro-inflammatory biomarkers were significantly increased in the deceased of
cerebral malaria compared to the survivors. Regarding organ damage, kidney
failure was significantly associated with death in adults suffering of cerebral
malaria. Conclusions. Our results suggest that a poorly controlled inflammatory
response determines a bad outcome in African adults suffering of cerebral
malaria.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.1965 
PMCID: PMC4860323
PMID: 27168977 

