
1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2016 Jun;174:1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2016.04.004.
Epub 2016 Apr 5.

Immune response of turkey poults exposed at 1 day of age to either attenuated or 
wild Salmonella strains.

Hesse M(1), Stamm A(2), Weber R(2), Glünder G(2), Berndt A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for Poultry, University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Bünteweg 17,
Hannover, Germany. Electronic address: Martina.Hesse@tiho-hannover.de.
(2)Clinic for Poultry, University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Bünteweg 17,
Hannover, Germany.
(3)Institute of Molecular Pathogenesis, 'Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut' (Federal
Research Institute for Animal Health), Naumbruger Straße 96a, Jena, Germany.

Salmonellosis is a foodborne zoonosis that is most often acquired by consuming
poultry products such as eggs and poultry meat. Amongst other measures the
vaccination of food-producing poultry is thought to contribute to a reduction in 
human salmonellosis. In the European Union (EU) in 2014 the licence of a
commercially available Salmonella vaccine for chickens and ducks was extended to 
turkeys. In the present study, we examined the course of infection with a
virulent Salmonella enterica ssp. enterica serovar Enteritidis (SE) strain, a
virulent S. enterica ssp. enterica serovar Typhimurium (ST) strain, and the
respective live vaccine containing attenuated strains of both serovars in turkey 
poults. Besides collecting microbiological data and detecting invading Salmonella
in the caecal mucosa via immunohistochemistry, we also assessed immune reactions 
in terms of antibody production, influx of CD4-, CD8α- and CD28-positive cells
into the caecal mucosa and the expression of four different immune-related
proteins. We found that the attenuated strains were able to invade the caecum,
but to a lower degree and for a shorter duration of time compared to virulent
strains. Infections with virulent Salmonellae also caused an increase in CD4-,
CD8α- and CD28-positive cells in the caecal mucosa and an increased transcription
of iNOS, IL-8-like chemokines, and IFN-γ. In poults treated with attenuated
bacteria we could not detect any evidence of immune responses. In conclusion, the
vaccine showed a lower degree of caecal invasion and induced weaker immune
reactions compared to the virulent Salmonella strains in turkeys. The efficiency 
of the vaccine has to be verified in future studies.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2016.04.004 
PMID: 27185257  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

