
1. J Crohns Colitis. 2016 Nov;10(11):1336-1350. Epub 2016 May 17.

Genetic Deletion of Tissue Inhibitor of Metalloproteinase-1/TIMP-1 Alters
Inflammation and Attenuates Fibrosis in Dextran Sodium Sulphate-induced Murine
Models of Colitis.

Breynaert C(1)(2), de Bruyn M(1)(3), Arijs I(1)(4), Cremer J(1)(2), Martens E(3),
Van Lommel L(5), Geboes K(6), De Hertogh G(6), Schuit F(5), Ferrante M(1)(7),
Vermeire S(1)(7), Ceuppens J(2), Opdenakker G(3), Van Assche G(8)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Research Center for Gastrointestinal Disorders [TARGID],
Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Laboratory of Clinical Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Laboratory of Immunobiology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Rega
Institute for Medical Research, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Faculty of Medicine and Life Sciences, Hasselt University, Hasselt, Belgium.
(5)Gene Expression Unit, Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, KU
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(6)Translational Cell and Tissue Research, Department of Imaging and Pathology,
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(7)University Hospitals Leuven, Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, KU
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(8)Translational Research Center for Gastrointestinal Disorders [TARGID],
Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
gert.vanassche@uzleuven.be.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Increased levels of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 
[TIMP-1] have been detected in both inflammatory and fibrotic lesions in Crohn's 
disease. In a murine model of chronic inflammation, fibrosis was associated with 
an increase in TIMP-1 and inhibition of matrix metalloproteinase [MMP]-mediated
degradation. We investigated the effect of TIMP-1 deficiency in acute and chronic
murine models of colitis.
METHODS: Colitis was induced via oral administration of dextran sodium sulphate
[DSS] to B6.129S4-Timp1tm1Pds/J knock-out [KO] and C57BL/6J wild-type [WT] mice. 
Levels of inflammation and fibrosis were assessed and gelatin zymographies and
gene expression microarrays were performed.
RESULTS: Compared with WT mice, TIMP-1 KO mice had higher inflammatory parameters
after acute DSS administration and developed less fibrosis after chronic DSS
administration. MMP-2 levels were increased in WT versus TIMP-1 KO mice with
acute colitis, whereas a trend for higher proMMP-9 levels was observed in WT
versus TIMP-1 KO mice with chronic colitis. In control conditions, several
immune-related genes [e.g Ido1, Cldn8] were differentially expressed between
young TIMP-1 KO and WT mice, but to a lesser extent between older TIMP-1 KO and
WT mice. In response to DSS, the gene expression pattern was significantly
different between young TIMP-1 KO and WT mice, whereas it was similar in older
TIMP-1 KO and WT mice.
CONCLUSIONS: TIMP-1 deficiency leads to differential expression of immune-related
genes and to attenuated development of fibrosis. Unravelling the role of TIMP-1
in intestinal remodelling is necessary to develop more effective and more
targeted therapeutic strategies for intestinal fibrosis.

Copyright © 2016 European Crohn’s and Colitis Organisation (ECCO). Published by
Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjw101 
PMID: 27194531  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

