
1. J Oral Maxillofac Pathol. 2016 Jan-Apr;20(1):51-8. doi: 10.4103/0973-029X.180929.

Quantitative evaluation of microvessel density using CD34 in clinical variants of
ameloblastoma: An immunohistochemical study.

Pereira T(1), Dodal S(1), Tamgadge A(1), Bhalerao S(1), Tamgadge S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology and Microbiology, School of
Dentistry, D. Y. Patil University, Navi Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.

BACKGROUND: Odontogenic epithelium plays an important role in the histogenesis of
odontogenic tumors of the jaws. Ameloblastomas, which arise from odontogenic
epithelium, are considered benign with little tendency to metastasize. Tumors
require an adequate supply of oxygen and a way to remove their waste products.
This can be achieved by angiogenesis. In situ quantification of the microvessel
density (MVD) is a usual method for assessing angiogenesis. Moreover,
angiogenesis may differ in subtypes of ameloblastomas and could play a role in
determining the pattern of tumor growth.
AIM: The aim of the present study was to demonstrate the expression of cluster of
differentiation (CD34) in variants of ameloblastomas and to correlate and compare
their expression to the aggressive behavior.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A retrospective cross-sectional study which included forty
paraffin blocks was conducted after obtaining ethical committee clearance. Ten
cases of pyogenic granuloma were used as a positive control and thirty cases were
of solid multicystic ameloblastoma (SMA), unicystic ameloblastoma (UA) and
desmoplastic ameloblastomas. Angiogenesis was assessed using CD34 antigen and was
immunohistochemically localized. Statistical analysis was carried out for
comparative analysis with the help of ANOVA test, Kolmogorov-Smirnov test and
least significance difference test.
RESULTS: A significant correlation was obtained between the MVD of all the three 
variants, i.e., SMA, UA and desmoplastic ameloblastomas which was statistically
significant (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Increased MVD in the three variants, i.e., SMA, UA and desmoplastic
ameloblastoma seen in the present study could suggest that the angiogenesis has
an important role in tumor progression and aggressiveness of ameloblastomas.

DOI: 10.4103/0973-029X.180929 
PMCID: PMC4860937
PMID: 27194862 

