
1. Oncotarget. 2016 Jun 21;7(25):38292-38305. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.9438.

Sorafenib inhibits macrophage-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition in
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Deng YR(1), Liu WB(2), Lian ZX(3), Li X(4), Hou X(5).

Author information: 
(1)Intensive Care Unit, Affiliated Provincial Hospital of Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, China.
(2)Department of Hepatic Surgery and Anhui Province Key Laboratory of
Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery, Affiliated Provincial Hospital of Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, China.
(3)Liver Immunology Laboratory, Institute of Immunology and School of Life
Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China.
(4)Department of Gerontology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, China.
(5)Anhui Provincial Laboratory of Microbiology and Parasitology, Department of
Microbiology and Parasitology, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, China.

Tumor-associated macrophages, crucial components of the microenvironment in
hepatocellular carcinoma, hamper anti-cancer immune responses. The aim of the
present study was to investigate the effect of sorafenib on the formation of the 
tumor microenvironment, especially the relationship between polarized macrophages
and hepatocytes. Macrophage infiltration was reduced in patients with
hepatocellular carcinoma who were treated with sorafenib. In vitro, sorafenib
abolished polarized macrophage-induced epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT)
and migration of hepatocellular carcinoma cells but not normal hepatocytes.
Moreover, sorafenib attenuated HGF secretion in polarized macrophages, and
decreased plasma HGF in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. Additionally,
sorafenib abolished the polarized macrophage-induced activation of the HGF
receptor Met in hepatocellular carcinoma cells. Our findings suggest that
sorafenib inhibits polarized macrophage-induced EMT in hepatocellular carcinoma
cells via the HGF-Met signaling pathway. These results contribute to our
understanding of the immunological mechanisms that underlie the protective
effects of sorafenib in hepatocellular carcinoma therapy.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.9438 
PMCID: PMC5122390
PMID: 27203677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

