
1. Indian J Dent Res. 2016 Mar-Apr;27(2):145-50. doi: 10.4103/0970-9290.183116.

Effect of electron-beam irradiation on antimicrobial, antibiofilm activity, and
cytotoxicity of mouth rinses.

Geethashri A(1), Kumar BM(2), Palaksha KJ(2), Sridhar KR(3), Sanjeev G(4), Shetty
AV(5).

Author information: 
(1)Nitte University Centre for Science Education and Research, Nitte University, 
Mangalore, Karnataka, India.
(2)NUCSReM, Nitte University, Mangalore, Karnataka, India.
(3)Department of Biosciences, Mangalore University, Mangalore, Karnataka, India.
(4)Department of Physics, Mangalore University, Mangalore, Karnataka, India.
(5)Department of Microbiology, K. S. Hegde Medical Academy, Nitte University,
Mangalore, Karnataka, India.

BACKGROUND: Oral health diseases are common in all regions of the world. Mouth
rinses are widely used generally by population as a port of daily oral care
regimen. In addition to antimicrobial activity, mouth rinses possess certain
cytotoxic effects. Electron-beam (E-beam) radiation is a form of ionizing energy 
known to induce structural, physical, and chemical changes in irradiated
products. In this study, the modulatory effects of E-beam in irradiated mouth
rinses were evaluated for its biological activities.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The antimicrobial activities of nonirradiated and
irradiated mouth rinses were evaluated for its antimicrobial and antibiofilm
activities against oral pathogens, Enterococcus faecalis, Streptococcus mutans,
Staphylococcus aureus, and Candida albicans. The antimicrobial activity was
evaluated by disc diffusion method and antibiofilm activity was evaluated by
O'Toole method. The cytotoxicity was evaluated against human gingival fibroblast 
(HGF) cells by 3-(4, 5 Dimethythiazol-yl)-2,5-Diphenyl-tetrazolium bromide assay.
RESULTS: Colgate Plax (CP) exhibited the antimicrobial activity against the
tested pathogens, and a significant (P< 0.05) increase was observed against S.
aureus at 750 Gy irradiation. Further, CP significantly (P< 0.05) suppressed S.
mutans, S. aureus, and C. albicans biofilm. Listerine (LS) inhibited S. mutans
and C. albicans biofilm. Whereas irradiated CP and LS significantly (P< 0.05)
suppressed the biofilm formed by oral pathogens. The suppression of biofilm by
irradiated mouth rinses was dose- and species-dependent. There was no significant
(P > 0.05) difference in the cytotoxicity of irradiated and nonirradiated mouth
rinses on HGF cells. However, an increased percentage viability of HGF cells was 
observed by mouth rinses irradiated at 750 Gy.xs
CONCLUSION: The E-beam irradiation enhanced the antibiofilm activity of mouth
rinses without modifying the cytotoxicity.

DOI: 10.4103/0970-9290.183116 
PMID: 27237203  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

