
1. Oncotarget. 2017 May 9;8(19):30844-30858. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.9602.

Chemotherapeutics-induced Oct4 expression contributes to drug resistance and
tumor recurrence in bladder cancer.

Lu CS(1), Shieh GS(2), Wang CT(1), Su BH(3), Su YC(1), Chen YC(1), Su WC(4), Wu
P(5), Yang WH(6), Shiau AL(1)(7), Wu CL(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Urology, Tainan Hospital, Ministry of Health and Welfare,
Executive Yuan, Tainan, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine,
National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(5)Institute for Science & Technology in Medicine, Keele University, Keele,
United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Urology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University,
Tainan, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, National Cheng
Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.

Cancer cells initially characterized as sensitive to chemotherapy may acquire
resistance to chemotherapy and lead to tumor recurrence through the expansion of 
drug-resistant population. Acquisition of drug resistance to conventional
chemotherapy is a major obstacle in the treatment of recurrent cancer. Here we
investigated whether anticancer drugs induced Oct4 expression, thereby
contributing to acquired drug resistance and tumor recurrence in bladder cancer. 
We identified a positive correlation of Oct4 expression with tumor recurrence in 
122 clinical specimens of superficial high-grade (stages T1-2) bladder
transitional cell carcinoma (TCC). Increased Oct4 levels in bladder tumors were
associated with short recurrence-free intervals in the patients. Chemotherapy
induced Oct4 expression in bladder cancer cells. Notably, treatment with
cisplatin increased CD44-positive bladder cancer cells expressing Oct4,
representing cancer stem-like cell subpopulation. Forced expression of Oct4
reduced, whereas knockdown of Oct4 enhanced, drug sensitivity in bladder cancer
cells. Furthermore, tumor cells overexpressing Oct4 responded poorly to cisplatin
in vivo. In regard to clinical relevance, inhibition of Oct4 by all-trans
retinoic acid (ATRA) synergistically increased sensitivity to cisplatin in
bladder cancer cells. Furthermore, the combination of cisplatin and ATRA was
superior to cisplatin alone in suppressing tumor growth. Therefore, our results
provide evidence that Oct4 increases drug resistance and implicate that
inhibition of Oct4 may be a therapeutic strategy to circumvent drug resistance.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.9602 
PMCID: PMC5458172
PMID: 27244887  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

