
1. Front Microbiol. 2016 May 24;7:702. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00702. eCollection
2016.

Low Fermentation pH Is a Trigger to Alcohol Production, but a Killer to Chain
Elongation.

Ganigué R(1), Sánchez-Paredes P(2), Bañeras L(3), Colprim J(2).

Author information: 
(1)LEQUIA, Institute of the Environment, University of Girona, Campus de
MontiliviGirona, Spain; Center for Microbial Ecology and Technology (CMET) - FBE 
- Ghent UniversityGent, Belgium.
(2)LEQUIA, Institute of the Environment, University of Girona, Campus de
Montilivi Girona, Spain.
(3)Institute of Aquatic Ecology, University of Girona, Campus de Montilivi
Girona, Spain.

Gasification of organic wastes coupled to syngas fermentation allows the recovery
of carbon in the form of commodity chemicals, such as carboxylates and biofuels. 
Acetogenic bacteria ferment syngas to mainly two-carbon compounds, although a few
strains can also synthesize four-, and six-carbon molecules. In general, longer
carbon chain products have a higher biotechnological (and commercial) value due
to their higher energy content and their lower water solubility. However, de-novo
synthesis of medium-chain products from syngas is quite uncommon in acetogenic
bacteria. An alternative to de-novo synthesis is bioproduction of short-chain
products (C2 and C4), and their subsequent elongation to C4, C6, or C8 through
reversed β-oxidation metabolism. This two-step synergistic approach has been
successfully applied for the production of up to C8 compounds, although the
accumulation of alcohols in these mixed cultures remained below detection limits.
The present work investigates the production of higher alcohols from syngas by
open mixed cultures (OMC). A syngas-fermenting community was enriched from sludge
of an anaerobic digester for a period of 109 days in a lab-scale reactor. At the 
end of this period, stable production of ethanol and butanol was obtained. C6
compounds were only transiently produced at the beginning of the enrichment
phase, during which Clostridium kluyveri, a bacterium able to carry out carbon
chain elongation, was detected in the community. Further experiments showed pH as
a critical parameter to maintain chain elongation activity in the co-culture.
Production of C6 compounds was recovered by preventing fermentation pH to
decrease below pH 4.5-5. Finally, experiments showed maximal production of C6
compounds (0.8 g/L) and alcohols (1.7 g/L of ethanol, 1.1 g/L of butanol, and 0.6
g/L of hexanol) at pH 4.8. In conclusion, low fermentation pH is critical for the
production of alcohols, although detrimental to C. kluyveri. Fine control of
fermentation pH to final values around 4.8 could allow sustained production of
higher alcohols.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00702 
PMCID: PMC4877396
PMID: 27252682 

