
1. Nucl Med Biol. 2016 Jun;43(6):355-9. doi: 10.1016/j.nucmedbio.2016.02.004. Epub
2016 Feb 27.

Increased choline uptake in macrophages and prostate cancer cells does not allow 
for differentiation between benign and malignant prostate pathologies.

Schwarz T(1), Seidl C(2), Schiemann M(3), Senekowitsch-Schmidtke R(4), Krause
BJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Technische Universität München, Munich,
Germany; Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Regensburg University Medical Center,
Bad Abbach, Germany.
(2)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Technische Universität München, Munich,
Germany; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Technische Universität München,
Munich, Germany. Electronic address: christof.seidl@lrz.tum.de.
(3)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, Technische
Universität München, Munich, Germany.
(4)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Technische Universität München, Munich,
Germany.
(5)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Technische Universität München, Munich,
Germany; Department of Nuclear Medicine, Universitätsmedizin Rostock, Rostock,
Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Inflammatory cells may contribute to the choline uptake in
different prostate pathologies. The aim of this study was (i) to assess if
inflammatory cells incorporate choline and (ii) to potentially detect differences
compared to FDG uptake. Therefore we investigated the uptake of [(3)H]choline and
[(18)F]FDG in human prostate carcinoma cells and human inflammatory cells.
METHODS: Macrophages were cultured from isolated mononuclear cells, gained by
density gradient centrifugation of human buffy coats. T-lymphocytes,
B-lymphocytes and granulocytes were enriched by density gradient centrifugation
before cell sorting by means of flow cytometry was performed. [(3)H]choline and
[(18)F]FDG uptake of isolated inflammatory cells as well as of LNCaP and PC-3
human prostate carcinoma cells was assessed simultaneously in dual tracer uptake 
experiments.
RESULTS: Macrophages showed highest [(3)H]choline and [(18)F]FDG uptake compared 
to the tracer uptake rates of leukocytes. [(3)H]choline uptake of macrophages was
in the same range as in prostate cancer cells. Lipopolysaccharide stimulation of 
macrophages resulted in an increase of [(18)F]FDG uptake in macrophages, but not 
in an increased [(3)H]choline uptake.
CONCLUSIONS: The high [(3)H]choline uptake in macrophages may be a source of
false-positive PET results in diagnosis of prostate cancer by choline-PET/CT. As 
already known from FDG-PET, discrimination between tumor and inflammation in
prostate cancer patients is not possible via choline-PET.
ADVANCES IN KNOWLEDGE AND IMPLICATIONS FOR PATIENT CARE: The application of
choline-PET for reliable primary prostate cancer detection and delineation has to
be queried.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nucmedbio.2016.02.004 
PMID: 27260776  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

