
1. Pharmacogn Mag. 2016 May;12(Suppl 2):S170-4. doi: 10.4103/0973-1296.182155. Epub 
2016 May 11.

Cardioprotective and Antioxidant Influence of Aqueous Extracts from Sesamum
indicum Seeds on Oxidative Stress Induced by Cadmium in Wistar Rats.

Oyinloye BE(1), Ajiboye BO(2), Ojo OA(2), Nwozo SO(3), Kappo AP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology and Structural Biochemistry Group, Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, Republic of South
Africa; Department of Biochemistry, College of Sciences, Afe Babalola University,
Ado-Ekiti 360001, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, College of Sciences, Afe Babalola University,
Ado-Ekiti 360001, Nigeria.
(3)Nutritional and Industrial Research Laboratories, Department of Biochemistry, 
Faculty of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, University of Ibadan,
Ibadan 200002, Nigeria.
(4)Biotechnology and Structural Biochemistry Group, Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, Republic of South
Africa.

BACKGROUND: Oxidative stress has been implicated in the pathogenesis of several
acute and chronic diseases of the heart as a result of indiscriminate exposure to
cardiotoxic heavy metals. The study reported here was designed to evaluate the
possible ameliorative effect of aqueous extracts from Sesamum indicum (SI) seeds 
on oxidative stress induced by cadmium (Cd) in Wistar rats.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Daily administration of Cd (200 mg/L Cd as CdCl2) in the
animals' main drinking water for 21 days led to oxidative stress. Thereafter, the
ameliorative effects were assessed by measuring biochemical parameters such as
extent of lipid peroxidation (LPO), lipid profile, and enzymatic and nonenzymatic
antioxidants, as well as serum aminotransferase activities.
RESULTS: Treatment with SI extract elicited notable reduction in serum total
cholesterol, triglyceride, and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels as well
as concomitant increase in high-density lipoprotein cholesterol. SI extract also 
reversed the elevations witnessed in serum aminotransferase activities, LPO
level, and ameliorated enzymatic and nonenzymatic antioxidant status in the heart
of Cd-exposed rats.
CONCLUSION: Thus, SI appears to be an attractive candidate with potential for the
novel treatment of cardiotoxicity and management of oxidative stress arising from
Cd exposure.
SUMMARY: Cadmium (200 mg/L) exposure in drinking water caused pronounced
oxidative stress and cardiac tissue damage in animal modelAqueous extract of
Sesamum indicum (SI) seeds at a dose of 200 or 400 mg/kg body weight exhibited a 
significant reversal effect in all biochemical parameters measured such as extent
of lipid peroxidation, lipid profile, and enzymatic and nonenzymatic
antioxidants, as well as serum aminotransferase activitiesAqueous extract of SI
seeds possess antioxidant and cardioprotective potential in a dose-dependent
manner, thus conferring protection against oxidative stress induced by cadmium.
Abbreviation used: SI: Sesamum indicum, Cd: Cadmium, CdCl2: Cadmium chloride,
LPO: Lipid peroxidation, TBA: Thiobarbituric acid, ALT: Alanine aminotransferase,
AST: Aspartate aminotransferase, ALP: Alkaline phosphatise, TC: Total
cholesterol, TG: Triglyceride, HDL-C: Highdensity lipoprotein cholesterol, LDL-C:
Low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, SD: Standard deviation, GSH: Glutathione,
SOD: Superoxide dismutase, CAT: Catalase, GST: Glutathione-S-transferase, GPx:
Glutathione peroxidise.

DOI: 10.4103/0973-1296.182155 
PMCID: PMC4883075
PMID: 27279703 

