
1. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2016 Aug 1;311(2):L219-28. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00078.2016. Epub 2016 Jun 10.

Lung epithelial MyD88 drives early pulmonary clearance of Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
by a flagellin dependent mechanism.

Anas AA(1), van Lieshout MH(2), Claushuis TA(2), de Vos AF(2), Florquin S(3), de 
Boer OJ(3), Hou B(4), Van't Veer C(2), van der Poll T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Infection and Immunity, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Center of Experimental and Molecular
Medicine, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands; a.a.anas@amc.uva.nl.
(2)Center of Infection and Immunity, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Center of Experimental and Molecular
Medicine, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands;
(3)Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands;
(4)Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity, Institute of Biophysics, Chaoyang
District, Beijing, China; and.
(5)Center of Infection and Immunity, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Center of Experimental and Molecular
Medicine, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands; Division of Infectious Diseases, Academic Medical Center, University
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a flagellated pathogen frequently causing pneumonia in 
hospitalized patients and sufferers of chronic lung disease. Here we investigated
the role of the common Toll-like receptor (TLR) adaptor myeloid differentiation
factor (MyD)88 in myeloid vs. lung epithelial cells in clearance of P. aeruginosa
from the airways. Mice deficient for MyD88 in lung epithelial cells
(Sftpccre-MyD88-lox mice) or myeloid cells (LysMcre-MyD88-lox mice) and bone
marrow chimeric mice deficient for TLR5 (the receptor recognizing Pseudomonas
flagellin) in either parenchymal or hematopoietic cells were infected with P.
aeruginosa via the airways. Sftpccre-MyD88-lox mice demonstrated a reduced influx
of neutrophils into the bronchoalveolar space and an impaired early antibacterial
defense after infection with P. aeruginosa, whereas the response of
LysMcre-MyD88-lox mice did not differ from control mice. The immune-enhancing
role of epithelial MyD88 was dependent on recognition of pathogen-derived
flagellin by epithelial TLR5, as demonstrated by an unaltered clearance of mutant
P. aeruginosa lacking flagellin from the lungs of Sftpccre-MyD88-lox mice and an 
impaired bacterial clearance in bone marrow chimeric mice lacking TLR5 in
parenchymal cells. These data indicate that early clearance of P. aeruginosa from
the airways is dependent on flagellin-TLR5-MyD88-dependent signaling in
respiratory epithelial cells.

Copyright © 2016 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00078.2016 
PMID: 27288486  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

