
1. Gut. 2017 Sep;66(9):1623-1630. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2016-312132. Epub 2016 Jun 15.

Antibiotic-induced gut microbiota disruption during human endotoxemia: a
randomised controlled study.

Lankelma JM(1), Cranendonk DR(1), Belzer C(2), de Vos AF(1), de Vos WM(2)(3), van
der Poll T(1)(4), Wiersinga WJ(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Laboratory of Microbiology, Wageningen University, Wageningen,
The Netherlands.
(3)RPU Immunobiology, Department of Bacteriology and Immunology, Helsinki
University, Helsinski, Finland.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: The gut microbiota is essential for the development of the intestinal 
immune system. Animal models have suggested that the gut microbiota also acts as 
a major modulator of systemic innate immunity during sepsis. Microbiota
disruption by broad-spectrum antibiotics could thus have adverse effects on
cellular responsiveness towards invading pathogens. As such, the use of
antibiotics may attribute to immunosuppression as seen in sepsis. We aimed to
test whether disruption of the gut microbiota affects systemic innate immune
responses during endotoxemia in healthy subjects.
DESIGN: In this proof-of-principle intervention trial, 16 healthy young men
received either no treatment or broad-spectrum antibiotics (ciprofloxacin,
vancomycin and metronidazole) for 7 days, after which all were administered
lipopolysaccharide intravenously to induce a transient sepsis-like syndrome. At
various time points, blood and faeces were sampled.
RESULTS: Gut microbiota diversity was significantly lowered by the antibiotic
treatment in all subjects. Clinical parameters, neutrophil influx, cytokine
production, coagulation activation and endothelial activation during endotoxemia 
were not different between antibiotic-pretreated and control individuals.
Antibiotic treatment had no impact on blood leucocyte responsiveness to various
Toll-like receptor ligands and clinically relevant causative agents of sepsis
(Streptococcus pneumoniae, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Escherichia coli) during
endotoxemia.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that gut microbiota disruption by
broad-spectrum antibiotics does not affect systemic innate immune responses in
healthy subjects during endotoxemia in humans, disproving our hypothesis. Further
research is needed to test this hypothesis in critically ill patients. These data
underline the importance of translating findings in mice to humans.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT02127749; Pre-results).

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/.

DOI: 10.1136/gutjnl-2016-312132 
PMID: 27307305  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

