
1. World J Emerg Surg. 2016 Jun 14;11:26. doi: 10.1186/s13017-016-0086-1.
eCollection 2016.

Focus on the prophylaxis, epidemiology and therapy of methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus surgical site infections and a position paper on associated
risk factors: the perspective of an Italian group of surgeons.

Sganga G(1), Tascini C(2), Sozio E(3), Carlini M(4), Chirletti P(5), Cortese
F(6), Gattuso R(7), Granone P(8), Pempinello C(9), Sartelli M(10), Colizza S(11).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Clinica Chirurgica, Divisione Chirurgia Generale e Trapianti
d'Organo, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Fondazione Policlinico
Universitario Agostino Gemelli, Rome, Italy.
(2)U.O. Malattie Infettive, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Pisana, Pisa,
Italy.
(3)U.O. Medicina d'Urgenza Universitaria, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria
Pisana, Pisa, Italy.
(4)Chirurgia generale Ospedale Sant'Eugenio di Roma, Rome, Italy.
(5)Dipartimento di Chirurgia Università La Sapienza, Policlinico Umberto I, Rome,
Italy.
(6)UOC Chirurgia di Urgenza Ospedale San Filippo Neri, Rome, Italy.
(7)Dipartimento di Chirurgia Generale e Trapianti d'Organo, UOC Chirurgia
Vascolare, Università La Sapienza, Policlinico Umberto I, Rome, Italy.
(8)Istituto Patologia Chirurgia, Unità Operativa Complessa Chirurgia Toracica,
Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario
Agostino Gemelli, Rome, Italy.
(9)Ortopedia e Traumatologia dell'Ospedale S. Gennaro ASL Napoli 1 Centro,
Naples, Italy.
(10)U.O Chirurgia Generale Ospedale di Macerata, Macerata, Italy.
(11)Master Sepsi in Chirurgia, Università Cattolica, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this research was to study the epidemiology, microbiology,
prophylaxis, and antibiotic therapy of surgical site infections (SSIs),
especially those caused by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA),
and identify the risk factors for these infections. In Italy SSIs occur in about 
5 % of all surgical procedures. They are predominantly caused by staphylococci,
and 30 % of them are diagnosed after discharge. In every surgical specialty there
are specific procedures more associated with SSIs.
METHODS: The authors conducted a systematic review of the literature on SSIs,
especially MRSA infections, and used the Delphi method to identify risk factors
for these resistant infections.
RESULTS: Risk factors associated with MRSA SSIs identified by the Delphi method
were: patients from long-term care facilities, recent hospitalization (within the
preceding 30 days), Charlson score > 5 points, chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease and thoracic surgery, antibiotic therapy with beta-lactams (especially
cephalosporins and carbapenem) and/or quinolones in the preceding 30 days, age
75 years or older, current duration of hospitalization >16 days, and surgery with
prothesis implantation. Protective factors were adequate antibiotic prophylaxis, 
laparoscopic surgery and the presence of an active, in-hospital surveillance
program for the control of infections. MRSA therapy, especially with agents that 
enable the patient's rapid discharge from hospital is described.
CONCLUSION: The prevention, identification and treatment of SSIs, especially
those caused by MRSA, should be implemented in surgical units in order to improve
clinical and economic outcomes.

DOI: 10.1186/s13017-016-0086-1 
PMCID: PMC4908758
PMID: 27307786 

