
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2016 Jun;4(3). doi: 10.1128/microbiolspec.UTI-0019-2014.

Susceptibility to Urinary Tract Infection: Benefits and Hazards of the
Antibacterial Host Response.

Ambite I(1), Nagy K(2), Godaly G(1), Puthia M(1), Wullt B(1), Svanborg C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Glycobiology, Institute of
Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Lund, S-223 62, Sweden.
(2)Department of Urology, South-Pest Hospital, Budapest 1204, Hungary.

A paradigm shift is needed to improve and personalize the diagnosis of infectious
disease and to select appropriate therapies. For many years, only the most severe
and complicated bacterial infections received more detailed diagnostic and
therapeutic attention as the efficiency of antibiotic therapy has guaranteed
efficient treatment of patients suffering from the most common infections.
Indeed, treatability almost became a rationale not to analyze bacterial and host 
parameters in these larger patient groups. Due to the rapid spread of antibiotic 
resistance, common infections like respiratory tract- or urinary-tract infections
(UTIs) now pose new and significant therapeutic challenges. It is fortunate and
timely that infectious disease research can offer such a wealth of new molecular 
information that is ready to use for the identification of susceptible patients
and design of new suitable therapies. Paradoxically, the threat of antibiotic
resistance may become a window of opportunity, by encouraging the implementation 
of new diagnostic and therapeutic approaches. The frequency of antibiotic
resistance is rising rapidly in uropathogenic organisms and the molecular and
genetic understanding of UTI susceptibility is quite advanced. More bold
translation of the new molecular diagnostic and therapeutic tools would not just 
be possible but of great potential benefit in this patient group. This chapter
reviews the molecular basis for susceptibility to UTI, including recent advances 
in genetics, and discusses the consequences for diagnosis and therapy. By
dissecting the increasingly well-defined molecular interactions between bacteria 
and host and the molecular features of excessive bacterial virulence or
host-response malfunction, it is becoming possible to isolate the defensive from 
the damaging aspects of the host response. Distinguishing "good" from "bad"
inflammation has been a long-term quest of biomedical science and in UTI,
patients need the "good" aspects of the inflammatory response to resist infection
while avoiding the "bad" aspects, causing chronicity and tissue damage.

DOI: 10.1128/microbiolspec.UTI-0019-2014 
PMID: 27337480  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

