
1. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2016 Aug 1;311(2):L507-16. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00116.2016. Epub 2016 Jun 24.

Granzyme A impairs host defense during Streptococcus pneumoniae pneumonia.

van den Boogaard FE(1), van Gisbergen KP(2), Vernooy JH(3), Medema JP(4), Roelofs
JJ(5), van Zoelen MA(6), Endeman H(7), Biesma DH(7), Boon L(8), Van't Veer C(6), 
de Vos AF(6), van der Poll T(9).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine (CEMM), Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Center for Infection
and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; f.e.vandenboogaard@amc.nl.
(2)Laboratory of Experimental Immunology, Academic Medical Center, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Hematopoiesis, Sanquin
Research and Landsteiner Laboratory, Amsterdam, The Netherlands;
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University Maastricht, The Netherlands;
(4)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine (CEMM), Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Laboratory of
Experimental Oncology and Radiobiology, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands;
(5)Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands;
(6)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine (CEMM), Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Center for Infection
and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands;
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, St. Antonius Hospital, Nieuwegein, The
Netherlands;
(8)Bioceros, Utrecht, The Netherlands; and.
(9)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine (CEMM), Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Center for Infection
and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Medicine, Division of
Infectious Diseases, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.

Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most common causative pathogen in
community-acquired pneumonia (CAP). Granzyme A (GzmA) is a serine protease
produced by a variety of cell types involved in the immune response. We sought to
determine the role of GzmA on the host response during pneumococcal pneumonia.
GzmA was measured in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) harvested from CAP
patients from the infected and contralateral uninfected side and in lung tissue
slides from CAP patients and controls. In CAP patients, GzmA levels were
increased in BALF obtained from the infected lung. Human lungs showed
constitutive GzmA expression by both parenchymal and nonparenchymal cells. In an 
experimental setting, pneumonia was induced in wild-type (WT) and GzmA-deficient 
(GzmA(-/-)) mice by intranasal inoculation of S. pneumoniae In separate
experiments, WT and GzmA(-/-) mice were treated with natural killer (NK) cell
depleting antibodies. Upon infection with S. pneumoniae, GzmA(-/-) mice showed a 
better survival and lower bacterial counts in BALF and distant body sites
compared with WT mice. Although NK cells showed strong GzmA expression, NK cell
depletion did not influence bacterial loads in either WT or GzmA(-/-) mice. These
results implicate that GzmA plays an unfavorable role in host defense during
pneumococcal pneumonia by a mechanism that does not depend on NK cells.

Copyright © 2016 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00116.2016 
PMID: 27343190  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

