
1. J Clin Periodontol. 2016 Oct;43(10):863-73. doi: 10.1111/jcpe.12583. Epub 2016
Jul 15.

Effectiveness of enamel matrix derivative on the clinical and microbiological
outcomes following surgical regenerative treatment of peri-implantitis. A
randomized controlled trial.

Isehed C(1)(2)(3), Holmlund A(2)(3), Renvert S(4)(5)(6), Svenson B(7)(8),
Johansson I(9), Lundberg P(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Odontology/Molecular Periodontology, Umeå University, Umeå,
Sweden.
(2)Department of Periodontology, Gävle County Hospital, Gävle, Sweden.
(3)Center for Research & Development, Uppsala University/Region Gävleborg, Gävle,
Sweden.
(4)Department of Health Sciences, Kristianstad University, Kristianstad, Sweden.
(5)School of Dental Sciences, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland.
(6)Blekinge Institute of Technology, Karlskrona, Sweden.
(7)Department of Oral Radiology, Postgraduate Dental Education Center, Örebro,
Sweden.
(8)Faculty of Medicine and Health, School of Health and Medical Sciences, Örebro 
University, Örebro, Sweden.
(9)Department of Odontology/Cariology, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(10)Department of Odontology/Molecular Periodontology, Umeå University, Umeå,
Sweden. pernilla.lundberg@umu.se.

OBJECTIVE: This randomized clinical trial aimed at comparing radiological,
clinical and microbial effects of surgical treatment of peri-implantitis alone or
in combination with enamel matrix derivative (EMD).
METHODS: Twenty-six subjects were treated with open flap debridement and
decontamination of the implant surfaces with gauze and saline preceding
adjunctive EMD or no EMD. Bone level (BL) change was primary outcome and
secondary outcomes were changes in pocket depth (PD), plaque, pus, bleeding and
the microbiota of the peri-implant biofilm analyzed by the Human Oral Microbe
Identification Microarray over a time period of 12 months.
RESULTS: In multivariate modelling, increased marginal BL at implant site was
significantly associated with EMD, the number of osseous walls in the
peri-implant bone defect and a Gram+/aerobic microbial flora, whereas reduced BL 
was associated with a Gram-/anaerobic microbial flora and presence of bleeding
and pus, with a cross-validated predictive capacity (Q(2) ) of 36.4%. Similar,
but statistically non-significant, trends were seen for BL, PD, plaque, pus and
bleeding in univariate analysis.
CONCLUSION: Adjunctive EMD to surgical treatment of peri-implantitis was
associated with prevalence of Gram+/aerobic bacteria during the follow-up period 
and increased marginal BL 12 months after treatment.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcpe.12583 
PMID: 27418458  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

