
1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2016 Oct;138(4):1089-1097.e3. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2016.04.042. Epub 2016 Jun 14.

Eosinophil production of prostaglandin D2 in patients with aspirin-exacerbated
respiratory disease.

Feng X(1), Ramsden MK(2), Negri J(2), Baker MG(2), Payne SC(3), Borish L(4),
Steinke JW(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, QiLu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan,
China.
(2)Asthma and Allergic Disease Center, University of Virginia Health System,
Charlottesville, Va.
(3)Asthma and Allergic Disease Center, University of Virginia Health System,
Charlottesville, Va; Department of Medicine, University of Virginia Health
System, Charlottesville, Va; Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, 
University of Virginia Health System, Charlottesville, Va.
(4)Asthma and Allergic Disease Center, University of Virginia Health System,
Charlottesville, Va; Carter Immunology Center, University of Virginia Health
System, Charlottesville, Va; Department of Medicine, University of Virginia
Health System, Charlottesville, Va; Department of Microbiology, University of
Virginia Health System, Charlottesville, Va.
(5)Asthma and Allergic Disease Center, University of Virginia Health System,
Charlottesville, Va; Carter Immunology Center, University of Virginia Health
System, Charlottesville, Va; Department of Medicine, University of Virginia
Health System, Charlottesville, Va. Electronic address: js3ch@virginia.edu.

BACKGROUND: Aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease (AERD) differs from
aspirin-tolerant disease in part because of eosinophilic tissue infiltration and 
overexpression of arachidonic acid metabolic pathway components that lead to
enhanced secretion of cysteinyl leukotrienes and prostaglandin (PG) D2 observed
constitutively and paradoxically in response to aspirin and other COX inhibitors.
We have previously demonstrated the capacity of IFN-γ to drive cysteinyl
leukotriene expression and response.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated eosinophils as a source of PGD2 production in patients
with AERD.
METHODS: Eosinophils were enriched from tissue and peripheral blood obtained from
control subjects, patients with aspirin-tolerant disease, and patients with AERD.
mRNA was extracted and evaluated for expression of hematopoietic prostaglandin D 
synthase (hPGDS). Expression of hPGDS protein was confirmed with Western
hybridization and immunofluorescence staining. Cells were stimulated with
aspirin, and secretion of PGD2 was quantified. CD34+ progenitor cells were
isolated and matured into eosinophils in the presence or absence of IFN-γ and
hPGDS mRNA, and PGD2 release was measured.
RESULTS: Gene expression analysis revealed that eosinophils from tissue and blood
of patients with AERD display increased levels of hPGDS compared with asthmatic
and control samples. Western hybridization confirmed the increase in hPGDS mRNA
translated to increased protein expression. Immunofluorescence confirmed mast
cells and eosinophils from tissue of patients with AERD and asthma demonstrated
hPGDS expression, with higher levels in eosinophils from patients with AERD.
Incubation of eosinophils from blood and tissue with aspirin stimulated PGD2
release. IFN-γ-matured eosinophil progenitors showed enhanced hPGDS expression
and increased levels of PGD2 release at baseline and after aspirin stimulation.
CONCLUSIONS: In addition to mast cells, eosinophils represent an important source
of PGD2 in patients with AERD and identify a new target for therapeutic
intervention.

Copyright © 2016 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2016.04.042 
PMCID: PMC5056805
PMID: 27423494  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

