
1. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Aug 15;25(16):3524-3538. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddw195. Epub 2016
Jul 17.

Cancer-associated isocitrate dehydrogenase mutations induce mitochondrial DNA
instability.

Kingsbury JM(1), Shamaprasad N(2), Billmyre RB(2), Heitman J(2), Cardenas ME(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, NC, USA joanne.kingsbury@esr.cri.nz.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, NC, USA.

A major advance in understanding the progression and prognostic outcome of
certain cancers, such as low-grade gliomas, acute myeloid leukaemia, and
chondrosarcomas, has been the identification of early-occurring mutations in the 
NADP+-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase genes IDH1 and IDH2 These mutations
result in the production of the onco-metabolite D-2-hydroxyglutarate (2HG),
thought to contribute to disease progression. To better understand the mechanisms
of 2HG pathophysiology, we introduced the analogous glioma-associated mutations
into the NADP+ isocitrate dehydrogenase genes (IDP1, IDP2, IDP3) in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae Intriguingly, expression of the mitochondrial IDP1R148H mutant allele 
results in high levels of 2HG production as well as extensive mtDNA loss and
respiration defects. We find no evidence for a reactive oxygen-mediated mechanism
mediating this mtDNA loss. Instead, we show that 2HG production perturbs the iron
sensing mechanisms as indicated by upregulation of the Aft1-controlled iron
regulon and a concomitant increase in iron levels. Accordingly, iron chelation,
or overexpression of a truncated AFT1 allele that dampens transcription of the
iron regulon, suppresses the loss of respirative capacity. Additional suppressing
factors include overexpression of the mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase gene
ALD5 or disruption of the retrograde response transcription factor RTG1
Furthermore, elevated α-ketoglutarate levels also suppress 2HG-mediated
respiration loss; consistent with a mechanism by which 2HG contributes to mtDNA
loss by acting as a toxic α-ketoglutarate analog. Our findings provide insight
into the mechanisms that may contribute to 2HG oncogenicity in glioma and acute
myeloid leukaemia progression, with the promise for innovative diagnostic and
prognostic strategies and novel therapeutic modalities.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddw195 
PMCID: PMC5179947
PMID: 27427385  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

