
1. Malar J. 2016 Jul 22;15(1):380. doi: 10.1186/s12936-016-1438-8.

Routine implementation costs of larviciding with Bacillus thuringiensis
israelensis against malaria vectors in a district in rural Burkina Faso.

Dambach P(1), Schleicher M(2), Stahl HC(3), Traoré I(4), Becker N(5)(6), Kaiser
A(5), Sié A(4), Sauerborn R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Public Health, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
peter.dambach@web.de.
(2)South Asia Institute, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Institute of Public Health, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Centre de Recherche en Santé de Nouna, Nouna, Burkina Faso.
(5)German Mosquito Control Association (KABS), Speyer, Germany.
(6)Centre for Organismal Studies, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The key tools in malaria control are early diagnosis and treatment of
cases as well as vector control. Current strategies for malaria vector control in
sub-Saharan Africa are largely based on long-lasting insecticide-treated nets
(LLINs) and to a much smaller extent on indoor residual spraying (IRS). An
additional tool in the fight against malaria vectors, larval source management
(LSM), has not been used in sub-Saharan Africa on a wider scale since the
abandonment of environmental spraying of DDT. Increasing concerns about
limitations of LLINs and IRS and encouraging results from large larvicide-based
LSM trials make a strong case for using biological larviciding as a complementary
tool to existing control measures. Arguments that are often quoted against such a
combined approach are the alleged high implementation costs of LSM. This study
makes the first step to test this argument. The implementation costs of larval
source management based on Bacillus thuringiensis israelensis (Bti) (strain
AM65-52) spraying under different implementation scenarios were analysed in a
rural health district in Burkina Faso.
METHODS: The analysis draws on detailed cost data gathered during a large-scale
LSM intervention between 2013 and 2015. All 127 villages in the study setup were 
assigned to two treatment arms and one control group. Treatment either implied
exhaustive spraying of all available water collections or targeted spraying of
the 50 % most productive larval sources via remote-sensing derived and
entomologically validated risk maps. Based on the cost reports from both
intervention arms, the per capita programme costs were calculated under the
assumption of covering the whole district with either intervention scenario. Cost
calculations have been generalized by providing an adaptable cost formula. In
addition, this study assesses the sensitivity of per capita programme costs with 
respect to changes in the underlying cost components.
RESULTS: The average annual per capita costs of exhaustive larviciding with Bti
during the main malaria transmission period (June-October) in the Nouna health
district were calculated to be US$ 1.05. When targeted spraying of the 50 % most 
productive larval sources is used instead, average annual per capita costs
decrease by 27 % to US$ 0.77. Additionally, a high sensitivity of per capita
programme costs against changes in total surface of potential larval sources and 
the number of spraying repetitions was found.
DISCUSSION: The per capita costs for larval source management interventions with 
Bti are roughly a third of the annual per capita expenditures for anti-malarial
drugs and those for LLINs in Burkina Faso which are US$ 3.80 and 3.00,
respectively. The average LSM costs compare to those of IRS and LLINs for
sub-Saharan Africa. The authors argue that in such a setting LSM based on Bti
spraying is within the range of affordable anti-malarial strategies and,
consequently, should deserve more attention in practice. Future research includes
a cost-benefit calculation, based on entomological and epidemiological data
collected during the research project.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-016-1438-8 
PMCID: PMC4957841
PMID: 27449023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

