
1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Jun 29;7:1011. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01011. eCollection
2016.

Distribution and Composition of Thiotrophic Mats in the Hypoxic Zone of the Black
Sea (150-170 m Water Depth, Crimea Margin).

Jessen GL(1), Lichtschlag A(1), Struck U(2), Boetius A(3).

Author information: 
(1)HGF-MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck Institute for
Marine Microbiology Bremen, Germany.
(2)Museum für Naturkunde, Leibniz-Institut für Evolutions- und
Biodiversitätsforschung Berlin, Germany.
(3)HGF-MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck Institute for
Marine MicrobiologyBremen, Germany; Alfred Wegener Institute, Helmholtz Center
for Polar and Marine ResearchBremerhaven, Germany.

At the Black Sea chemocline, oxygen- and sulfide-rich waters meet and form a
niche for thiotrophic pelagic bacteria. Here we investigated an area of the
Northwestern Black Sea off Crimea close to the shelf break, where the chemocline 
reaches the seafloor at around 150-170 m water depth, to assess whether
thiotrophic bacteria are favored in this zone. Seafloor video transects were
carried out with the submersible JAGO covering 20 km(2) on the region between 110
and 200 m depth. Around the chemocline we observed irregular seafloor
depressions, covered with whitish mats of large filamentous bacteria. These
comprised 25-55% of the seafloor, forming a belt of 3 km width around the
chemocline. Cores from the mats obtained with JAGO showed higher accumulations of
organic matter under the mats compared to mat-free sediments. The mat-forming
bacteria were related to Beggiatoa-like large filamentous sulfur bacteria based
on 16S rRNA sequences from the mat, and visual characteristics. The microbial
community under the mats was significantly different from the surrounding
sediments and enriched with taxa affiliated with polymer degrading, fermenting
and sulfate reducing microorganisms. Under the mats, higher organic matter
accumulation, as well as higher remineralization and radiotracer-based sulfate
reduction rates were measured compared to outside the mat. Mat-covered and
mat-free sediments showed similar degradability of the bulk organic matter pool, 
suggesting that the higher sulfide fluxes and subsequent development of the
thiotrophic mats in the patches are consequences of the accumulation of organic
matter rather than its qualitative composition. Our observations suggest that the
key factors for the distribution of thiotrophic mat-forming communities near to
the Crimean shelf break are hypoxic conditions that (i) repress grazers, (ii)
enhance the accumulation and degradation of labile organic matter by
sulfate-reducers, and (iii) favor thiotrophic filamentous bacteria which are
adapted to exploit steep gradients in oxygen and sulfide availability; in
addition to a specific seafloor topography which may relate to internal waves at 
the shelf break.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01011 
PMCID: PMC4925705
PMID: 27446049 

