
1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Jun 21;7:964. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00964. eCollection
2016.

Single-cell Sequencing of Thiomargarita Reveals Genomic Flexibility for
Adaptation to Dynamic Redox Conditions.

Winkel M(1), Salman-Carvalho V(2), Woyke T(3), Richter M(4), Schulz-Vogt HN(5),
Flood BE(6), Bailey JV(6), Mußmann M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Ecology Group, Department of Molecular Ecology, Max Planck Institute
for Marine MicrobiologyBremen, Germany; Section Geomicrobiology, GFZ German
Research Centre for Geoscience, Helmholtz Centre PotsdamPotsdam, Germany.
(2)HGF MPG Joint Research Group for Deep-sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck
Institute for Marine Microbiology Bremen, Germany.
(3)Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute, Walnut Creek CA, USA.
(4)Microbial Genomics and Bioinformatics Group, Department of Molecular Ecology, 
Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology Bremen, Germany.
(5)Leibniz-Institut für Ostseeforschung Warnemünde Rostock, Germany.
(6)Department of Earth Sciences, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis MN, USA.
(7)Molecular Ecology Group, Department of Molecular Ecology, Max Planck Institute
for Marine Microbiology Bremen, Germany.

Large, colorless sulfur-oxidizing bacteria (LSB) of the family Beggiatoaceae form
thick mats at sulfidic sediment surfaces, where they efficiently detoxify sulfide
before it enters the water column. The genus Thiomargarita harbors the largest
known free-living bacteria with cell sizes of up to 750 μm in diameter. In
addition to their ability to oxidize reduced sulfur compounds, some Thiomargarita
spp. are known to store large amounts of nitrate, phosphate and elemental sulfur 
internally. To date little is known about their energy yielding metabolic
pathways, and how these pathways compare to other Beggiatoaceae. Here, we present
a draft single-cell genome of a chain-forming "Candidatus Thiomargarita nelsonii 
Thio36", and conduct a comparative analysis to five draft and one full genome of 
other members of the Beggiatoaceae. "Ca. T. nelsonii Thio36" is able to respire
nitrate to both ammonium and dinitrogen, which allows them to flexibly respond to
environmental changes. Genes for sulfur oxidation and inorganic carbon fixation
confirmed that "Ca. T. nelsonii Thio36" can function as a chemolithoautotroph.
Carbon can be fixed via the Calvin-Benson-Bassham cycle, which is common among
the Beggiatoaceae. In addition we found key genes of the reductive tricarboxylic 
acid cycle that point toward an alternative CO2 fixation pathway. Surprisingly,
"Ca. T. nelsonii Thio36" also encodes key genes of the C2-cycle that convert
2-phosphoglycolate to 3-phosphoglycerate during photorespiration in higher plants
and cyanobacteria. Moreover, we identified a novel trait of a flavin-based energy
bifurcation pathway coupled to a Na(+)-translocating membrane complex (Rnf). The 
coupling of these pathways may be key to surviving long periods of anoxia. As
other Beggiatoaceae "Ca. T. nelsonii Thio36" encodes many genes similar to those 
of (filamentous) cyanobacteria. In summary, the genome of "Ca. T. nelsonii
Thio36" provides additional insight into the ecology of giant sulfur-oxidizing
bacteria, and reveals unique genomic features for the Thiomargarita lineage
within the Beggiatoaceae.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00964 
PMCID: PMC4914600
PMID: 27446006 

