
1. Shock. 2017 Jan;47(1):40-51.

Flt3 Ligand Treatment Attenuates T Cell Dysfunction and Improves Survival in a
Murine Model of Burn Wound Sepsis.

Patil NK(1), Bohannon JK, Luan L, Guo Y, Fensterheim B, Hernandez A, Wang J,
Sherwood ER.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Anesthesiology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee†Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee.

INTRODUCTION: Sepsis is a leading cause of death among severely burned patients. 
Burn injury disrupts the protective skin barrier and causes immunological
dysfunction. In our previous studies, we found that burn injury and wound
infection causes a significant decline in lymphocyte populations, implying
adaptive immune system dysfunction. In the present study, we examined the effect 
of treatment with Fms-like tyrosine kinase-3 Ligand (Flt3L) on T cell phenotype
and function in a model of burn wound sepsis. FLt3L is an essential cytokine
required for hematopoietic progenitor cell development and expansion of both
myeloid and lymphoid lineages. Flt3L has been shown to potentiate innate immune
functions of dendritic cells and neutrophils during burn wound sepsis. However,
the ability of Flt3L to improve T cell function during burn wound sepsis has not 
been previously evaluated.
METHODS: Mice underwent 35% total body surface area scald burn and were treated
with Flt3L (10 μg) or vehicle daily via the intraperitoneal route starting 1 day 
after burn injury. On day 4 after burn injury, Pseudomonas aeruginosa was used to
induce wound infection. Leukocytes in spleen and wound draining lymph nodes were 
characterized using flow cytometry. Bacterial clearance, organ injury, and
survival were also assessed.
RESULTS: Flt3L treatment prevented the decline in splenic CD4 and CD8 T cells
caused by burn injury and infection. Flt3L treatment also attenuated the decline 
in CD28 expression on CD4 and CD8 T cells and IFNγ production by CD8 T cells in
the spleen and wound draining lymph nodes. Furthermore, Flt3L decreased the
levels of programmed death ligand 1 expression on splenic dendritic cells and
macrophages. Flt3 treatment improved systemic bacterial clearance, decreased
liver and kidney injury, and significantly improved survival in mice with burn
wound sepsis.
CONCLUSION: Burn injury and associated sepsis causes significant loss of T cells 
and evidence of T cell dysfunction. Flt3L attenuates T cell dysfunction and
improves host resistance to burn wound sepsis in mice.

DOI: 10.1097/SHK.0000000000000688 
PMCID: PMC5167662
PMID: 27454384  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: of Conflicts of Interest: All authors declare no 
conflict of interest.

