
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2016 Jul 27;17(8). pii: E1207. doi: 10.3390/ijms17081207.

Chicken-Specific Kinome Array Reveals that Salmonella enterica Serovar
Enteritidis Modulates Host Immune Signaling Pathways in the Cecum to Establish a 
Persistence Infection.

Kogut MH(1), Swaggerty CL(2), Byrd JA(3), Selvaraj R(4), Arsenault RJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Southern Plains Agricultural Resarch Center, United States Department of
Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, College Station, TX 77845, USA.
mike.kogut@ars.usda.gov.
(2)Southern Plains Agricultural Resarch Center, United States Department of
Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, College Station, TX 77845, USA.
christi.swaggerty@ars.usda.gov.
(3)Southern Plains Agricultural Resarch Center, United States Department of
Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, College Station, TX 77845, USA.
allen.byrd@ars.usda.gov.
(4)Ohio Agricultural Research Center, The Ohio State University, Wooster, OH
44691, USA. selvaraj.7@osu.edu.
(5)Department of Animal and Food Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE
19716, USA. rja@udel.edu.

Non-typhoidal Salmonella enterica induces an early, short-lived pro-inflammatory 
response in chickens that is asymptomatic of clinical disease and results in a
persistent colonization of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract that transmits
infections to naïve hosts via fecal shedding of bacteria. The underlying
mechanisms that control this persistent colonization of the ceca of chickens by
Salmonella are only beginning to be elucidated. We hypothesize that alteration of
host signaling pathways mediate the induction of a tolerance response. Using
chicken-specific kinomic immune peptide arrays and quantitative RT-PCR of
infected cecal tissue, we have previously evaluated the development of disease
tolerance in chickens infected with Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis (S.
Enteritidis) in a persistent infection model (4-14 days post infection). Here, we
have further outlined the induction of an tolerance defense strategy in the cecum
of chickens infected with S. Enteritidis beginning around four days post-primary 
infection. The response is characterized by alterations in the activation of T
cell signaling mediated by the dephosphorylation of phospholipase c-γ1 (PLCG1)
that inhibits NF-κB signaling and activates nuclear factor of activated T-cells
(NFAT) signaling and blockage of interferon-γ (IFN-γ) production through the
disruption of the JAK-STAT signaling pathway (dephosphorylation of JAK2, JAK3,
and STAT4). Further, we measured a significant down-regulation reduction in IFN-γ
mRNA expression. These studies, combined with our previous findings, describe
global phenotypic changes in the avian cecum of Salmonella Enteritidis-infected
chickens that decreases the host responsiveness resulting in the establishment of
persistent colonization. The identified tissue protein kinases also represent
potential targets for future antimicrobial compounds for decreasing Salmonella
loads in the intestines of food animals before going to market.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms17081207 
PMCID: PMC5000605
PMID: 27472318  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

