
1. Clin Transl Gastroenterol. 2016 Aug 4;7(8):e186. doi: 10.1038/ctg.2016.43.

Antibiotic-Induced Gut Microbiota Disruption Decreases TNF-α Release by
Mononuclear Cells in Healthy Adults.

Lankelma JM(1), Belzer C(2), Hoogendijk AJ(1), de Vos AF(1), de Vos WM(2)(3), van
der Poll T(1)(4), Wiersinga WJ(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Laboratory of Microbiology, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The
Netherlands.
(3)RPU Immunobiology, Department of Bacteriology and Immunology, Helsinki
University, Helsinski, Finland.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVES: Broad-spectrum antibiotics disrupt the intestinal microbiota. The
microbiota is essential for physiological processes, such as the development of
the gut immune system. Recent murine data suggest that the intestinal microbiota 
also modulates systemic innate immune responses; however, evidence in humans is
lacking.
METHODS: Twelve healthy young men were given oral broad-spectrum antibiotics
(ciprofloxacin 500 mg bid, vancomycin 500 mg tid and metronidazole 500 mg tid)
for 7 days. At baseline, 1 day, and 6 weeks after antibiotics, blood and feces
were sampled. Whole blood and isolated mononuclear cells were stimulated with
selected Toll-like receptor agonists and heat-killed bacteria. Microbiota
diversity and composition was determined using bacterial 16S rDNA sequencing.
RESULTS: One day after the antibiotic course, microbial diversity was
significantly lower compared with baseline. After antibiotic therapy, systemic
mononuclear cells produced lower levels of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α after ex
vivo stimulation with lipopolysaccharide (LPS). This diminished capacity to
produce TNF-α was restored 6 weeks after cessation of antibiotic therapy. In
whole blood, a reduced capacity to release interleukin (IL)-1β and IL-6 was
observed after LPS stimulation. Antibiotic treatment did not impact on
differential leukocyte counts, phagocytosis, and cell surface markers of
neutrophils and monocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: In this proof-of-principle study of healthy subjects, microbiota
disruption by broad-spectrum antibiotics is reversibly associated with decreased 
systemic cellular responsiveness towards LPS. The implications of these findings 
in a clinical setting remain to be determined.

DOI: 10.1038/ctg.2016.43 
PMCID: PMC5543405
PMID: 27489950 

