
1. J Biotechnol. 2016 Oct 20;236:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2016.08.004. Epub 2016 
Aug 3.

Modulation of heterologous expression from PBAD promoter in Escherichia coli
production strains.

Széliová D(1), Krahulec J(2), Šafránek M(1), Lišková V(1), Turňa J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius
University in Bratislava, Slovakia.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius
University in Bratislava, Slovakia. Electronic address: krahulec@fns.uniba.sk.

Promoter PBAD is frequently used for heterologous gene expression due to several 
advantages, such as moderately high expression levels, induction by an
inexpensive and non-toxic monosaccharide L-arabinose and tight regulation of
transcription, which is particularly important for expression of toxic proteins. 
A drawback of this promoter is all-or-none induction that occurs at subsaturating
inducer concentrations. Although the overall expression level of the cell culture
seems to correlate with increasing arabinose concentrations, the population is a 
mixture of induced and uninduced cells and with increasing arabinose
concentrations, only the fraction of induced cells increases. This phenomenon is 
caused by autocatalytic gene expression - the expression of the arabinose
transporter AraE is induced by the transported molecule. In this work the
promoter PE, controlling the expression of araE, was exchanged for the stronger
PBAD promoter in two Escherichia coli strains commonly used for heterologous
protein production. This modification should increase a basal number of arabinose
transporters in the cell wall and reduce the threshold concentration required for
induction and thus reduce heterogeneity of cell population. Heterogeneity and
level of expression in individual cells were analysed by flow cytometry using gfp
as a reporter gene. In the strain BL21ai, the promoter exchange increased the
number of induced cells at subsaturating arabinose concentrations as well as a
yield of protein at saturating inducer concentration. In contrast, the
modification did not improve these characteristics in RV308ai. In both strains it
was possible to modulate the expression level in induced cells 3-6-fold even at
subsaturating arabinose concentrations.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2016.08.004 
PMID: 27498315  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

