
1. AIDS. 2016 Oct 23;30(16):2477-2486.

Associations between antiretroviral use and subclinical coronary atherosclerosis.

Thomas GP(1), Li X, Post WS, Jacobson LP, Witt MD, Brown TT, Kingsley LA, Phair
JP, Palella FJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)aDivision of Infectious Diseases, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern
University, Chicago, Illinois bDepartment of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health cDepartment of Medicine, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland dLos Angeles Biomedical
Research Institute at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, California
eDepartment of Infectious Diseases and Microbiology, University of Pittsburgh
Graduate School of Public Health, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

OBJECTIVES: HIV infection is associated with increased prevalence of subclinical 
coronary plaque. The extent to which such plaque reflects effects of HIV
infection or effects of long-term antiretroviral therapy (ART) use remains
unclear and was the goal of this analysis.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We compared the prevalence and extent of coronary plaque and 
stenosis between users of specific ART drugs or drug classes using coronary
computed tomography (CT) among HIV-infected men in the Multicenter AIDS Cohort
Study. To account for time-dependent confounders, including cardiovascular
disease risk factors and time-varying reasons for using specific treatments, we
conducted fully adjusted logistic and linear models with inverse probability of
treatment weighting.
RESULTS: There were 618 men who underwent noncontrast coronary CT; 450 also
underwent coronary CT angiography. At the time of scanning, 81% had undetectable 
plasma HIV RNA. In fully adjusted models, cumulative use of zidovudine, abacavir,
darunavir, and protease inhibitors as a drug class were inconsistently associated
with specific forms of plaque presence or extent.
CONCLUSION: Among virally suppressed HIV-infected men with extensive ART
exposure, no consistent associations between use of specific ART drugs and both
subclinical coronary plaque presence and extent were apparent. Our findings
support the hypothesis that, among virally suppressed persons, type of ART used
is not in general a major determinant of subclinical coronary plaque risk.

DOI: 10.1097/QAD.0000000000001220 
PMCID: PMC5173385
PMID: 27490639  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: TTB has served as a consultant to Gilead
Sciences, Merck, ViiV Healthcare, Abbvie, EMD-Serono, Bristol Myers Squibb, and
Theratechnologies; FJP serves as a consultant for and on speakers' bureau for
Gilead Sciences, Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Merck and Co., and Bristol Myers
Squibb; MDW has served as a consultant for Gilead Sciences. For the remaining
authors no conflicts of interest were declared.

