
1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2016 Nov;71(11):3117-3124. Epub 2016 Aug 1.

Use of WGS data for investigation of a long-term NDM-1-producing Citrobacter
freundii outbreak and secondary in vivo spread of blaNDM-1 to Escherichia coli,
Klebsiella pneumoniae and Klebsiella oxytoca.

Hammerum AM(1), Hansen F(2), Nielsen HL(3), Jakobsen L(2), Stegger M(2)(4),
Andersen PS(2)(4)(5), Jensen P(6), Nielsen TK(7), Hansen LH(7), Hasman H(2),
Fuglsang-Damgaard D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infection Control, Statens Serum Institut,
Copenhagen, Denmark ama@ssi.dk.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Infection Control, Statens Serum Institut,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg,
Denmark.
(4)Pathogen Genomics Division, Translational Genomics Research Institute (TGen), 
Flagstaff, AZ, USA.
(5)Veterinary Disease Biology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(6)Department of Haematology, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark.
(7)Department of Environmental Science, Aarhus University, Roskilde, Denmark.

OBJECTIVES: An outbreak of NDM-1-producing Citrobacter freundii and possible
secondary in vivo spread of blaNDM-1 to other Enterobacteriaceae were
investigated.
METHODS: From October 2012 to March 2015, meropenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae 
were detected in 45 samples from seven patients at Aalborg University Hospital,
Aalborg, Denmark. In silico resistance genes, Inc plasmid types and STs (MLST)
were obtained from WGS data from 24 meropenem-resistant isolates (13 C. freundii,
6 Klebsiella pneumoniae, 4 Escherichia coli and 1 Klebsiella oxytoca) and 1
meropenem-susceptible K. oxytoca. The sequences of the meropenem-resistant C.
freundii isolates were compared by phylogenetic analyses. In vitro susceptibility
to 21 antimicrobial agents was tested. Furthermore, in vitro conjugation and
plasmid characterization was performed.
RESULTS: From the seven patients, 13 highly clonal ST18 NDM-1-producing C.
freundii were isolated. The ST18 NDM-1-producing C. freundii isolates were only
susceptible to tetracycline, tigecycline, colistin and fosfomycin (except for the
C. freundii isolates from Patient 2 and Patient 7, which were additionally
resistant to tetracycline). The E. coli and K. pneumoniae from different patients
belonged to different STs, indicating in vivo transfer of blaNDM-1 in the
individual patients. This was further supported by in vitro conjugation and
detection of a 154 kb IncA/C2 plasmid with blaNDM-1. Patient screenings failed to
reveal any additional cases. None of the patients had a history of recent travel 
abroad and the source of the blaNDM-1 plasmid was unknown.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, this is the first report of an NDM-1-producing C. 
freundii outbreak and secondary in vivo spread of an IncA/C2 plasmid with
blaNDM-1 to other Enterobacteriaceae.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkw289 
PMID: 27494919  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

