
1. Crit Care. 2016 Aug 6;20(1):252. doi: 10.1186/s13054-016-1429-8.

Association of diabetes and diabetes treatment with the host response in
critically ill sepsis patients.

van Vught LA(1)(2), Scicluna BP(3)(4), Hoogendijk AJ(3)(4), Wiewel MA(3)(4),
Klein Klouwenberg PM(5)(6)(7), Cremer OL(5), Horn J(8), Nürnberg P(9)(10)(11),
Bonten MM(6), Schultz MJ(8)(12), van der Poll T(3)(4)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, Room G2-130, 1105, AZ, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. l.a.vanvught@amc.uva.nl.
(2)the Center for Infection and Immunity, Academic Medical Center, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. l.a.vanvught@amc.uva.nl.
(3)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, Room G2-130, 1105, AZ, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(4)the Center for Infection and Immunity, Academic Medical Center, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Medical Microbiology, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(7)Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Intensive Care, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(9)Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(10)Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated
Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(11)Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne,
Germany.
(12)Laboratory of Experimental Intensive Care and Anesthesiology, Academic
Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(13)Division of Infectious Diseases, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Diabetes is associated with chronic inflammation and activation of
the vascular endothelium and the coagulation system, which in a more acute manner
are also observed in sepsis. Insulin and metformin exert immune modulatory
effects. In this study, we aimed to determine the association of diabetes and
preadmission insulin and metformin use with sepsis outcome and host response.
METHODS: We evaluated 1104 patients with sepsis, admitted to the intensive care
unit and stratified according to the presence or absence of diabetes mellitus.
The host response was examined by a targeted approach (by measuring 15 plasma
biomarkers reflective of pathways implicated in sepsis pathogenesis) and an
unbiased approach (by analyzing whole genome expression profiles in blood
leukocytes).
RESULTS: Diabetes mellitus was not associated with differences in sepsis
presentation or mortality up to 90 days after admission. Plasma biomarker
measurements revealed signs of systemic inflammation, and strong endothelial and 
coagulation activation in patients with sepsis, none of which were altered in
those with diabetes. Patients with and without diabetes mellitus, who had sepsis 
demonstrated similar transcriptional alterations, comprising 74 % of the
expressed gene content and involving over-expression of genes associated with
pro-inflammatory, anti-inflammatory, Toll-like receptor and metabolic signaling
pathways and under-expression of genes associated with T cell signaling pathways.
Amongst patients with diabetes mellitus and sepsis, preadmission treatment with
insulin or metformin was not associated with an altered sepsis outcome or host
response.
CONCLUSIONS: Neither diabetes mellitus nor preadmission insulin or metformin use 
are associated with altered disease presentation, outcome or host response in
patients with sepsis requiring intensive care.

DOI: 10.1186/s13054-016-1429-8 
PMCID: PMC4975896
PMID: 27495247  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

