
1. J Am Chem Soc. 2016 Sep 7;138(35):11318-26. doi: 10.1021/jacs.6b06781. Epub 2016 
Aug 24.

Overexpression of Antimicrobial, Anticancer, and Transmembrane Peptides in
Escherichia coli through a Calmodulin-Peptide Fusion System.

Ishida H(1), Nguyen LT(1), Gopal R(1), Aizawa T(1), Vogel HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Research Group, Department of Biological Sciences, University of 
Calgary , Calgary, Alberta T2N 1N4, Canada.

In recent years, the increasing number of antibiotic-resistant bacteria has
become a serious health concern. Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are an important
component of the innate immune system of most organisms. A better understanding
of their structures and mechanisms of action would lead to the design of more
potent and safer AMPs as alternatives for current antibiotics. For detailed
investigations, effective recombinant production which allows the facile
modification of the amino acid sequence, the introduction of unnatural amino
acids, and labeling with stable isotopes for nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
studies is desired. Several expression strategies have been introduced in
previous reports; however, their effectiveness has been limited to a select few
AMPs. Here, we have studied calmodulin (CaM) as a more universal carrier protein 
to express many types of AMPs in E. coli. We have discovered that the unique
architecture of CaM, consisting of two independent target binding domains with
malleable methionine-rich interaction surfaces, can accommodate numerous amino
acid sequences containing basic and hydrophobic residues. This effectively masks 
the toxic antimicrobial activities of many amphipathic AMPs and protects them
from degradation during expression and purification. Here, we demonstrate the
expression of various AMPs using a CaM-fusion expression system, including
melittin, fowlicidin-1, tritrpticin, indolicidin, puroindoline A peptide,
magainin II F5W, lactoferrampin B, MIP3α51-70, and human β-defensin 3 (HBD-3),
the latter requiring three disulfide bonds for proper folding. In addition, our
approach was extended to the transmembrane domain of the cell adhesion protein
l-selectin. We propose the use of the CaM-fusion system as a universal approach
to express many cationic amphipathic peptides that are normally toxic and would
kill the bacterial host cells.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.6b06781 
PMID: 27502305  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

