
1. BMC Genomics. 2016 Aug 11;17(1):619. doi: 10.1186/s12864-016-2960-3.

The human olfactory transcriptome.

Olender T(1), Keydar I(2), Pinto JM(3), Tatarskyy P(2), Alkelai A(2), Chien
MS(4), Fishilevich S(2), Restrepo D(5), Matsunami H(4), Gilad Y(6), Lancet D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Israel. tsviya.olender@weizmann.ac.il.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Israel.
(3)Section of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Department of Neurobiology,
Duke Institute for Brain Sciences, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC,
USA.
(5)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Neuroscience Program, and Rocky 
Mountain Taste and Smell Center, University of Colorado School of Medicine,
Aurora, CO, USA.
(6)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

BACKGROUND: Olfaction is a versatile sensory mechanism for detecting thousands of
volatile odorants. Although molecular basis of odorant signaling is relatively
well understood considerable gaps remain in the complete charting of all relevant
gene products. To address this challenge, we applied RNAseq to four
well-characterized human olfactory epithelial samples and compared the results to
novel and published mouse olfactory epithelium as well as 16 human control
tissues.
RESULTS: We identified 194 non-olfactory receptor (OR) genes that are
overexpressed in human olfactory tissues vs.
CONTROLS: The highest overexpression is seen for lipocalins and
bactericidal/permeability-increasing (BPI)-fold proteins, which in other species 
include secreted odorant carriers. Mouse-human discordance in orthologous
lipocalin expression suggests different mammalian evolutionary paths in this
family. Of the overexpressed genes 36 have documented olfactory function while
for 158 there is little or no previous such functional evidence. The latter group
includes GPCRs, neuropeptides, solute carriers, transcription factors and
biotransformation enzymes. Many of them may be indirectly implicated in sensory
function, and ~70 % are over expressed also in mouse olfactory epithelium,
corroborating their olfactory role. Nearly 90 % of the intact OR repertoire, and 
~60 % of the OR pseudogenes are expressed in the olfactory epithelium, with the
latter showing a 3-fold lower expression. ORs transcription levels show a
1000-fold inter-paralog variation, as well as significant inter-individual
differences. We assembled 160 transcripts representing 100 intact OR genes. These
include 1-4 short 5' non-coding exons with considerable alternative splicing and 
long last exons that contain the coding region and 3' untranslated region of
highly variable length. Notably, we identified 10 ORs with an intact open reading
frame but with seemingly non-functional transcripts, suggesting a yet unreported 
OR pseudogenization mechanism. Analysis of the OR upstream regions indicated an
enrichment of the homeobox family transcription factor binding sites and a
consensus localization of a specific transcription factor binding site subfamily 
(Olf/EBF).
CONCLUSIONS: We provide an overview of expression levels of ORs and auxiliary
genes in human olfactory epithelium. This forms a transcriptomic view of the
entire OR repertoire, and reveals a large number of over-expressed
uncharacterized human non-receptor genes, providing a platform for future
discovery.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-016-2960-3 
PMCID: PMC4982115
PMID: 27515280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

