
1. J Neurochem. 2016 Nov;139(3):440-455. doi: 10.1111/jnc.13774. Epub 2016 Oct 18.

Neuron-microglia interaction induced bi-directional cytotoxicity associated with 
calpain activation.

Podbielska M(1)(2)(3), Das A(1), Smith AW(1), Chauhan A(4), Ray SK(4), Inoue
J(5), Azuma M(5), Nozaki K(6), Hogan EL(1), Banik NL(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, USA.
(2)Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center, Charleston, South Carolina, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Signaling Proteins, Ludwik Hirszfeld Institute of Immunology &
Experimental Therapy, Polish Academy of Sciences, Wroclaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of South
Carolina School of Medicine, Columbia, South Carolina, USA.
(5)Senju Pharmaceutical, Co LTD, Kobe, Japan.
(6)Department of Neurology, University of Alabama School of Medicine, Birmingham,
Alabama, USA.
(7)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, USA. baniknl@musc.edu.
(8)Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center, Charleston, South Carolina, USA.
baniknl@musc.edu.

Erratum in
    J Neurochem. 2018 Jan;144(2):234.

Activated microglia release pro-inflammatory factors and calpain into the
extracellular milieu, damaging surrounding neurons. However, mechanistic links to
progressive neurodegeneration in disease such as multiple sclerosis (MS) remain
obscure. We hypothesize that persistent damaged/dying neurons may also release
cytotoxic factors and calpain into the media, which then activate microglia
again. Thus, inflammation, neuronal damage, and microglia activation, i.e.,
bi-directional interaction between neurons and microglia, may be involved in the 
progressive neurodegeneration. We tested this hypothesis using two in vitro
models: (i) the effects of soluble factors from damaged primary cortical neurons 
upon primary rat neurons and microglia and (ii) soluble factors released from
CD3/CD28 activated peripheral blood mononuclear cells of MS patients on primary
human neurons and microglia. The first model indicated that neurons due to injury
with pro-inflammatory agents (IFN-γ) release soluble neurotoxic factors,
including COX-2, reactive oxygen species, and calpain, thus activating microglia,
which in turn released neurotoxic factors as well. This repeated microglial
activation leads to persistent inflammation and neurodegeneration. The released
calpain from neurons and microglia was confirmed by the use of calpain inhibitor 
calpeptin or SNJ-1945 as well as μ- and m-calpain knock down using the small
interfering RNA (siRNA) technology. Our second model using activated peripheral
blood mononuclear cells, a source of pro-inflammatory Th1/Th17 cytokines and
calpain released from auto-reactive T cells, corroborated similar results in
human primary cell cultures and confirmed calpain to be involved in progressive
MS. These insights into reciprocal paracrine regulation of cell injury and
calpain activation in the progressive phase of MS, Parkinson's disease, and other
neurodegenerative diseases suggest potentially beneficial preventive and
therapeutic strategies, including calpain inhibition.

© 2016 International Society for Neurochemistry.

DOI: 10.1111/jnc.13774 
PMCID: PMC5374727
PMID: 27529445  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

