
1. Infect Immun. 2016 Oct 17;84(11):3172-3181. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00568-16. Print 2016
Nov.

Yersinia enterocolitica YopH-Deficient Strain Activates Neutrophil Recruitment to
Peyer's Patches and Promotes Clearance of the Virulent Strain.

Dave MN(1)(2), Silva JE(1)(2), Eliçabe RJ(1)(2), Jeréz MB(1)(2), Filippa
VP(1)(2), Gorlino CV(1)(2), Autenrieth S(3), Autenrieth IB(4), Di Genaro
MS(5)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Multidisciplinary Institute of Biological Investigations-San Luis (IMIBIO-SL),
National Council of Scientific and Technical Investigations-National University
of San Luis (CONICET-UNSL), San Luis, Argentina.
(2)Faculty of Chemistry, Biochemistry and Pharmacy, UNSL, San Luis, Argentina.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine II, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen,
Germany.
(4)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University Hospital Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany.
(5)Multidisciplinary Institute of Biological Investigations-San Luis (IMIBIO-SL),
National Council of Scientific and Technical Investigations-National University
of San Luis (CONICET-UNSL), San Luis, Argentina sdigena@unsl.edu.ar.

Yersinia enterocolitica evades the immune response by injecting Yersinia outer
proteins (Yops) into the cytosol of host cells. YopH is a tyrosine phosphatase
critical for Yersinia virulence. However, the mucosal immune mechanisms subverted
by YopH during in vivo orogastric infection with Y. enterocolitica remain
elusive. The results of this study revealed neutrophil recruitment to Peyer's
patches (PP) after infection with a YopH-deficient mutant strain (Y.
enterocolitica ΔyopH). While the Y. enterocolitica wild-type (WT) strain in PP
induced the major neutrophil chemoattractant CXCL1 mRNA and protein levels,
infection with the Y. enterocolitica ΔyopH mutant strain exhibited a higher
expression of the CXCL1 receptor, CXCR2, in blood neutrophils, leading to
efficient neutrophil recruitment to the PP. In contrast, migration of neutrophils
into PP was impaired upon infection with Y. enterocolitica WT strain. In vitro
infection of blood neutrophils revealed the involvement of YopH in CXCR2
expression. Depletion of neutrophils during Y. enterocolitica ΔyopH infection
raised the bacterial load in PP. Moreover, the clearance of WT Y. enterocolitica 
was improved when an equal mixture of Y. enterocolitica WT and Y. enterocolitica 
ΔyopH strains was used in infecting the mice. This study indicates that Y.
enterocolitica prevents early neutrophil recruitment in the intestine and that
the effector protein YopH plays an important role in the immune evasion
mechanism. The findings highlight the potential use of the Y. enterocolitica
YopH-deficient strain as an oral vaccine carrier.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00568-16 
PMCID: PMC5067750
PMID: 27550935  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

