
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2017 Feb;101(2):567-576. doi: 10.1189/jlb.4A0616-271R. Epub 2016
Aug 26.

Coordination between T helper cells, iNKT cells, and their follicular helper
subsets in the humoral immune response against Clostridium difficile toxin B.

Rampuria P(1), Lang GA(1), Devera TS(1), Gilmore C(1), Ballard JD(1), Lang ML(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA mark-lang@ouhsc.edu.

Activation of iNKT cells with the CD1d-binding glycolipid adjuvant
α-galactosylceramide (α-GC) enhances humoral immunity specific for coadministered
T-dependent Ag. However, the relationship between the iNKT cell and the classic T
helper (Th) or T follicular helper (Tfh) function following this immunization
modality remains unclear. We show that immunization with the C-terminal domain
(CTD) of Clostridium difficile toxin B (TcdB), accompanied by activation of iNKT 
cells with α-GC, led to enhanced production of CTD-specific IgG, which was CD1d- 
and iNKT cell-dependent and associated with increased neutralization of active
TcdB. Immunization with CTD plus α-GC followed by NP hapten-linked CTD increased 
NP-specific IgG1 titers in an NKT-dependent manner, suggesting that iNKT
activation could enhance Th or Tfh function or that iNKT and iNKTfh cells could
provide supplemental, yet independent, B cell help. Th, Tfh, iNKT, and iNKTfh
cells were, therefore, examined quantitatively, phenotypically, and functionally 
following immunization with CTD or with CTD plus α-GC. Our results demonstrated
that α-GC-activated iNKT cells had no direct effect on the numbers, phenotype, or
function of Th or Tfh cells. However, CD4+ T cell-specific ablation of the Bcl6
transcription factor demonstrated that Tfh and iNKTfh cells both contributed to B
cell help. This work extends our understanding of the immune response to
vaccination and demonstrates an important contribution by NKTfh cells to humoral 
immunity.

© Society for Leukocyte Biology.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.4A0616-271R 
PMCID: PMC5235901
PMID: 27566831  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

