
1. PLoS Pathog. 2016 Sep 6;12(9):e1005876. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005876.
eCollection 2016 Sep.

Intestinal Epithelial Cell-Intrinsic Deletion of Setd7 Identifies Role for
Developmental Pathways in Immunity to Helminth Infection.

Oudhoff MJ(1)(2), Antignano F(1), Chenery AL(1), Burrows K(1), Redpath SA(3),
Braam MJ(1), Perona-Wright G(3), Zaph C(1)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)The Biomedical Research Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada.
(2)Center of Molecular Inflammation Research, Department of Cancer Research and
Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim,
Norway.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Life Sciences Institute, University
of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(5)Infection and Immunity Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute and
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia.

The intestine is a common site for a variety of pathogenic infections. Helminth
infections continue to be major causes of disease worldwide, and are a
significant burden on health care systems. Lysine methyltransferases are part of 
a family of novel attractive targets for drug discovery. SETD7 is a member of the
Suppressor of variegation 3-9-Enhancer of zeste-Trithorax (SET) domain-containing
family of lysine methyltransferases, and has been shown to methylate and alter
the function of a wide variety of proteins in vitro. A few of these putative
methylation targets have been shown to be important in resistance against
pathogens. We therefore sought to study the role of SETD7 during parasitic
infections. We find that Setd7-/- mice display increased resistance to infection 
with the helminth Trichuris muris but not Heligmosomoides polygyrus bakeri.
Resistance to T. muris relies on an appropriate type 2 immune response that in
turn prompts intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) to alter differentiation and
proliferation kinetics. Here we show that SETD7 does not affect immune cell
responses during infection. Instead, we found that IEC-specific deletion of Setd7
renders mice resistant to T. muris by controlling IEC turnover, an important
aspect of anti-helminth immune responses. We further show that SETD7 controls IEC
turnover by modulating developmental signaling pathways such as Hippo/YAP and
Wnt/β-Catenin. We show that the Hippo pathway specifically is relevant during T. 
muris infection as verteporfin (a YAP inhibitor) treated mice became susceptible 
to T. muris. We conclude that SETD7 plays an important role in IEC biology during
infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005876 
PMCID: PMC5012677
PMID: 27598373  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

