
1. Protein J. 2016 Oct;35(5):340-345.

Biophysical Analysis of the N-Terminal Domain from the Human Protein Phosphatase 
1 Nuclear Targeting Subunit PNUTS Suggests an Extended Transcription Factor
TFIIS-Like Fold.

Zacharchenko T(1), Barsukov I(2), Rigden DJ(2), Bennett D(2), Mayans O(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Integrative Biology, University of
Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool, L69 7ZB, UK. fbstz@leeds.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Integrative Biology, University of
Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool, L69 7ZB, UK.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Integrative Biology, University of
Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool, L69 7ZB, UK. olga.mayans@uni-konstanz.de.
(4)Department of Biology, Universität Konstanz, Universitätstrasse 10, 78457,
Constance, Germany. olga.mayans@uni-konstanz.de.

Human protein phosphatase 1 nuclear targeting subunit (PNUTS) plays critical
roles in DNA repair, cell growth and survival. The N-terminal domain of PNUTS
mediates interactions with Tox4 and the phosphatase and tensin homolog PTEN,
which are essential for the roles of this protein. To study this N-terminal
domain, we have established its recombinant overproduction in E. coli utilizing
NusA fusion. Upon removal of the tag, the remaining PNUTS sample is soluble and
highly pure. We have characterized the domain using circular dichroism and
nuclear magnetic resonance and analyzed its sequence using bioinformatics. All
data agree in suggesting that the PNUTS N-terminal segment adopts a compact,
globular fold rich in α-helical content, where the folded fraction is
substantially larger than the previously annotated fold. We conclude that this
domain adopts a single fold, likely being an extended form of the transcription
factor S-II leucine/tryptophan conserved-motif. Thermal denaturation yielded a
melting temperature of ~49.5 °C, confirming the stability of the fold. These
findings pave the way for the molecular characterization of functional
interactions mediated by the N-terminal region of PNUTS.

DOI: 10.1007/s10930-016-9677-7 
PMID: 27591855  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

