
1. Mol Hum Reprod. 2016 Dec;22(12):898-912. Epub 2016 Sep 8.

Identification of genes differentially expressed in menstrual breakdown and
repair.

Paiva P(1), Lockhart MG(2), Girling JE(2), Olshansky M(3)(4), Woodrow N(5),
Marino JL(2), Hickey M(2), Rogers PA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, The University of Melbourne,
Gynaecology Research Centre, Royal Women's Hospital, Cnr Flemington Rd and
Grattan St, Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia ppaiva@unimelb.edu.au.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, The University of Melbourne,
Gynaecology Research Centre, Royal Women's Hospital, Cnr Flemington Rd and
Grattan St, Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia.
(3)Bioinformatics Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, 1G Royal Parade,
Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Wellington Road and Blackburn
Road, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia.
(5)Pauline Gandel Imaging Centre, Royal Women's Hospital, 20 Flemington Road,
Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia.

STUDY QUESTION: Does the changing molecular profile of the endometrium during
menstruation correlate with the histological profile of menstruation.
SUMMARY ANSWER: We identified several genes not previously associated with
menstruation; on Day 2 of menstruation (early-menstruation), processes related to
inflammation are predominantly up-regulated and on Day 4 (late-menstruation), the
endometrium is predominantly repairing and regenerating.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Menstruation is induced by progesterone withdrawal at the 
end of the menstrual cycle and involves endometrial tissue breakdown,
regeneration and repair. Perturbations in the regulation of menstruation may
result in menstrual disorders including abnormal uterine bleeding.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE DURATION: Endometrial samples were collected by Pipelle biopsy
on Days 2 (n = 9), 3 (n = 9) or 4 (n = 6) of menstruation.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: RNA was extracted from endometrial
biopsies and analysed by genome wide expression Illumina Sentrix Human HT12
arrays. Data were analysed using 'Remove Unwanted Variation-inverse (RUV-inv)'.
Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) and the Database for Annotation, Visualization
and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) v6.7 were used to identify canonical pathways,
upstream regulators and functional gene clusters enriched between Days 2, 3 and 4
of menstruation. Selected individual genes were validated by quantitative PCR.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Overall, 1753 genes were differentially
expressed in one or more comparisons. Significant canonical pathways, gene
clusters and upstream regulators enriched during menstrual bleeding included
those associated with immune cell trafficking, inflammation, cell cycle
regulation, extracellular remodelling and the complement and coagulation cascade.
We provide the first evidence for a role for glutathione-mediated detoxification 
(glutathione-S-transferase mu 1 and 2; GSTM1 and GSTM2) during menstruation. The 
largest number of differentially expressed genes was between Days 2 and 4 of
menstruation (n = 1176). We identified several genes not previously associated
with menstruation including lipopolysaccharide binding protein, serpin peptidase 
inhibitor, clade B (ovalbumin), member 3 (SERPINB3) and -4 (SERPINB4),
interleukin-17C (IL17C), V-set domain containing T-cell activation inhibitor 1
(VTCN1), proliferating cell nuclear antigen factor (KIAA0101/PAF), trefoil factor
3 (TFF3), laminin alpha 2 (LAMA2) and serine peptidase inhibitor, Kazal type 1
(SPINK1). Genes related to inflammatory processes were up-regulated on Day 2
(early-menstruation), and those associated with endometrial repair and
regeneration were up-regulated on Day 4 (late-menstruation).
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: Participants presented with a variety of
endometrial pathologies related to bleeding status and other menstrual
characteristics. These variations may also have influenced the menstrual process.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: The temporal molecular profile of
menstruation presented in this study identifies a number of genes not previously 
associated with the menstrual process. Our findings provide valuable insight into
the menstrual process and may present novel targets for therapeutic intervention 
in cases of endometrial dysfunction.
LARGE SCALE DATA: All microarray data have been deposited in the public data
repository Gene Expression Omnibus (GSE86003).
STUDY FUNDING AND COMPETING INTERESTS: Funding for this work was provided by a
National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia (NHMRC) Project Grant
APP1008553 to M.H., P.R. and J.G. M.H. is supported by an NHMRC Practitioner
Fellowship. P.P. is supported by a NHMRC Early Career Fellowship. The authors
have no conflict of interest to declare.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molehr/gaw060 
PMID: 27609758  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

