
1. Mol Neuropsychiatry. 2016 May;2(1):28-36. doi: 10.1159/000444587. Epub 2016 Apr
1.

Cell Type-Specific Effects of Mutant DISC1: A Proteomics Study.

Xia M(1), Broek JA(2), Jouroukhin Y(3), Schoenfelder J(2), Abazyan S(3),
Jaaro-Peled H(3), Sawa A(4), Bahn S(2), Pletnikov M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Md., USA; Preclinical College, Guangxi University 
of Chinese Medicine, Nanning, PR China.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK.
(3)Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Md., USA.
(4)Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Md., USA; Solomon H. Snyder Department of
Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Md., USA.
(5)Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Md., USA; Departments of Molecular and Comparative
Pathobiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Md., USA;
Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Md., USA; Department of Molecular Microbiology and
Immunology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Md., USA.

Despite the recent progress in psychiatric genetics, very few studies have
focused on genetic risk factors in glial cells that, compared to neurons, can
manifest different molecular pathologies underlying psychiatric disorders. In
order to address this issue, we studied the effects of mutant disrupted in
schizophrenia 1 (DISC1), a genetic risk factor for schizophrenia, in cultured
primary neurons and astrocytes using an unbiased mass spectrometry-based
proteomic approach. We found that selective expression of mutant DISC1 in neurons
affects a wide variety of proteins predominantly involved in neuronal development
(e.g., SOX1) and vesicular transport (Rab proteins), whereas selective expression
of mutant DISC1 in astrocytes produces changes in the levels of mitochondrial
(GDPM), nuclear (TMM43) and cell adhesion (ECM2) proteins. The present study
demonstrates that DISC1 variants can perturb distinct molecular pathways in a
cell type-specific fashion to contribute to psychiatric disorders through
heterogenic effects in diverse brain cells.

DOI: 10.1159/000444587 
PMCID: PMC4996005
PMID: 27606318 

