
1. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2016 Oct;50 Suppl 1:S70-3. doi:
10.1097/MCG.0000000000000641.

Probiotics for the Treatment of Symptomatic Uncomplicated Diverticular Disease:
Rationale and Current Evidence.

Scarpignato C(1), Bertelé A, Tursi A.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Clinical & Experimental Medicine, Clinical Pharmacology &
Digestive Pathophysiology Unit, University of Parma †Laboratory for GI Functional
Investigations, Maggiore University Hospital, Parma ‡Gastroenterology Service,
ASL BAT, Andria, BT, Italy.

Changes in the colonic microbiota are critical to the pathogenesis of
diverticular complications such as diverticulitis and peridiverticular abscesses.
However, more subtle changes in microbiota composition may well be important to
the more chronic manifestations of diverticulosis. Some studies have shown the
presence of bacterial overgrowth in subgroups of patients with diverticular
disease and recent studies, using molecular biology techniques, found an increase
of proteobacteria and actinobacteria in patients with symptomatic uncomplicated
diverticular disease (SUDD), compared with healthy controls. The use of
probiotics to modulate intestinal microecology in SUDD appears therefore
rational. Although several investigations evaluating the clinical efficacy of
probiotics have been performed, no definitive results have yet been achieved,
mainly due to the heterogeneity of the available studies. Most of the studies
used probiotics in combination with poorly absorbed antimicrobials or
anti-inflammatory drugs. In only 4 studies, there was a harm using probiotics
alone, but only 1 was a placebo-controlled, double-blind trial. The analysis of
the available evidence reveals a poor quality of the published studies, whose
design was heterogeneous, with only 2 out of 11 trials being double-blind and
randomized. Therefore, available data can only suggest a benefit of probiotics in
SUDD, but do not allow any evidence-based definite conclusion. As a consequence, 
current guidelines state that there is insufficient evidence to recommend
probiotics for symptom relief in patients with diverticular disease.

DOI: 10.1097/MCG.0000000000000641 
PMID: 27622371  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

