
1. Gastroenterology. 2017 Jan;152(1):193-205.e10. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2016.09.004.
Epub 2016 Sep 14.

Fucosylation Deficiency in Mice Leads to Colitis and Adenocarcinoma.

Wang Y(1), Huang D(1), Chen KY(2), Cui M(1), Wang W(1), Huang X(1), Awadellah
A(3), Li Q(3), Friedman A(4), Xin WW(5), Di Martino L(6), Cominelli F(6), Miron
A(7), Chan R(8), Fox JG(9), Xu Y(10), Shen X(2), Kalady MF(11), Markowitz S(12), 
Maillard I(4), Lowe JB(13), Xin W(14), Zhou L(15).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York.
(3)Department of Pathology, University Hospitals Case Medical Center, Cleveland, 
Ohio.
(4)Life Sciences Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(5)School of Arts and Sciences, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospitals Case Medical Center,
Cleveland, Ohio.
(7)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, Ohio.
(8)Institute for Computational Biology, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, Ohio.
(9)Division of Comparative Medicine, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(10)Department of Chemistry, Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio.
(11)Department of Colorectal Surgery, Digestive Diseases Institute, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio.
(12)Department of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio.
(13)Department of Pathology, Genentech, Inc, San Francisco, California.
(14)Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio;
Department of Pathology, University Hospitals Case Medical Center, Cleveland,
Ohio.
(15)Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio;
Department of Pathology, University Hospitals Case Medical Center, Cleveland,
Ohio. Electronic address: lan.zhou@case.edu.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: De novo synthesis of guanosine diphosphate (GDP)-fucose, a
substrate for fucosylglycans, requires sequential reactions mediated by
GDP-mannose 4,6-dehydratase (GMDS) and GDP-4-keto-6-deoxymannose
3,5-epimerase-4-reductase (FX or tissue specific transplantation antigen P35B
[TSTA3]). GMDS deletions and mutations are found in 6%-13% of colorectal cancers;
these mostly affect the ascending and transverse colon. We investigated whether a
lack of fucosylation consequent to loss of GDP-fucose synthesis contributes to
colon carcinogenesis.
METHODS: FX deficiency and GMDS deletion produce the same biochemical phenotype
of GDP-fucose deficiency. We studied a mouse model of fucosylation deficiency
(Fx-/- mice) and mice with the full-length Fx gene (controls). Mice were placed
on standard chow or fucose-containing diet (equivalent to a control fucosylglycan
phenotype). Colon tissues were collected and analyzed histologically or by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays to measure cytokine levels; T cells also were 
collected and analyzed. Fecal samples were analyzed by 16s ribosomal RNA
sequencing. Mucosal barrier function was measured by uptake of fluorescent
dextran. We transplanted bone marrow cells from Fx-/- or control mice (Ly5.2)
into irradiated 8-week-old Fx-/- or control mice (Ly5.1). We performed
immunohistochemical analyses for expression of Notch and the hes family bHLH
transcription factor (HES1) in colon tissues from mice and a panel of 60 human
colorectal cancer specimens (27 left-sided, 33 right-sided).
RESULTS: Fx-/- mice developed colitis and serrated-like lesions. The intestinal
pathology of Fx-/- mice was reversed by addition of fucose to the diet, which
restored fucosylation via a salvage pathway. In the absence of fucosylation,
dysplasia appeared and progressed to adenocarcinoma in up to 40% of mice,
affecting mainly the right colon and cecum. Notch was not activated in Fx-/- mice
fed standard chow, leading to decreased expression of its target Hes1.
Fucosylation deficiency altered the composition of the fecal microbiota, reduced 
mucosal barrier function, and altered epithelial proliferation marked by Ki67.
Fx-/- mice receiving control bone marrow cells had intestinal inflammation and
dysplasia, and reduced expression of cytokines produced by cytotoxic T cells.
Human sessile serrated adenomas and right-sided colorectal tumors with epigenetic
loss of MutL homolog 1 (MLH1) had lost or had lower levels of HES1 than other
colorectal tumor types or nontumor tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: In mice, fucosylation deficiency leads to colitis and
adenocarcinoma, loss of Notch activation, and down-regulation of Hes1. HES1 loss 
correlates with the development of human right-sided colorectal tumors with
epigenetic loss of MLH1. These findings indicate that carcinogenesis in a subset 
of colon cancer is consequent to a molecular mechanism driven by fucosylation
deficiency and/or HES1-loss.

Copyright © 2017 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2016.09.004 
PMCID: PMC5164974
PMID: 27639802  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: of potential conflicts of interest: The authors
declare no potential conflicts relevant to the manuscript

