
1. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2016 Jul-Sep;30(3):649-653.

ENOX2 (or tNOX): a new and old molecule with cancer activity involved in tumor
prevention and therapy.

Ronconi G(1), Lessiani G(2), Spinas E(3), Kritas SK(4), Caraffa Al(5), Saggini
A(6), Antinolfi P(7), Pizzicannella J(8), Toniato E(9), Conti P(10).

Author information: 
(1)UOS Clinica dei Pazienti del Territorio, Policlinico Gemelli, Roma, Italy.
(2)Center of Intensive Rehabilitation, “S. Agnese”, Pineto (TE), Italy.
(3)Department of Surgery and Odontostomatological Sciences, University of
Cagliari, Italy.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, School of Veterinary
Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Macedonia, Greece.
(5)Pharmacology, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(6)Department of Dermatology, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(7)Orthopedics Department, University Hospital, Perugia, Italy.
(8)University of Chieti, Chieti, Italy.
(9)Department of Medical, Oral and Biological Sciences, University of Chieti,
Chieti, Italy.
(10)Immunology Division, Postgraduate Medical School, University of
Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy.

Cancer includes a number of related diseases due to abnormal cell proliferation
that spreads to nearby tissues. Many compounds (physical, chemical and
biological) have been used to try to halt this abnormal proliferation, but the
therapeutic results are poor, due also to the side effects. It has been reported 
that ecto-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide oxidase di-sulfide-thiol exchanger 2 
(ENOX2), also known as tumor-associated nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide oxidase
(tNOX), was found to be located on the cancer cell surface, essential for cancer 
cell growth. Capsaicin and other anti-oxidants are capable of inhibiting tNOX,
causing apoptosis of cells, exerting anti-tumor activity. It is interesting that 
some authors reported that ENOX2 is present in the serum of cancer patients
several years before the clinical symptoms of the tumor. However, this result has
to be confirmed. In this article we discuss ENOX2 and its inhibition as a hope of
improving cancer therapy.


PMID: 27655481  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

