
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2016 Sep 30;13(10). pii: E972.

Universal Stress Proteins as New Targets for Environmental and Therapeutic
Interventions of Schistosomiasis.

Masamba P(1), Adenowo AF(2), Oyinloye BE(3)(4), Kappo AP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology and Structural Biochemistry (BSB) Group, Department of
Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South
Africa. presh4u@rocketmail.com.
(2)Biotechnology and Structural Biochemistry (BSB) Group, Department of
Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South
Africa. afaatimah@yahoo.com.
(3)Biotechnology and Structural Biochemistry (BSB) Group, Department of
Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South
Africa. tunji4reele@yahoo.com.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Afe Babalola University, PMB 5454, Ado-Ekiti
360001, Nigeria. tunji4reele@yahoo.com.
(5)Biotechnology and Structural Biochemistry (BSB) Group, Department of
Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South
Africa. KappoA@unizulu.ac.za.

In spite of various control measures and eradication methods that have been in
progress, schistosomiasis still prevails as one of the most prevalent
debilitating parasitic diseases, typically affecting the poor and the
underprivileged that are predominantly concentrated in sub-Saharan Africa. The
parasitic schistosome blood fluke responsible for causing the disease completes
its complex developmental cycle in two hosts: humans and freshwater snails, where
they physically undergo gross modifications to endure the different conditions
associated with each host. Just like any other organism, the worm possesses
mechanisms that help them respond to environmental insults. It has been
hypothesized that a special class of proteins known as Universal Stress Proteins 
(USPs) are up-regulated during sudden environmental changes, thus assisting the
worm to tolerate the unfavourable conditions associated with its developmental
cycle. The position of praziquantel as the drug of choice against all schistosome
infections has been deemed vulnerable due to mounting concerns over drug pressure
and so the need for alternative treatment is now a matter of urgency. Therefore, 
this review seeks to explore the associations and possible roles of USPs in
schistosomiasis as well as the functioning of these proteins in the
schistosomulae stage in order to develop new therapeutic interventions against
this disease.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph13100972 
PMCID: PMC5086711
PMID: 27706050  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

