
1. J Hum Genet. 2017 Feb;62(2):243-252. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2016.116. Epub 2016 Oct 6.

The sensitivity of exome sequencing in identifying pathogenic mutations for LGMD 
in the United States.

Reddy HM(1), Cho KA(1), Lek M(2)(3), Estrella E(4), Valkanas E(2)(3), Jones
MD(1), Mitsuhashi S(5), Darras BT(5), Amato AA(6), Lidov HG(7), Brownstein
CA(4)(8), Margulies DM(4)(8), Yu TW(4), Salih MA(9), Kunkel LM(4), MacArthur
DG(2)(3), Kang PB(1)(5)(10)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(2)Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(8)Research Connection and Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, Division of
Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neurology, College of Medicine and King 
Khalid University Hospital, King Saud University, Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia.
(10)Department of Neurology and Department of Molecular Genetics and
Microbiology, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(11)Genetics Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.

The current study characterizes a cohort of limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD)
in the United States using whole-exome sequencing. Fifty-five families affected
by LGMD were recruited using an institutionally approved protocol. Exome
sequencing was performed on probands and selected parental samples. Pathogenic
mutations and cosegregation patterns were confirmed by Sanger sequencing.
Twenty-two families (40%) had novel and previously reported pathogenic mutations,
primarily in LGMD genes, and also in genes for Duchenne muscular dystrophy,
facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy, congenital myopathy, myofibrillar
myopathy, inclusion body myopathy and Pompe disease. One family was diagnosed via
clinical testing. Dominant mutations were identified in COL6A1, COL6A3, FLNC,
LMNA, RYR1, SMCHD1 and VCP, recessive mutations in ANO5, CAPN3, GAA, LAMA2, SGCA 
and SGCG, and X-linked mutations in DMD. A previously reported variant in DMD was
confirmed to be benign. Exome sequencing is a powerful diagnostic tool for LGMD. 
Despite careful phenotypic screening, pathogenic mutations were found in other
muscle disease genes, largely accounting for the increased sensitivity of exome
sequencing. Our experience suggests that broad sequencing panels are useful for
these analyses because of the phenotypic overlap of many neuromuscular
conditions. The confirmation of a benign DMD variant illustrates the potential of
exome sequencing to help determine pathogenicity.

DOI: 10.1038/jhg.2016.116 
PMCID: PMC5266644
PMID: 27708273  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure TWY and LMK have received personal
compensation from Claritas Genomics.

