
1. Food Funct. 2016 Sep 14;7(9):3999-4011.

The effect of a plant extract enriched in stigmasterol and β-sitosterol on
glycaemic status and glucose metabolism in alloxan-induced diabetic rats.

Ramu R(1), Shirahatti PS(2), Nayakavadi S(3), R V(4), Zameer F(5), Dhananjaya
BL(6), Prasad Mn N(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of P.G. Studies and Research in Biotechnology, Sri Dharmasthala
Manjunatheshwara College, Ujire, Dakshina Kannada - 574240, Karnataka, India.
(2)Department of P.G. Studies and Research in Biotechnology, Sri Dharmasthala
Manjunatheshwara College, Ujire, Dakshina Kannada - 574240, Karnataka, India and 
Department of Biotechnology, Sri Jayachamarajendra College of Engineering, JSS
Institution Camp, Manasagangothri, Mysore - 570 006, Karnataka, India.
npmicro8@yahoo.com mnnagendraprasad@hotmail.com.
(3)Department of Veterinary Pathology, G-9, Animal Science, ICAR - CCARI, Old Goa
403402, India.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, JSS College of Pharmacy, "Rocklands" Post Box No. 
20, Udhagamandalam - 643 001, Tamil Nadu, India.
(5)Department of Studies in Biotechnology, Microbiology and Biochemistry,
Mahajana Life Science Research Centre, Pooja Bhagavat Memorial Mahajana PG
Centre, Mysore - 570 016, Karnataka, India.
(6)Toxinology/Toxicology and Drug Discovery Unit, Centre for Emerging
Technologies (CET), Jain Global Campus, Jain University, Kanakapura Taluk,
Ramanagara Dist, Karnataka-562112, India.
(7)Department of Biotechnology, Sri Jayachamarajendra College of Engineering, JSS
Institution Camp, Manasagangothri, Mysore - 570 006, Karnataka, India.
npmicro8@yahoo.com mnnagendraprasad@hotmail.com.

Banana is an extensively cultivated plant worldwide, mainly for its fruit, while 
its ancillary product, the banana pseudostem, is consumed as a vegetable and is
highly recommended for diabetics in the traditional Indian medicine system. The
present study was aimed at elucidating the mechanism of antihyperglycaemia
exerted by the ethanol extract of banana pseudostem (EE) and its isolated
compounds viz., stigmasterol (C1) and β-sitosterol (C2), in an alloxan-induced
diabetic rat model. Diabetic rats which were administered with C1, C2 and EE (100
and 200 mg per kg b. wt.) for 4 weeks showed reduced levels of fasting blood
glucose and reversal of abnormalities in serum/urine protein, urea and creatinine
in diabetic rats compared to the diabetic control group of rats. Diabetic
symptoms such as polyphagia, polydipsia, polyuria, urine glucose and reduced body
weight were ameliorated in the diabetic group of rats fed with EE, C1 and C2 (100
mg per kg b. wt., once daily) for 28 days. The levels of insulin and Hb were also
increased, while the HbA1c level was reduced. The altered activities of hepatic
marker enzymes viz., aspartate transaminase (AST), alanine transaminase (ALT) and
alkaline phosphatase (ALP); glycolytic enzyme (hexokinase); shunt enzyme
(glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase); gluconeogenic enzymes
(glucose-6-phosphatase, fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase and lactate dehydrogenase)
and pyruvate kinase were significantly reverted to normal levels by the
administration of EE, C1 and C2. In addition, increased levels of hepatic
glycogen and glycogen synthase and the corresponding decrease of glycogen
phosphorylase activity in diabetic rats illustrated the antihyperglycaemic
potential of EE and its components. The histological observations revealed a
marked regeneration of the β-cells in the drug treated diabetic rats. These
findings suggest that EE might exert its antidiabetic potential in the presence
of C1 and C2, attributable to the enhanced glycolytic activity, besides
increasing the hepatic glucose utilization in diabetic rats by stimulating
insulin secretion from the remnant β-cells.

DOI: 10.1039/c6fo00343e 
PMID: 27711824  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

