
1. Crit Care. 2016 Oct 10;20(1):322.

Impact of HIV infection on the presentation, outcome and host response in
patients admitted to the intensive care unit with sepsis; a case control study.

Wiewel MA(1)(2), Huson MA(3)(4), van Vught LA(3)(4), Hoogendijk AJ(3)(4), Klein
Klouwenberg PM(5)(6)(7), Horn J(8), Lutter R(9), Cremer OL(5), Schultz MJ(8),
Bonten MJ(6)(7), van der Poll T(3)(4)(10); MARS Consortium.

Collaborators: de Beer FM, Bos LD, Frencken JF, Glas GJ, van Hooijdonk RT, Ong
DS, Schouten LR, Scicluna BP, Straat M, Witteveen E, Wieske L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. m.a.wiewel@amc.uva.nl.
(2)The Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. m.a.wiewel@amc.uva.nl.
(3)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)The Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Medical Microbiology, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(7)Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Intensive Care, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(9)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Experimental Immunology, Academic
Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(10)Division of Infectious Diseases, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Sepsis is a prominent reason for intensive care unit (ICU) admission 
in patients with HIV. We aimed to investigate the impact of HIV infection on
presentation, outcome and host response in sepsis.
METHODS: We performed a prospective observational study in the ICUs of two
tertiary hospitals. For the current analyses, we selected all patients diagnosed 
with sepsis within 24 hours after admission. Host response biomarkers were
analyzed in a more homogeneous subgroup of admissions involving HIV-positive
patients with pneumosepsis, matched to admissions of HIV-negative patients for
age, gender and race. Matching was done by nearest neighbor matching with R
package "MatchIt".
RESULTS: We analyzed 2251 sepsis admissions including 41 (1.8 %) with HIV
infection (32 unique patients). HIV-positive patients were younger and admission 
of HIV-positive patients more frequently involved pneumonia (73.2 % versus 48.8 %
of admissions of HIV-negative patients, P = 0.004). Disease severity and
mortality up to one year after admission did not differ according to HIV status. 
Furthermore, sequential plasma levels of host response biomarkers, providing
insight into activation of the cytokine network, the vascular endothelium and the
coagulation system, were largely similar in matched admissions of HIV-positive
and HIV-negative patients with pneumosepsis.
CONCLUSIONS: Sepsis is more often caused by pneumonia in HIV-positive patients.
HIV infection has little impact on the disease severity, mortality and host
response during sepsis.

DOI: 10.1186/s13054-016-1469-0 
PMCID: PMC5056483
PMID: 27719675  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

