
1. J Oral Maxillofac Pathol. 2016 Sep-Dec;20(3):467-473.

Immunohistochemical analysis of angiogenesis by CD34 and mast cells by toluidine 
blue in different grades of oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Ingaleshwar PS(1), Pandit S(2), Desai D(2), Redder CP(3), Shetty AS(4), Mithun
KM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology and Microbiology, P.M.N.M. Dental College and
Hospital, Bagalkot, Karnataka, India.
(2)Department of Oral Pathology and Microbiology, A.J Institute of Dental
Sciences, Mangalore, Karnataka, India.
(3)Department of Oral Pathology and Microbiology, College of Dental Sciences,
Davangere, Karnataka, India.
(4)Department of Oral Pathology and Microbiology, Subbaiah Dental College,
Shimoga, Karnataka, India.

INTRODUCTION: Angiogenesis is a complex event mediated by angiogenic factors
released from cancer cells and immune cells. It has been reported to be
associated with progression, aggressiveness and metastases of various malignant
tumors including oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). Similarly, mast cells have 
also been reported to play a role in tumor progression and metastases by
promoting angiogenesis.
OBJECTIVES: The present study was conducted to compare microvessel density (MVD) 
and mast cell density (MCD) in different histological grades of OSCC in
comparison with normal oral mucosa (NM).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Comparison of MVD by CD34 and MCD by toluidine blue among 
different histological grades of OSCC and in NM as controls.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS: The results were analysed using "t" test, ANOVA and
Pearson's correlation co-efficient.
RESULTS: The mean MVD was higher in different grades as compared to normal
mucosa. Intergroup comparison of increase in MVD between different grades of OSCC
was not found to be highly statistically significant. Pearson's correlation
between MVD and MCD revealed a linear increase in MVD as the MCD increased,
suggestive of a positive correlation.
CONCLUSION: There was significant correlation found between MVD and MCD which was
in agreement that mast cells promote tumor progression through upregulation of
angiogenesis.

DOI: 10.4103/0973-029X.190950 
PMCID: PMC5051296
PMID: 27721613 

