
1. Breastfeed Med. 2016 Dec;11:555-556. Epub 2016 Oct 11.

Ultrasound-Guided Percutaneous Catheter Drainage of Large Breast Abscesses in
Lactating Women: How to Preserve Breastfeeding Safely.

Falco G(1), Foroni M(1), Castagnetti F(1), Marano L(2), Bordoni D(3), Rocco N(4),
Marchesi V(5), Iotti V(5), Vacondio R(5), Ferrari G(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Breast Surgery Unit, IRCCS-Arcispedale Santa Maria Nuova , Reggio Emilia,
Italy .
(2)2 General, Minimally Invasive and Robotic Surgery, Department of Surgery, "San
Matteo degli Infermi" Hospital-ASL Umbria 2 , Spoleto, Italy .
(3)3 Department of Senology, Asur Marche Area Vasta 1, Santa Maria della
Misericordia , Urbino, Italy .
(4)4 Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, University of Naples "Federico 
II," Naples , Italy .
(5)5 Diagnostic Imaging Department, IRCCS-Arcispedale Santa Maria Nuova , Reggio 
Emilia, Italy .

INTRODUCTION: Management of breast abscess in lactating women remains
controversial. During pregnancy, women may develop different kinds of benign
breast lesions that could require a surgical incision performed under general
anesthesia with consequent breastfeeding interruption. The purpose of this study 
was to prospectively evaluate the management of large breast abscesses with
ultrasound-assisted drainage aiming at breastfeeding preservation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: 34 lactating women with a diagnosis of unilateral breast
abscess have been treated with an ultrasound (US)-assisted drainage of the
abscess. A pigtail catheter was inserted into the fluid collection using the
Seldinger technique under US guide and connected to a three stop way to allow
drainage and irrigation of the cavity until its resolution.
RESULTS: All procedures have been found safe and well tolerated. No recurrence
was observed and breastfeeding was never interrupted.
CONCLUSIONS: The described technique allows to avoid surgery and to preserve
breastfeeding in well-selected patients with a safe, well-tolerated and
cost-effective procedure.

DOI: 10.1089/bfm.2016.0121 
PMID: 27726424  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

