
1. Crit Care. 2016 Oct 14;20(1):328.

Risk factors, host response and outcome of hypothermic sepsis.

Wiewel MA(1), Harmon MB(2), van Vught LA(1), Scicluna BP(1), Hoogendijk AJ(1),
Horn J(3), Zwinderman AH(4), Cremer OL(5), Bonten MJ(6)(7), Schultz MJ(3), van
der Poll T(1)(8), Juffermans NP(3), Wiersinga WJ(1)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Intensive Care, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. m.harmon@amc.uva.nl.
(3)Department of Intensive Care, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Clinical Epidemiology Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Medical Microbiology, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(7)Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(8)Division of Infectious Diseases, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Crit Care. 2017 Jan 11;21(1):8.

BACKGROUND: Hypothermia is associated with adverse outcome in patients with
sepsis. The objective of this study was to characterize the host immune response 
in patients with hypothermic sepsis in order to determine if an excessive
anti-inflammatory response could explain immunosuppression and adverse outcome.
Markers of endothelial activation and integrity were also measured to explore
potential alternative mechanisms of hypothermia. Finally we studied risk factors 
for hypothermia in an attempt to find new clues to the etiology of hypothermia in
sepsis.
METHODS: Consecutive patients diagnosed with sepsis within 24 hours after
admission to ICUs in two tertiary hospitals in the Netherlands were included in
the study (n = 525). Hypothermia was defined as body temperature below 36 °C in
the first 24 h of ICU admission.
RESULTS: Hypothermia was identified in 186 patients and was independently
associated with mortality. Levels of proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory
cytokines were not different between groups. Hypothermia was also not associated 
with an altered response to ex vivo stimulation with lipopolysaccharide in a
subset of 15 patients. Risk factors for hypothermia included low body mass index,
hypertension and chronic cardiovascular insufficiency. Levels of the endothelial 
activation marker fractalkine were increased during the first 4 days of ICU stay.
CONCLUSIONS: Hypothermia during sepsis is independently associated with
mortality, which cannot be attributed to alterations in the host immune responses
that were measured in this study. Given that risk factors for hypothermic sepsis 
are mainly cardiovascular and that the endothelial activation marker fractalkine 
increased in hypothermia, these findings may suggest that vascular dysfunction
plays a role in hypothermic sepsis.

DOI: 10.1186/s13054-016-1510-3 
PMCID: PMC5064908
PMID: 27737683  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

