
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2017 Apr 17;247:70-78. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2016.10.012. Epub 2016 Oct 12.

The use of 16S rRNA gene metagenetic monitoring of refrigerated food products for
understanding the kinetics of microbial subpopulations at different storage
temperatures: the example of white pudding.

Cauchie E(1), Gand M(2), Kergourlay G(2), Taminiau B(2), Delhalle L(3), Korsak
N(2), Daube G(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Liège, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Fundamental and Applied
Research for Animal & Health (FARAH), Food Science Departement - Food
Microbiology, Quartier Vallée 2, Avenue de Cureghem 10, B-4000 Liège, Belgium.
Electronic address: ecauchie@ulg.ac.be.
(2)University of Liège, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Fundamental and Applied
Research for Animal & Health (FARAH), Food Science Departement - Food
Microbiology, Quartier Vallée 2, Avenue de Cureghem 10, B-4000 Liège, Belgium.
(3)KeyFood platform, rue Auguste Piccard, 20, Maison de l'Industrie, 6040
Gosselies, Belgium.

In order to control food losses and wastage, monitoring the microbial diversity
of food products, during processing and storage is important, as studies have
highlighted the metabolic activities of some microorganisms which can lead to
spoilage. Knowledge of this diversity can be greatly improved by using a
metagenetic approach based on high throughput 16S rRNA gene sequencing, which
enables a much higher resolution than culture-based methods. Moreover, the
Jameson effect, a phenomenon described by Jameson in 1962, is often used to
classify bacterial strains within an ecosystem. According to this, we have
studied the bacterial microbiota of Belgian white pudding during storage at
different temperatures using culture-dependent and independent methods. The
product was inoculated with a mix of dominant strains previously isolated from
this foodstuff at the end of its shelf life (Carnobacterium maltaromaticum,
Lactobacillus fuchuensis, Lactobacillus graminis, Lactobacillus oligofermentans, 
Lactococcus lactis, Leuconostoc mesenteroides, Raoultella terrigena and Serratia 
sp.). Daily during 16days, the absolute abundance of inoculated strain was
monitored by combining total count on plate agar and metagenetic analysis. The
results were confirmed by qPCR analysis. The growth of each species was modelled 
for each temperature conditions, representative of good or bad storage practices.
These data allowed the bacterial strains subdivision into three classes based on 
criteria of growth parameters for the studied temperature: the "dominant", the
"subdominant" and the "inhibited" bacterial species, according to their maximal
concentration (Nmax, log CFU/g), growth rate (μmax, 1/h) and time to reach the
stationary phase (TRSP, days). Thereby, depending on the storage conditions,
these data have permitted to follow intrinsically the evolution of each strain on
the bacterial ecosystem of Belgian white pudding. Interestingly, it has shown
that the reliability of the Jameson effect can be discussed. For example, at 4°C 
when Lactococcus lactis and Serratia sp. stopped growth at day 12, at the same
time Carnobacterium maltaromaticum reached its maximal concentration and entered 
its stationary phase. In opposition to this, it can be noticed that in the same
condition, the "sub-dominant" organisms continued their growth independently of
the "dominant" species behaviour. In this case, the Jameson effect was not
illustrated. This pattern is described for all storage conditions with the same
strain classifications. These results highlighted the importance of combining
metagenetic analysis and classical methods, with modelling, to offer a new tool
for studying the evolution of microorganisms present in perishable food within
different environmental conditions.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2016.10.012 
PMID: 27751567  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

