
1. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 2016 Sep 30;62(11):108-114.

Marrubium vulgare ethanolic extract induces proliferation block, apoptosis, and
cytoprotective autophagy in cancer cells in vitro.

Paunovic V(1), Kosic M(2), Djordjevic S(3), Zugic A(3), Djalinac N(2), Gasic
U(4), Trajkovic V(2), Harhaji-Trajkovic J(5).

Author information: 
(1)University of Belgrade Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, School of
Medicine Belgrade Serbia vericapaunovic@gmail.com.
(2)University of Belgrade Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, School of
Medicine Belgrade Serbia.
(3)Institute for Medicinal Plant Research Dr Josif Pancic Department for
Pharmaceutical Research and Development Belgrade Serbia.
(4)University of Belgrade Faculty of Chemistry Belgrade Serbia.
(5)University of Belgrade Institute for Biological Research Sinisa Stankovic
Belgrade Serbia buajk@yahoo.com.

Marrubium vulgare is a European medicinal plant with numerous beneficial effects 
on human health. The aim of the study was to isolate the plant ethanolic extract 
(MVE) and to investigate its anti-melanoma and anti-glioma effects. MVE was
prepared by the modified pharmacopoeial percolation method and characterized by
UHPLC-LTQ OrbiTrap MS. MVE dose-dependently reduced viability of melanoma (B16)
and glioma (U251) cells, but not peripheral blood mononuclear cells. It arrested 
cell cycle in S+G2/M phase, which was associated with the activation of MAP
kinase p38 and up-regulation of antiproliferative genes p53, p21 and p27. MVE
induced oxidative stress, while antioxidants abrogated its antitumor effect.
Furthermore, MVE induced mitochondrial depolarization, activation of caspase-9
and -3, Parp cleavage, phosphatidylserine exposure and DNA fragmentation. The
mitochondrial apoptotic pathway was associated with the up-regulation of
proapoptotic genes Pten, Bak1, Apaf1, and Puma and down-regulation of
antiapoptotic genes survivin and Xiap. MVE also stimulated the expression of
autophagy-related genes Atg5, Atg7, Atg12, Beclin-1, Gabarab and Sqstm1, as well 
as LC3-I conversion to the autophagosome associated LC3-II, while autophagy
inhibitors exacerbated its cytotoxicity. Finally, the most abundant phenolic
components of MVE, ferulic, p-hydroxybenzoic, caffeic and chlorogenic acids, did 
not exert a profound effect on viability of tumor cells, suggesting that other
components individually or in concert are the mediators of the extracts'
cytotoxicity. By demonstrating the ability of MVE to inhibit proliferation,
induce apoptosis and cytoprotective autophagy, our results suggest that MVE,
alone or combined with autophagy inhibitors, could be a good candidate for
anti-melanoma and anti-glioma therapy.


PMID: 27755961  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

