
1. Pharmacogn Mag. 2016 Jul;12(Suppl 4):S471-S474.

Assessment of In vitro Antibacterial Activity and Cytotoxicity Effect of Nigella 
sativa Oil.

Ugur AR(1), Dagi HT(2), Ozturk B(3), Tekin G(3), Findik D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Konya Education and Research Hospital,
Konya, Turkey.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Selcuk University,
Konya, Turkey.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Selcuk University, Konya,
Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Methicillin resistance is a serious health concern since it has
spread among Staphylococcus aureus and coagulase-negative Staphylococci (CoNS)
that are frequent community and nosocomial pathogens worldwide.
Methicillin-resistant strains are often resistant to other classes of
antibiotics, making their treatment difficult. Nigella sativa oil is known to be 
active against Gram-positive cocci, yet its in vitro cytotoxicity is rarely
investigated, is a proper and powerful candidate for treatment of
methicillin-resistant isolates.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study is to evaluate the in vitro antibacterial
activity and cytotoxicity effect of N. sativa oil.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of N. sativa 
oil were determined by broth microdilution method against four different American
Type Culture Collection strains, 45 clinical isolates of methicillin-resistant S.
aureus (MRSA), and 77 methicillin-resistant CoNS (MRCoNS). The effects of
different dilutions (0.25 μg/mL, 0.5 μg/mL, and 1 μg/mL) of N. sativa oil on the 
proliferation of gingival fibroblasts were evaluated.
RESULTS: The MIC values of N. sativa oil against clinical isolates of
Staphylococci were between <0.25 μg/mL and 1.0 μg/mL. Compared to the control
group, there was no cytotoxic effect on the proliferation of the gingival
fibroblasts.
CONCLUSION: In the present study, the oil of N. sativa was very active against
MRSA and MRCoNS and had no in vitro cytotoxicity at relevant concentrations.
These findings emphasize that there is a requirement for further clinical trials 
on N. sativa oil for "safe" medical management of infections caused by
methicillin-resistant Staphylococci.
SUMMARY: The minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) values of Nigella sativa oil 
against Staphylococcus aureus American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) 29213,
Enterococcus faecalis ATCC 29212, Escherichia coli ATCC 25922, and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa ATCC 27853 standard strains were 0.5 μg/mL, 2 μg/mL, 64 μg/mL, and 64 
μg/mL, respectivelyThe N. sativa oil showed an excellent antibacterial activity
against clinical isolates of methicillin-resistant S. aureus and
methicillin-resistant coagulase-negative Staphylococci with very low MIC range of
<0.25-1.0 µg/mLThe N. sativa oil exhibited no cytotoxic effect on the
proliferation of the gingival fibroblasts. Abbreviation used: ATCC: American Type
Culture Collection; CLSI: Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute; CoNS:
Coagulase-negative Staphylococci; DMEM: Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium; DMSO:
Dimethyl sulfoxide; FBS: Fetal bovine serum; HGF: Human gingival fibroblast; MIC:
Minimal inhibitory concentration; MRCoNS: Methicillin-resistant CoNS; MRSA:
Methicillin-resistant S. aureus.

DOI: 10.4103/0973-1296.191459 
PMCID: PMC5068126
PMID: 27761077 

