
1. Autophagy. 2016 Dec;12(12):2326-2343.

Autophagy induced by AXL receptor tyrosine kinase alleviates acute liver injury
via inhibition of NLRP3 inflammasome activation in mice.

Han J(1), Bae J(1), Choi CY(1), Choi SP(1), Kang HS(2), Jo EK(3), Park J(4), Lee 
YS(1), Moon HS(1), Park CG(5), Lee MS(6), Chun T(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Biotechnology , College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology,
Korea University , Seoul , Korea.
(2)b School of Biological Sciences and Technology, Biotechnology Research
Institute, Chonnam National University , Kwangju , Korea.
(3)c Infection Signaling Network Research Center , Department of Microbiology ,
College of Medicine, Chungnam National University , Daejeon , Korea.
(4)d Department of Pharmacology , Metabolic Diseases and Cell Signaling
Laboratory, Research Institute for Medical Sciences, College of Medicine,
Chungnam National University , Daejeon , Korea.
(5)e Department of Microbiology and Immunology , Seoul National University
College of Medicine , Seoul , Korea.
(6)f Severance Biomedical Science Institute , Department of Internal Medicine ,
College of Medicine, Yonsei University , Seoul , Korea.

Severe hepatic inflammation is a common cause of acute or chronic liver disease. 
Macrophages are one of the key mediators which regulate the progress of hepatic
inflammation. Increasing evidence shows that the TAM (TYRO3, AXL and MERTK)
family of RTKs (receptor tyrosine kinases), which is expressed in macrophages,
alleviates inflammatory responses through a negative feedback loop. However, the 
functional contribution of each TAM family member to the progression of hepatic
inflammation remains elusive. In this study, we explore the role of individual
TAM family proteins during autophagy induction and evaluate their contribution to
hepatic inflammation. Among the TAM family of RTKs, AXL (AXL receptor tyrosine
kinase) only induces autophagy in macrophages after interaction with its ligand, 
GAS6 (growth arrest specific 6). Based on our results, autophosphorylation of 2
tyrosine residues (Tyr815 and Tyr860) in the cytoplasmic domain of AXL in mice is
required for autophagy induction and AXL-mediated autophagy induction is
dependent on MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase)14 activity. Furthermore,
induction of AXL-mediated autophagy prevents CASP1 (caspase 1)-dependent IL1B
(interleukin 1, β) and IL18 (interleukin 18) maturation by inhibiting NLRP3 (NLR 
family, pyrin domain containing 3) inflammasome activation. In agreement with
these observations, axl-/- mice show more severe symptoms than do wild-type
(Axl+/+) mice following acute hepatic injury induced by administration of
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or carbon tetrachloride (CCl4). Hence, GAS6-AXL
signaling-mediated autophagy induction in murine macrophages ameliorates hepatic 
inflammatory responses by inhibiting NLRP3 inflammasome activation.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2016.1235124 
PMCID: PMC5173275
PMID: 27780404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

