
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1978 Jul;75(7):3109-12.

Transposition of plasmid DNA segments specifying hydrocarbon degradation and
their expression in various microorganisms.

Chakrabarty AM, Friello DA, Bopp LH.

The conjugative TOL plasmid (75 Mdal), specifying biodegradation of xylenes,
toluene, and trimethylbenzene derivatives, undergoes dissociation in Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa PAO to a nonconjugative TOL(*) plasmid (28 Mdal) and a transfer
plasmid termed TOLDelta (48 Mdal). The TOL(*) plasmid is rendered transmissible
through introduction of a number of conjugative plasmids such as factor K, CAM,
and TOLDelta but not by the FP2 derivative pR0271. Transfer of TOL(*) via factor 
K or TOLDelta is mediated by the formation of plasmid cointegrates; no
recombination is observed with CAM. A recombinant RP4-TOL plasmid (76 Mdal),
which has lost resistance to tetracycline, has been isolated. The TOL(*) segment 
can be transposed from this RP4-TOL recombinant plasmid to other antibiotic
resistance plasmids such as R702. A segment of DNA, specifying salicylate
degradation from SAL plasmid, was transposed onto pAC10, the TOL(*-) derivative
of RP4-TOL recombinant plasmid, which has lost resistance to tetracycline but
retains the transfer genes of RP4. Transposition of the salicylate degradative
genes onto pAC10 results in the loss of kanamycin resistance. It has been
possible to isolate SAL(+) segregants from pAC10[unk]SAL transposition
derivatives that have lost the pAC10 plasmid. Such segregants harbor the
salicylate degradative genes in the form of a nonconjugative plasmid (SAL(*)).
Transfer of RP4[unk]TOL(*) or pAC10[unk]SAL(*) transposition derivatives to
Escherichia coli, Salmonella typhimurium, Agrobacterium tumefaciens, or
Azotobacter vinelandii results in the functional expression of the antibiotic
resistance genes but not of the hydrocarbon degradative genes. Such genes,
however, are fully expressed on being transferred back to Pseudomonas.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.75.7.3109 
PMCID: PMC392723
PMID: 277912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

