
1. Microb Pathog. 2017 May;106:50-59. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2016.10.018. Epub 2016 
Nov 2.

Reversal of resistance in bacteria underlies synergistic effect of essential oils
with conventional antibiotics.

Lahmar A(1), Bedoui A(2), Mokdad-Bzeouich I(2), Dhaouifi Z(2), Kalboussi Z(2),
Cheraif I(3), Ghedira K(4), Chekir-Ghedira L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, Faculté de Médecine
Dentaire, Université de Monastir, Rue Avicenne, Monastir, Tunisia; Unité de
Substances Naturelles Bioactives et Biotechnologie UR12ES12, Faculté de Pharmacie
de Monastir, Université de Monastir, Rue Avicenne, Monastir, Tunisia. Electronic 
address: elahmar.aida@gmail.com.
(2)Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, Faculté de Médecine
Dentaire, Université de Monastir, Rue Avicenne, Monastir, Tunisia; Unité de
Substances Naturelles Bioactives et Biotechnologie UR12ES12, Faculté de Pharmacie
de Monastir, Université de Monastir, Rue Avicenne, Monastir, Tunisia.
(3)Laboratoire de Biochimie, USCR de Spectrométrie de Masse, Faculté de Médecine,
Université de Monastir, Tunisia.
(4)Unité de Substances Naturelles Bioactives et Biotechnologie UR12ES12, Faculté 
de Pharmacie de Monastir, Université de Monastir, Rue Avicenne, Monastir,
Tunisia.

The pervasive of bacterial resistance earnestly threaten the prevention and the
treatment of infectious diseases. Therefore, scientific communities take
precedence over development of new antimicrobial agents. The aim of the study was
to determine antimicrobial potency of three North-African essential oils
Pituranthos chloranthus, Teucruim ramosissimum and Pistacia lentiscus
individually, and in combination with antibiotics, to inhibit the growth of
highly resistant clinical pathogen. Bacteria clinically isolated from patients,
subsequently, challenged to a panel of drugs to determine the
antibiotic-resistance profiles. Drugs displaying clinically irrelevant CMI were
subjected to further studies in order to rescue antibiotic actions. Singular
activity of essential oils and activity when combined with an antibiotic was
hence elucidated. The results obtained highlighted the occurrence of strong
antibacterial potential of essential oils when administrated alone. In the
interactive experiment essential oils were found highly effective in reducing the
resistance of Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus to amoxicillin,
tetracycline, piperacillin, ofloxacin and oxacillin and resistance of
Acinetobacter baumannii to amoxicillin and to ofloxacin in interactive manner.
Furthermore, the results proved synergism among essential oils and both
antibiotics ofloxacin and novobiocin against the Extended-Spectrum Beta-Lactamase
producing E. coli (ESBL). Time kill kinetics was performed with a combination of 
sub-inhibitory concentrations to confirm the efficiency and killing rate of the
combination over time. Further, the hypothetical toxicity of essential oils
against human keratinocytes HaCat and murine spleenocytes were examined. The
chemical composition of essential oils was assessed by GC/MS analysis and the
major constituents found were sabinene, limonene, terpinen-4-ol, and β-eudesmol.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2016.10.018 
PMID: 27815129  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

