
1. Physiol Rep. 2016 Nov;4(21). pii: e13018.

Postnatal regulation of MAMDC4 in the porcine intestinal epithelium is influenced
by bacterial colonization.

Pasternak AJ(1), Hamonic GM(1), Van Kessel A(2), Wilson HL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization, International Vaccine Centre
(VIDO-InterVac) University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.
(2)Department of Animal and Poultry Science, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.
(3)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization, International Vaccine Centre
(VIDO-InterVac) University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada
heather.wilson@usask.ca.

The MAM domain-containing 4 (MAMDC4) protein is associated with the unique
endocytotic mechanism observed in the intestine of mammals during the immediate
postnatal period. Transcriptional expression of MAMDC4 was substantially
upregulated at birth in both the piglet jejunum and ileum and its expression
decreases after birth. The protein was found localized specifically to the apical
region of the luminal epithelium, however, MAMDC4 protein expression was lost at 
day 10 and 15 in the jejunum and ileum, respectively, and was not associated with
"fetal" enterocyte replacement. Although spatial variation in the subcellular
localization of Claudin 1 (CLDN1) was noted at day 3, the loss of MAMDC4 at later
stages of development did not appear to have any effect on the tight junction
structure. Germ-free (GF) piglets and piglets whose gastrointestinal flora
consists exclusively of Escherichia coli (EC) or Lactobacillus fermentum (LF)
maintained MAMDC4 protein expression to 14 days of age in distal regions of the
small intestine whereas those with conventionalized intestinal flora (CV) showed 
no MAMDC4 protein at this age. MAMDC4 protein expression was most pronounced in
the LF and GF colonized piglets which showed staining in the epithelial cells at 
75% and 95% of the length of the small intestine, respectively, which matched
that of the newborn. In contrast, EC animals showed only a low abundance at these
regions as well as a discontinuous staining pattern. Collectively these results
suggest that maturation of MAMDC4 expression in the porcine epithelium occurs
more rapidly than what is reported in previously studied rodent species.
Furthermore, intestinal bacterial colonization is a major regulator of MAMDC4 in 
a manner specific to bacterial species and independent of enterocyte turnover.

© 2016 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on
behalf of the American Physiological Society and The Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.14814/phy2.13018 
PMCID: PMC5112496
PMID: 27821716  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

