
1. Vet Res. 2016 Nov 8;47(1):110.

Oestrous cycle-dependent equine uterine immune response to induced infectious
endometritis.

Marth CD(1)(2), Firestone SM(3), Glenton LY(3)(4), Browning GF(3), Young ND(5),
Krekeler N(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Asia-Pacific Centre for Animal Health, Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural 
Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
christina.marth@unimelb.edu.au.
(2)Translational Research and Animal Clinical Trial Study Group, Faculty of
Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Werribee, VIC,
Australia. christina.marth@unimelb.edu.au.
(3)Asia-Pacific Centre for Animal Health, Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural 
Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(4)Translational Research and Animal Clinical Trial Study Group, Faculty of
Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Werribee, VIC,
Australia.
(5)Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences, The University of Melbourne, 
Parkville, VIC, Australia.

Infectious endometritis is a major cause of reduced pregnancy rates in horses.
The objectives of this study were to establish a timeline of the innate immune
response in the uterus of healthy horses and to investigate the oestrous cycle
effect on this. Endometrial biopsies were collected from five horses before and
at 3, 12, 24, 48 and 72 h after inoculation of Escherichia coli, once in oestrus 
and once in dioestrus. They were analysed by quantitative real-time PCR,
microbiology and histology. Neutrophil numbers increased from very low levels in 
the absence of inflammation to severe neutrophilia 3 h after inoculation. The
concentrations of mRNAs for Toll-like receptor (TLR)2, TLR4, NOD-like receptor
NLRC5, tissue inhibitor of metallopeptidases 1 (TIMP1) and chemokines CCL2,
CXCL9, CXCL10 and CXCL11 were all increased 3 h after inoculation of E. coli
compared to levels detected prior to inoculation. Chemokine mRNA levels remained 
elevated for 48 h. Concentrations of mRNAs for the antimicrobial peptides equine 
β-defensin 1 (EBD1), lysozyme, secretory leukoprotease inhibitor (SLPI),
lipocalin 2 (LCN2), lactoferrin and uteroferrin were increased between 3 and 12 h
post inoculation. The gene for secreted phospholipase A2 (sPLA2) was expressed
constitutively. P19 uterocalin mRNA levels were higher in dioestrus than in
oestrus over the first 24 h of inflammation. Neutrophils and many innate immune
genes responded rapidly to the introduction of E. coli into the uterus, while the
oestrous cycle stage had only a relatively minor effect on the response to E.
coli. This study has delineated a useful model of innate immunity in infectious
endometritis of healthy animals.

DOI: 10.1186/s13567-016-0398-x 
PMCID: PMC5101692
PMID: 27825391  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

