
1. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2017 Jan 1;312(1):G24-G33. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00169.2016. Epub 2016 Nov 17.

Regulation and function of bone morphogenetic protein signaling in colonic injury
and inflammation.

Ji T(1), Takabayashi H(1), Mao M(1), Han X(1), Xue X(2), Brazil JC(3), Eaton
KA(4), Shah YM(2), Todisco A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor, Michigan.
(2)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan
Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor,
Michigan; and.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor, Michigan; atodisco@umich.edu.

The bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) regulate gastrointestinal homeostasis. We 
investigated the expression of BMP-4 and the localization and function of BMP
signaling during colonic injury and inflammation. Mice expressing the
β-galactosidase (β-gal) gene under the control of a BMP-responsive element (BRE),
BMP-4-β-gal/ mice, and animals generated by crossing villin-Cre mice to mice with
floxed alleles of BMP receptor 1A (villin-Cre;Bmpr1aflox/flox) were treated with 
dextran sodium sulfate (DSS) to induce colonic injury and inflammation.
Expression of BMP-4, β-gal, BMPR1A, IL-8, α-smooth muscle actin, and
phosphorylated Smad1, -5, and -8 was assessed by X-Gal staining, quantitative
RT-PCR, and immunohistochemistry. Morphology of the colonic mucosa was examined
by staining with hematoxylin and eosin. The effect of IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-1β, and
IL-6 on BMP-4 mRNA expression was investigated in human intestinal fibroblasts,
whereas that of BMP-4 on IL-8 was assessed in human colonic organoids. BMP-4 was 
localized in α-smooth muscle actin-positive mesenchymal cells while the majority 
of BMP-generated signals targeted the epithelium. DSS caused injury and
inflammation leading to reduced expression of BMP-4 and of BMPR1A mRNAs, and to
decreased BMP signaling. Deletion of BMPR1A enhanced colonic inflammation and
damage. Administration of anti-TNF-α antibodies to DSS-treated mice ameliorated
colonic inflammation and increased the expression of BMP-4 and BMPR1A mRNAs.
TNF-α and IL-1β inhibited both basal and IFN-γ-stimulated BMP-4 expression,
whereas IL-6 had no effect. BMP-4 reduced TNF-α-stimulated IL-8 mRNA expressor
IL-8 mRNA expression in the organoids. Inflammation and injury inhibit BMP-4
expression and signaling, leading to enhanced colonic damage and inflammation.
These observations underscore the importance of BMP signaling in the regulation
of intestinal inflammation and homeostasis.NEW & NOTEWORTHY: In this study we
report a series of novel observations that underscore the importance of bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling in the regulation of colonic homeostasis
during the development of injury and inflammation. In particular, we present
evidence that BMP signaling mitigates the response of the colonic epithelium to
injury and inflammation and that cytokines, such as TNF-α and IL-1β, inhibit the 
expression of BMP-4.

Copyright © 2017 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.00169.2016 
PMCID: PMC5283904
PMID: 27856416  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

