
1. Am J Chin Med. 2016;44(8):1693-1717. Epub 2016 Nov 16.

Standardized Extract from Caesalpinia spinosa is Cytotoxic Over Cancer Stem Cells
and Enhance Anticancer Activity of Doxorubicin.

Sandoval TA(1), Urueña CP(1), Llano M(1), Gómez-Cadena A(1), Hernández JF(1),
Sequeda LG(2), Loaiza AE(2), Barreto A(1), Li S(3), Fiorentino S(1).

Author information: 
(1)* Department of Microbiology, Grupo de Investigación Fitoquímica Universidad
Javeriana (GIFUJ), Bogotá, Colombia.
(2)† Departament of Chemistry, Pontificia Universidad Javeriana, Grupo de
Investigación Fitoquímica Universidad Javeriana (GIFUJ), Bogotá, Colombia.
(3)‡ Institute of Chinese Medical Sciences, University of Macau, Macau,
P.R. China.

Cancer stem cells (CSC) are the primary cell type responsible for metastasis and 
relapse. ABC-transporters are integral membrane proteins involved in the
translocation of substrates across membranes protecting CSC from chemotherapeutic
agents. A plant extract derived from C. spinosa (P2Et) previously investigated
for its antitumor activity has been shown to reduce lung and spleen metastasis in
mice that have been transplanted with breast cancer cells, suggesting that P2Et
has a significant activity against cancer stem cells (CSC). P2Et extract was
thoroughly characterized by HPLC/MS. The cytotoxicity of P2Et extract was
evaluated using a MTT assay in human and murine cell lines with different
profiles of resistance, by Pgp overexpression or by enrichment in cancer stem
cells. The synergistic effect of P2Et with doxorubicin was evaluated in vitro in 
several cell lines and in vivo in mice transplanted with TS/A cells, a highly
resistant cell line and enriched in CD44[Formula: see text]CD24[Formula: see
text]CSC. The chromatographic fingerprint of P2Et extract revealed 13
gallotannins. We also found that P2Et extract was cytotoxic to cells regardless
of their resistant phenotype. Similarly, complementary activities were observed
as drug efflux reversion and antioxidant activity. Short-treatment with P2Et
extract, revealed a synergistic effect with doxorubicin in resistant cell lines. 
In vivo the P2Et increases mice survival in a TS/A breast cancer model associated
with augmentation of calreticulin expression. Our results suggest that P2Et
treatment could be used as adjuvant along with conventional chemotherapy to treat
tumors with a MDR phenotype or with high frequency of CSC.

DOI: 10.1142/S0192415X16500956 
PMID: 27852125  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

