
1. Sci Technol Adv Mater. 2014 Mar 7;15(2):025001. eCollection 2014 Apr.

Modulation of human dermal microvascular endothelial cell and human gingival
fibroblast behavior by micropatterned silica coating surfaces for zirconia dental
implant applications.

Laranjeira MS(1), Carvalho Â(1), Pelaez-Vargas A(2), Hansford D(3), Ferraz MP(4),
Coimbra S(5), Costa E(6), Santos-Silva A(6), Fernandes MH(7), Monteiro FJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)INEB-Instituto Engenharia Biomédica, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal;
Faculdade de Engenharia, DEMM, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(2)Facultad de Odontología, Universidad Cooperativa de Colombia, Medellín,
Colombia.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering (BME), Ohio State University, Columbus,
OH, USA.
(4)INEB-Instituto Engenharia Biomédica, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal;
Laboratory CEBIMED-Centro de Estudos em Biomedicina, Universidade Fernando
Pessoa, Porto, Portugal.
(5)IBMC-Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do Porto, Porto, 
Portugal; CESPU-Instituto de Investigação e Formação Avançada em Ciências e
Tecnologias da Saúde, Gandra-PRD, Portugal.
(6)IBMC-Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do Porto, Porto, 
Portugal; Departamento de Ciências Biológicas-Serviço de Bioquímica, Faculdade de
Farmácia, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(7)Laboratory for Bone Metabolism and Regeneration, Faculdade de Medicina
Dentária, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.

Dental ceramic implants have shown superior esthetic behavior and the absence of 
induced allergic disorders when compared to titanium implants. Zirconia may
become a potential candidate to be used as an alternative to titanium dental
implants if surface modifications are introduced. In this work, bioactive
micropatterned silica coatings were produced on zirconia substrates, using a
combined methodology of sol-gel processing and soft lithography. The aim of the
work was to compare the in vitro behavior of human gingival fibroblasts (HGFs)
and human dermal microvascular endothelial cells (HDMECs) on three types of
silica-coated zirconia surfaces: flat and micropatterned (with pillars and with
parallel grooves). Our results showed that cells had a higher metabolic activity 
(HGF, HDMEC) and increased gene expression levels of fibroblast-specific
protein-1 (FSP-1) and collagen type I (COL I) on surfaces with pillars.
Nevertheless, parallel grooved surfaces were able to guide cell growth. Even
capillary tube-like networks of HDMEC were oriented according to the surface
geometry. Zirconia and silica with different topographies have shown to be blood 
compatible and silica coating reduced bacteria adhesion. All together, the
results indicated that microstructured bioactive coating seems to be an efficient
strategy to improve soft tissue integration on zirconia implants, protecting
implants from peri-implant inflammation and improving long-term implant
stabilization. This new approach of micropatterned silica coating on zirconia
substrates can generate promising novel dental implants, with surfaces that
provide physical cues to guide cells and enhance their behavior.

DOI: 10.1088/1468-6996/15/2/025001 
PMCID: PMC5090413
PMID: 27877662 

