
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Nov 29;6:37955. doi: 10.1038/srep37955.

Hyperglycaemia and Pseudomonas aeruginosa acidify cystic fibrosis airway surface 
liquid by elevating epithelial monocarboxylate transporter 2 dependent lactate-H+
secretion.

Garnett JP(1)(2), Kalsi KK(3), Sobotta M(2), Bearham J(3), Carr G(1), Powell
J(1), Brodlie M(1), Ward C(1), Tarran R(4), Baines DL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK.
(2)Immunology &Respiratory Diseases Research, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH
&Co. KG, Biberach an der Riss, Germany.
(3)Institute for Infection and Immunity, St George's, University of London,
Tooting, London, UK.
(4)Cystic Fibrosis Centre/Marisco Lung Institute, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

The cystic fibrosis (CF) airway surface liquid (ASL) provides a nutrient rich
environment for bacterial growth including elevated glucose, which together with 
defective bacterial killing due to aberrant HCO3- transport and acidic ASL, make 
the CF airways susceptible to colonisation by respiratory pathogens such as
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Approximately half of adults with CF have CF related
diabetes (CFRD) and this is associated with increased respiratory decline. CF ASL
contains elevated lactate concentrations and hyperglycaemia can also increase ASL
lactate. We show that primary human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells secrete
lactate into ASL, which is elevated in hyperglycaemia. This leads to ASL
acidification in CFHBE, which could only be mimicked in non-CF HBE following
HCO3- removal. Hyperglycaemia-induced changes in ASL lactate and pH were
exacerbated by the presence of P. aeruginosa and were attenuated by inhibition of
monocarboxylate lactate-H+ co-transporters (MCTs) with AR-C155858. We conclude
that hyperglycaemia and P. aeruginosa induce a metabolic shift which increases
lactate generation and efflux into ASL via epithelial MCT2 transporters. Normal
airways compensate for MCT-driven H+ secretion by secreting HCO3-, a process
which is dysfunctional in CF airway epithelium leading to ASL acidification and
that these processes may contribute to worsening respiratory disease in CFRD.

DOI: 10.1038/srep37955 
PMCID: PMC5126573
PMID: 27897253  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

