
1. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2016;40(3-4):716-726. Epub 2016 Nov 30.

Radioprotective Effects of Heat-Killed Mycobacterium Tuberculosis in Cultured
Cells and Radiosensitive Tissues.

Chen Y(1), Xu Y, Du J, Guo J, Lei X, Cui J, Liu C, Cheng Y, Li B, Gao F, Ju J,
Cai J, Yang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine, Faculty of Naval Medicine, Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai, P.R. China.

BACKGROUND: Exposure to ionizing radiation (IR) often causes severe damage to
radiosensitive tissues, which limits the use of radiotherapy in cancer patients. 
Novel safe and effective radioprotectant is urgently required. It has been
reported toll like receptor 2 (TLR2) plays a critical role in radioresistance. In
this study, we demonstrated the protective effects of Heat-Killed Mycobacterium
tuberculosis (HKMT), a potent TLR2 agonist, against IR.
METHODS: Cell survival and apoptosis were determined by CCK-8 assay and Annexin V
assay, respectively. An immunofluorescence staining assay was used to detect the 
translocation of nuclear faktor-kappa beta (NF-kB) p65. Tissue damage was
evaluated by Haematoxilin-Eosin (HE) staining assay. We also used a flow
cytometry assay to measure the number of nucleated cells and CD34+ hemopoietic
stem cells in bone marrow. A western blot assay was used to detect the changes of
proteins involving TLR signaling pathway.
RESULTS: We found that HKMT increased cell viability and inhibited cell apoptosis
after irradiation. HKMT induced NF-kB translocation and activated Erk1/2, p38
signaling pathway. HKMT also protected bone marrow and testis from destruction.
Radiation-induced decreases of nucleated cells and CD34+ hemopoietic stem cells
in bone marrow were also inhibited by HKMT treatment. We found that radiation
caused increase of inflammatory cytokines was also suppressed by HKMT.
CONCLUSION: Our data showed that HKMT exhibited radioprotective effects in vivo
and in vitro through activating NF-kB and MAPK signaling pathway, suggesting a
potential of HKMT as novel radioprotector.

© 2016 The Author(s) Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000452583 
PMID: 27898411  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

