
1. Avian Dis. 2016 Dec;60(4):810-816.

Characterization of Thai Mycoplasma synoviae Isolates by Sequence Analysis of
Partial vlhA Gene.

Limpavithayakul K(1), Sasipreeyajan J(1), Pakpinyo S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Avian Health Research Unit, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Faculty of
Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn University, Patumwan, Bangkok 10330, Thailand.

Mycoplasma synoviae (MS), a remarkable pathogen in poultry, causes subclinical
infection of the upper respiratory tract and an infectious synovitis, especially 
in the tendon sheaths and synovial membranes of joints. Because the specific
detection of MS 16S rRNA gene-based PCR was unsuitable for strain
differentiation, vlhA gene-based PCR was designed to differentiate the MS
strains. The vlhA gene of MS encodes for hemagglutinin and other immunodominant
membrane proteins involved in colonization, antigenic variations, and virulence. 
Sequence analysis of the vlhA gene based on the nucleotide insertion/deletion of 
the proline-rich repeat (PRR) region and the nucleotide polymorphisms of the RIII
region in vlhA gene fragments was useful for typing and subtyping of MS strains. 
This study aimed to characterize the Thai MS field isolates and to differentiate 
the field and vaccine strains in Thailand by using sequence analysis of the
partial vlhA gene. In total, 20 MS field isolates submitted from registered
chicken farms in Thailand during 2015 were identified as Type C1 (n = 1), C2 (n =
4), E1 (n = 9), E2 (n = 1), and L (n = 5). The results revealed that six of the
nine isolates resulting in respiratory signs were Type E1. In addition, four
isolates from lame chickens showing joint swelling were identified as Type L,
with a length of 105 nucleotides. This study provides the first molecular data of
Thai MS isolates and the first evidence of Type L for being an arthropathic
strain that differs from a previous study demonstrating that only MS Type B, with
a longer PRR of 135 nucleotides, could be highly invasive strains and associated 
with infectious synovitis in chickens. Furthermore, one farm showed coinfection
of MS Types E and L, but most of the farms were affected by only one type of MS. 
The results indicated that sequence analysis of the partial vlhA gene can be used
as a tool for tracing MS characterization.

DOI: 10.1637/11450-061216-Reg 
PMID: 27902903  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

