
1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Nov 23;7:1884. eCollection 2016.

Diazotroph Diversity in the Sea Ice, Melt Ponds, and Surface Waters of the
Eurasian Basin of the Central Arctic Ocean.

Fernández-Méndez M(1), Turk-Kubo KA(2), Buttigieg PL(3), Rapp JZ(1), Krumpen
T(4), Zehr JP(2), Boetius A(1).

Author information: 
(1)HGF-MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Alfred Wegener Institute
Helmholtz Centre for Polar and Marine ResearchBremerhaven, Germany; HGF-MPG Group
for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck Institute for Marine
MicrobiologyBremen, Germany.
(2)Department of Ocean Sciences, University of California at Santa Cruz, Santa
Cruz CA, USA.
(3)HGF-MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Alfred Wegener Institute
Helmholtz Centre for Polar and Marine Research Bremerhaven, Germany.
(4)Sea Ice Physics Section, Climate Sciences Department, Alfred Wegener Institute
Helmholtz Centre for Polar and Marine Research Bremerhaven, Germany.

The Eurasian basin of the Central Arctic Ocean is nitrogen limited, but little is
known about the presence and role of nitrogen-fixing bacteria. Recent studies
have indicated the occurrence of diazotrophs in Arctic coastal waters potentially
of riverine origin. Here, we investigated the presence of diazotrophs in ice and 
surface waters of the Central Arctic Ocean in the summer of 2012. We identified
diverse communities of putative diazotrophs through targeted analysis of the nifH
gene, which encodes the iron protein of the nitrogenase enzyme. We amplified 529 
nifH sequences from 26 samples of Arctic melt ponds, sea ice and surface waters. 
These sequences resolved into 43 clusters at 92% amino acid sequence identity,
most of which were non-cyanobacterial phylotypes from sea ice and water samples. 
One cyanobacterial phylotype related to Nodularia sp. was retrieved from sea ice,
suggesting that this important functional group is rare in the Central Arctic
Ocean. The diazotrophic community in sea-ice environments appear distinct from
other cold-adapted diazotrophic communities, such as those present in the coastal
Canadian Arctic, the Arctic tundra and glacial Antarctic lakes. Molecular
fingerprinting of nifH and the intergenic spacer region of the rRNA operon
revealed differences between the communities from river-influenced Laptev Sea
waters and those from ice-related environments pointing toward a marine origin
for sea-ice diazotrophs. Our results provide the first record of diazotrophs in
the Central Arctic and suggest that microbial nitrogen fixation may occur north
of 77°N. To assess the significance of nitrogen fixation for the nitrogen budget 
of the Arctic Ocean and to identify the active nitrogen fixers, further
biogeochemical and molecular biological studies are needed.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01884 
PMCID: PMC5120112
PMID: 27933047 

