
1. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2017 Apr;30(2):91-99. doi: 10.1089/jamp.2016.1317.
Epub 2016 Dec 15.

Nebulized Recombinant Human Tissue Factor Pathway Inhibitor Attenuates
Coagulation and Exerts Modest Anti-inflammatory Effects in Rat Models of Lung
Injury.

van den Boogaard FE(1)(2)(3), Hofstra JJ(1)(4), Brands X(1)(2), Levi MM(5),
Roelofs JJ(6), Zaat SA(3)(4), Van't Veer C(2)(3), van der Poll T(2)(3)(7),
Schultz MJ(1)(8).

Author information: 
(1)1 Laboratory of Experimental Intensive Care and Anesthesiology (L路E路I路C路A),
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam , Amsterdam, The Netherlands .
(2)2 Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine (CEMM), Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam , Amsterdam, The Netherlands .
(3)3 Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam , Amsterdam, The Netherlands .
(4)4 Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Amsterdam , Amsterdam, The
Netherlands .
(5)5 Department of Internal Medicine, University of Amsterdam , Amsterdam, The
Netherlands .
(6)6 Department of Pathology, University of Amsterdam , Amsterdam, The
Netherlands .
(7)7 Department of Infectious Diseases, University of Amsterdam , Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands .
(8)8 Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Academic Medical Center, University
of Amsterdam , Amsterdam, The Netherlands .

BACKGROUND: Critically ill patients are at a constant risk of direct (e.g., by
pneumonia) or indirect lung injury (e.g., by sepsis). Excessive alveolar fibrin
deposition is a prominent feature of lung injury, undermining pulmonary integrity
and function.
METHODS: We examined the effect of local administration of recombinant human
tissue factor pathway inhibitor (rh-TFPI), a natural anticoagulant, in two
well-established models of lung injury in rats. Rats received intratracheal
instillation of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, causing direct lung injury, or they
received an intravenous injection of Escherichia coli lipopolysaccharide (LPS),
causing indirect lung injury. Rats were randomized to local treatment with
rh-TFPI or placebo through repeated nebulization.
RESULTS: Challenge with P. aeruginosa or LPS was associated with increased
coagulation and decreased fibrinolysis in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and
plasma. Rh-TFPI levels in BALF increased after nebulization, whereas plasma
rh-TFPI levels remained low and systemic TFPI activity was not affected.
Nebulization of rh-TFPI attenuated pulmonary and systemic coagulation in both
models, without affecting fibrinolysis. Nebulization of rh-TFPI modestly reduced 
the inflammatory response and bacterial growth of P. aeruginosa in the alveolar
compartment.
CONCLUSIONS: Local treatment with rh-TFPI does not alter systemic TFPI activity; 
however, it attenuates both pulmonary and systemic coagulopathy. Furthermore,
nebulized rh-TFPI modestly reduces the pulmonary inflammatory response and allows
increased bacterial clearance in rats with direct lung injury caused by P.
aeruginosa.

DOI: 10.1089/jamp.2016.1317 
PMID: 27977318  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

