
1. ISME J. 2017 Feb;11(2):415-425. doi: 10.1038/ismej.2016.131. Epub 2016 Dec 16.

Fungal-bacterial dynamics and their contribution to terrigenous carbon turnover
in relation to organic matter quality.

Fabian J(1), Zlatanovic S(2), Mutz M(2), Premke K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department Chemical Analytics and Biogeochemistry, Leibniz-Institute of
Freshwater Ecology and Inland Fisheries (IGB), Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Freshwater Conservation, BTU-Cottbus Senftenberg, Bad Saarow,
Germany.

Ecological functions of fungal and bacterial decomposers vary with environmental 
conditions. However, the response of these decomposers to particulate organic
matter (POM) quality, which varies widely in aquatic ecosystems, remains poorly
understood. Here we investigated how POM pools of substrates of different
qualities determine the relative contributions of aquatic fungi and bacteria to
terrigenous carbon (C) turnover. To this end, surface sediments were incubated
with different POM pools of algae and/or leaf litter. 13C stable-isotope
measurements of C mineralization were combined with phospholipid analysis to link
the metabolic activities and substrate preferences of fungal and bacterial
heterotrophs to dynamics in their abundance. We found that the presence of labile
POM greatly affected the dominance of bacteria over fungi within the degrader
communities and stimulated the decomposition of beech litter primarily through an
increase in metabolic activity. Our data indicated that fungi primarily
contribute to terrigenous C turnover by providing litter C for the microbial
loop, whereas bacteria determine whether the supplied C substrate is assimilated 
into biomass or recycled back into the atmosphere in relation to phosphate
availability. Thus, this study provides a better understanding of the role of
fungi and bacteria in terrestrial-aquatic C cycling in relation to environmental 
conditions.

DOI: 10.1038/ismej.2016.131 
PMCID: PMC5270572
PMID: 27983721  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

