
1. Oncotarget. 2017 Jan 10;8(2):2053-2068. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.14026.

Autologous reconstitution of human cancer and immune system in vivo.

Fu J(1), Sen R(1), Masica DL(2), Karchin R(2)(3), Pardoll D(3), Walter V(4),
Hayes DN(5), Chung CH(6), Kim YJ(3)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology - Head & Neck Surgery, SKCCC, Johns Hopkins
Hospital, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering and The Institute for Computational
Medicine, SKCCC, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Bloomberg-Kimmel Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, SKCCC, Johns Hopkins
Hospital, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Penn State Milton S. Hershey
Medical Center, Hershey, PA, USA.
(5)UNC Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(6)Department of Head & Neck - Endocrine Oncology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, 
FL, USA.
(7)Department of Otolaryngology - Head & Neck Surgery, VICC, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.

Correlative studies from checkpoint inhibitor trials have indicated that better
understanding of human leukocytic trafficking into the human tumor
microenvironment can expedite the translation of future immune-oncologic agents. 
In order to directly characterize signaling pathways that can regulate human
leukocytic trafficking into the tumor, we have developed a completely autologous 
xenotransplantation method to reconstitute the human tumor immune
microenvironment in vivo. We were able to genetically mark the engrafted CD34+
bone marrow cells as well as the tumor cells, and follow the endogenous
leukocytic infiltration into the autologous tumor. To investigate human tumor
intrinsic factors that can potentially regulate the immune cells in our system,
we silenced STAT3 signaling in the tumor compartment. As expected, STAT3
signaling suppression in the tumor compartment in these autologously
reconstituted humanized mice showed increased tumor infiltrating lymphocytes and 
reduction of arginase-1 in the stroma, which were associated with slower tumor
growth rate. We also used this novel system to characterize human myeloid
suppressor cells as well as to screen novel agents that can alter endogenous
leukocytic infiltration into the tumor. Taken together, we present a valuable
method to study individualized human tumor microenvironments in vivo without
confounding allogeneic responses.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.14026 
PMCID: PMC5356779
PMID: 28008146  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

