
1. Cancer Sci. 2017 Mar;108(3):322-330. doi: 10.1111/cas.13146.

MET4 expression predicts poor prognosis of gastric cancers with Helicobacter
pylori infection.

Sakamoto N(1), Tsujimoto H(1), Takahata R(1), Cao B(2), Zhao P(2), Ito N(1),
Shimazaki H(3), Ichikura T(4), Hase K(1), Vande Woude GF(5), Shinomiya N(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, National Defense Medical College, Tokorozawa, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Antibody Technology, Van Andel Research Institute, Grand Rapids,
MI, USA.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, National Defense Medical College,
Tokorozawa, Japan.
(4)Court Physician in Chief, The Imperial Household Agency, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Van Andel Research Institute, Grand Rapids, 
MI, USA.
(6)Department of Integrative Physiology and Bio-Nano Medicine, National Defense
Medical College, Tokorozawa, Japan.

The role of HGF/SF-MET signaling is important in cancer progression, but its
relation with Helicobacter pylori-positive gastric cancers remains to be
elucidated. In total, 201 patients with primary gastric carcinoma who underwent
curative or debulking resection without preoperative chemotherapy were studied.
MET4 and anti-HGF/SF mAbs were used for immunohistochemical analysis. Survival of
gastric cancer patients was estimated by Kaplan-Meier method and compared with
log-rank. Cox proportional hazards models were fit to determine the independent
association of MET-staining status with outcome. The effect of live H. pylori
bacteria on cell signaling and biological behaviors was evaluated using gastric
cancer cell lines. MET4-positive gastric cancers showed poorer prognosis than
MET4-negative cases (overall survival, P = 0.02; relapse-free survival,
P = 0.06). Positive staining for MET4 was also a statistically significant factor
to predict poor prognosis in H. pylori-positive cases (overall survival,
P < 0.01; relapse-free survival, P = 0.01) but not in H. pylori-negative cases.
Gastric cancers positively stained with both HGF/SF and MET4 showed a tendency of
the worst prognosis. Stimulation of MET-positive gastric cancer cells with live
H. pylori bacteria directly upregulated MET phosphorylation and activated MET
downstream signals such as p44/42MAPK and Akt, conferring cell proliferation and 
anti-apoptotic activity. In conclusion, positive staining for MET4 was useful for
predicting poor prognosis of gastric cancers with H. pylori infection.
Helicobacter pylori stimulated MET-positive gastric cancers and activated
downstream signaling, thereby promoting cancer proliferation and anti-apoptotic
activity. These results support the importance of H. pylori elimination from
gastric epithelial surface in clinical therapy.

© 2016 The Authors. Cancer Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd 
on behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.13146 
PMCID: PMC5378289
PMID: 28012218  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

