
1. J Thromb Haemost. 2017 Mar;15(3):487-499. doi: 10.1111/jth.13605. Epub 2017 Feb
22.

Inactivation of human coagulation factor X by a protease of the pathogen
Capnocytophaga canimorsus.

Hack K(1), Renzi F(1), Hess E(1), Lauber F(1), Douxfils J(2), Dogné JM(2),
Cornelis GR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Namur, Namur, Belgium.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, University of Namur, Namur, Belgium.

Essentials Capnocytophaga canimorsus causes severe dog bite related blood stream 
infections. We investigated if C. canimorsus contributes to bleeding
abnormalities during infection. The C. canimorsus protease CcDPP7 causes factor X
dysfunction by N-terminal cleavage. CcDPP7 inhibits coagulation in vivo, which
could promote immune evasion and trigger hemorrhage.SUMMARY: Background
Capnocytophaga canimorsus is a Gram-negative bacterium that is present in the
oral flora of dogs and causes fulminant sepsis in humans who have been bitten,
licked, or scratched. In patients, bleeding abnormalities, such as petechiae,
purpura fulminans, or disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), occur
frequently. Objective To investigate whether C. canimorsus could actively
contribute to these bleeding abnormalities. Methods Calibrated automated
thrombogram and clotting time assays were performed to assess the anticoagulant
activity of C. canimorsus 5 (Cc5), a strain isolated from a fatal human
infection. Clotting factor activities were measured with factor-deficient plasma.
Factor X cleavage was monitored with the radiolabeled zymogen and western
blotting. Mutagenesis of Cc5 genes encoding putative serine proteases was
performed to identify the protease that cleaves FX. Protein purification was
performed with affinity chromatography. Edman degradation allowed the detection
of N-terminal cleavage of FX. Tail bleeding times were measured in mice. Results 
We found that Cc5 inhibited thrombin generation and increased the prothrombin
time and the activated partial thromboplastin time of human plasma via FX
cleavage. A mutant that was unable to synthesize a type 7 dipeptidyl peptidase
(DPP7) of the S46 serine protease family failed to proteolyse FX. The purified
protease (CcDPP7) cleaved FX heavy and light chains from the N-terminus, and was 
active in vivo after intravenous injection. Conclusions This is, to our
knowledge, the first study demonstrating a detailed mechanism for FX inactivation
by a bacterial protease, and it is the first functional study associating DPP7
proteases with a potentially pathogenic outcome.

© 2016 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

DOI: 10.1111/jth.13605 
PMID: 28029716  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

