
1. J Membr Biol. 2017 Apr;250(2):145-162. doi: 10.1007/s00232-016-9942-x. Epub 2016 
Dec 26.

Characterisation of the DAACS Family Escherichia coli Glutamate/Aspartate-Proton 
Symporter GltP Using Computational, Chemical, Biochemical and Biophysical
Methods.

Rahman M(1)(2), Ismat F(1)(2), Jiao L(1), Baldwin JM(1), Sharples DJ(1), Baldwin 
SA(1), Patching SG(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of BioMedical Sciences and the Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular 
Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
(2)Drug Discovery and Structural Biology Group, Health Biotechnology Division,
National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering (NIBGE), Faisalabad,
Pakistan.
(3)School of BioMedical Sciences and the Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular 
Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK. s.g.patching@leeds.ac.uk.
(4)Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Astbury Building, Leeds, 
LS2 9JT, UK. s.g.patching@leeds.ac.uk.

Escherichia coli glutamate/aspartate-proton symporter GltP is a member of the
Dicarboxylate/Amino Acid:Cation Symporter family of secondary active transport
proteins. A range of computational, chemical, biochemical and biophysical methods
characterised evolutionary relationships, structural features, substrate binding 
affinities and transport kinetics of wild-type and mutant forms of GltP. Sequence
alignments and phylogenetic analysis revealed close homologies of GltP with human
glutamate transporters involved in neurotransmission, neutral amino acid
transporters and with the archaeal aspartate transporter GltPh. Topology
predictions and comparisons with the crystal structure of GltPh were consistent
with eight transmembrane-spanning α-helices and two hairpin re-entrant loops in
GltP. Amplified expression of recombinant GltP with C-terminal affinity tags was 
achieved at 10% of total membrane protein in E. coli and purification to
homogeneity with a yield of 0.8 mg/litre. Binding of substrates to GltP in native
inner membranes and to purified protein solubilised in detergent was observed and
quantified using solid-state NMR and fluorescence spectroscopy, respectively. A
homology model of GltP docked with L-glutamate identified a putative binding site
and residues predicted to interact with substrate. Sequence alignments identified
further highly conserved residues predicted to have essential roles in GltP
function. Residues were investigated by measuring transport activities, kinetics 
and response to thiol-specific reagents in 42 site-specific mutants compared with
cysteine-less GltP (C256A) having an apparent affinity of initial rate transport 
(K m) for 3H-L-glutamate of 22.6 ± 5.5 μM in energised E. coli cells. This
confirmed GltP residues involved in substrate binding and transport, especially
in transmembrane helices VII and VIII.

DOI: 10.1007/s00232-016-9942-x 
PMID: 28025687  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

