
1. PLoS One. 2017 Jan 11;12(1):e0169565. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0169565.
eCollection 2017.

Bad to the Bone: On In Vitro and Ex Vivo Microbial Biofilm Ability to Directly
Destroy Colonized Bone Surfaces without Participation of Host Immunity or
Osteoclastogenesis.

Junka A(1), Szymczyk P(2), Ziółkowski G(2), Karuga-Kuzniewska E(3), Smutnicka
D(1), Bil-Lula I(4), Bartoszewicz M(1), Mahabady S(5), Sedghizadeh PP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Microbiology and Parasitology, Wroclaw Medical
University, Wroclaw, Poland.
(2)Center for Advanced Manufacturing Technologies (CAMT/FPC), Faculty of
Mechanical Engineering, Wroclaw University of Technology, Wroclaw, Poland.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases of Animals and Veterinary Administration,
Wroclaw University, Wroclaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland.
(5)Center for Biofilms and Craniofacial Molecular Biology, Ostrow School of
Dentistry of University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United
States of America.

Bone infections are a significant public health burden associated with morbidity 
and mortality in patients. Microbial biofilm pathogens are the causative agents
in chronic osteomyelitis. Research on the pathogenesis of osteomyelitis has
focused on indirect bone destruction by host immune cells and cytokines secondary
to microbial insult. Direct bone resorption by biofilm pathogens has not yet been
seriously considered. In this study, common osteomyelitis pathogens
(Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Candida albicans, and
Streptococcus mutans) were grown as biofilms in multiple in vitro and ex vivo
experiments to analyze quantitative and qualitative aspects of bone destruction
during infection. Pathogens were grown as single or mixed species biofilms on the
following substrates: hydroxyapatite, rat jawbone, or polystyrene wells, and in
various media. Biofilm growth was evaluated by scanning electron microscopy and
pH levels were monitored over time. Histomorphologic and quantitative effects of 
biofilms on tested substrates were analyzed by microcomputed tomography and
quantitative cultures. All tested biofilms demonstrated significant damage to
bone. Scanning electron microscopy indicated that all strains formed mature
biofilms within 7 days on all substrate surfaces regardless of media.
Experimental conditions impacted pH levels, although this had no impact on
biofilm growth or bone destruction. Presence of biofilm led to bone dissolution
with a decrease of total volume by 20.17±2.93% upon microcomputed tomography
analysis, which was statistically significant as compared to controls (p <0.05,
ANOVA). Quantitative cultures indicated that media and substrate did not impact
biofilm formation (Kruskall-Wallis test, post-hoc Dunne's test; p <0.05).
Overall, these results indicate that biofilms associated with osteomyelitis have 
the ability to directly resorb bone. These findings should lead to a more
complete understanding of the etiopathogenesis of osteomyelitis, where direct
bone resorption by biofilm is considered in addition to the well-known
osteoclastic and host cell destruction of bone.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0169565 
PMCID: PMC5226730
PMID: 28076372  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

