
1. mBio. 2017 Jan 10;8(1). pii: e02179-16. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02179-16.

Promyelocytic Leukemia Protein (PML) Controls Listeria monocytogenes Infection.

Ribet D(1)(2)(3), Lallemand-Breitenbach V(4)(5), Ferhi O(4)(5), Nahori
MA(1)(2)(3), Varet H(6)(7), de Thé H(8)(5), Cossart P(9)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Unité des Interactions Bactéries-Cellules, Paris, France.
(2)Inserm, U604, Paris, France.
(3)INRA, USC2020, Paris, France.
(4)Inserm, CNRS, Université Paris Diderot, Institut Universitaire Hématologie,
U944/UMR7212, Hôpital St. Louis, Paris, France.
(5)PSL, Collège de France, Paris, France.
(6)Institut Pasteur, Plate-forme Transcriptome et Epigenome, Biomics, Centre
d'Innovation et Recherche Technologique (Citech), Paris, France.
(7)Institut Pasteur, Hub Bioinformatique et Biostatistique, Centre de
Bioinformatique, Biostatistique et Biologie Intégrative (C3BI, USR 3756 IP CNRS),
Paris, France.
(8)Inserm, CNRS, Université Paris Diderot, Institut Universitaire Hématologie,
U944/UMR7212, Hôpital St. Louis, Paris, France hugues.dethe@inserm.fr
pascale.cossart@pasteur.fr.
(9)Institut Pasteur, Unité des Interactions Bactéries-Cellules, Paris, France
hugues.dethe@inserm.fr pascale.cossart@pasteur.fr.

The promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) is the main organizer of
stress-responsive subnuclear structures called PML nuclear bodies. These
structures recruit multiple interactors and modulate their abundance or their
posttranslational modifications, notably by the SUMO ubiquitin-like modifiers.
The involvement of PML in antiviral responses is well established. In contrast,
the role of PML in bacterial infection remains poorly characterized. Here, we
show that PML restricts infection by the pathogenic bacterium Listeria
monocytogenes but not by Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium. During
infection, PML undergoes oxidation-mediated multimerization, associates with the 
nuclear matrix, and becomes de-SUMOylated due to the pore-forming activity of the
Listeria toxin listeriolysin O (LLO). These events trigger an antibacterial
response that is not observed during in vitro infection by an LLO-defective
Listeria mutant, but which can be phenocopied by specific induction of PML
de-SUMOylation. Using transcriptomic and proteomic microarrays, we also
characterized a network of immunity genes and cytokines, which are regulated by
PML in response to Listeria infection but independently from the listeriolysin O 
toxin. Our study thus highlights two mechanistically distinct complementary roles
of PML in host responses against bacterial infection.IMPORTANCE: The
promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) is a eukaryotic protein that can polymerize 
in discrete nuclear assemblies known as PML nuclear bodies (NBs) and plays
essential roles in many different cellular processes. Key to its function, PML
can be posttranslationally modified by SUMO, a ubiquitin-like modifier.
Identification of the role of PML in antiviral defenses has been deeply
documented. In contrast, the role of PML in antibacterial defenses remains
elusive. Here, we identify two mechanistically distinct complementary roles of
PML in antibacterial responses against pathogens such as Listeria: (i) we show
that PML regulates the expression of immunity genes in response to bacterial
infection, and (ii) we unveil the fact that modification of PML SUMOylation by
bacterial pore-forming toxins is sensed as a danger signal, leading to a
restriction of bacterial intracellular multiplication. Taken together, our data
reinforce the concept that intranuclear bodies can dynamically regulate important
processes, such as defense against invaders.

Copyright © 2017 Ribet et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02179-16 
PMCID: PMC5225316
PMID: 28074026  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

