
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2016 Dec 26;6:195. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2016.00195.
eCollection 2016.

Sterol Regulatory Element-Binding Protein-1c Regulates Inflammasome Activation in
Gingival Fibroblasts Infected with High-Glucose-Treated Porphyromonas gingivalis.

Kuo HC(1), Chang LC(2), Chen TC(3), Lee KC(4), Lee KF(5), Chen CN(6), Yu HR(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Chang Gung University of Science and Technology
(CGUST)Chiayi, Taiwan; Research Center for Industry of Human Ecology and Research
Center for Chinese Herbal Medicine, College of Human Ecology, Chang Gung
University of Science and Technology (CGUST)Taoyuan, Taiwan; Chronic Diseases and
Health Promotion Research Center, Chang Gung University of Science and Technology
(CGUST)Chiayi, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Dentistry, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital Chiayi, Taiwan.
(3)Division of Nephrology Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung
University College of Medicine Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(4)Division of Colorectal Surgery, Department of Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital - Kaohsiung Medical Center Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Pathology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital Chiayi, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Biochemical Science and Technology, National Chiayi University
Chiayi, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital - Kaohsiung Medical
CenterKaohsiung, Taiwan; Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Science, Chang
Gung University College of MedicineKaohsiung, Taiwan.

Background:Porphyromonas gingivalis is a major bacterial species implicated in
the progression of periodontal disease, which is recognized as a common
complication of diabetes. The interleukin (IL)-1β, processed by the NLR family
pyrin domain containing 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome, has been identified as a target
for pathogenic infection of the inflammatory response. However, the effect of P. 
gingivalis in a high-glucose situation in the modulation of inflammasome
activation in human gingival fibroblasts (HGFs) is not well-understood.
Methods:P. gingivalis strain CCUG25226 was used to study the mechanisms
underlying the regulation of HGF NLRP3 expression by the infection of
high-glucose-treated P. gingivalis (HGPg). Results: HGF infection with HGPg
increases the expression of IL-1β and NLRP3. We further demonstrated that the
upregulation of sterol regulatory element-binding protein (SREBP)-1c by
activation of the Akt and p70S6K pathways is critical for HGPg-induced NLRP3
expression. We showed that the inhibition of Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) blocks the
Akt- and p70S6K-mediated SREBP-1c, NLRP3, and IL-1β expression. The effect of
HGPg on HGF signaling and NLRP3 expression is mediated by β1 integrin. In
addition, gingival tissues from diabetic patients with periodontal disease
exhibited higher NLRP3 and SREBP-1c expression. Conclusions: Our findings
identify the molecular pathways underlying HGPg-dependent NLRP3 inflammasome
expression in HGFs, providing insight into the effect of P. gingivalis invasion
in HGFs.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2016.00195 
PMCID: PMC5183582
PMID: 28083517  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

