
1. PLoS One. 2017 Jan 13;12(1):e0169514. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0169514.
eCollection 2017.

Profiles of Amino Acids and Acylcarnitines Related with Insecticide Exposure in
Culex quinquefasciatus (Say).

Martin-Park A(1), Gomez-Govea MA(2), Lopez-Monroy B(2), Treviño-Alvarado VM(3),
Torres-Sepúlveda MD(4), López-Uriarte GA(4), Villanueva-Segura OK(2),
Ruiz-Herrera MD(4), Martinez-Fierro ML(5), Delgado-Enciso I(6)(7), Flores-Suárez 
AE(2), White GS(8), Martínez de Villarreal LE(4), Ponce-Garcia G(2), Black WC
4th(1), Rodríguez-Sanchez IP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Pathology, Colorado State
University, Fort Collins, Colorado, United States of America.
(2)Departamento de Zoología de Invertebrados, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas
Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, San Nicolás de los Garza, Nuevo León, México.
(3)Cátedra de Bioinformática, Escuela de Medicina, Tecnológico de Monterrey,
Monterrey, Nuevo León, México.
(4)Departamento de Genética, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo 
León, Monterrey, Nuevo León, México.
(5)Unidad Académica de Medicina Humana, Laboratorio de Medicina Molecular
Universidad Autónoma de Zacatecas, Zacatecas, Zacatecas, México.
(6)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Colima, Colima, México.
(7)Instituto Estatal de Cáncer, Secretaria de Salud de Colima, Colima, México.
(8)The Coachella Valley Mosquito and Vector Control District, Indio, California, 
United States of America.

Culex quinquefasciatus Say is a vector of many pathogens of humans, and both
domestic and wild animals. Personal protection, reduction of larval habitats, and
chemical control are the best ways to reduce mosquito bites and, therefore, the
transmission of mosquito-borne pathogens. Currently, to reduce the risk of
transmission, the pyrethroids, and other insecticide groups have been extensively
used to control both larvae and adult mosquitoes. In this context, amino acids
and acylcarnitines have never been associated with insecticide exposure and or
insecticide resistance. It has been suggested that changes in acylcarnitines and 
amino acids profiles could be a powerful diagnostic tool for metabolic
alterations. Monitoring these changes could help to better understand the
mechanisms involved in insecticide resistance, complementing the strategies for
managing this phenomenon in the integrated resistance management. The purpose of 
the study was to determine the amino acids and acylcarnitines profiles in larvae 
of Cx. quinquefasciatus after the exposure to different insecticides. Bioassays
were performed on Cx. quinquefasciatus larvae exposed to the diagnostic doses
(DD) of the insecticides chlorpyrifos (0.001 μg/mL), temephos (0.002 μg/mL) and
permethrin (0.01 μg/mL). In each sample, we analyzed the profile of 12 amino
acids and 31 acylcarnitines by LC-MS/MS. A t-test was used to determine
statistically significant differences between groups and corrections of q-values.
Results indicates three changes, the amino acids arginine (ARG), free carnitine
(C0) and acetyl-carnitine (C2) that could be involved in energy production and
insecticide detoxification. We confirmed that concentrations of amino acids and
acylcarnitines in Cx. quinquefasciatus vary with respect to different
insecticides. The information generated contributes to understand the possible
mechanisms and metabolic changes occurring during insecticide exposure.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0169514 
PMCID: PMC5234828
PMID: 28085898  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

