
1. Cytometry A. 2017 Apr;91(4):372-381. doi: 10.1002/cyto.a.23050. Epub 2017 Jan 12.

Connected component masking accurately identifies the ratio of phagocytosed and
cell-bound particles in individual cells by imaging flow cytometry.

Fei C(1), Lillico DME(1), Hall B(2), Rieger AM(3), Stafford JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Alberta, Canada.
(2)EMD Millipore, Amnis, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta,
Alberta, Canada.

Innate immune cell-mediated recognition, capture, and engulfment of large
particulate targets such as bacteria is known as phagocytosis. This highly
dynamic cellular process involves a series of steps including receptor-mediated
target binding, phagocytic cup formation, pseudopod extension, and phagosome
closure, which depend on distinct actin polymerization events. Using flow
cytometry, precise determination of target locations relative to cell membranes
(i.e., surface-bound vs. fully engulfed/internalized) during the phagocytic
process is difficult to quantify. Here, we describe the application of new
analysis features within the IDEAS® software to distinguish internalized and
surface-bound particles on individual cells with a high degree of accuracy and
reproducibility. Through the use of connected component masks, the accurate
discrimination of surface-bound beads versus those internalized is clearly
demonstrated. In addition, we were able to further analyze the ratio of beads
that had been surface-bound or internalized within individual cells. This novel
method of analyzing the phagocytic process provides more accurate determination
of target-cell interactions that will assist in examination of the signalling
events that occur during the various stages of phagocytosis. © 2017 International
Society for Advancement of Cytometry.

© 2017 International Society for Advancement of Cytometry.

DOI: 10.1002/cyto.a.23050 
PMID: 28081295  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

