
1. J Thromb Haemost. 2017 Apr;15(4):744-757. doi: 10.1111/jth.13625. Epub 2017 Feb
16.

Thrombin contributes to protective immunity in pneumonia-derived sepsis via
fibrin polymerization and platelet-neutrophil interactions.

Claushuis TA(1)(2), de Stoppelaar SF(1)(2), Stroo I(1)(2)(3), Roelofs JJ(4),
Ottenhoff R(5), van der Poll T(1)(2)(6), Van't Veer C(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)Center for Infection and Immunity, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Immunopathology, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

Essentials Immunity and coagulation are linked during sepsis but the role of
thrombin is not fully elucidated. We investigated the effect of thrombin
inhibition on murine Klebsiella pneumosepsis outcome. Thrombin is crucial for
survival and limiting bacterial growth in pneumonia derived sepsis. Thrombin
improves host defense via fibrin and enhancement of platelet-neutrophil
interactions.SUMMARY: Background Innate immunity and coagulation are closely
linked during sepsis. Their interaction can be detrimental to the outcome because
of microvascular failure but can also enhance host defense. The role of thrombin 
therein has not been fully elucidated. Objective We aimed to investigate the
contribution of thrombin to the host response during pneumonia-derived sepsis.
Methods Mice treated with the specific thrombin inhibitor dabigatran or control
chow were infected with the common human sepsis pathogen Klebsiella (K.)
pneumoniae via the airways. In subsequent infection experiments, mice were
additionally treated with ancrod to deplete fibrinogen. Ex vivo Klebsiella growth
was assessed by incubating human whole blood or specific blood components in
various conditions with Klebsiella. Results Thrombin inhibition by dabigatran
enhanced bacterial outgrowth and spreading, and accelerated mortality. Thrombin
inhibition did not influence neutrophil recruitment to the lung or activation or 
neutrophil extracellular trap formation. Dabigatran reduced D-dimer formation and
fibrin deposition in the lung. Fibrin depletion also enhanced bacterial outgrowth
and spreading, and thrombin inhibition had no additional effect. Both thrombin
and fibrin polymerization inhibited ex vivo Klebsiella outgrowth in human whole
blood, which was neutrophil dependent, and the effect of thrombin required the
presence of platelets and platelet protease activated receptor-1. In vivo
thrombin inhibition reduced platelet-neutrophil complex formation and endothelial
cell activation, but did not prevent sepsis-induced thrombocytopenia or organ
damage. Conclusions These results suggest that thrombin plays an important role
in protective immunity during pneumonia-derived sepsis by fibrin polymerization
and enhancement of platelet-neutrophil interactions.

© 2017 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

DOI: 10.1111/jth.13625 
PMID: 28092405  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

