
1. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids. 2016;5:e351. doi: 10.1038/mtna.2016.52.

Reactivating Fetal Hemoglobin Expression in Human Adult Erythroblasts Through
BCL11A Knockdown Using Targeted Endonucleases.

Bjurström CF(1), Mojadidi M(1), Phillips J(2), Kuo C(3), Lai S(1), Lill GR(1),
Cooper A(1), Kaufman M(1), Urbinati F(1), Wang X(4), Hollis RP(1), Kohn DB(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, & Molecular Genetics, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
California, USA.
(4)Department of General Internal Medicine and Health Services Research,
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, & Molecular Genetics, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA; Department of Pediatrics, 
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA. Electronic
address: dkohn@mednet.ucla.edu.

We examined the efficiency, specificity, and mutational signatures of zinc finger
nucleases (ZFNs), transcriptional activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs), and
clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat (CRISPR)/Cas9 systems
designed to target the gene encoding the transcriptional repressor BCL11A, in
human K562 cells and human CD34+ progenitor cells. ZFNs and TALENs were delivered
as in vitro transcribed mRNA through electroporation; CRISPR/Cas9 was codelivered
by Cas9 mRNA with plasmid-encoded guideRNA (gRNA) (pU6.g1) or in vitro
transcribed gRNA (gR.1). Analyses of efficacy revealed that for these specific
reagents and the delivery methods used, the ZFNs gave rise to more allelic
disruption in the targeted locus compared to the TALENs and CRISPR/Cas9, which
was associated with increased levels of fetal hemoglobin in erythroid cells
produced in vitro from nuclease-treated CD34+ cells. Genome-wide analysis to
evaluate the specificity of the nucleases revealed high specificity of this
specific ZFN to the target site, while specific TALENs and CRISPRs evaluated
showed off-target cleavage activity. ZFN gene-edited CD34+ cells had the capacity
to engraft in NOD-PrkdcSCID-IL2Rγnull mice, while retaining multi-lineage
potential, in contrast to TALEN gene-edited CD34+ cells. CRISPR engraftment
levels mirrored the increased relative plasmid-mediated toxicity of pU6.g1/Cas9
in hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs), highlighting the value for the
further improvements of CRISPR/Cas9 delivery in primary human HSPCs.

Copyright © 2016 Official journal of the American Society of Gene & Cell Therapy.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1038/mtna.2016.52 
PMCID: PMC5023398
PMID: 28131278 

