
1. Oncotarget. 2017 Mar 28;8(13):20895-20908. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.14947.

Resveratrol induces mitochondria-mediated, caspase-independent apoptosis in
murine prostate cancer cells.

Kumar S(1), Eroglu E(2), Stokes JA 3rd(1), Scissum-Gunn K(1), Saldanha SN(1),
Singh UP(3), Manne U(4), Ponnazhagan S(4), Mishra MK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Research and Training, Department of Biological Sciences,
Alabama State University, Montgomery, AL, USA.
(2)Faculty of Engineering, Bioengineering Department, Celal Bayar University,
Muradiye, Manisa, Turkey.
(3)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, University of South
Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.

Found in the skins of red fruits, including grapes, resveratrol (RES) is a
polyphenolic compound with cancer chemopreventive activity. Because of this
activity, it has gained interest for scientific investigations. RES inhibits
tumor growth and progression by targeting mitochondria-dependent or -independent 
pathways. However, further investigations are needed to explore the underlying
mechanisms.The present study is focused on examining the role of RES-induced,
mitochondria-mediated, caspase-independent apoptosis of prostate cancer cells,
namely transgenic adenocarcinoma of mouse prostate (TRAMP) cells. These cells
were exposed to RES for various times, and cell killing, cell morphology,
mitochondrial membrane potential (Δψm), expression of Bax and Bcl2 proteins, the 
role of caspase-3, and DNA fragmentation were analyzed.TRAMP cells exposed to RES
showed decreased cell viability, altered cell morphology, and disrupted Δψm,
which led to aberrant expression of Bax and Bcl2 proteins. Furthermore, since the
caspase-3 inhibitor, z-VAD-fmk (benzyloxycarbonyl-valine-alanine-aspartic
acid-fluoromethyl ketone), had no appreciable impact on RES-induced cell killing,
the killing was evidently caspase-independent. In addition, RES treatment of
TRAMP-C1, TRAMP-C2, and TRAMP-C3 cells caused an appreciable breakage of genomic 
DNA into low-molecular-weight fragments.These findings show that, in inhibition
of proliferation of TRAMP cells, RES induces mitochondria-mediated,
caspase-independent apoptosis. Therefore, RES may be utilized as a therapeutic
agent to control the proliferation and growth of cancer cells.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.14947 
PMCID: PMC5400554
PMID: 28157696  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

