
1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2017 Apr;85:44-55. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2017.01.021.
Epub 2017 Feb 3.

Loss of Ssq1 leads to mitochondrial dysfunction, activation of autophagy and cell
cycle arrest due to iron overload triggered by mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster 
assembly defects in Candida albicans.

Dong Y(1), Zhang D(2), Yu Q(2), Zhao Q(2), Xiao C(2), Zhang K(2), Jia C(2), Chen 
S(2), Zhang B(2), Zhang B(3), Li M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology and Technology, Ministry of
Education, Department of Microbiology, College of Life Sciences, Nankai
University, Tianjin, PR China; The State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant
Disease and Insect Pests, Institute of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, PR China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology and Technology, Ministry of
Education, Department of Microbiology, College of Life Sciences, Nankai
University, Tianjin, PR China.
(3)Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tianjin, PR China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology and Technology, Ministry of
Education, Department of Microbiology, College of Life Sciences, Nankai
University, Tianjin, PR China. Electronic address: nklimingchun@163.com.

Iron-sulfur clusters perform essential functions in enzymatic catalysis and
homeostatic regulation. Here we for the first time identified Ssq1 as an
essential component for iron-sulfur cluster assembly in Candida albicans. Ssq1
played an important role in cell growth. Shutting off SSQ1 led to accumulation of
intracellular iron, especially in mitochondria, and disorder of intracellular
iron regulation. In tetO-SSQ1, iron overloading triggered the oxidative damage of
mitochondrial function. Surprisingly, disruption of SSQ1 activated autophagic
pathway. The mitochondrial dysfunction was further aggravated when CCZ1 (which is
essential for autophagy) and SSQ1 was simultaneously deleted, suggesting that
autophagy played a critical role in maintenance of mitochondrial function in
tetO-SSQ1. In addition, double deletion of SSQ1 and CCZ1 further elevated
cellular iron levels in comparison with tetO-SSQ1, indicating that autophagy
participated in maintenance of iron homeostasis. Furthermore, we found that loss 
of SSQ1 led to increasing protein expression of Rnr1 and redistribution of Rnr2
from the nucleus to cytoplasm, and further resulted in cell cycle arrest. The
results implied that cell cycle arrest was caused by activating the checkpoint
pathway because of impairing the iron-sulfur cluster assembly in tetO-SSQ1.
Shutting off SSQ1 led to a significant defect in filamentous development.
Interestingly, the tetO-SSQ1ccz1Δ/Δ growth was inhibited on hyphae-inducing solid
media. Both tetO-SSQ1 and tetO-SSQ1ccz1Δ/Δ exhibited extremely attenuated
virulence, indicating that Ssq1 might provide a promising target for antifungal
drugs development. In summary, our findings provide new insights into the
understanding of iron-sulfur cluster assembly-related gene in C. albicans.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2017.01.021 
PMID: 28163187  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

