
1. J Tissue Viability. 2017 May;26(2):131-137. doi: 10.1016/j.jtv.2017.01.004. Epub 
2017 Feb 1.

Maltodextrin/ascorbic acid stimulates wound closure by increasing collagen
turnover and TGF-β1 expression in vitro and changing the stage of inflammation
from chronic to acute in vivo.

Salgado RM(1), Cruz-Castañeda O(2), Elizondo-Vázquez F(2), Pat L(2), De la Garza 
A(3), Cano-Colín S(4), Baena-Ocampo L(5), Krötzsch E(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Connective Tissue, Centro Nacional de Investigación y Atención
de Quemados, Instituto Nacional de Rehabilitación, Mexico City, Mexico.
(2)Wound Care Clinic, Hospital Regional "General Ignacio Zaragoza", Mexico City, 
Mexico.
(3)UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital, Oakland, USA.
(4)Unidad de Biología Molecular y Medicina Genómica, Instituto de Investigaciones
Biomédicas, UNAM/Instituto de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán,
Mexico City, Mexico.
(5)Department of Pathology, Hospital Ángeles Acoxpa, Mexico City, Mexico.
(6)Laboratory of Connective Tissue, Centro Nacional de Investigación y Atención
de Quemados, Instituto Nacional de Rehabilitación, Mexico City, Mexico.
Electronic address: kroted@yahoo.com.mx.

It has been reported that carbohydrates confer physicochemical properties to the 
wound environment that improves tissue repair. We evaluated in vitro and in vivo 
wound healing during maltodextrin/ascorbic acid treatment. In a fibroblast
monolayer scratch assay, we demonstrated that maltodextrin/ascorbic acid
stimulated monolayer repair by increasing collagen turnover coordinately with
TGF-β1 expression (rising TGF-β1 and MMP-1 expression, as well as gelatinase
activity, while TIMP-1 was diminished), similar to in vivo trends. On the other
hand, we observed that venous leg ulcers treated with maltodextrin/ascorbic acid 
diminished microorganism population and improved wound repair during a 12 week
period. When maltodextrin/ascorbic acid treatment was compared with zinc oxide,
almost four fold wound closure was evidenced. Tissue architecture and granulation
were improved after the carbohydrate treatment also, since patients that received
maltodextrin/ascorbic acid showed lower type I collagen fiber levels and
increased extracellular alkaline phosphatase activity and blood vessels than
those treated with zinc oxide. We hypothesize that maltodextrin/ascorbic acid
treatment stimulated tissue repair of chronic wounds by changing the stage of
inflammation and modifying collagen turnover directly through fibroblast
response.

Copyright © 2017 Tissue Viability Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtv.2017.01.004 
PMID: 28162862  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

