
1. PLoS One. 2017 Feb 13;12(2):e0171191. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0171191.
eCollection 2017.

TIMP1 and MMP9 are predictors of mortality in septic patients in the emergency
department and intensive care unit unlike MMP9/TIMP1 ratio: Multivariate model.

Niño ME(1), Serrano SE(1), Niño DC(2), McCosham DM(2), Cardenas ME(3), Villareal 
VP(2), Lopez M(4), Pazin-Filho A(5), Jaimes FA(6), Cunha F(7), Schulz R(8),
Torres-Dueñas D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, Medicine Program, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Universidad Autónoma de Bucaramanga, Bucaramanga, Santander, Colombia.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Medicine Program, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Universidad Autónoma de Bucaramanga, Bucaramanga, Santander, Colombia.
(3)Microbiology and Inmunology Department, Medicine Program, Faculty of Health
Sciences, Universidad Autónoma de Bucaramanga, Bucaramanga, Santander, Colombia.
(4)Biotechnology Department, Enterprise Technology Center, Fundación
Cardiovascular de Colombia, Bucaramanga, Santander, Colombia.
(5)Department of Medical Clinics, Emergency unit, Faculty of Medicine,
Universidade de Sao Paulo, Ribeirao preto, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, School Of Medicine, Universidad de Antioquia,
Medellin, Antioquia, Colombia.
(7)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Universidade de Sao Paulo,
Ribeirao preto, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(8)Departments of Pediatrics and Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine & Dentistry,
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: Matrix metalloproteinases and tissue inhibitors of
metalloproteinases could be promising biomarkers for establishing prognosis
during the development of sepsis. It is necessary to clarify the relationship
between matrix metalloproteinases and their tissue inhibitors. We conducted a
cohort study with 563 septic patients, in order to elucidate the biological role 
and significance of these inflammatory biomarkers and their relationship to the
severity and mortality of patients with sepsis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A multicentric prospective cohort was performed. The
sample was composed of patients who had sepsis as defined by the International
Conference 2001. Serum procalcitonin, creatinine, urea nitrogen, C-Reactive
protein, TIMP1, TIMP2, MMP2 and MMP9 were quantified; each patient was followed
until death or up to 30 days. A descriptive analysis was performed by calculating
the mean and the 95% confidence interval for continuous variables and proportions
for categorical variables. A multivariate logistic regression model was
constructed by the method of intentional selection of covariates with mortality
at 30 days as dependent variable and all the other variables as predictors.
RESULTS: Of the 563 patients, 68 patients (12.1%) died within the first 30 days
of hospitalization in the ICU. The mean values for TIMP1, TIMP2 and MMP2 were
lower in survivors, MMP9 was higher in survivors. Multivariate logistic
regression showed that age, SOFA and Charlson scores, along with TIMP1
concentration, were statistically associated with mortality at 30 days of septic 
patients; serum MMP9 was not statistically associated with mortality of patients,
but was a confounder of the TIMP1 variable.
CONCLUSION: It could be argued that plasma levels of TIMP1 should be considered
as a promising prognostic biomarker in the setting of sepsis. Additionally, this 
study, like other studies with large numbers of septic patients does not support 
the predictive value of TIMP1 / MMP9.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0171191 
PMCID: PMC5305237
PMID: 28192449  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

