
1. Sci Adv. 2017 Feb 10;3(2):e1601897. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.1601897. eCollection 2017
Feb.

Hypoxia causes preservation of labile organic matter and changes seafloor
microbial community composition (Black Sea).

Jessen GL(1), Lichtschlag A(1), Ramette A(1), Pantoja S(2), Rossel PE(3),
Schubert CJ(4), Struck U(5), Boetius A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology, Bremen, Germany.; HGF MPG Joint 
Research Group for Deep-Sea Ecology and Technology, Alfred Wegener Institute,
Helmholtz Centre for Polar and Marine Sciences, Bremerhaven, Germany.
(2)Department of Oceanography and COPAS Sur-Austral, University of Concepción,
Concepción, Chile.
(3)Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology, Bremen, Germany.; HGF MPG Joint 
Research Group for Deep-Sea Ecology and Technology, Alfred Wegener Institute,
Helmholtz Centre for Polar and Marine Sciences, Bremerhaven, Germany.; Research
Group for Marine Geochemistry (ICBM-MPI Bridging Group), Institute for Chemistry 
and Biology of the Marine Environment (ICBM), University of Oldenburg, Oldenburg,
Germany.
(4)Department of Surface Waters-Research and Management, Swiss Federal Institute 
of Aquatic Science and Technology, Kastanienbaum, Switzerland.
(5)Museum für Naturkunde, Leibniz-Institut für Evolutions- und
Biodiversitätsforschung, Berlin, Germany.

Bottom-water oxygen supply is a key factor governing the biogeochemistry and
community composition of marine sediments. Whether it also determines carbon
burial rates remains controversial. We investigated the effect of varying oxygen 
concentrations (170 to 0 μM O2) on microbial remineralization of organic matter
in seafloor sediments and on community diversity of the northwestern Crimean
shelf break. This study shows that 50% more organic matter is preserved in
surface sediments exposed to hypoxia compared to oxic bottom waters. Hypoxic
conditions inhibit bioturbation and decreased remineralization rates even within 
short periods of a few days. These conditions led to the accumulation of
threefold more phytodetritus pigments within 40 years compared to the oxic zone. 
Bacterial community structure also differed between oxic, hypoxic, and anoxic
zones. Functional groups relevant in the degradation of particulate organic
matter, such as Flavobacteriia, Gammaproteobacteria, and Deltaproteobacteria,
changed with decreasing oxygenation, and the microbial community of the hypoxic
zone took longer to degrade similar amounts of deposited reactive matter. We
conclude that hypoxic bottom-water conditions-even on short time
scales-substantially increase the preservation potential of organic matter
because of the negative effects on benthic fauna and particle mixing and by
favoring anaerobic processes, including sulfurization of matter.

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.1601897 
PMCID: PMC5302875
PMID: 28246637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

