
1. Front Oncol. 2017 Feb 22;7:24. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2017.00024. eCollection 2017.

The Unique Molecular and Cellular Microenvironment of Ovarian Cancer.

Worzfeld T(1), Pogge von Strandmann E(2), Huber M(3), Adhikary T(4), Wagner U(5),
Reinartz S(6), Müller R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, Biochemical-Pharmacological Center (BPC), Philipps 
University, Marburg, Germany; Department of Pharmacology, Max-Planck-Institute
for Heart and Lung Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany.
(2)Experimental Tumor Research, Clinic for Hematology, Oncology and Immunology,
Center for Tumor Biology and Immunology, Philipps University , Marburg , Germany.
(3)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, Biomedical Research Center,
Philipps University , Marburg , Germany.
(4)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research, Center for Tumor Biology
and Immunology, Philipps University , Marburg , Germany.
(5)Clinic for Gynecology, Gynecological Oncology and Gynecological Endocrinology,
University Hospital of Giessen and Marburg (UKGM) , Marburg , Germany.
(6)Clinic for Gynecology, Gynecological Oncology and Gynecological Endocrinology,
Center for Tumor Biology and Immunology (ZTI), Philipps University , Marburg ,
Germany.

The reciprocal interplay of cancer cells and host cells is an indispensable
prerequisite for tumor growth and progression. Cells of both the innate and
adaptive immune system, in particular tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) and T
cells, as well as cancer-associated fibroblasts enter into a malicious liaison
with tumor cells to create a tumor-promoting and immunosuppressive tumor
microenvironment (TME). Ovarian cancer, the most lethal of all gynecological
malignancies, is characterized by a unique TME that enables specific and
efficient metastatic routes, impairs immune surveillance, and mediates therapy
resistance. A characteristic feature of the ovarian cancer TME is the role of
resident host cells, in particular activated mesothelial cells, which line the
peritoneal cavity in huge numbers, as well as adipocytes of the omentum, the
preferred site of metastatic lesions. Another crucial factor is the peritoneal
fluid, which enables the transcoelomic spread of tumor cells to other pelvic and 
peritoneal organs, and occurs at more advanced stages as a malignancy-associated 
effusion. This ascites is rich in tumor-promoting soluble factors, extracellular 
vesicles and detached cancer cells as well as large numbers of T cells, TAMs, and
other host cells, which cooperate with resident host cells to support tumor
progression and immune evasion. In this review, we summarize and discuss our
current knowledge of the cellular and molecular interactions that govern this
interplay with a focus on signaling networks formed by cytokines, lipids, and
extracellular vesicles; the pathophysiologial roles of TAMs and T cells; the
mechanism of transcoelomic metastasis; and the cell type selective processing of 
signals from the TME.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2017.00024 
PMCID: PMC5319992
PMID: 28275576 

