
1. Front Microbiol. 2017 Feb 24;8:266. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00266. eCollection
2017.

Response of Bacterial Communities to Different Detritus Compositions in Arctic
Deep-Sea Sediments.

Hoffmann K(1), Hassenrück C(2), Salman-Carvalho V(1), Holtappels M(3), Bienhold
C(1).

Author information: 
(1)HGF-MPG Joint Research Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck
Institute for Marine MicrobiologyBremen, Germany; Biosciences, HGF-MPG Joint
Research Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Alfred-Wegener-Institut
Helmholtz-Zentrum für Polar- und MeeresforschungBremerhaven, Germany.
(2)HGF-MPG Joint Research Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck
Institute for Marine Microbiology Bremen, Germany.
(3)Biosciences, Bentho-Pelagic Processes, Alfred-Wegener-Institut
Helmholtz-Zentrum für Polar- und Meeresforschung Bremerhaven, Germany.

Benthic deep-sea communities are largely dependent on particle flux from surface 
waters. In the Arctic Ocean, environmental changes occur more rapidly than in
other ocean regions, and have major effects on the export of organic matter to
the deep sea. Because bacteria constitute the majority of deep-sea benthic
biomass and influence global element cycles, it is important to better understand
how changes in organic matter input will affect bacterial communities at the
Arctic seafloor. In a multidisciplinary ex situ experiment, benthic bacterial
deep-sea communities from the Long-Term Ecological Research Observatory
HAUSGARTEN were supplemented with different types of habitat-related detritus
(chitin, Arctic algae) and incubated for 23 days under in situ conditions. Chitin
addition caused strong changes in community activity, while community structure
remained similar to unfed control incubations. In contrast, the addition of
phytodetritus resulted in strong changes in community composition, accompanied by
increased community activity, indicating the need for adaptation in these
treatments. High-throughput sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene and 16S rRNA revealed
distinct taxonomic groups of potentially fast-growing, opportunistic bacteria in 
the different detritus treatments. Compared to the unfed control, Colwelliaceae, 
Psychromonadaceae, and Oceanospirillaceae increased in relative abundance in the 
chitin treatment, whereas Flavobacteriaceae, Marinilabiaceae, and
Pseudoalteromonadaceae increased in the phytodetritus treatments. Hence, these
groups may constitute indicator taxa for the different organic matter sources at 
this study site. In summary, differences in community structure and in the uptake
and remineralization of carbon in the different treatments suggest an effect of
organic matter quality on bacterial diversity as well as on carbon turnover at
the seafloor, an important feedback mechanism to be considered in future climate 
change scenarios.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00266 
PMCID: PMC5323390
PMID: 28286496 

