
1. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2017 Mar 17;8(1):67. doi: 10.1186/s13287-017-0519-0.

Cytokine-free directed differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells
efficiently produces hemogenic endothelium with lymphoid potential.

Galat Y(1), Dambaeva S(2), Elcheva I(1)(3), Khanolkar A(4), Beaman K(2),
Iannaccone PM(5), Galat V(6).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Stanley Manne Children's Research Institute,
Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Rosalind Franklin University of
Medicine and Science, North Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Present Address: Department of Pediatrics, Division of Hematology & Oncology, 
Penn State Hershey College of Medicine, Hershey, PA, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Stanley Manne Children's Research Institute, Ann &
Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Northwestern University Feinberg 
School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Developmental Biology Program, Stanley Manne
Children's Research Institute, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of
Chicago, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, Developmental Biology Program, Stanley Manne
Children's Research Institute, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of
Chicago, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
v-galat@northwestern.edu.

BACKGROUND: The robust generation of human hematopoietic progenitor cells from
induced or embryonic pluripotent stem cells would be beneficial for multiple
areas of research, including mechanistic studies of hematopoiesis, the
development of cellular therapies for autoimmune diseases, induced transplant
tolerance, anticancer immunotherapies, disease modeling, and drug/toxicity
screening. Over the past years, significant progress has been made in identifying
effective protocols for hematopoietic differentiation from pluripotent stem cells
and understanding stages of mesodermal, endothelial, and hematopoietic
specification. Thus, it has been shown that variations in cytokine and inhibitory
molecule treatments in the first few days of hematopoietic differentiation define
primitive versus definitive potential of produced hematopoietic progenitor cells.
The majority of current feeder-free, defined systems for hematopoietic induction 
from pluripotent stem cells include prolonged incubations with various cytokines 
that make the differentiation process complex and time consuming. We established 
that the application of Wnt agonist CHIR99021 efficiently promotes
differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells in the absence of any
hematopoietic cytokines to the stage of hemogenic endothelium capable of
definitive hematopoiesis.
METHODS: The hemogenic endothelium differentiation was accomplished in an
adherent, serum-free culture system by applying CHIR99021. Hemogenic endothelium 
progenitor cells were isolated on day 5 of differentiation and evaluated for
their endothelial, myeloid, and lymphoid potential.
RESULTS: Monolayer induction based on GSK3 inhibition, described here, yielded a 
large number of CD31+CD34+ hemogenic endothelium cells. When isolated and
propagated in adherent conditions, these progenitors gave rise to mature
endothelium. When further cocultured with OP9 mouse stromal cells, these
progenitors gave rise to various cells of myeloid lineages as well as natural
killer lymphoid, T-lymphoid, and B-lymphoid cells.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study substantiate a method that significantly
reduces the complexity of current protocols for hematopoietic induction, offers a
defined system to study the factors that affect the early stages of
hematopoiesis, and provides a new route of lymphoid and myeloid cell derivation
from human pluripotent stem cells, thus enhancing their use in translational
medicine.

DOI: 10.1186/s13287-017-0519-0 
PMCID: PMC5356295
PMID: 28302184  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

