
1. Diabetes. 2017 Jun;66(6):1535-1547. doi: 10.2337/db16-1354. Epub 2017 Mar 21.

Deletion of Macrophage Mineralocorticoid Receptor Protects Hepatic Steatosis and 
Insulin Resistance Through ERα/HGF/Met Pathway.

Zhang YY(1)(2)(3), Li C(1)(2)(3), Yao GF(3), Du LJ(1)(2)(3), Liu Y(1)(2)(3),
Zheng XJ(1)(2)(3), Yan S(3), Sun JY(3), Liu Y(1)(2), Liu MZ(3), Zhang X(4), Wei
G(4), Tong W(5), Chen X(5), Wu Y(6)(7), Sun S(2)(8), Liu S(9), Ding Q(3), Yu
Y(10), Yin H(3), Duan SZ(11)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Oral Microbiology, Shanghai Research Institute of Stomatology,
Ninth People's Hospital, School of Stomatology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Stomatology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School
of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Computational Biology, CAS-MPG Partner Institute for
Computational Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, Ren-Min Hospital of Wuhan University,
Wuhan, China.
(6)Division of Cancer Research and Training, Department of Internal Medicine,
Charles R. Drew University of Medicine and Science, Los Angeles, CA.
(7)David Geffen School of Medicine at University of California Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA.
(8)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial-Head Neck Oncology, Ninth People's
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(9)Shanghai Cancer Center and Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Key Laboratory
of Breast Cancer in Shanghai, Cancer Institute, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China.
(10)Department of Pharmacology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical
University, Tianjin, China.
(11)Laboratory of Oral Microbiology, Shanghai Research Institute of Stomatology, 
Ninth People's Hospital, School of Stomatology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China duansz@shsmu.edu.cn.

Although the importance of macrophages in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
(NAFLD) and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) has been recognized, how macrophages 
affect hepatocytes remains elusive. Mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) has been
implicated to play important roles in NAFLD and T2DM. However, cellular and
molecular mechanisms are largely unknown. We report that myeloid MR knockout
(MRKO) improves glucose intolerance, insulin resistance, and hepatic steatosis in
obese mice. Estrogen signaling is sufficient and necessary for such improvements.
Hepatic gene and protein expression suggests that MRKO reduces hepatic
lipogenesis and lipid storage. In the presence of estrogen, MRKO in macrophages
decreases lipid accumulation and increases insulin sensitivity of hepatocytes
through hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)/Met signaling. MR directly regulates
estrogen receptor 1 (Esr1 [encoding ERα]) in macrophages. Knockdown of hepatic
Met eliminates the beneficial effects of MRKO in female obese mice. These
findings identify a novel MR/ERα/HGF/Met pathway that conveys metabolic signaling
from macrophages to hepatocytes in hepatic steatosis and insulin resistance and
provide potential new therapeutic strategies for NAFLD and T2DM.

© 2017 by the American Diabetes Association.

DOI: 10.2337/db16-1354 
PMCID: PMC5860190
PMID: 28325853  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

