
1. Oncoimmunology. 2017 Jan 17;6(2):e1273301. doi: 10.1080/2162402X.2016.1273301.
eCollection 2017.

Pappalysin-1 T cell receptor transgenic allo-restricted T cells kill Ewing
sarcoma in vitro and in vivo.

Kirschner A(1), Thiede M(1), Grünewald TG(2), Alba Rubio R(3), Richter GH(4),
Kirchner T(5), Busch DH(6), Burdach S(7), Thiel U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Functional Genomics and Transplantation Biology, Department of 
Pediatrics and Children's Cancer Research Center, Klinikum rechts der Isar,
Technische Universität München , München, Germany.
(2)Max-Eder Research Group for Pediatric Sarcoma Biology, Institute of Pathology 
of the LMU Munich, München, Germany; German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg,
Germany; German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Max-Eder Research Group for Pediatric Sarcoma Biology, Institute of Pathology 
of the LMU Munich , München, Germany.
(4)Laboratory for Functional Genomics and Transplantation Biology, Department of 
Pediatrics and Children's Cancer Research Center, Klinikum rechts der Isar,
Technische Universität München, München, Germany; German Cancer Consortium
(DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany; German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg,
Germany.
(5)Max-Eder Research Group for Pediatric Sarcoma Biology, Institute of Pathology 
of the LMU Munich, München, Germany; German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg,
Germany; German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany; Comprehensive
Cancer Center (CCC) Munich, München, Germany.
(6)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, Technische
Universität München , München, Germany.
(7)Laboratory for Functional Genomics and Transplantation Biology, Department of 
Pediatrics and Children's Cancer Research Center, Klinikum rechts der Isar,
Technische Universität München, München, Germany; German Cancer Consortium
(DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany; German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg,
Germany; Comprehensive Cancer Center (CCC) Munich, München, Germany.

Pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A (PAPPA), also known as pappalysin, is a
member of the insulin-like growth factor (IGF) family. PAPPA acts as a protease, 
cleaving IGF inhibitors, i.e., IGF binding proteins (IGFBPs), thereby setting
free IGFs. The insulin/IGF-axis is involved in cancer in general and in Ewing
sarcoma (ES) in particular. ES is a highly malignant bone tumor characterized by 
early metastatic spread. PAPPA is associated with various cancers. It is
overexpressed and required for proliferation in ES. PAPPA also stimulates normal 
bone growth. We isolated HLA-A*02:01+/peptide-restricted T cells from A*02:01-
healthy donors directed against PAPPA, generated by priming with A*02:01+ PAPPA
peptide loaded dendritic cells. After TCR identification, retrovirally TCR
transduced CD8+ T cells were assessed for their in vitro specificity and in vivo 
efficacy in human ES bearing Rag2-/-γc-/- mice. Engraftment in mice and tumor
infiltration of TCR transgenic T cells in the mice was evaluated. The TCR
transgenic T cell clone PAPPA-2G6 demonstrated specific reactivity toward
HLA-A*02:01+/PAPPA+ ES cell lines. We furthermore detected circulating TCR
transgenic T cells in the blood in Rag2-/-γc-/- mice and in vivo engraftment in
bone marrow. Tumor growth in mice with xenografted ES was significantly reduced
after treatment with PAPPA-2G6 TCR transgenic T cells in contrast to controls.
Tumors of treated mice revealed tumor-infiltrating PAPPA-2G6 TCR transgenic T
cells. In summary, we demonstrate that PAPPA is a first-rate target for TCR-based
immunotherapy of ES.

DOI: 10.1080/2162402X.2016.1273301 
PMCID: PMC5353903
PMID: 28344885 

