
1. PLoS One. 2017 Mar 30;12(3):e0172499. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0172499.
eCollection 2017.

A multifunctional bioactive material that stimulates osteogenesis and promotes
the vascularization bone marrow stem cells and their resistance to bacterial
infection.

Ma C(1)(2), Wei Q(3), Cao B(1), Cheng X(4), Tian J(5), Pu H(6), Yusufu A(1), Cao 
L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics Center, First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang
Medical University, Urumqi, China.
(2)Department of Orthopedics Center, First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang
Medical University Chang Ji Branch, Chang Ji, China.
(3)Xinjiang Key Laboratory of Medical Animal Model Research, Clinical Medical
Research Institute of the First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical
University, Urumqi, China.
(4)Carders Health Care No. 4 Department of Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region
People's Hospital, Urumqi, China.
(5)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The first people's Hospital of Urumqi,
Urumqi, China.
(6)Department of Science and Research Education Center, First Affiliated Hospital
of Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, China.

The main limitation of tissue engineering lies in the inability to stimulate
osteogenesis, angiogenesis of stem cells and broad-spectrum antimicrobial
activity. However, the development of multifunctional bioactive materials with
these capabilities remains a great challenge. In this study, we prepared
mesoporous silica nanoparticles encapsulated with silver nanocrystals (AG-MSN)
with uniform sphere size and mesopores. Platelet-derived growth factor BB
(PDGF-BB) was effectively loaded in the AG-MSN mesopores (P-AG-MSN). The silicon 
ions (Si) released by P-AG-MSN stimulate osteogenic differentiation of bone
marrow stromal cells (BMSC) by activating the alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity
of bone-related genes and increasing protein (OCN, RUNX2 and OPN) expression. Ag+
ions could be slowly released from the interior of the shell, highlighting their 
durable antibacterial activity. The sustained release of PDGF-BB from P-AG-MSN
stimulated the angiogenic differentiation of BMSC, as indicated by the enhanced
secretion of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), HIF-1α, HGF and ANG-1 and
protein expression. Our results show that P-AG-MSN can clearly promote BMSC
osteostimulation and vascularization. This research serves as a preliminary study
of the utilization of this multifunctional mixture to fabricate a new active
biological scaffold that integrates BMSC osteostimulation, vascularization and
bactericidal effects by 3D printing technology.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0172499 
PMCID: PMC5373515
PMID: 28358890  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

