
1. Oncogene. 2017 Aug 10;36(32):4619-4628. doi: 10.1038/onc.2017.85. Epub 2017 Apr
3.

Interferon γ is a STAT1-dependent direct inducer of BCL6 expression in
imatinib-treated chronic myeloid leukemia cells.

Madapura HS(1), Nagy N(1), Ujvari D(2), Kallas T(1), Kröhnke MCL(1), Amu S(1),
Björkholm M(3), Stenke L(3), Mandal PK(4), McMurray JS(4), Keszei M(1),
Westerberg LS(1), Cheng H(5), Xue F(5), Klein G(1), Klein E(1), Salamon D(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.
(3)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital
Solna and Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(5)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Maryland School of
Pharmacy, Baltimore, MD, USA.

B-cell CLL/lymphoma 6 (BCL6) exerts oncogenic effects in several human
hematopoietic malignancies including chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), where BCL6
expression was shown to be essential for CML stem cell survival and self-renewal 
during imatinib mesylate (IM) treatment. As several lines of evidence suggest
that interferon γ (IFNγ) production in CML patients might have a central role in 
the response to tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) therapy, we analyzed if IFNγ
modulates BCL6 expression in CML cells. Although separate IFNγ or IM treatment
only slightly upregulated BCL6 expression, combined treatment induced remarkable 
BCL6 upregulation in CML lines and primary human CD34+ CML stem cells. We proved 
that during combined treatment, inhibition of constitutive signal transducer and 
activator of transcription (STAT) 5 activation by IM allowed the specific
enhancement of the STAT1 dependent, direct upregulation of BCL6 by IFNγ in CML
cells. By using colony-forming assay, we found that IFNγ enhanced the ex vivo
colony or cluster-forming capacity of human CML stem cells in the absence or
presence of IM, respectively. Furthermore, inhibition of the transcriptional
repressor function of BCL6 in the presence of IM and IFNγ almost completely
blocked the cluster formation of human CML stem cells. On the other hand, by
using small interfering RNA knockdown of BCL6, we demonstrated that in an
IM-treated CML line the antiapoptotic effect of IFNγ was independent of BCL6
upregulation. We found that IFNγ also upregulated several antiapoptotic members
of the BCL2 and BIRC gene families in CML cells, including the long isoform of
MCL1, which proved to be essential for the antiapoptotic effect of IFNγ in an
IM-treated CML line. Our results suggest that combination of TKIs with BCL6 and
MCL1 inhibitors may potentially lead to the complete eradication of CML stem
cells.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2017.85 
PMID: 28368400  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

