
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2017 Mar 15;7:76. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00076.
eCollection 2017.

Different Phenotypes of Mature Biofilm in Flavobacterium psychrophilum Share a
Potential for Virulence That Differs from Planktonic State.

Levipan HA(1), Avendaño-Herrera R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Patología de Organismos Acuáticos y Biotecnología Acuícola,
Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Andres BelloViña del Mar, Chile;
Interdisciplinary Center for Aquaculture ResearchConcepción, Chile.
(2)Laboratorio de Patología de Organismos Acuáticos y Biotecnología Acuícola,
Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Andres BelloViña del Mar, Chile;
Interdisciplinary Center for Aquaculture ResearchConcepción, Chile; Centro de
Investigación Marina QuintayValparaíso, Chile.

Flavobacterium psychrophilum is the etiological agent of bacterial coldwater
disease and the rainbow trout fry syndrome in salmonid aquaculture worldwide.
However, there have been few studies into the capacity of F. psychrophilum to
form biofilms and how these cellular accretions differ from planktonic cells or
how they affect potential virulence. We evaluated the biofilm formation by three 
Chilean isolates of F. psychrophilum (LM-02-Fp, LM-06-Fp, and LM-13-Fp) and two
non-Chilean strains (JIP02/86 and NCMB1947T), and compared biofilm and planktonic
states to obtain insights into expression differences of virulence- and
biofilm-related genes (VBRGs). Our findings are based on scanning confocal laser 
microscopy (SCLM) and LIVE/DEAD staining, enzymatic reactions, reverse
transcription-quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) of genes encoding putative virulence
factors, and transcriptomes (RNA-Seq). The LM-02-Fp and NCMB1947T strains were
the strongest and weakest biofilm producers, respectively. The strong-biofilm
producer showed different physiological cell states distributed in different
layers of mature biofilms, whereas the NCMB1947T biofilms consisted of cells
arranged in a monolayer. WGA-binding exopolysaccharides would be the main
components of their corresponding extracellular matrices. Transcriptomes of F.
psychrophilum NCMB1947T and LM-02-Fp were clustered by state (biofilm vs.
planktonic) rather than by strain, indicating important state-dependent
differences in gene expression. Analysis of differentially expressed genes
between states identified putative VBRGs involved in polysaccharide biosynthesis,
lateral gene transfer, membrane transport (e.g., for drugs and Fe3+), sensory
mechanisms, and adhesion, and indicated that about 60-100% of VBRGs involved in
these processes was significantly upregulated in the biofilm state. Conversely,
upregulated motility-related genes in the biofilm state were not identified,
whereas a lower fraction of proteolysis-related genes (33%) was upregulated in
biofilms. In summary, F. psychrophilum strains that produce different biofilm
phenotypes show global transcriptional activity in the mature biofilm state that 
differs significantly from their planktonic counterparts. Also, different biofilm
phenotypes share a genetic potential for virulence that is transcriptionally
enhanced with respect to free-living cells. Our results suggest that the F.
psychrophilum biofilm lifestyle acts as a reservoir for a given set of putative
virulence factors, and recommend a deeper understanding of which could help
prevent recurring infections in salmonid farms.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00076 
PMCID: PMC5350093
PMID: 28361040  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

