
1. J Bacteriol. 2017 May 25;199(12). pii: e00089-17. doi: 10.1128/JB.00089-17. Print
2017 Jun 15.

Appropriate Regulation of the σE-Dependent Envelope Stress Response Is Necessary 
To Maintain Cell Envelope Integrity and Stationary-Phase Survival in Escherichia 
coli.

Nicoloff H(1), Gopalkrishnan S(1), Ades SE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA ades@psu.edu.

The alternative sigma factor σE is a key component of the Escherichia coli
response to cell envelope stress and is required for viability even in the
absence of stress. The activity of σE increases during entry into stationary
phase, suggesting an important role for σE when nutrients are limiting. Elevated 
σE activity has been proposed to activate a pathway leading to the lysis of
nonculturable cells that accumulate during early stationary phase. To better
understand σE-directed cell lysis and the role of σE in stationary phase, we
investigated the effects of elevated σE activity in cultures grown for 10 days.
We demonstrate that high σE activity is lethal for all cells in stationary phase,
not only those that are nonculturable. Spontaneous mutants with reduced σE
activity, due primarily to point mutations in the region of σE that binds the -35
promoter motif, arise and take over cultures within 5 to 6 days after entry into 
stationary phase. High σE activity leads to large reductions in the levels of
outer membrane porins and increased membrane permeability, indicating membrane
defects. These defects can be counteracted and stationary-phase lethality delayed
significantly by stabilizing membranes with Mg2+ and buffering the growth medium 
or by deleting the σE-dependent small RNAs (sRNAs) MicA, RybB, and MicL, which
inhibit the expression of porins and Lpp. Expression of these sRNAs also reverses
the loss of viability following depletion of σE activity. Our results demonstrate
that appropriate regulation of σE activity, ensuring that it is neither too high 
nor too low, is critical for envelope integrity and cell viability.IMPORTANCE The
Gram-negative cell envelope and cytoplasm differ significantly, and separate
responses have evolved to combat stress in each compartment. An array of cell
envelope stress responses exist, each of which is focused on different parts of
the envelope. The σE response is conserved in many enterobacteria and is tuned to
monitor pathways for the maturation and delivery of outer membrane porins,
lipoproteins, and lipopolysaccharide to the outer membrane. The activity of σE is
tightly regulated to match the production of σE regulon members to the needs of
the cell. In E. coli, loss of σE results in lethality. Here we demonstrate that
excessive σE activity is also lethal and results in decreased membrane integrity,
the very phenotype the system is designed to prevent.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00089-17 
PMCID: PMC5446625
PMID: 28373273  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

