
1. Chemosphere. 2017 Aug;181:9-18. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2017.04.039. Epub 2017
Apr 8.

Geosmin as a source of the earthy-musty smell in fruits, vegetables and water:
Origins, impact on foods and water, and review of the removing techniques.

Liato V(1), Aïder M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Nutrition and Functional Foods (INAF), Université Laval, Quebec, 
QC, G1V 0A6, Canada; Department of Soil Sciences and Agri-Food Engineering,
Université Laval, Quebec, QC, G1V 0A6, Canada.
(2)Institute of Nutrition and Functional Foods (INAF), Université Laval, Quebec, 
QC, G1V 0A6, Canada; Department of Soil Sciences and Agri-Food Engineering,
Université Laval, Quebec, QC, G1V 0A6, Canada. Electronic address:
mohammed.aider@fsaa.ulaval.ca.

The earthy-musty smell produced by Streptomyces sp. is assigned to geosmin and is
responsible for the major organoleptic defects found in drinking water, fruits
and vegetables such as grapes, mushrooms, carrots, and beet. Geosmin is also
found in juices and musts before fermentation and its presence has been
associated with partial presence of Botrytis cinerea. It has a variable detection
threshold depending on the matrix and the detection level ranges from 5 to
50 ng/L. On the sensory level, very few individuals are immune to geosmin and
although the intensity of the defect caused by this molecule decreases rapidly in
the nose, a bad taste is very persistent in the mouth. As the origin of geosmin
is fungal, conventional control techniques used for geosmin prevention are
limited to ventilation, improving the integrity of plants and use of storage
temperatures around 1 °C in a humidity-controlled environment. However, it has
been demonstrated that only the combination of different prophylactic and
preventive measures provide a relatively sufficient efficacy. Therefore,
prevention of factors favoring the formation of geosmin is still topical. Some
chemical treatments showed relatively good results against Botrytis cinerea.
However, there is a requirement that must be met, namely that only one chemical
per family per year must be used. Moreover, a multi-year alternation of chemical 
families is a strong agronomic recommendation. Regarding Penicillium, no active
material is 100% approved and it negative effects plants such as beet and grapes.
Consequently, the importance of finding effective ways to fight against geosmin
formation is still relevant. From analytical point of view, measurement of
geosmin is mainly based on gas chromatography.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2017.04.039 
PMID: 28414956  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

