
1. Mol Cell Probes. 2017 Jun;33:65-77. doi: 10.1016/j.mcp.2017.04.001. Epub 2017 Apr
12.

Evidence for polymicrobial communities in explanted vascular filters and atheroma
debris.

Ellis JE(1), Heuser R(2), Missan DS(1), Martinez D(1), Heningburg A(1), Shabilla 
M(1), Schwartz R(3), Fry S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Fry Laboratories, LLC, Scottsdale, AZ 85260, USA.
(2)St. Luke's Phoenix Heart Center, Phoenix, AZ 85006, USA; University of
Arizona, College of Medicine, Phoenix, AZ 85006, USA.
(3)St. Luke's Phoenix Heart Center, Phoenix, AZ 85006, USA.
(4)Fry Laboratories, LLC, Scottsdale, AZ 85260, USA. Electronic address:
medicaldirector@frylabs.com.

RATIONALE: Microbial communities have been implicated in a variety of disease
processes and have been intermittently observed in arterial disease; however, no 
comprehensive unbiased community analysis has been performed. We hypothesize that
complex microbial communities may be involved in chronic vascular diseases as
well and may be effectively characterized by molecular assays.
OBJECTIVE: The main objective is to survey vascular debris, atheroma, and
vascular filters for polymicrobial communities consisting of prokaryotic and
eukaryotic microbes, specifically eukaryotic microbes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We examined vascular aspirates of atheromatous debris or
embolic protection filters in addition to matched peripheral blood samples, from 
fifteen patients, as well as three cadaveric coronary arteries from two separate 
patients, for microbial communities. General fluorescence microscopy by Höechst
and ethidium bromide DNA stains, prokaryotic and eukaryotic community analysis by
Next Generation DNA Sequencing (NGS), and a eukaryotic microbial 9 probe
multiplexed quantitative PCR were used to detect and characterize the presence of
putative polymicrobial communities. No prokaryotes were detected in peripheral
blood; however, in 4 of 9 sequenced filters and in 2 of 7 sequenced atheroma
debris samples, prokaryotic populations were identified. By DNA sequencing,
eukaryotic microbes were detected in 4 of 15 blood samples, 5 of the 9 sequenced 
filters, and 3 of the 7 atheroma debris samples. The quantitative multiplex PCR
detected sequences consistent with eukaryotic microbes in all 9 analyzed filter
samples as well as 5 of the 7 atheroma debris samples. Microscopy reveals
putative polymicrobial communities within filters and atheroma debris. The main
contributing prokaryotic species in atheroma debris suggest a diverse and novel
composition. Additionally, Funneliformis mosseae, an arbuscular mycorrhizal
fungus in the Glomeraceae family, was detected in the coronary hard plaque from
two patients. Well studied biofilm forming bacteria were not detectable in
circulating peripheral blood and were not universally present in atheroma or
filters. Analyses of the sequenced eukaryotes are consistent with a diverse of
array poorly studied environmental eukaryotes. In summary, out of 15 patients, 6 
exhibited molecular evidence of prokaryotes and 14 had molecular evidence of
eukaryotic and/or polymicrobial communities in vivo, while 2 post-mortem coronary
plaque samples displayed evidence of fungi.
CONCLUSION: Prokaryotes are not consistently observed in atheroma debris or
filter samples; however, detection of protozoa and fungi in these samples
suggests that they may play a role in arterial vascular disease or atheroma
formation.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcp.2017.04.001 
PMID: 28411089  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

