
1. Front Immunol. 2017 Apr 6;8:398. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00398. eCollection 2017.

Challenge of Humans with Wild-type Salmonella enterica Serovar Typhi Elicits
Changes in the Activation and Homing Characteristics of Mucosal-Associated
Invariant T Cells.

Salerno-Goncalves R(1), Luo D(1), Fresnay S(1), Magder L(2), Darton TC(3), Jones 
C(3), Waddington CS(3), Blohmke CJ(3), Angus B(3), Levine MM(1), Pollard AJ(3),
Sztein MB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Vaccine Development, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Oxford Vaccine Group, Department of Paediatrics, University of Oxford, Oxford,
UK.

Gastrointestinal infections by Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi (S. Typhi) are
rare in industrialized countries. However, they remain a major public health
problem in the developing world with an estimated 26.9 million new cases annually
and significant mortality when untreated. Recently, we provided the first direct 
evidence that CD8+ MAIT cells are activated and have the potential to kill cells 
exposed to S. Typhi, and that these responses are dependent on bacterial load.
However, MAIT cell kinetics and function during bacterial infections in humans
remain largely unknown. In this study, we characterize the human CD8+ MAIT cell
immune response to S. Typhi infection in subjects participating in a challenge
clinical trial who received a low- or high dose of wild-type S. Typhi. We define 
the kinetics of CD8+ MAIT cells as well as their levels of activation,
proliferation, exhaustion/apoptosis, and homing potential. Regardless of the
dose, in volunteers resistant to infection (NoTD), the levels of CD8+ MAIT cells 
after S. Typhi challenge fluctuated around their baseline values (day 0). In
contrast, volunteers susceptible to the development of typhoid disease (TD)
exhibited a sharp decline in circulating MAIT cells during the development of
typhoid fever. Interestingly, MAIT cells from low-dose TD volunteers had higher
levels of CD38 coexpressing CCR9, CCR6, and Ki67 during the development of
typhoid fever than high-dose TD volunteers. No substantial perturbations on the
levels of these markers were observed in NoTD volunteers irrespective of the
dose. In sum, we describe, for the first time, that exposure to an enteric
bacterium, in this case S. Typhi, results in changes in MAIT cell activation,
proliferation, and homing characteristics, suggesting that MAIT cells are an
important component of the human host response to bacterial infection.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00398 
PMCID: PMC5382150
PMID: 28428786 

