
1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2017 Sep-Oct;35(5):777-785. Epub 2017 Apr 18.

Laser microdissection coupled with RNA-seq reveal cell-type and disease-specific 
markers in the salivary gland of Sjögren's syndrome patients.

Tandon M(1), Perez P(2), Burbelo PD(3), Calkins C(4), Alevizos I(5).

Author information: 
(1)Sjögren's Syndrome and Salivary Gland Dysfunction Unit, NIH, National
Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, Bethesda, MD; Dept.of Microbiology
& Immunology, Jefferson College of Biomedical Sciences, T.Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Sjögren's Syndrome and Salivary Gland Dysfunction Unit, National Institutes of
Health, National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, Bethesda, MD,
USA.
(3)Dental Clinical Research Core, National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial
Research, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Jefferson College of Biomedical
Sciences, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Sjögren's Syndrome and Salivary Gland Dysfunction Unit, National Institutes of
Health, National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, Bethesda, MD,
USA. alevizosi@mail.nih.gov.

OBJECTIVES: Little is known about the molecular details regarding the
contribution of different cell types of the salivary gland to the altered gene
expression profile seen in Sjögren's syndrome (SS).
METHODS: Using laser microdissection, tissue samples enriched in acini, ducts and
inflammatory foci in subjects with and without SS were isolated for RNA-seq
analysis. Gene expression profiles were analysed and selected enriched genes were
further examined using real time PCR and by immunofluorescence.
RESULTS: RNA-seq analysis of salivary biopsies from subjects with and without SS 
revealed marked differences in gene expression occurring in the ductal and
infiltrating cells compared to acinar cells. Up-regulated genes in the SS ductal 
cells included C4A complement and the SLC26A9 ion channel. The inflammatory
infiltrate showed the most dramatic differences in gene expression and contained 
up-regulated genes associated with T-cells, natural killer, dendritic and
basophils/mast cells. qPCR with total salivary gland mRNA confirmed the
differential mRNA expression of several genes (MMP9, FOL1HB, CCL21, CCR7),
thereby validating the approach. Additional immunofluorescence studies
demonstrated high expression and co-localisation of CCL21 chemokine and CCR7
chemokine receptor within the SS infiltrates.
CONCLUSIONS: Major gene expression changes in the salivary gland of SS were
detected in the ductal and inflammatory cells and not in the acinar cells. Two
chemokines involved in immune cell trafficking to secondary lymphoid tissue, CCR7
and CCL21, showed markedly increased expression and may contribute to the
recruitment of diverse immune cells to the salivary glands, causing inflammation 
and loss of secretory function.


PMID: 28421997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

