
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2017 Sep;74:101-109. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2017.04.013. Epub 2017 
Apr 20.

Characterization of leukocyte subsets in buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) with
cross-reactive monoclonal antibodies specific for bovine MHC class I and class II
molecules and leukocyte differentiation molecules.

Grandoni F(1), Elnaggar MM(2), Abdellrazeq GS(2), Signorelli F(1), Fry LM(3),
Marchitelli C(1), Hulubei V(4), Khaliel SA(5), Torky HA(5), Davis WC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Consiglio per la ricerca in agricoltura e l'analisi dell'economia agraria,
Centro di ricerca per la Produzione delle Carni e Il Miglioramento genetico
(CREA-PCM), Monterotondo, Roma, Italy.
(2)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, USA; Department of
Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Alexandria University, Egypt.
(3)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, USA; USDA, ARS, Animal
Disease Research Unit, Pullman, WA 99164, USA.
(4)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Alexandria
University, Egypt.
(6)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, USA. Electronic address:
davisw@vetmed.wsu.edu.

Although buffaloes (Bubalus bubalis) are a major component of the livestock
industry worldwide, limited progress has been made in the study of the mechanisms
regulating the immune response to pathogens and parasites affecting their health 
and productivity. This has been, in part, attributable to the limited
availability of reagents to study immune responses in buffalo. As reported here, 
a set of cross-reactive monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), developed against bovine,
ovine and caprine leukocyte differentiation molecules (LDM) and major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules, were identified and used to compare
expression of LDM in Italian and Egyptian buffalo. The results show most of the
epitopes identified with the mAbs are conserved on LDM and MHC I and II molecules
in both lineages of buffalo. Comparison of the composition of lymphocyte subsets 
between buffalo and cattle revealed they are similar except for expression of CD2
and CD8 on workshop cluster one (WC1) positive γδ T cells. In cattle, CD8 is
expressed on a subset of CD2+/WC1- γδ T cells that are present in low frequency
in blood of young and old animals, whereas, CD8-/CD2-/WC1+ γδ T cells are present
in high frequency in young animals, decreasing with age. In the buffalo, CD2 is
expressed on a subset of WC1+ γδ T cells and CD8 is expressed on all WC1+ γδ T
cells. The availability of this extensive set of mAbs provides opportunities to
study the immunopathogenesis of pathogens and parasites affecting the health of
buffalo.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2017.04.013 
PMID: 28433527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

