
1. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2017 May/Jun;18(4):424-430. doi: 10.1089/sur.2016.252.
Epub 2017 Mar 1.

Pressure Irrigation of Surgical Incisions and Traumatic Wounds.

Fry DE(1).

Author information: 
(1)MPA Healthcare Solutions, Chicago, Illinois; Department of Surgery,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois;
Department of Surgery, University of New Mexico School of Medicine , Albuquerque,
New Mexico.

BACKGROUND: Pressure irrigation of surgical incisions and traumatic wounds is
commonly used to prevent infections. Commercial pressure irrigation devices have 
proliferated rapidly, but scientific validation of clinical benefit or
appropriate use remains uncertain.
METHODS: The published experimental and clinical investigations of pressure
irrigation have been reviewed since the introduction of the Waterpik device in
1967 to identify the evidence for use to prevent soft tissue infections
associated with injury wounds or surgical incisions.
RESULTS: The published literature favors low pressure irrigation between 5-15
pounds/square inch (psi) for experimental removal of bacteria from contaminated
tissues, with pressures higher being associated with soft tissue and bone injury.
No experimental or clinical data have demonstrated improved benefit from pulsed
over continuous lavage. Clinical studies have been very heterogeneous in patient 
populations and study design; meta-analysis was not feasible. High-risk abdominal
operations may have lower surgical site infection rates with pressure irrigation.
Pressure irrigation in fractures and joint replacement surgery has shown mixed
results. The largest multi-center randomized trial showed no benefit of pulsed
(8-10 psi) lavage over conventional continuous gravity irrigation of open
fractures.
CONCLUSIONS: Experimental studies have shown effective removal of bacteria and
contamination, but with a potential risk of tissue injury or displacement of
contamination deeper into the soft tissues. Rigorous clinical documentation has
not validated the optimum flow or pressure characteristics of pressure lavage in 
clinical practice. There is need for randomized clinical trials to validate
pressure lavage in the prevention of infections in soft tissue injuries or
high-risk surgical incisions.

DOI: 10.1089/sur.2016.252 
PMID: 28437197  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

