
1. Photodiagnosis Photodyn Ther. 2017 Sep;19:33-36. doi:
10.1016/j.pdpdt.2017.04.007. Epub 2017 Apr 21.

Effect of photodynamic therapy based on indocyanine green on expression of
apoptosis-related genes in human gingival fibroblast cells.

Gharesi S(1), Pourhajibagher M(2), Chiniforush N(3), Raoofian R(4), Hashemi M(1),
Shahabi S(5), Bahador A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Islamic Azad University, Tehran Medical Branch,
Theran, Iran.
(2)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran; Laser Research Center of Dentistry (LRCD), Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran; Dental Research Center, Dentistry
Research Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Laser Research Center of Dentistry (LRCD), Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Legal Medicine Research Center, Legal Medicine Organization, Tehran, Iran;
Innovative Research Center, Islamic Azad University, Mashhad branch, Mashhad,
Iran.
(5)Laser Research Center of Dentistry (LRCD), Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran; Dental Research Center, Dentistry Research Institute,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Laser Research Center of Dentistry (LRCD), Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran; Dental Research Center, Dentistry Research Institute,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran; Department of Microbiology, 
School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
Electronic address: ab.bahador@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Periodontal diseases refer to inflammation of the gingiva, induction 
of apoptosis in human gingival fibroblast cells, destruction of the surrounding
tissues, and early bone loss resulting in infections due to the pathogenic
activity of the microorganisms and the host immune inflammatory responses. Recent
investigations have suggested that antimicrobial photodynamic therapy (aPDT) can 
be an adjunct treatment therapy for periodontal infections.
AIM: To prove the lack of side effects of PDT on periodontal tissues, we
investigated the expression of BAX and BCL-2 genes that are involved in apoptosis
after the PDT on human gingival fibroblast (HGF) cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study the effect of PDT based on indocyanine green
(ICG) as a photosensitizer with the diode laser were tested on the expression of 
BAX and BCL-2 genes in monolayers of HGF cells. The effects of PDT on the
expression of BAX and BCL-2 genes were evaluated by real-time quantitative
reverse transcription PCR.
RESULTS: The results of the genes expression analysis revealed that ICG-PDT at
concentrations 1000μg/mL, induced the significant expression of BAX in HGF cells;
however, the laser irradiation as well as ICG showed no significant effects on
the expression of these genes. Treatment with ICG alone, laser irradiation and
ICG-PDT caused no observable BCL-2 gene expression changes between the tested and
control groups.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that ICG-PDT at 1000μg/mL of ICG with the
exposure time of 60s for the diode laser would appear to be an inducer of
apoptosis in HGF at transcriptome level.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pdpdt.2017.04.007 
PMID: 28438509  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

