
1. mSphere. 2017 Apr 19;2(2). pii: e00121-17. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00121-17.
eCollection 2017 Mar-Apr.

Gene Expression Profile of Human Cytokines in Response to Burkholderia
pseudomallei Infection.

Krishnananthasivam S(1), Sathkumara HD(1), Corea E(2), Natesan M(3), De Silva
AD(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Genetech Research Institute, Colombo, Sri Lanka.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Colombo,
Colombo, Sri Lanka.
(3)Molecular and Translational Sciences, United States Army Medical Research
Institute of Infectious Diseases, Frederick, Maryland, USA.
(4)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute of Allergy and Immunology,
La Jolla, California, USA.

Melioidosis is an underreported infectious disease, caused by the Gram-negative
bacterium Burkholderia pseudomallei. Understanding the disease susceptibility and
pathogenesis is crucial for developing newer diagnostic and therapeutic
strategies for this life-threatening infection. In this study, we aimed to
analyze the gene expression levels of important cytokines in melioidosis patients
and establish useful correlates with disease biomarkers compared to cases of
sepsis infection caused by other pathogens and healthy individuals. A Qiagen
common human cytokines array profiling the gene expression of 84 important
cytokines by real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) was used. We analyzed 26
melioidosis cases, 5 healthy controls, and 10 cases of sepsis infection caused by
other pathogens. Our results showed consistently upregulated expression of
interleukins (IL) interleukin-4 (IL-4), interleukin-17 alpha (IL-17A), IL-23A,
and IL-24, interferons (IFN) interferon alpha 1 (IFNA1) and interferon beta 1
(IFNB1), tumor necrosis factor (TNF) superfamily 4 (TNFSF4), transforming growth 
factor (TGF) superfamily, bone morphogenetic proteins 3 and 6 (BMP3 and BMP6),
transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGFB1), and other growth factors, including
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF), C-fos-induced growth factor (FIGF),
and platelet-derived growth factor alpha (PDGFA) polypeptide, in melioidosis
patients compared to their expression in other sepsis cases, irrespective of
comorbidities, duration of fever/clinical symptoms, and antibiotic treatment. Our
findings indicate a dominant Th2- and Th17-type-cytokine response, suggesting
that their dysregulation at initial stages of infection may play an important
role in disease pathogenesis. IL-1A, interleukin-1 beta (IL-1B), and IL-8 were
significantly downregulated in septicemic melioidosis patients compared to their 
expression in other sepsis cases. These differentially expressed genes may serve 
as biomarkers for melioidosis diagnosis and targets for therapeutic intervention 
and may help us understand immune response mechanisms. IMPORTANCE Melioidosis is 
a life-threatening infectious disease caused by a soil-associated Gram-negative
bacterium, B. pseudomallei. Melioidosis is endemic in Southeast Asia and northern
Australia; however, the global distribution of B. pseudomallei and the disease
burden of melioidosisis are still poorly understood. Melioidosis is difficult to 
treat, as B. pseudomallei is intrinsically resistant to many antibiotics and
requires a long course of antibiotic treatment. The mortality rates remain high
in areas of endemicity, with reoccurrence being common. Therefore, it is
imperative to diagnose the disease at an early stage and provide vital clinical
care to reduce the mortality rate. With limitations in treatment and lack of a
vaccine, it is crucial to study the immune response mechanisms to this infection 
to get a better understanding of disease susceptibility and pathogenesis.
Therefore, this study aimed to analyze the gene expression levels of important
cytokines to establish useful correlations for diagnostic and therapeutic
purposes.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00121-17 
PMCID: PMC5397567
PMID: 28435890 

