
1. Front Immunol. 2017 Apr 10;8:387. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00387. eCollection
2017.

Natural Killer Group 2D Ligand Depletion Reconstitutes Natural Killer Cell
Immunosurveillance of Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma.

Weil S(1)(2), Memmer S(1)(2), Lechner A(3), Huppert V(4), Giannattasio A(1),
Becker T(5), Müller-Runte A(4), Lampe K(6), Beutner D(3), Quaas A(7), Schubert
R(8), Herrmann E(9), Steinle A(10), Koehl U(11), Walter L(12), von
Bergwelt-Baildon MS(13), Koch J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)NK Cell Biology, Georg-Speyer-Haus, Institute for Tumor Biology and
Experimental Therapy, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(2)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Mainz Medical
Center, Mainz, Germany.
(3)Medical Faculty, Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery,
University of Cologne, Center for Integrated Oncology Köln Bonn, Cologne,
Germany.
(4)Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany.
(5)Primate Husbandry, German Primate Center, Leibniz Institute for Primate
Research, Göttingen, Germany.
(6)Infectious Pathology Unit, German Primate Center, Leibniz Institute for
Primate Research, Göttingen, Germany.
(7)Institute of Pathology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(8)Allergy, Pulmonology, and Cystic Fibrosis, Children's Hospital, Goethe
University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(9)Institute for Biostatistics and Mathematical Modelling, Goethe University,
Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(10)Institute for Molecular Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany.
(11)Hannover Medical School, Institute for Cellular Therapeutics, IFB-Tx,
Hannover, Germany.
(12)Primate Genetics Laboratory, German Primate Center, Leibniz Institute for
Primate Research, Göttingen, Germany.
(13)Cologne Interventional Immunology Department I of Internal Medicine,
University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is a highly heterogeneous and
aggressive tumor originating from the epithelial lining of the upper
aero-digestive tract accounting for 300,000 annual deaths worldwide due to
failure of current therapies. The natural killer group 2D (NKG2D) receptors on
natural killer (NK) cells and several T cell subsets play an important role for
immunosurveillance of HNSCC and are thus targeted by tumor immune evasion
strategies in particular by shedding of various NKG2D ligands (NKG2DLs). Based on
plasma and tumor samples of 44 HNSCC patients, we found that despite
compositional heterogeneity the total plasma level of NKG2DLs correlates with NK 
cell inhibition and disease progression. Strikingly, based on tumor spheroids and
primary tumors of HNSCC patients, we found that NK cells failed to infiltrate
HNSCC tumors in the presence of high levels of NKG2DLs, demonstrating a novel
mechanism of NKG2DL-dependent tumor immune escape. Therefore, the diagnostic
acquisition of the plasma level of all NKG2DLs might be instrumental for
prognosis and to decipher a patient cohort, which could benefit from restoration 
of NKG2D-dependent tumor immunosurveillance. Along these lines, we could show
that removal of shed NKG2DLs (sNKG2DLs) from HNSCC patients' plasma restored NK
cell function in vitro and in individual patients following surgical removal of
the primary tumor. In order to translate these findings into a therapeutic
setting, we performed a proof-of-concept study to test the efficacy of adsorption
apheresis of sNKG2DLs from plasma after infusion of human MICA in rhesus monkeys.
Complete removal of MICA was achieved after three plasma volume exchanges.
Therefore, we propose adsorption apheresis of sNKG2DLs as a future
preconditioning strategy to improve the efficacy of autologous and adoptively
transferred immune cells in cellular cancer immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00387 
PMCID: PMC5385630
PMID: 28443091 

