
1. Front Immunol. 2017 Apr 18;8:427. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00427. eCollection
2017.

Gut Microbiota Species Can Provoke both Inflammatory and Tolerogenic Immune
Responses in Human Dendritic Cells Mediated by Retinoic Acid Receptor Alpha
Ligation.

Bene K(1), Varga Z(1), Petrov VO(2), Boyko N(2), Rajnavolgyi E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Immunology, University of Debrecen,
Debrecen, Hungary.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, R&D Centre of Molecular Microbiology and Mucosal
Immunology, Uzhhorod National University, Uzhhorod, Ukraine.

Dendritic cells are considered as the main coordinators of both mucosal and
systemic immune responses, thus playing a determining role in shaping the outcome
of effector cell responses. However, it is still uncovered how primary human
monocyte-derived DC (moDC) populations drive the polarization of helper T (Th)
cells in the presence of commensal bacteria harboring unique immunomodulatory
properties. Furthermore, the individual members of the gut microbiota have the
potential to modulate the outcome of immune responses and shape the
immunogenicity of differentiating moDCs via the activation of retinoic acid
receptor alpha (RARα). Here, we report that moDCs are able to mediate robust Th1 
and Th17 responses upon stimulation by Escherichia coli Schaedler or Morganella
morganii, while the probiotic Bacillus subtilis strain limits this effect.
Moreover, physiological concentrations of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) are able
to re-program the differentiation of moDCs resulting in altered gene expression
profiles of the master transcription factors RARα and interferon regulatory
factor 4, and concomitantly regulate the cell surface expression levels of CD1
proteins and also the mucosa-associated CD103 integrin to different directions.
It was also demonstrated that the ATRA-conditioned moDCs exhibited enhanced
pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion while reduced their co-stimulatory and
antigen-presenting capacity thus reducing Th1 and presenting undetectable Th17
type responses against the tested microbiota strains. Importantly, these
regulatory circuits could be prevented by the selective inhibition of RARα
functionality. These results altogether demonstrate that selected commensal
bacterial strains are able to drive strong effector immune responses by moDCs,
while in the presence of ATRA, they support the development of both tolerogenic
and inflammatory moDC in a RARα-dependent manner.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00427 
PMCID: PMC5394128
PMID: 28458670 

