
1. Front Microbiol. 2017 Apr 20;8:662. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00662. eCollection
2017.

Bacterial Community Composition and Potential Driving Factors in Different Reef
Habitats of the Spermonde Archipelago, Indonesia.

Kegler HF(1)(2), Lukman M(3), Teichberg M(4), Plass-Johnson J(4)(5), Hassenrück
C(1)(6), Wild C(2), Gärdes A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tropical Marine Microbiology, Department of Biogeochemistry and Geology,
Leibniz Center for Tropical Marine ResearchBremen, Germany.
(2)Faculty of Biology and Chemistry (FB 2), University of BremenBremen, Germany.
(3)Marine Science Department, Faculty of Marine Science and Fisheries, Hasanuddin
UniversitySouth Sulawesi, Indonesia.
(4)Algae and Seagrass Ecology, Department of Ecology, Leibniz Center for Tropical
Marine ResearchBremen, Germany.
(5)Centre for Ocean Life, National Institute of Aquatic Resources (DTU-Aqua),
Technical University of DenmarkCharlottenlund, Denmark.
(6)HGF MPG Joint Research Group for Deep-Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck
Institute for Marine MicrobiologyBremen, Germany.

Coastal eutrophication is a key driver of shifts in bacterial communities on
coral reefs. With fringing and patch reefs at varying distances from the coast
the Spermonde Archipelago in southern Sulawesi, Indonesia offers ideal conditions
to study the effects of coastal eutrophication along a spatially defined
gradient. The present study investigated bacterial community composition of three
coral reef habitats: the water column, sediments, and mucus of the hard coral
genus Fungia, along that cross-shelf environmental and water quality gradient.
The main research questions were: (1) How do water quality and bacterial
community composition change along a coastal shelf gradient? (2) Which water
quality parameters influence bacterial community composition? (3) Is there a
difference in bacterial community composition among the investigated habitats?
For this purpose, a range of key water parameters were measured at eight stations
in distances from 2 to 55 km from urban Makassar. This was supplemented by
sampling of bacterial communities of important microbial habitats using 454
pyrosequencing. Findings revealed that the population center Makassar had a
strong effect on the concentrations of Chlorophyll a, suspended particulate
matter (SPM), and transparent exopolymer particles (TEP), which were all
significantly elevated at the inshore compared the other seven sites. Shifts in
the bacterial communities were specific to each sampled habitat. Two OTUs,
belonging to the genera Escherichia/Shigella (Gammaproteobacteria) and Ralstonia 
(Betaproteobacteria), respectively, both dominated the bacterial community
composition of the both size fractions of the water column and coral mucus. The
sampled reef sediments were more diverse, and no single OTUs was dominant. There 
was no gradual shift in bacterial classes or OTUs within the sampled habitats. In
addition, we observed very distinct communities between the investigated
habitats. Our data show strong changes in the bacterial community composition at 
the inshore site for water column and sediment samples. Alarmingly, there was
generally a high prevalence of potentially pathogenic bacteria across the entire 
gradient.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00662 
PMCID: PMC5397486
PMID: 28473810 

