
1. Front Immunol. 2017 Apr 20;8:452. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00452. eCollection
2017.

How Escherichia coli Circumvent Complement-Mediated Killing.

Abreu AG(1)(2), Barbosa AS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Biologia Parasitária, CEUMA University, São Luís,
Brazil.
(2)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências da Saúde, Federal University of
Maranhão, São Luís, Brazil.
(3)Laboratory of Bacteriology, Butantan Institute, São Paulo, Brazil.

Complement is a crucial arm of the innate immune response against invading
bacterial pathogens, and one of its main functions is to recognize and destroy
target cells. Similar to other pathogens, Escherichia coli has evolved mechanisms
to overcome complement activation. It is well known that capsular polysaccharide 
may confer resistance to complement-mediated killing and phagocytosis, being one 
of the strategies adopted by this bacterium to survive in serum. In addition,
proteases produced by E. coli have been shown to downregulate the complement
system. Pic, an autotransporter secreted by different pathogens in the
Enterobacteriaceae family, is able to cleave C2, C3/C3b, and C4/C4b and works
synergistically with human Factor I and Factor H (FH), thereby promoting
inactivation of C3b. Extracellular serine protease P, a serine protease of
enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC), downregulates complement activation by cleaving
C3/C3b and C5. StcE, a metalloprotease secreted by EHEC, inhibits the classical
complement-mediated cell lysis by potentiating the action of C1 inhibitor, and
the periplasmic protease Prc contributes to E. coli complement evasion by
interfering with the classical pathway activation and by preventing membrane
attack complex deposition. Finally, it has been described that E. coli proteins
interact with negative complement regulators to modulate complement activation.
The functional consequences resulting from the interaction of outer membrane
protein A, new lipoprotein I, outer membrane protein W, and Stx2 with proteins of
the FH family and C4b-binding protein (C4BP) are discussed in detail. In brief,
in this review, we focused on the different mechanisms used by pathogenic E. coli
to circumvent complement attack, allowing these bacteria to promote a successful 
infection.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00452 
PMCID: PMC5397495
PMID: 28473832 

