
1. IUBMB Life. 2017 Jun;69(6):373-381. doi: 10.1002/iub.1632. Epub 2017 May 3.

Iron catalysis at the origin of life.

Camprubi E(1), Jordan SF(1), Vasiliadou R(1), Lane N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, University College London, 
London, UK.

Iron-sulphur proteins are ancient and drive fundamental processes in cells,
notably electron transfer and CO2 fixation. Iron-sulphur minerals with equivalent
structures could have played a key role in the origin of life. However, the
'iron-sulphur world' hypothesis has had a mixed reception, with questions raised 
especially about the feasibility of a pyrites-pulled reverse Krebs cycle.
Phylogenetics suggests that the earliest cells drove carbon and energy metabolism
via the acetyl CoA pathway, which is also replete in Fe(Ni)S proteins. Deep
differences between bacteria and archaea in this pathway obscure the ancestral
state. These differences make sense if early cells depended on natural proton
gradients in alkaline hydrothermal vents. If so, the acetyl CoA pathway diverged 
with the origins of active ion pumping, and ancestral CO2 fixation might have
been equivalent to methanogens, which depend on a membrane-bound NiFe
hydrogenase, energy converting hydrogenase. This uses the proton-motive force to 
reduce ferredoxin, thence CO2 . The mechanism suggests that pH could modulate
reduction potential at the active site of the enzyme, facilitating the difficult 
reduction of CO2 by H2 . This mechanism could be generalised under abiotic
conditions so that steep pH differences across semi-conducting Fe(Ni)S barriers
drives not just the first steps of CO2 fixation to C1 and C2 organics such as CO,
CH3 SH and CH3 COSH, but a series of similar carbonylation and hydrogenation
reactions to form longer chain carboxylic acids such as pyruvate, oxaloacetate
and α-ketoglutarate, as in the incomplete reverse Krebs cycle found in
methanogens. We suggest that the closure of a complete reverse Krebs cycle, by
regenerating acetyl CoA directly, displaced the acetyl CoA pathway from many
modern groups. A later reliance on acetyl CoA and ATP eliminated the need for the
proton-motive force to drive most steps of the reverse Krebs cycle. © 2017 IUBMB 
Life, 69(6):373-381, 2017.

© 2017 The Authors IUBMB Life published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of
International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

DOI: 10.1002/iub.1632 
PMID: 28470848  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

