
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2017 Jul;123(1):104-115. doi: 10.1111/jam.13490.

Prevention, removal and inactivation of Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus
aureus biofilms using selected monoterpenes of essential oils.

Borges A(1), Lopez-Romero JC(2), Oliveira D(1), Giaouris E(3), Simões M(1).

Author information: 
(1)LEPABE, Department of Chemical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, University
of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(2)CIAD, Research Center for Food and Development, Hermosillo, Sonora, Mexico.
(3)Department of Food Science and Nutrition, Faculty of the Environment,
University of the Aegean, Myrina, Lemnos Island, Greece.

AIMS: The aim of this study was to investigate the antibiofilm potential of five 
essential oil (EO) components with cyclic (sabinene-SAB, carveol-C1, carvone-C2) 
and acyclic (citronellol-C3 and citronellal-C4) structures against Escherichia
coli and Staphylococcus aureus.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The selected EO components prevented biofilm set-up, with C3
and C4 causing remarkable effects. When applied against pre-established biofilms,
they promoted high biomass removal and inactivation of biofilm cells. Moreover,
no viable E. coli biofilm cells were detected after exposure to SAB at 5 × MIC
and 10 × MIC, and a significant viability decrease was observed for both bacteria
with the other EO components. SAB, C3 and C4 caused the most prominent effects
apparently due to their octanol-water partition coefficient (Po/w), the number of
rotatable bonds (n-ROTB) and the free hydroxyl groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The overall results demonstrated that the selected EO components,
particularly SAB, C3 and C4 are of interest as new lead molecules to both prevent
biofilm set-up and to control pre-established biofilms of E. coli and S. aureus.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: The tested EO components exhibited
prominent antibiofilm properties against E. coli and S. aureus providing a novel 
and effective alternative/complementary approach to counteract chronic infections
and the transmission of diseases in clinical settings.

© 2017 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/jam.13490 
PMID: 28497526 

