
1. PLoS One. 2017 May 12;12(5):e0177735. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0177735.
eCollection 2017.

The malleable gut microbiome of juvenile rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss):
Diet-dependent shifts of bacterial community structures.

Michl SC(1)(2)(3), Ratten JM(4), Beyer M(4), Hasler M(5), LaRoche J(4), Schulz
C(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Gesellschaft für Marine Aquakultur mbH (GMA) Büsum, Büsum, Germany.
(2)Department of Marine Aquaculture, Institute of Animal Breeding and Husbandry, 
Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(3)GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(4)Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada.
(5)Lehrfach Variationsstatistik, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Kiel,
Germany.

Plant-derived protein sources are the most relevant substitutes for fishmeal in
aquafeeds. Nevertheless, the effects of plant based diets on the intestinal
microbiome especially of juvenile Rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) are yet to 
be fully investigated. The present study demonstrates, based on 16S rDNA
bacterial community profiling, that the intestinal microbiome of juvenile Rainbow
trout is strongly affected by dietary plant protein inclusion levels. After first
feeding of juveniles with either 0%, 50% or 97% of total dietary protein content 
derived from plants, statistically significant differences of the bacterial gut
community for the three diet-types were detected, both at phylum and order level.
The microbiome of juvenile fish consisted mainly of the phyla Proteobacteria,
Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Fusobacteria and Actinobacteria, and thus fits the
salmonid core microbiome suggested in previous studies. Dietary plant proteins
significantly enhanced the relative abundance of the orders Lactobacillales,
Bacillales and Pseudomonadales. Animal proteins in contrast significantly
promoted Bacteroidales, Clostridiales, Vibrionales, Fusobacteriales and
Alteromonadales. The overall alpha diversity significantly decreased with
increasing plant protein inclusion levels and with age of experimental animals.
In order to investigate permanent effects of the first feeding diet-type on the
early development of the microbiome, a diet change was included in the study
after 54 days, but no such effects could be detected. Instead, the microbiome of 
juvenile trout fry was highly dependent on the actual diet fed at the time of
sampling.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0177735 
PMCID: PMC5428975
PMID: 28498878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

