
1. Toxicon. 2017 Aug;134:50-56. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2017.05.017. Epub 2017 May
19.

Vertical transmission of microcystins to Nile crocodile (Crocodylus niloticus)
eggs.

Singo A(1), Myburgh JG(1), Laver PN(2), Venter EA(1), Ferreira GCH(1), Rösemann
GM(3), Botha CJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paraclinical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University
of Pretoria, South Africa.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
University of Pretoria, South Africa.
(3)National Horseracing Authority of Southern Africa, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(4)Department of Paraclinical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University
of Pretoria, South Africa. Electronic address: christo.botha@up.ac.za.

Cyanobacteria or blue green algae are known for their extensive and highly
visible blooms in eutrophic, stagnant freshwater bodies. Climate change and
global warming have also contributed to a rise in toxic cyanobacterial blooms.
One of the most important cyanobacteria is Microcystis aeruginosa, which can
synthesize various microcystins that can affect the health of terrestrial and
aquatic animals. Commercial Nile crocodile (Crocodylus niloticus) farming in
South Africa is based on keeping breeders (adult males and females) in big dams
on farms (captive-bred approach). Unfortunately, cyanobacterial blooms in the
breeder dams are a concern to farm owners, managers and veterinarians. The main
objectives of this research project were to determine if microcystins were
present in the contents of crocodile eggs and the liver and yolk of dead
hatchlings, and to determine if the reduced hatchability on commercial farms
might be caused by these toxins. Furthermore, the concentration of microcystins
in the breeder dam was monitored on a monthly basis spanning the ovulation and
egg laying period. During the hatching season microcystin concentrations in
unfertilised eggs, egg shell membranes and in the yolk and liver of dead
hatchlings were determined using liquid chromatography-high resolution mass
spectrometry (LC-HRMS). Microcystins were detected in Nile crocodile egg and
hatchling samples. Microcystin (MC-LR, MC-RR, MC-YR) concentrations in the
crocodile egg and hatchling samples collected from clutches with a good hatching 
rate (≥90%) ranged between 0 and 1.76 ng g-1, with the highest concentration in
the egg shell membranes. Microcystin concentrations in samples collected from
clutches with a bad hatching rate (≤10%) ranged from 0 - 1.63 ng g-1 with the
highest concentration detected in the hatchling yolk. However, the concentrations
were probably underestimated as the percentage recovery from spiked samples was
very low with the extraction method employed. Bayesian analysis suggests that the
liver, yolk and unfertilised egg all have similar microcystin concentrations,
while the membranes have (with moderate to high certainty) higher microcystin
concentrations. There appears to be no difference in microcystin concentrations
among good and bad clutches across all tissue types or within a specific tissue
type, but due to the small sample size, it was not possible to determine whether 
microcystin affected the hatchability of Nile crocodile eggs. However, vertical
transmission of microcystin variants to the Nile crocodile egg does occur and the
possible implications for the survival of wild Nile crocodile populations should 
be ascertained.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2017.05.017 
PMID: 28528816  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

