
1. Microb Pathog. 2017 Aug;109:61-66. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2017.05.026. Epub 2017 
May 22.

Melaleuca alternifolia essential oil prevents alterations to purinergic enzymes
and ameliorates the innate immune response in silver catfish infected with
Aeromonas hydrophila.

Baldissera MD(1), Souza CF(2), Doleski PH(3), de Vargas AC(4), Duarte MMMF(5),
Duarte T(6), Boligon AA(7), Leal DBR(3), Baldisserotto B(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Universidade Federal de Santa
Maria (UFSM), Santa Maria, RS, Brazil. Electronic address:
matheusd.biomed@yahoo.com.br.
(2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Universidade Federal de Santa Maria
(UFSM), Santa Maria, RS, Brazil.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Universidade Federal de Santa
Maria (UFSM), Santa Maria, RS, Brazil.
(4)Department of Preventive Veterinary Medicine, Universidade Federal de Santa
Maria (UFSM), Santa Maria, RS, Brazil.
(5)Lutheran University of Brazil (ULBRA), Santa Maria, RS, Brazil.
(6)Department of Morphology, Universidade Federal de Santa Maria (UFSM), Santa
Maria, RS, Brazil.
(7)Laboratory of Phytochemistry, Universidade Federal de Santa Maria (UFSM),
Santa Maria, RS, Brazil.
(8)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Universidade Federal de Santa Maria
(UFSM), Santa Maria, RS, Brazil. Electronic address: bbaldisserotto@hotmail.com.

Aeromonas hydrophila infection represents a major impediment to the development
of aquaculture, leading to important economic losses. Over the last few years,
different methods have been used to counteract and minimize the negative effects 
of this infection, such as the use of Melaleuca alternifolia essential oil,
popularly known as tea tree oil (TTO), that possess a bactericide action against 
A. hydrophila. The purinergic system develops an important role in the
inflammatory response, principally due to involvement of adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) in the inflammatory process, as well as by the anti-inflammatory properties
of adenosine (Ado), a molecule that is controlled by NTPDase, 5'-nucleotidase and
adenosine deaminase (ADA) enzymes. Thus, the aim of this study was to investigate
the involvement of purinergic enzymes in the pathogenesis of A. hydrophila
infection, and whether the purinergic pathway and innate immune response are
involved in the protective effects of TTO in silver catfish (Rhamdia quelen)
experimentally infected with A. hydrophila. Our results revealed that
A. hydrophila infection increased seric NTPDase and 5'-nucleotidase activity,
while ADA activity decreased. Also, the seric levels of pro-inflammatory
cytokines such as interleukin-1 (IL-1), IL-6, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α)
and interferon gamma (INF-γ) increased in the infected fish, while the seric
level of anti-inflammatory interleukin-10 (IL-10) decreased. Treatment with TTO
was able to prevent the impairment of purinergic enzymes and improve the innate
immune response through the modulation of cytokine response during A. hydrophila 
infection. In summary, prophylactic therapy with TTO can be considered an
important approach to improve the immune response and consequently avoid the
inflammatory process in fish infected with A. hydrophila.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2017.05.026 
PMID: 28546114  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

