
1. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2017 Apr;51(2):156-164.

[Investigation of cytokine responses and variations in the expression of
beta-defensin-3 of Caco-2 human colon epidermal adenocarsinoma and THP-1 human
leukemia monocyte cell lines in response to Toxoplasma gondii under various
conditions].

[Article in Turkish]

Aral Akarsu G(1), Biriken D, Karahan ZC.

Author information: 
(1)Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Microbiology,
Division of Medical Parasitology, Ankara, Turkey. gakarsu@yahoo.com.

Mononuclear phogocytic cells and epithelial cells are effective during the
initiation and regulation of the innate immune response. They have an active role
in mucosal immune response both mechanically and by interaction with other cells 
with cytokine release. Defensins are microbicidal peptides that are expressed in 
various cells and are thought to be effective in the first line defense against
pathogens. IL-12 and IL-10, showing proinflamatory and antiinflamatory
activities, respectively, are actors of the cellular immunity and limit the
infection of the host without causing immunopathology. The aim of this study was 
to observe the differences in the release of IL-12 and IL-10 and the expression
of human beta-defensin-3 (hBD-3) inCaco-2 (human colon epidermal adenocarcinoma
cell) and THP-1 (human leukemia monocytic cell) cell lines cultured alone or in
co-culture, by the stimulation of Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoites either in direct 
contact with the cells or separated by an insert filter from the cells.
Twenty-four hours after the addition of RH strain tachyzoites to the cells, the
supernatants were collected from the experiment wells, and commercial ELISA kits 
(Invitrogen) were used according to the manufacturers instructions to measure
IL-12 and IL-10 levels. HBD-3 expression of cells collected from the experiment
wells afterfour and 24 hourswere analyzed by using real time PCR. For this
procedure, complementary c-DNA was obtained (Transcriptor High Fidelity cDNA
Synthesis Kit, Roche Diagnostics, Germany)after the extraction of RNA with a
commercial kit (High pure RNA isolation kit, Roche Diagnostics, Germany). IL-12
was higher than IL-10 in all experiment wells. IL-12 was induced more in the
co-culture wells where Caco-2 and THP-1 cells were challenged together, than the 
wells in which the cells infected with T.gondii tachyzoites alone. No differences
in respect to cytokine response were observed between the cells with which
tachyzoites were in contact and the cells which were separated from the parasites
with an insert. In hBD-3 experiments, Caco-2 and THP-1 cells interacted in
co-culture wells when infected with tachyzoites and displayed a higher level of
hBD-3 expression than the condition when they were infected alone. This study
showed that, IL-12 release and hBD-3 expression, which play a role in innate
immunity, are greater when various antigens of T.gondii interacted with
stimulated mononuclear cell and epithelial cells.


PMID: 28566079  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

