
1. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2017 Jul;105:86-95. doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2017.04.011. Epub
2017 Apr 28.

Quantitative and qualitative iNKT repertoire associations with disease
susceptibility and outcome in macaque tuberculosis infection.

Chancellor A(1), White A(2), Tocheva AS(1), Fenn JR(1), Dennis M(2), Tezera L(1),
Singhania A(1), Elliott T(3), Tebruegge M(4), Elkington P(4), Gadola S(5), Sharpe
S(2), Mansour S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of
Southampton, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Southampton NHS
Foundation Trust, Southampton, United Kingdom.
(2)Public Health England, National Infections Service, Porton Down, Salisbury,
United Kingdom.
(3)Institute for Life Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton, United
Kingdom; Cancer Sciences Unit, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton,
Southampton, United Kingdom.
(4)Academic Unit of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of
Southampton, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Southampton NHS
Foundation Trust, Southampton, United Kingdom; Institute for Life Sciences,
University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom; Global Health Research
Institute, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom; NIHR
Respiratory Biomedical Research Unit, University Hospital Southampton NHS
Foundation Trust, Southampton, United Kingdom.
(5)Academic Unit of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of
Southampton, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Southampton NHS
Foundation Trust, Southampton, United Kingdom; Institute for Life Sciences,
University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom; F.Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, 
Basel, Switzerland.
(6)Academic Unit of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of
Southampton, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Southampton NHS
Foundation Trust, Southampton, United Kingdom; Institute for Life Sciences,
University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
s.mansour@soton.ac.uk.

Correlates of immune protection that reliably predict vaccine efficacy against
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) infection are urgently needed. Invariant NKT
cells (iNKTs) are CD1d-dependent innate T cells that augment host antimicrobial
immunity through production of cytokines, including interferon (IFN)-γ and tumour
necrosis factor (TNF)-α. We determined peripheral blood iNKT numbers, their
proliferative responses and iNKT subset proportions after in vitro antigen
expansion by α-galactosylceramide (αGC) in a large cohort of mycobacteria-naïve
non-human primates, and macaques from Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) vaccine and 
Mtb challenge studies. Animals studied included four genetically distinct groups 
of macaques within cynomolgus and rhesus species that differ in their
susceptibility to Mtb infection. We demonstrate significant differences in
ex vivo iNKT frequency between groups, which trends towards an association with
susceptibility to Mtb, but no significant difference in overall iNKT
proliferative responses. Susceptible animals exhibited a skewed CD4+/CD8+ iNKT
subset ratio in comparison to more Mtb-resistant groups. Correlation of iNKT
subsets post BCG vaccination with clinical disease manifestations following Mtb
challenge in the Chinese cynomolgus and Indian rhesus macaques identified a
consistent trend linking increased CD8+ iNKTs with favourable disease outcome.
Finally, a similar iNKT profile was conferred by BCG vaccination in rhesus
macaques. Our study provides the first detailed characterisation of iNKT cells in
macaque tuberculosis infection, suggesting that iNKT repertoire differences may
impact on disease outcome, which warrants further investigation.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tube.2017.04.011 
PMCID: PMC6168056
PMID: 28610792  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

