
1. Chest. 2018 Feb;153(2):507-514. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2017.05.031. Epub 2017 Jun
10.

Airway Glucose Homeostasis: A New Target in the Prevention and Treatment of
Pulmonary Infection.

Baker EH(1), Baines DL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infection and Immunity, St. George's, University of London,
London, England. Electronic address: ebaker@sgul.ac.uk.
(2)Institute of Infection and Immunity, St. George's, University of London,
London, England.

In health, the glucose concentration of airway surface liquid (ASL) is 0.4 mM,
about 12 times lower than the blood glucose concentration. Airway glucose
homeostasis comprises a set of processes that actively maintain low ASL glucose
concentration against the transepithelial gradient. Tight junctions between
airway epithelial cells restrict paracellular glucose movement. Epithelial
cellular glucose transport and metabolism removes glucose from ASL. Low ASL
glucose concentrations make an important contribution to airway defense against
infection, limiting bacterial growth by restricting nutrient availability. Both
airway inflammation, which increases glucose permeability of tight junctions, and
hyperglycemia, which increases the transepithelial glucose gradient, increase ASL
glucose concentrations, with the greatest effect seen where they coexist.
Elevated ASL glucose drives proliferation of bacteria able to use glucose as a
carbon source, including Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and other
gram-negative bacteria. Clinically, this appears to be important in driving
exacerbations of chronic lung disease, especially in patients with comorbid
diabetes mellitus. Drugs can restore airway glucose homeostasis by reducing the
permeability of tight junctions (eg, metformin), increasing epithelial cell
glucose transport (eg, β-agonists, insulin), and/or by lowering blood glucose
(eg, dapagliflozin). In cell culture and animal models these reduce ASL glucose
concentrations and limit bacterial growth, preventing infection. Observational
studies in humans indicate that airway glucose homeostasis-modifying drugs could 
prevent chronic lung disease exacerbations if tested in randomized trials.

Copyright © 2017 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2017.05.031 
PMID: 28610911  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

