
1. PLoS One. 2017 Jun 16;12(6):e0178647. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0178647.
eCollection 2017.

Giardia co-infection promotes the secretion of antimicrobial peptides
beta-defensin 2 and trefoil factor 3 and attenuates attaching and effacing
bacteria-induced intestinal disease.

Manko A(1)(2)(3), Motta JP(1)(2)(3), Cotton JA(1)(3), Feener T(1)(2), Oyeyemi
A(1)(2)(3), Vallance BA(4), Wallace JL(2)(5), Buret AG(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta,
Canada.
(2)Inflammation Research Network, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta,
Canada.
(3)Host-Parasite Interactions, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Gastroenterology, Child and Family
Research Institute, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(5)Department of Physiology & Pharmacology, University of Calgary, Alberta,
Canada.

Our understanding of polymicrobial gastrointestinal infections and their effects 
on host biology remains incompletely understood. Giardia duodenalis is an
ubiquitous intestinal protozoan parasite infecting animals and humans.
Concomitant infections with Giardia and other gastrointestinal pathogens commonly
occur. In countries with poor sanitation, Giardia infection has been associated
with decreased incidence of diarrheal disease and fever, and reduced serum
inflammatory markers release, via mechanisms that remain obscure. This study
analyzed Giardia spp. co-infections with attaching and effacing (A/E) pathogens, 
and assessed whether and how the presence of Giardia modulates host responses to 
A/E enteropathogens, and alters intestinal disease outcome. In mice infected with
the A/E pathogen Citrobacter rodentium, co-infection with Giardia muris
significantly attenuated weight loss, macro- and microscopic signs of colitis,
bacterial colonization and translocation, while concurrently enhancing the
production and secretion of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) mouse β-defensin 3 and 
trefoil factor 3 (TFF3). Co-infection of human intestinal epithelial cells
(Caco-2) monolayers with G. duodenalis trophozoites and enteropathogenic
Escherichia coli (EPEC) enhanced the production of the AMPs human β-defensin 2
(HBD-2) and TFF3; this effect was inhibited with treatment of G. duodenalis with 
cysteine protease inhibitors. Collectively, these results suggest that Giardia
infections are capable of reducing enteropathogen-induced colitis while
increasing production of host AMPs. Additional studies also demonstrated that
Giardia was able to directly inhibit the growth of pathogenic bacteria. These
results reveal novel mechanisms whereby Giardia may protect against
gastrointestinal disease induced by a co-infecting A/E enteropathogen. Our
findings shed new light on how microbial-microbial interactions in the gut may
protect a host during concomitant infections.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0178647 
PMCID: PMC5473565
PMID: 28622393  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

