
1. PLoS Pathog. 2017 Jun 20;13(6):e1006457. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006457.
eCollection 2017 Jun.

Potassium is a key signal in host-microbiome dysbiosis in periodontitis.

Yost S(1), Duran-Pinedo AE(2), Krishnan K(1), Frias-Lopez J(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Forsyth Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(2)Department of Oral Biology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida,
United States of America.

Dysbiosis, or the imbalance in the structural and/or functional properties of the
microbiome, is at the origin of important infectious inflammatory diseases such
as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and periodontal disease. Periodontitis is a
polymicrobial inflammatory disease that affects a large proportion of the world's
population and has been associated with a wide variety of systemic health
conditions, such as diabetes, cardiovascular and respiratory diseases. Dysbiosis 
has been identified as a key element in the development of the disease. However, 
the precise mechanisms and environmental signals that lead to the initiation of
dysbiosis in the human microbiome are largely unknown. In a series of previous in
vivo studies using metatranscriptomic analysis of periodontitis and its
progression we identified several functional signatures that were highly
associated with the disease. Among them, potassium ion transport appeared to be
key in the process of pathogenesis. To confirm its importance we performed a
series of in vitro experiments, in which we demonstrated that potassium levels a 
increased the virulence of the oral community as a whole and at the same time
altering the immune response of gingival epithelium, increasing the production of
TNF-α and reducing the expression of IL-6 and the antimicrobial peptide human
β-defensin 3 (hBD-3). These results indicate that levels of potassium in the
periodontal pocket could be an important element in of dysbiosis in the oral
microbiome. They are a starting point for the identification of key environmental
signals that modify the behavior of the oral microbiome from a symbiotic
community to a dysbiotic one.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006457 
PMCID: PMC5493431
PMID: 28632755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

