
1. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2017 Jun 14;11:1729-1736. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S138888.
eCollection 2017.

Efficacy of antibiotic treatment of implant-associated Staphylococcus aureus
infections with moxifloxacin, flucloxacillin, rifampin, and combination therapy: 
an animal study.

Greimel F(1), Scheuerer C(1), Gessner A(2), Simon M(2), Kalteis T(1), Grifka
J(1), Benditz A(1), Springorum HR(1), Schaumburger J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, University Medical Center Regensburg, Asklepios
Klinikum Bad Abbach, Bad Abbach.
(2)Institute of Clinical Microbiology and Hygiene, University Medical Center
Regensburg, Regensburg, Bavaria, Germany.

The efficacy of antibiotic monotherapy and combination therapy in the treatment
of implant-associated infection by Staphylococcus aureus was evaluated in an
animal study. The femoral medullary cavity of 66 male Wistar rats was
contaminated with S. aureus (ATCC 29213) and a metal device was implanted, of
which 61 could be evaluated. Six treatment groups were studied: flucloxacillin,
flucloxacillin in combination with rifampin, moxifloxacin, moxifloxacin in
combination with rifampin, rifampin, and a control group with aqua. The treatment
was applied for 14 days. After euthanasia, the bacterial counts in the
periprosthetic bone, the soft tissue, and the implant-associated biofilm were
measured. Both antibiotic combination treatments (moxifloxacin plus rifampin and 
flucloxacillin plus rifampin) achieved a highly significant decrease in microbial
counts in the bone and soft tissue and in the biofilm. Mono-antibiotic treatments
with either moxifloxacin or flucloxacillin were unable to achieve a significant
decrease in microbial counts in bone and soft tissue or the biofilm, whilst
rifampin was able to reduce the counts significantly only in the biofilm.
Antibiotic resistance was measured in 1/3 of the cases in the rifampin group,
whereas no resistance was measured in all other groups. The results show that
combinations of both moxifloxacin and flucloxacillin plus rifampin are adequate
for the treatment of periprosthetic infections due to infections with S. aureus, 
whereas monotherapies are not effective or not applicable due to the rapid
development of antibiotic resistance. Therefore, moxifloxacin is an effective
alternative in combination with rifampin for the treatment of implant-associated 
infections.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S138888 
PMCID: PMC5476658
PMID: 28652709  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of
interest in this work.

