
1. PeerJ. 2017 Jun 26;5:e3471. doi: 10.7717/peerj.3471. eCollection 2017.

LuxS-dependent AI-2 production is not involved in global regulation of natural
product biosynthesis in Photorhabdus and Xenorhabdus.

Heinrich AK(#)(1), Hirschmann M(#)(1), Neubacher N(1), Bode HB(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Fachbereich Biowissenschaften, Merck Stiftungsprofessur für Molekulare
Biotechnologie, Goethe-Universität Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(2)Buchmann Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Goethe-Universität Frankfurt, 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

The Gram-negative bacteria Photorhabdus and Xenorhabdus are known to produce a
variety of different natural products (NP). These compounds play different roles 
since the bacteria live in symbiosis with nematodes and are pathogenic to insect 
larvae in the soil. Thus, a fine tuned regulatory system controlling NP
biosynthesis is indispensable. Global regulators such as Hfq, Lrp, LeuO and HexA 
have been shown to influence NP production of Photorhabdus and Xenorhabdus.
Additionally, photopyrones as quorum sensing (QS) signals were demonstrated to be
involved in the regulation of NP production in Photorhabdus. In this study, we
investigated the role of another possible QS signal, autoinducer-2 (AI-2), in
regulation of NP production. The AI-2 synthase (LuxS) is widely distributed
within the bacterial kingdom and has a dual role as a part of the activated
methyl cycle pathway, as well as being responsible for AI-2 precursor production.
We deleted luxS in three different entomopathogenic bacteria and compared NP
levels in the mutant strains to the wild type (WT) but observed no difference to 
the WT strains. Furthermore, the absence of the small regulatory RNA micA, which 
is encoded directly upstream of luxS, did not influence NP levels. Phenotypic
differences between the P. luminescens luxS deletion mutant and an earlier
described luxS deficient strain of P. luminescens suggested that two
phenotypically different strains have evolved in different laboratories.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.3471 
PMCID: PMC5488855
PMID: 28663937 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing
interests.

