
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2017 Jun 21;7:275. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00275.
eCollection 2017.

Differential Substrate Usage and Metabolic Fluxes in Francisella tularensis
Subspecies holarctica and Francisella novicida.

Chen F(1), Rydzewski K(2), Kutzner E(1), Häuslein I(1), Schunder E(2), Wang X(1),
Meighen-Berger K(1), Grunow R(3), Eisenreich W(1), Heuner K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Chair of Biochemistry, Technische Universität
MünchenGarching, Germany.
(2)Working Group "Cellular Interactions of Bacterial Pathogens", ZBS 2, Robert
Koch InstituteBerlin, Germany.
(3)Centre for Biological Threats and Special Pathogens, Division 2 (ZBS 2),
Highly Pathogenic Microorganisms, Robert Koch InstituteBerlin, Germany.

Francisella tularensis is an intracellular pathogen for many animals causing the 
infectious disease, tularemia. Whereas F. tularensis subsp. holarctica is highly 
pathogenic for humans, F. novicida is almost avirulent for humans, but virulent
for mice. In order to compare metabolic fluxes between these strains, we
performed 13C-labeling experiments with F. tularensis subsp. holarctica wild type
(beaver isolate), F. tularensis subsp. holarctica strain LVS, or F. novicida
strain U112 in complex media containing either [U-13C6]glucose,
[1,2-13C2]glucose, [U-13C3]serine, or [U-13C3]glycerol. GC/MS-based isotopolog
profiling of amino acids, polysaccharide-derived glucose, free fructose, amino
sugars derived from the cell wall, fatty acids, 3-hydroxybutyrate, lactate,
succinate and malate revealed uptake and metabolic usage of all tracers under the
experimental conditions with glucose being the major carbon source for all
strains under study. The labeling patterns of the F. tularensis subsp. holarctica
wild type were highly similar to those of the LVS strain, but showed remarkable
differences to the labeling profiles of the metabolites from the F. novicida
strain. Glucose was directly used for polysaccharide and cell wall biosynthesis
with higher rates in F. tularensis subsp. holarctica or metabolized, with higher 
rates in F. novicida, via glycolysis and the non-oxidative pentose phosphate
pathway (PPP). Catabolic turnover of glucose via gluconeogenesis was also
observed. In all strains, Ala was mainly synthesized from pyruvate, although no
pathway from pyruvate to Ala is annotated in the genomes of F. tularensis and F. 
novicida. Glycerol efficiently served as a gluconeogenetic substrate in F.
novicida, but only less in the F. tularensis subsp. holarctica strains. In any of
the studied strains, serine did not serve as a major substrate and was not
significantly used for gluconeogenesis under the experimental conditions. Rather,
it was only utilized, at low rates, in downstream metabolic processes, e.g., via 
acetyl-CoA in the citrate cycle and for fatty acid biosynthesis, especially in
the F. tularensis subsp. holarctica strains. In summary, the data reflect
differential metabolite fluxes in F. tularensis subsp. holarctica and F. novicida
suggesting that the different utilization of substrates could be related to host 
specificity and virulence of Francisella.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00275 
PMCID: PMC5478678
PMID: 28680859  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

