
1. Ann Neurol. 2017 Aug;82(2):186-195. doi: 10.1002/ana.24987. Epub 2017 Jul 22.

Matrix metalloproteinase 9 is decreased in natalizumab-treated multiple sclerosis
patients at risk for progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy.

Fissolo N(1), Pignolet B(2), Matute-Blanch C(1), Triviño JC(3), Miró B(4), Mota
M(4), Perez-Hoyos S(4), Sanchez A(4)(5), Vermersch P(6), Ruet A(7), de Sèze J(8),
Labauge P(9), Vukusic S(10), Papeix C(11), Almoyna L(12), Tourbah A(13), Clavelou
P(14), Moreau T(15), Pelletier J(16), Lebrun-Frenay C(17), Montalban X(1),
Brassat D(2), Comabella M(1); Biomarkers and Response to Natalizumab for Multiple
Sclerosis Treatment (BIONAT), Best EScalation Treatment in Multiple Sclerosis
(BEST-MS), and the Société Francophone de la Sclérose En Plaques (SFSEP) Network.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology-Neuroimmunology, Multiple Sclerosis Center of
Catalonia, Vall d'Hebron Research Institute, Vall d'Hebron University Hospital,
Autonomous University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Neurosciences Pole, Toulouse University Hospital Center, Physiopathology
Center of Toulouse-Purpan, National Institute of Health and Medical Research,
University of Toulouse, and Paul Sabatier University, Toulouse, France.
(3)Genomic Systems, Valencia, Spain.
(4)Statistics and Bioinformatics Unit, Vall d'Hebron Research Institute,
Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Department of Genetics, Microbiology, and Statistics, University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Lilly University, Lille University Hospital Center, Lille Inflammation
Research International Center, National Institute of Health and Medical Research,
Immune-Mediated Inflammatory Diseases and Targeted Therapies Federal Hospital
University Project, Lille, France.
(7)Bordeaux University Hospital Center, National Institute of Health and Medical 
Research, Neurology Services, and Magendie Neurocenter, Bordeaux, France.
(8)Department of Neurology, Civil Hospital, Strasbourg, France.
(9)Department of Neurology, Montpellier University Hospital Center, France.
(10)Department of Neurology, Lyon University Hospital Center, Bron, France.
(11)Department of Neurology, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France.
(12)Chi Aix-en-Provence, Aix-en-Provence, France.
(13)Department of Neurology and Reims Faculty of Medicine, Reims University
Hospital Center, University of Reims Champagne-Ardenne, Reims, and University of 
Paris VIII, Saint-Denis, France.
(14)Department of Neurology, Clermont-Ferrand Regional University Hospital
Center, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(15)Department of Neurology, Dijon University Hospital Center, Dijon, France.
(16)Aix-Marseille University, Public Assistance Hospitals of Marseilles, Timone
Hospital, Clinical Neurosciences Pole, Neurology Service, National Center for
Scientific Research, Biological and Medical Magnetic Resonance Center, Marseille,
France.
(17)Neurology Service, Pasteur Hospital, Nice, France.

Comment in
    Ann Neurol. 2017 Oct;82(4):647-648.
    Ann Neurol. 2017 Oct;82(4):647.

OBJECTIVE: To identify biomarkers associated with the development of progressive 
multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) in multiple sclerosis (MS) patients treated 
with natalizumab (NTZ).
METHODS: Relapsing-remitting MS patients who developed PML under NTZ therapy
(pre-PML) and non-PML NTZ-treated patients (NTZ-ctr) were included in the study. 
Cryopreserved peripheral blood mononuclear cells and serum samples collected at
baseline, at 1- and 2-year treated time points, and during PML were analyzed for 
gene expression by RNA sequencing and for serum protein levels by Luminex and
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays, respectively.
RESULTS: Among top differentially expressed genes in the RNA sequencing between
pre-PML and NTZ-ctr patients, pathway analysis revealed a high representation of 
genes belonging to the following categories: proangiogenic factors (MMP9, VEGFA),
chemokines (CXCL1, CXCL5, IL8, CCL2), cytokines (IL1B, IFNG), and plasminogen-
and coagulation-related molecules (SERPINB2, PLAU, PLAUR, TFPI, THBD). Serum
protein levels for these candidates were measured in a 2-step manner in a
screening cohort and a validation cohort of pre-PML and NTZ-ctr patients. Only
matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) was validated; in pre-PML patients, MMP9
protein levels were significantly reduced at baseline compared with NTZ-ctr
patients, and levels remained lower at later time points during NTZ treatment.
INTERPRETATION: The results from this study suggest that the proangiogenic factor
MMP9 may play a role as a biomarker associated with the development of PML in MS 
patients treated with NTZ. Ann Neurol 2017;82:186-195.

© 2017 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.24987 
PMID: 28681388  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

