
1. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2017 Apr-Jun;31(2):263-267.

Mast cell, pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory: Jekyll and Hyde, the story
continues.

Conti P(1), Caraffa Al(2), Kritas SK(3), Ronconi G(4), Lessiani G(5), Toniato
E(6), Theoharides TC(7).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Division, Postgraduate Medical School, University of Chieti,
Chieti, Italy.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, School of Veterinary
Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Macedonia, Greece.
(4)UOS Clinica dei Pazienti del Territorio, Policlinico Gemelli, Rome, Italy.
(5)Center of Intensive Rehabilitation, “S. Agnese”, Pineto (TE), Italy.
(6)Department of Medical, Oral and Biotechnological Sciences, University of
Chieti, Italy.
(7)Molecular Immunopharmacology and Drug Discovery Laboratory, Department of
Integrative Physiology and Pathobiology, Tufts University School of Medicine,
Boston, MA USA.

IL-1 family members include inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines. They
can be beneficial or detrimental, not only in cancer, but also in inflammatory
conditions. Mast cells (MCs) originate from CD34+/CD117+/CD13+ pluripotent
hematopoietic stem cells, express c-Kit receptor (c-Kit-R), which regulates the
proliferation and sustain the survival, differentiation and maturation of MCs.
They are immune cells involved in innate and adaptive immunity, allergy,
autoimmunity, cancer and inflammation. MCs along with T cells and macrophages
release interleukin (IL)-10, which is a pleiotropic immunoregulatory cytokine
with multiple biological effects. IL-10 inhibits Th1 inflammatory cells, in
particular TNF mostly generated by macrophages and MCs, and down-regulates IFN-γ,
IL-1 and IL-6. IL-37 is a family member cytokine which binds IL-18 receptor α
chain and inhibits inflammatory mediators including TNF, IL-1, IL-6, IL-33 and
nitric oxide (NO). IL-37 similar to IL-10 inhibits MC inflammatory cytokines in
several disorders, including asthma, allergy, arthrtitis and cancer. Here we
report a study comparing IL-10 with IL-37, two anti-inflammatory cytokines.


PMID: 28685525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

