
1. Environ Health Perspect. 2017 Jul 5;125(7):077003. doi: 10.1289/EHP876.

Effects of Coal Fly Ash Particulate Matter on the Antimicrobial Activity of
Airway Surface Liquid.

Vargas Buonfiglio LG(1), Mudunkotuwa IA(2), Abou Alaiwa MH(1), Vanegas Calderón
OG(3), Borcherding JA(1), Gerke AK(1), Zabner J(1), Grassian VH(4)(5)(6),
Comellas AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of
Medicine,
(2)Department of Chemistry, College of Liberal Arts and Sciences, and
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine,
University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA
(4)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
(5)Department of Nanoengineering, and
(6)Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California San Diego, La
Jolla, California, USA

BACKGROUND: Sustained exposure to ambient particulate matter (PM) is a global
cause of mortality. Coal fly ash (CFA) is a byproduct of coal combustion and is a
source of anthropogenic PM with worldwide health relevance. The airway epithelia 
are lined with fluid called airway surface liquid (ASL), which contains
antimicrobial proteins and peptides (AMPs). Cationic AMPs bind negatively charged
bacteria to exert their antimicrobial activity. PM arriving in the airways could 
potentially interact with AMPs in the ASL to affect their antimicrobial activity.
OBJECTIVES: We hypothesized that PM can interact with ASL AMPs to impair their
antimicrobial activity.
METHODS: We exposed pig and human airway explants, pig and human ASL, and the
human cationic AMPs β-defensin-3, LL-37, and lysozyme to CFA or control.
Thereafter, we assessed the antimicrobial activity of exposed airway samples
using both bioluminescence and standard colony-forming unit assays. We
investigated PM-AMP electrostatic interaction by attenuated total reflection
Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy and measuring the zeta potential. We also
studied the adsorption of AMPs on PM.
RESULTS: We found increased bacterial survival in CFA-exposed airway explants,
ASL, and AMPs. In addition, we report that PM with a negative surface charge can 
adsorb cationic AMPs and form negative particle-protein complexes.
CONCLUSION: We propose that when CFA arrives at the airway, it rapidly adsorbs
AMPs and creates negative complexes, thereby decreasing the functional amount of 
AMPs capable of killing pathogens. These results provide a novel translational
insight into an early mechanism for how ambient PM increases the susceptibility
of the airways to bacterial infection. https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP876.

DOI: 10.1289/EHP876 
PMCID: PMC5744695
PMID: 28696208  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

