
1. Biophys J. 2017 Jul 11;113(1):91-100. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2017.05.027.

A Cardiomyopathy Mutation in the Myosin Essential Light Chain Alters Actomyosin
Structure.

Guhathakurta P(1), Prochniewicz E(1), Roopnarine O(1), Rohde JA(1), Thomas DD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Electronic address: ddt@umn.edu.

We have used site-directed time-resolved fluorescence resonance energy transfer
to determine the effect of a pathological mutation in the human ventricular
essential light chain (hVELC) of myosin, on the structural dynamics of the
actin-myosin complex. The hVELC modulates the function of actomyosin, through the
interaction of its N-terminal extension with actin and its C-terminal lobe with
the myosin heavy chain. Several mutations in hVELC are associated with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). Some biochemical effects of these mutations
are known, but further insight is needed about their effects on the structural
dynamics of functioning actomyosin. Therefore, we introduced the HCM mutation
E56G into a single-cysteine (C16) hVELC construct and substituted it for the VELC
of bovine cardiac myosin subfragment 1. Using a donor fluorescent probe on actin 
(at C374) and an acceptor probe on C16 of hVELC, we performed time-resolved
fluorescence resonance energy transfer, directly detecting structural changes
within the bound actomyosin complex during function. The E56G mutation has no
significant effect on actin-activated ATPase activity or actomyosin affinity in
the presence of ATP, or on the structure of the strong-binding S complex in the
absence of ATP. However, in the presence of saturating ATP, where both W
(prepowerstroke) and S (postpowerstroke) structural states are observed, the
mutant increases the mole fraction of the S complex (increasing the duty ratio), 
while shifting the structure of the remaining W complex toward that of S,
indicating a structural redistribution toward the strongly bound
(force-generating) complex. We propose that this effect is responsible for the
hypercontractile phenotype induced by this HCM mutation in myosin.

Copyright © 2017 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpj.2017.05.027 
PMCID: PMC5510710
PMID: 28700929  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

