
1. Microb Pathog. 2017 Sep;110:352-358. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2017.07.021. Epub
2017 Jul 12.

Serotyping of Brunei pneumococcal clinical strains and the investigation of their
capability to adhere and invade a brain endothelium model.

Rahman NA(1), Sharudin A(2), Diah S(3), Muharram SH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Pengiran Anak Puteri Rashidah Sa'adatul Bolkiah Institute of Health Sciences, 
Universiti Brunei Darussalam, Brunei Darussalam. Electronic address:
14h8153@ubd.edu.bn.
(2)School of Health Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kelantan, Malaysia.
(3)Pengiran Anak Puteri Rashidah Sa'adatul Bolkiah Institute of Health Sciences, 
Universiti Brunei Darussalam, Brunei Darussalam.

INTRODUCTION: Pneumococcal infections have caused morbidity and mortality
globally. Streptococcus pneumoniae (pneumococci) are commensal bacteria that
colonize the nasopharynx, asymptomatically. From there, pneumococci can spread in
the lungs causing pneumonia and disseminate in the bloodstream causing bacteremia
(sepsis) and reach the brain leading to meningitis. Endothelial cells are one of 
the most important components of the blood-brain barrier that separates the blood
from the brain and plays the first protective role against pneumococcal entry.
Thus this study aimed to investigate on the ability of non-meningitis
pneumococcal clinical strains to adhere and invade a brain endothelium model.
METHODS: Two pneumococcal Brunei clinical strains were serotyped by multiplex PCR
method using oligonucleotide sequences derived from Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention. A validated immortalised mouse brain endothelial cell line
(bEnd.3) was used as a brain endothelium model for the study of the pneumococcal 
breach of the blood-brain barrier using an adherence and invasion assay.
RESULTS: Both of the pneumococcal clinical strains were found to be serotype 19F,
a common circulating serotype in Southeast Asia and globally and possess the
ability to adhere and invade the brain endothelial cells.
CONCLUSION: In addition, this is the first report on the serotype identification 
of pneumococci in Brunei Darussalam and their application on a brain endothelium 
model. Further studies are required to understand the virulence capabilities of
the clinical strains.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2017.07.021 
PMID: 28711510  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

