
1. ACS Chem Biol. 2017 Sep 15;12(9):2335-2344. doi: 10.1021/acschembio.7b00389. Epub
2017 Aug 8.

Structure-Activity Relationships Reveal Key Features of 8-Oxoguanine: A Mismatch 
Detection by the MutY Glycosylase.

Manlove AH(1), McKibbin PL(1), Doyle EL(1), Majumdar C(1), Hamm ML(2), David
SS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California at Davis , One Shields
Avenue, Davis, California 95616, United States.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Richmond , Richmond, Virginia 23173,
United States.

Base excision repair glycosylases locate and remove damaged bases in DNA with
remarkable specificity. The MutY glycosylases, unusual for their excision of
undamaged adenines mispaired to the oxidized base 8-oxoguanine (OG), must
recognize both bases of the mispair in order to prevent promutagenic activity.
Moreover, MutY must effectively find OG:A mismatches within the context of highly
abundant and structurally similar T:A base pairs. Very little is known about the 
factors that initiate MutY's interaction with the substrate when it first
encounters an intrahelical OG:A mispair, or about the order of recognition
checkpoints. Here, we used structure-activity relationships (SAR) to investigate 
the features that influence the in vitro measured parameters of mismatch affinity
and adenine base excision efficiency by E. coli MutY. We also evaluated the
impacts of the same substrate alterations on MutY-mediated repair in a cellular
context. Our results show that MutY relies strongly on the presence of the OG
base and recognizes multiple structural features at different stages of
recognition and catalysis to ensure that only inappropriately mispaired adenines 
are excised. Notably, some OG modifications resulted in more dramatic reductions 
in cellular repair than in the in vitro kinetic parameters, indicating their
importance for initial recognition events needed to locate the mismatch within
DNA. Indeed, the initial encounter of MutY with its target base pair may rely on 
specific interactions with the 2-amino group of OG in the major groove, a feature
that distinguishes OG:A from T:A base pairs. These results furthermore suggest
that inefficient substrate location in human MutY homologue variants may prove
predictive for the early onset colorectal cancer phenotype known as
MUTYH-Associated Polyposis, or MAP.

DOI: 10.1021/acschembio.7b00389 
PMCID: PMC5603899
PMID: 28723094  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

