
1. Dis Aquat Organ. 2017 Jul 24;125(2):155-166. doi: 10.3354/dao03143.

Health and Environmental Risk Assessment Project for bottlenose dolphins Tursiops
truncatus from the southeastern USA. II. Environmental aspects.

Reif JS(1), Schaefer AM, Bossart GD, Fair PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Radiological Health Sciences, College of
Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort
Collins, Colorado 80523, USA.

Bottlenose dolphins Tursiops truncatus are the most common apex predators found
in coastal and estuarine ecosystems along the southeastern coast of the USA,
where these animals are exposed to multiple chemical pollutants and microbial
agents. In this review, we summarize the results of investigations of
environmental exposures evaluated in 360 free-ranging dolphins between 2003 and
2015. Bottlenose dolphins inhabiting the Indian River Lagoon, Florida (IRL, n =
246), and coastal waters of Charleston, South Carolina (CHS, n = 114), were
captured, given comprehensive health examinations, and released as part of a
multidisciplinary and multi-institutional study of individual and population
health. High concentrations of persistent organic pollutants including legacy
contaminants (DDT and other pesticides, polychlorinated biphenyl compounds) as
well as 'emerging' contaminants (polybrominated diphenyl ethers, perfluorinated
compounds) were detected in dolphins from CHS, with lower concentrations in the
IRL. Conversely, the concentrations of mercury in the blood and skin of IRL
dolphins were among the highest reported worldwide and approximately 5 times as
high as those found in CHS dolphins. A high prevalence of resistance to
antibiotics commonly used in humans and animals was detected in bacteria isolated
from fecal, blowhole, and/or gastric samples at both sites, including
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) at CHS. Collectively, these
studies illustrate the importance of long-term surveillance of estuarine
populations of bottlenose dolphins and reaffirm their important role as sentinels
for marine ecosystems and public health.

DOI: 10.3354/dao03143 
PMID: 28737160  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

