
1. Int Wound J. 2017 Dec;14(6):1388-1390. doi: 10.1111/iwj.12794. Epub 2017 Jul 23.

Topical sevoflurane for chronic venous ulcers infected by multi-drug-resistant
organisms.

Imbernón-Moya A(1), Ortiz-de Frutos FJ(2), Sanjuan-Alvarez M(3), Portero-Sanchez 
I(4), Merinero-Palomares R(5), Alcazar V(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Severo Ochoa, Leganés, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Doce de Octubre, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Anestesiology, Hospital Severo Ochoa, Leganés, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Department of Clinical Medicine, Complutense University of Madrid, Madrid,
Spain.
(5)Department of Crystallography and Mineralogy, Complutense University of
Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Department of Endocrinology, Hospital Severo Ochoa, Leganés, Madrid, Spain.

Several anaesthetic drugs have demonstrated antibacterial properties in vitro.
Anaesthetics can primarily affect the cell wall of both susceptible and
multi-resistant bacteria. They may also have a synergistic effect with
conventional antibiotics through an unknown mechanism. We present three cases of 
a chronic venous ulcer infected by multi-resistant bacteria refractory to
conventional systemic antibiotics, including Pseudomonas aeruginosa and
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Treatment with topical
sevoflurane was performed for 1 month without systemic antibiotics. Patients with
an MRSA infection showed progressive improvement with negative culture at the end
of the treatment. Multi-drug-resistant P. aeruginosa infection persisted at the
end of treatment with positive culture. The local adverse events were mild and
transient, including heat, pruritus and erythema. Topical sevoflurane may have an
antibacterial effect on sensitive and multi-resistant strains. It can allow more 
complete surgical cleaning, leaving a cleaner wound with less fibrin and necrotic
tissue. This decreases the bacterial colonisation and therefore the infectious
risk, the bad smell and the exudation. The simultaneous use of conventional
antibiotics and topical sevoflurane can have a synergistic antimicrobial effect.

© 2017 Medicalhelplines.com Inc and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/iwj.12794 
PMID: 28736974  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

