
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2017 Jul 27;11(7):e0005823. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0005823. eCollection 2017 Jul.

Expression of intra- and extracellular granzymes in patients with typhoid fever.

de Jong HK(1)(2), Garcia-Laorden MI(2), Hoogendijk AJ(2), Parry CM(3)(4)(5)(6),
Maude RR(3), Dondorp AM(3)(4)(7), Faiz MA(3)(8), van der Poll T(1)(2), Wiersinga 
WJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases and Center
for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine (CEMM), Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit (MORU), Faculty of Tropical
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Center for Tropical Medicine, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine,
Churchill Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(5)Clinical Research Department, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, 
London, United Kingdom.
(6)School of Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, 
Japan.
(7)Chittagong Medical College Hospital, Chittagong, Bangladesh.
(8)Dev Care Foundation, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

BACKGROUND: Typhoid fever, caused by the intracellular pathogen Salmonella (S.)
enterica serovar Typhi, remains a major cause of morbidity and mortality
worldwide. Granzymes are serine proteases promoting cytotoxic lymphocytes
mediated eradication of intracellular pathogens via the induction of cell death
and which can also play a role in inflammation. We aimed to characterize the
expression of extracellular and intracellular granzymes in patients with typhoid 
fever and whether the extracellular levels of granzyme correlated with IFN-γ
release.
METHODS AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We analyzed soluble protein levels of
extracellular granzyme A and B in healthy volunteers and patients with confirmed 
S. Typhi infection on admission and day of discharge, and investigated whether
this correlated with interferon (IFN)-γ release, a cytokine significantly
expressed in typhoid fever. The intracellular expression of granzyme A, B and K
in subsets of lymphocytic cells was determined using flow cytometry. Patients
demonstrated a marked increase of extracellular granzyme A and B in acute phase
plasma and a correlation of both granzymes with IFN-γ release. In patients, lower
plasma levels of granzyme B, but not granzyme A, were found at day of discharge
compared to admission, indicating an association of granzyme B with stage of
disease. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells of typhoid fever patients had a
higher percentage of lymphocytic cells expressing intracellular granzyme A and
granzyme B, but not granzyme K, compared to controls.
CONCLUSION: The marked increase observed in extra- and intracellular levels of
granzyme expression in patients with typhoid fever, and the correlation with
stage of disease, suggests a role for granzymes in the host response to this
disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0005823 
PMCID: PMC5549753
PMID: 28749963  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

