
1. Arch Oral Biol. 2017 Nov;83:97-104. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2017.07.005. Epub 
2017 Jul 12.

Effect of cinnamon (Cinnamomum verum) bark essential oil on the
halitosis-associated bacterium Solobacterium moorei and in vitro cytotoxicity.

LeBel G(1), Haas B(1), Adam AA(1), Veilleux MP(1), Lagha AB(1), Grenier D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Oral Ecology Research Group, Faculty of Dentistry, Université Laval, Quebec
City, Quebec, Canada.
(2)Oral Ecology Research Group, Faculty of Dentistry, Université Laval, Quebec
City, Quebec, Canada. Electronic address: Daniel.Grenier@greb.ulaval.ca.

OBJECTIVES: Halitosis, also known as bad breath or oral malodour, is a condition 
affecting a large proportion of the population. Solobacterium moorei is a
Gram-positive anaerobic bacterium that has been specifically associated with
halitosis. In this study, we investigated the effects of essential oils, more
particularly cinnamon bark oil, on growth, biofilm formation, eradication and
killing, as well as hydrogen sulfide (H2S) production by S. moorei.
METHODS: A broth microdilution assay was used to determine the antibacterial
activity of essential oils. Biofilm formation was assessed by a crystal violet
staining assay and scanning electron microscopy. The biofilm of S. moorei was
characterized by enzymatic treatments. Biofilm killing was determined by a
luminescence assay monitoring ATP production. H2S production was quantified with 
a colorimetric assay. The biocompatibility of cinnamon oil was investigated using
a gingival keratinocyte cell line.
RESULTS: Among the ten essential oils tested, cinnamon oil was found to be the
most powerful against S. moorei with MIC and MBC values of 0.039% and 0.156%,
respectively. The biofilm formed by S. moorei was then characterized. The fact
that DNase I and to a lesser extent proteinase K significantly reduced biofilm
formation by S. moorei and induced its eradication suggests that the
extracellular matrix of S. moorei biofilm may be mainly containing a DNA backbone
associated with proteins. At concentrations below the MIC, cinnamon oil reduced
S. moorei biofilm formation that resulted from an attenuation of bacterial
growth. It was also found that treatment of a pre-formed biofilm of S. moorei
with cinnamon oil significantly decreased its viability although it did not cause
its eradication. Cinnamon oil had an inhibitory effect on the production of H2S
by S. moorei. Lastly, it was found that at concentrations effective against S.
moorei, no significant loss of viability in gingival keratinocytes occurred after
a 1-h exposure.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study brought evidence that cinnamon oil may be a promising
substance to incorporate into oral hygiene products for controlling bad breath by
inhibiting growth, killing biofilm, and reducing H2S production by S. moorei.
Moreover, at the effective concentrations, cinnamon oil was found to have no
toxic effects on oral keratinocytes.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2017.07.005 
PMID: 28743086  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

