
1. Periodontol 2000. 2017 Oct;75(1):116-151. doi: 10.1111/prd.12181.

Revisiting the Page & Schroeder model: the good, the bad and the unknowns in the 
periodontal host response 40 years later.

Hajishengallis G, Korostoff JM.

In their classic 1976 paper, Page & Schroeder described the histopathologic
events and the types of myeloid cells and lymphocytes involved in the initiation 
and progression of inflammatory periodontal disease. The staging of periodontal
disease pathogenesis as 'initial', 'early', 'established' and 'advanced' lesions 
productively guided subsequent research in the field and remains fundamentally
valid. However, major advances regarding the cellular and molecular mechanisms
underlying the induction, regulation and effector functions of immune and
inflammatory responses necessitate a reassessment of their work and its
integration with emerging new concepts. We now know that each type of leukocyte
is actually represented by functionally distinct subsets with different, or even 
conflicting, roles in immunity and inflammation. Unexpectedly, neutrophils,
traditionally regarded as merely antimicrobial effectors in acute conditions and 
protagonists of the 'initial' lesion, are currently appreciated for their
functional versatility and critical roles in chronic inflammation. Moreover, an
entirely new field of study, osteoimmunology, has emerged and sheds light on the 
impact of immunoinflammatory events on the skeletal system. These developments
and the molecular dissection of crosstalk interactions between innate and
adaptive leukocytes, as well as between the immune system and local homeostatic
mechanisms, offer a more nuanced understanding of the host response in
periodontitis, with profound implications for treatment. At the same time, deeper
insights have generated new questions, many of which remain unanswered. In this
review, 40 years after Page & Schroeder proposed their model, we summarize
enduring and emerging advances in periodontal disease pathogenesis.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/prd.12181 
PMCID: PMC5539911
PMID: 28758305  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

