
1. Circulation. 2017 Sep 26;136(13):1217-1232. doi:
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.026361. Epub 2017 Aug 4.

Disturbed Flow Promotes Arterial Stiffening Through Thrombospondin-1.

Kim CW(1), Pokutta-Paskaleva A(1), Kumar S(1), Timmins LH(1), Morris AD(1), Kang 
DW(1), Dalal S(1), Chadid T(1), Kuo KM(1), Raykin J(1), Li H(1), Yanagisawa H(1),
Gleason RL Jr(1), Jo H(2), Brewster LP(2).

Author information: 
(1)From Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia
Institute of Technology and Emory University, Atlanta (C.W.K., A.P.-P., S.K.,
D.-W.K., J.R., R.L.G., H.J., L.P.B.); Department of Microbiology, College of
Medicine, Inha University, Incheon, Republic of Korea (C.W.K.); Department of
Surgery, Emory University, Atlanta, GA (A.P.-P., A.D.M., T.C., K.M.K., H.L.,
L.P.B.); Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Emory University, Atlanta,
GA (L.H.T.); Department of Bioengineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City
(L.H.T.); Mercer University School of Medicine, Macon, GA (S.D.); Life Science
Center, Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan
(H.Y.); George W. Woodruff School of Mechanical Engineering, Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta (R.L.G.); Surgical and Research Services, Atlanta VA Medical 
Center, Decatur, GA (L.P.B.); and Parker H. Petit Institute for Bioengineering
and Biosciences, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta (L.P.B.).
(2)From Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia
Institute of Technology and Emory University, Atlanta (C.W.K., A.P.-P., S.K.,
D.-W.K., J.R., R.L.G., H.J., L.P.B.); Department of Microbiology, College of
Medicine, Inha University, Incheon, Republic of Korea (C.W.K.); Department of
Surgery, Emory University, Atlanta, GA (A.P.-P., A.D.M., T.C., K.M.K., H.L.,
L.P.B.); Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Emory University, Atlanta,
GA (L.H.T.); Department of Bioengineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City
(L.H.T.); Mercer University School of Medicine, Macon, GA (S.D.); Life Science
Center, Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan
(H.Y.); George W. Woodruff School of Mechanical Engineering, Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta (R.L.G.); Surgical and Research Services, Atlanta VA Medical 
Center, Decatur, GA (L.P.B.); and Parker H. Petit Institute for Bioengineering
and Biosciences, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta (L.P.B.).
lbrewst@emory.edu luke.brewster@va.gov hjo@emory.edu.

BACKGROUND: Arterial stiffness and wall shear stress are powerful determinants of
cardiovascular health, and arterial stiffness is associated with increased
cardiovascular mortality. Low and oscillatory wall shear stress, termed disturbed
flow (d-flow), promotes atherosclerotic arterial remodeling, but the relationship
between d-flow and arterial stiffness is not well understood. The objective of
this study was to define the role of d-flow on arterial stiffening and discover
the relevant signaling pathways by which d-flow stiffens arteries.
METHODS: D-flow was induced in the carotid arteries of young and old mice of both
sexes. Arterial stiffness was quantified ex vivo with cylindrical biaxial
mechanical testing and in vivo from duplex ultrasound and compared with
unmanipulated carotid arteries from 80-week-old mice. Gene expression and pathway
analysis was performed on endothelial cell-enriched RNA and validated by
immunohistochemistry. In vitro testing of signaling pathways was performed under 
oscillatory and laminar wall shear stress conditions. Human arteries from regions
of d-flow and stable flow were tested ex vivo to validate critical results from
the animal model.
RESULTS: D-flow induced arterial stiffening through collagen deposition after
partial carotid ligation, and the degree of stiffening was similar to that of
unmanipulated carotid arteries from 80-week-old mice. Intimal gene pathway
analyses identified transforming growth factor-β pathways as having a prominent
role in this stiffened arterial response, but this was attributable to
thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1) stimulation of profibrotic genes and not changes to
transforming growth factor-β. In vitro and in vivo testing under d-flow
conditions identified a possible role for TSP-1 activation of transforming growth
factor-β in the upregulation of these genes. TSP-1 knockout animals had
significantly less arterial stiffening in response to d-flow than wild-type
carotid arteries. Human arteries exposed to d-flow had similar increases TSP-1
and collagen gene expression as seen in our model.
CONCLUSIONS: TSP-1 has a critical role in shear-mediated arterial stiffening that
is mediated in part through TSP-1's activation of the profibrotic signaling
pathways of transforming growth factor-β. Molecular targets in this pathway may
lead to novel therapies to limit arterial stiffening and the progression of
disease in arteries exposed to d-flow.

© 2017 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.026361 
PMCID: PMC5614852
PMID: 28778947  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

