
1. PLoS One. 2017 Aug 9;12(8):e0181531. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0181531.
eCollection 2017.

Response of Posidonia oceanica seagrass and its epibiont communities to ocean
acidification.

Guilini K(1), Weber M(2)(3), de Beer D(4), Schneider M(3), Molari M(2), Lott
C(3), Bodnar W(1), Mascart T(1), De Troch M(1), Vanreusel A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Marine Biology Research Group, Department of Biology, Ghent University, Ghent,
Belgium.
(2)HGF-MPG Joint Research Group on Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck
Institute for Marine Microbiology, Bremen, Germany.
(3)HYDRA Institute for Marine Sciences, Elba Field Station, Italy.
(4)Microsensor Group, Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology, Bremen,
Germany.

The unprecedented rate of CO2 increase in our atmosphere and subsequent ocean
acidification (OA) threatens coastal ecosystems. To forecast the functioning of
coastal seagrass ecosystems in acidified oceans, more knowledge on the long-term 
adaptive capacities of seagrass species and their epibionts is needed. Therefore 
we studied morphological characteristics of Posidonia oceanica and the structure 
of its epibiont communities at a Mediterranean volcanic CO2 vent off Panarea
Island (Italy) and performed a laboratory experiment to test the effect of OA on 
P. oceanica photosynthesis and its potential buffering capacity. At the study
site east of Basiluzzo Islet, venting of CO2 gas was controlled by tides,
resulting in an average pH difference of 0.1 between the vent and reference site.
P. oceanica shoot and leaf density was unaffected by these levels of OA, although
shorter leaves at the vent site suggest increased susceptibility to erosion,
potentially by herbivores. The community of sessile epibionts differed in
composition and was characterized by a higher species richness at the vent site, 
though net epiphytic calcium carbonate concentration was similar. These findings 
suggest a higher ecosystem complexity at the vent site, which may have
facilitated the higher diversity of copepods in the otherwise unaffected motile
epibiont community. In the laboratory experiment, P. oceanica photosynthesis
increased with decreasing pHT (7.6, 6.6, 5.5), which induced an elevated pH at
the leaf surfaces of up to 0.5 units compared to the ambient seawater pHT of 6.6.
This suggests a temporary pH buffering in the diffusive boundary layer of leaves,
which could be favorable for epibiont organisms. The results of this multispecies
study contribute to understanding community-level responses and underlying
processes in long-term acidified conditions. Increased replication and monitoring
of physico-chemical parameters on an annual scale are, however, recommended to
assure that the biological responses observed during a short period reflect
long-term dynamics of these parameters.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0181531 
PMCID: PMC5549886
PMID: 28792960  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

