
1. PLoS One. 2017 Aug 9;12(8):e0182825. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0182825.
eCollection 2017.

Media from macrophages co-incubated with Enterococcus faecalis induces epithelial
cell monolayer reassembly and altered cell morphology.

Belogortseva N(1), Krezalek M(1), Guyton K(1), Labno C(2), Poroyko V(3), Zaborina
O(1), Alverdy JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United States
of America.
(2)Integrated Light Microscopy Core Facility, University of Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois, United States of America.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology and Therapeutics, Research City of Hope
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Duarte, California, United States of America.

Signal exchange between intestinal epithelial cells, microbes and local immune
cells is an important mechanism of intestinal homeostasis. Given that intestinal 
macrophages are in close proximity to both the intestinal epithelium and the
microbiota, their pathologic interactions may result in epithelial damage. The
present study demonstrates that co-incubation of murine macrophages with E.
faecalis strains producing gelatinase (GelE) and serine protease (SprE) leads to 
resultant condition media (CM) capable of inducing reassembly of primary colonic 
epithelial cell monolayers. Following the conditioned media (CM) exposure, some
epithelial cells are shed whereas adherent cells are observed to undergo
dissolution of cell-cell junctions and morphologic transformation with actin
cytoskeleton reorganization resulting in flattened and elongated shapes. These
cells exhibit marked filamentous filopodia and lamellipodia formation. Cellular
reorganization is not observed when epithelial monolayers are exposed to: CM from
macrophages co-incubated with E. faecalis GelE/SprE-deficient mutants, CM from
macrophages alone, or E. faecalis (GelE/SprE) alone. Flow cytometry analysis
reveals increased expression of CD24 and CD44 in cells treated with macrophage/E.
faecalis CM. This finding in combination with the appearance colony formation in 
matrigel demonstrate that the cells treated with macrophage/E. faecalis CM
contain a higher proportion progenitor cells compared to untreated control. Taken
together, these findings provide evidence for a triangulated molecular dialogue
between E. faecalis, macrophages and colonic epithelial cells, which may have
important implications for conditions in the gut that involve inflammation,
injury or tumorigenesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0182825 
PMCID: PMC5549984
PMID: 28793333  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

