
1. Infect Immun. 2017 Oct 18;85(11). pii: e00115-17. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00115-17.
Print 2017 Nov.

Chronic Brucella Infection Induces Selective and Persistent Interferon
Gamma-Dependent Alterations of Marginal Zone Macrophages in the Spleen.

Machelart A(1), Khadrawi A(1), Demars A(1), Willemart K(1), De Trez C(2),
Letesson JJ(1), Muraille E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherche en Biologie des Microorganismes, Laboratoire d'Immunologie 
et de Microbiologie, Université de Namur, Namur, Belgium.
(2)Research Unit of Cellular and Molecular Immunology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel
and Vlaams Instituut voor Biotechnologie, Department of Structural Biology
Research Center, Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Laboratoire de Parasitologie, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium
emuraille@hotmail.com.

The spleen is known as an important filter for blood-borne pathogens that are
trapped by specialized macrophages in the marginal zone (MZ): the CD209+ MZ
macrophages (MZMs) and the CD169+ marginal metallophilic macrophages (MMMs).
Acute systemic infection strongly impacts MZ populations and the location of T
and B lymphocytes. This phenomenon has been linked to reduced chemokine secretion
by stromal cells. Brucella spp. are the causative agent of brucellosis, a
widespread zoonotic disease. Here, we used Brucella melitensis infection as a
model to investigate the impact of chronic stealth infection on splenic MZ
macrophage populations. During the late phase of Brucella infection, we observed 
a loss of both MZMs and MMMs, with a durable disappearance of MZMs, leading to a 
reduction of the ability of the spleen to take up soluble antigens, beads, and
unrelated bacteria. This effect appears to be selective as every other lymphoid
and myeloid population analyzed increased during infection, which was also
observed following Brucella abortus and Brucella suis infection. Comparison of
wild-type and deficient mice suggested that MZ macrophage population loss is
dependent on interferon gamma (IFN-γ) receptor but independent of T cells or
tumor necrosis factor alpha receptor 1 (TNF-αR1) signaling pathways and is not
correlated to an alteration of CCL19, CCL21, and CXCL13 chemokine mRNA
expression. Our results suggest that MZ macrophage populations are particularly
sensitive to persistent low-level IFN-γ-mediated inflammation and that Brucella
infection could reduce the ability of the spleen to perform certain MZM- and
MMM-dependent tasks, such as antigen delivery to lymphocytes and control of
systemic infection.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00115-17 
PMCID: PMC5649024
PMID: 28808159  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

