
1. Physiol Rep. 2017 Aug;5(15). pii: e13308. doi: 10.14814/phy2.13308.

Effect of densely ionizing radiation on cardiomyocyte differentiation from
human-induced pluripotent stem cells.

Baljinnyam E(1), Venkatesh S(2), Gordan R(1), Mareedu S(2), Zhang J(3), Xie
LH(1), Azzam EI(4), Suzuki CK(2), Fraidenraich D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine, New Jersey Medical School, 
Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences, Newark, New Jersey.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, New Jersey
Medical School, Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences, Newark, New Jersey.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, School of Medicine and School of
Engineering, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama.
(4)Department of Radiology, New Jersey Medical School, Rutgers Biomedical and
Health Sciences, Newark, New Jersey.
(5)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine, New Jersey Medical School, 
Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences, Newark, New Jersey fraidedi@rutgers.edu.

The process of human cardiac development can be faithfully recapitulated in a
culture dish with human pluripotent stem cells, where the impact of environmental
stressors can be evaluated. The consequences of ionizing radiation exposure on
human cardiac differentiation are largely unknown. In this study, human-induced
pluripotent stem cell cultures (hiPSCs) were subjected to an external beam of
3.7 MeV α-particles at low mean absorbed doses of 0.5, 3, and 10 cGy.
Subsequently, the hiPSCs were differentiated into beating cardiac myocytes
(hiPSC-CMs). Pluripotent and cardiac markers and morphology did not reveal
differences between the irradiated and nonirradiated groups. While cell number
was not affected during CM differentiation, cell number of differentiated CMs was
severely reduced by ionizing radiation in a dose-responsive manner. β-adrenergic 
stimulation causes calcium (Ca2+) overload and oxidative stress. Although no
significant increase in Ca2+ transient amplitude was observed in any group after 
treatment with 1 μmol/L isoproterenol, the incidence of spontaneous Ca2+
waves/releases was more frequent in hiPSC-CMs of the irradiated groups,
indicating arrhythmogenic activities at the single cell level. Increased
transcript expression of mitochondrial biomarkers (LONP1, TFAM) and mtDNA-encoded
genes (MT-CYB, MT-RNR1) was detected upon differentiation of hiPSC-CMs suggesting
increased organelle biogenesis. Exposure of hiPSC-CM cultures to 10 cGy
significantly upregulated MT-CYB and MT-RNR1 expression, which may reflect an
adaptive response to ionizing radiation. Our results indicate that important
aspects of differentiation of hiPSCs into cardiac myocytes may be affected by low
fluences of densely ionizing radiations such as α-particles.

© 2017 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on
behalf of The Physiological Society and the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.14814/phy2.13308 
PMCID: PMC5555881
PMID: 28801517  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

