
1. Eur J Oral Sci. 2017 Oct;125(5):379-384. doi: 10.1111/eos.12370. Epub 2017 Aug
31.

Self-perceived mouthfeel and physico-chemical surface effects after chewing gums 
containing sorbitol and Magnolia bark extract.

Wessel SW(1), van der Mei HC(1), Slomp AM(1), van de Belt-Gritter B(1), Dodds
MWJ(2), Busscher HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Groningen and University
Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(2)William Wrigley, Jr. Company, Chicago, IL, USA.

The European Food Safety Authority recognizes the contribution of sugar-free
chewing gum to oral health through increased salivation, clearance of food
debris, and neutralization of biofilm pH. Magnolia bark extract is a gum additive
shown to reduce the prevalence of bad-breath bacteria but its effects on
self-perceived mouthfeel are unknown. This paper aims to relate the effects of
sorbitol-containing chewing gum, with and without Magnolia bark extract, on
tooth-surface hydrophobicity and salivary-film composition with self-perceived
mouthfeel. In a crossover clinical trial, volunteers chewed sorbitol-containing
gum, with or without Magnolia bark extract added, three times daily during a 4-wk
time period. A subset of volunteers also chewed Parafilm as a mastication
control. Oral moistness and tooth smoothness were assessed using questionnaires, 
and intra-oral water-contact angles were measured before, immediately after, and 
60 min after, chewing. Simultaneously, saliva samples were collected, placed on
glass slides, and the compositions of the adsorbed film were measured using X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy. Chewing of gum, regardless of whether or not it
contained Magnolia bark extract, improved self-perceived mouthfeel up to 60 min, 
concurrent with a more hydrophilic tooth surface and an increased amount of O1s
electrons bound at 532.6 eV in salivary films. Chewing of Parafilm affected
neither tooth-surface hydrophobicity nor salivary-film composition. Accordingly, 
adsorption of sorbitol, rather than the presence of Magnolia bark extract or
increased salivation, is responsible for improved self-perceived mouthfeel.

© 2017 Eur J Oral Sci.

DOI: 10.1111/eos.12370 
PMID: 28857279  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

