
1. Hepatology. 2018 Feb;67(2):721-735. doi: 10.1002/hep.29512. Epub 2017 Dec 26.

Natural immunoglobulin M initiates an inflammatory response important for both
hepatic ischemia reperfusion injury and regeneration in mice.

Marshall K(1), Jin J(1)(2)(3), Atkinson C(1)(4), Alawieh A(1), Qiao F(1), Lei
B(1), Chavin KD(5), He S(1)(6), Tomlinson S(1)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC.
(2)Laboratory of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of
Guilin Medical University, Guilin, People's Republic of China.
(3)China-USA Lipids in Health and Disease Research Center, Guilin Medical
University, Guilin, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Surgery, Lee Patterson Allen Transplant Immunobiology
Laboratory, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC.
(5)University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center, Department of Surgery, Case
Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH.
(6)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi 
Medical University, Nanning, People's Republic of China.
(7)Ralph H. Johnson Veteran Affairs Medical Center, Charleston, SC.

Complement plays a role in both hepatic ischemia reperfusion (IR) injury (IRI)
and liver regeneration, but it is not clear how complement is activated in either
process. We investigated the role of self-reactive immunoglobulin M (IgM)
antibodies in activating complement after hepatic IR and liver resection. Natural
IgM antibodies that recognize danger-associated molecular patterns (neoepitopes) 
activate complement following both hepatic IR and liver resection.
Antibody-deficient Rag1-/- mice were protected from hepatic IRI, but had
increased hepatic injury and an impaired regenerative response after 70% partial 
hepatectomy (PHx). We identified two IgM monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) that
specifically reversed the effect of Rag1 deficiency in both models; B4
(recognizes Annexin IV) and C2 (recognizes subset of phospholipids). Focusing on 
the B4-specific response, we demonstrated sinusoidal colocalization of IgM and
C3d in Rag1-/- mice that were reconstituted with B4 mAb, and furthermore that the
Annexin IV neoepitope is specifically and similarly expressed after both hepatic 
IR and PHx in wild-type (WT) mice. A single-chain antibody construct (scFv)
derived from B4 mAb blocked IgM binding and reduced injury post-IR in WT mice,
although, interestingly, B4scFv did not alter regeneration post-PHx, indicating
that anti-Annexin IV antibodies are sufficient, but not necessary, for the
regenerative response in the context of an entire natural antibody repertoire. We
also demonstrated expression of the B4 neoepitope in postischemic human liver
samples obtained posttransplantation and a corollary depletion in IgM recognizing
the B4 and C2 neoepitopes in patient sera following liver transplantation.
Conclusion: These data indicate an important role for IgM in hepatic IRI and
regeneration, with a similar cross-species injury-specific recognition system
that has implications for the design of neoepitope targeted therapeutics.
(Hepatology 2018;67:721-735).

© 2017 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases. This article 
has been contributed to by US Government employees and their work is in the
public domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.29512 
PMCID: PMC5842100
PMID: 28880403  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

