
1. Front Microbiol. 2017 Sep 4;8:1623. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01623. eCollection
2017.

The Green Berry Consortia of the Sippewissett Salt Marsh: Millimeter-Sized
Aggregates of Diazotrophic Unicellular Cyanobacteria.

Wilbanks EG(1), Salman-Carvalho V(2), Jaekel U(3), Humphrey PT(4), Eisen JA(5),
Buckley DH(6), Zinder SH(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Marine Biology, University of
California, Santa Barbara, Santa BarbaraCA, United States.
(2)HGF MPG Joint Research Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck
Institute for Marine MicrobiologyBremen, Germany.
(3)Department for Microbiology, Max Planck Institute for Marine
MicrobiologyBremen, Germany.
(4)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University,
CambridgeMA, United States.
(5)Genome Center, Department of Evolution and Ecology, Department of Medical
Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, Davis, DavisCA, United
States.
(6)School of Integrative Plant Science, Cornell University, IthacaNY, United
States.
(7)Department of Microbiology, Cornell University, IthacaNY, United States.

Microbial interactions driving key biogeochemical fluxes often occur within
multispecies consortia that form spatially heterogeneous microenvironments. Here,
we describe the "green berry" consortia of the Sippewissett salt marsh (Falmouth,
MA, United States): millimeter-sized aggregates dominated by an uncultured,
diazotrophic unicellular cyanobacterium of the order Chroococcales (termed
GB-CYN1). We show that GB-CYN1 is closely related to Crocosphaera watsonii
(UCYN-B) and "Candidatus Atelocyanobacterium thalassa" (UCYN-A), two groups of
unicellular diazotrophic cyanobacteria that play an important role in marine
primary production. Other green berry consortium members include pennate diatoms 
and putative heterotrophic bacteria from the Alphaproteobacteria and
Bacteroidetes. Tight coupling was observed between photosynthetic oxygen
production and heterotrophic respiration. When illuminated, the green berries
became supersaturated with oxygen. From the metagenome, we observed that GB-CYN1 
encodes photosystem II genes and thus has the metabolic potential for oxygen
production unlike UCYN-A. In darkness, respiratory activity rapidly depleted
oxygen creating anoxia within the aggregates. Metagenomic data revealed a suite
of nitrogen fixation genes encoded by GB-CYN1, and nitrogenase activity was
confirmed at the whole-aggregate level by acetylene reduction assays. Metagenome 
reads homologous to marker genes for denitrification were observed and suggest
that heterotrophic denitrifiers might co-occur in the green berries, although the
physiology and activity of facultative anaerobes in these aggregates remains
uncharacterized. Nitrogen fixation in the surface ocean was long thought to be
driven by filamentous cyanobacterial aggregates, though recent work has
demonstrated the importance of unicellular diazotrophic cyanobacteria (UCYN) from
the order Chroococcales. The green berries serve as a useful contrast to studies 
of open ocean UCYN and may provide a tractable model system to investigate
microbial dynamics within phytoplankton aggregates, a phenomenon of global
importance to the flux of particulate organic carbon and nitrogen in surface
waters.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01623 
PMCID: PMC5591377
PMID: 28928719 

