
1. J Sci Food Agric. 2018 Apr;98(6):2147-2155. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.8699. Epub 2017 Nov
1.

Micro-organisms growing on rapeseed during storage affect the profile of volatile
compounds of virgin rapeseed oil.

Wagner C(1), Bonte A(2), Brühl L(2), Niehaus K(3), Bednarz H(3), Matthäus B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Food Chemistry, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(2)Department of Safety and Quality of Cereals, Federal Research Institute of
Nutrition and Food, Max Rubner-Institut, Detmold, Germany.
(3)Department of Proteome and Metabolome Research, Faculty of Biology & Center
for Biotechnology (CeBiTec), Bielefeld University, Bielefeld, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Micro-organisms populate on rapeseed after harvest during storage
depending on the growing conditions. The composition of the bacterial
colonization is unknown, although its contribution to the profile of volatile
aroma-active compounds determines the sensory quality of virgin cold-pressed
rapeseed oil.
RESULTS: From four rapeseed samples, 46 bacterial strains were isolated. By
DNA-sequencing, the identification of four bacteria species and 17 bacteria
genera was possible. In total, 22 strains were selected, based on their typical
off-flavors resembling those of virgin sensory bad cold-pressed rapeseed oils.
The cultivation of these strains on rapeseed meal agar and examination of
volatile compounds by solid phase microextraction-gas chromatography-mass
spectrometry allowed the identification of 29 different compounds, mainly
degradation products of fatty acids such as alkanes, alkenes, aldehydes, ketones 
and alcohols and, in addition, sulfur-containing compounds, including one terpene
and three pyrazines. From these compounds, 19 are described as aroma-active in
the literature.
CONCLUSION: Micro-organisms populating on rapeseed during storage may strongly
influence the sensory quality of virgin rapeseed oil as a result of the
development of volatile aroma-active metabolic products. It can be assumed that
occurrence of off-flavor of virgin rapeseed oils on the market are the result of 
metabolic degradation products produced by micro-organisms populating on rapeseed
during storage. © 2017 Society of Chemical Industry.

© 2017 Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/jsfa.8699 
PMID: 28960362  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

