
1. J Econ Entomol. 2017 Dec 5;110(6):2623-2629. doi: 10.1093/jee/tox253.

Selection of Reference Genes for Expression Studies in Diaphorina citri
(Hemiptera: Liviidae).

Bassan MM(1), Angelotti-Mendonc A JS(1), Alves GR(2), Yamamoto PT(2), Moura O
Filho FAA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Produc¸a~o Vegetal, Universidade de Sa~o Paulo, Escola
Superior de Agricultura "Luiz de Queiroz", Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Entomologia e Acarologia, Universidade de Sa~o Paulo, Escola
Superior de Agricultura "Luiz de Queiroz", Brazil.

The Asian citrus psyllid, Diaphorina citri Kuwayama (Hemiptera: Liviidae), is
considered the main vector of the bacteria associated with huanglongbing, a very 
serious disease that has threatened the world citrus industry. The absence of
efficient control management protocols, including a lack of resistant cultivars, 
has led to the development of different approaches to study this pathosystem. The
production of resistant genotypes relies on D. citri gene expression analyses by 
RT-qPCR to assess control of the vector population. High-quality, reliable
RT-qPCR analyses depend upon proper reference gene selection and validation.
However, adequate D. citri reference genes have not yet been identified. In the
present study, we evaluated the genes EF 1-α, ACT, GAPDH, RPL7, RPL17, and TUB as
candidate reference genes for this insect. Gene expression stability was
evaluated using the mathematical algorithms deltaCt, NormFinder, BestKeeper, and 
geNorm, at five insect developmental stages, grown on two different plant hosts
[Citrus sinensis (L.) Osbeck (Sapindales: Rutaceae) and Murraya paniculata (L.)
Jack (Sapindales: Rutaceae)]. The final gene ranking was calculated using
RefFinder software, and the V-ATPase-A gene was selected for validation.
According to our results, two reference genes are recommended when different
plant hosts and developmental stages are considered. Considering gene expression 
studies in D. citri grown on M. paniculata, regardless of the insect
developmental stage, GAPDH and RPL7 have the best fit as reference genes in
RT-qPCR analyses, whereas GAPDH and EF 1-α are recommended as reference genes in 
insect studies using C. sinensis.

© The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
Entomological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jee/tox253 
PMID: 29029285  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

