
1. Exp Hematol. 2018 Jan;57:30-41.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2017.09.009. Epub 2017
Oct 10.

Human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells secrete endocannabinoids that stimulate 
in vitro hematopoietic stem cell migration effectively comparable to
beta-adrenergic stimulation.

Köse S(1), Aerts-Kaya F(1), Köprü ÇZ(2), Nemutlu E(3), Kuşkonmaz B(4),
Karaosmanoğlu B(1), Taşkıran EZ(5), Altun B(6), Uçkan Çetinkaya D(7), Korkusuz
P(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Sciences, Institute of Health Sciences, Center for
Stem Cell Research and Development (PEDI-STEM), Hacettepe University, Ankara,
Turkey.
(2)Department of Histology and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, Yuksek Ihtisas
University, Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Hacettepe University,
Ankara, Turkey.
(4)Pediatric Hematology, BMT Unit, Hacettepe University Children's Hospital,
Ankara, Turkey.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University,
Ankara, Turkey.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University, Ankara,
Turkey.
(7)Department of Stem Cell Sciences, Institute of Health Sciences, Center for
Stem Cell Research and Development (PEDI-STEM), Hacettepe University, Ankara,
Turkey; Pediatric Hematology, BMT Unit, Hacettepe University Children's Hospital,
Ankara, Turkey.
(8)Department of Histology and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe
University, Ankara, Turkey. Electronic address: petek@haccettepe.edu.tr.

Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) is a well-known hematopoietic stem 
cell (HSC)-mobilizing agent used in both allogeneic and autologous
transplantation. However, a proportion of patients or healthy donors fail to
mobilize a sufficient number of cells. New mobilization agents are therefore
needed. Endocannabinoids (eCBs) are endogenous lipid mediators generated in the
brain and peripheral tissues and activate the cannabinoid receptors CB1 and CB2. 
We suggest that eCBs may act as mobilizers of HSCs from the bone marrow (BM)
under stress conditions as beta-adrenergic receptors (Adrβ). This study
demonstrates that BM mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) secrete anandamide (AEA) and
2-arachidonylglycerol (2-AG) and the peripheral blood (PB) and BM
microenvironment contain AEA and 2-AG. 2-AG levels are significantly higher in PB
of the G-CSF-treated group compared with BM plasma. BM mononuclear cells (MNCs)
and CD34+ HSCs express CB1, CB2, and Adrβ subtypes. CD34+ HSCs had higher CB1 and
CB2 receptor expression in G-CSF-untreated and G-CSF-treated groups compared with
MSCs. MNCs but not MSCs expressed CB1 and CB2 receptors based on qRT-PCR and flow
cytometry. AEA- and 2-AG-stimulated HSC migration was blocked by eCB receptor
antagonists in an in vitro migration assay. In conclusion, components of the eCB 
system and their interaction with Adrβ subtypes were demonstrated on HSCs and
MSCs of G-CSF-treated and G-CSF-untreated healthy donors in vitro, revealing that
eCBs might be potential candidates to enhance or facilitate G-CSF-mediated HSC
migration under stress conditions in a clinical setting.

Copyright © 2018 ISEH – Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exphem.2017.09.009 
PMID: 29030083  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

