
1. Front Synaptic Neurosci. 2017 Oct 4;9:13. doi: 10.3389/fnsyn.2017.00013.
eCollection 2017.

Activity-Dependent Phosphorylation by CaMKIIδ Alters the Ca2+ Affinity of the
Multi-C2-Domain Protein Otoferlin.

Meese S(1)(2), Cepeda AP(2)(3), Gahlen F(4), Adams CM(5), Ficner R(1), Ricci
AJ(6), Heller S(6), Reisinger E(3), Herget M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Structural Biology, Institute for Microbiology and
Genetics, and Collaborative Research Center 889, University of Göttingen,
Göttingen, Germany.
(2)Göttingen Graduate School for Neurosciences, Biophysics, and Molecular
Biosciences, Göttingen, Germany.
(3)Molecular Biology of Cochlear Neurotransmission Group, Department of
Otorhinolaryngology, University Medical Center Göttingen, and Collaborative
Research Center 889, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Ruhr-University
Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
(5)Stanford University Mass Spectrometry, Stanford University, Stanford, CA,
United States.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Stanford School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States.

Otoferlin is essential for fast Ca2+-triggered transmitter release from auditory 
inner hair cells (IHCs), playing key roles in synaptic vesicle release,
replenishment and retrieval. Dysfunction of otoferlin results in profound
prelingual deafness. Despite its crucial role in cochlear synaptic processes,
mechanisms regulating otoferlin activity have not been studied to date. Here, we 
identified Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent serine/threonine kinase II delta (CaMKIIδ)
as an otoferlin binding partner by pull-downs from chicken utricles and reassured
interaction by a co-immunoprecipitation with heterologously expressed proteins in
HEK cells. We confirmed the expression of CaMKIIδ in rodent IHCs by
immunohistochemistry and real-time PCR. A proximity ligation assay indicates
close proximity of the two proteins in rat IHCs, suggesting that otoferlin and
CaMKIIδ also interact in mammalian IHCs. In vitro phosphorylation of otoferlin by
CaMKIIδ revealed ten phosphorylation sites, five of which are located within
C2-domains. Exchange of serines/threonines at phosphorylated sites into
phosphomimetic aspartates reduces the Ca2+ affinity of the recombinant C2F domain
10-fold, and increases the Ca2+ affinity of the C2C domain. Concordantly, we show
that phosphorylation of otoferlin and/or its interaction partners are enhanced
upon hair cell depolarization and blocked by pharmacological CaMKII inhibition.
We therefore propose that otoferlin activity is regulated by CaMKIIδ in IHCs.

DOI: 10.3389/fnsyn.2017.00013 
PMCID: PMC5632675
PMID: 29046633 

