
1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2017 Oct;192:54-59. doi: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2017.09.007. 
Epub 2017 Oct 3.

Identification of monoclonal antibodies cross-reactive with bottlenose dolphin
orthologues of the major histocompatibility complex and leukocyte differentiation
molecules.

Elnaggar MM(1), Abdellrazeq GS(2), Venn-Watson SK(3), Jensen ED(4), Hulubei V(5),
Fry LM(6), Sacco RE(7), Davis WC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Washington State University, WA, USA; Department of Microbiology,
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Alexandria University, Egypt. Electronic address:
mahmoud.elnaggar@vetmed.wsu.edu.
(2)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Washington State University, WA, USA; Department of Microbiology,
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Alexandria University, Egypt.
(3)Translational Medicine and Research Program, National Marine Mammal
Foundation, San Diego, CA, USA.
(4)U.S Navy Marine Mammal Program, Biosciences Division, Space and Naval Warfare 
Systems Center Pacific, San Diego, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Washington State University, WA, USA.
(6)Animal Disease Research Unit, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural
Research Service, Pullman, WA, 99164, USA.
(7)Ruminant Diseases and Immunology Research Unit, National Animal Disease
Center, Agricultural Research Service, Ames, IA, USA.

The slow progress in understanding immunotoxic effects of environmental
contaminants and their influence on disease susceptibility in whales is largely
due to the limited information available on the immune systems and immune
function of species included in the Cetancodontamorpha clade. Studies in species 
in the other major clades included in the Artiodactylamorpha, Ruminantiamorpha,
Suinamorpha, and Camelidamorpha have revealed the immune systems are similar, but
not identical. The present study was undertaken to expand the available
monoclonal antibody reagents needed to gain insight into the composition,
function, and evolution of the immune system in Cetancodontamorpha, using the
dolphin (Tursiops truncatus) as a model cetacean species. Screening of a set of
mAbs that recognize highly conserved epitopes expressed on the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) and leukocyte differentiation molecules (LDMs)
in cattle by flow cytometry revealed some of the mAbs recognize epitopes
conserved on dolphin orthologues of MHC class I, MHC class II, CD11a, CD14, CD16,
CD18, CD163 and CD172a. Comparison of the amino acid sequences of dolphin and
bovine orthologues revealed limited changes in sequence have occurred during
speciation, suggesting an approach for developing cross-reactive mAbs for use in 
cetacean research.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2017.09.007 
PMID: 29042015  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

