
1. Stem Cells Dev. 2017 Dec 15;26(24):1735-1748. doi: 10.1089/scd.2017.0133. Epub
2017 Nov 27.

Human Bone Marrow Mesenchymal Stromal Cell-Derived Osteoblasts Promote the
Expansion of Hematopoietic Progenitors Through Beta-Catenin and Notch Signaling
Pathways.

Michalicka M(1), Boisjoli G(1), Jahan S(1)(2), Hovey O(1)(2), Doxtator E(1),
Abu-Khader A(1), Pasha R(1), Pineault N(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Canadian Blood Services, Centre for Innovation , Ottawa, Ontario, Canada .
(2)2 Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology Department, University of Ottawa ,
Ottawa, Canada .

Coculture of hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) with primary stromal cells from HSC
niches supports the maintenance and expansion of HSC and progenitors ex vivo.
However, a major drawback is the availability of primary human samples for
research and clinical applications. We investigated the use of in vitro derived
osteoblasts as a new source of feeder cells and characterized the molecular
pathways that mediate their growth-promoting activities. First, we compared the
growth and differentiation modulating activities of mesenchymal stromal cells
(MSC)-derived osteoblasts (M-OST) with those of their undifferentiated precursor 
on umbilical cord blood (UCB) progenitors. Feeder-free cultures were also
included as baseline control. Cell growth and expansion of hematopoietic
progenitors were significantly enhanced by both feeder cell types. However,
progenitor cell growth was considerably greater with M-OST. Coculture also
promoted the maintenance of immature CD34+ progenitor subsets and modulated in a 
positive fashion the expression of several homing-related cell surface receptors,
in a feeder-specific fashion. Serial transplantation experiments revealed that
M-OST coculture supported the maintenance of long-term lympho-myeloid
reconstituting HSC that provided engraftment levels that were generally superior 
to those from MSC cocultures. Mechanistically, we found that coculture with M-OST
was associated with enhanced beta-catenin (β-Cat) activity in UCB cells and that 
abrogation of β-Cat/T-cell factor activity blunted the growth-promoting activity 
of the M-OST coculture. Conversely, Notch inhibition reduced UCB cell expansion, 
but to a much lesser extent. In conclusion, this study demonstrates that M-OST
are excellent feeder cells for HSC and progenitors, and it identifies key
molecular pathways that are responsible for the growth-enhancing activities of
osteoblasts on UCB progenitors.

DOI: 10.1089/scd.2017.0133 
PMID: 29050516  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

