
1. Sci Total Environ. 2018 Apr 15;621:1233-1242. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.10.105. Epub 2017 Oct 22.

Shading and sediment structure effects on stream metabolism resistance and
resilience to infrequent droughts.

Zlatanović S(1), Fabian J(2), Premke K(2), Mutz M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Freshwater Conservation, BTU-Cottbus Senftenberg, 15526 Bad
Saarow, Germany. Electronic address: sanjatmf@yahoo.com.
(2)Leibniz-Institute of Freshwater Ecology and Inland Fisheries (IGB), 12587
Berlin, Germany.
(3)Department of Freshwater Conservation, BTU-Cottbus Senftenberg, 15526 Bad
Saarow, Germany.

Perennial, temperate, low-order streams are predicted to become intermittent as a
result of irregular droughts caused by global warming and increased water demand.
We hypothesize that stream metabolism changes caused by irregular droughts are
linked to the shading and bed sediment structure of temperate streams. We set up 
16 outdoor experimental streams with low or high shade conditions and streambeds 
either with alternating sorted patches of gravel and sand or homogeneous
gravel-sand mix sediment structures. We assessed community respiration (CR), net 
ecosystem production (NEP) and periphyton biomass and structure (diatoms, green
algae, cyanobacteria) in the course of 6weeks colonization, 6weeks desiccation,
and 2.5weeks after rewetting. The heterotroph to autotroph (H:A) and fungi to
bacteria (F:B) ratios in the microbial biofilm community were assessed at the end
of the colonization and rewetting phases. Streams with different bed sediment
structure were functionally similar; their metabolism under desiccation was
controlled solely by light availability. During flow recession, all streams
showed net heterotrophy. As desiccation progressed, NEP and CR decreased to zero.
Desiccation altered the periphyton composition from predominantly diatoms to
green algae and cyanobacteria, particularly in streams with low shade and mixed
sediments. Rapid post-drought resilience of NEP was accompanied by high
cyanobacteria and green algae growth in low shade, but poor total periphyton
growth in high shade streams. Variable periphyton recovery was followed by
increased H:A in relation to shading, and decreased F:B in relation to sediments 
structure. These shifts resulted in poor CR recovery compared to the colonization
phase, suggesting a link between CR resilience and microbial composition changes.
The links between drought effects, post-drought recovery, shading level, and
streambed structure reveal the importance of low-order stream management under a 
changing climate and land use to mitigate the future impact of unpredictable
infrequent droughts on stream metabolism in temperate ecosystems.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.10.105 
PMID: 29070450 

