
1. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2017 Oct;21(19):4263-4269.

The significance of HBD-3 and fluorescent composite carriers in the processof
bone formation in rats infected with Staphylococcus aureus.

Zhu C(1), Fang SY, Kong R, Wu KR, Xia R, Shang XF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Anhui Provincial Hospital of Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, China. shangxifuahslly@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: The objective of the present study was to explore the significance of 
human β-defensin 3 (HBD-3) through establishment and evaluation of the model of
implant-related biofilm infection of the femoral condyle of the outer knee using 
Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Age-matched SD rats were divided into three groups, the
HBD-3 group, HBD-3 fluorescent liposome group, and the HBD-3 liposome-microbubble
fluorescent composite carrier group. After biofilm infection for 24 h, the
fluorescent composite vector was injected intraperitoneally 2 times/day. After
the first injection, rats in each group were sacrificed on the 7th, 14th, and
28th day. The lower end of the femur bone was harvested after removing the
surrounding soft tissue. H&E and immunohistochemical staining were applied and
light microscopy was used for observation. Fluorescent markers including
tetracycline and calcein were used to follow the formation of new bone in vivo.
Undecalcified specimens were embedded in epoxy resin (thickness of roughly 150
m), and confocal microscopy was used for observation.
RESULTS: By assessing cell proliferation with cell counting kit-8, the
proliferation ability of cells in the HBD-3 liposome-microbubble fluorescent
composite carrier group was significantly increased compared with the other
groups (p<0.05). qPCR was used to measure the levels of alkaline phosphatase
(ALP), type I collagen, osteocalcin (OCN), osteopontin (OPN), and bone
sialoprotein (BSP) in each group. The levels of these genes in the HBD-3
liposome-microbubble fluorescent composite carrier group were significantly
higher than those in other groups (p<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The application of the HBD-3 liposome-microbubble fluorescent
composite carrier can significantly promote osteogenesis in rats infected with
Staphylococcus aureus, and increase the expression levels of ALP, type I
collagen, OCN, OPN, and BSP.


PMID: 29077172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

