
1. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2018 Feb;70(2):242-254. doi: 10.1002/art.40359. Epub 2018
Jan 3.

Gut Microbiota Perturbations in Reactive Arthritis and Postinfectious
Spondyloarthritis.

Manasson J(1), Shen N(2), Garcia Ferrer HR(3), Ubeda C(4), Iraheta I(3), Heguy
A(5), Von Feldt JM(6), Espinoza LR(7), Garcia Kutzbach A(3), Segal LN(5), Ogdie
A(6), Clemente JC(2), Scher JU(1).

Author information: 
(1)New York University School of Medicine and Hospital for Joint Diseases, New
York, New York.
(2)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York.
(3)Guatemalan Association Against Rheumatic Diseases and Universidad Francisco
Marroquin, Guatemala City, Guatemala.
(4)Fundación para el Fomento de la Investigación Sanitaria y Biomédica de la
Comunitat Valenciana, Valencia, Spain, and CIBER en Epidemiologia y Salud
Publica, Madrid, Spain.
(5)New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York.
(6)University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
(7)Louisiana State University Health Science Center, New Orleans.

OBJECTIVE: Reactive arthritis (ReA) is an inflammatory disorder occurring several
weeks after gastrointestinal or genitourinary tract infections. HLA-B27
positivity is considered a risk factor, although it is not necessarily predictive
of disease incidence. Among nongenetic factors, the intestinal microbiome may
play a role in disease susceptibility. The objective of this study was to
characterize the gut microbiota and host gene interactions in ReA and
postinfectious spondyloarthritis.
METHODS: Adult subjects with peripheral spondyloarthritis and control subjects
with preceding infections who did not develop arthritis were prospectively
recruited from a geographic region with a high prevalence of ReA. Clinical
variables, HLA status, and 16S ribosomal RNA gene sequencing of intestinal
microbiota were analyzed.
RESULTS: Subjects with ReA showed no significant differences from controls in gut
bacterial richness or diversity. However, there was a significantly higher
abundance of Erwinia and Pseudomonas and an increased prevalence of typical
enteropathogens associated with ReA. Subjects with ultrasound evidence of
enthesitis were enriched in Campylobacter, while subjects with uveitis and
radiographic sacroiliitis were enriched in Erwinia and unclassified
Ruminococcaceae, respectively; both were enriched in Dialister. Host genetics,
particularly HLA-A24, were associated with differences in gut microbiota
diversity irrespective of disease status. We identified several co-occurring taxa
that were also predictive of HLA-A24 status.
CONCLUSION: This is the first culture-independent study characterizing the gut
microbial community in postinfectious arthritis. Although bacterial factors
correlated with disease presence and clinical features of ReA, host genetics also
appeared to be a major independent driver of intestinal community composition.
Understanding of these gut microbiota-host genetic relationships may further
clarify the pathogenesis of postinfectious spondyloarthritides.

© 2017, American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/art.40359 
PMCID: PMC5788722
PMID: 29073348  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

