
1. Mol Cell Biochem. 2018 Jun;443(1-2):131-138. doi: 10.1007/s11010-017-3217-4. Epub
2017 Oct 31.

Purinergic signaling modulates the cerebral inflammatory response in
experimentally infected fish with Streptococcus agalactiae: an attempt to improve
the immune response.

Souza CF(1), Baldissera MD(2), Bottari NB(3), Moreira KLS(4), da Rocha MIUM(4),
da Veiga ML(4), Santos RCV(5), Baldisserotto B(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Universidade Federal de Santa
Maria, Santa Maria, RS, Brazil.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Universidade Federal de Santa
Maria, Santa Maria, RS, Brazil. matheusd.biomed@yahoo.com.br.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Universidade Federal de
Santa Maria (UFSM), Santa Maria, RS, Brazil.
(4)Department of Morphology, Universidade Federal de Santa Maria (UFSM), Santa
Maria, RS, Brazil.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Universidade Federal de Santa
Maria, Santa Maria, RS, Brazil.
(6)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Universidade Federal de Santa
Maria, Santa Maria, RS, Brazil. bbaldisserotto@hotmail.com.

Appropriate control of the immune response is a critical determinant of fish
health, and the purinergic cascade has an important role in the immune and
inflammatory responses. This cascade regulates the levels of adenosine
triphosphate (ATP), adenosine diphosphate, adenosine monophosphate and adenosine 
(Ado), molecules involved in physiological or pathological events as inflammatory
and anti-inflammatory mediators. Thus, the aim of this study was to evaluate
whether purinergic signaling, through the activities of nucleoside triphosphate
diphosphohydrolase (NTPDase), 5'-nucleotidase, and adenosine deaminase (ADA), is 
capable of modulating the cerebral immune and inflammatory responses in silver
catfish that is experimentally infected with Streptococcus agalactiae. Cerebral
NTPDase (with ATP as substrate) and 5'-nucleotidase activities increased, while
ADA activity decreased in silver catfish that is experimentally infected with S. 
agalactiae, compared to the control group. Moreover, the cerebral levels of ATP
and Ado increased in infected animals compared to the uninfected control group.
Brain histopathology in infected animals revealed inflammatory demyelination (the
presence of occasional bubbly collections), increased cellular density in the
area near to pia-mater and intercellular edema. Based on this evidence, the
modulation of the purinergic cascade by the enzymes NTPDase, 5'-nucleotidase, and
ADA exerts an anti-inflammatory profile due to the regulation of ATP and Ado
levels. This suggests involvement of purinergic enzymes on streptococcosis
pathogenesis, through regulating cerebral ATP and Ado levels, molecules known to 
participate in physiological or pathological events as inflammatory and
anti-inflammatory mediators, respectively. In summary, the modulation of the
cerebral purinergic cascade exerts an anti-inflammatory profile in an attempt to 
reduce inflammatory damage.

DOI: 10.1007/s11010-017-3217-4 
PMID: 29086165  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

