
1. Interdiscip Sci. 2019 Mar;11(1):135-144. doi: 10.1007/s12539-017-0261-4. Epub
2017 Oct 31.

Identification of Ideal Multi-targeting Bioactive Compounds Against Mur Ligases
of Enterobacter aerogenes and Its Binding Mechanism in Comparison with Chemical
Inhibitors.

Chakkyarath V(1), Natarajan J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Data Mining and Text Mining Lab, Department of Bioinformatics, Bharathiar
University, Coimbatore, India.
(2)Data Mining and Text Mining Lab, Department of Bioinformatics, Bharathiar
University, Coimbatore, India. n.jeyakumar@yahoo.co.in.

Enterobacter aerogenes have been reported as important opportunistic and
multi-resistant bacterial pathogens for humans during the last three decades in
hospital wards. The emergence of drug-resistant E. aerogenes demands the need for
developing new drugs. Peptidoglycan is an important component of the cell wall of
bacteria and the peptidoglycan biochemical pathway is considered as the best
source of antibacterial targets. Within this pathway, four Mur ligases MurC,
MurD, MurE, and MurF are responsible for the successive additions of L-alanine
and suitable targets for developing novel antibacterial drugs. As an inference
from this fact, we modeled the three-dimensional structure of above Mur ligases
using best template structures available in PDB and analyzed its common binding
features. Structural refinement and energy minimization of the predicted Mur
ligases models is also being done using molecular dynamics studies. The models of
Mur ligases were further investigated for in silico docking studies using
bioactive plant compounds from the literature. Interestingly, these results
indicate that four plant compounds Isojuripidine, Atroviolacegenin, Porrigenin B,
and Nummularogenin showing better docking results in terms of binding energy and 
number of hydrogen bonds. All these four compounds are spirostan-based compounds 
with differences in side chains and the amino acid such as ASN, LYS, THR, HIS,
ARG (polar) and PHE, GLY, VAL, ALA, MET (non-polar) playing active role in
binding site of all four Mur ligases. Overall, in the predicted model, the four
plant compounds with its binding features could pave way to design novel
multi-targeted antibacterial plant-based bioactive compounds specific to Mur
ligases for the treatment of Enterobacter infections.

DOI: 10.1007/s12539-017-0261-4 
PMID: 29086207  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

