
1. Front Immunol. 2017 Sep 29;8:1212. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01212. eCollection
2017.

Targeting Multiple Tumors Using T-Cells Engineered to Express a Natural
Cytotoxicity Receptor 2-Based Chimeric Receptor.

Eisenberg V(1), Shamalov K(1), Meir S(1), Hoogi S(1), Sarkar R(2)(3), Pinker
S(1), Markel G(4), Porgador A(2), Cohen CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Laboratory of Tumor Immunology and Immunotherapy, The Mina and Everard
Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel.
(2)Faculty of Health Sciences, The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology,
Immunology and Genetics, The National Institute for Biotechnology in the Negev,
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.
(3)ASAS, Amity University Haryana, Manesar, India.
(4)The Ella Lemelbaum Institute of Immuno-Oncology, Institute of Oncology, Sheba 
Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel.

Recent developments in cancer treatment are demonstrating the increasing and
powerful potential of immunotherapeutic strategies. In this regard, the adoptive 
transfer of tumor-specific T-lymphocytes approaches can lead to tumor regression 
in cancer patients. More recently, the use of T-cells genetically engineered to
express cancer-specific receptors such as the anti-CD19 chimeric antigen receptor
(CAR) continues to show promise for the treatment of hematological malignancies. 
Still, there is a crucial need to develop efficient CAR-T cell approaches for the
treatment of solid tumors. It has been shown that other lymphocytes such as
natural killer (NK) cells can demonstrate potent antitumor function-nonetheless, 
their use in immunotherapy is rather limited due to difficulties in expanding
these cells to therapeutically relevant numbers and to suppression by endogenous 
inhibitory mechanisms. Cancer recognition by NK cells is partly mediated by
molecules termed natural cytotoxicity receptors (NCRs). In the present study, we 
hypothesize that it is possible to endow T-cells with an NK recognition pattern, 
providing them with a mean to recognize tumor cells, in a non-MHC restricted way.
To test this, we genetically modified human T-cells with different chimeric
receptors based on the human NCR2 molecule and then assessed their antitumor
activity in vitro and in vivo. Our results show that expression in primary
lymphocytes of an NCR2-derived CAR, termed s4428z, confers T-cells with the
ability to specifically recognize heterogeneous tumors and to mediate tumor
cytotoxicity in a mouse model. This study demonstrates the benefit of combining
tumor recognition capability of NK cells with T cell effectiveness to improve
cancer immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01212 
PMCID: PMC5649149
PMID: 29085357 

