
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Nov 8;7(1):15022. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-14785-z.

Poly-β-hydroxybutyrate administration during early life: effects on performance, 
immunity and microbial community of European sea bass yolk-sac larvae.

Franke A(1), Roth O(2), Schryver P(3)(4), Bayer T(2), Garcia-Gonzalez L(5),
Künzel S(6), Bossier P(3), Miest JJ(2)(7), Clemmesen C(2).

Author information: 
(1)GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel, Evolutionary Ecology of
Marine Fishes, Kiel, Germany. andreafranke@gmail.com.
(2)GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel, Evolutionary Ecology of
Marine Fishes, Kiel, Germany.
(3)Laboratory of Aquaculture and Artemia Reference Center, Ghent University,
Ghent, Belgium.
(4)INVE Technologies N.V., Hoogveld 93, Dendermonde, Belgium.
(5)Flemish Institute for Technological Research (VITO), Mol, Belgium.
(6)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Biology, Department for Evolutionary
Genetics, Plön, Germany.
(7)University of Greenwich, Department of Life & Sports Sciences, Chatham
Maritime, London, United Kingdom.

The reliable production of marine fish larvae is one of the major bottlenecks in 
aquaculture due to high mortalities mainly caused by infectious diseases. To
evaluate if the compound poly-β-hydroxybutyrate (PHB) might be a suitable
immunoprophylactic measure in fish larviculture, its capacity to improve immunity
and performance in European sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax) yolk-sac larvae was
explored. PHB was applied from mouth opening onwards to stimulate the developing 
larval immune system at the earliest possible point in time. Larval survival,
growth, microbiota composition, gene expression profiles and disease resistance
were assessed. PHB administration improved larval survival and, furthermore,
altered the larva-associated microbiota composition. The bacterial challenge test
using pathogenic Vibrio anguillarum revealed that the larval disease resistance
was not influenced by PHB. The expression profiles of 26 genes involved e.g. in
the immune response showed that PHB affected the expression of the antimicrobial 
peptides ferritin (fer) and dicentracin (dic), however, the response to PHB was
inconsistent and weaker than previously demonstrated for sea bass post-larvae.
Hence, the present study highlights the need for more research focusing on the
immunostimulation of different early developmental stages for gaining a more
comprehensive picture and advancing a sustainable production of high quality fry.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-14785-z 
PMCID: PMC5678127
PMID: 29118332  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

