
1. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2018 Mar 1;314(3):L397-L405. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00288.2017. Epub 2017 Nov 9.

Limited role of kininogen in the host response during gram-negative
pneumonia-derived sepsis.

Ding C(1)(2), van 't Veer C(2), Roelofs JJTH(3), Shukla M(4), McCrae KR(4),
Revenko AS(5), Crosby J(5), van der Poll T(2)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Jinling Hospital, Medical School of Nanjing
University , Nanjing , China.
(2)Center of Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam , Amsterdam , The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam , The Netherlands.
(4)Departments of Hematology-Oncology and Cellular and Molecular Medicine,
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio.
(5)Antisense Drug Discovery, IONIS Pharmaceuticals, Carlsbad, California.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam , The Netherlands.

High-molecular-weight kininogen (HK), together with factor XI, factor XII and
prekallikrein, is part of the contact system that has proinflammatory,
prothrombotic, and vasoactive properties. We hypothesized that HK plays a role in
the host response during pneumonia-derived sepsis. To this end mice were depleted
of kininogen (KNG) to plasma HK levels of 28% of normal by repeated treatment
with a specific antisense oligonucleotide (KNG ASO) for 3 wk before infection
with the common human sepsis pathogen Klebsiella pneumoniae via the airways.
Whereas plasma HK levels increased during infection in mice treated with a
scrambled control ASO (Ctrl ASO), HK level in the KNG ASO-treated group remained 
reduced to 25-30% of that in the corresponding Ctrl ASO group both before and
after infection. KNG depletion did not influence bacterial growth in lungs or
dissemination to distant body sites. KNG depletion was associated with lower lung
CXC chemokine and myeloperoxidase levels but did not impact neutrophil influx,
lung pathology, activation of the vascular endothelium, activation of the
coagulation system, or the extent of distant organ injury. These results were
corroborated by studies in mice with a genetic deficiency of KNG, which were
indistinguishable from wild-type mice during Klebsiella-induced sepsis. Both KNG 
depletion and KNG deficiency were associated with strongly reduced plasma
prekallikrein levels, indicating the carrier function of HK for this zymogen.
This study suggests that KNG does not significantly contribute to the host
defense during gram-negative pneumonia-derived sepsis.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00288.2017 
PMCID: PMC6842874
PMID: 29122754  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

