
1. Front Immunol. 2017 Nov 1;8:1447. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01447. eCollection
2017.

Mixed Signals: Co-Stimulation in Invariant Natural Killer T Cell-Mediated Cancer 
Immunotherapy.

Shissler SC(1), Lee MS(1), Webb TJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Greenebaum Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States.

Invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells are an integral component of the immune
system and play an important role in antitumor immunity. Upon activation, iNKT
cells can directly kill malignant cells as well as rapidly produce cytokines that
stimulate other immune cells, making them a front line defense against
tumorigenesis. Unfortunately, iNKT cell number and activity are reduced in
multiple cancer types. This anergy is often associated with upregulation of
co-inhibitory markers such as programmed death-1. Similar to conventional T
cells, iNKT cells are influenced by the conditions of their activation.
Conventional T cells receive signals through the following three types of
receptors: (1) T cell receptor (TCR), (2) co-stimulation molecules, and (3)
cytokine receptors. Unlike conventional T cells, which recognize peptide antigen 
presented by MHC class I or II, the TCRs of iNKT cells recognize lipid antigen in
the context of the antigen presentation molecule CD1d (Signal 1). Co-stimulatory 
molecules can positively and negatively influence iNKT cell activation and
function and skew the immune response (Signal 2). This study will review the
background of iNKT cells and their co-stimulatory requirements for general
function and in antitumor immunity. We will explore the impact of monoclonal
antibody administration for both blocking inhibitory pathways and engaging
stimulatory pathways on iNKT cell-mediated antitumor immunity. This review will
highlight the incorporation of co-stimulatory molecules in antitumor dendritic
cell vaccine strategies. The use of co-stimulatory intracellular signaling
domains in chimeric antigen receptor-iNKT therapy will be assessed. Finally, we
will explore the influence of innate-like receptors and modification of
immunosuppressive cytokines (Signal 3) on cancer immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01447 
PMCID: PMC5671952
PMID: 29163518 

