
1. PLoS One. 2017 Nov 21;12(11):e0188194. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0188194.
eCollection 2017.

Microbial-caddisfly bioherm association from the Lower Cretaceous Shinekhudag
Formation, Mongolia: Earliest record of plant armoring in fossil caddisfly cases.

Adiya T(1), Johnson CL(1), Loewen MA(1)(2)(3), Ritterbush KA(1), Constenius
KN(4), Dinter CM(3)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geology and Geophysics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City,
Utah, United States of America.
(2)Natural History Museum of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of
America.
(3)Evolutionary Studies Institute, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg,
South Africa.
(4)Department of Geosciences, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, United
States of America.
(5)School of Geosciences, University of Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South
Africa.

Caddisfly larvae construct underwater protective cases using surrounding
materials, thus providing information on environmental conditions in both modern 
and ancient systems. Microbial bioherms associated with caddisfly cases are found
in the Berriassian-Hauterivian (~140-130 Ma) Shinekhudag Formation of Mongolia,
and yield new insights into aspects of lacustrine paleoecosystems and
paleoenvironments. This formation contains the earliest record of plant-armored
caddisfly cases and a rare occurrence of microbial-caddisfly association from the
Mesozoic. The bioherms are investigated within the context of stratigraphic
correlations, depositional environment interpretations, and basin-evolution
models of the sedimentary fill. The bioherms form 0.5-2.0 m diameter mound-shaped
bodies and are concentrated within a single, oil shale-bound stratigraphic
interval. Each bioherm is composed of up to 40% caddisfly cases along with
stromatolites of millimeter-scale, micritic laminations. Petrographic analyses
reveal these bioherms are composed of non-systematic associations of columnar and
oncoidal microbialites, constructed around colonies of caddisfly cases. The cases
are straight to curved, slightly tapered, and tube-shaped, with a progressively
increasing length and width trend (7-21 mm by 1.5-2.5 mm). Despite these
variations, the case architectures reveal similar construction materials; the
particles used for cases are dominated by plant fragments, ostracod valves,
carbonate rocks, and rare mica and feldspar grains. Allochems within the bioherms
include ooids, ostracods, plant fragments, rare gastropods, feldspar grains bound
in micritic matrices, and are consolidated by carbonate dominated cements. The
combination of microbial-caddisfly association, plant fragment case particles,
and ooids/oncoids are indicative of a shallow, littoral lake setting.
Stratigraphic juxtaposition of nearshore bioherms and the bounding distal
oil-shale facies suggests that the bioherms developed in an underfilled lake
basin, resulting from an abrupt and short-lived lake desiccation event. Lake
chemistry is believed to have been relatively alkaline, saline to hypersaline,
and rich in Ca, Mg, and HCO3 ions. Through analyzing bioherm characteristics,
caddisfly case architecture, carbonate microfacies, and stratigraphic
variability, we infer larger-scale processes that controlled basin development
during their formation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0188194 
PMCID: PMC5697877
PMID: 29161280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

