
1. Biomater Sci. 2018 Jan 30;6(2):304-313. doi: 10.1039/c7bm00931c.

Minocycline hydrochloride loaded on titanium by graphene oxide: an excellent
antibacterial platform with the synergistic effect of contact-killing and
release-killing.

Qian W (1), Qiu J , Su J , Liu X .

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prosthodontics, School of Stomatology, Tongji University,
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Tooth Restoration and Regeneration,
Shanghai 200072, China. sjs@tongji.edu.cn.

Titanium and its alloys have been widely used in orthopedic and dental implants
because of their excellent properties. However, implant failures still occur due 
to implant-associated bacterial infections. Therefore, proper surface
modification of titanium and its alloys is necessary. In this work, commercial
pure titanium plates were modified with graphene oxide (GO) which was used to
load minocycline hydrochloride. Gram-positive Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus)
and Streptococcus mutans (S. mutans) and Gram-negative Escherichia coli (E. coli)
were used to investigate the antibacterial activity of the samples. Human
gingival fibroblast (HGF) cells were applied to assess the cytocompatibility of
the various samples. To investigate cell adhesion and cell surface coverage in
the presence of bacteria, the coculture of HGF cells and S. aureus was performed.
The results indicated that the GO-modified titanium surface could inhibit the
growth of the bacteria which had direct contact with GO, while it could not
affect the bacteria without direct contact of GO. Minocycline hydrochloride on
the GO-modified titanium surface (M@GO-Ti) showed a slow release behavior and
exhibited excellent antibacterial activity with the synergistic effect of
contact-killing and release-killing by GO and minocycline hydrochloride,
respectively. In the coculture process with the presence of S. aureus, HGF cells 
on M@GO-Ti demonstrated the best cell viability and cell surface coverage among
all the samples.

DOI: 10.1039/c7bm00931c 
PMID: 29184938  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

