
1. Blood. 2018 Feb 22;131(8):864-876. doi: 10.1182/blood-2017-06-788067. Epub 2017
Nov 29.

Platelet glycoprotein VI aids in local immunity during pneumonia-derived sepsis
caused by gram-negative bacteria.

Claushuis TAM(1), de Vos AF(1), Nieswandt B(2)(3), Boon L(4), Roelofs JJTH(5), de
Boer OJ(5), van 't Veer C(1), van der Poll T(1)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Institute of Experimental Biomedicine, University Hospital of Würzburg,
Würzburg, Germany.
(3)Rudolf Virchow Center for Experimental Biomedicine, University of Würzburg,
Würzburg, Germany.
(4)Bioceros, Utrecht, The Netherlands; and.
(5)Department of Pathology and.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Platelet collagen receptor glycoprotein VI (GPVI) and podoplanin receptor C-type 
lectin-like receptor 2 (CLEC2) are receptors implicated in platelet activation
that both signal via an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif. Platelets
are necessary for host defense and prevention of hemorrhage during sepsis, but
the role of platelet GPVI and CLEC2 herein is unknown. To investigate this, we
infected mice depleted of platelet GPVI or CLEC2 by antibody treatment or GPVI-/-
mice with the common human sepsis pathogen Klebsiella pneumoniae via the airways 
to induce pneumonia-derived sepsis. The GPVI ligand collagen and the CLEC2 ligand
podoplanin were constitutively present in the lung, whereas the GPVI ligands
fibrin and histone were induced during pneumonia. During late-stage infection,
both mice depleted of GPVI and GPVI-/- mice showed increased bacterial growth in 
lungs, and GPVI-/- mice also showed increased bacterial growth in distant body
sites. Despite higher bacterial loads, GPVI-depleted mice showed reduced platelet
numbers, platelet activation, and platelet-leukocyte complex formation in the
bronchoalveolar space. Consistently, in human whole blood, GPVI stimulation of
platelets increased platelet-leukocyte complex formation and leukocyte
activation, which was accompanied by enhanced phagocytosis of Klebsiella
GPVI-depleted mice showed increased lung hemorrhage during infection, but not to 
the extent observed in platelet-depleted mice, and lung bleeding was not
significantly different between GPVI-/- and wild-type mice. CLEC2 depletion did
not affect any of the responses during pneumonia. These results suggest that
platelet GPVI, but not CLEC2, contributes to local host defense during
pneumonia-derived sepsis by enhancing leukocyte function.

© 2018 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2017-06-788067 
PMID: 29187378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

