
1. Hum Mol Genet. 2017 Dec 15;26(24):4951-4960. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddx378.

Thrombospondin-1 and disease progression in dysferlinopathy.

Urao N(1)(2), Mirza RE(1), Corbiere TF(1), Hollander Z(3)(4), Borchers
CH(5)(6)(7)(8), Koh TJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Kinesiology and Nutrition, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60612, USA.
(2)Center for Wound Healing and Tissue Regeneration, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.
(3)PROOF Center of Excellence, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(4)UBC James Hogg Research Centre, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(5)University of Victoria - Genome British Columbia Proteomics Centre, University
of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, Victoria,
BC, Canada.
(7)Proteomics Centre, Segal Cancer Centre, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General
Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(8)Gerald Bronfman Department of Oncology, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, QC,
Canada.

The purpose of this study was to determine whether thrombospondin (TSP)-1
promotes macrophage activity and disease progression in dysferlinopathy. First,
we found that levels of TSP-1 are elevated in blood of non-ambulant
dysferlinopathy patients compared with ambulant patients and healthy controls,
supporting the idea that TSP-1 levels are correlated with disease progression. We
then crossed dysferlinopathic BlaJ mice with TSP-1 knockout mice and assessed
disease progression longitudinally with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). In
these mice, deletion of TSP-1 ameliorated loss in volume and mass of the
moderately affected gluteal muscle but not of the severely affected psoas muscle.
T2 MRI parameters revealed that loss of TSP-1 modestly inhibited inflammation
only in gluteal muscle of male mice. Histological assessment indicated that
deletion of TSP-1 reduced inflammatory cell infiltration of muscle fibers, but
only early in disease progression. In addition, flow cytometry analysis revealed 
that, in males, TSP-1 knockout reduced macrophage infiltration and phagocytic
activity, which is consistent with TSP-1-enhanced phagocytosis and
pro-inflammatory cytokine induction in cultured macrophages. In summary, TSP-1
appears to play an accessory role in modulating Mp activity in BlaJ mice in a
gender, age and muscle-dependent manner, but is unlikely a primary driver of
disease progression of dysferlinopathy.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddx378 
PMID: 29206970  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

