
1. PLoS One. 2017 Dec 6;12(12):e0188487. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0188487.
eCollection 2017.

Arsenic exposure and intestinal microbiota in children from Sirajdikhan,
Bangladesh.

Dong X(1), Shulzhenko N(2), Lemaitre J(2), Greer RL(2), Peremyslova K(1),
Quamruzzaman Q(3), Rahman M(3), Hasan OS(3), Joya SA(3), Golam M(3), Christiani
DC(4), Morgun A(1), Kile ML(5).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, United States of 
America.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, United
States of America.
(3)Dhaka Community Hospital, Wireless Railgate, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(4)Department of Environmental Heath, Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health,
Boston, MA, United States of America.
(5)School of Biological and Population Health Sciences, College of Public Health 
and Human Sciences, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, United States of
America.

BACKGROUND: Arsenic has antimicrobial properties at high doses yet few studies
have examined its effect on gut microbiota. This warrants investigation since
arsenic exposure increases the risk of many diseases in which gut microbiota have
been shown to play a role. We examined the association between arsenic exposure
from drinking water and the composition of intestinal microbiota in children
exposed to low and high arsenic levels during prenatal development and early
life.
RESULTS: 16S rRNA gene sequencing revealed that children with high arsenic
exposure had a higher abundance of Proteobacteria in their stool compared to
matched controls with low arsenic exposure. Furthermore, whole metagenome shotgun
sequencing identified 332 bacterial SEED functions that were enriched in the high
exposure group. A separate model showed that these genes, which included genes
involved in virulence and multidrug resistance, were positively correlated with
arsenic concentration within the group of children in the high arsenic group. We 
performed reference free genome assembly, and identified strains of E.coli as
contributors to the arsenic enriched SEED functions. Further genome annotation of
the E.coli genome revealed two strains containing two different arsenic
resistance operons that are not present in the gut microbiome of a recently
described European human cohort (Metagenomics of the Human Intestinal Tract,
MetaHIT). We then performed quantification by qPCR of two arsenic resistant genes
(ArsB, ArsC). We observed that the expression of these two operons was higher
among the children with high arsenic exposure compared to matched controls.
CONCLUSIONS: This preliminary study indicates that arsenic exposure early in life
was associated with altered gut microbiota in Bangladeshi children. The
enrichment of E.coli arsenic resistance genes in the high exposure group provides
an insight into the possible mechanisms of how this toxic compound could affect
gut microbiota.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0188487 
PMCID: PMC5718612
PMID: 29211769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

