
1. Glia. 2018 Mar;66(3):670-687. doi: 10.1002/glia.23274. Epub 2017 Dec 9.

Myelin extracellular leaflet compaction requires apolipoprotein D membrane
management to optimize lysosomal-dependent recycling and glycocalyx removal.

García-Mateo N(1), Pascua-Maestro R(1), Pérez-Castellanos A(1), Lillo C(2),
Sanchez D(1), Ganfornina MD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología y Genética Molecular-Departamento de Bioquímica y
Biología Molecular y Fisiología, Universidad de Valladolid-CSIC, Valladolid,
Spain.
(2)Instituto de Neurociencias de Castilla y León, IBSAL, Universidad de
Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.

To compact the extracellular sides of myelin, an important transition must take
place: from membrane sliding, while building the wraps, to membrane adhesion and 
water exclusion. Removal of the negatively charged glycocalyx becomes the
limiting factor in such transition. What is required to initiate this
membrane-zipping process? Knocking-out the Lipocalin Apolipoprotein D (ApoD),
essential for lysosomal functional integrity in glial cells, results in a
specific defect in myelin extracellular leaflet compaction in peripheral and
central nervous system, which results in reduced conduction velocity and
suboptimal behavioral outputs: motor learning is compromised. Myelination
initiation, growth, intracellular leaflet compaction, myelin thickness or
internodal length remain unaltered. Lack of ApoD specifically modifies Plp and P0
protein expression, but not Mbp or Mag. Late in myelin maturation period, ApoD
affects lipogenic and growth-related, but not stress-responsive, signaling
pathways. Without ApoD, the sialylated glycocalyx is maintained and ganglioside
content remains high. In peripheral nervous system, Neu3 membrane sialidase and
lysosomal Neu1 are coordinately expressed with ApoD in subsets of Schwann cells. 
ApoD-KO myelin becomes depleted of Neu3 and enriched in Fyn, a kinase with
pivotal roles in transducing axon-derived signals into myelin properties. In the 
absence of ApoD, partial permeabilization of lysosomes alters Neu1 location as
well. Exogenous ApoD rescues ApoD-KO hypersialylated glycocalyx in astrocytes,
demonstrating that ApoD is necessary and sufficient to control glycocalyx
composition in glial cells. By ensuring lysosomal functional integrity and
adequate subcellular location of effector and regulatory proteins, ApoD
guarantees the glycolipid recycling and glycocalyx removal required to complete
myelin compaction.

© 2017 The Authors GLIA Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/glia.23274 
PMID: 29222871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

