
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2017 Dec 12;18(12). pii: E2694. doi: 10.3390/ijms18122694.

Exploring the Caste-Specific Multi-Layer Defense Mechanism of Formosan
Subterranean Termites, Coptotermes formosanus Shiraki.

Hussain A(1)(2), Tian MY(3), Wen SY(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, College of Natural Resources and Environment, South 
China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510640, China. abhussain@kfu.edu.sa.
(2)Laboratory of Bio-control and Molecular Biology, Department of Arid Land
Agriculture, College of Agricultural and Food Sciences, King Faisal University,
31982 Hofuf, Al-Ahsa, Saudi Arabia. abhussain@kfu.edu.sa.
(3)Department of Entomology, College of Natural Resources and Environment, South 
China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510640, China. mytian@scau.edu.cn.
(4)Department of Entomology, College of Natural Resources and Environment, South 
China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510640, China. shywen@scau.edu.cn.

The survival and foraging of Coptotermesformosanus Shiraki in a microbe-rich
environment reflect the adaptation of an extraordinary, sophisticated defense
mechanism by the nest-mates. We aimed to explore the host pathogen interaction by
studying caste-specific volatile chemistry and genes encoding the antioxidant
defense of winged imagoes, nymphs, soldiers and workers of Formosan subterranean 
termites. Qualitative analyses of C.formosanus Shiraki performed by HS-SPME/GC-MS
showed considerable variations in the chemical composition of volatile organic
compounds (VOCs) and their proportions among all the castes. Winged imagoes
produced the most important compounds such as naphthalene and n-hexanoic acid.
The antifungal activity of these compounds along with nonanal, n-pentadecane,
n-tetradecane, n-heptadecane and methyl octanoate against the conidial
suspensions of Metarhiziumanisopliae and Beauveriabassiana isolates enable us to 
suggest that the failure of natural fungal infection in the nest is due to the
antiseptic environment of the nest, which is mainly controlled by the VOCs of
nest-mates. In addition, conidial germination of M.anisopliae and B.bassiana
isolates evaluated on the cuticle of each caste showed significant variations
among isolates and different castes. Our results showed that the conidia of
M.anisopliae 02049 exhibited the highest germination on the cuticle of all the
inoculated castes. Moreover, we recorded the lowest germination of the conidia of
B.bassiana 200436. Caste-specific germination variations enabled us to report for
the first time that the cuticle of winged imagoes was found to be the most
resistant cuticle. The analysis of the transcriptome of C.formosanus Shiraki
revealed the identification of 17 genes directly involved in antioxidant defense.
Expression patterns of the identified antioxidant genes by quantitative real-time
PCR (qPCR) revealed the significantly highest upregulation of CAT, GST, PRXSL,
Cu/Zn-SOD2, TXN1, TXN2, TXNL1, TXNL2, TXNL4A and TPx genes among winged imagoes
upon infection with the most virulent isolate, M.anisopliae 02049. Furthermore,
soldiers showed the least expression of genes encoding antioxidant defense. Our
findings indicated that the volatile chemistry of nest-mates and genes encoding
antioxidant defense greatly contribute to the survival and foraging of Formosan
subterranean termites in a microbe-rich habitat.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms18122694 
PMCID: PMC5751295
PMID: 29231889  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
founding sponsors had no role in the design of the study; in the collection,
analyses or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; nor in the 
decision to publish the results.

