
1. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2018 Mar;218(3):294-314.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.ajog.2017.12.009.
Epub 2017 Dec 14.

Spontaneous preterm birth: advances toward the discovery of genetic
predisposition.

Strauss JF 3rd(1), Romero R(2), Gomez-Lopez N(3), Haymond-Thornburg H(4), Modi
BP(5), Teves ME(4), Pearson LN(6), York TP(7), Schenkein HA(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Virginia Commonwealth University
School of Medicine, Richmond, VA; Department of Human and Molecular Genetics,
Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond, VA. Electronic
address: jerome.strauss@vcuhealth.org.
(2)Perinatology Research Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute for
Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, US Department 
of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD and Detroit, MI; Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI; Department of
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI;
Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI. 
Electronic address: prbchiefstaff@med.wayne.edu.
(3)Perinatology Research Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute for
Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, US Department 
of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD and Detroit, MI; Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology and the Department of Immunology, Microbiology and
Biochemistry, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Virginia Commonwealth University
School of Medicine, Richmond, VA.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(6)Department of Anthropology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
PA.
(7)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Virginia Commonwealth University
School of Medicine, Richmond, VA; Department of Human and Molecular Genetics,
Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond, VA.
(8)Department of Periodontics, Virginia Commonwealth University School of
Dentistry, Richmond, VA.

Evidence from family and twin-based studies provide strong support for a
significant contribution of maternal and fetal genetics to the timing of
parturition and spontaneous preterm birth. However, there has been only modest
success in the discovery of genes predisposing to preterm birth, despite
increasing sophistication of genetic and genomic technology. In contrast, DNA
variants associated with other traits/diseases have been identified. For example,
there is overwhelming evidence that suggests that the nature and intensity of an 
inflammatory response in adults and children are under genetic control. Because
inflammation is often invoked as an etiologic factor in spontaneous preterm
birth, the question of whether spontaneous preterm birth has a genetic
predisposition in the case of pathologic inflammation has been of long-standing
interest to investigators. Here, we review various genetic approaches used for
the discovery of preterm birth genetic variants in the context of
inflammation-associated spontaneous preterm birth. Candidate gene studies have
sought genetic variants that regulate inflammation in the mother and fetus;
however, the promising findings have often not been replicated. Genome-wide
association studies, an approach to the identification of chromosomal loci
responsible for complex traits, have also not yielded compelling evidence for DNA
variants predisposing to preterm birth. A recent genome-wide association study
that included a large number of White women (>40,000) revealed that maternal loci
contribute to preterm birth. Although none of these loci harbored genes directly 
related to innate immunity, the results were replicated. Another approach to
identify DNA variants predisposing to preterm birth is whole exome sequencing,
which examines the DNA sequence of protein-coding regions of the genome. A recent
whole exome sequencing study identified rare mutations in genes encoding for
proteins involved in the negative regulation (dampening) of the innate immune
response (eg, CARD6, CARD8, NLRP10, NLRP12, NOD2, TLR10) and antimicrobial
peptide/proteins (eg, DEFB1, MBL2). These findings support the concept that
preterm labor, at least in part, has an inflammatory etiology, which can be
induced by pathogens (ie, intraamniotic infection) or "danger signals" (alarmins)
released during cellular stress or necrosis (ie, sterile intraamniotic
inflammation). These findings support the notion that preterm birth has a
polygenic basis that involves rare mutations or damaging variants in multiple
genes involved in innate immunity and host defense mechanisms against microbes
and their noxious products. An overlap among the whole exome
sequencing-identified genes and other inflammatory conditions associated with
preterm birth, such as periodontal disease and inflammatory bowel disease, was
observed, which suggests a shared genetic substrate for these conditions. We
propose that whole exome sequencing, as well as whole genome sequencing, is the
most promising approach for the identification of functionally significant
genetic variants responsible for spontaneous preterm birth, at least in the
context of pathologic inflammation. The identification of genes that contribute
to preterm birth by whole exome sequencing, or whole genome sequencing, promises 
to yield valuable population-specific biomarkers to identify the risk for
spontaneous preterm birth and potential strategies to mitigate such a risk.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajog.2017.12.009 
PMCID: PMC5834399
PMID: 29248470  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

