
1. mBio. 2017 Dec 19;8(6). pii: e02073-17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02073-17.

SLC6A14 Is a Genetic Modifier of Cystic Fibrosis That Regulates Pseudomonas
aeruginosa Attachment to Human Bronchial Epithelial Cells.

Di Paola M(1)(2), Park AJ(3), Ahmadi S(1)(4), Roach EJ(3), Wu YS(1)(4),
Struder-Kypke M(3)(5), Lam JS(3), Bear CE(6)(2)(4), Khursigara CM(7)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Programme of Molecular Medicine, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph,
Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Molecular and Cellular Imaging Facility, Advanced Analysis Centre, University 
of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Programme of Molecular Medicine, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada bear@sickkids.ca ckhursig@uoguelph.ca.
(7)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph,
Ontario, Canada bear@sickkids.ca ckhursig@uoguelph.ca.

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is caused by mutations in the CFTR gene and is associated
with progressive and ultimately fatal infectious lung disease. There can be
considerable variability in disease severity among individuals with the same CFTR
mutations, and recent genome-wide association studies have identified secondary
genetic factors that contribute to this. One of these modifier genes is SLC6A14, 
which encodes an amino acid transporter. Importantly, variants of this gene have 
been associated with age at first acquisition of Pseudomonas aeruginosa In this
study, we aimed to determine the function of SLC6A14 in airway epithelia and how 
it might affect colonization by P. aeruginosa We show that SLC6A14 is expressed
in respiratory epithelial cells and transports l-arginine out of the airway
surface liquid (ASL). Exposure of airway epithelia to flagellin from
P. aeruginosa led to upregulation of SLC6A14 expression and increased
SLC6A14-dependent uptake of l-arginine from the ASL. In support of the hypothesis
that l-arginine affects P. aeruginosa attachment, we showed that l-arginine
supplementation promoted P. aeruginosa attachment to an abiotic surface in a
dose-dependent manner. In a coculture model, we found that inhibition of
SLC6A14-dependent l-arginine transport enhanced P. aeruginosa attachment. In
Slc6a14-/y (knockout) mice, P. aeruginosa attachment to lung tissue was also
significantly enhanced. Together, these findings suggest that SLC6A14 activity
plays a role in the modification of the initial stages of airway infection by
altering the level of l-arginine in the ASL, which in turn affects the attachment
of P. aeruginosaIMPORTANCE CF patients with shared CFTR gene mutations show
significant variability in their clinical presentation of infectious lung
disease. Genome-wide association studies have been used to identify secondary
genetic factors that may explain the variable susceptibility to infection by
opportunistic pathogens, including P. aeruginosa, the leading cause of
pathogen-induced lung damage in nonpediatric CF patients. Once identified and
characterized, these secondary genetic modifiers may allow for the development of
personalized medicine for patients and ultimately the extension of life. In this 
study, we interrogated the biological role of one of these modifiers, SLC6A14,
and showed that it contributes to host defense by depleting extracellular
arginine (an attachment-promoting metabolite for P. aeruginosa) from the airway
surface liquid.

Copyright © 2017 Di Paola et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02073-17 
PMCID: PMC5736915
PMID: 29259090  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

