
1. Microb Pathog. 2018 Feb;115:64-67. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2017.12.044. Epub 2017 
Dec 16.

Aeromonas caviae alters the activities of ecto-enzymes that hydrolyze adenine
nucleotides in fish thrombocytes.

Baldissera MD(1), Souza CF(2), Verdi CM(3), Vizzotto BS(4), Santos RCV(3),
Baldisserotto B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Universidade Federal de Santa
Maria, Santa Maria, RS, Brazil. Electronic address: mdbaldissera@mail.ufsm.br.
(2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Universidade Federal de Santa
Maria, Santa Maria, RS, Brazil.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Universidade Federal de Santa
Maria, Santa Maria, RS, Brazil.
(4)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Centro Universitário Franciscano, Santa
Maria, RS, Brazil.
(5)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Universidade Federal de Santa
Maria, Santa Maria, RS, Brazil. Electronic address: bbaldisserotto@hotmail.com.

It is recognized that the purinergic system, through the activities of
ectonucleoside triphosphate diphosphohydrolase (E-NTPDase), ecto-5'-nucleotidase 
(E-5'-nucleotidase), and ecto-adenosine deaminase (E-ADA), is involved in the
regulation and modulation of the physiological and pathological events linked to 
hemostasis. This occurs due to the role of adenosine diphosphate (ADP) in the
activation and recruitment of platelets, and the role of adenosine (Ado) in the
inhibition of platelet activation. Thus, here we aimed to evaluate whether
Aeromonas caviae infection impairs the ecto-enzymes of the purinergic system in
fish thrombocytes and the involvement of this system in the hemorrhagic
septicemia. The total number of fish thrombocytes decreased in infected animals
compared to uninfected animals. Regarding the ecto-enzymes of the purinergic
system, the E-NTPDase and E-5'-nucleotidase activities increased in infected
animals compared to uninfected animals, while the E-ADA activity decreased. These
findings show that adenine nucleotide hydrolysis is modified in the thrombocytes 
of fish experimentally infected with A. caviae, which impairs the coagulation
process due the excessive hydrolysis of ADP, a molecule linked with activation
and recruitment of thrombocytes at the site of vascular injury, and augmentation 
on Ado levels, a molecule linked with inhibitory effects on platelet activation
and aggregation. In summary, the purinergic system might contribute to the
occurrence of hemorrhagic frames in fish infected with A. caviae.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2017.12.044 
PMID: 29253595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

