
1. Signal Transduct Target Ther. 2017 Sep 22;2:17049. doi: 10.1038/sigtrans.2017.49.
eCollection 2017.

Ageing affects chondroitin sulfates and their synthetic enzymes in the
intervertebral disc.

Collin EC(1), Carroll O(1), Kilcoyne M(2)(3), Peroglio M(4), See E(1), Hendig
D(5), Alini M(4), Grad S(4), Pandit A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Research in Medical Devices (CÚRAM), National University of
Ireland, Galway, Ireland.
(2)Department of Microbiology, School of Natural Sciences, National University of
Ireland, Galway, Ireland.
(3)Glycoscience Group, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland.
(4)AO Research Institute, Davos, Switzerland.
(5)Institut für Laboratoriums-und Transfusionsmedizin, Herz-und Diabeteszentrum
Nordrhein-Westfalen, Universitätsklinik der Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bad
Oeynhausen, Germany.

The depletion of chondroitin sulfates (CSs) within the intervertebral disc (IVD) 
during degenerative disc disease (DDD) results in a decrease in tissue hydration,
a loss of fluid movement, cell apoptosis, a loss of nerve growth inhibition and
ultimately, the loss of disc function. To date, little is known with regards to
the structure and content of chondroitin sulfates (CSs) during IVD ageing. The
behavior of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), specifically CSs, as well as
xylosyltransferase I (XT-I) and glucuronyltransferase I (GT-I), two key enzymes
involved in CS synthesis as a primer of glycosaminoglycan (GAG) chain elongation 
and GAG synthesis in the nucleus pulposus (NP), respectively, were evaluated in a
bovine ageing IVD model. Here, we showed significant changes in the composition
of GAGs during the disc ageing process (6-month-old, 2-year-old and 8-year-old
IVDs representing the immature to mature skeleton). The CS quantity and
composition of annulus fibrosus (AF) and NP were determined. The expression of
both XT-I and GT-I was detected using immunohistochemistry. A significant
decrease in GAGs was observed during the ageing process. CSs are affected at both
the structural and quantitative levels with important changes in sulfation
observed upon maturity, which correlated with a decrease in the expression of
both XT-I and GT-I. A progressive switch of the sulfation profile was noted in
both NP and AF tissues from 6 months to 8 years. These changes give an
appreciation of the potential impact of CSs on the disc biology and the
development of therapeutic approaches for disc regeneration and repair.

DOI: 10.1038/sigtrans.2017.49 
PMCID: PMC5661628
PMID: 29263929 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

