
1. J Fish Dis. 2018 Apr;41(4):683-687. doi: 10.1111/jfd.12773. Epub 2017 Dec 19.

Purinergic signalling displays an anti-inflammatory profile in the spleen of fish
experimentally infected with Aeromonas caviae: Modulation of the immune response.

Baldissera MD(1), Souza CF(2), Bottari NB(3), Verdi CM(1), Santos RCV(1),
Vizzotto BS(4), Baldisserotto B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Universidade Federal de Santa
Maria, Santa Maria, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.
(2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Universidade Federal de Santa
Maria, Santa Maria, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Universidade Federal de
Santa Maria (UFSM), Santa Maria, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.
(4)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Centro Universitário Franciscano, Santa
Maria, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.

Extracellular adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and its metabolite adenosine (Ado) are
recognized as key mediators of immune and inflammatory responses. Depending on
its concentration, ATP may act as an immunostimulant or immunodepressant, while
Ado levels display an anti-inflammatory profile. The aim of this study was to
evaluate whether splenic purinergic signalling is capable of modulating immune
and inflammatory responses in fish experimentally infected with Aeromonas caviae.
Triphosphate diphosphohydrolase (NTPDase) and 5'-nucleotidase activities
increased in the spleen of silver catfish (Rhamdia quelen) experimentally
infected with A. caviae compared with the uninfected control group. Moreover,
splenic Ado levels increased in the infected animals relative to the uninfected
control group. Based on these lines of evidence, our findings revealed that
adenine nucleotide hydrolysis is modified in the spleen of fish infected with
A. caviae attempting to restrict the inflammatory process through the
upregulation of NTPDase and 5'-nucleotidase activities, which occurs in an
attempt to hydrolyse the excessive ATP in the extracellular environment and
rapidly hydrolyse AMP to form Ado. In summary, purinergic signalling can modulate
immune and inflammatory responses during A. caviae infection.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jfd.12773 
PMID: 29265378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

