
1. Transfusion. 2018 Mar;58(3):718-725. doi: 10.1111/trf.14458. Epub 2017 Dec 25.

Unrelated donor choices for allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation in
Canada: an evaluation of factors influencing donor selection.

Greco-Stewart V(1), Kiernan J(2)(3), Killeen D(1), Haun S(1), Mercer D(1), Young 
K(1), Liwski RS(1)(4), Allan DS(1)(2)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)OneMatch Stem Cell & Marrow Network, Canadian Blood Services.
(2)Centre for Transfusion Research.
(3)University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Departments of Pathology and Microbiology & Immunology, Dalhousie University, 
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(5)Ottawa Hospital Research Institute.
(6)Department of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Utilization of unrelated donors and cord blood units (CBUs) for
allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation continues to increase.
Understanding the practices of donor selection by transplant centers is critical 
for unrelated donor registries and cord blood banks to optimize registry
composition and inventory to meet patient need.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: Unrelated donor and CBU selection practices of Canadian
transplant centers served by Canadian Blood Services' OneMatch Stem Cell & Marrow
Network (OM) were reviewed, including HLA match level, locus of disparity, age,
sex, and product choice (donor vs. CBU).
RESULTS: HLA-matched donors within OM and/or international (INT) registries were 
preferentially investigated, underscoring the primary importance of HLA matching.
In the case of HLA-mismatched donors, HLA-A disparities were most common while
DRB1 mismatches were least common. Advanced age, sex, and lack of donor
availability were the most frequent reasons that high-probability OM donors were 
overlooked in favor of INT donors. High-probability 10 of 10 HLA-matched female
donors from OM were often avoided in favor of INT male donors. Use of female
donors, however, increased in cases restricted to more HLA-disparate donor
options. Caucasian patients were more likely to find 10 of 10 matched donors,
whereas use of mismatched donors and CBUs were more prevalent among non-Caucasian
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Recruitment and retention of young, male donors from diverse ethnic 
backgrounds may increase the usage of histocompatible OM donors for patients in
need.

© 2017 AABB.

DOI: 10.1111/trf.14458 
PMID: 29277913  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

