
1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2018 Apr 1;109:639-650. doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.12.085.
Epub 2017 Dec 19.

Probing the interaction of zero valent iron nanoparticles with blood system by
biophysical, docking, cellular, and molecular studies.

Asl BA(1), Mogharizadeh L(2), Khomjani N(1), Rasti B(3), Pishva SP(4), Akhtari
K(5), Attar F(6), Falahati M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Advance Science and
Technology, Pharmaceutical Sciences Branch, Islamic Azad University of Tehran
(IAUPS), Iran.
(2)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Central Tehran Branch, Islamic Azad 
University, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Lahijan Branch, Islamic
Azad University (IAU), Lahijan, Guilan, Iran.
(4)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Pharmaceutical
Sciences Branch, Islamic Azad University of Tehran (IAUPS), Iran.
(5)Department of Physics, University of Kurdistan, P.O. Box 416, Sanandaj, Iran.
(6)Department of Biology, Faculty of Food Industry & Agriculture, Standard
Research Institute (SRI), Karaj, Iran. Electronic address:
f.attar@standard.ac.ir.
(7)Department of Nanotechnology, Faculty of Advance Science and Technology,
Pharmaceutical Sciences Branch, Islamic Azad University of Tehran (IAUPS), Iran. 
Electronic address: falahati@ibb.ut.ac.ir.

Human exposure to nanoparticles (NPs) is inevitable as NPs become more widely
applied and, as a result, nanotoxicology study is now gaining attention. Herein, 
the interaction of zero valent iron NPs (ZVFe-NPs) with human hemoglobin (Hb) was
evaluated using a variety of techniques including fluorescence spectroscopy, far 
circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy as well as docking study. Also, the
cytotoxicity of ZVFe-NPs on the human lymphocyte cell line as a model of blood
system cell line was investigated by 3-(4,
5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT), acridine
orange/ethidium bromide (AO/EB) staining, flow cytometry, and real-time PCR
assays. Fluorescence studies revealed that ZVFe-NPs bind to Hb via hydrogen bonds
and induced conformational changes of Hb in a static denaturation mechanism. CD
experiment showed that Hb retained its native structure in the presence of
ZVFe-NP. Molecular docking study also demonstrated that polar residues of Hb
provide convenient medium to establish hydrogen bonds with water molecules on
ZVFe-NP surface. Likewise, it was also revealed that ZVFe-NPs impaired the
viability of lymphocyte cells through apoptotic pathway. For NPs to move into the
clinical area, it is crucial that nanotoxicology research provide pivotal
information about the adverse effect of NPs against biological systems.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.12.085 
PMID: 29273525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

