
1. Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017 Oct 14;5(1):83-98.e10. doi:
10.1016/j.jcmgh.2017.10.001. eCollection 2018.

Uncovering a Predictive Molecular Signature for the Onset of NASH-Related
Fibrosis in a Translational NASH Mouse Model.

van Koppen A(1)(2), Verschuren L(3), van den Hoek AM(1), Verheij J(4), Morrison
MC(1), Li K(5), Nagabukuro H(6), Costessi A(7), Caspers MPM(3), van den Broek
TJ(3), Sagartz J(8), Kluft C(9), Beysen C(5), Emson C(5), van Gool AJ(3)(10),
Goldschmeding R(2), Stoop R(1), Bobeldijk-Pastorova I(1), Turner SM(5), Hanauer
G(6), Hanemaaijer R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Health Research, TNO, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Systems Biology, TNO, Zeist, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pathology, Amsterdam University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(5)Kinemed, Inc, Emeryville, California.
(6)Takeda Pharmaceutical Company, Kanagawa, Japan.
(7)BaseClear B.V., Leiden, The Netherlands.
(8)Seventh Wave, Maryland Heights, Missouri.
(9)Good Biomarker Sciences B.V., Leiden, The Netherlands.
(10)Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Background & Aims: The incidence of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is
increasing. The pathophysiological mechanisms of NASH and the sequence of events 
leading to hepatic fibrosis are incompletely understood. The aim of this study
was to gain insight into the dynamics of key molecular processes involved in NASH
and to rank early markers for hepatic fibrosis.
Methods: A time-course study in low-density lipoprotein-receptor knockout. Leiden
mice on a high-fat diet was performed to identify the temporal dynamics of key
processes contributing to NASH and fibrosis. An integrative systems biology
approach was used to elucidate candidate markers linked to the active fibrosis
process by combining transcriptomics, dynamic proteomics, and histopathology. The
translational value of these findings were confirmed using human NASH data sets.
Results: High-fat-diet feeding resulted in obesity, hyperlipidemia, insulin
resistance, and NASH with fibrosis in a time-dependent manner. Temporal dynamics 
of key molecular processes involved in the development of NASH were identified,
including lipid metabolism, inflammation, oxidative stress, and fibrosis. A
data-integrative approach enabled identification of the active fibrotic process
preceding histopathologic detection using a novel molecular fibrosis signature.
Human studies were used to identify overlap of genes and processes and to perform
a network biology-based prioritization to rank top candidate markers representing
the early manifestation of fibrosis.
Conclusions: An early predictive molecular signature was identified that marked
the active profibrotic process before histopathologic fibrosis becomes manifest. 
Early detection of the onset of NASH and fibrosis enables identification of
novel blood-based biomarkers to stratify patients at risk, development of new
therapeutics, and help shorten (pre)clinical experimental time frames.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcmgh.2017.10.001 
PMCID: PMC5738456
PMID: 29276754 

