
1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2018 Jan 2;19(1):1. doi: 10.1186/s12859-017-2006-0.

Evaluation and comparison of bioinformatic tools for the enrichment analysis of
metabolomics data.

Marco-Ramell A(1)(2), Palau-Rodriguez M(1)(2), Alay A(3), Tulipani S(1),
Urpi-Sarda M(1)(2), Sanchez-Pla A(3)(4), Andres-Lacueva C(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Biomarkers & Nutrimetabolomics Laboratory, Nutrition, Food Science and
Gastronomy Department, Food Technology Reference Net (XaRTA), Nutrition and Food 
Safety Research Institute (INSA-UB), Faculty of Pharmacy and Food Sciences,
Pharmacy and Food Science Faculty, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)CIBER Fragilidad y Envejecimiento Saludable [CIBERfes], Instituto de Salud
Carlos III [ISCIII], Madrid, Spain.
(3)Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics Department, Biology Faculty, University 
of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Statistics and Bioinformatics Unit, Vall d'Hebron Institut de Recerca (VHIR), 
Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Biomarkers & Nutrimetabolomics Laboratory, Nutrition, Food Science and
Gastronomy Department, Food Technology Reference Net (XaRTA), Nutrition and Food 
Safety Research Institute (INSA-UB), Faculty of Pharmacy and Food Sciences,
Pharmacy and Food Science Faculty, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
candres@ub.edu.
(6)CIBER Fragilidad y Envejecimiento Saludable [CIBERfes], Instituto de Salud
Carlos III [ISCIII], Madrid, Spain. candres@ub.edu.

BACKGROUND: Bioinformatic tools for the enrichment of 'omics' datasets facilitate
interpretation and understanding of data. To date few are suitable for
metabolomics datasets. The main objective of this work is to give a critical
overview, for the first time, of the performance of these tools. To that aim,
datasets from metabolomic repositories were selected and enriched data were
created. Both types of data were analysed with these tools and outputs were
thoroughly examined.
RESULTS: An exploratory multivariate analysis of the most used tools for the
enrichment of metabolite sets, based on a non-metric multidimensional scaling
(NMDS) of Jaccard's distances, was performed and mirrored their diversity. Codes 
(identifiers) of the metabolites of the datasets were searched in different
metabolite databases (HMDB, KEGG, PubChem, ChEBI, BioCyc/HumanCyc, LipidMAPS,
ChemSpider, METLIN and Recon2). The databases that presented more identifiers of 
the metabolites of the dataset were PubChem, followed by METLIN and ChEBI.
However, these databases had duplicated entries and might present false
positives. The performance of over-representation analysis (ORA) tools, including
BioCyc/HumanCyc, ConsensusPathDB, IMPaLA, MBRole, MetaboAnalyst, Metabox,
MetExplore, MPEA, PathVisio and Reactome and the mapping tool KEGGREST, was
examined. Results were mostly consistent among tools and between real and
enriched data despite the variability of the tools. Nevertheless, a few
controversial results such as differences in the total number of metabolites were
also found. Disease-based enrichment analyses were also assessed, but they were
not found to be accurate probably due to the fact that metabolite disease sets
are not up-to-date and the difficulty of predicting diseases from a list of
metabolites.
CONCLUSIONS: We have extensively reviewed the state-of-the-art of the available
range of tools for metabolomic datasets, the completeness of metabolite
databases, the performance of ORA methods and disease-based analyses. Despite the
variability of the tools, they provided consistent results independent of their
analytic approach. However, more work on the completeness of metabolite and
pathway databases is required, which strongly affects the accuracy of enrichment 
analyses. Improvements will be translated into more accurate and global insights 
of the metabolome.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-017-2006-0 
PMCID: PMC5749025
PMID: 29291722  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

