
1. Ann Bot. 2018 Feb 12;121(2):297-310. doi: 10.1093/aob/mcx160.

The Arabidopsis thaliana non-specific phospholipase C2 is involved in the
response to Pseudomonas syringae attack.

Krcková Z(1), Kocourková D(1), Danek M(1), Brouzdová J(1), Pejchar P(1), Janda
M(1)(2), Pokotylo I(3), Ott PG(4), Valentová O(2), Martinec J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Botany of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Czech
Republic.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Chemistry and
Technology, Prague, Czech Republic.
(3)The Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry and Petrochemistry, National Academy of 
Sciences of Ukraine, Ukraine.
(4)Plant Protection Institute, Centre for Agricultural Research, Hungarian
Academy of Sciences, Hungary.

Background and Aims: The non-specific phospholipase C (NPC) is a new member of
the plant phospholipase family that reacts to abiotic environmental stresses,
such as phosphate deficiency, high salinity, heat and aluminium toxicity, and is 
involved in root development, silicon distribution and brassinolide signalling.
Six NPC genes (NPC1-NPC6) are found in the Arabidopsis genome. The NPC2 isoform
has not been experimentally characterized so far.
Methods: The Arabidopsis NPC2 isoform was cloned and heterologously expressed in 
Escherichia coli. NPC2 enzyme activity was determined using fluorescent
phosphatidylcholine as a substrate. Tissue expression and subcellular
localization were analysed using GUS- and GFP-tagged NPC2. The expression
patterns of NPC2 were analysed via quantitative real-time PCR. Independent
homozygous transgenic plant lines overexpressing NPC2 under the control of a 35S 
promoter were generated, and reactive oxygen species were measured using a
luminol-based assay.
Key Results: The heterologously expressed protein possessed phospholipase C
activity, being able to hydrolyse phosphatidylcholine to diacylglycerol. NPC2
tagged with GFP was predominantly localized to the Golgi apparatus in Arabidopsis
roots. The level of NPC2 transcript is rapidly altered during plant immune
responses and correlates with the activation of multiple layers of the plant
defence system. Transcription of NPC2 decreased substantially after plant
infiltration with Pseudomonas syringae, flagellin peptide flg22 and salicylic
acid treatments and expression of the effector molecule AvrRpm1. The decrease in 
NPC2 transcript levels correlated with a decrease in NPC2 enzyme activity.
NPC2-overexpressing mutants showed higher reactive oxygen species production
triggered by flg22.
Conclusions: This first experimental characterization of NPC2 provides new
insights into the role of the non-specific phospholipase C protein family. The
results suggest that NPC2 is involved in the response of Arabidopsis to P.
syringae attack.

© The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Annals of Botany Company. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/aob/mcx160 
PMCID: PMC5808806
PMID: 29300825  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

