
1. Microb Cell Fact. 2018 Jan 9;17(1):2. doi: 10.1186/s12934-017-0852-0.

Insights into metabolic osmoadaptation of the ectoines-producer bacterium
Chromohalobacter salexigens through a high-quality genome scale metabolic model.

Piubeli F(1), Salvador M(1), Argandoña M(1), Nieto JJ(1), Bernal V(2)(3), Pastor 
JM(2), Cánovas M(2), Vargas C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University
of Sevilla, C/Profesor García González 2, 41012, Sevilla, Spain.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology B and Immunology, Faculty of 
Chemistry, Campus Regional de Excelencia Internacional "Campus Mare Nostrum",
University of Murcia, 30100, Murcia, Spain.
(3)Centro de Tecnología de Repsol, REPSOL S.A. Calle Agustín de Betancourt, s/n. 
28935, Móstoles, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University
of Sevilla, C/Profesor García González 2, 41012, Sevilla, Spain. cvargas@us.es.

BACKGROUND: The halophilic bacterium Chromohalobacter salexigens is a natural
producer of ectoines, compatible solutes with current and potential
biotechnological applications. As production of ectoines is an osmoregulated
process that draws away TCA intermediates, bacterial metabolism needs to be
adapted to cope with salinity changes. To explore and use C. salexigens as cell
factory for ectoine(s) production, a comprehensive knowledge at the systems level
of its metabolism is essential. For this purpose, the construction of a robust
and high-quality genome-based metabolic model of C. salexigens was approached.
RESULTS: We generated and validated a high quality genome-based C. salexigens
metabolic model (iFP764). This comprised an exhaustive reconstruction process
based on experimental information, analysis of genome sequence, manual
re-annotation of metabolic genes, and in-depth refinement. The model included
three compartments (periplasmic, cytoplasmic and external medium), and two
salinity-specific biomass compositions, partially based on experimental results
from C. salexigens. Using previous metabolic data as constraints, the metabolic
model allowed us to simulate and analyse the metabolic osmoadaptation of C.
salexigens under conditions for low and high production of ectoines. The iFP764
model was able to reproduce the major metabolic features of C. salexigens. Flux
Balance Analysis (FBA) and Monte Carlo Random sampling analysis showed
salinity-specific essential metabolic genes and different distribution of fluxes 
and variation in the patterns of correlation of reaction sets belonging to
central C and N metabolism, in response to salinity. Some of them were related to
bioenergetics or production of reducing equivalents, and probably related to
demand for ectoines. Ectoines metabolic reactions were distributed according to
its correlation in four modules. Interestingly, the four modules were independent
both at low and high salinity conditions, as they did not correlate to each
other, and they were not correlated with other subsystems.
CONCLUSIONS: Our validated model is one of the most complete curated networks of 
halophilic bacteria. It is a powerful tool to simulate and explore C. salexigens 
metabolism at low and high salinity conditions, driving to low and high
production of ectoines. In addition, it can be useful to optimize the metabolism 
of other halophilic bacteria for metabolite production.

DOI: 10.1186/s12934-017-0852-0 
PMCID: PMC5759318
PMID: 29316921  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

