
1. Mol Plant Pathol. 2018 Jul;19(7):1742-1753. doi: 10.1111/mpp.12657. Epub 2018 Feb
22.

Population genomic footprints of host adaptation, introgression and recombination
in coffee leaf rust.

Silva DN(1)(2)(3), Várzea V(2)(3), Paulo OS(1), Batista D(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia Animal, Centre for Ecology, Evolution and
Environmental Changes (cE3c), Computational Biology and Population Genomics Group
(CoBiG2), Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal.
(2)Centro de Investigação das Ferrugens do Cafeeiro (CIFC), Instituto Superior de
Agronomia, Universidade de Lisboa, Oeiras, Portugal.
(3)Linking Landscape, Environment, Agriculture and Food (LEAF), Instituto
Superior de Agronomia, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal.

Coffee leaf rust, caused by Hemileia vastatrix (Hv), represents the biggest
threat to coffee production worldwide and ranks amongst the most serious fungal
diseases in history. Despite a recent series of outbreaks and emergence of
hypervirulent strains, the population evolutionary history and potential of this 
pathogen remain poorly understood. To address this issue, we used restriction
site-associated DNA sequencing (RADseq) to generate ∼19 000 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) across a worldwide collection of 37 Hv samples. Contrary to 
the long-standing idea that Hv represents a genetically unstructured and
cosmopolitan species, our results reveal the existence of a cryptic species
complex with marked host tropism. Using phylogenetic and pathological data, we
show that one of these lineages (C3) infects almost exclusively the most
economically valuable coffee species (tetraploids that include Coffea arabica and
interspecific hybrids), whereas the other lineages (C1 and C2) are severely
maladapted to these hosts, but successfully infect diploid coffee species.
Population dynamic analyses suggest that the C3 group may be a recent
'domesticated' lineage that emerged via host shift from diploid coffee hosts. We 
also found evidence of recombination occurring within this group, which could
explain the high pace of pathotype emergence despite the low genetic variation.
Moreover, genomic footprints of introgression between the C3 and C2 groups were
discovered and raise the possibility that virulence factors may be quickly
exchanged between groups with different pathogenic abilities. This work advances 
our understanding of the evolutionary strategies used by plant pathogens in
agro-ecosystems with direct and far-reaching implications for disease control.

© 2018 BSPP AND JOHN WILEY & SONS LTD.

DOI: 10.1111/mpp.12657 
PMCID: PMC6638104
PMID: 29328532  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

