
1. Front Immunol. 2018 Jan 5;8:1917. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01917. eCollection
2017.

Intravital Microscopic Evaluation of the Effects of a CXCR2 Antagonist in a Model
of Liver Ischemia Reperfusion Injury in Mice.

de Oliveira THC(1)(2), Marques PE(3), Poosti F(2), Ruytinx P(2), Amaral FA(1),
Brandolini L(4), Allegretti M(4), Proost P(2), Teixeira MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Immunopharmacology Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry and Immunology,
Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo
Horizonte, Brazil.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Rega Institute, Catholic University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Program in Cell Biology, The Hospital of Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Dompé farmaceutici S.p.A., Milano, Italy.

Background: Ischemia-reperfusion (IR) is a major contributor to graft rejection
after liver transplantation. During IR injury, an intense inflammatory process
occurs in the liver. Neutrophils are considered central players in the events
that lead to liver injury. CXC chemokines mediate hepatic inflammation following 
reperfusion. However, few studies have demonstrated in real-time the behavior of 
recruited neutrophils. We used confocal intravital microscopy (IVM) to image
neutrophil migration in the liver and to analyze in real-time parameters of
neutrophil recruitment in the inflamed tissue in animals treated or not with
reparixin, an allosteric antagonist of CXCR1/2 receptors.
Materials and methods: WT and LysM-eGFP mice treated with reparixin or saline
were subjected to 60 min of ischemia followed by different times of reperfusion. 
Mice received Sytox orange intravenously to show necrotic DNA in IVM. The effect 
of reparixin on parameters of local and systemic reperfusion-induced injury was
also investigated.
Results: IR induced liver injury and inflammation, as evidenced by high levels of
alanine aminotransferase and myeloperoxidase activity, chemokine and cytokine
production, and histological outcome. Treatment with reparixin significantly
decreased neutrophil influx. Moreover, reparixin effectively suppressed the
increase in serum concentrations of TNF-α, IL-6, and CCL3, and the
reperfusion-associated tissue damage. The number of neutrophils in the liver
increased between 6 and 24 h of reperfusion, whereas the distance traveled,
velocity, neutrophil size and shape, and cluster formation reached a maximum 6 h 
after reperfusion and then decreased gradually. In vivo imaging revealed that
reparixin significantly decreased neutrophil infiltration and movement and
displacement of recruited cells. Moreover, neutrophils had a smaller size and
less elongated shape in treated mice.
Conclusion: Imaging of the liver by confocal IVM was successfully implemented to 
describe neutrophil behavior in vivo during liver injury by IR. Treatment with
reparixin decreased not only the recruitment of neutrophils in tissues but also
their activation state and capacity to migrate within the liver. CXCR1/2
antagonists may be a promising therapy for patients undergoing liver
transplantation.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01917 
PMCID: PMC5770890
PMID: 29379500 

