
1. Cell Mol Immunol. 2018 Mar;15(3):226-232. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2017.145. Epub 2018
Jan 29.

Immunological roulette: Luck or something more? Considering the connections
between host and environment in TB.

Pearl JE(1), Das M(1), Cooper AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Leicester Tuberculosis Research Group (LTBRG), Department of Infection
Immunity and Inflammation, University of Leicester, University Road, Leicester
LE1 7RH, UK.

Accurate prediction of which patient will progress from a sub-clinical
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection to active tuberculosis represents an
elusive, yet critical, clinical research objective. From the individual
perspective, progression can be considered to be the product of a series of
unfortunate events or even a run of bad luck. Here, we identify the subtle
physiological relationships that can influence the odds of progression to active 
TB and how this progression may reflect directed dysbiosis in a number of
interrelated systems. Most infected individuals who progress to disease have
apparently good immune responses, but these responses are, at times, compromised 
by either local or systemic environmental factors. Obvious disease promoting
processes, such as tissue-damaging granulomata, usually manifest in the lung, but
illness is systemic. This apparent dichotomy between local and systemic reflects 
a clear need to define the factors that promote progression to active disease
within the context of the body as a physiological whole. We discuss aspects of
the host environment that can impact expression of immunity, including the
microbiome, glucocorticoid-mediated regulation, catecholamines and interaction
between the gut, liver and lung. We suggest the importance of integrating
precision medicine into our analyses of experimental outcomes such that
apparently conflicting results are not contentious, but rather reflect the impact
of these subtle relationships with our environment and microbiota.

DOI: 10.1038/cmi.2017.145 
PMCID: PMC5843621
PMID: 29375129  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

