
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2018 Jan 12;7:540. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00540.
eCollection 2017.

Sinus Microanatomy and Microbiota in a Rabbit Model of Rhinosinusitis.

Cho DY(1)(2), Mackey C(1), Van Der Pol WJ(3), Skinner D(1), Morrow CD(4), Schoeb 
TR(4), Rowe SM(2)(5), Swords WE(2)(6), Tearney GJ(7)(8), Woodworth BA(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States.
(2)Gregory Fleming James Cystic Fibrosis Research Center, University of Alabama
at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States.
(3)Center for Clinical and Translational Science-Informatics, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States.
(4)Departments of Cell, Developmental and Integrative Biology, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States.
(5)Departments of Medicine, Pediatrics, Cell Developmental and Integrative
Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States.
(6)Departments of Medicine, Microbiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, AL, United States.
(7)Wellman Center for Photomedicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, 
United States.
(8)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.

Background: Rabbits are useful for preclinical studies of sinusitis because of
similar physiologic features to humans. The objective of this study is to develop
a rabbit model of sinusitis that permits assessment of microanatomy and sampling 
for evaluating shifts in the sinus microbiota during the development of sinusitis
and to test how the mucociliary clearance (MCC) defect might lead to dysbiosis
and chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS). Methods: Generation of CRS was accomplished
with an insertion of a sterile sponge into the left middle meatus of New Zealand 
white rabbits (n = 9) for 2 weeks. After sponge removal, 4 rabbits were observed 
for another 10 weeks and evaluated for CRS using endoscopy, microCT,
visualization of the functional micro-anatomy by micro-optical coherence
tomography (μOCT), and histopathological analysis of the sinus mucosa. Samples
were taken from the left middle meatus and submitted for microbiome analysis.
Results: CT demonstrated opacification of all left sinuses at 2 weeks in all
rabbits (n = 9), which persisted in animals followed for another 12 weeks (n =
4). Histology at week 2 showed mostly neutrophils. On week 14, significant
infiltration of plasma cells and lymphocytes was noted with increased submucosal 
glands compared to controls (p = 0.02). Functional microanatomy at 2 weeks showed
diminished periciliary layer (PCL) depth (p < 0.0001) and mucus transport (p =
0.0044) compared to controls despite a thick mucus layer. By 12 weeks, the
thickened mucus layer was resolved but PCL depletion persisted in addition to
decreased ciliary beat frequency (CBF; p < 0.0001). The mucin fermenting microbes
(Lactobacillales, Bacteroidales) dominated on week 2 and there was a significant 
shift to potential pathogens (e.g., Pseudomonas, Burkholderia) by week 14
compared to both controls and the acute phase (p < 0.05). Conclusion: We
anticipate this reproducible model will provide a means for identifying
underlying mechanisms of airway-surface liquid (ASL) depletion and fundamental
changes in sinus microbial communities that contribute to the development of CRS.
The rabbit model of sinusitis exhibited diminished PCL depth with delayed mucus
transport and significant alterations and shift in the sinus microbiome during
the development of chronic inflammation.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00540 
PMCID: PMC5770360
PMID: 29376039  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

