
1. Toxicol In Vitro. 2018 Apr;48:221-231. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2018.01.024.

Effect of diesel exhaust generated by a city bus engine on stress responses and
innate immunity in primary bronchial epithelial cell cultures.

Zarcone MC(1), Duistermaat E(2), Alblas MJ(3), van Schadewijk A(4), Ninaber
DK(5), Clarijs V(6), Moerman MM(7), Vaessen D(8), Hiemstra PS(9), Kooter IM(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: M.C.Zarcone@lumc.nl.
(2)Triskelion B.V., Zeist, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
evert.duistermaat@triskelion.nl.
(3)Netherlands Organization for Applied Scientific Research, TNO, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: marcel.alblas@tno.nl.
(4)Department of Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: A.van_Schadewijk@lumc.nl.
(5)Department of Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: D.K.Ninaber@lumc.nl.
(6)Netherlands Organization for Applied Scientific Research, TNO, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: vincent.clarijs@tno.nl.
(7)Netherlands Organization for Applied Scientific Research, TNO, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: marcel.moerman@tno.nl.
(8)Netherlands Organization for Applied Scientific Research, TNO, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: daan.vaessen@daftrucks.com.
(9)Department of Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: P.S.Hiemstra@lumc.nl.
(10)Netherlands Organization for Applied Scientific Research, TNO, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: ingeborg.kooter@tno.nl.

Harmful effects of diesel emissions can be investigated via exposures of human
epithelial cells, but most of previous studies have largely focused on the use of
diesel particles or emission sources that are poorly representative of engines
used in current traffic. We studied the cellular response of primary bronchial
epithelial cells (PBECs) at the air-liquid interface (ALI) to the exposure to
whole diesel exhaust (DE) generated by a Euro V bus engine, followed by treatment
with UV-inactivated non-typeable Haemophilus influenzae (NTHi) bacteria to mimic 
microbial exposure. The effect of prolonged exposures was investigated, as well
as the difference in the responses of cells from COPD and control donors and the 
effect of emissions generated during a cold start. HMOX1 and NQO1 expression was 
transiently induced after DE exposure. DE inhibited the NTHi-induced expression
of human beta-defensin-2 (DEFB4A) and of the chaperone HSPA5/BiP. In contrast,
expression of the stress-induced PPP1R15A/GADD34 and the chemokine CXCL8 was
increased in cells exposed to DE and NTHi. HMOX1 induction was significant in
both COPD and controls, while inhibition of DEFB4A expression by DE was
significant only in COPD cells. No significant differences were observed when
comparing cellular responses to cold engine start and prewarmed engine emissions.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tiv.2018.01.024 
PMID: 29408669  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

