
1. JCI Insight. 2018 Feb 8;3(3). pii: 96914. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.96914.
eCollection 2018 Feb 8.

Thrombospondin-1 protects against pathogen-induced lung injury by limiting
extracellular matrix proteolysis.

Qu Y(1), Olonisakin T(1), Bain W(1), Zupetic J(1), Brown R(1), Hulver M(1), Xiong
Z(1), Tejero J(1)(2), Shanks RM(3)(4), Bomberger JM(4), Cooper VS(4), Zegans
ME(5), Ryu H(6), Han J(6)(7)(8), Pilewski J(1), Ray A(1), Cheng Z(9), Ray P(1),
Lee JS(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Medicine.
(2)Vascular Medicine Institute, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, and.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dartmouth Geisel School of
Medicine, Hanover, New Hampshire, USA.
(6)Research Laboratory of Electronics.
(7)Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, and.
(8)Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(9)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada.

Acute lung injury is characterized by excessive extracellular matrix proteolysis 
and neutrophilic inflammation. A major risk factor for lung injury is bacterial
pneumonia. However, host factors that protect against pathogen-induced and
host-sustained proteolytic injury following infection are poorly understood.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) is a major cause of nosocomial pneumonia and secretes
proteases to amplify tissue injury. We show that thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1), a
matricellular glycoprotein released during inflammation, dose-dependently
inhibits PA metalloendoprotease LasB, a virulence factor. TSP-1-deficient
(Thbs1-/-) mice show reduced survival, impaired host defense, and increased lung 
permeability with exaggerated neutrophil activation following acute
intrapulmonary PA infection. Administration of TSP-1 from platelets corrects the 
impaired host defense and aberrant injury in Thbs1-/- mice. Although TSP-1 is
cleaved into 2 fragments by PA, TSP-1 substantially inhibits Pseudomonas
elastolytic activity. Administration of LasB inhibitor, genetic disabling of the 
PA type II secretion system, or functional deletion of LasB improves host defense
and neutrophilic inflammation in mice. Moreover, TSP-1 provides an additional
line of defense by directly subduing host-derived proteolysis, with
dose-dependent inhibition of neutrophil elastase from airway neutrophils of
mechanically ventilated critically ill patients. Thus, a host matricellular
protein provides dual levels of protection against pathogen-initiated and
host-sustained proteolytic injury following microbial trigger.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.96914 
PMCID: PMC5821195
PMID: 29415890  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

