
1. Front Microbiol. 2018 Jan 23;9:18. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.00018. eCollection
2018.

Stress Tolerance-Related Genetic Traits of Fish Pathogen Flavobacterium
psychrophilum in a Mature Biofilm.

Levipan HA(1)(2)(3), Quezada J(1)(2), Avendaño-Herrera R(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Patología de Organismos Acuáticos y Biotecnología Acuícola,
Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Andres Bello, Viña del Mar, Chile.
(2)Interdisciplinary Center for Aquaculture Research, Concepción, Chile.
(3)Centro de Investigación Marina Quintay (CIMARQ), Universidad Andrés Bello,
Quintay, Chile.

Flavobacterium psychrophilum is the causative agent of bacterial cold-water
disease and rainbow trout fry syndrome, and hence this bacterium is placed among 
the most important salmonid pathogens in the freshwater aquaculture industry.
Since bacteria in biofilms differ substantially from free-living counterparts,
this study sought to find the main differences in gene expression between sessile
and planktonic states of F. psychrophilum LM-02-Fp and NCMB1947T, with focus on
stress-related changes in gene expression occurring during biofilm formation. To 
this end, biofilm and planktonic samples were analyzed by RNA sequencing to
detect differentially expressed candidate genes (DECGs) between the two growth
states, and decreasing the effects of interstrain variation by considering only
genes with log2-fold changes ≤ -2 and ≥ 2 at Padj-values ≤ 0.001 as DECGs.
Overall, 349 genes accounting for ~15% of total number of genes expressed in
transcriptomes of F. psychrophilum LM-02-Fp and NCMB1947T (n = 2327) were DECGs
between biofilm and planktonic states. Approximately 83 and 81% of all up- and
down-regulated candidate genes in mature biofilms, respectively, were assigned to
at least one gene ontology term; these were primarily associated with the
molecular function term "catalytic activity." We detected a potential stress
response in mature biofilms, characterized by a generalized down-regulation of
DECGs with roles in the protein synthesis machinery (n = 63, primarily ribosomal 
proteins) and energy conservation (seven ATP synthase subunit genes), as well as 
an up-regulation of DECGs involved in DNA repair (ruvC, recO, phrB1, smf, and
dnaQ) and oxidative stress response (cytochrome C peroxidase, probable
peroxiredoxin, and a probable thioredoxin). These results support the idea of a
strategic trade-off between growth-related processes and cell homeostasis to
preserve biofilm structure and metabolic functioning. In addition, LDH-based
cytotoxicity assays and an intraperitoneal challenge model for rainbow trout fry 
agreed with the transcriptomic evidence that the ability of F. psychrophilum to
form biofilms could contribute to the virulence. Finally, the reported changes in
gene expression, as induced by the plankton-to-biofilm transition, represent the 
first transcriptomic guideline to obtain insights into the F. psychrophilum
biofilm lifestyle that could help understand the prevalence of this bacterium in 
aquaculture settings.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.00018 
PMCID: PMC5787105
PMID: 29410654 

