
1. Front Immunol. 2018 Jan 30;9:99. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00099. eCollection 2018.

A Recurrent Mutation in Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase with Distinct Neoepitope
Conformations.

Toor JS(1), Rao AA(2), McShan AC(1), Yarmarkovich M(3), Nerli S(1)(4), Yamaguchi 
K(1), Madejska AA(5), Nguyen S(6), Tripathi S(1), Maris JM(3), Salama SR(2)(7),
Haussler D(2)(7), Sgourakis NG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Santa
Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, United States.
(2)Department of Biomolecular Engineering, University of California, Santa Cruz, 
Santa Cruz, CA, United States.
(3)Division of Oncology, Center for Childhood Cancer Research, Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
(4)Department of Computer Science, University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa
Cruz, CA, United States.
(5)Department of Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, United States.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
(7)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa
Cruz, CA, United States.

The identification of recurrent human leukocyte antigen (HLA) neoepitopes driving
T cell responses against tumors poses a significant bottleneck in the development
of approaches for precision cancer therapeutics. Here, we employ a bioinformatics
method, Prediction of T Cell Epitopes for Cancer Therapy, to analyze sequencing
data from neuroblastoma patients and identify a recurrent anaplastic lymphoma
kinase mutation (ALK R1275Q) that leads to two high affinity neoepitopes when
expressed in complex with common HLA alleles. Analysis of the X-ray structures of
the two peptides bound to HLA-B*15:01 reveals drastically different conformations
with measurable changes in the stability of the protein complexes, while the
self-epitope is excluded from binding due to steric hindrance in the MHC groove. 
To evaluate the range of HLA alleles that could display the ALK neoepitopes, we
used structure-based Rosetta comparative modeling calculations, which accurately 
predict several additional high affinity interactions and compare our results
with commonly used prediction tools. Subsequent determination of the X-ray
structure of an HLA-A*01:01 bound neoepitope validates atomic features seen in
our Rosetta models with respect to key residues relevant for MHC stability and T 
cell receptor recognition. Finally, MHC tetramer staining of peripheral blood
mononuclear cells from HLA-matched donors shows that the two neoepitopes are
recognized by CD8+ T cells. This work provides a rational approach toward
high-throughput identification and further optimization of putative
neoantigen/HLA targets with desired recognition features for cancer
immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00099 
PMCID: PMC5797543
PMID: 29441070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

