
1. J Crohns Colitis. 2018 Jun 28;12(7):860-869. doi: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjy034.

Dietary Supplementation With a Bacillus Superoxide Dismutase Protects Against
γ-Radiation-induced Oxidative Stress and Ameliorates Dextran Sulphate
Sodium-induced Ulcerative Colitis in Mice.

Kang JE(1), Kim HD(1), Park SY(1), Pan JG(1), Kim JH(1), Yum DY(1).

Author information: 
(1)GenoFocus, Inc., Techno 1-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, Korea.

Background and Aims: Commercial superoxide dismutase [SOD] is derived from melon 
extract and has a potential as a dietary supplement due to its beneficial
antioxidative effects. We aimed to improve the productivity of SOD compared with 
plant SOD by using a generally regarded as safe [GRAS] microorganism, Bacillus
amyloliquefaciens, and assess its antioxidative effect using γ-radiation- and
dextransulphate sodium [DSS]-induced oxidative models in mice.
Methods: We identified the sodA gene encoding manganese-containing SODs [Mn-SOD] 
in B. amyloliquefaciens, constructed a Mn-SOD deficient mutant, and screened a
high-SOD-producing strain. We compared the antioxidative effect of orally
administered enteric-coated SOD protein partially purified from B.
amyloliquefaciens with wild-type and high-SOD-producing strain spores. The effect
of SOD on DSS-induced colitis was also investigated. Colonic inflammation was
assessed using disease activity index, macroscopic and histological damage
scores, antioxidant enzyme activities, and inflammatory cytokines.
Results: The SOD activity of B. amyloliquefaciens is derived from secreted Mn-SOD
encoded by the sodA gene, as shown by comparing sodA knock-out mutant spores with
wild-type and high-SOD-producing spores. Enteric-coated SOD of B.
amyloliquefaciens appears to be effective in reducing oxidative stress in
γ-radiation- and DSS-induced mouse models. Co-administration of SOD with
wild-type B. amyloliquefaciens or high-SOD-producer strain spores showed a
synergistic effect. SOD enzyme and B. amyloliquefaciens spores contribute to the 
reduction of oxidative stress and inflammatory response in DSS-induced colitis.
Conclusions: Mn-SOD of B. amyloliquefaciens could be another source of SOD
supplement and may be useful to prevent and treat ulcerative colitis.

DOI: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjy034 
PMID: 29547907  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

