
1. J Fish Dis. 2018 May;41(5):829-845. doi: 10.1111/jfd.12795. Epub 2018 Mar 15.

Flavobacteria colonizing the early life stages of hatchery-incubated Chinook
salmon Oncorhynchus tshawytscha (Walbaum 1792) are markedly diverse.

Loch TP(1)(2), Faisal M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology and Diagnostic Investigation, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Fisheries and Wildlife, College of Agriculture and Natural
Resources, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA.

Flavobacterial diseases are significant impediments to hatchery-based fishery
conservation and aquaculture productivity worldwide. Recent studies revealed a
multitude of novel flavobacteria within the reproductive fluids and unfertilized 
eggs of feral Chinook salmon Oncorhynchus tshawytscha broodstock, some of which
were associated with systemic disease. Herein, embryonated eggs/fry from these
broodstock were assayed for flavobacteria while in incubator stacks in three
hatcheries over 2 years, as was the water entering hatchery incubators. Overall, 
>65% of sampled eggs and 38% of fry were colonized by flavobacteria. One hundred 
and ninety-one egg and fry-associated flavobacterial isolates were characterized 
phenotypically and via 16S rRNA gene sequencing and phylogenetic analyses,
revealing that the majority fell into 22 clades (i.e., 15 Flavobacterium spp.
groups and seven Chryseobacterium spp. groups) that varied in presence by
facility. Although some matched previously described fish-pathogenic species, the
majority were distinct from all described flavobacteria and likely represent
novel species. Of concern, iodophor disinfection at the commonly utilized
dose/duration for egg-surface disinfection did not eliminate flavobacteria.
Results also implicated maternal routes of infection and source water for some
flavobacteria. In total, study findings underscore the complexity of
flavobacterial ecology within hatchery environments and highlight the need for
improved hatchery biosecurity practices.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jfd.12795 
PMID: 29542826  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

