
1. Horm Metab Res. 2018 May;50(5):359-374. doi: 10.1055/s-0044-100920. Epub 2018 Mar
22.

Estradiol: A Steroid with Multiple Facets.

Kumar A(1), Banerjee A(2), Singh D(3), Thakur G(4), Kasarpalkar N(5), Gavali
S(6), Gadkar S(7), Madan T(4), Mahale SD(2), Balasinor NH(1), Sachdeva G(7).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroendocrinology Laboratory, National Institute for Research in Reproductive
Health, Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR-NIRRH), Mumbai, India.
(2)Structural Biology Laboratory, ICMR-NIRRH, Mumbai, India.
(3)Transmission Electron Microscopy Facility, ICMR-NIRRH, Mumbai, India.
(4)Innate Immunity Laboratory, ICMR-NIRRH, Mumbai, India.
(5)Molecular Immunology and Microbiology Laboratory, ICMR-NIRRH, Mumbai, India.
(6)Molecular Immunodiagnostics Laboratory, ICMR-NIRRH, Mumbai, India.
(7)Primate Biology Laboratory, ICMR-NIRRH, Mumbai, India.

Seventy-five glorious years have passed since estradiol was discovered by Edward 
Doisy. From discovery in the ovaries to delineation of diverse physiological
effects, research on estrogens has covered a lot of ground. Estrogen receptors
that mediate estrogenic effects, have been detected not only in reproductive
organs, but also in other body organs. Estrogen receptors function either as
conventional transcription factors or as rapid signal transducers. These
different modes of action are opted by estrogens to elicit an array of
reproductive and non-reproductive functions. It is well established that
estrogens promote cell proliferation in various tissues and hence are also linked
to carcinogenesis. Anti-estrogens are being used as adjunct therapies for cancers
since several years. On the other hand, estrogen-based strategies are used to
alleviate adverse effects of menopause. Apart from estrogens synthesized in
various organs, exposure to environmental estrogens can also impact physiology.
Thus, too much or too less of estrogens can tip the balance and lead to
unfavorable consequences. Multiple estrogen receptors with their tissue- or cell 
type-specific expression eliciting dose-dependent effects make it perplexing to
'unify' estrogenic actions in diverse tissues/organs. This warrants more research
on estrogen-mediated effects and their regulation in somatic and reproductive
tissues. This review presents physiological and pathological aspects of estrogens
thus highlighting the good, bad, and ugly facets of estrogens.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0044-100920 
PMID: 29566418  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

