
1. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2018 Jul 1;315(1):G43-G52. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00307.2017. Epub 2018 Mar 29.

Clostridium difficile toxins A and B decrease intestinal SLC26A3 protein
expression.

Coffing H(1), Priyamvada S(1), Anbazhagan AN(1), Salibay C(2), Engevik M(3),
Versalovic J(3), Yacyshyn MB(4), Yacyshyn B(4), Tyagi S(1), Saksena S(1)(5), Gill
RK(1), Alrefai WA(1)(5), Dudeja PK(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine,
University of Illinois at Chicago , Chicago, Illinois.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Illinois at Chicago , Chicago,
Illinois.
(3)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine and
Department of Pathology, Texas Children's Hospital , Houston, Texas.
(4)Division of Digestive Diseases, Department. of Medicine, University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine , Cincinnati, Ohio.
(5)Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical Center , Chicago, Illinois.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is the primary cause of nosocomial diarrhea
in the United States. Although C. difficile toxins A and B are the primary
mediators of CDI, the overall pathophysiology underlying C. difficile-associated 
diarrhea remains poorly understood. Studies have shown that a decrease in both
NHE3 (Na+/H+ exchanger) and DRA (downregulated in adenoma, Cl-/[Formula: see
text] exchanger), resulting in decreased electrolyte absorption, is implicated in
infectious and inflammatory diarrhea. Furthermore, studies have shown that NHE3
is depleted at the apical surface of intestinal epithelial cells and
downregulated in patients with CDI, but the role of DRA in CDI remains unknown.
In the current studies, we examined the effects of C. difficile toxins TcdA and
TcdB on DRA protein and mRNA levels in intestinal epithelial cells (IECs). Our
data demonstrated that DRA protein levels were significantly reduced in response 
to TcdA and TcdB in IECs in culture. This effect was also specific to DRA, as
NHE3 and PAT-1 (putative anion transporter 1) protein levels were unaffected by
TcdA and TcdB. Additionally, purified TcdA and TcdA + TcdB, but not TcdB,
resulted in a decrease in colonic DRA protein levels in a toxigenic mouse model
of CDI. Finally, patients with recurrent CDI also exhibited significantly reduced
expression of colonic DRA protein. Together, these findings indicate that C.
difficile toxins markedly downregulate intestinal expression of DRA which may
contribute to the diarrheal phenotype of CDI. NEW & NOTEWORTHY Our studies
demonstrate, for the first time, that C. difficile toxins reduce DRA protein, but
not mRNA, levels in intestinal epithelial cells. These findings suggest that a
downregulation of DRA may be a critical factor in C. difficile
infection-associated diarrhea.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.00307.2017 
PMCID: PMC6109705
PMID: 29597352  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

