
1. Yakugaku Zasshi. 2018;138(4):517-520. doi: 10.1248/yakushi.17-00201-5.

[Potential Use of Sacran Hydrogels as Wound Dressing Material].

[Article in Japanese]

Motoyama K(1), Higashi T(1), Okajima MK(2), Kaneko T(2), Arima H(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Pharmaceutics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Kumamoto University.
(2)Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (JAIST).
(3)Program for Leading Graduate Schools "HIGO (Health Life Science:
Interdisciplinary and Glocal Oriented) Program", Kumamoto University.

　A wound dressing is one of the essential approaches to prevent further harm to
cutaneous wounds as well as to promote wound healing. Therefore, to achieve ideal
wound healing, the development of advanced dressing materials is necessary.
Sacran, a novel megamolecular polysaccharide derived from the cyanobacterium
Aphanothece sacrum, has a very high molecular weight that exceeds 107 g/mol and
water-superabsorbent capacity. Recently, we demonstrated that sacran exerts
anti-inflammatory activity by ameliorating the skin barrier function in patients 
with atopic dermatitis. In this study, to develop and characterize sacran
hydrogel films (Sac-HGFs) for wound dressing materials, we prepared a physically 
crosslinked-Sac-HGFs, and evaluated their physicochemical properties,
cytotoxicity, skin hydration and wound healing ability. Additionally, we
encapsulated curcumin, as a model drug for wound healing, into Sac-HGFs by
complexation with 2-hydroxypropyl-γ-cyclodextrin (HP-γ-CyD), and investigated
their potential for wound dressing application. Sac-HGF has potentially good
properties for wound dressing application, due to not only the moisturizing
effect but also the anti-inflammatory effect of sacran. Additionally, Sac-HGF has
the potential to deliver water soluble complex of curcumin/HP-γ-CyD at the wound 
site and thereby promote wound healing. These findings may be useful information 
for preparation of wound dressing materials using sacran, CyDs and drugs.

DOI: 10.1248/yakushi.17-00201-5 
PMID: 29607998  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

