
1. mBio. 2018 Apr 3;9(2). pii: e00440-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00440-18.

Genomic Analysis of a Pan-Resistant Isolate of Klebsiella pneumoniae, United
States 2016.

de Man TJB(1), Lutgring JD(2)(3), Lonsway DR(2), Anderson KF(2), Kiehlbauch
JA(4)(5), Chen L(6), Walters MS(2), Sjölund-Karlsson M(2), Rasheed JK(2), Kallen 
A(2), Halpin AL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA xku6@cdc.gov.
(2)Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Emory University
School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(4)Nevada State Public Health Laboratory, Reno, Nevada, USA.
(5)School of Community Health Sciences, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, Nevada,
USA.
(6)Washoe County Health District, Reno, Nevada, USA.

Antimicrobial resistance is a threat to public health globally and leads to an
estimated 23,000 deaths annually in the United States alone. Here, we report the 
genomic characterization of an unusual Klebsiella pneumoniae, nonsusceptible to
all 26 antibiotics tested, that was isolated from a U.S.PATIENT: The isolate
harbored four known beta-lactamase genes, including plasmid-mediated blaNDM-1 and
blaCMY-6, as well as chromosomal blaCTX-M-15 and blaSHV-28, which accounted for
resistance to all beta-lactams tested. In addition, sequence analysis identified 
mechanisms that could explain all other reported nonsusceptibility results,
including nonsusceptibility to colistin, tigecycline, and chloramphenicol. Two
plasmids, IncA/C2 and IncFIB, were closely related to mobile elements described
previously and isolated from Gram-negative bacteria from China, Nepal, India, the
United States, and Kenya, suggesting possible origins of the isolate and
plasmids. This is one of the first K. pneumoniae isolates in the United States to
have been reported to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as
nonsusceptible to all drugs tested, including all beta-lactams, colistin, and
tigecycline.IMPORTANCE Antimicrobial resistance is a major public health threat
worldwide. Bacteria that are nonsusceptible or resistant to all antimicrobials
available are of major concern to patients and the public because of lack of
treatment options and potential for spread. A Klebsiella pneumoniae strain that
was nonsusceptible to all tested antibiotics was isolated from a U.S.
PATIENT: Mechanisms that could explain all observed phenotypic antimicrobial
resistance phenotypes, including resistance to colistin and beta-lactams, were
identified through whole-genome sequencing. The large variety of resistance
determinants identified demonstrates the usefulness of whole-genome sequencing
for detecting these genes in an outbreak response. Sequencing of isolates with
rare and unusual phenotypes can provide information on how these extremely
resistant isolates develop, including whether resistance is acquired on mobile
elements or accumulated through chromosomal mutations. Moreover, this provides
further insight into not only detecting these highly resistant organisms but also
preventing their spread.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00440-18 
PMCID: PMC5885025
PMID: 29615503  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

