
1. Front Immunol. 2018 Mar 21;9:500. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00500. eCollection
2018.

Functional Complement Analysis Can Predict Genetic Testing Results and Long-Term 
Outcome in Patients With Complement Deficiencies.

Blazina Š(1), Debeljak M(2), Košnik M(3)(4), Simčič S(5), Stopinšek S(5), Markelj
G(1), Toplak N(1)(6), Kopač P(3), Zakotnik B(7), Pokorn M(7), Avčin T(1)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergology, Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Children's
Hospital Ljubljana, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(2)Department of Special Laboratory Diagnostics, Children's Hospital Ljubljana,
University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(3)University Clinic of Pulmonary and Allergic Diseases Golnik, Golnik, Slovenia.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana,
Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(6)Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana,
Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(7)Department of Infectious Diseases, University Medical Centre Ljubljana,
Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Background: Prevalence of complement deficiencies (CDs) is markedly higher in
Slovenian primary immunodeficiency (PID) registry in comparison to other national
and international PID registries.
Objective: The purposes of our study were to confirm CD and define complete and
partial CD in registered patients in Slovenia, to evaluate frequency of clinical 
manifestations, and to assess the risk for characteristic infections separately
for subjects with complete and partial CD.
Methods: CD was confirmed with genetic analyses in patients with C2 deficiency,
C8 deficiency, and hereditary angioedema or with repeated functional complement
studies and measurement of complement components in other CD. Results of genetic 
studies (homozygous subjects vs. heterozygous carriers) and complement functional
studies were analyzed to define complete (complement below the level of
heterozygous carriers) and partial CD (complement above the level of homozygous
patients). Presence of characteristic infections was assessed separately for
complete and partial CD.
Results: Genetic analyses confirmed markedly higher prevalence of CD in Slovenian
PID registry (26% of all PID) than in other national and international PID
registries (0.5-6% of all PID). Complement functional studies and complement
component concentrations reliably distinguished between homozygous and
heterozygous CD carriers. Subjects with partial CD had higher risk for
characteristic infections than previously reported.
Conclusion: Results of our study imply under-recognition of CD worldwide.
Complement functional studies and complement component concentrations reliably
predicted risk for characteristic infections in patients with complete or partial
CD. Vaccination against encapsulated bacteria should be advocated also for
subjects with partial CD and not limited to complete CD.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00500 
PMCID: PMC5871747
PMID: 29619023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

