
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2018 Jun;98(6):1763-1769. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0971. Epub
2018 Apr 5.

Elevated Levels of Urinary 8-oxodG Correlate with Persistent Periductal Fibrosis 
after Praziquantel Treatment in Chronic Opisthorchiasis.

Wangboon C(1), Yongvanit P(2)(3), Loilome W(2)(3), Thanan R(2), Worasith C(4),
Eamudomkarn C(4), Chamadol N(5), Mairiang E(5), Sithithaworn J(6), Saichua P(7), 
Sripa B(8), Khuntikeo N(9)(3), Bethony JM(10), Sithithaworn P(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Graduate School, Biomedical Science Program, Khon Kaen University, 
Khon Kaen, Thailand.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon
Kaen, Thailand.
(3)Cholangiocarcinoma Screening and Care Program (CASCAP), Khon Kaen University, 
Khon Kaen, Thailand.
(4)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon
Kaen, Thailand.
(5)Department of Radiology, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen,
Thailand.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, Mahasarakham University, Mahasarakham, Thailand.
(7)Tropical Disease Research Center, Tropical Medicine International Graduate
Program, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Thailand.
(8)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen,
Thailand.
(9)Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen,
Thailand.
(10)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Tropical Medicine, George
Washington University, Washington, District of Columbia.

Previous studies demonstrated that urinary 8-oxodG is a predictive biomarker for 
Opisthorchis viverrini (OV)-associated hepatobiliary disease (HBD) and
cholangiocarcinoma (CCA). This study examined the effects of praziquantel
treatment on the profile of urinary 8-oxodG in relation to HBD status. Infection 
with OV, levels of urinary 8-oxodG, and HBD status in terms of periductal
fibrosis (PDF) assessed by abdominal ultrasonography (US) were monitored and
compared in cohorts of participants in Khon Kaen, Thailand, before and 1 year
after praziquantel treatment. Urinary 8-oxodG levels significantly decreased
after treatment compared with the baseline level in OV-infected participants who 
had no HBD (PDF negative; PDF-ve) (N = 14). Levels of 8-oxodG were unchanged
after treatment in OV-infected subjects (OV+ve) who had positive PDF (N = 52).
Within the positive PDF (PDF+ve) group who became PDF-ve after treatment, there
was no significant change in 8-oxodG levels between pre-and posttreatment
(reversible PDF = 65.3%). In those who had persistent PDF+ve at both ultrasound
sampling points, there was no significant difference in urinary 8-oxodG levels
between pre- and posttreatment (persistent PDF = 34.6%). Based on a logistic
regression model and receiver operation curve analysis, the increase of 8-oxodG
levels was found to be associated with increasing risk of PDF. Measurement of
urinary 8-oxodG and US increased the likelihood of discovering persistent PDF,
which is a predictable condition for the patients at risk of OV-associated CCA.
To identify high-risk individuals for CCA, it is useful to perform US in
combination with urinary 8-oxodG measurement.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0971 
PMCID: PMC6086152
PMID: 29637887  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

