
1. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2018 Oct;123(4):407-422. doi: 10.1111/bcpt.13026.
Epub 2018 Jun 8.

A Whole-Body Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic Model for Colistin and
Colistin Methanesulfonate in Rat.

Bouchene S(1), Marchand S(2)(3), Couet W(2)(3), Friberg LE(1), Gobin P(2),
Lamarche I(2), Grégoire N(2)(3), Björkman S(1), Karlsson MO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)INSERM U-1070, Pôle Biologie Santé, Poitiers, France.
(3)Laboratoire de Toxicologie et Pharmacocinétique, CHU de Poitiers, Poitiers,
France.

Colistin is a polymyxin antibiotic used to treat patients infected with
multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria (MDR-GNB). The objective of this work 
was to develop a whole-body physiologically based pharmacokinetic (WB-PBPK) model
to predict tissue distribution of colistin in rat. The distribution of a drug in 
a tissue is commonly characterized by its tissue-to-plasma partition coefficient,
Kp . Colistin and its prodrug, colistin methanesulfonate (CMS) Kp priors, were
measured experimentally from rat tissue homogenates or predicted in silico. The
PK parameters of both compounds were estimated fitting in vivo their plasma
concentration-time profiles from six rats receiving an i.v. bolus of CMS. The
variability in the data was quantified by applying a nonlinear mixed effect
(NLME) modelling approach. A WB-PBPK model was developed assuming a well-stirred 
and perfusion-limited distribution in tissue compartments. Prior information on
tissue distribution of colistin and CMS was investigated following three
scenarios: Kp was estimated using in silico Kp priors (I) or Kp was estimated
using experimental Kp priors (II) or Kp was fixed to the experimental values
(III). The WB-PBPK model best described colistin and CMS plasma
concentration-time profiles in scenario II. Colistin-predicted concentrations in 
kidneys in scenario II were higher than in other tissues, which was consistent
with its large experimental Kp prior. This might be explained by a high affinity 
of colistin for renal parenchyma and active reabsorption into the proximal
tubular cells. In contrast, renal accumulation of colistin was not predicted in
scenario I. Colistin and CMS clearance estimates were in agreement with published
values. The developed model suggests using experimental priors over in silico Kp 
priors for kidneys to provide a better prediction of colistin renal distribution.
Such models might serve in drug development for interspecies scaling and
investigate the impact of disease state on colistin disposition.

© 2018 Nordic Association for the Publication of BCPT (former Nordic
Pharmacological Society).

DOI: 10.1111/bcpt.13026 
PMID: 29665289  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

