
1. Oncotarget. 2018 Apr 3;9(25):17937-17950. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.24788.
eCollection 2018 Apr 3.

Phytochemicals as modulators of M1-M2 macrophages in inflammation.

Saqib U(1), Sarkar S(2), Suk K(3), Mohammad O(4), Baig MS(5), Savai R(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Chemistry, School of Basic Sciences, Indian Institute of
Technology (IIT) Indore, MP, India.
(2)PostGraduate Department of Food & Nutrition, BRSN College (affiliated to
WBSU), Kolkata, WB, India.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Kyungpook National University School of Medicine, 
Joong-gu Daegu, South Korea.
(4)Interdisciplinary Biotechnology Unit, Aligarh Muslim University (AMU),
Aligarh, UP, India.
(5)Discipline of Biosciences and Biomedical Engineering (BSBE), Indian Institute 
of Technology (IIT), Indore, MP, India.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Universities of Giessen and Marburg Lung
Center (UGMLC), member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Justus
Liebig University, Giessen 35392, Germany.
(7)Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Department of Lung
Development and Remodeling, Member of the DZL, Bad Nauheim, Germany.

Macrophages are critical mediators of the innate immune response against foreign 
pathogens, including bacteria, physical stress, and injury. Therefore, these
cells play a key role in the "inflammatory pathway" which in turn can lead to an 
array of diseases and disorders such as autoimmune neuropathies and myocarditis, 
inflammatory bowel disease, atherosclerosis, sepsis, arthritis, diabetes, and
angiogenesis. Recently, more studies have focused on the macrophages inflammatory
diseases since the discovery of the two subtypes of macrophages, which are
differentiated on the basis of their phenotype and distinct gene expression
pattern. Of these, M1 macrophages are pro-inflammatory and responsible for
inflammatory signaling, while M2 are anti-inflammatory macrophages that
participate in the resolution of the inflammatory process, M2 macrophages produce
anti-inflammatory cytokines, thereby contributing to tissue healing. Many studies
have shown the role of these two subtypes in the inflammatory pathway, and their 
emergence appears to decide the fate of inflammatory signaling and disease
progression. As a next step in directing the pro-inflammatory response toward the
anti-inflammatory type after an insult by a foreign pathogen (e. g., bacterial
lipopolysaccharide), investigators have identified many natural compounds that
have the potential to modulate M1 to M2 macrophages. In this review, we provide a
focused discussion of advances in the identification of natural therapeutic
molecules with anti-inflammatory properties that modulate the phenotype of
macrophages from M1 to M2.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.24788 
PMCID: PMC5915167
PMID: 29707159 

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no
conflicts of interest.

