
1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2018 Jul 12;24(8):1733-1744. doi: 10.1093/ibd/izy126.

Anti-TNF Therapy Induces CD4+ T-Cell Production of IL-22 and Promotes Epithelial 
Repairs in Patients With Crohn's Disease.

Fang L(1), Pang Z(2), Shu W(1), Wu W(1), Sun M(1), Cong Y(3), Liu Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital of Tongji
University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Suzhou Municipal Hospital Affiliated to
Nanjing Medical University, Suzhou, China.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Texas Medical
Branch, Galveston, Texas.

Background: Anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF) therapy appears to be effective in
the treatment of Crohn's disease (CD), a chronic inflammatory disease of the
gastrointestinal tract. However, the mechanisms involved are not completely
understood.
Methods: Fifty-seven active CD patients were enrolled, and cytokine profiles in
colonic biopsies of patients with active CD receiving anti-TNF monoclonal
antibody (mAb) (infliximab [IFX]) treatment were determined using quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). Colonic biopsies of active CD
patients and healthy donors were cultured with IFX in vitro, and cytokine
profiles were measured by qRT-PCR. Peripheral blood (PB)-CD4+ T cells were
stimulated with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 mAbs in the presence of human immunoglobin
(HIg), IFX, recombinant human TNF-α converting enzyme (rhTACE), and aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) inhibitor (CH-223191), respectively, to determine
interleukin (IL)-22 expression by CD4+ T cells. Caco2 cells were also utilized to
study their potential role in modulating epithelial cell barrier repairs in
vitro.
Results: IFX therapy markedly upregulated IL-22 mRNA expression in the gut mucosa
of CD patients. In vitro treatment with IFX greatly promoted CD CD4+ T cells to
express IL-22, which was inhibited by rhTACE, indicating that reverse signaling
through binding to membrane-bound TNF mediates anti-TNF-induced IL-22 expression 
of CD CD4+ T cells. However, blockade of AhR markedly inhibited anti-TNF-induced 
IL-22+CD4+ T (Th22) cell differentiation in CD patients. Moreover, treatment with
IL-22 induced intestinal epithelial cell expression of tight junction proteins
(eg, claudin1 and ZO-1) and facilitated transepithelial resistance, indicating
that IL-22 protects intestinal mucosa from inflammation via maintenance of
epithelial barrier integrity.
Conclusions: Our results uncover a novel mechanism whereby anti-TNF therapy
upregulates IL-22 production in CD patients through promoting Th22 cell
differentiation and contributes to intestinal epithelial barrier repairs.

DOI: 10.1093/ibd/izy126 
PMID: 29718341  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

