
1. J Sci Food Agric. 2018 Dec;98(15):5731-5741. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.9120. Epub 2018
Jun 27.

Phytochemical composition of smoothies combining pomegranate juice (Punica
granatum L) and Mediterranean minor crop purées (Ficus carica, Cydonia oblonga,
and Ziziphus jujube).

Cano-Lamadrid M(1), Nowicka P(2), Hernández F(3), Carbonell-Barrachina AA(1),
Wojdyło A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Group 'Food Quality and Safety', Department of Agro-Food Technology, 
Escuela Politécnica Superior de Orihuela (EPSO), Universidad Miguel Hernández de 
Elche (UMH), Alicante, Spain.
(2)Department of Fruit, Vegetable and Plant Nutraceutical Technology, Wrocław
University of Environmental and Life Sciences, Wrocław, Poland.
(3)Research Group 'Plant Production and Technology', Department of Plant Sciences
and Microbiology, EPSO, UMH, Alicante, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Daily intake of fruits and vegetables as suggested by the World
Health Organization is lower than the recommended dietary intake (RDI). A good
option to increase the intake of fruit and vegetables is the consumption of
smoothies. This work evaluated the effect of adding fig, jujube or quince purée
to pomegranate juice (cultivars 'Wonderful' and 'Mollar de Elche') in preparing
smoothies at two ratios of purée:juice (40:60 and 60:40) on the composition of
minerals, sugars, organic acids, vitamin C, antioxidant activity and polyphenols.
RESULTS: Smoothies composition was mainly affected by the addition of the fruit
purée. Twenty-eight polyphenolic compounds were found in the pomegranate
smoothies (quadrupole time-of-flight liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry).
The highest total content of polyphenolic compounds (ultra-performance liquid
chromatography with photodiode array and fluorescence detection) was found in
smoothies with quince purée, 501 mg 100 g-1 fresh weight (FW), followed by jujube
and figs, with 374 and 320 mg 100 g-1 FW, respectively. Fig smoothies were rich
in anthocyanins, while the jujube ones had high content of flavonols and vitamin 
C; finally, the quince smoothies were rich in hydroxycinnamic acids.
CONCLUSION: A positive effect of the addition of minor crops (fig, jujube and
quince) was observed on the nutritional and functionality of the novel
pomegranate smoothies. Moreover, the addition of jujube contributed to an
enrichment of the final smoothies in vitamin C and organic acids, while an
increase of pectin content was found in fig and quince pomegranate based
smoothies. Therefore, the blend of minor Mediterranean crop purées with
pomegranate juice to produce smoothies is a good strategy to promote the
consumption of these healthy but underutilized fruits. © 2018 Society of Chemical
Industry.

© 2018 Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/jsfa.9120 
PMID: 29737517  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

