
1. Indian J Med Microbiol. 2018 Jan-Mar;36(1):87-92. doi: 10.4103/ijmm.IJMM_17_400.

Echinocandins: Their role in the management of Candida biofilms.

Swaminathan S(1), Kamat S(2), Pinto NA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Gleneagles Global Hospital, Chennai, Tamil 
Nadu, India.
(2)Medical Affairs, Pfizer Ltd., Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.

The importance of antifungal agents and their clinical implications has received 
little attention in comparison to antibiotics, particularly in the health-care
setting. However, apart from bacterial infections rising in hospitals, the
incidences of fungal infections are growing with the development of resistance to
conventional antifungal agents. Newer antifungal agents such as echinocandins
(ECs) have been extensively studied over the past decade and are recognised as a 
superior treatment compared with prior antifungals as a first line of therapy in 
tertiary institutions. Caspofungin (CAS), micafungin (MICA) and anidulafungin
(ANID) are the three most widely used EC antifungal agents. The treatment of
biofilm-associated fungal infections affecting patients in tertiary health-care
facilities has been identified as a challenge, particularly in Indian Intensive
Care Unit (ICU) settings. With the rising number of critically ill patients
requiring invasive devices such as central venous catheters for treatment,
especially in ICUs, these devices serve as a potential source of nosocomial
infections. Candida spp. colonisation is a major precursor of these infections
and further complicates and prolongs treatment procedures, adding to increasing
costs both for hospitals and the patient. Analysing studies involving the use of 
these agents can help in making critical decisions for antifungal therapy in the 
event of a fungal infection in the ICU. In addition, the development of
resistance to antifungal agents is a crucial factor for assessing the appropriate
antifungals that can be used for treatment. This review provides an overview of
ANID in biofilms, along with CAS and MICA, in terms of clinical efficacy,
resistance development and potency, primarily against Candida spp.

DOI: 10.4103/ijmm.IJMM_17_400 
PMID: 29735833  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. S. Swaminathan has been a speaker at Pfizer
forums and has received advisory board and consultant honoraria from Pfizer Ltd.,
India. S. Kamat is a full-time employee of Pfizer Ltd., India and N.A. Pinto is
working as a Consultant with Pfizer Ltd., India at the time of publication.

