
1. Methods Enzymol. 2018;599:21-68. doi: 10.1016/bs.mie.2017.11.035. Epub 2018 Jan
10.

Fe-S Clusters and MutY Base Excision Repair Glycosylases: Purification, Kinetics,
and DNA Affinity Measurements.

Nuñez NN(1), Majumdar C(1), Lay KT(1), David SS(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Davis, CA, United States.
(2)University of California, Davis, CA, United States. Electronic address:
ssdavid@ucdavis.edu.

A growing number of iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster cofactors have been identified in 
DNA repair proteins. MutY and its homologs are base excision repair (BER)
glycosylases that prevent mutations associated with the common oxidation product 
of guanine (G), 8-oxo-7,8-dihydroguanine (OG) by catalyzing adenine (A) base
excision from inappropriately formed OG:A mispairs. The finding of an [4Fe-4S]2+ 
cluster cofactor in MutY, Endonuclease III, and structurally similar BER enzymes 
was surprising and initially thought to represent an example of a purely
structural role for the cofactor. However, in the two decades subsequent to the
initial discovery, purification and in vitro analysis of bacterial MutYs and
mammalian homologs, such as human MUTYH and mouse Mutyh, have demonstrated that
proper Fe-S cluster coordination is required for OG:A substrate recognition and
adenine excision. In addition, the Fe-S cluster in MutY has been shown to be
capable of redox chemistry in the presence of DNA. The work in our laboratory
aimed at addressing the importance of the MutY Fe-S cluster has involved a
battery of approaches, with the overarching hypothesis that understanding the
role(s) of the Fe-S cluster is intimately associated with understanding the
biological and chemical properties of MutY and its unique damaged DNA substrate
as a whole. In this chapter, we focus on methods of enzyme expression and
purification, detailed enzyme kinetics, and DNA affinity assays. The methods
described herein have not only been leveraged to provide insight into the roles
of the MutY Fe-S cluster but have also been provided crucial information needed
to delineate the impact of inherited variants of the human homolog MUTYH
associated with a colorectal cancer syndrome known as MUTYH-associated polyposis 
or MAP. Notably, many MAP-associated variants have been found adjacent to the
Fe-S cluster further underscoring the intimate relationship between the cofactor,
MUTYH-mediated DNA repair, and disease.

© 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.mie.2017.11.035 
PMCID: PMC6267926
PMID: 29746241  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

