
1. Methods Enzymol. 2018;599:69-99. doi: 10.1016/bs.mie.2017.12.006. Epub 2018 Jan
10.

Cellular Assays for Studying the Fe-S Cluster Containing Base Excision Repair
Glycosylase MUTYH and Homologs.

Majumdar C(1), Nuñez NN(1), Raetz AG(1), Khuu C(1), David SS(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Davis, Davis, CA, United States.
(2)University of California, Davis, Davis, CA, United States. Electronic address:
ssdavid@ucdavis.edu.

Many DNA repair enzymes, including the human adenine glycosylase MUTYH, require
iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster cofactors for DNA damage recognition and subsequent
repair. MUTYH prokaryotic and eukaryotic homologs are a family of adenine (A)
glycosylases that cleave A when mispaired with the oxidatively damaged guanine
lesion, 8-oxo-7,8-dihydroguanine (OG). Faulty OG:A repair has been linked to the 
inheritance of missense mutations in the MUTYH gene. These inherited mutations
can result in the onset of a familial colorectal cancer disorder known as
MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP). While in vitro studies can be exceptional at
unraveling how MutY interacts with its OG:A substrate, cell-based assays are
needed to provide a cellular context to these studies. In addition, strategic
comparison of in vitro and in vivo studies can provide exquisite insight into the
search, selection, excision process, and the coordination with protein partners, 
required to mediate full repair of the lesion. A commonly used assay is the
rifampicin resistance assay that provides an indirect evaluation of the intrinsic
mutation rate in Escherichia coli (E. coli or Ec), read out as
antibiotic-resistant cell growth. Our laboratory has also developed a bacterial
plasmid-based assay that allows for direct evaluation of repair of a defined OG:A
mispair. This assay provides a means to assess the impact of catalytic defects in
affinity and excision on overall repair. Finally, a mammalian GFP-based reporter 
assay has been developed that more accurately models features of mammalian cells.
Taken together, these assays provide a cellular context to the repair activity of
MUTYH and its homologs that illuminates the role these enzymes play in preventing
mutations and disease.

© 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.mie.2017.12.006 
PMCID: PMC6201757
PMID: 29746250  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

