
1. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2018 Jul;80(1):e12969. doi: 10.1111/aji.12969. Epub 2018 May
9.

Enhanced Th1 and inflammatory mRNA responses upregulate NK cell cytotoxicity and 
NKG2D ligand expression in human pre-eclamptic placenta and target it for NK cell
attack.

Vinnars MT(1), Björk E(1), Nagaev I(1), Ottander U(2), Bremme K(3), Holmlund
U(4), Sverremark-Ekström E(4), Mincheva-Nilsson L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Infection and Immunology, Umeå
University, Umeå, Sweden.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences/Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Umeå University,
Umeå, Sweden.
(3)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Obstetrics and Gynaecology,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Molecular Biosciences, The Wenner-Gren Institute, Stockholm
University, Stockholm, Sweden.

PROBLEM: Pre-eclampsia (PE), a severe human pregnancy disorder, is associated
with exaggerated systemic inflammation, enhanced cytokine production, and
increased shedding of microvesicles leading to endothelial dysfunction,
coagulopathy, and extensive placenta destruction. The cause of PE is still
unclear. Evidence suggests that its origin lies in the placenta and that the
maternal immune system is involved. A shift in cytokine production in PE
pregnancy promotes NK cell activation, suggested to be important in PE
pathogenesis. In line with this suggestion, we studied NK cell cytotoxicity in
peripheral blood of PE patients and controls and the mRNA expression of cytokines
and of the NKG2D receptor and its ligands MICA/B and ULBP1-3 in PE- and normal
placenta.
METHOD OF STUDY: The cytotoxic capacity of peripheral blood NK cells was analyzed
using K562 target cells. The cytokine mRNA profiles and the mRNA expression of
the NKG2D receptor and its ligands MICA/B and ULBP 1-3 in PE placenta were
assessed and compared to those in normal placenta using real-time quantitative
RT-PCR.
RESULTS: The cytotoxicity of peripheral blood NK cells was upregulated in PE
cases. Further, we found an enhanced inflammatory cytokine mRNA response combined
with a dysregulated regulatory response and a significant mRNA overexpression of 
NKG2D receptor and its ligands MICA/B and ULBP in PE placenta.
CONCLUSION: The destruction of chorionic villi observed in PE placenta might be
conveyed by an enhanced local cytotoxic response through the NKG2D
receptor-ligand pathway, which in turn might be promoted by an intense
inflammatory response not counteracted by regulatory cytokine responses.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/aji.12969 
PMID: 29741244  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

