
1. Plant Biotechnol J. 2019 Jan;17(1):75-87. doi: 10.1111/pbi.12948. Epub 2018 Jun
19.

Engineering the unicellular alga Phaeodactylum tricornutum for high-value plant
triterpenoid production.

D'Adamo S(1)(2), Schiano di Visconte G(1), Lowe G(1), Szaub-Newton J(1), Beacham 
T(3), Landels A(3)(4), Allen MJ(3)(5), Spicer A(1), Matthijs M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Eden Laboratory, Algenuity, Stewartby, UK.
(2)Wageningen Universiteit en Researchcentrum, Bioprocess Engineering,
Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(3)PML: Plymouth Marine Laboratory, Plymouth, UK.
(4)Rothamsted Research, Harpenden, UK.
(5)Biosciences, College of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter,
Exeter, UK.

Plant triterpenoids constitute a diverse class of organic compounds that play a
major role in development, plant defence and environmental interaction. Several
triterpenes have demonstrated potential as pharmaceuticals. One example is
betulin, which has shown promise as a pharmaceutical precursor for the treatment 
of certain cancers and HIV. Major challenges for triterpenoid commercialization
include their low production levels and their cost-effective purification from
the complex mixtures present in their natural hosts. Therefore, attempts to
produce these compounds in industrially relevant microbial systems such as
bacteria and yeasts have attracted great interest. Here, we report the production
of the triterpenes betulin and its precursor lupeol in the photosynthetic diatom 
Phaeodactylum tricornutum, a unicellular eukaryotic alga. This was achieved by
introducing three plant enzymes in the microalga: a Lotus japonicus oxidosqualene
cyclase and a Medicago truncatula cytochrome P450 along with its native
reductase. The introduction of the L. japonicus oxidosqualene cyclase perturbed
the mRNA expression levels of the native mevalonate and sterol biosynthesis
pathway. The best performing strains were selected and grown in a 550-L
pilot-scale photobioreactor facility. To our knowledge, this is the most
extensive pathway engineering undertaken in a diatom and the first time that a
sapogenin has been artificially produced in a microalga, demonstrating the
feasibility of the photo-bio-production of more complex high-value, metabolites
in microalgae.

© 2018 The Authors. Plant Biotechnology Journal published by Society for
Experimental Biology and The Association of Applied Biologists and John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pbi.12948 
PMCID: PMC6330534
PMID: 29754445  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

