
1. Food Funct. 2018 May 23;9(5):2705-2715. doi: 10.1039/c8fo00547h.

Anticancer potential against cervix cancer (HeLa) cell line of probiotic
Lactobacillus casei and Lactobacillus paracasei strains isolated from human
breast milk.

Riaz Rajoka MS (1), Zhao H , Lu Y , Lian Z , Li N , Hussain N , Shao D , Jin M , 
Li Q , Shi J .

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Space Bioscience and Space Biotechnology, School of Life
Sciences, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi'an 710072, Shaanxi, People's 
Republic of China. sjlshi2004@nwpu.edu.cn.

Lactic acid bacteria have been categorized as probiotics and play a crucial role 
in human health by stimulating the supply of nutrients, shaping the immune
system, and preventing the colonization of pathogenic microbes. This study
investigated the mechanisms for the action of three potential probiotic
Lactobacillus strains: Lactobacillus casei SR1, Lactobacillus casei SR2, and
Lactobacillus paracasei SR4 isolated from human breast milk. These Lactobacillus 
strains were identified via 16S DNA sequencing and characterized via biochemical 
assays including acid resistance, bile resistance, antioxidant activity, and
antibiotic susceptibility. The bioactivity of the cell-free culture supernatant
(CFCS) secreted by these strains on the cervix cancer (HeLa) cell line was also
evaluated via cytotoxicity assay and apoptosis analysis. The mechanism of
anticancer activity was also investigated via RT-qPCR and western blotting. The
results demonstrated that these newly isolated Lactobacillus strains from human
milk displayed noticeable probiotic characteristics such as excellent antibiotic 
susceptibility, outstanding antioxidant activity, and promising resistance to low
pH and high concentration of bile salts. The results of the conducted bioactivity
assays verified that the CFCSs had acceptable anticancer effects on cervix cancer
(HeLa) cells by upregulating the expression of apoptotic genes BAX, BAD,
caspase3, caspase8, and caspase9 and by downregulating the expression of the
BCl-2 gene. Overall, these results indicate that the Lactobacillus strains
isolated from human breast milk could be considered as a topical medication with 
a potential therapeutic index due to their efficacy against cervix cancer cells.

DOI: 10.1039/c8fo00547h 
PMID: 29762617  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

