
1. Mol Biol Rep. 2018 Aug;45(4):395-401. doi: 10.1007/s11033-018-4167-y. Epub 2018
May 22.

Cloning and expression of nlpA gene as DNA vaccine candidate against
Acinetobacter baumannii.

Hashemzehi R(1)(2), Doosti A(3), Kargar M(4), Jaafarinia M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Fars Science and Research Branch, Islamic
Azad University, Shiraz, Islamic Republic of Iran.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics, Marvdasht Branch, Islamic Azad University,
Marvdasht, Islamic Republic of Iran.
(3)Biotechnology Research Center, Shahrekord Branch, Islamic Azad University,
Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran. abbasdoosti@iaushk.ac.ir.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Jahrom Branch, Islamic Azad University, Jahrom,
Islamic Republic of Iran.

Acinetobacter baumannii is one of the highly antibiotic-resistant bacteria that
cause infections with high rate of death. This bacterium is one the common causes
of infection worldwide leading to endemic and epidemic nosocomial infections.
Despite many efforts, there is no effective vaccine against A. baumannii. As NlpA
is one of the important antigenic factors in biogenesis of outer membrane
vesicles, and OMV-based reported vaccines in A. baumannii stimulated the immune
responses, this study was aimed to clone and express nlpA gene in eukaryotic HDF 
cells and evaluate the induced immunization following the administration of
resulting construct as DNA vaccine in BALB/c mice. The nlpA gene of A. baumannii 
was amplified using PCR. The PCR product was then cloned and subcloned into the
pTZ57R/T and pEGFP-C2 vectors respectively. The cloning was confirmed by PCR,
restriction enzyme digestion and DNA sequencing. The pEGFP-C2-nlpA recombinant
plasmid was transferred into the HDF cells using electroporation and the
expression of target gene was validated by RT-PCR. The recombinant construct was 
injected to BALB/c mice through three IM injections and the levels of IgG, IgM,
INF-γ, IL-2, IL-4, and IL-12 were determined using ELISA assay. The A. baumannii 
nlpA gene was amplified during PCR as 867 bp band which was successfully cloned
in pEGFP-C2-nlpA vector. Obtained data from RT-PCR and presence of the 867 bp
fragment in transformed HDF cells confirmed the nlpA gene expression. Following
the injection of pEGFP-C2-nlpA showed the increased level of IgG, IgM, INF-γ,
IL-2, IL-4, and IL-12 in serum of immunized mice. Overall, through this study
recombinant pEGFP-C2-nlpA was generated and successfully expressed the A.
baumannii nlpA gene in eukaryotic cells. Additionally, our in vivo study
confirmed that the recombinant construct capable to induce the immune response in
immunized mice. These findings suggest the pEGFP-C2-nlpA may be considered as DNA
vaccine candidate against A. baumannii.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-018-4167-y 
PMID: 29790084  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

