
1. J Periodontal Res. 2018 Oct;53(5):883-893. doi: 10.1111/jre.12578. Epub 2018 Jun 
7.

Transcription factor DEC1 is required for maximal experimentally induced
periodontal inflammation.

Zhang F(1), Suzuki M(1), Kim IS(2), Kobayashi R(3), Hamada N(4), Sato F(5),
Bhawal UK(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo,
Chiba, Japan.
(2)Department of Dental Hygiene, Honam University, Gwangju, Korea.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Nihon University School of
Dentistry at Matsudo, Chiba, Japan.
(4)Division of Microbiology, Department of Oral Science, Graduate School of
Dentistry, Kanagawa Dental University, Yokosuka, Japan.
(5)Department of Pathology, Wakayama Medical University School of Medicine,
Wakayama, Japan.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Nihon University School of
Dentistry at Matsudo, Chiba, Japan.
(7)Research Institute of Oral Health, Nihon University School of Dentistry at
Matsudo, Chiba, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Disruption of transcriptional regulation is a
confounding factor associated with a wide range of human inflammatory diseases.
To investigate mechanistic links between transcription factor DEC1 and pathways
underlying inflammation, wild-type and DEC1 knockout (KO) C57BL/6 mice were
treated with Porphyromonas gingivalis (or carboxymethyl cellulose as a control)
to induce periodontal inflammation. It provoked an inflammatory response within
the oral environment, which showed robust variation in alveolar bone resorption
and expression of inflammatory cytokines.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Male DEC1KO mice and their wild-type littermates were used 
for the experimental periodontitis model. Measurement of alveolar bone
resorption, micro-computed tomography, isolation of gingival mononuclear cells
(GMCs), flow cytometry and immunohistochemical analysis were used in this study. 
Human gingival fibroblast cells (HGF-1) were used for DEC1 over-expression and
short interference RNA (siRNA) studies and quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction and western blot analysis were performed.
RESULTS: Micro-computed tomography analysis demonstrated that P. gingivalis
caused a decrease in bone area of wild-type mice compared with DEC1KO mice.
Expression of inflammatory and immune markers in GMCs was significantly decreased
in DEC1KO mice after treatment with P. gingivalis. Conversely, interleukin (IL)-4
and IL-10 mRNAs were significantly increased in GMCs isolated from DEC1KO mice.
The results show that treatment of DEC1KO mice with P. gingivalis decreased the
numbers of CD11b+ F4/80+ and CD4+ RANKL+ T cells. Moreover, expression of CD4,
F4/80, RANKL and cathepsin K in inflammatory cell infiltrates was significantly
reduced in DEC1KO mice treated with P. gingivalis compared with controls.
Furthermore, over-expression of DEC1 in HGF-1 cells increased the expression of
IL-1β and tumor necrosis factor-α mRNAs and their expression levels reached a
maximum in response to treatment with lipopolysaccharide. Inhibition of DEC1 by
short interference RNA interference suppressed the P. gingivalis-derived
lipopolysaccharide-induced expression of IL-1β, tumor necrosis factor-α and
toll-like receptor4.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that transcription factor DEC1 can modulate
P. gingivalis-induced periodontitis in the oral mucosa.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jre.12578 
PMID: 29882288  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

