
1. Cell Microbiol. 2018 Oct;20(10):e12867. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12867. Epub 2018 Jun 28.

Valosin-containing protein VCP/p97 is essential for the intracellular development
of Leishmania and its survival under heat stress.

Guedes Aguiar B(1)(2)(3), Padmanabhan PK(1)(2), Dumas C(1)(2), Papadopoulou
B(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center in Infectious Diseases, CHU de Quebec Research
Center-University Laval, Quebec, Canada.
(2)Department of Microbiology-Infectious Disease and Immunology, Faculty of
Medicine, University Laval, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Department of Community Medicine, Federal University of Piauí, Teresina,
Brazil.

Valosin-containing protein (VCP)/p97/Cdc48 is one of the best-characterised type 
II cytosolic AAA+ ATPases most known for their role in ubiquitin-dependent
protein quality control. Here, we provide functional insights into the role of
the Leishmania VCP/p97 homologue (LiVCP) in the parasite intracellular
development. We demonstrate that although LiVCP is an essential gene, Leishmania 
infantum promastigotes can grow with less VCP. In contrast, growth of axenic and 
intracellular amastigotes is dramatically affected upon decreased LiVCP levels in
heterozygous and temperature sensitive (ts) LiVCP mutants or the expression of
dominant negative mutants known to specifically target the second conserved VCP
ATPase domain, a major contributor of the VCP overall ATPase activity.
Interestingly, these VCP mutants are also unable to survive heat stress, and a ts
VCP mutant is defective in amastigote growth. Consistent with LiVCP's essential
function in amastigotes, LiVCP messenger ribonucleic acid undergoes
3'Untranslated Region (UTR)-mediated developmental regulation, resulting in
higher VCP expression in amastigotes. Furthermore, we show that parasite mutant
lines expressing lower VCP levels or dominant negative VCP forms exhibit high
accumulation of polyubiquitinated proteins and increased sensitivity to
proteotoxic stress, supporting the ubiquitin-selective chaperone function of
LiVCP. Together, these results emphasise the crucial role LiVCP plays under heat 
stress and during the parasite intracellular development.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12867 
PMID: 29895095  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

