
1. Acta Trop. 2018 Sep;185:285-293. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2018.06.005. Epub
2018 Jun 8.

Insecticide susceptibility status of Phlebotomus argentipes and polymorphisms in 
voltage-gated sodium channel (vgsc) gene in Kala-azar endemic areas of West
Bengal, India.

Sardar AA(1), Saha P(2), Chatterjee M(3), Bera DK(4), Biswas P(5), Maji D(6),
Guha SK(7), Basu N(8), Maji AK(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine, Kolkata,
West Bengal, India. Electronic address: ashifbappa786@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine, Kolkata,
West Bengal, India; Department of Zoology, A. P. C. Roy Govt. College, Himachal
Bihar, Matigara, Siliguri, West Bengal, India. Electronic address:
pabitra.saha82@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine, Kolkata,
West Bengal, India. Electronic address: moytreychatterjee@yahoo.in.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine, Kolkata,
West Bengal, India. Electronic address: bera_dk.helminthology@yahoo.in.
(5)Department of Health and Family Welfare, Government of West Bengal, Swasthya
Bhavan, Salt Lake City, Kolkata, West Bengal, India. Electronic address:
dr.prasantabiswas@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Health and Family Welfare, Government of West Bengal, Swasthya
Bhavan, Salt Lake City, Kolkata, West Bengal, India. Electronic address:
maji.dipankar@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Tropical Medicine, Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine,
Kolkata, West Bengal, India. Electronic address: drskguha@gmail.com.
(8)Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine, Kolkata, West Bengal, India. Electronic 
address: stmkolkatadirector@gmail.com.
(9)Department of Microbiology, Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine, Kolkata,
West Bengal, India. Electronic address: maji_ardhendu@yahoo.com.

Rational use of insecticides, as advocated by World Health Organisation, plays a 
crucial role for vector control in eliminating visceral leishmaniasis from
endemic countries. Emergence and spread of resistance among vector sand flies is 
of increasing concern for achieving these goals. Information on insecticide
susceptibility status of sand fly populations and potential association between
the former and polymorphisms in the insecticide target genes is important for
formulating proper vector control measures. The present study was designed to
evaluate the susceptibility status of vector sand fly species (Phlebotomus
argentipes) against deltamethrin (type II pyrethroid), DDT (organochlorine) and
malathion (organophosphate) and to detect polymorphisms in voltage gated sodium
channel (vgsc) gene and investigating their association with type II pyrethroid
and DDT susceptibility in three Kala-azar endemic districts of West Bengal,
India. Adult sand flies were collected from human dwelling and cattle sheds of
the study areas and subjected to insecticide bioassay using insecticide
impregnated papers as per WHO protocol. Polymorphisms in domain II segment 6 of
vgsc gene of pyrethroid and DDT susceptible and tolerant P. argentipes were
detected by DNA sequencing. P. argentipes population of the study area was found 
to be susceptible to deltamethrin and malathion with corrected mortality rate
between 98.02% to 98.80% and 98.81% to 100% respectively, but resistant to DDT
(corrected mortality rate = 65.62%-76.33%). Two non-synonymous mutations L1014S
and L1014F were detected of which L1014F was found to be associated with
deltamethrin/DDT resistance. The replacement of DDT by synthetic pyrethroid is
aptly done by national vector borne disease control programme (NVBDCP). The
prevalence of L1014F mutation in vgsc gene and its association with type II
pyrethroid tolerability is an indication of emergence of resistance against it.
Malathion may be used as an alternative in the study areas if needed in future.
Similar studies at a regular interval are highly suggested for monitoring
susceptibility of used insecticide and to detect early signs of emergence of
resistance against them.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2018.06.005 
PMID: 29890155  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

