
1. Front Immunol. 2018 May 30;9:1125. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01125. eCollection
2018.

Expression of Programmed Death-Ligand 1 by Human Colonic CD90+ Stromal Cells
Differs Between Ulcerative Colitis and Crohn's Disease and Determines Their
Capacity to Suppress Th1 Cells.

Beswick EJ(1), Grim C(2), Singh A(2), Aguirre JE(2), Tafoya M(3), Qiu S(4),
Rogler G(5), McKee R(6), Samedi V(3), Ma TY(7), Reyes VE(8)(9), Powell DW(2),
Pinchuk IV(2)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque, NM, United States.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX, United States.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, United
States.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX,
United States.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital of Zürich, 
Zürich, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Surgery, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, United
States.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 
University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, United States.
(8)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX, United States.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX,
United States.

Background and Aims: The role of programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) and its
ligands in the dysregulation of T helper immune responses observed in the
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is unclear. Recently, a novel concept emerged
that CD90+ colonic (myo)fibroblasts (CMFs), also known as stromal cells, act as
immunosuppressors, and are among the key regulators of acute and chronic
inflammation. The objective of this study was to determine if the level of the
PD-1 ligands is changed in the IBD inflamed colonic mucosa and to test the
hypothesis that changes in IBD-CMF-mediated PD-1 ligand-linked immunosuppression 
is a mechanism promoting the dysregulation of Th1 cell responses.
Methods: Tissues and cells derived from Crohn's disease (CD), ulcerative colitis 
(UC), and healthy individuals (N) were studied in situ, ex vivo, and in culture.
Results: A significant increase in programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) was observed
in the inflamed UC colonic mucosa when compared to the non-inflamed matched
tissue samples, CD, and healthy controls. UC-CMFs were among the major
populations in the colonic mucosa contributing to the enhanced PD-L1 expression. 
In contrast, PD-L1 expression was decreased in CD-CMFs. When compared to CD-CMFs 
and N-CMFs, UC-CMFs demonstrated stronger suppression of IL-2, Th1
transcriptional factor Tbet, and IFN-γ expression by CD3/CD28-activated CD4+ T
cells, and this process was PD-L1 dependent. Similar observations were made when 
differentiated Th1 cells were cocultured with UC-CMFs. In contrast, CD-CMFs
showed reduced capacity to suppress Th1 cell activity and addition of recombinant
PD-L1 Fc to CD-CMF:T cell cocultures partially restored the suppression of the
Th1 type responses.
Conclusion: We present evidence showing that increased PD-L1 expression
suppresses Th1 cell activity in UC. In contrast, loss of PD-L1 expression
observed in CD contributes to the persistence of the Th1 inflammatory milieu in
CD. Our data suggest that dysregulation of the Th1 responses in the inflamed
colonic mucosa of IBD patients is promoted by the alterations in PD-L1 expression
in the mucosal mesenchymal stromal cell compartment.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01125 
PMCID: PMC5992387
PMID: 29910803  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

