
1. Front Immunol. 2018 Jun 7;9:1284. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01284. eCollection
2018.

Rotenone Treatment Reveals a Role for Electron Transport Complex I in the
Subcellular Localization of Key Transcriptional Regulators During T Helper Cell
Differentiation.

Ozay EI(1), Sherman HL(1), Mello V(2), Trombley G(3), Lerman A(4), Tew
GN(1)(2)(5), Yadava N(1)(6)(7), Minter LM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Graduate Program, University of Massachusetts
Amherst, Amherst, MA, United States.
(2)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, University of Massachusetts
Amherst, Amherst, MA, United States.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Massachusetts 
Amherst, Amherst, MA, United States.
(4)Department of Microbiology, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA, 
United States.
(5)Department of Polymer Science and Engineering, University of Massachusetts
Amherst, Amherst, MA, United States.
(6)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA,
United States.
(7)Pioneer Valley Life Sciences Institute, Springfield, MA, United States.

Recent advances in our understanding of tumor cell mitochondrial metabolism
suggest it may be an attractive therapeutic target. Mitochondria are central hubs
of metabolism that provide energy during the differentiation and maintenance of
immune cell phenotypes. Mitochondrial membranes harbor several enzyme complexes
that are involved in the process of oxidative phosphorylation, which takes place 
during energy production. Data suggest that, among these enzyme complexes,
deficiencies in electron transport complex I may differentially affect immune
responses and may contribute to the pathophysiology of several immunological
conditions. Once activated by T cell receptor signaling, along with
co-stimulation through CD28, CD4 T cells utilize mitochondrial energy to
differentiate into distinct T helper (Th) subsets. T cell signaling activates
Notch1, which is cleaved from the plasma membrane to generate its intracellular
form (N1ICD). In the presence of specific cytokines, Notch1 regulates gene
transcription related to cell fate to modulate CD4 Th type 1, Th2, Th17, and
induced regulatory T cell (iTreg) differentiation. The process of differentiating
into any of these subsets requires metabolic energy, provided by the
mitochondria. We hypothesized that the requirement for mitochondrial metabolism
varies between different Th subsets and may intersect with Notch1 signaling. We
used the organic pesticide rotenone, a well-described complex I inhibitor, to
assess how compromised mitochondrial integrity impacts CD4 T cell differentiation
into Th1, Th2, Th17, and iTreg cells. We also investigated how Notch1
localization and downstream transcriptional capabilities regulation may be
altered in each subset following rotenone treatment. Our data suggest that
mitochondrial integrity impacts each of these Th subsets differently, through its
influence on Notch1 subcellular localization. Our work further supports the
notion that altered immune responses can result from complex I inhibition.
Therefore, understanding how mitochondrial inhibitors affect immune responses may
help to inform therapeutic approaches to cancer treatment.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01284 
PMCID: PMC5999735
PMID: 29930555  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

