
1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2018 Aug;38(8):1772-1784. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.118.311332.

Nbeal2 Deficiency Increases Organ Damage but Does Not Affect Host Defense During 
Gram-Negative Pneumonia-Derived Sepsis.

Claushuis TAM(1), de Stoppelaar SF(1), de Vos AF(1), Grootemaat AE(2), van der
Wel NN(2), Roelofs JJTH(3), Ware J(4), Van't Veer C(1), van der Poll T(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine (T.A.M.C., S.F.d.S.,
A.F.d.V., C.v.V., T.v.d.P.).
(2)Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Electron
Microscopy Center Amsterdam, Medical Biology, Academic Medical Center, The
Netherlands (A.E.G., N.N.v.d.W.).
(3)Department of Pathology (J.J.T.H.R.).
(4)University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock (J.W.).
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, The Netherlands (T.v.d.P.).

Objective- Nbeal2-/- mice, a model of human gray platelet syndrome, have reduced 
neutrophil granularity and impaired host defense against systemic Staphylococcus 
aureus infection. We here aimed to study the role of Nbeal2 deficiency in both
leukocytes and platelets during gram-negative pneumonia and sepsis. Approach and 
Results- We studied the role of Nbeal2 in platelets and leukocytes during murine 
pneumonia and sepsis by Klebsiella pneumoniae. Apart from platelet α-granule
deficiency and reduced neutrophil granularity, also monocyte granularity was
reduced in Nbeal2-/- mice, whereas plasma levels of MPO (myeloperoxidase),
elastase, NGAL (neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin), and MMP-9 (matrix
metalloproteinase 9), and leukocyte CD11b expression were increased. Nbeal2-/-
leukocytes showed unaltered in vitro antibacterial response and phagocytosis
capacity against Klebsiella, and unchanged reactive nitrogen species and cytokine
production. Also during Klebsiella pneumonia and sepsis, Nbeal2-/- mice had
similar bacterial growth in lung and distant body sites, with enhanced leukocyte 
migration to the bronchoalveolar space. Despite similar infection-induced
inflammation, organ damage was increased in Nbeal2-/- mice, which was also seen
during endotoxemia. Platelet-specific Nbeal2 deficiency did not influence
leukocyte functions, indicating that Nbeal2 directly modifies leukocytes.
Transfusion of Nbeal2-/- but not of Nbeal2+/+ platelets into thrombocytopenic
mice was associated with bleeding in the lung but similar host defense, pointing 
at a role for platelet α-granules in maintaining vascular integrity but not host 
defense during Klebsiella pneumosepsis. Conclusions- These data show that Nbeal2 
deficiency-resulting in gray platelet syndrome-affects platelets, neutrophils,
and monocytes, with intact host defense but increased organ damage during
gram-negative pneumosepsis.

DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.118.311332 
PMID: 29930006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

