
1. PLoS One. 2018 Jun 26;13(6):e0199591. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0199591.
eCollection 2018.

Biocompatibility and antibacterial properties of zirconium nitride coating on
titanium abutments: An in vitro study.

Brunello G(1)(2), Brun P(3), Gardin C(4)(5), Ferroni L(4)(5), Bressan E(2),
Meneghello R(1), Zavan B(4)(5), Sivolella S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Management and Engineering, University of Padova, Vicenza,
Italy.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, Section of Dentistry, University of Padova,
Padova, Italy.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(5)Maria Cecilia Hospital, GVM Care & Research, E.S: Health Science Foundation,
Cotignola, Italy.

Improving soft tissue attachment and reducing bacterial colonization on titanium 
abutments are key factors for the long-term maintenance of healthy soft and hard 
peri-implant tissues. This in vitro study was conducted to compare the
biocompatibility and antibacterial activity of four different surfaces: uncoated 
Ti6Al4V, anodized, and coated with titanium nitride or zirconium nitride. Surface
topography was investigated with a high-resolution system for measuring surface
finishes. Human gingival fibroblast (HGF) adhesion and proliferation were
examined using MTT assay, Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) imaging,
immunofluorescence analysis and real-time PCR for selected target genes. The
hemolysis and AMES tests were performed to assess the chemical compounds' blood
compatibility and mutagenic potential, respectively. Antibacterial activity was
tested against five bacterial strains isolated from the oral cavity
(Streptococcus salivarius, S. sanguinis, S. mutans, S. sobrinus, S. oralis), and 
the percentage of dead bacteria was calculated. Roughness measurements confirmed 
a substantial similarity between the surfaces and their compatibility with
clinical applications. MTT assay, SEM analysis and immunofluorescence staining
showed adhesion and proliferation of HGFs cultured on all the examined surfaces. 
PCR confirmed that HGFs produced extracellular matrix components efficiently on
all the surfaces. No hemolytic activity was detected, and the AMES test confirmed
the surfaces' clinical safety. For all tested bacterial strains, biofilms grown
on the zirconium nitride surface showed a higher percentage of dead bacteria than
on the other disks. The titanium nitride surface inactivated bacterial biofilms, 
too, but to a lesser extent.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0199591 
PMCID: PMC6019405
PMID: 29944716  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: This work was partially supported by MegaGen
Implant Co. Ltd. (South Korea), which provided the disks. This does not alter our
adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.

