
1. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2018 Aug;59(7):613-624. doi: 10.1002/em.22205. Epub 2018 Jul
3.

Hepatic DNA damage in harbour porpoises (Phocoena phocoena) stranded along the
English and Welsh coastlines.

Acevedo-Whitehouse K(1)(2), Cole KJ(3), Phillips DH(4)(5), Jepson PD(1), Deaville
R(1), Arlt VM(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Zoology, Zoological Society of London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Unit for Basic and Applied Microbiology, Autonomous University of Querétaro,
Querétaro, Mexico.
(3)Section of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton,
Surrey, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Analytical, Environmental and Forensic Sciences, MRC-PHE Centre 
for Environment and Health, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(5)NIHR Health Protection Research Unit in Health Impact of Environmental Hazards
at King's College London in partnership with Public Health England, London and
Imperial College London, United Kingdom.

One level at which persistent organic pollutants (POPs) and polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons PAHs) can exert damage is by causing DNA strand-breaks or nucleotide
base modifications, which, if unrepaired, can lead to embryonic mutations,
abnormal development and cancer. In marine ecosystems, genotoxicity is expected
to be particularly strong in long-lived apex predators due to pollutant
bioaccumulation. We conducted 32 P-postlabeling analyses optimized for the
detection and quantification of aromatic/hydrophobic DNA adducts in the livers of
40 sexually-mature North Atlantic harbour porpoises (Phocoena phocoena) stranded 
along the English and Welsh coastlines. We examined hepatic tissue to search for 
inflammatory and preneoplastic lesions and examine their association with adduct 
levels. Adducts were found in all porpoises (mean: 17.56 ± 11.95 per 108
nucleotides), and were higher than levels reported for marine vertebrates from
polluted sites. The pollutants causing the induced DNA adducts could not be
further characterized. Hepatic DNA damage did not correlate with levels of
blubber POP concentrations (including total polychlorinated biphenyl [PCBs],
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane [DDT] and dieldrin); PAH concentrations were not 
available for the present study. However, DNA damage predicted occurrence of
inflammatory and preneoplastic lesions. Further, our data showed a reduction in
hepatic DNA adduct levels with age in the 40 animals examined while POP
concentrations, particularly PCBs, increased with age. Using a different dataset 
of 145 mature male harbour porpoises confirmed that higher contaminant levels
(total PCBs, DDT and dieldrin) are found in older animals. The reduction in
hepatic DNA adduct levels in older animals was in accordance with other studies
which show that suppression of hepatic CYP1A enzyme activity at high PCB
concentrations might impact on CYP1A-mediated DNA adduct formation of PAHs which 
are ubiquitous environmental pollutants and readily metabolized by CYP1A to
species binding to DNA. In summary, our study shows that pollutant-induced DNA
damage is prevalent in harbour porpoises from UK waters and may lead to
detectable sub-lethal hepatic damage. Environ. Mol. Mutagen. 59:613-624, 2018. © 
2018 The Authors Environmental and Molecular Mutagenesis published by Wiley
Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of Environmental Mutagen Society.

© 2018 The Authors Environmental and Molecular Mutagenesis published by Wiley
Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of Environmental Mutagen Society.

DOI: 10.1002/em.22205 
PMCID: PMC6174976
PMID: 29968392  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

