
1. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2018 Aug 8;10(31):26128-26141. doi:
10.1021/acsami.8b10764. Epub 2018 Jul 24.

Assembly Pathway Selection of Designer Self-Assembling Peptide and Fabrication of
Hierarchical Scaffolds for Neural Regeneration.

Zhao Y, Zhu R, Song X(1), Ma Z(2), Chen S, Wu D, Liu F(2), Ouyang S(1), Zhang
J(3), Ramakrishna S(4), Zhu X(5), He L.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics , Chinese
Academy of Sciences , Beijing 100101 , China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Industrial Fermentation Microbiology, Ministry of Education,
College of Biotechnology , Tianjin University of Science & Technology , Tianjin
300457 , P. R. China.
(3)Center for Biological Imaging, Institute of Biophysics , Chinese Academy of
Sciences , Beijing 100101 , China.
(4)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering , National
University of Singapore , Singapore 117576 , Singapore.
(5)Department of Chinese Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan
University , Jinan University , Guangzhou 510632 , China.

The self-assembling peptide (SAP) RADA 16-I has been modified with various
functional motifs to improve its performances in biomedical applications.
Nevertheless, the assembly mechanisms of designer functional RADA 16-I SAPs
(F-SAPs) have not been clearly illustrated. The main problem is the difficulty in
preparing a completely molecular aqueous solution of F-SAP. In the current study,
we demonstrated that different procedures for preparing the F-SAP solution could 
result in the formation of different conformations and consequently
micro/macroscopic morphologies. F-SAP was molecularly dissolved in an appropriate
solvent, such as hexafluoroisopropanol (HFIP), as evidenced by random coil
conformation characterized by circular dichroism spectroscopy and morphologies
under transmission electron microscopy. The monomers were induced into monolayers
when the F-SAP solution in HFIP was adsorbed on mica as observed by atomic force 
microscopy. However, nanoscaled filaments containing β-sheets dominated in the
F-SAP aqueous solution, in which case water acted as a poor solvent of F-SAP.
Furthermore, the results of molecular dynamics simulation implicated that water
facilitated F-SAP aggregation, whereas HFIP inhibited it. The β-sheet assemblies 
formed in water exhibited a high kinetic stability and did not disassemble
rapidly after the addition of HFIP. Our study indicated that selecting the right 
assembly pathway of F-SAP required for targeted functions, for example, delivery 
of hydrophobic drugs in aqueous conditions, could be achieved by optimizing the
preparation protocol in addition to molecular design. Moreover, hierarchical
scaffolds mimicking the natural extracellular matrix could be fabricated by the
direct electrospinning of F-SAP molecular solution in HFIP and biodegradable
polymer for applications in neural regeneration by promoting neural
differentiation, neurite outgrowth, and synapse formation.

DOI: 10.1021/acsami.8b10764 
PMID: 30001104  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

