
1. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2018 Jul 18;16(1):67. doi: 10.1186/s12958-018-0385-3.

The dynamic changes in the number of uterine natural killer cells are specific to
the eutopic but not to the ectopic endometrium in women and in a baboon model of 
endometriosis.

Drury JA(1), Parkin KL(2)(3), Coyne L(4)(5), Giuliani E(2)(6), Fazleabas AT(2),
Hapangama DK(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Institute of Translational
Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
(2)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, College of
Human Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI, USA.
(4)Department of Gynecology, Liverpool Women's Hospital, Liverpool, UK.
(5)Hewitt Fertility Centre; Liverpool Women's Hospital, Liverpool, UK.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Grand Rapids Medical Education
Partners/Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI, USA.
(7)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Institute of Translational
Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK. dharani@liv.ac.uk.
(8)Department of Gynecology, Liverpool Women's Hospital, Liverpool, UK.
dharani@liv.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Endometriosis is a common condition associated with growth of
endometrial-like tissue beyond the uterine cavity. Previous reports have
suggested a role for uNK cells in the pathogenesis of endometriosis postulating
that survival and accumulation of menstrual endometrial tissue in the peritoneal 
cavity may relate to a reduction in the cytotoxic activity of peripheral blood NK
cells. We aimed to assess the differences in percentage of uNK cells and their
phenotypical characterization in eutopic and ectopic endometrial samples from
women with and without endometriosis and baboons with induced endometriosis.
METHODS: Eutopic and ectopic endometrial samples from 82 women across the
menstrual cycle with/without endometriosis and from 8 baboons before and after
induction of endometriosis were examined for CD56 and NKp30 expression with
immunohistochemistry, quantified using computer assisted image analysis. Curated 
secretory phase endometrial microarray datasets were interrogated for NK cell
receptors and their ligands. In silico data was validated by examining the
secretory phase eutopic endometrium of women with and without endometriosis
(n = 8/group) for the immuno-expression of BAG6 protein.
RESULTS: The percentage of uNK cells increased progressively from the
proliferative phase with the highest levels in the late secretory phase in the
eutopic endometrium of women with and without endometriosis. The percentage of
uNK cells in ectopic lesions remained significantly low throughout the cycle. In 
baboons, induction of endometriosis increased the percentage of uNK in the
ectopic lesions but not NKp30. Published eutopic endometrial microarray datasets 
demonstrated significant upregulation of NKp30 and its ligand BAG6 in women with 
endometriosis compared with controls. Immunohistochemical staining scores for
BAG6 was also significantly higher in secretory phase eutopic endometrium from
women with endometriosis compared with the endometrium of healthy women
(n = 8/group).
CONCLUSIONS: The dynamic increase in the percentage of uNK cells in the secretory
phase is preserved in the endometrium of women with endometriosis. The low number
of uNK cells in human and baboon ectopic lesions may be due to their exaggerated 
reduction in hormonal responsiveness (progesterone resistance).

DOI: 10.1186/s12958-018-0385-3 
PMCID: PMC6052567
PMID: 30021652  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

