
1. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2018 Oct;42(10):1909-1923. doi: 10.1111/acer.13843. Epub
2018 Aug 16.

In Vivo Metabolic Tracing Demonstrates the Site-Specific Contribution of Hepatic 
Ethanol Metabolism to Histone Acetylation.

Kriss CL(1), Gregory-Lott E(1), Storey AJ(2), Tackett AJ(2), Wahls WP(2), Stevens
SM Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Microbiology, and Molecular Biology, University of
South Florida, Tampa, Florida.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic dysregulation through ethanol (EtOH)-induced changes in
DNA methylation and histone modifications has been implicated in several
alcohol-related disorders such as alcoholic liver disease. EtOH metabolism in the
liver results in the formation of acetate, a metabolite that can be converted to 
acetyl-CoA, which can then be used by histone acetyltransferases to acetylate
lysine residues. EtOH metabolism in the liver can also indirectly influence
lysine acetylation through NAD+ -dependent sirtuin activity that is altered due
to increases in NADH. As a proof-of-concept study to determine the direct
influence of hepatic EtOH metabolism on histone acetylation changes, we used
heavy-labeled EtOH (13 C2 ) and mass spectrometry (MS) to site specifically
characterize lysine acetylation on histone proteins.
METHODS: Eight-week-old male C57BL/6J mice were gavaged using a bolus dose of
either 13 C2 -labeled EtOH (5 g/kg) or maltose dextrin. Blood and livers were
collected at 0, 4, and 24 hours followed by histone protein enrichment and
derivatization using acid extraction and propionylation, respectively. Metabolic 
tracing and relative quantitation of acetylated histone proteins were performed
using a hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer. Data were analyzed using
MaxQuant, Xcalibur Qual Browser, and the Bioconductor package "mzR." The
contribution of EtOH to histone acetylation was quantified using the change in
relative abundance of stable isotope incorporation in acetylated peptides
detected by MS.
RESULTS: Data show significant incorporation of the EtOH-derived 13 C2 -label
into N-terminal lysine acetylation sites on histones H3 and H4 after 4 hours,
with rapid turnover of labeled histone acetylation sites and return to endogenous
levels at 24 hours postgavage. Moreover, site-specific selectivity was observed
in regard to label incorporation into certain lysine acetylation sites as
determined by tandem mass spectrometry and comparison to isotope simulations.
CONCLUSIONS: These data provide the first quantitative evidence of how hepatic
EtOH metabolism directly influences histone lysine acetylation in a site-specific
manner and may influence EtOH-induced gene expression through these
transcriptionally activating chromatin marks.

© 2018 by the Research Society on Alcoholism.

DOI: 10.1111/acer.13843 
PMCID: PMC6208134
PMID: 30030934  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

