
1. J Ethnopharmacol. 2018 Nov 15;226:26-35. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2018.07.029. Epub
2018 Jul 27.

Euphorbia kansui fry-baked with vinegar modulates gut microbiota and reduces
intestinal toxicity in rats.

Jiang D(1), Kang A(1), Yao W(1), Lou J(1), Zhang Q(1), Bao B(1), Cao Y(1), Yu
S(1), Guo S(1), Zhang Y(1), Tang Y(2), Zhang L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for High Technology Research of TCM Formulae, National 
and Local Collaborative Engineering Center of Chinese Medicinal Resources
Industrialization and Formulae Innovative Medicine and Jiangsu Collaborative
Innovation Center of Chinese Medicinal Resources Industrialization, Nanjing
University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing 210023, China.
(2)College of Pharmacy and Shaanxi Collaborative Innovation Center of Chinese
Medicinal Resources Industrialization, Shaanxi University of Chinese Medicine,
Xianyang 712046, China.
(3)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for High Technology Research of TCM Formulae, National 
and Local Collaborative Engineering Center of Chinese Medicinal Resources
Industrialization and Formulae Innovative Medicine and Jiangsu Collaborative
Innovation Center of Chinese Medicinal Resources Industrialization, Nanjing
University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing 210023, China. Electronic address:
zhangli@njucm.edu.cn.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Euphorbia kansui (EK), a kind of toxic
traditional Chinese medicine (TCM), is used in the treatment of edema, ascites
and asthma. EK fry-baked with vinegar (VEK) is regularly used to reduce the
toxicity in TCM. Previous studies have confirmed that fry-baking with vinegar
could significantly reduce the significant gastrointestinal toxicity of EK. The
toxic side-effects of EK are closely associated with intestinal tract, but
existing research results could not provide practical measures for detoxification
in terms of the biological effects of EK fry-baked with vinegar.
AIM OF THE STUDY: This study aimed to investigate the gastrointestinal toxicity
of EK and detoxification of VEK through the regulation of gut microbiota. Thirty 
male Sprague Dawley (SD) rats were randomly divided equally into 3 groups and
received by oral gavage 0.5% CMC-Na (C group), EK (EKC group) or VEK (VEKC group)
powder at 680 mg/kg for seven consecutive days.
RESULTS: The ten toxic components in VEK were reduced significantly compared with
those in EK. After fry-baked with vinegar, those side effects associated with VEK
were significantly relieved in terms of histopathology and inflammatory injury
indices of intestinal tissues, liver function and oxidative damage indices. The
toxicity of EK might be highly correlated with Lactobacillus and Blautia genera. 
In addition, EK fry-baked with vinegar increased the production of short-chain
fatty acids (SCFAs), which are regulated by gut microbiota.
CONCLUSIONS: The proportion of main probiotics increased and potentially
pathogenic bacteria decreased after EK was fry-baked with vinegar. It turned out 
that effective detoxification could be achieved by fry-baking with vinegar.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2018.07.029 
PMID: 30059729  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

