
1. Front Immunol. 2018 Jul 16;9:1616. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01616. eCollection
2018.

Linking CD1-Restricted T Cells With Autoimmunity and Dyslipidemia: Lipid Levels
Matter.

Bagchi S(1), Genardi S(1), Wang CR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Northwestern University, Chicago,
IL, United States.

Dyslipidemia, or altered blood lipid content, is a risk factor for developing
cardiovascular disease. Furthermore, several autoimmune diseases, including
systemic lupus erythematosus, psoriasis, diabetes, and rheumatoid arthritis, are 
correlated highly with dyslipidemia. One common thread between both autoimmune
diseases and altered lipid levels is the presence of inflammation, suggesting
that the immune system might act as the link between these related pathologies.
Deciphering the role of innate and adaptive immune responses in autoimmune
diseases and, more recently, obesity-related inflammation, have been active areas
of research. The broad picture suggests that antigen-presenting molecules, which 
present self-peptides to autoreactive T cells, can result in either aggravation
or amelioration of inflammation. However, very little is known about the role of 
self-lipid reactive T cells in dyslipidemia-associated autoimmune events. Given
that a range of autoimmune diseases are linked to aberrant lipid profiles and a
majority of lipid-specific T cells are reactive to self-antigens, it is important
to examine the role of these T cells in dyslipidemia-related autoimmune ailments 
and determine if dysregulation of these T cells can be drivers of autoimmune
conditions. CD1 molecules present lipids to T cells and are divided into two
groups based on sequence homology. To date, most of the information available on 
lipid-reactive T cells comes from the study of group 2 CD1d-restricted natural
killer T (NKT) cells while T cells reactive to group 1 CD1 molecules remain
understudied, despite their higher abundance in humans compared to NKT cells.
This review evaluates the mechanisms by which CD1-reactive, self-lipid specific T
cells contribute to dyslipidemia-associated autoimmune disease progression or
amelioration by examining available literature on NKT cells and highlighting
recent progress made on the study of group 1 CD1-restricted T cells.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01616 
PMCID: PMC6055000
PMID: 30061888 

