
1. Microb Pathog. 2018 Oct;123:449-453. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2018.08.006. Epub
2018 Aug 4.

Purinergic signalling displays a pro-inflammatory profile in spleen and splenic
lymphocytes of Rhamdia quelen fed with a diet contaminated by fungal mycotoxin:
Involvement on disease pathogenesis.

Baldissera MD(1), Souza CF(2), Zeppenfeld CC(2), Garzon LR(3), Descovi SN(2), Da 
Silva AS(4), Stefani LM(4), Baldisserotto B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Universidade Federal de Santa
Maria, Santa Maria, RS, Brazil. Electronic address: mdbaldissera@mail.ufsm.br.
(2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Universidade Federal de Santa
Maria, Santa Maria, RS, Brazil.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Universidade Federal de Santa
Maria, Santa Maria, RS, Brazil.
(4)Department of Animal Science, Universidade do Estado de Santa Catarina,
Chapecó, RS, Brazil.

The spleen is an important secondary lymphatic organ that plays a key role in the
immune and inflammatory responses of teleost fish. The purinergic signalling has 
been associated to these types of responses under pathological conditions by the 
regulation of extracellular adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and its metabolite
adenosine (Ado), where both exert potent pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory
profiles, respectively. The exact pathway involved on the immunotoxic effects of 
aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) in fish fed with diets containing this mycotoxin remains
poorly understood. Thus, the aim of this study was to evaluate whether purinergic
signalling exerts anti or pro-inflammatory effects in spleen and splenic
lymphocytes of Rhamdia quelen fed with a diet contaminated by AFB1.
Ectonucleoside triphosphate diphosphohydrolase (NTPDase) activity (ATP as
substrate) decreased in spleen and splenic lymphocytes of fish fed with an
AFB1-contaminated diet on day 21 post-feeding compared to fish fed with a basal
diet; while adenosine deaminase (ADA) activity increased. No differences were
observed between groups or over time regarding NTPDase (adenosine diphosphate as 
substrate) and 5'-nucleotidase activities. In summary, the purinergic signalling 
can be a pathway involved in the impairment of the immune and inflammatory
responses in fish fed with an AFB1-contaminated diet, contributing to the
immunotoxic effects of AFB1 in spleens of fish.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2018.08.006 
PMID: 30086344  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

