
1. J Pediatr Neurosci. 2018 Apr-Jun;13(2):170-175. doi: 10.4103/jpn.JPN_71_17.

Genome-Wide Association Study in Craniosynostosis Condition Using Innovative
Systematic Bioinformatic Analysis Tools and Techniques: Future Prospective and
Clinical Practice.

Barik M(1), Bajpai M(1), Malhotra A(2), Samantaray JC(3), Dwivedi S(4), Das S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Nuclear Medicine, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Microbiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India.
(5)Department of Cardiac Anaesthesia, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
New Delhi, India.

Background: Craniosynostosis (CS) conditions are included with the premature
fusion of one or more multiple cranial sutures. As the second leading and most
common craniofacial anomaly and orofacial clefts globally. Syndromic and
nonsyndromic CS (NSCS) occur as a part of a genetic syndrome unlike Apert,
Crouzon, Pfeiffer, Muenke, and Saethre-Chotzen syndromes. Approximately, 90% of
the cases of CS arises from NSCS group and it is now a great challenge for the
researcher and neurosurgeon for Indian-origin children, a great burden worldwide.
Material and Methods: Study design: Prospective study of analysis sequence
pattern on CS and NSCS from January 2007 to 2018 was carried out.Inclusion
criteria: Diagnosed cases in syndromic and NSCS patients between 3 months and 14 
years of age either preoperative or postoperative were included in the study of
both groups (syndromic and NSCS).Exclusion criteria: Patients with primary
microcephaly (secondary CS), postural plagiocephaly, incomplete data, no visual
perception, and who were lost to follow-up, and who had no interest to
participate the study were excluded from the study.Bioinformatic analysis: We
have performed systematic bioinformatic analysis for all responsible genes by
combining with using through the GeneDecks, Gene Runner, DAVID, and STRING
databases.Genes testing: FGF family genes, MSX genes, such as Irf6, TP63, Dlx2,
Dlx5, Pax3, Pax9, Bmp4, Tgf-beta2, and Tgf-beta3 were found to be involved in
Cleft lip and cleft palate (CL/P), and Fgfr2, Fgfr1, Fgfr3, and TWIST, MSX, MSX1,
2 were found to be involved in both the groups of CS (SCS + NSCS).
Results: FGFR, MSX, Irf6, TP63, Dlx2, Dlx5, Pax3, Pax9, Bmp4, Tgf-beta2, and
Tgf-beta3 demonstrated and find out that in CL/P, and Fgfr2, Fgfr1, Fgfr3, and
Twist1 had accurate sequence data with more than accuracy of 95% reported with
proper order with additional anomalies CS through newly developed tools.
Conclusion: Newly developed techniques of GeneDecks, Gene Runner, DAVID, and
STRING databases gave better picture to analyze the larger population, patients
(SCS + NSCS) with complex genetic, maternal, parental age, environmental, and
stochastic factors contributing to NSCS networking, signaling, and pathways
involvement. This bioinformatic tools analyzed better prediction of CS and NSCS
sequences guiding us the newer invention modalities of pattern of screening and
further development of recent future application.

DOI: 10.4103/jpn.JPN_71_17 
PMCID: PMC6057197
PMID: 30090130 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.

