
1. Front Immunol. 2018 Jul 26;9:1571. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01571. eCollection
2018.

Quantitative Measurement of Naïve T Cell Association With Dendritic Cells, FRCs, 
and Blood Vessels in Lymph Nodes.

Tasnim H(1), Fricke GM(1)(2), Byrum JR(3), Sotiris JO(1), Cannon JL(3)(4)(5),
Moses ME(1)(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Moses Biological Computation Laboratory, Department of Computer Science, The
University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, United States.
(2)UNM Center for Advanced Research Computing (CARC), The University of New
Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, United States.
(3)The Cannon Laboratory, Molecular Genetics & Microbiology, The University of
New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, United States.
(4)Department of Pathology, The University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, United
States.
(5)Autophagy, Inflammation, and Metabolism Center of Biomedical Research
Excellence, The University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, United States.
(6)Biology Department, The University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, United
States.
(7)Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, NM, United States.

T cells play a vital role in eliminating pathogenic infections. To activate,
naïve T cells search lymph nodes (LNs) for dendritic cells (DCs). Positioning and
movement of T cells in LNs is influenced by chemokines including CCL21 as well as
multiple cell types and structures in the LNs. Previous studies have suggested
that T cell positioning facilitates DC colocalization leading to T:DC
interaction. Despite the influence chemical signals, cells, and structures can
have on naïve T cell positioning, relatively few studies have used quantitative
measures to directly compare T cell interactions with key cell types. Here, we
use Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) and normalized mutual information (NMI)
to quantify the extent to which naïve T cells spatially associate with DCs,
fibroblastic reticular cells (FRCs), and blood vessels in LNs. We measure spatial
associations in physiologically relevant regions. We find that T cells are more
spatially associated with FRCs than with their ultimate targets, DCs. We also
investigated the role of a key motility chemokine receptor, CCR7, on T cell
colocalization with DCs. We find that CCR7 deficiency does not decrease naïve T
cell association with DCs, in fact, CCR7-/- T cells show slightly higher DC
association compared with wild type T cells. By revealing these associations, we 
gain insights into factors that drive T cell localization, potentially affecting 
the timing of productive T:DC interactions and T cell activation.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01571 
PMCID: PMC6070610
PMID: 30093900  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

