
1. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2018 Oct;80(4):e13031. doi: 10.1111/aji.13031. Epub 2018 Aug
12.

Human β-defensin-1: A natural antimicrobial peptide present in amniotic fluid
that is increased in spontaneous preterm labor with intra-amniotic infection.

Varrey A(1)(2), Romero R(1)(3)(4)(5), Panaitescu B(1)(2), Miller D(1)(2),
Chaiworapongsa T(1)(2), Patwardhan M(2), Faro J(1)(2), Pacora P(1)(2), Hassan
SS(1)(2)(6), Hsu CD(2), Gomez-Lopez N(1)(2)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Perinatology Research Branch, Division of Obstetrics and Maternal-Fetal
Medicine, Division of Intramural Research, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health,
U. S. Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, Maryland, and Detroit,
Michigan.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, Michigan.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan.
(4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Michigan State University, East 
Lansing, Michigan.
(5)Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University, Detroit,
Michigan.
(6)Department of Physiology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, 
Michigan.
(7)Department of Immunology, Microbiology and Biochemistry, Wayne State
University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan.

PROBLEM: Human β-defensins (HBDs) are antimicrobial peptides that participate in 
the soluble innate immune mechanisms against infection. Herein, we determined
whether HBD-1 was present in amniotic fluid during normal pregnancy and whether
its concentrations change with intra-amniotic inflammation and/or infection.
METHOD OF STUDY: Amniotic fluid was collected from 219 women in the following
groups: (a) midtrimester who delivered at term (n = 35); (b) term with (n = 33)
or without (n = 17) labor; (c) preterm labor with intact membranes who delivered 
at term (n = 29) or who delivered preterm with (n = 19) and without (n = 29)
intra-amniotic inflammation and infection or with intra-amniotic inflammation but
without infection (n = 21); and (d) preterm prelabor rupture of membranes (pPROM)
with (n = 19) and without (n = 17) intra-amniotic inflammation/infection.
Amniotic fluid HBD-1 concentrations were determined using a sensitive and
specific ELISA kit.
RESULTS: (a) HBD-1 was detectable in all amniotic fluid samples; (b) amniotic
fluid concentrations of HBD-1 were changed with gestational age (midtrimester vs 
term no labor), being higher in midtrimester; (c) amniotic fluid concentrations
of HBD-1 were similar between women with and without spontaneous labor at term;
(d) among patients with spontaneous preterm labor, amniotic fluid concentrations 
of HBD-1 in women with intra-amniotic inflammation/infection and in those with
intra-amniotic inflammation without infection were greater than in women without 
intra-amniotic inflammation or infection who delivered preterm or at term; and
(e) the presence of intra-amniotic inflammation and infection in patients with
pPROM did not change amniotic fluid concentrations of HBD-1.
CONCLUSION: HBD-1 is a physiological constituent of amniotic fluid that is
increased in midtrimester during normal pregnancy and in the presence of
culturable microorganisms in the amniotic cavity. These findings provide insight 
into the soluble host defense mechanisms against intra-amniotic infection.

Published 2018. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public
domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1111/aji.13031 
PMCID: PMC6160339
PMID: 30101464  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

