
1. J Endocrinol. 2018 Nov 1;239(2):167-180. doi: 10.1530/JOE-18-0349.

Inhibition of PPARγ, adipogenesis and insulin sensitivity by MAGED1.

Wang Q(1)(2), Tang J(1), Jiang S(1)(3), Huang Z(1)(4), Song A(1), Hou S(1), Gao
X(1), Ruan HB(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology and MOE Key Laboratory of
Model Animal for Disease Study, Model Animal Research Center, Nanjing Biomedical 
Research Institute, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Laboratory Animal Center, Nantong University, Nantong, Jiangsu, China.
(3)School of Traditional Chinese Medicine, China Pharmaceutical University,
Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
(4)Laboratory of Gastrointestinal Microbiology, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of
Gastrointestinal Nutrition and Animal Health, College of Animal Science and
Technology, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
(5)Department of Integrative Biology and Physiology, University of Minnesota
Medical School, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ (PPARγ) is a master regulator of
adipogenesis and a target of the thiazolidinedione (TZD) class of antidiabetic
drugs; therefore, identifying novel regulators of PPARγ action in adipocytes is
essential for the future development of therapeutics for diabetes. MAGE family
member D1 (MAGED1), by acting as an adaptor for ubiquitin-dependent degradation
pathways and a co-factor for transcription, plays an important role in neural
development, cell differentiation and circadian rhythm. Here, we showed that
MAGED1 expression was downregulated during adipogenesis and loss of MAGED1
promoted preadipocyte proliferation and differentiation in vitro. MAGED1 bound to
PPARγ and suppressed the stability and transcriptional activity of PPARγ.
Compared to WT littermates, MAGED1-deficient mice showed increased levels of
PPARγ protein and its target genes, more CD29+CD34+Sca-1+ adipocyte precursors
and hyperplasia of white adipose tissues (WATs). Moreover, MAGED1-deficient mice 
developed late-onset obesity as a result of decreased energy expenditure and
physical activity. However, these mice were metabolically healthy as shown by
improved glucose clearance and insulin sensitivity, normal levels of serum lipids
and enhanced secretion of adipokines such as leptin and adiponectin. Taken
together, our data identify MAGED1 as a novel negative regulator of PPARγ
activity, adipogenesis and insulin sensitivity in mice. MAGED1 might therefore
serve as a novel pharmaceutical target to treat obesity-associated insulin
resistance.

DOI: 10.1530/JOE-18-0349 
PMID: 30121577  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

