
1. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2018 Aug 17;7(1):149. doi: 10.1038/s41426-018-0148-4.

Multiple domains of bacterial and human Lon proteases define substrate
selectivity.

He L(1), Luo D(2), Yang F(3), Li C(4), Zhang X(2), Deng H(3), Zhang JR(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Disease Research, School of Medicine, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China.
(2)MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Bioinformatics Division, TNLIST and
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
(3)MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, 10084, China.
(4)Philip Research Institute for Oral Health, School of Dentistry, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA.
(5)Center for Infectious Disease Research, School of Medicine, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China. zhanglab@tsinghua.edu.cn.
(6)Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, State Key Laboratory of
Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, West China Medical School,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, China. zhanglab@tsinghua.edu.cn.

The Lon protease selectively degrades abnormal proteins or certain normal
proteins in response to environmental and cellular conditions in many prokaryotic
and eukaryotic organisms. However, the mechanism(s) behind the substrate
selection of normal proteins remains largely unknown. In this study, we
identified 10 new substrates of F. tularensis Lon from a total of 21 candidate
substrates identified in our previous work, the largest number of novel Lon
substrates from a single study. Cross-species degradation of these and other
known Lon substrates revealed that human Lon is unable to degrade many bacterial 
Lon substrates, suggestive of a "organism-adapted" substrate selection mechanism 
for the natural Lon variants. However, individually replacing the N, A, and P
domains of human Lon with the counterparts of bacterial Lon did not enable the
human protease to degrade the same bacterial Lon substrates. This result showed
that the "organism-adapted" substrate selection depends on multiple domains of
the Lon proteases. Further in vitro proteolysis and mass spectrometry analysis
revealed a similar substrate cleavage pattern between the bacterial and human Lon
variants, which was exemplified by predominant representation of leucine,
alanine, and other hydrophobic amino acids at the P(-1) site within the
substrates. These observations suggest that the Lon proteases select their
substrates at least in part by fine structural matching with the proteins in the 
same organisms.

DOI: 10.1038/s41426-018-0148-4 
PMCID: PMC6098112
PMID: 30120231  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

