
1. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2018 Nov 1;315(5):L799-L809. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00014.2018. Epub 2018 Aug 23.

Inhibition of the extrinsic or intrinsic coagulation pathway during
pneumonia-derived sepsis.

Stroo I(1)(2), Ding C(1)(3), Novak A(1), Yang J(1), Roelofs JJTH(4), Meijers
JCM(5)(6), Revenko AS(7), van 't Veer C(1), Zeerleder S(2)(8), Crosby JR(7), van 
der Poll T(1)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam , Amsterdam , The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Immunopathology, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam , The Netherlands.
(3)Department of General Surgery, Jinling Hospital, Medical School of Nanjing
University , Nanjing , China.
(4)Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam ,
Amsterdam , The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Experimental Vascular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam , Amsterdam , The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Plasma Proteins, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam , The Netherlands.
(7)Drug Discovery and Corporate Development, Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Incorporated,
Carlsbad, California.
(8)Department of Hematology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam ,
Amsterdam , The Netherlands.
(9)Division of Infectious Diseases, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam , Amsterdam , The Netherlands.

Pneumonia is the most frequent cause of sepsis, and Klebsiella pneumoniae is a
common pathogen in pneumonia and sepsis. Infection is associated with activation 
of the coagulation system. Coagulation can be activated by the extrinsic and
intrinsic routes, mediated by factor VII (FVII) and factor XII (FXII),
respectively. To determine the role of FVII and FXII in the host response during 
pneumonia-derived sepsis, mice were treated with specific antisense
oligonucleotide (ASO) directed at FVII or FXII for 3 wk before infection with K. 
pneumoniae via the airways. FVII ASO treatment strongly inhibited hepatic FVII
mRNA expression, reduced plasma FVII to ~25% of control, and selectively
prolonged the prothrombin time. FXII ASO treatment strongly suppressed hepatic
FXII mRNA expression, reduced plasma FXII to ~20% of control, and selectively
prolonged the activated partial thromboplastin time. Lungs also expressed FVII
mRNA, which was not altered by FVII ASO administration. Very low FXII mRNA levels
were detected in lungs, which were not modified by FXII ASO treatment. FVII ASO
attenuated systemic activation of coagulation but did not influence fibrin
deposition in lung tissue. FVII ASO enhanced bacterial loads in lungs and
mitigated sepsis-induced distant organ injury. FXII inhibition did not affect any
of the host response parameters measured. These results suggest that partial
inhibition of FVII, but not of FXII, modifies the host response to gram-negative 
pneumonia-derived sepsis.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00014.2018 
PMID: 30136609  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

