
1. Metab Eng. 2018 Sep;49:201-211. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2018.08.008. Epub 2018 Aug
23.

Synthetic metabolic pathways for photobiological conversion of CO2 into
hydrocarbon fuel.

Yunus IS(1), Wichmann J(2), Wördenweber R(2), Lauersen KJ(2), Kruse O(2), Jones
PR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, SW7 2AZ London, UK.
(2)Bielefeld University, Faculty of Biology, Center for Biotechnology (CeBiTec), 
Universitätsstrasse 27, 33615 Bielefeld, Germany.
(3)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, SW7 2AZ London, UK.
Electronic address: p.jones@imperial.ac.uk.

Liquid fuels sourced from fossil sources are the dominant energy form for mobile 
transport today. The consumption of fossil fuels is still increasing, resulting
in a continued search for more sustainable methods to renew our supply of liquid 
fuel. Photosynthetic microorganisms naturally accumulate hydrocarbons that could 
serve as a replacement for fossil fuel, however productivities remain low. We
report successful introduction of five synthetic metabolic pathways in two green 
cell factories, prokaryotic cyanobacteria and eukaryotic algae. Heterologous
thioesterase expression enabled high-yield conversion of native fatty acyl-acyl
carrier protein (ACP) into free fatty acids (FFA) in Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803
but not in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii where the polar lipid fraction instead was
enhanced. Despite no increase in measurable FFA in Chlamydomonas, genetic
recoding and over-production of the native fatty acid photodecarboxylase (FAP)
resulted in increased accumulation of 7-heptadecene. Implementation of a
carboxylic acid reductase (CAR) and aldehyde deformylating oxygenase (ADO)
dependent synthetic pathway in Synechocystis resulted in the accumulation of
fatty alcohols and a decrease in the native saturated alkanes. In contrast, the
replacement of CAR and ADO with Pseudomonas mendocina UndB (so named as it is
responsible for 1-undecene biosynthesis in Pseudomonas) or Chlorella variabilis
FAP resulted in high-yield conversion of thioesterase-liberated FFAs into
corresponding alkenes and alkanes, respectively. At best, the engineering
resulted in an increase in hydrocarbon accumulation of 8- (from 1 to 8.5 mg/g
cell dry weight) and 19-fold (from 4 to 77 mg/g cell dry weight) for
Chlamydomonas and Synechocystis, respectively. In conclusion, reconstitution of
the eukaryotic algae pathway in the prokaryotic cyanobacteria host generated the 
most effective system, highlighting opportunities for mix-and-match synthetic
metabolism. These studies describe functioning synthetic metabolic pathways for
hydrocarbon fuel synthesis in photosynthetic microorganisms for the first time,
moving us closer to the commercial implementation of photobiocatalytic systems
that directly convert CO2 into infrastructure-compatible fuels.

Copyright © 2018 International Metabolic Engineering Society. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymben.2018.08.008 
PMID: 30144559  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

