
1. J Thromb Haemost. 2018 Nov;16(11):2223-2232. doi: 10.1111/jth.14273. Epub 2018
Oct 8.

Elimination of factor VIII-specific B cells by immunotoxins composed of a single 
factor VIII domain fused to Pseudomonas exotoxin A.

Brettschneider K(1)(2), Schmidt A(1), Kahle J(1), Orlowski A(1), Stichel D(1),
Schwabe D(1), Königs C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital, Goethe 
University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(2)Faculty of Biological Science, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

Essentials There is still a need for novel therapeutic approaches for hemophilia 
A patients with inhibitors. A factor VIII domain was used as the targeting moiety
for elimination of FVIII-specific B cells. The immunodominant C2 domain was fused
to exotoxin A from Pseudomonas aeruginosa (hC2-ETA). Murine C2 domain-specific B 
cells were selectively and efficiently eliminated by hC2-ETA ex vivo. SUMMARY:
Background Today, the most serious complication for patients with hemophilia A
undergoing factor VIII (FVIII) replacement therapy is the development of
neutralizing antibodies (inhibitors). Although inhibitors can be eradicated by
application of high doses of FVIII, the immune tolerance induction therapy fails 
in up to 30% of patients. Hence, there is still an urgent need for novel
therapeutic approaches for patients with persisting inhibitors. Objectives In the
present study, the potential use of immunotoxins containing exotoxin A (ETA) from
Pseudomonas aeruginosa for selective elimination of FVIII-specific B cells was
explored. Methods The immunodominant C2 domain of human FVIII was used as a
targeting moiety instead of the full-length FVIII protein and the resulting human
C2 domain-ETA fusion protein (hC2-ETA) was produced in Escherichia coli. Results 
Binding studies with monoclonal C2 domain-specific antibodies confirmed the
conformational integrity of the C2 domain in hC2-ETA. The functionality of
hC2-ETA was tested ex vivo by incubation of splenocytes from inhibitor-positive
FVIII knockout mice with hC2-ETA and controls. FVIII-specific memory B cells from
splenocytes were differentiated by FVIII stimulation in antibody-secreting cells 
(ASC) and detected by an enzyme-linked immunospot assay. Although the controls
showed no effect, incubation of splenocytes with hC2-ETA reduced the number of
C2-specific ASC in a dose-dependent fashion, indicating specific and efficient
elimination of C2-specific memory B cells. Conclusions Overall, the results of
the study support the fact that FVIII domain immunotoxins might be a potential
new tool for the elimination of FVIII-specific B cells in patients with
hemophilia A and persisting inhibitors.

© 2018 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

DOI: 10.1111/jth.14273 
PMID: 30152083  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

