
1. Breast Cancer Res. 2018 Sep 4;20(1):105. doi: 10.1186/s13058-018-1020-0.

NOTCH3 expression is linked to breast cancer seeding and distant metastasis.

Leontovich AA(1), Jalalirad M(2), Salisbury JL(3), Mills L(4), Haddox C(2),
Schroeder M(2), Tuma A(2), Guicciardi ME(5), Zammataro L(6), Gambino MW(3), Amato
A(7), Di Leonardo A(7), McCubrey J(8), Lange CA(9), Liu M(2), Haddad T(2), Goetz 
M(2), Boughey J(10), Sarkaria J(2), Wang L(2), Ingle JN(2), Galanis E(2)(4),
D'Assoro AB(11)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN, USA.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 200 First
Street SW, Rochester, MN, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 200 First
Street SW, Rochester, MN, USA.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 200 First
Street SW, Rochester, MN, USA.
(6)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(7)Department of Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of Palermo,
Palermo, Italy.
(8)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Brody School of Medicine, East
Carolina University, Greenville, NC, USA.
(9)Department of Medicine and Pharmacology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN, USA.
(10)Department of Surgery, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 200 First Street SW, 
Rochester, MN, USA.
(11)Department of Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 200 First
Street SW, Rochester, MN, USA. dassoro.antonio@mayo.edu.
(12)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN, USA. dassoro.antonio@mayo.edu.

BACKGROUND: Development of distant metastases involves a complex multistep
biological process termed the invasion-metastasis cascade, which includes
dissemination of cancer cells from the primary tumor to secondary organs. NOTCH
developmental signaling plays a critical role in promoting
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, tumor stemness, and metastasis. Although
all four NOTCH receptors show oncogenic properties, the unique role of each of
these receptors in the sequential stepwise events that typify the
invasion-metastasis cascade remains elusive.
METHODS: We have established metastatic xenografts expressing high endogenous
levels of NOTCH3 using estrogen receptor alpha-positive (ERα+) MCF-7 breast
cancer cells with constitutive active Raf-1/mitogen-associated protein kinase
(MAPK) signaling (vMCF-7Raf-1) and MDA-MB-231 triple-negative breast cancer
(TNBC) cells. The critical role of NOTCH3 in inducing an invasive phenotype and
poor outcome was corroborated in unique TNBC cells resulting from a
patient-derived brain metastasis (TNBC-M25) and in publicly available claudin-low
breast tumor specimens collected from participants in the Molecular Taxonomy of
Breast Cancer International Consortium database.
RESULTS: In this study, we identified an association between NOTCH3 expression
and development of metastases in ERα+ and TNBC models. ERα+ breast tumor
xenografts with a constitutive active Raf-1/MAPK signaling developed spontaneous 
lung metastases through the clonal expansion of cancer cells expressing a NOTCH3 
reprogramming network. Abrogation of NOTCH3 expression significantly reduced the 
self-renewal and invasive capacity of ex vivo breast cancer cells, restoring a
luminal CD44low/CD24high/ERαhigh phenotype. Forced expression of the mitotic
Aurora kinase A (AURKA), which promotes breast cancer metastases, failed to
restore the invasive capacity of NOTCH3-null cells, demonstrating that NOTCH3
expression is required for an invasive phenotype. Likewise, pharmacologic
inhibition of NOTCH signaling also impaired TNBC cell seeding and metastatic
growth. Significantly, the role of aberrant NOTCH3 expression in promoting tumor 
self-renewal, invasiveness, and poor outcome was corroborated in unique TNBC
cells from a patient-derived brain metastasis and in publicly available
claudin-low breast tumor specimens.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate the key role of NOTCH3 oncogenic
signaling in the genesis of breast cancer metastasis and provide a compelling
preclinical rationale for the design of novel therapeutic strategies that will
selectively target NOTCH3 to halt metastatic seeding and to improve the clinical 
outcomes of patients with breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1186/s13058-018-1020-0 
PMCID: PMC6123953
PMID: 30180881  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

