
1. Indian J Exp Biol. 2017 Mar;55(3):161-70.

Isolation of bacterial strains possessing nitrogen-fixation, phosphate and
potassium-solubilization and their inoculation effects on sugarcane.

Muthukumarasamy R, Revathi G, Vadivelu M, Arun K.

Inorganic nitrogen (N), phosphate (P) and potash (K) are the most influencing
macro-nutrients for plant growth and microbial supplementation of these minerals 
through N2-fixation, P- and K-solubilization is gaining importance. In the
present study, a macronutrient deficient (MD), N-free novel medium, supplemented 
with tri calcium phosphate (TCP as P- source) and Mica (as K- source) was used
for isolation of microbes possessing nitrogen fixing, P- & K solubilizing
abilities. Samples of rhizosphere and non-rhizosphere soils, roots and leaves of 
sugarcane varieties (viz., Co 6304, Co 86032 and CoC 671) collected from Tamil
Nadu, India were used for isolation. Totally, 8 individual nitrogen-fixing,
phosphate- and potash-solubilizing bacterial strains were obtained.
Nitrogen-fixing abilities of these isolates were confirmed by analyzing acetylene
reduction (AR) activity and the presence of nif genes. P- and K- solubilizing
activities were confirmed by cultivating these isolates in solid/liquid medium
supplemented with insoluble forms of P and K. These isolates which produced
growth hormone IAA, were in two groups as Roseateles terrae and Burkholderia
gladioli, respectively based on the morphological, physiological, biochemical and
16S rDNA gene sequence analysis. Association between diazotrophic, P- and
K-solubilizing R. terrae and B. gladioli with sugarcane has not been reported
earlier. These isolates were tested for their growth-promoting abilities in
sugarcane cultivated in pots, and the results showed that these isolates were
able to increase the leaf chlorophyll, N content and total biomass. This study
may encourage farmers to use single microbe for microbial supplementation of N, P
and K instead of consortium of microbes wherein the compatibility between
different microbes is often compromised.


PMID: 30184417  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

