
1. J Cell Physiol. 2019 Apr;234(4):4702-4712. doi: 10.1002/jcp.27243. Epub 2018 Sep 
7.

Nanostructured lipid carriers containing rapamycin for prevention of corneal
fibroblasts proliferation and haze propagation after burn injuries: In vitro and 
in vivo.

Zahir-Jouzdani F(1), Khonsari F(2), Soleimani M(3), Mahbod M(4), Arefian E(3)(5),
Heydari M(2), Shahhosseini S(4), Dinarvand R(1)(2)(6), Atyabi F(1)(2)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Nanotechnology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutics, Faculty of Pharmacy, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Bonyakhteh Stem Cell Research Center, Cellular and Molecular Biology
Department, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Noor Ophthalmology Research Center, Pathology Department, Noor Eye Hospital,
Tehran, Iran.
(5)Department of Microbiology, School of Biology, College of Science, University 
of Tehran, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Nanotechnology Research Centre, Novel Drug Delivery Department, Faculty of
Pharmacy, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Chemical burns are a major cause of corneal haze and blindness. Corticosteroids
are commonly used after corneal burns to attenuate the severity of the
inflammation-related fibrosis. While research efforts have been aimed toward
application of novel therapeutics. In the current study, a novel drug delivery
system based nanostructured lipid carriers (NLCs) were designed to treat corneal 
alkaline burn injury. Rapamycin, a potent inhibitor of mammalian target of
rapamycin pathway, was loaded in NLCs (rapa-NLCs), and the NLCs were
characterized. Cell viability assay, cellular uptake of NLCs, and in vitro
evaluation of the fibrotic/angiogenic genes suppression by rapa-NLCs were carried
out on human isolated corneal fibroblasts. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) assays were
also performed after treatment of murine model of corneal alkaline burn with
rapa-NLCs. According to the results, rapamycin was efficiently loaded in NLCs.
NLCs could enhance coumarin-6 fibroblast uptake by 1.5 times. Rapa-NLCs
efficiently downregulated platelet-derived growth factor and transforming growth 
factor beta genes in vitro. Furthermore, proliferation of fibroblasts, a major
cause of corneal haze after injury, reduced. IHC staining of treated cornea with 
alpha-smooth muscle actin and CD34 + antibodies showed efficient prevention of
myofibroblasts differentiation and angiogenesis, respectively. In conclusion,
ocular delivery of rapamycin using NLCs after corneal injury may be considered as
a promising antifibrotic/angiogenic treatment approach to preserve patient
eyesight.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.27243 
PMID: 30191977  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

