
1. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek. 2019 Feb;112(2):263-274. doi: 10.1007/s10482-018-1153-2.
Epub 2018 Sep 7.

Intracellular calcite and sulfur dynamics of Achromatium cells observed in a
lab-based enrichment and aerobic incubation experiment.

Yang T(1)(2), Teske A(3), Ambrose W(4), Salman-Carvalho V(5), Bagnell R(6),
Nielsen LP(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Marine Sciences, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, USA. tingting.yang@bios.au.dk.
(2)Department of Bioscience, Center for Geomicrobiology, Aarhus, Denmark.
tingting.yang@bios.au.dk.
(3)Department of Marine Sciences, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, USA.
(4)Department of Applied Physical Sciences, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, USA.
(5)HGF MPG Joint Research Group for Deep-Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck
Institute for Marine Microbiology, Bremen, Germany.
(6)Microscopy Services Laboratory, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, USA.
(7)Department of Bioscience, Center for Geomicrobiology, Aarhus, Denmark.

We investigated the intracellular dynamics of calcite and sulfur in the large
sulfur-oxidizing, calcite-accumulating bacterium Achromatium, with an emphasis on
oxygen exposure as a physiological control. For this purpose, morphological
changes and possible accretion mechanisms of calcite granules in cells that were 
freshly collected from natural Achromatium-containing sediment were compared to
cells from the same source after prolonged exposure to atmospheric oxygen.
Intracellular sulfur is oxidized and removed in response to oxygen exposure.
Calcite granules also undergo distinct oxygen-related dynamics; they alternate
between tightly packaged, smooth granules with narrow but sharply defined
interstitial spaces in atmospheric oxygen-exposed cells, and more loosely
packaged granules with irregular, bumpy surface texture and larger interstitial
spaces in cells that were not artificially exposed to oxygen. These results
suggest that morphological changes of the calcite granules reflect their changing
physiological role inside the cell. Sulfur oxidation and calcite dissolution
appear to be linked in that proton generation during sulfur oxidation is buffered
by gradual calcite erosion, visible in the smooth, rounded surface morphology
observed after oxygen exposure. Our results support the hypothesis that calcite
dynamics buffer the intracellular pH fluctuations linked to electron acceptor
limitation during proton-consuming sulfide oxidation to sulfur, and electron
acceptor abundance during proton-generating sulfur oxidation to sulfate.

DOI: 10.1007/s10482-018-1153-2 
PMID: 30194507  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

