
1. J Bacteriol. 2018 Nov 6;200(23). pii: e00476-18. doi: 10.1128/JB.00476-18. Print 
2018 Dec 1.

Genotoxic, Metabolic, and Oxidative Stresses Regulate the RNA Repair Operon of
Salmonella enterica Serovar Typhimurium.

Kurasz JE(#)(1), Hartman CE(#)(2), Samuels DJ(#)(1), Mohanty BK(1)(2), Deleveaux 
A(1), Mrázek J(1)(3), Karls AC(4)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA.
(3)Institute of Bioinformatics, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
akarls@uga.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

The σ54 regulon in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium includes a predicted
RNA repair operon encoding homologs of the metazoan Ro60 protein (Rsr), Y RNAs
(YrlBA), RNA ligase (RtcB), and RNA 3'-phosphate cyclase (RtcA). Transcription
from σ54-dependent promoters requires that a cognate bacterial enhancer binding
protein (bEBP) be activated by a specific environmental or cellular signal; the
cognate bEBP for the σ54-dependent promoter of the rsr-yrlBA-rtcBA operon is
RtcR. To identify conditions that generate the signal for RtcR activation in S
Typhimurium, transcription of the RNA repair operon was assayed under multiple
stress conditions that result in nucleic acid damage. RtcR-dependent
transcription was highly induced by the nucleic acid cross-linking agents
mitomycin C (MMC) and cisplatin, and this activation was dependent on RecA.
Deletion of rtcR or rtcB resulted in decreased cell viability relative to that of
the wild type following treatment with MMC. Oxidative stress from peroxide
exposure also induced RtcR-dependent transcription of the operon. Nitrogen
limitation resulted in RtcR-independent increased expression of the operon; the
effect of nitrogen limitation required NtrC. The adjacent toxin-antitoxin module,
dinJ-yafQ, was cotranscribed with the RNA repair operon but was not required for 
RtcR activation, although YafQ endoribonuclease activated RtcR-dependent
transcription. Stress conditions shown to induce expression the RNA repair operon
of Escherichia coli (rtcBA) did not stimulate expression of the S Typhimurium RNA
repair operon. Similarly, MMC did not induce expression of the E. coli rtcBA
operon, although when expressed in S Typhimurium, E. coli RtcR responds
effectively to the unknown signal(s) generated there by MMC exposure.IMPORTANCE
Homologs of the metazoan RNA repair enzymes RtcB and RtcA occur widely in
eubacteria, suggesting a selective advantage. Although the enzymatic activities
of the eubacterial RtcB and RtcA have been well characterized, the physiological 
roles remain largely unresolved. Here we report stress responses that activate
expression of the σ54-dependent RNA repair operon (rsr-yrlBA-rtcBA) of S
Typhimurium and demonstrate that expression of the operon impacts cell survival
under MMC-induced stress. Characterization of the requirements for activation of 
this tightly regulated operon provides clues to the possible functions of operon 
components in vivo, enhancing our understanding of how this human pathogen copes 
with environmental stressors.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00476-18 
PMCID: PMC6222203
PMID: 30201777  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

