
1. Acta Biomater. 2018 Oct 15;80:169-175. doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2018.09.012. Epub
2018 Sep 13.

Incorporation of hydroxyproline in bacterial collagen from Streptococcus
pyogenes.

Peng YY(1), Nebl T(2), Glattauer V(3), Ramshaw JAM(4).

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Manufacturing, Bayview Avenue, Clayton, VIC 3169, Australia. Electronic 
address: yong.peng@csiro.au.
(2)CSIRO Manufacturing, Bayview Avenue, Clayton, VIC 3169, Australia. Electronic 
address: tom.nebl@csiro.au.
(3)CSIRO Manufacturing, Bayview Avenue, Clayton, VIC 3169, Australia. Electronic 
address: veronica.glattauer@csiro.au.
(4)CSIRO Manufacturing, Bayview Avenue, Clayton, VIC 3169, Australia.

Bacterial collagen-like proteins differ from vertebrate collagens in that they do
not contain hydroxyproline, which is seen as a characteristic of the vertebrate
collagens, and which provides a significant contribution to the stability of the 
collagen triple-helix at body temperature. Despite this difference, the bacterial
collagens are stable at around body temperature through inclusion of other
stabilising sequence elements. Another difference is the lack of aggregation, and
certain vertebrate collagen binding domains that can be introduced into the
bacterial sequence lack full function when hydroxyproline is absent. In the
present study we have demonstrated that a simple method utilising
co-translational incorporation during fermentation can be used to incorporate
hydroxyproline into the recombinant bacterial collagen. The presence and amount
of hydroxyproline incorporation was shown by amino acid analysis and by mass
spectrometry. A small increase in thermal stability was observed using circular
dichroism spectroscopy. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE: Recombinant bacterial
collagens provide a new opportunity for biomedical materials as they are readily 
produced in large quantity in E. coli. Unlike animal collagens, they are stable
without the need for inclusion of a secondary modification system for
hydroxyproline incorporation. In animal collagens, however, introduction of
hydroxyproline is essential for stability and is also important for functional
molecular interactions within the mammalian extracellular matrix. The present
study has shown that hydroxyproline can be readily introduced into recombinant S.
pyogenes bacterial collagen through direct co-translational incorporation of this
modified imino acid during expression using the codons for proline in the
introduced gene construct. This hydroxylation further improves the stability of
the collagen and is available to enhance any introduced molecular functions.

Copyright © 2018 Acta Materialia Inc. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actbio.2018.09.012 
PMID: 30218779  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

