
1. Connect Tissue Res. 2019 Jan;60(1):29-39. doi: 10.1080/03008207.2018.1517758.
Epub 2018 Sep 20.

Fibroblasts from recurrent fibrotic overgrowths reveal high rate of proliferation
in vitro - findings from the study of hereditary and idiopathic gingival
fibromatosis.

Gawron K(1), Łazarz-Bartyzel K(2), Kowalska A(1), Bereta G(1), Nowakowska Z(1),
Plakwicz P(3), Potempa J(1)(4), Fertala A(5), Chomyszyn-Gajewska M(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and
Biotechnology , Jagiellonian University , Krakow , Poland.
(2)b Department of Periodontology and Oral Medicine, Medical College ,
Jagiellonian University , Krakow , Poland.
(3)c Department of Periodontology , Medical University of Warsaw , Warsaw ,
Poland.
(4)d Department of Oral Immunology and Infectious Diseases , School of Dentistry,
University of Louisville , Louisville , KY , USA.
(5)e Department of Orthopaedic Surgery , Sidney Kimmel Medical College, Thomas
Jefferson University , Philadelphia , PA , USA.

PURPOSE: Investigate the content of fibrotic fibrils in gingival tissue and the
proliferation of fibroblasts collected from recurrent and non-recurrent
hereditary gingival fibromatosis (HGF) and idiopathic gingival fibromatosis
(IGF).
METHODS: Gingival biopsies were collected from HGF (n = 3) and IGF (n = 3) donors
with recurrent and non-recurrent gingival overgrowths and from a control group
(Ctrl, n = 3). Hematoxylin staining was performed to evaluate the histomorphology
of gingival tissue. Heidenhain's AZAN trichrome staining served for visualization
of fibrotic fibrils in gingiva. Quantitative analysis of the content of fibrotic 
fibrils in gingival tissue was performed using a polarized light microscope.
Proliferation was evaluated at 24 h, 48 h, and 72 h in fibroblast cultures using 
a cell proliferation ELISA assay based on 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU).
RESULTS: Numerous blood vessels and fibroblasts were observed in recurrent
overgrowths, whereas moderate blood vessels and moderate to scanty fibroblasts
were detected in non-recurrent overgrowths. Heidenhain's staining revealed
numerous collagen fibers in both recurrent and non-recurrent overgrowths.
Quantitative analysis in a polarizing microscope showed significant accumulation 
of fibrotic fibrils exclusively in the overgrowths with the recurrence. In all
time-points, increased proliferation of cells from all recurrent overgrowths was 
observed, but not from overgrowths which do not reoccur.
CONCLUSIONS: The study revealed that recurrent gingival overgrowths consist of
highly fibrotic and dense connective tissue with numerous blood vessels and
abundant fibroblasts. We also demonstrated that unlike fibroblasts derived from
overgrowths, which did not present recurrence, fibroblasts derived from highly
fibrotic and recurrent overgrowths maintain high rate of proliferation in vitro.

DOI: 10.1080/03008207.2018.1517758 
PMID: 30231645  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

