
1. Dent Res J (Isfahan). 2018 Sep-Oct;15(5):327-333.

Effect of Sudarshan Kriya Pranayama on periodontal status and human salivary
beta-defensin-2: An interventional study.

Ananthalakshmi R(1), Mahendra J(2), Jayamathi P(3), Mahendra L(4), Kareem N(2),
Subramaniam S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology and Microbiology, Thai Moogambigai Dental College
and Hospital, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.
(2)Department of Periodontology, Meenakshi Ammal Dental College and Hospital,
Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Meenakshi Ammal Dental College and Hospital,
Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.
(4)Department of Periodontology, Priyadharshini Dental College and Hospital,
Tamil Nadu Dr. MGR University, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.
(5)Regenix Research Centre, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.

Background: Yogic stretching (asana) has been proven to have an effect on
salivary human beta-defensin-2 (HBD-2) concentration, which is an antimicrobial
peptide and is an inflammatory marker in periodontal disease. Sudarshan Kriya
Pranayama (SKP) is a part of yoga which involves rhythmic breathing. Hence, we
aim to evaluate the periodontal parameters and to estimate the salivary HBD-2
level before and after SKP program in periodontitis individuals.
Materials and Methods: An interventional study was designed and individuals were 
divided into three groups: Group I - healthy periodontium, Group II - chronic
gingivitis, and Group III - chronic periodontitis. SKP was the interventional
tool. The clinical parameters such as plaque index (PI), gingival index (GI),
probing pocket depth (PPD), clinical attachment level (CAL), and salivary HBD-2
level were analyzed at baseline and 90 days after the SKP practice. Enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was used to evaluate salivary HBD-2. McNemar's
Chi-square, Paired samples t-test, and one-way ANOVA were used to analyze the
results. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results: Following the SKP intervention, the clinical parameters such as PI and
GI improved significantly in all the groups (P < 0.001); however, Group III
showed a significant reduction as compared to the other groups. The mean baseline
salivary HBD-2 levels of Group I, Group II, and Group III were 91.78 ng/μl,
110.22 ng/μl, and 157.63 ng/μl which was further decreased to 95.22 ng/μl, 98.22 
ng/μl, and 132.88 ng/μl, respectively, following SKP intervention (P < 0.001).
However, Group III had a higher HBD-2 level at 90 th day as compared to other
groups.
Conclusion: There was an improvement in PI and GI with a decrease in salivary
HBD-2 in chronic periodontitis patients following SKP. Hence, SKP can be
considered as an adjunct to treatment modality in patients with periodontal
disease.


PMCID: PMC6134726
PMID: 30233652 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors of this manuscript declare that they 
have no conflicts of interest, real or perceived, financial or non-financial in
this article.

