
1. PLoS One. 2018 Sep 19;13(9):e0198541. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0198541.
eCollection 2018.

Pre-existing technological core and roots for the CRISPR breakthrough.

Magee CL(1)(2), Kleyn PW(3), Monks BM(4), Betz U(4), Basnet S(2)(5).

Author information: 
(1)MIT Institute for Data, Systems and Society (IDSS), Cambridge, Massachusetts, 
United States of America.
(2)SUTD-MIT International Design Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States 
of America.
(3)EMD Serono Research & Development Institute, Billerica, Massachusetts, United 
States of America.
(4)Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany.
(5)Raysoonga inc., Framingham, Massachusetts, United States of America.

This paper applies objective methods to explore the technological origins of the 
widely acclaimed CRISPR breakthrough in the technological domain of genome
engineering. Previously developed patent search techniques are first used to
recover a set of patents that well-represent the genome editing domain before
CRISPR. Main paths are then determined from the citation network associated with 
this patent set allowing identification of the three major knowledge
trajectories. The most significant of these trajectories for CRISPR involves the 
core of genome editing with less significant trajectories involving cloning and
endonuclease specific developments. The major patents on the core trajectory are 
consistent with qualitative expert knowledge of the topical area. A second set of
patents that we call the CRISPR roots are obtained by finding the patents
directly cited by the recent CRISPR patents along with patents cited by that set 
of patents. We find that the CRISPR roots contain 8 key patents from the genome
engineering main path associated with restriction endonucleases and the expected 
strong connection of CRISPR to prior genome editing technology such as Zn finger 
nucleases. Nonetheless, analysis of the full CRISPR roots shows that a very wide 
array of technological knowledge beyond genome engineering has contributed to
achieving the CRISPR breakthrough. Such breadth in origins is not surprising
since "spillover" is generally perceived as important and previous qualitative
studies of CRISPR have shown not only technological breadth in origins but
scientific breadth as well. In addition, we find that the estimated rate of
functional performance improvement of the CRISPR roots set is about 9% per year
compared to the genome engineering set (~4% per year). These estimates indicate
below average rates of improvement and may indicate that CRISPR (and perhaps yet 
undiscovered) genome engineering developments could evolve in effectiveness over 
an upcoming long rather than short time period.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0198541 
PMCID: PMC6145527
PMID: 30231020  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Merck KGaA gave a research grant to MIT with the 
lead author (CLM) as the PI of the grant. Patrick W. Kleyn, Brendan M. Monks,
Ulrich Betz are employed by Merck. No Merck interests affected the choice of what
and where to publish but the topic (CRISPR) was of interest to Merck and learning
what the MIT techniques showed in this case was also of interest to them. There
are no patents, products in development or marketed products to declare. This
does not alter our adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and
materials.

