
1. Int J Urol. 2018 Nov;25(11):966-972. doi: 10.1111/iju.13787. Epub 2018 Sep 25.

Occurrence and characterization of carbapenem-resistant Gram-negative bacilli: A 
collaborative study of antibiotic-resistant bacteria between Indonesia and Japan.

Kuntaman K(1)(2), Shigemura K(3)(4), Osawa K(5), Kitagawa K(6), Sato K(3), Yamada
N(3), Nishimoto K(3), Yamamichi F(5), Rahardjo D(2), Hadi U(1)(7), Mertaniasih
NM(1)(2), Kinoshita S(4), Fujisawa M(4), Shirakawa T(4)(6)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Airlangga University and Dr. 
Soetomo Hospital, Surabaya, Indonesia.
(2)Institute of Tropical Disease, Airlangga University, Surabaya, Indonesia.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of International Health, Kobe
University Graduate School of Health Sciences, Kobe, Japan.
(4)Department of Urology, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe,
Japan.
(5)Department of Biophysics, Kobe University Graduate School of Health Sciences, 
Kobe University Graduate School of Health Sciences, Kobe, Japan.
(6)Division of Translational Research for Biologics, Department of Internal
Related, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Airlangga University and
Dr. Soetomo Hospital, Surabaya, Indonesia.
(8)Division of Advanced Medical Science, Kobe University Graduate School of
Science, Technology and Innovation, Kobe, Japan.

Comment in
    Int J Urol. 2018 Nov;25(11):972-973.

OBJECTIVES: To explore the occurrence and characterization of
carbapenemase-producing pathogens among carbapenem-resistant Gram-negative
bacilli isolated from hospitalized patients with urinary tract infection in
Indonesia.
METHODS: This was a study promoted by the Japanese-Indonesian collaborative
research program in the Japan Initiative for Global Research Network on
Infectious Diseases. Bacterial pathogens were prospectively isolated from urine
specimens of hospitalized urinary tract infection patients at Dr. Soetomo
Hospital (Surabaya, Indonesia). All Gram-negative bacteria resistant to
third-generation cephalosporin or carbapenem were included in this study.
Carbapenemase genes were investigated for phenotype and genotype.
RESULTS: In total, 1082 Gram-negative bacilli were isolated, of which 116 strains
were resistant to imipenem or meropenem (carbapenem-resistant Gram-negative
bacilli), and 22 strains were carbapenemase-producing Gram-negative bacilli.
Carbapenemase-producing Gram-negative bacilli consisted of Acinetobacter
baumannii (n = 4), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (n = 4), Klebsiella pneumoniae (n = 5),
Providencia rettgeri (n = 4) and five others. The carbapenemase-producing
Gram-negative bacilli included NDM-1 (n = 18, 81.8%, in Enterobacteriaceae and
Acinetobacter spp.) and IMP-7 (n = 4, 18.2%, all in P. aeruginosa). Among
carbapenem-resistant Gram-negative bacilli, all four P. aeruginosa were sensitive
to colistin, and all six Acinetobacter spp. were sensitive to minocycline,
colistin and tigecycline. Of those patients harboring carbapenemase-producing
Gram-negative bacilli, 12 (54.5%) were seriously ill at the time of admission,
with longer hospital stays and three deaths (13.6% mortality rate).
CONCLUSIONS: Urinary tract infection-causing carbapenem-resistant Gram-negative
bacilli are widely disseminated in Indonesia. The NDM-1 phenotype seems to be
dominant, and it can be treated with colistin and tigecycline in most cases. Most
patients harboring carbapenemase-producing Gram-negative bacilli are seriously
ill, have a bad prognosis, with a longer hospital stay and a significant
mortality rate.

© 2018 The Japanese Urological Association.

DOI: 10.1111/iju.13787 
PMID: 30253445  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

