
1. World Neurosurg. 2018 Dec;120:442-447. doi: 10.1016/j.wneu.2018.09.082. Epub 2018
Sep 22.

Extensive Leptomeningeal Intracranial and Spinal Metastases in a Patient with a
Supratentorial Glioblastoma Multiforme, IDH-Wildtype.

Schwartz C(1), Romagna A(2), Machegger L(3), Weiss L(4), Huemer F(4), Fastner
G(5), Kleindienst W(6), Weis S(7), Greil R(8), Winkler PA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital Salzburg, Paracelsus Medical
University, Salzburg, Austria. Electronic address: c.schwartz@salk.at.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital Salzburg, Paracelsus Medical
University, Salzburg, Austria.
(3)Division of Neuroradiology, University Hospital Salzburg, Paracelsus Medical
University, Salzburg, Austria.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine III with Hematology, Medical Oncology,
Hemostaseology, Infectious Diseases and Rheumatology, Oncologic Center,
Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria; Salzburg Cancer Research
Institute-Laboratory for Immunological and Molecular Cancer Research, Paracelsus 
Medical University, Salzburg, Austria.
(5)Department of Radiotherapy and Radio-Oncology, University Hospital Salzburg,
Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria.
(6)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Salzburg, Paracelsus Medical
University, Salzburg, Austria.
(7)Division of Neuropathology, Institute of Pathology and Microbiology, Neuromed 
Campus, Kepler University Hospital, Linz, Austria.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine III with Hematology, Medical Oncology,
Hemostaseology, Infectious Diseases and Rheumatology, Oncologic Center,
Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria; Salzburg Cancer Research
Institute-Laboratory for Immunological and Molecular Cancer Research, Paracelsus 
Medical University, Salzburg, Austria; Cancer Cluster Salzburg, Salzburg,
Austria.

BACKGROUND: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is usually characterized by diffuse,
infiltrative growth and local tumor progression. Extensive leptomeningeal
metastases are rarely observed. It is unclear which GBMs are prone to this
specific growth pattern and progression, and standardized salvage treatment
protocols are unavailable.
CASE DESCRIPTION: In a 45-year-old man without focal neurologic deficit, a right 
temporal GBM, IDH-wildtype (biomarkers MGMT promoter methylation negative, Ki-67 
proliferation rate 70%) was diagnosed. Gross tumor resection followed by
concomitant and adjuvant radiotherapy and chemotherapy with temozolomide was
performed. Routine follow-up imaging 8 months later showed a right parietal
meningeal tumor. Resection confirmed a distant GBM, and next-generation
sequencing revealed high tumor mutational burden, high-frequency microsatellite
instability, and a pharmacologically targetable KIT mutation. Complete neuraxis
imaging revealed multiple contrast-enhancing tumors in the craniocervical
junction and levels C7, Th8-Th11, and S1. The craniocervical tumors and the
cervical spine from C1-C2 were irradiated as palliative care, and second-line
combined chemotherapy and antiangiogenic therapy with irinotecan and bevacizumab 
was initiated, which was later changed to an immune-checkpoint blockade with
pembrolizumab in combination with bevacizumab owing to tumor progression. Tumor
growth was slowed, but the patient eventually developed a progressive
paraparesis. Subsequent KIT-targeting tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy with
imatinib was administered for a short time. The patient died 13.8 months after
initial diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: High-risk genetic profiles for GBMs prone to develop extensive
leptomeningeal metastases need to be identified. Guidelines on preemptive,
complete neuraxis imaging in certain patients with GBM as well as treatment
guidelines need to be developed.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2018.09.082 
PMID: 30253992  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

