
1. Cell Death Dis. 2018 Sep 24;9(10):990. doi: 10.1038/s41419-018-0997-8.

Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase inhibition induces p-mTOR-independent autophagy
and promotes multilineage differentiation in embryonal carcinoma stem-like cells.

Sharif T(1), Martell E(1), Dai C(2), Ghassemi-Rad MS(2), Lee K(3), Singh
SK(4)(5)(6), Weaver ICG(1)(3)(7)(8), Gujar S(9)(10)(11)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, 
Canada.
(4)McMaster Stem Cell and Cancer Research Institute, McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Health
Sciences, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(6)Department of Surgery, Faculty of Health Sciences, McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.
(8)Brain Repair Centre, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.
(9)Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.
shashi.gujar@dal.ca.
(10)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS,
Canada. shashi.gujar@dal.ca.
(11)Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.
shashi.gujar@dal.ca.
(12)Centre for Innovative and Collaborative Health Systems Research, IWK Health
Centre, Halifax, NS, B3K 6R8, Canada. shashi.gujar@dal.ca.

Cancer cells with a less differentiated stem-like phenotype are more resistant to
therapeutic manipulations than their differentiated counterparts, and are
considered as one of the main causes of cancer persistence and relapse. As such, 
induction of differentiation in cancer stem-like cells (CSLCs) has emerged as an 
alternative strategy to enhance the efficacy of anticancer therapies. CSLCs are
metabolically distinct from differentiated cells, and any aberration from the
intrinsic metabolic state can induce differentiation of CSLCs. Therefore,
metabolism-related molecular targets, with a capacity to promote differentiation 
within CSLCs, are of therapeutic importance. Here, we demonstrate that
phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH), an essential enzyme catalyzing the
synthesis of amino acid serine, is important for maintaining the poorly
differentiated, stem-like state of CSLCs. Our data shows that PHGDH deficiency
impairs the tumorsphere formation capacity in embryonal carcinoma stem-like cells
(ECSLCs), breast cancer stem-like cells (BCSLCs) and patient-derived brain
tumor-initiating cells (BTICs), which is accompanied by the reduced expression of
characteristic stemness-promoting factors, such as Oct4, Nanog, Sox-2, and Bmi-1.
Mechanistically, PHGDH deficiency in ECSLCs promotes differentiation to various
lineages via degradation of Oct4 and by increasing the stability of
differentiation marker β3-tubulin. Furthermore, PHGDH inhibition promotes p-mTOR 
independent but Beclin-1-dependent autophagy, independent of apoptosis. When
studied in combination, the inhibition of both PHGDH and p-mTOR in ECSLCs causes 
further augmentation of autophagy, and additionally promotes apoptosis,
demonstrating the clinical applicability of PHGDH-based manipulations in cancer
therapies. Recapitulating these in vitro findings in CSLC models, the
intratumoral PHGDH expression in patient-derived tumors is positively correlated 
with the mRNA levels of stemness factors, especially Oct4, and cancer patients
co-expressing high levels of PHGDH and Oct4 display significantly lower survival 
than those with low PHGDH/Oct4 co-expression. Altogether, this study identifies a
clinically-relevant role for PHGDH in the regulation of stemness-differentiation 
axis within CSLCs.

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-018-0997-8 
PMCID: PMC6155240
PMID: 30250195  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

