
1. Front Immunol. 2018 Sep 11;9:2082. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02082. eCollection
2018.

Complex Network of NKT Cell Subsets Controls Immune Homeostasis in Liver and Gut.

Marrero I(1)(2), Maricic I(1)(2), Feldstein AE(3), Loomba R(2), Schnabl B(2),
Rivera-Nieves J(2), Eckmann L(2), Kumar V(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immune Regulation, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA, United States.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, United States.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA,
United States.

The liver-gut immune axis is enriched in several innate immune cells, including
innate-like unconventional and adaptive T cells that are thought to be involved
in the maintenance of tolerance to gut-derived antigens and, at the same time,
enable effective immunity against microbes. Two subsets of lipid-reactive
CD1d-restricted natural killer T (NKT) cells, invariant NKT (iNKT) and type II
NKT cells present in both mice and humans. NKT cells play an important role in
regulation of inflammation in the liver and gut due to their innate-like
properties of rapid secretion of a myriad of pro-inflammatory and
anti-inflammatory cytokines and their ability to influence other innate cells as 
well as adaptive T and B cells. Notably, a bi-directional interactive network
between NKT cells and gut commensal microbiota plays a crucial role in this
process. Here, we briefly review recent studies related to the cross-regulation
of both NKT cell subsets and how their interactions with other immune cells and
parenchymal cells, including hepatocytes and enterocytes, control inflammatory
diseases in the liver, such as alcoholic and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, as
well as inflammation in the gut. Overwhelming experimental data suggest that
while iNKT cells are pathogenic, type II NKT cells are protective in the liver.
Since CD1d-dependent pathways are highly conserved from mice to humans, a
detailed cellular and molecular understanding of these immune regulatory pathways
will have major implications for the development of novel therapeutics against
inflammatory diseases of liver and gut.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02082 
PMCID: PMC6141878
PMID: 30254647  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

