
1. J Infect Dis. 2019 Jan 29;219(4):648-659. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiy541.

Thrombocytopenia Impairs Host Defense Against Burkholderia pseudomallei
(Melioidosis).

Birnie E(1), Claushuis TAM(1), Koh GCKW(2), Limmathurotsakul D(3)(4)(5), Day
NPJ(4)(5), Roelofs JJTH(6), Ware J(7), Hou B(8), de Vos AF(1), van der Poll
T(1)(9), van 't Veer C(1), Wiersinga WJ(1)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Amsterdam University Medical
Center (UMC), University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(3)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Department of Tropical Hygiene, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(5)Center for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, University of Oxford, United
Kingdom.
(6)Department of Pathology, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(7)University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock.
(8)Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity, Institute of Biophysics, Beijing,
China.
(9)Division of Infectious Diseases, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam UMC,
University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Background: Infection with the gram-negative bacillus Burkholderia pseudomallei
(melioidosis) is an important cause of pneumosepsis in Southeast Asia and has a
mortality of up to 40%. We aimed to assess the role of platelets in the host
response against B. pseudomallei infection.
Methods: Association between platelet counts and mortality was determined in 1160
patients with culture-proven melioidosis. Mice treated with (low- or high-dose)
platelet-depleting antibody were inoculated intranasally with B. pseudomallei and
killed. Additional studies using functional glycoprotein Ibα-deficient mice were 
conducted.
Results: Thrombocytopenia was present in 31% of patients at admission and
predicted mortality in melioidosis patients even after adjustment for
confounders. In our murine-melioidosis model, platelet counts decreased, and mice
treated with a platelet-depleting antibody showed enhanced mortality and higher
bacterial loads compared to mice with normal platelet counts. Low platelet counts
had a modest impact on early-pulmonary neutrophil influx. Reminiscent of their
role in hemostasis, platelet depletion impaired vascular integrity, resulting in 
early lung bleeding. Glycoprotein Ibα-deficient mice had reduced platelet counts 
during B. pseudomallei infection together with an impaired local host defense in 
the lung.
Conclusions: Thrombocytopenia predicts mortality in melioidosis patients and,
during experimental melioidosis, platelets play a protective role in both innate 
immunity and vascular integrity.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiy541 
PMCID: PMC6350952
PMID: 30312422  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

