
1. Pharmacol Rep. 2018 Dec;70(6):1146-1149. doi: 10.1016/j.pharep.2018.06.005. Epub 
2018 Jun 20.

Changes in DNA integrity and gene expression in ovarian follicular cells of
lipopolysaccharide-treated female mice.

Shepel E(1), Grushka N(2), Makogon N(3), Sribna V(4), Pavlovych S(5), Yanchii
R(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunophysiology, Bogomoletz Institute of Physiology, NAS of
Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine. Electronic address: elena-shepel@ukr.net.
(2)Department of Immunophysiology, Bogomoletz Institute of Physiology, NAS of
Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine. Electronic address: grunay@i.ua.
(3)Department of Immunophysiology, Bogomoletz Institute of Physiology, NAS of
Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine. Electronic address: nataliya.v.makogon@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Immunophysiology, Bogomoletz Institute of Physiology, NAS of
Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine. Electronic address: valia-z@ukr.net.
(5)Department of Immunophysiology, Bogomoletz Institute of Physiology, NAS of
Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine. Electronic address: spavl@biph.kiev.ua.
(6)Department of Immunophysiology, Bogomoletz Institute of Physiology, NAS of
Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine. Electronic address: tas@biph.kiev.ua.

BACKGROUND: Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), the endotoxin of gram-negative bacteria,
can impair female reproductive function. However, there is a little information
about genotoxic stress in ovarian follicular cells as well as about the changes
in oocyte developmental potential under endotoxemia. So the aim of our study was 
to investigate in vitro oocyte maturation, the DNA damage and expression of some 
developmental competence-related genes in follicular cells of mice treated with
LPS.
METHODS: LPS (3mg/kg) was intraperitoneally injected into the mice for 24h, and
in vitro maturation of mouse oocyte was determined. The expression levels of
genes in cumulus cells were detected by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction. DNA damage in granulosa cells was assessed by the alkaline comet assay.
RESULTS: LPS injection caused an impairment of oocyte maturation in vitro: the
percentage of oocytes reaching metaphase I and metaphase II decreased markedly
compared to vehicle control mice. At the same time we observed strong DNA damage 
in granulosa cells of LPS-treated animals. The endotoxemia resulted in
significantly reduced mRNA expression levels for hyaluronan synthase 2 (HAS2),
cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2) and Gremlin-1 (GREM1) genes compared with control.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results obtained in a mouse model of endotoxin-induced female
reproductive dysfunction suggest that LPS may affect oocyte quality through the
induction of DNA damage and decreasing the cumulus expression of genes associated
with cumulus expansion and oocyte maturation, such as HAS2, COX2 and GREM1.

Copyright © 2018 Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy of Sciences. Published
by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pharep.2018.06.005 
PMID: 30317130  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

