
1. Acta Trop. 2019 Jan;189:124-128. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2018.10.003. Epub
2018 Oct 12.

Evaluation of a short term effect of praziquantel treatment in
opisthorchiasis-induced hepatobiliary inflammation by urinary 8-oxodG.

Wangboon C(1), Worasith C(2), Thanan R(3), Eamudomkarn C(2), Techasen A(4),
Sithithaworn J(5), Loilome W(6), Chamadol N(7), Pinlaor S(2), Jumnainsong A(8),
Yongvanit P(9), Khuntikeo N(10), Bethony JM(11), Sithithaworn P(12).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Science Program, Faculty of Graduate School, Khon Kaen University, 
Khon Kaen, Thailand.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon
Kaen, Thailand.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon
Kaen, Thailand.
(4)Faculty of Associated Medical Science, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen,
Thailand; Cholangiocarcinoma Screening and Care Program (CASCAP), Khon Kaen
University, Khon Kaen, Thailand.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, Mahasarakham University, Mahasarakham, Thailand.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon
Kaen, Thailand; Cholangiocarcinoma Screening and Care Program (CASCAP), Khon Kaen
University, Khon Kaen, Thailand.
(7)Cholangiocarcinoma Screening and Care Program (CASCAP), Khon Kaen University, 
Khon Kaen, Thailand; Department of Radiology, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen
University, Khon Kaen, Thailand.
(8)Faculty of Associated Medical Science, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen,
Thailand.
(9)Cholangiocarcinoma Screening and Care Program (CASCAP), Khon Kaen University, 
Khon Kaen, Thailand.
(10)Cholangiocarcinoma Screening and Care Program (CASCAP), Khon Kaen University,
Khon Kaen, Thailand; Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen
University, Khon Kaen, Thailand.
(11)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Tropical Medicine, George
Washington University, Washington, DC, USA.
(12)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon
Kaen, Thailand; Cholangiocarcinoma Screening and Care Program (CASCAP), Khon Kaen
University, Khon Kaen, Thailand. Electronic address: paibsit@gmail.com.

Inflammation of the hepatobiliary system in chronic opisthorchiasis is associated
with an elevated level of urinary 8-oxo-7,8 dihydro-2'deoxyguanosine (8-oxodG)
during active as well as past exposure to Opisthorchis viverrini infection. In
this study, we evaluated the short-term effect of praziquantel treatment on
hepatobiliary disease (HBD) using urinary 8-oxodG as an inflammatory marker in a 
cohort of residents in endemic areas of opisthorchiasis in Khon Kaen, Thailand.
The HBD status in terms of periductal fibrosis (PDF) was determined by abdominal 
ultrasonography and O. viverrini infection was monitored at baseline and 2-4
weeks after curative treatment by praziquantel. Analysis of O. viverrini-infected
participants who were PDF-ve revealed that there was a significant reduction of
urinary 8-oxodG after treatment compared with the baseline levels (p <  0.001).
By contrast, in PDF+ve individuals, the levels of urinary 8-oxodG were similar
between baseline and those post-treatment. Although confirmation by using a
larger sample size is needed, the positive association between HBD and urinary
8-oxodG level after worm clearance suggests that chronic hepatobiliary
inflammation is neither affected nor interrupted by short-term praziquantel
treatment. Individuals with persistent PDF at pre- and post-treatment who have a 
high risk of cholangiocarcinoma, could be identified within 2-4 weeks after
parasite removal by drug treatment. Thus, urinary 8-oxodG is a useful biomarker
for predicting persistent PDF in individuals with a recent drug treatment history
who require further clinical investigation, management and treatment.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2018.10.003 
PMID: 30321522  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

