
1. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2018 Sep-Oct;32(5):1061-1065.

IL-33 mediates allergy through mast cell activation: Potential inhibitory effect 
of certain cytokines.

Tettamanti L(1), Kritas SK(2), Gallenga CE(3), D'Ovidio C(4), Mastrangelo F(5),
Ronconi G(6), Caraffa Al(7), Toniato E(8), Conti P(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Morphological Science, University of Insubria,
Varese, Italy.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Macedonia, Greece.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Specialist Surgery, Section of
Ophthalmology, University of Ferrara, Italy.
(4)Section of Legal Medicine, Department of Medicine and Aging Sciences, "G.
d'Annunzio" University of Chieti-Pescara, Italy.
(5)Department of Medical Science and Biotechnology, University of Foggia, Foggia,
Italy.
(6)UOS Clinica dei Pazienti del Territorio, Policlinico Gemelli, Rome, Italy.
(7)School of Pharmacy, University of Camerino, Camerino, Italy.
(8)Department of Medical, Oral and Biotechnological Sciences, University “G.
d’Annunzio” of Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy.
(9)Immunology Division, Postgraduate Medical School, University of
Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy.

Mast cells (MCs) are hematopoietic immune cells commonly found in adjacent to
blood vessels in the lamina propria of airway mucosa. They are important in
allergic reactions since the cross-linking of their surface high affinity
receptor FceRI induces activation of these cells, and provokes the synthesis,
degranulation and release of inflammatory mediators including arachidonic
acid-derived eicosanoids (de novo synthesized), stored enzyme mediators, and
inflammatory TH1 and TH2 cytokines, and chemokines. Interleukin (IL)-33
participates in innate and adaptive immunity and inflammation and, acting on
CD34+ cells, causes MC differentiation and maturation. IL-33 is generated by
activated immune cells, and activates MCs which degranulate and release
pro-inflammatory mediators. IL-33 is very important in mediating allergic
inflammation and can be induced by IL-1 beta. It is also called "alarmin" and is 
an inflammatory cytokine IL-1 family member, expressed from mocytes and MCs,
which binds its receptor ST2, provoking its release after cell damage. MC-derived
allergic compounds in response to IL-33 is critical to innate type 2 immunity.
IL-37 is expressed by immune and non-immune cells after pro-inflammatory
stimulus. IL-37, an anti-inflammatory cytokine, binds IL-18Ra and suppresses
pro-inflammatory IL-1 beta released by activated immune cells such as
macrophages. Here, we hypothesize that pro-inflammatory IL-1 family member
cytokines released by activated MCs, mediating inflammatory allergic phenomenon, 
can be suppressed by IL-37.


PMID: 30334399  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

