
1. Biochem J. 2018 Nov 30;475(22):3651-3667. doi: 10.1042/BCJ20180548.

Two active site arginines are critical determinants of substrate binding and
catalysis in MenD: a thiamine-dependent enzyme in menaquinone biosynthesis.

Qin M(1), Song H(1), Dai X(1), Chen Y(1), Guo Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(2)Department of Chemistry, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR, China chguo@ust.hk.

The bacterial enzyme MenD, or
2-succinyl-5-enolpyruvyl-6-hydroxy-3-cyclohexene-1-carboxylate (SEPHCHC)
synthase, catalyzes an essential Stetter reaction in menaquinone (vitamin K2)
biosynthesis via thiamine diphosphate (ThDP)-bound tetrahedral
post-decarboxylation intermediates. The detailed mechanism of this intermediate
chemistry, however, is still poorly understood, but of significant interest given
that menaquinone is an essential electron transporter in many pathogenic
bacteria. Here, we used site-directed mutagenesis, enzyme kinetic assays, and
protein crystallography to reveal an active-inactive intermediate equilibrium in 
MenD catalysis and its modulation by two conserved active site arginine residues.
We observed that these conserved residues play a key role in shifting the
equilibrium to the active intermediate by orienting the C2-succinyl group of the 
intermediates through strong ionic hydrogen bonding. We found that when this
interaction is moderately weakened by amino acid substitutions, the resulting
proteins are catalytically competent with the C2-succinyl group taking either the
active or the inactive orientation in the post-decarboxylation intermediate. When
this hydrogen-bonding interaction was strongly weakened, the succinyl group was
re-oriented by 180° relative to the native intermediate, resulting in the
reversal of the stereochemistry at the reaction center that disabled catalysis.
Interestingly, this inactive intermediate was formed with a distinct kinetic
behavior, likely as a result of a non-native mode of enzyme-substrate
interaction. The mechanistic insights gained from these findings improve our
understanding of the new ThDP-dependent catalysis. More importantly, the
non-native-binding site of the inactive MenD intermediate uncovered here provides
a new target for the development of antibiotics.

© 2018 The Author(s). Published by Portland Press Limited on behalf of the
Biochemical Society.

DOI: 10.1042/BCJ20180548 
PMID: 30341164  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

