
1. J Cell Physiol. 2019 Jun;234(6):9495-9503. doi: 10.1002/jcp.27637. Epub 2018 Oct 
26.

Combination therapy of sorafenib with mesenchymal stem cells as a novel cancer
treatment regimen in xenograft models of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Seyhoun I(1), Hajighasemlou S(1)(2), Muhammadnejad S(3), Ai J(1), Nikbakht M(4), 
Alizadeh AA(5), Hosseinzadeh F(1), Mirmoghtadaei M(6), Seyhoun SM(7), Verdi J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tissue Engineering & Applied Cell Sciences, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Food and Drug Control Laboratory (FDCL), Iran Ministry of Health and Medical
Education, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Cell-Based Therapies Research Center, Digestive Diseases Research Institute,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Hematology-Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation Research Center, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Tissue Engineering & Applied Cell Sciences, Shiraz University of Medical
Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(6)School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences (TUMS), Tehran,
Iran.
(7)Department of Microbiology, Qom Branch, Islamic Azad University, Qom, Iran.

AIM: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common liver malignancy and the
second leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the world. Sorafenib is the
first-line treatment of HCC. Although sorafenib has positive effects on the
survival of patients, novel therapeutic strategies are needed to extend survival 
and improve the efficacy of sorafenib. This study combines sorafenib with
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) as a new approach to enhance the efficacy of
sorafenib.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A subcutaneous xenograft model of HCC, established by human
HepG2 cell lines, was implanted into the flank of nude mice and was used to
evaluate tumor growth after treatment with sorafenib alone or in combination with
MSCs. The aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, blood urea
nitrogen, and creatinine levels were measured for safety assessment.
Histopathological studies were performed using hematoxylin and eosin staining,
and immunohistochemistry tests were performed to evaluate proliferation (Ki67)
and angiogenesis (CD34). The TUNEL assay was used to detect apoptosis and measure
the expression of major inflammatory cytokines (IL-1a, IL-10, and TNF-α) with
real-time polymerase chain reaction.
RESULT: Sorafenib, in combination with MSCs, strongly inhibited tumor growth in
the xenograft model. Furthermore, the combination therapy significantly inhibited
HCC cell proliferation, decreased tumor angiogenesis, and induced apoptosis and
maintained antitumor-associated anti-inflammatory effects of MSCs.
CONCLUSION: This combination therapy strategy could be used as a new therapeutic 
approach to the treatment of HCC that significantly improves upon the results
achieved using sorafenib as monotherapy.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.27637 
PMID: 30362607  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

