
1. Heart. 2019 Apr;105(7):559-565. doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2018-313667. Epub 2018 Oct 
26.

Predictors of electrocardiographic QT interval prolongation in men with HIV.

Wu KC(1), Zhang L(2), Haberlen SA(2), Ashikaga H(1), Brown TT(3), Budoff MJ(4),
D'Souza G(2), Kingsley LA(5), Palella FJ(6), Margolick JB(7), Martínez-Maza
O(8)(9), Soliman EZ(10)(11), Post WS(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of
Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(4)Los Angeles Biomedical Research Institute at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Los
Angeles, California, USA.
(5)Departments of Infectious Diseases and Microbiology and Epidemiology,
University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public Health, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(7)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(8)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Microbiology, Immunology & Molecular 
Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(9)Department of Epidemiology, UCLA Fielding School of Public Health, and UCLA
AIDS Institute, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(10)Division of Public Health Sciences, Department of Epidemiology and
Prevention, Epidemiological Cardiology Research Center (EPICARE), Winston-Salem, 
North Carolina, USA.
(11)Department of Medicine, Cardiology Section, Wake Forest School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA.

OBJECTIVE: HIV-infected (HIV+) individuals may be at increased risk for sudden
arrhythmic cardiac death. Some studies have reported an association between HIV
infection and prolongation of the electrocardiographic QT interval, a measure of 
ventricular repolarisation, which could potentiate ventricular arrhythmias. We
aimed to assess whether HIV+ men have longer QT intervals than HIV-uninfected
(HIV-) men and to determine factors associated with QT duration.
METHODS: We performed resting 12-lead ECGs in 774 HIV+ and 652 HIV- men in the
Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study (MACS). We used multivariable linear and logistic
regression analyses to assess associations between HIV serostatus and Framingham 
corrected QT interval (QTc), after accounting for potential confounders. We also 
determined associations among QTc interval and HIV-related factors in HIV+ men.
In a subgroup of participants, levels of serum markers of inflammation were also 
assessed.
RESULTS: After adjusting for demographics and risk factors, QTc was 4.0 ms longer
in HIV+ than HIV- men (p<0.001). Use of antiretroviral therapy (ART), specific
ART drug class use and other HIV-specific risk factors were not associated with
longer QTc. Among the subgroup with inflammatory biomarker measurements, higher
interleukin-6 (IL-6), intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) and B-cell
activating factor levels were independently associated with longer QTc and their 
inclusion partially attenuated the HIV effect.
CONCLUSIONS: HIV+ men had longer QTc, which was associated with higher levels of 
systemic inflammatory factors. This longer QTc may contribute to the increased
risk for sudden arrhythmic cardiac death in some HIV+ individuals.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. No commercial re-use. See rights and
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/heartjnl-2018-313667 
PMCID: PMC7366367
PMID: 30366934  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: FJP is on the speaker’s
bureau for Gilead Sciences, Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Merck & Co, Inc and
Bristol‐Myers Squibb. MJB has received grants from General Electric Company. TTB 
has served as a consultant to Gilead Sciences, Merck, Theratechnologies and
EMD-Serono.

