
1. J Cell Biochem. 2018 Oct 29. doi: 10.1002/jcb.27334. [Epub ahead of print]

Drug repositioning as an effective therapy for protease-activated receptor 2
inhibition.

Saqib U(1), Savai R(2), Liu D(3)(4), Banerjee S(5), Baig MS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Indore (IITI), Indore,
India.
(2)Department of Lung Development and Remodeling, Member of the German Center for
Lung Research (DZL), Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Bad
Nauheim, Germany.
(3)Center for Inflammation & Epigenetics, Houston Methodist Research Institute,
Houston, Texas.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Cornell Medical College,
Cornell University, New York.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, Orta Doğu Teknik Üniversitesi (ODTU/METU), 
Ankara, Turkey.
(6)Discipline of Biosciences and Biomedical Engineering (BSBE), Indian Institute 
of Technology Indore (IITI), Indore, India.

Proteinase-activated receptor 2 (PAR-2) is a G protein-coupled receptor activated
by both trypsin and a specific agonist peptide, SLIGKV-NH2. It has been linked to
various pathologies, including pain and inflammation. Several peptide and
peptidomimetic agonizts for PAR-2 have been developed exhibiting high potency and
efficacy. However, the number of PAR-2 antagonists is smaller. We screened the
Food and Drug Administration library of approved compounds to retrieve novel
antagonists for repositioning in the PAR-2 structure. The most efficacious
compound bicalutamide bound to the PAR-2 binding groove near the extracellular
domain as observed in the in silico studies. Further, it showed reduced Ca2+
release in trypsin activated cells in a dose-dependent manner. Hence,
bicalutamide is a novel and potent PAR-2 antagonist which could be
therapeutically useful in blocking multiple pathways diverging from PAR-2
signaling. Further, the novel scaffold of bicalutamide represents a new molecular
structure for PAR-2 antagonism and can serve as a basis for further drug
development.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.27334 
PMID: 30370939 

