
1. Environ Pollut. 2019 Jan;244:575-587. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2018.10.076. Epub
2018 Oct 18.

A critical review on the application of the National Sanitation Foundation Water 
Quality Index.

Noori R(1), Berndtsson R(2), Hosseinzadeh M(3), Adamowski JF(4), Abyaneh MR(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Environment, College of Engineering, University of Tehran, Tehran,
Iran. Electronic address: noor@ut.ac.ir.
(2)Department of Water Resources Engineering & Center for Middle Eastern Studies,
Lund University, Box 118, SE-221 00, Lund, Sweden.
(3)Environmental Science Research Center, Islamshahr Branch, Islamic Azad
University, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Department of Bioresource Engineering, Faculty of Agricultural and
Environmental Sciences, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada, H3A 0G4.

Many studies have employed the National Sanitation Foundation Water Quality Index
(NSFWQI) with non-original rather than originally defined parameters of the
model, particularly when incorporating fecal coliform (FC), total solids, and
total phosphates as inputs. For this reason, this study aimed to perform a
critical review on the application of the NSFWQI to explore the amount of change 
that can be expected when users employed non-original parameters (such as
orthophosphate and total dissolved solids/total suspended solids instead of total
phosphorous and total solids, respectively), or different units (FC based on the 
maximum probable number (FC-MPN) rather than the colony forming unit (FC-CPU)).
To demonstrate the influence of originally defined inputs on NSFWQI results,
various scenarios were investigated. These scenarios were generated using
different possible inputs to the NSFWQI, altering the FC, total solids, and total
phosphorous parameters obtained from the monitoring stations of the Sefidroud
River in Iran. Considerable differences were observed in the NSFWQI values when
using orthophosphate and total suspended solids, instead of the originally
defined data (i.e., total phosphorous and total solids), in the model (first
scenario). In this case, the number of stations with "good" water quality
increased from one to seven when compared with the first scenario results. In
addition, unlike the results of the first scenario, none of the stations were
classified as class IV (i.e., "bad" water quality status). However, the results
of the implemented scenarios presented a more favorable water quality status than
those obtained using the first scenario (except the second scenario which
included FC-MPN rather than FC-CFU). Using total dissolved solids instead of
total solids and FC-MPN rather than FC-CPU, resulted in fewer changes. In both
cases, the average of the NSFWQI values in the river classed all stations as
"medium" and "bad" water quality for the wet and dry seasons, respectively.
Proper application of NSFWQI is important to provide high quality results for
evaluation of water bodies, particularly when incorporating total solids and
total phosphorous as inputs.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envpol.2018.10.076 
PMID: 30384063  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

