
1. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2019 Mar;187:42-51. doi: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2018.10.021.
Epub 2018 Nov 3.

Airway infection with Nontypeable Haemophilus influenzae is more rapidly
eradicated in vitamin D deficient mice.

Serré J(1), Mathyssen C(1), Ajime TT(1), Korf H(2), Maes K(1), Heulens N(1),
Gysemans C(3), Mathieu C(3), Vanaudenaerde B(1), Janssens W(1), Gayan-Ramirez
G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Respiratory Diseases, Department of Chronic Diseases, Metabolism
and Ageing (CHROMETA), KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Laboratory of Hepatology, Department of Chronic Diseases, Metabolism and
Ageing (CHROMETA), KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Clinical and Experimental Endocrinology, Department of Chronic Diseases,
Metabolism and Ageing (CHROMETA), KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Laboratory of Respiratory Diseases, Department of Chronic Diseases, Metabolism
and Ageing (CHROMETA), KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address:
Ghislaine.Gayan-ramirez@kuleuven.be.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), which is characterized by an
excessive inflammatory response of the airways, is often complicated by
exacerbations. Vitamin D deficiency has been associated with an increased risk
for COPD and may predispose COPD patients to a higher exacerbation rate,
particularly during smoking. In the current study, we investigated the effect of 
vitamin D deficiency and cigarette smoke (CS)-exposure on lung inflammation and
bacterial clearance after an acute infection with Nontypeable Haemophilus
influenzae (NTHi). Vitamin D deficient or sufficient mice were exposed to
nose-only CS or ambient air for 6 weeks and oropharyngeally instilled with 106
NTHi. Residual viable NTHi were measured at different time points post-infection.
Mechanisms of bacterial clearance (e.g. phagocytosis, pattern recognition
receptors, antimicrobial peptides, surfactant proteins and mucin) and lung
remodeling (e.g. metalloproteinases, MMP's) were assessed. Although smoking
resulted in reduced phagocytosis capacity of macrophages and neutrophils,
bacterial clearance was similar to control mice. By contrast and independent of
smoking, bacterial clearance was significantly accelerated in vitamin D deficient
mice already from 24 h post-infection (p = 0.0087). This faster and complete
eradication was associated with a more rapid resolution of cytokines and
neutrophils 72 h post-infection and dominated by an upregulation of
cathelicidin-related antimicrobial peptide (CRAMP) mRNA during infection
(p = 0.026). However, vitamin D deficiency also resulted in more MMP12 protein in
broncho-alveolar lavage and a shift in mRNA expression of MMP12/TIMP1 (p = 0.038)
and MMP9/TIMP1 (p = 0.024) ratio towards more protease activity. Overall, vitamin
D deficient mice resolved NTHi infection faster with a faster resolution of local
lung inflammation, possibly through upregulation of CRAMP. This was associated
with a disruption of the protease/anti-protease balance, which may potentially
scale towards a higher extracellular matrix breakdown.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2018.10.021 
PMID: 30399417  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

