
1. Biochim Biophys Acta Biomembr. 2018 Nov;1860(11):2155-2165. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamem.2018.08.012. Epub 2018 Aug 23.

Biophysical characterization and antitumor activity of synthetic Pantinin
peptides from scorpion's venom.

Crusca E Jr(1), Basso LGM(2), Altei WF(3), Marchetto R(4).

Author information: 
(1)São Paulo State University (UNESP), Institute of Chemistry, Department of
Biochemistry and Technological Chemistry, Araraquara, SP, Brazil.
(2)Molecular Biophysics Laboratory, Physics Department, School of Philosophy,
Sciences and Letters at Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Av.
Bandeirantes, 3900, 14040-901 Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.
(3)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Department of Physiological 
Sciences, Federal University of São Carlos, São Carlos, SP, Brazil.
(4)São Paulo State University (UNESP), Institute of Chemistry, Department of
Biochemistry and Technological Chemistry, Araraquara, SP, Brazil. Electronic
address: marcheto@iq.unesp.br.

Antimicrobial peptides have been extensively described as bioactive agents,
mainly considering their selective toxicity towards bacteria but not to healthy
mammalian cells. In past years, this class of compounds has been classified as an
attractive and novel family of anticancer agents. Pantinin peptides isolated from
scorpion Pandinus imperator presented antimicrobial activity. In this study, we
have explored the in vitro antitumor activity of antimicrobial pantinin peptides 
against the tumor cell lines MDA-MB-231 (breast adenocarcinoma) and DU - 145
(prostate adenocarcinoma) and healthy fibroblasts HGF - 1. To further improve our
mechanistic understanding for this class of compounds, we have also performed a
biophysical characterization of these peptides in lipid model membranes. Cell
viability assays revealed that all peptides were more effective on tumor cells
when compared to fibroblasts, indicating selectivity towards cancer cells.
Furthermore, flow cytometry analysis revealed that all peptides induced apoptosis
in cancer cells in a different way from fibroblasts. Circular dichroism
spectroscopy showed that all peptides adopted an α-helical structure and an
evaluation of the binding constant indicates a higher affinity of the peptides to
negatively charged phospholipids. Additionally, permeabilization assays showed
that POPG and POPS anionic vesicles were more susceptible to peptide-induced
lysis than POPC:Chol and POPC:POPE vesicles. Moreover, we have observed that
increasing concentrations of cholesterol inhibits peptide binding process.
Therefore, our findings suggest that Pantinin peptides may have chemotherapeutic 
potential for cancer treatment.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2018.08.012 
PMID: 30409511  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

