
1. Cell Signal. 2019 Feb;54:122-129. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2018.11.010. Epub 2018
Nov 17.

Upregulated BMP-Smad signaling activity in the glucuronyl C5-epimerase knock out 
MEF cells.

Batool T(1), Fang J(2), Jansson V(1), Zhao H(3), Gallant C(3), Moustakas A(4), Li
JP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, The Biomedical Center,
University of Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, The Biomedical Center,
University of Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden; Glyconovo Technologies Co., Ltd.,
TianXiong Road, Shanghai International Medical Zone (SIMZ), Pudong New Area,
Shanghai 201318, China.
(3)Science for Life Laboratory Uppsala, The Biomedical Center, University of
Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden.
(4)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, The Biomedical Center,
University of Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden; Science for Life Laboratory Uppsala, The 
Biomedical Center, University of Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden.
(5)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, The Biomedical Center,
University of Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden; Science for Life Laboratory Uppsala, The 
Biomedical Center, University of Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden. Electronic address:
jin-ping.li@imbim.uu.se.

Glucuronyl C5-epimerase (Hsepi) catalyzes the conversion of glucuronic acid to
iduronic acid in the process of heparan sulfate biosynthesis. Targeted
interruption of the gene, Glce, in mice resulted in neonatal lethality with
varied defects in organ development. To understand the underlying molecular
mechanisms of the phenotypes, we used mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) as a
model to examine selected signaling pathways. Our earlier studies found reduced
activities of FGF-2, GDNF, but increased activity of sonic hedgehog in the mutant
cells. In this study, we focused on the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)
signaling pathway. Western blotting detected substantially elevated endogenous
Smad1/5/8 phosphorylation in the Hsepi mutant (KO) MEF cells, which is reverted
by re-expression of the enzyme in the KO cells. The mutant cells displayed an
enhanced proliferation and elevated alkaline phosphatase activitywhen cultured in
osteogenic medium. Analysis of the genes involved in the BMP signaling pathway
revealed upregulation of a number of BMP ligands, but reduced expression of
several Smads and BMP antagonist (Grem1) in the KO MEF cells. The high level of
Smad1/5/8 phosphorylation was also found in primary calvarial cells isolated from
the KO mice. The results suggest that Hsepi expression modulates BMP signaling
activity, which, at least partially, is associated with defected molecular
structure of heparan sulfate expressed in the cells.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2018.11.010 
PMID: 30458230  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

