
1. J Sci Food Agric. 2019 Apr;99(6):2966-2973. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.9510. Epub 2019 Jan
13.

Modified distribution in the polyphenolic profile of rosemary leaves induced by
plant inoculation with an arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus.

Seró R(1), Núñez N(1), Núñez O(1)(2)(3), Camprubí A(4), Grases JM(5), Saurina
J(1)(2), Moyano E(1), Calvet C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Analytical Chemistry, University of
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Research Institute in Food Nutrition and Food Safety, University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Serra Húnter Program, Generalitat de Catalunya, Rambla de Catalunya 19-21,
Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Sustainable Plant Protection Program, Institut de Recerca i Tecnologia
Agroalimentàries (IRTA), Cabrils (Barcelona), Spain.
(5)Laboratori Agroalimentari, Generalitat de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Rosemary forms an arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) symbiosis with a group 
of soilborne fungi belonging to the phylum Glomeromycota, which can modify the
plant metabolome responsible for the antioxidant capacity and other health
beneficial properties of rosemary.
RESULTS: The effect of inoculating rosemary plants with an AM fungus on their
growth via their polyphenolic fingerprinting was evaluated after analyzing leaf
extracts from non-inoculated and inoculated rosemary plants by ultra-high
performance liquid chromatography-high resolution mass spectrometry (UHPLC-HRMS).
Plant growth parameters indicated that mycorrhizal inoculation significantly
increased plant height and biomass. Chemical modifications in the plant
polyphenolic profile distribution were found after a principal components
analysis (PCA) loading plots study. Four compounds hosting strong antioxidant
properties - ferulic acid, asiatic acid, carnosol, and vanillin - were related to
mycorrhizal rosemary plants while caffeic and chlorogenic acids had a higher
influence on non-mycorrhizal plants.
CONCLUSION: Mycorrhization was found to stimulate growth to obtain a higher
biomass of plant leaves in a short time, avoiding chemical fertilization, while
analytical results demonstrate that there is an alteration in the distribution of
polyphenols in plants colonized by the symbiotic fungus, which can be related to 
an improvement in nutritional properties with future industrial significance. ©
2018 Society of Chemical Industry.

© 2018 Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/jsfa.9510 
PMID: 30478939  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

