
1. J Am Heart Assoc. 2018 Dec 4;7(23):e010239. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.118.010239.

Human Leukocyte Antigen Class I and II Knockout Human Induced Pluripotent Stem
Cell-Derived Cells: Universal Donor for Cell Therapy.

Mattapally S(1), Pawlik KM(2), Fast VG(1), Zumaquero E(3), Lund FE(3), Randall
TD(4), Townes TM(2), Zhang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Biomedical Engineering School of Medicine School of
Engineering The University of Alabama at Birmingham AL.
(2)2 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics School of Medicine The
University of Alabama at Birmingham AL.
(3)3 Department of Microbiology School of Medicine The University of Alabama at
Birmingham AL.
(4)4 Department of Medicine/Rheumatology School of Medicine The University of
Alabama at Birmingham AL.

Background We aim to generate a line of "universal donor" human induced
pluripotent stem cells (hi PSC s) that are nonimmunogenic and, therefore, can be 
used to derive cell products suitable for allogeneic transplantation. Methods and
Results hi PSC s carrying knockout mutations for 2 key components (β2
microglobulin and class II major histocompatibility class transactivator) of
major histocompatibility complexes I and II (ie, human leukocyte antigen [HLA] I/
II knockout hi PSC s) were generated using the Clustered Regularly Interspaced
Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR)/CRISPR associated protein 9 (Cas9)
gene-editing system and differentiated into cardiomyocytes. Pluripotency-gene
expression and telomerase activity in wild-type ( WT ) and HLAI / II knockout hi 
PSC s, cardiomyocyte marker expression in WT and HLAI / II knockout hi PSC
-derived cardiomyocytes, and assessments of electrophysiological properties (eg, 
conduction velocity, action-potential and calcium transient half-decay times, and
calcium transient increase times) in spheroid-fusions composed of WT and HLAI /
II knockout cardiomyocytes, were similar. However, the rates of T-cell activation
before (≈21%) and after (≈24%) exposure to HLAI / II knockout hi PSC -derived
cardiomyocytes were nearly indistinguishable and dramatically lower than after
exposure to WT hi PSC -derived cardiomyocytes (≈75%), and when WT and HLAI / II
knockout hi PSC -derived cardiomyocyte spheroids were cultured with human
peripheral blood mononuclear cells, the WT hi PSC -derived cardiomyocyte
spheroids were smaller and displayed contractile irregularities. Finally,
expression of HLA -E and HLA -F was inhibited in HLAI / II knockout cardiomyocyte
spheroids after coculture with human peripheral blood mononuclear cells, although
HLA -G was not inhibited; these results are consistent with the essential role of
class II major histocompatibility class transactivator in transcriptional
activation of the HLA -E and HLA-F genes, but not the HLA -G gene. Expression of 
HLA -G is known to inhibit natural killer cell recognition and killing of cells
that lack other HLAs. Conclusions HLAI / II knockout hi PSC s can be
differentiated into cardiomyocytes that induce little or no activity in human
immune cells and, consequently, are suitable for allogeneic transplantation.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.118.010239 
PMCID: PMC6405542
PMID: 30488760  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

