
1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2018 Nov 1;59(14):DES183-DES191. doi:
10.1167/iovs.17-23537.

Results of Detailed Investigations Into Stevens-Johnson Syndrome With Severe
Ocular Complications.

Ueta M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Frontier Medical Science and Technology for Ophthalmology, Kyoto
Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.

Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) are acute
inflammatory vesiculobullous reactions of the mucosa of the ocular surface, oral 
cavity, and genitals, and of the skin. Severe ocular complications (SOC) are
present in about half of SJS/TEN patients diagnosed by dermatologists. We review 
our group's findings on the genetic predisposition for and the etiology of
SJS/TEN with SOC. We suspected that abnormal innate mucosal immunity, resulting
in an anomalous response to commensal bacteria that usually do not elicit such a 
response, contributes to the ocular surface inflammation seen in SJS/TEN with
SOC. We found that cold medicines, including multi-ingredient cold medications
and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, were the main causative drugs
especially in patients with SJS/TEN with SOC. Cold medicine-related SJS/TEN
(CM-SJS/TEN) with SOC was strongly associated with HLA-A*02:06 in the Japanese
populations, and significantly associated with HLA-B*44:03 in the Japanese and in
Indian and Brazilian populations. Single nucleotide polymorphism association
analysis showed that the Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3), prostaglandin-E receptor 3 
(PTGER3), and IKZF1 gene were significantly associated with CM-SJS/TEN with SOC
and that they could regulate mucocutaneous inflammation including that of the
ocular surface. As we found several HLA-SNP sets with a high odds ratio, we
postulated that they may help to predict the possible development of SJS/TEN with
SOC. From our findings we suggest that besides microbial infection and cold
medicines, a combination of multiple gene polymorphisms and their interactions
contribute strongly to the onset of CM-SJS/TEN with SOC.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.17-23537 
PMID: 30481825  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

