
1. Front Immunol. 2018 Nov 20;9:2664. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02664. eCollection
2018.

Age and Sex-Associated Changes of Complement Activity and Complement Levels in a 
Healthy Caucasian Population.

Gaya da Costa M(1), Poppelaars F(1)(2), van Kooten C(3), Mollnes TE(4)(5)(6),
Tedesco F(7), Würzner R(8), Trouw LA(9)(10), Truedsson L(11), Daha MR(1)(3), Roos
A(12), Seelen MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Martini Hospital, Groningen,
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Nephrology, University of Leiden, Leiden University Medical
Center, Leiden, Netherlands.
(4)Department of Immunology, Oslo University Hospital and University of Oslo,
Oslo, Norway.
(5)Research Laboratory, Bodø Hospital, and K.G. Jebsen TREC, University of
Tromsø, Tromsø, Norway.
(6)Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, Trondheim, Norway.
(7)Immunorheumatology Research Laboratory, Istituto Auxologico Italiano, IRCCS,
Milan, Italy.
(8)Department of Hygiene, Microbiology and Public Health, Medical University of
Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(9)Department of Rheumatology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
Netherlands.
(10)Department of Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands.
(11)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Section of Microbiology, Immunology and
Glycobiology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(12)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, St. Antonius Hospital,
Nieuwegein, Netherlands.

Introduction: The complement system is essential for an adequate immune response.
Much attention has been given to the role of complement in disease. However, to
better understand complement in pathology, it is crucial to first analyze this
system under different physiological conditions. The aim of the present study was
therefore to investigate the inter-individual variation in complement activity
and the influences of age and sex. Methods: Complement levels and functional
activity were determined in 120 healthy volunteers, 60 women, 60 men, age range
20-69 year. Serum functional activity of the classical pathway (CP), lectin
pathway activated by mannan (MBL-LP) and alternative pathway (AP) was measured in
sera, using deposition of C5b-9 as readout. In addition, levels of C1q, MBL,
MASP-1, MASP-2, ficolin-2, ficolin-3, C2, C4, C3, C5, C6, C7, C8, C9, factor B,
factor D, properdin, C1-inhibitor and C4b-binding protein, were determined. Age- 
and sex-related differences were evaluated. Results: Significantly lower AP
activity was found in females compared to males. Further analysis of the AP
revealed lower C3 and properdin levels in females, while factor D concentrations 
were higher. MBL-LP activity was not influenced by sex, but MBL and ficolin-3
levels were significantly lower in females compared to males. There were no
significant differences in CP activity or CP components between females and
males, nevertheless females had significantly lower levels of the terminal
components. The CP and AP activity was significantly higher in the elderly, in
contrast to MBL-LP activity. Moreover, C1-inhibitor, C5, C8, and C9 increased
with age in contrast to a decrease of factor D and C3 levels. In-depth analysis
of the functional activity assays revealed that MBL-LP activity was predominantly
dependent on MBL and MASP-2 concentration, whereas CP activity relied on C2,
C1-inhibitor and C5 levels. AP activity was strongly and directly associated with
levels of C3, factor B and C5. Conclusion: This study demonstrated significant
sex and age-related differences in complement levels and functionality in the
healthy population. Therefore, age and sex analysis should be taken into
consideration when discussing complement-related pathologies and subsequent
complement-targeted therapies.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02664 
PMCID: PMC6255829
PMID: 30515158  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

