
1. Stem Cells. 2019 Mar;37(3):345-356. doi: 10.1002/stem.2956. Epub 2018 Dec 24.

Paracrine Factors Released by Osteoblasts Provide Strong Platelet Engraftment
Properties.

Abu-Khader A(1)(2), Law KW(1), Jahan S(1)(3), Manesia JK(1), Pasha R(1), Hovey
O(1)(3), Pineault N(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Blood Services, Centre for Innovation, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Cell Therapy and Applied Genomics, King Hussein Cancer Center,
Amman, Jordan.
(3)Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology Department, University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, Canada.

Ex vivo expansion of hematopoietic stem cell (HSCs) and progenitors may one day
overcome the slow platelet engraftment kinetics associated with umbilical cord
blood transplantation. Serum-free medium conditioned with osteoblasts (i.e.,
osteoblast-conditioned medium [OCM]) derived from mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC)
was previously shown to increase cell growth and raise the levels of human
platelets in mice transplanted with OCM-expanded progenitors. Herein, we
characterized the cellular and molecular mechanisms responsible for these
osteoblast-derived properties. Limiting dilution transplantation assays revealed 
that osteoblasts secrete soluble factors that synergize with exogenously added
cytokines to promote the production of progenitors with short-term platelet
engraftment activities, and to a lesser extent with long-term platelet
engraftment activities. OCM also modulated the expression repertoire of
cell-surface receptors implicated in the trafficking of HSC and progenitors to
the bone marrow. Furthermore, OCM contains growth factors with prosurvival and
proliferation activities that synergized with stem cell factor. Insulin-like
growth factor (IGF)-2 was found to be present at higher levels in OCM than in
control medium conditioned with MSC. Inhibition of the IGF-1 receptor, which
conveys IGF-2' intracellular signaling, largely abolished the growth-promoting
activity of OCM on immature CD34+ subsets and progenitors in OCM cultures.
Finally, IGF-1R effects appear to be mediated in part by the coactivator
β-catenin. In summary, these results provide new insights into the paracrine
regulatory activities of osteoblasts on HSC, and how these can be used to
modulate the engraftment properties of human HSC and progenitors expanded in
culture. Stem Cells 2019;37:345-356.

© AlphaMed Press 2018.

DOI: 10.1002/stem.2956 
PMID: 30520180  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

