
1. Syst Appl Microbiol. 2019 Jan;42(1):30-40. doi: 10.1016/j.syapm.2018.11.001. Epub
2018 Nov 15.

Recovering microbial genomes from metagenomes in hypersaline environments: The
Good, the Bad and the Ugly.

Ramos-Barbero MD(1), Martin-Cuadrado AB(1), Viver T(2), Santos F(1),
Martinez-Garcia M(1), Antón J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Genetics and Microbiology, University of Alicante,
Alicante, Spain.
(2)Department of Animal and Microbial Biodiversity, Marine Microbiology Group,
Mediterranean Institute for Advanced Studies (IMEDEA, CSIC-UIB), Esporles, Spain.
(3)Department of Physiology, Genetics and Microbiology, University of Alicante,
Alicante, Spain; Multidisciplinary Institute of Environmental Studies Ramon
Margalef, University of Alicante, Alicante, Spain. Electronic address:
anton@ua.es.

Erratum in
    Syst Appl Microbiol. 2020 Jul;43(4):126100.

Current metagenomic tools allow the recovery of microbial genomes directly from
the environment. This can be accomplished by binning metagenomic contigs
according to their coverage and tetranucleotide frequency, followed by an
estimation of the bin quality. The public availability of bioinformatics tools,
together with the decreasing cost of next generation sequencing, are
democratizing this powerful approach that is spreading from specialized research 
groups to the general public. Using metagenomes from hypersaline environments, as
well as mock metagenomes composed of Archaea and Bacteria frequently found in
these systems, we have analyzed the advantages and difficulties of the binning
process in these extreme environments to tackle microbial population diversity.
These extreme systems harbor relatively low species diversity but high
intraspecific diversity, which can compromise metagenome assembly and therefore
the whole binning process. The main goal is to compare the output of the binning 
process with what is previously known from the analyzed samples, based on years
of study using different approaches. Several scenarios have been analyzed in
detail: (i) a good quality bin from a species highly abundant in the environment;
(ii) an intermediate quality bin with incongruences that can be solved by further
analyses and manual curation, and (iii) a low-quality bin to investigate the
failure to recover a very abundant microbial genome as well as some possible
solutions. The latter can be considered the "great metagenomics anomaly" and is
mainly due to assembly problems derived from the microdiversity of naturally
co-existing populations in nature.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.syapm.2018.11.001 
PMID: 30528276  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

