
1. J Prosthodont. 2019 Feb;28(2):202-208. doi: 10.1111/jopr.13007. Epub 2019 Jan 6.

Differential Mucosal Gene Expression Patterns in Candida-Associated, Chronic Oral
Denture Stomatitis.

Offenbacher S(1), Barros SP(1), Bencharit S(2), Yu N(1), Preisser J(3), Moss
K(1), Loewy ZG(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)University of North Carolina School of Dentistry, North Carolina Oral Health
Institute Center for Oral and Systemic Diseases and Department of Periodontology,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC.
(2)Department of General Practice, Virginia Commonwealth University School of
Dentistry, Richmond, VA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Sciences, Touro College of
Pharmacy, New York, NY.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, New York Medical College, Valhalla,
NY.

PURPOSE: Denture stomatitis is a common condition manifested by inflammation of
the oral mucous membrane beneath a denture. The objective of this study was to
compare the transcriptome of human palatal mucosa with chronic oral
stomatitis-associated Candida albicans infection to that of healthy oral mucosa.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Oral palatal biopsies were obtained from 17 healthy and 15
C. albicans-infected stomatitis subjects for whole transcriptome analyses. The
presence of C. albicans was confirmed by cytology and cultivable methods. The
clinical severity of the stomatitis was evaluated by the Newton Classification
(Class II or III). For transcriptome analyses a false discovery rate (FDR) of
<0.05 was used, and the effects of age, race, and gender were evaluated by
principle component analysis (PCA). Specific differentially expressed genes
identified by mRNA array data were confirmed by measurements of salivary protein 
expression using multiplex analyses.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis of mRNA expression indicated that in C. albicans
stomatitis there were 3034 genes-in-play that were differentially expressed and
met the FDR < 0.05 criteria. Two hundred thirty five (235) genes were
up-regulated >2-fold, and 71 genes were down-regulated >2-fold. Five of the 6
most significant gene ontology pathways involve inflammation and activation of
the immune response with CD28 and CTLA signaling of T cells. There was strong
up-regulation of TLR2, CD14, MYD88, IKKA, and NFKB as the dominant toll-like
receptor-signaling pathway. The expression of several extracellularly expressed
inflammatory protein genes was up-regulated in candidiasis, and 2 were confirmed 
as up-regulated within the saliva using protein multiplexing analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: Neutrophil recruitment and activation, epithelial suppression, and
T-cell activation appear as major pathways in chronic oral candidiasis. Tissue
up-regulation of TLR2 pathways, as well as potential C. albicans binding
proteins, was observed, whereas keratin and adhesion molecule synthesis were
down-regulated. Several candidate biomarkers to potentially identify the presence
of oral candidiasis were differentially expressed in tissues and saliva.

© 2018 by the American College of Prosthodontists.

DOI: 10.1111/jopr.13007 
PMID: 30536831  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

