
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2019 Feb 26;63(3). pii: e01924-18. doi:
10.1128/AAC.01924-18. Print 2019 Mar.

Spreading Patterns of NDM-Producing Enterobacteriaceae in Clinical and
Environmental Settings in Yangon, Myanmar.

Sugawara Y(1), Akeda Y(2)(3), Hagiya H(3), Sakamoto N(2), Takeuchi D(2),
Shanmugakani RK(3), Motooka D(4), Nishi I(5), Zin KN(6), Aye MM(7), Myint T(7),
Tomono K(3), Hamada S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Japan-Thailand Research Collaboration Center on Emerging and Re-emerging
Infections, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Suita,
Japan y1yo2yo3@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp.
(2)Japan-Thailand Research Collaboration Center on Emerging and Re-emerging
Infections, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Suita,
Japan.
(3)Division of Infection Control and Prevention, Osaka University Hospital,
Suita, Japan.
(4)Department of Infection Metagenomics, Research Institute for Microbial
Diseases, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.
(5)Laboratory for Clinical Investigation, Osaka University Hospital, Suita,
Japan.
(6)Clinical Laboratory Department, Yangon General Hospital, Yangon, Myanmar.
(7)Bacteriology Research Division, Department of Medical Research, Yangon,
Myanmar.

The spread of carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae (CPE), contributing to
widespread carbapenem resistance, has become a global concern. However, the
specific dissemination patterns of carbapenemase genes have not been intensively 
investigated in developing countries, including Myanmar, where NDM-type
carbapenemases are spreading in clinical settings. In the present study, we
phenotypically and genetically characterized 91 CPE isolates obtained from
clinical (n = 77) and environmental (n = 14) samples in Yangon, Myanmar. We
determined the dissemination of plasmids harboring genes encoding NDM-1 and its
variants using whole-genome sequencing and plasmid analysis. IncFII plasmids
harboring bla NDM-5 and IncX3 plasmids harboring bla NDM-4 or bla NDM-7 were the 
most prevalent plasmid types identified among the isolates. The IncFII plasmids
were predominantly carried by clinical isolates of Escherichia coli, and their
clonal expansion was observed within the same ward of a hospital. In contrast,
the IncX3 plasmids were found in phylogenetically divergent isolates from
clinical and environmental samples classified into nine species, suggesting
widespread dissemination of plasmids via horizontal transfer. Half of the
environmental isolates were found to possess IncX3 plasmids, and this type of
plasmid was confirmed to transfer more effectively to recipient organisms at a
relatively low temperature (25°C) compared to the IncFII plasmid. Moreover,
various other plasmid types were identified harboring bla NDM-1, including
IncFIB, IncFII, IncL/M, and IncA/C2, among clinical isolates of Klebsiella
pneumoniae or Enterobacter cloacae complex. Overall, our results highlight three 
distinct patterns of the dissemination of bla NDM-harboring plasmids among CPE
isolates in Myanmar, contributing to a better understanding of their molecular
epidemiology and dissemination in a setting of endemicity.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01924-18 
PMCID: PMC6395922
PMID: 30530602  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

