
1. PeerJ. 2018 Dec 3;6:e5984. doi: 10.7717/peerj.5984. eCollection 2018.

Characterization of bacterioplankton communities and quantification of organic
carbon pools off the Galapagos Archipelago under contrasting environmental
conditions.

Guevara Campoverde NC(#)(1)(2), Hassenrück C(#)(2), Buttigieg PL(3), Gärdes A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Galapagos Science Center, Colegio de Ciencias Biológicas y Ambientales,
Universidad San Francisco de Quito, Quito, Ecuador.
(2)Tropical Marine Microbiology, Department of Biogeochemistry and Geology,
Leibniz-Centre for Tropical Marine Reseach, Bremen, Germany.
(3)HGF-MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Alfred-Wegener-Institut,
Helmholtz-Zentrum für Polar- und Meeresforschung, Bremerhaven, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

Bacteria play a crucial role in the marine carbon cycle, contributing to the
production and degradation of organic carbon. Here, we investigated organic
carbon pools, aggregate formation, and bacterioplankton communities in three
contrasting oceanographic settings in the Galapagos Archipelago. We studied a
submarine CO2 vent at Roca Redonda (RoR), an upwelling site at Bolivar Channel
(BoC) subjected to a weak El Niño event at the time of sampling in October 2014, 
as well as a site without volcanic or upwelling influence at Cowley Islet (CoI). 
We recorded physico-chemical parameters, and quantified particulate and dissolved
organic carbon, transparent exopolymeric particles, and the potential of the
water to form larger marine aggregates. Free-living and particle-attached
bacterial communities were assessed via 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Both RoR and
BoC exhibited temperatures elevated by 1-1.5 °C compared to CoI. RoR further
experienced reduced pH between 6.8 and 7.4. We observed pronounced differences in
organic carbon pools at each of the three sites, with highest dissolved organic
carbon concentrations at BoC and RoR, and highest particulate organic carbon
concentrations and aggregate formation at BoC. Bacterioplankton communities at
BoC were dominated by opportunistic copiotrophic taxa, such as Alteromonas and
Roseobacter, known to thrive in phytoplankton blooms, as opposed to oligotrophic 
taxa dominating at CoI, such as members of the SAR11 clade. Therefore, we propose
that bacterial communities were mainly influenced by the availability of organic 
carbon at the investigated sites. Our study provides a comprehensive
characterization of organic carbon pools and bacterioplankton communities,
highlighting the high heterogeneity of various components of the marine carbon
cycle around the Galapagos Archipelago.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.5984 
PMCID: PMC6282939
PMID: 30533298 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing
interests.

