
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2018 Dec 12;12(12):e0006977. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0006977. eCollection 2018 Dec.

Development of Onchocerca volvulus in humanized NSG mice and detection of
parasite biomarkers in urine and serum.

Patton JB(1), Bennuru S(2), Eberhard ML(3), Hess JA(1), Torigian A(1), Lustigman 
S(4), Nutman TB(2), Abraham D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(2)Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
(3)Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, CDC, Atlanta, Georgia, United
States of America.
(4)Laboratory of Molecular Parasitology, Lindsley F. Kimball Research Institute, 
New York Blood Center, New York, New York, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The study of Onchocerca volvulus has been limited by its host range, 
with only humans and non-human primates shown to be susceptible to the full life 
cycle infection. Small animal models that support the development of adult
parasites have not been identified.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We hypothesized that highly immunodeficient NSG
mice would support the survival and maturation of O. volvulus and alteration of
the host microenvironment through the addition of various human cells and tissues
would further enhance the level of parasite maturation. NSG mice were humanized
with: (1) umbilical cord derived CD34+ stem cells, (2) fetal derived liver,
thymus and CD34+ stem cells or (3) primary human skeletal muscle cells. NSG and
humanized NSG mice were infected with 100 O. volvulus infective larvae (L3) for 4
to 12 weeks. When necropsies of infected animals were performed, it was observed 
that parasites survived and developed throughout the infection time course. In
each of the different humanized mouse models, worms matured from L3 to advanced
fourth stage larvae, with both male and female organ development. In addition,
worms increased in length by up to 4-fold. Serum and urine, collected from
humanized mice for identification of potential biomarkers of infection, allowed
for the identification of 10 O. volvulus-derived proteins found specifically in
either the urine or the serum of the humanized O. volvulus-infected NSG mice.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The newly identified mouse models for onchocerciasis
will enable the development of O. volvulus specific biomarkers, screening for new
therapeutic approaches and potentially studying the human immune response to
infection with O. volvulus.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0006977 
PMCID: PMC6306240
PMID: 30540742  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

