
1. J Innate Immun. 2019;11(2):168-180. doi: 10.1159/000494147. Epub 2018 Dec 17.

Platelet-Dense Granules Worsen Pre-Infection Thrombocytopenia during
Gram-Negative Pneumonia-Derived Sepsis.

Claushuis TAM(1), de Vos AF(2), Roelofs JJTH(3), de Boer OJ(3), van 't Veer C(2),
van der Poll T(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, t.a.claushuis@amc.uva.nl.
(2)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Platelet-dense (δ) granules are important for platelet function. Platelets
contribute to host defense and vascular integrity during pneumonia and sepsis,
and δ granule products, including adenosine diphosphate (ADP), can influence
inflammatory responses. We therefore aimed to study the role of platelet δ
granules in the host response during sepsis. Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome (Hps)3coa 
mice (with reduced δ granule content), mice treated with the platelet ADP
receptor inhibitor clopidogrel, and appropriate control mice were infected with
the human sepsis pathogen Klebsiella pneumoniae via the airways to induce
pneumonia and sepsis. In order to override potential redundancy in platelet
functions, we also studied Hps3coa and control mice with moderate
antibody-induced thrombocytopenia (10%) prior to infection. We found that
sepsis-induced thrombocytopenia tended to be less severe in Hps3coa mice, and was
significantly ameliorated in Hps3coa mice with low pre-infection platelet counts.
Bacterial growth was similar in Hps3coa and control mice in the presence of
normal platelet counts prior to infection, but lower in the lungs of Hps3coa mice
with low pre-infection platelet counts. Hps3coa mice had unaltered lung pathology
and distant organ injury during pneumosepsis, irrespective of pre-infection
platelet counts; lung bleeding did not differ between Hps3coa and control mice.
Clopidogrel did not influence any host response parameter. These data suggest
that platelet δ granules can play a detrimental role in pneumosepsis by
aggravating thrombocytopenia and impairing local antibacterial defense, but that 
these unfavorable effects only become apparent in the presence of low platelet
counts.

© 2018 The Author(s) Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000494147 
PMCID: PMC6738263
PMID: 30557883  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

