
1. Z Rheumatol. 2019 Feb;78(1):55-65. doi: 10.1007/s00393-018-0573-8.

[The rich diversity of Whipple's disease].

[Article in German]

Sluszniak M(1), Tarner IH(2)(3), Thiele A(4), Schmeiser T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Rheumatologie, Immunologie und Osteologie, Krankenhaus St. Josef
Wuppertal, Bergstr. 6-12, 42105, Wuppertal, Deutschland.
Marta.Sluszniak@cellitinnen.de.
(2)Abt. für Rheumatologie, Klinische Immunologie, Osteologie und Physikalische
Medizin, Kerckhoff-Klinik GmbH Bad Nauheim, Bad Nauheim, Deutschland.
(3)Lehrstuhl für Innere Medizin mit Schwerpunkt Rheumatologie,
Justus-Liebig-Universität Gießen, Gießen, Deutschland.
(4)Klinik für Rheumatologie, Immunologie und Osteologie, Krankenhaus St. Josef
Wuppertal, Bergstr. 6-12, 42105, Wuppertal, Deutschland.

Whipple's disease (WD) is a rare, chronic multiorgan disease which can caused by 
Tropheryma whipplei, a ubiquitous gram positive bacterium. Detection of T.
whipplei is mostly performed histologically using periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)
staining in affected tissues to visualize characteristic PAS-positive macrophages
and by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Clinically, WD is often characterized
by gastrointestinal symptoms (diarrhea, colic-like abdominal pain and weight
loss). Arthritis is a common presentation of WS, often leading to a misdiagnosis 
of seronegative rheumatoid arthritis and as a consequence to immunosuppressive
therapy. The clinical presentation of WD is highly polymorphic affecting
different organ systems (e. g. cardiac or neurological manifestation) and making 
an appropriate clinical diagnosis and even the diagnostic process itself
difficult. This article reports on three cases presenting with completely
different leading symptoms (initially misdiagnosed as seronegative rheumatoid
arthritis, spondyloarthritis and adult onset of Still's disease, respectively)
that illustrate the rich diversity of WD. The cases were chosen to draw attention
to the fact that although WD is mainly associated with the field of
gastroenterology and gastrointestinal (GI) involvement is common, it may appear
without GI symptoms. In cases of a clinical suspicion of WD, diagnostic efforts
should be made to detect the bacterium in the affected organ. The German S2k
guidelines on GI infections and WD published in January 2015 summarized the
current state of the art for WD. The currently recommended primary treatment is
antibiotics that can infiltrate the cerebrospinal fluid, e. g. ceftriaxone,
followed by cotrimoxazole, which should be maintained over several months.

DOI: 10.1007/s00393-018-0573-8 
PMID: 30552512  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

