
1. PLoS One. 2018 Dec 19;13(12):e0207917. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0207917.
eCollection 2018.

Spatial variability of biogeochemistry in shallow coastal benthic communities of 
Potter Cove (Antarctica) and the impact of a melting glacier.

Hoffmann R(1), Pasotti F(2), Vázquez S(3), Lefaible N(2), Torstensson A(4),
MacCormack W(3)(5), Wenzhöfer F(1)(6), Braeckman U(2)(6).

Author information: 
(1)HGF MPG Join Research Group for Deep-Sea Ecology and Technology,
Alfred-Wegener-Institut, Helmholtz Zentrum für Polar- und Meeresforschung,
Bremerhaven, Bremen, Germany.
(2)Marine Biology Research Group, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Cátedra de Biotecnología, Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica, Universidad de
Buenos Aires; Nanobiotec UBA-Conicet, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(4)Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(5)Instituto Antárctico Argentino, San Martín, Provincia de Buenos Aires,
Argentina.
(6)HGF MPG Join Research Group for Deep-Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck
Institute for Marine Microbiology, Bremen, Bremen, Germany.

Measurements of biogeochemical fluxes at the sediment-water interface are
essential to investigate organic matter mineralization processes but are rarely
performed in shallow coastal areas of the Antarctic. We investigated
biogeochemical fluxes across the sediment-water interface in Potter Cove (King
George Island/Isla 25 de Mayo) at water depths between 6-9 m. Total fluxes of
oxygen and inorganic nutrients were quantified in situ. Diffusive oxygen fluxes
were also quantified in situ, while diffusive inorganic nutrient fluxes were
calculated from pore water profiles. Biogenic sediment compounds (concentration
of pigments, total organic and inorganic carbon and total nitrogen), and benthic 
prokaryotic, meio-, and macrofauna density and biomass were determined along with
abiotic parameters (sediment granulometry and porosity). The measurements were
performed at three locations in Potter Cove, which differ in terms of sedimentary
influence due to glacial melt. In this study, we aim to assess secondary effects 
of glacial melting such as ice scouring and particle release on the benthic
community and the biogeochemical cycles they mediate. Furthermore, we discuss
small-scale spatial variability of biogeochemical fluxes in shallow water depth
and the required food supply to cover the carbon demand of Potter Cove's shallow 
benthic communities. We found enhanced mineralization in soft sediments at one
location intermediately affected by glacial melt-related effects, while a reduced
mineralization was observed at a location influenced by glacial melting. The
benthic macrofauna assemblage constituted the major benthic carbon stock (>87% of
total benthic biomass) and was responsible for most benthic organic matter
mineralization. However, biomass of the dominant Antarctic bivalve Laternula
elliptica, which contributed 39-69% to the total macrofauna biomass, increased
with enhanced glacial melt-related influence. This is contrary to the pattern
observed for the remaining macrofauna. Our results further indicated that pelagic
primary production is able to fully supply Potter Cove's benthic carbon demand.
Therefore, Potter Cove seems to be an autotrophic ecosystem in the summer season.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0207917 
PMCID: PMC6300201
PMID: 30566444  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

