
1. PLoS One. 2019 Jan 2;14(1):e0208606. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0208606.
eCollection 2019.

Insights into evolving global populations of Phytophthora infestans via new
complementary mtDNA haplotype markers and nuclear SSRs.

Martin FN(1), Zhang Y(2), Cooke DEL(3), Coffey MD(4), Grünwald NJ(4), Fry WE(5).

Author information: 
(1)USDA-ARS, Crop Improvement and Protection Research Unit, Salinas, California, 
United States of America.
(2)Plant Pathology and Microbiology Department, University of California,
Riverside, California, United States of America.
(3)The James Hutton Institute, Invergowrie, Dundee, Scotland.
(4)USDA-ARS, Horticultural Crops Research Laboratory, Corvallis, Oregon, United
States of America.
(5)Plant Pathology and Plant-Microbe Biology Section, School of Integrative Plant
Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, United States of America.

In many parts of the world the damaging potato late blight pathogen, Phytophthora
infestans, is spread as a succession of clonal lineages. The discrimination of
genetic diversity within such evolving populations provides insights into the
processes generating novel lineages and the pathways and drivers of pathogen
evolution and dissemination at local and global scales. This knowledge, in turn, 
helps optimise management practices. Here we combine two key methods for
dissecting mitochondrial and nuclear diversity and resolve intra and
inter-lineage diversity of over 100 P. infestans isolates representative of key
clonal lineages found globally. A novel set of PCR primers that amplify five
target regions are provided for mitochondrial DNA sequence analysis. These five
loci increased the number of mtDNA haplotypes resolved from four with the PCR
RFLP method to 37 (17, 6, 8 and 4 for Ia, Ib, IIa, and IIb haplotypes,
respectively, plus 2 Herb-1 haplotypes). As with the PCR RFLP method, two main
lineages, I and II were defined. Group I contained 25 mtDNA haplotypes that
grouped broadly according to the Ia and Ib types and resolved several sub-clades 
amongst the global sample. Group II comprised two distinct clusters with four
haplotypes corresponding to the RFLP type IIb and eight haplotypes resolved
within type IIa. The 12-plex SSR assay revealed 90 multilocus genotypes providing
accurate discrimination of dominant clonal lineages and other genetically diverse
isolates. Some association of genetic diversity and geographic region of
contemporary isolates was observed; US and Mexican isolates formed a loose
grouping, distinct from isolates from Europe, South America and other regions.
Diversity within clonal lineages was observed that varied according to the age of
the clone. In combination, these fine-scale nuclear and maternally inherited
mitochondrial markers enabled a greater level of discrimination among isolates
than previously available and provided complementary perspectives on evolutionary
questions relating to the diversity, phylogeography and the origins and spread of
clonal lineages of P. infestans.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0208606 
PMCID: PMC6314598
PMID: 30601865  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

