
1. Front Microbiol. 2018 Dec 24;9:3183. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.03183. eCollection
2018.

Iron Regulation in Clostridioides difficile.

Berges M(1), Michel AM(1), Lassek C(2), Nuss AM(3), Beckstette M(3), Dersch P(3),
Riedel K(2), Sievers S(2), Becher D(2), Otto A(2), Maaß S(2), Rohde M(4),
Eckweiler D(1), Borrero-de Acuña JM(5), Jahn M(5), Neumann-Schaal M(6), Jahn
D(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Braunschweig Integrated Centre of Systems Biology (BRICS), Technische
Universität Braunschweig, Braunschweig, Germany.
(2)Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes (CFGM), Institute of Microbiology, 
University of Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.
(3)Department of Molecular Infection Biology, Helmholtz Centre for Infection
Research (HZI), Braunschweig, Germany.
(4)Central Facility for Microscopy, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research
(HZI), Braunschweig, Germany.
(5)Institute of Microbiology, Technische Universität Braunschweig, Braunschweig, 
Germany.
(6)Leibniz-Institute DSMZ-German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, 
Braunschweig, Germany.

The response to iron limitation of several bacteria is regulated by the ferric
uptake regulator (Fur). The Fur-regulated transcriptional, translational and
metabolic networks of the Gram-positive, pathogen Clostridioides difficile were
investigated by a combined RNA sequencing, proteomic, metabolomic and electron
microscopy approach. At high iron conditions (15 μM) the C. difficile fur mutant 
displayed a growth deficiency compared to wild type C. difficile cells. Several
iron and siderophore transporter genes were induced by Fur during low iron (0.2
μM) conditions. The major adaptation to low iron conditions was observed for the 
central energy metabolism. Most ferredoxin-dependent amino acid fermentations
were significantly down regulated (had, etf, acd, grd, trx, bdc, hbd). The
substrates of these pathways phenylalanine, leucine, glycine and some
intermediates (phenylpyruvate, 2-oxo-isocaproate, 3-hydroxy-butyryl-CoA,
crotonyl-CoA) accumulated, while end products like isocaproate and butyrate were 
found reduced. Flavodoxin (fldX) formation and riboflavin biosynthesis (rib) were
enhanced, most likely to replace the missing ferredoxins. Proline reductase
(prd), the corresponding ion pumping RNF complex (rnf) and the reaction product
5-aminovalerate were significantly enhanced. An ATP forming ATPase (atpCDGAHFEB) 
of the F0F1-type was induced while the formation of a ATP-consuming,
proton-pumping V-type ATPase (atpDBAFCEKI) was decreased. The [Fe-S]
enzyme-dependent pyruvate formate lyase (pfl), formate dehydrogenase (fdh) and
hydrogenase (hyd) branch of glucose utilization and glycogen biosynthesis (glg)
were significantly reduced, leading to an accumulation of glucose and pyruvate.
The formation of [Fe-S] enzyme carbon monoxide dehydrogenase (coo) was inhibited.
The fur mutant showed an increased sensitivity to vancomycin and polymyxin B. An 
intensive remodeling of the cell wall was observed, Polyamine biosynthesis (spe) 
was induced leading to an accumulation of spermine, spermidine, and putrescine.
The fur mutant lost most of its flagella and motility. Finally, the CRISPR/Cas
and a prophage encoding operon were downregulated. Fur binding sites were found
upstream of around 20 of the regulated genes. Overall, adaptation to low iron
conditions in C. difficile focused on an increase of iron import, a significant
replacement of iron requiring metabolic pathways and the restructuring of the
cell surface for protection during the complex adaptation phase and was only
partly directly regulated by Fur.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.03183 
PMCID: PMC6311696
PMID: 30619231 

