
1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2019 Mar;128:38-50. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2018.12.017. Epub
2019 Jan 6.

Mitochondrial LonP1 protects cardiomyocytes from ischemia/reperfusion injury in
vivo.

Venkatesh S(1), Li M(2), Saito T(3), Tong M(3), Rashed E(2), Mareedu S(2), Zhai
P(3), Bárcena C(4), López-Otín C(4), Yehia G(5), Sadoshima J(3), Suzuki CK(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry & Molecular Genetics, New Jersey
Medical School- Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Newark, NJ, USA.
Electronic address: sundarve@njms.rutgers.edu.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry & Molecular Genetics, New Jersey
Medical School- Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Newark, NJ, USA.
(3)Department of Cell Biology & Molecular Medicine, New Jersey Medical School-
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Newark, NJ, USA.
(4)Dpto. de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Instituto Universitario de Oncología
(IUOPA), Universidad de Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain.
(5)Genome Editing Core Facility, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, New
Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry & Molecular Genetics, New Jersey
Medical School- Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Newark, NJ, USA.
Electronic address: suzukick@njms.rutgers.edu.

RATIONALE: LonP1 is an essential mitochondrial protease, which is crucial for
maintaining mitochondrial proteostasis and mitigating cell stress. However, the
importance of LonP1 during cardiac stress is largely unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the functions of LonP1 during ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) 
injury in vivo, and hypoxia-reoxygenation (H/R) stress in vitro.
METHODS AND RESULTS: LonP1 was induced 2-fold in wild-type mice during cardiac
ischemic preconditioning (IPC), which protected the heart against
ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury. In contrast, haploinsufficiency of LonP1
(LONP1+/-) abrogated IPC-mediated cardioprotection. Furthermore, LONP1+/- mice
showed significantly increased infarct size after I/R injury, whereas mice with
3-4 fold cardiac-specific overexpression of LonP1 (LonTg) had substantially
smaller infarct size and reduced apoptosis compared to wild-type controls. To
investigate the mechanisms underlying cardioprotection, LonTg mice were subjected
to ischemia (45 min) followed by short intervals of reperfusion (10, 30,
120 min). During early reperfusion, the left ventricles of LonTg mice showed
substantially reduced oxidative protein damage, maintained mitochondrial redox
homeostasis, and showed a marked downregulation of both Complex I protein level
and activity in contrast to NTg mice. Conversely, when LonP1 was knocked down in 
isolated neonatal rat ventricular myocytes (NRVMs), an up-regulation of Complex I
subunits and electron transport chain (ETC) activities was observed, which was
associated with increased superoxide production and reduced respiratory
efficiency. The knockdown of LonP1 in NRVMs caused a striking dysmorphology of
the mitochondrial inner membrane, mitochondrial hyperpolarization and increased
hypoxia-reoxygenation (H/R)-activated apoptosis. Whereas, LonP1 overexpression
blocked H/R-induced cell death.
CONCLUSIONS: LonP1 is an endogenous mediator of cardioprotection. Our findings
show that upregulation of LonP1 mitigates cardiac injury by preventing oxidative 
damage of proteins and lipids, preserving mitochondrial redox balance and
reprogramming bioenergetics by reducing Complex I content and activity.
Mechanisms that promote the upregulation of LonP1 could be beneficial in
protecting the myocardium from cardiac stress and limiting I/R injury.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2018.12.017 
PMID: 30625302  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

