
1. Biomed Res Int. 2018 Dec 12;2018:4706976. doi: 10.1155/2018/4706976. eCollection 
2018.

Doxazosin and Carvedilol Treatment Improves Hepatic Regeneration in a Hamster
Model of Cirrhosis.

Serna-Salas SA(1), Navarro-González YD(2), Martínez-Hernández SL(3),
Barba-Gallardo LF(4), Sánchez-Alemán E(1), Aldaba-Muruato LR(5), Macías-Pérez
JR(5), Ventura-Juárez J(1), Muñoz-Ortega MH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Morphology Department, Basic Sciences Center, Autonomous University of
Aguascalientes, Mexico.
(2)Pharmacology and Physiology Department, Basic Sciences Center, Autonomous
University of Aguascalientes, Mexico.
(3)Microbiology Department, Basic Sciences Center, Autonomous University of
Aguascalientes, Mexico.
(4)Optometry Department, Center for Health Sciences, Autonomous University of
Aguascalientes, Mexico.
(5)Clinical Chemistry, Autonomous University of San Luis Potosí,
Multidisciplinary Academic Unit, Huasteca Zone, Mexico.
(6)Chemistry Department, Basic Sciences Center, Autonomous University of
Aguascalientes, Mexico.

Regulation of the mechanisms of fibrosis is an important goal in the treatment of
liver cirrhosis. One mechanism is the participation of hepatic stellate cells in 
fibrogenesis when activated by catecholamines. Consequently, α/β adrenoblockers
are proposed as an alternative treatment for chronic liver lesions such as
fibrosis and/or cirrhosis and for possible liver regeneration. We herein analyzed
the effect of doxazosin and carvedilol treatments during the regeneration of
tissue in a hamster model of liver cirrhosis. Tissue samples were examined by H&E
and PAS to evaluate tissue damage and with Sirius red to assess collagen fiber
content. ALT, AST, albumin, and total proteins were examined by
spectrophotometry. Determination of the levels of α-SMA and TGF-β in hepatic
tissue was examined by Western blot and of the expression of TIMP-2, MMP-13,
α-FP, HGF, CK-7, and c-Myc was examined by qPCR. Treatment with doxazosin or
carvedilol prompted histological recovery and reduced collagen fibers in the
livers of cirrhotic hamsters. The expression of TIMP-2 decreased and that of
MMP-13 increases in animals treated with adrenoblockers with respect to the group
with cirrhosis. Additionally, the concentration of α-SMA and TGF-β declined with 
both drugs with respect to placebo p<0.05. On the other hand, each drug treatment
led to a distinct scenario for cell proliferation markers. Whereas doxazosin
produced no irregularities in α-FP, Ki-67, and c-Myc expression, carvedilol
induced an increment in the expression of these markers with respect to the
intact. Hence, doxazosin and carvedilol are potential treatments for the
regression of hepatic cirrhosis in hamsters in relation to the decrease of
collagen in the hepatic parenchyma. However, at regeneration level we observed
that doxazosin caused slight morphological changes in hepatocytes, such as its
balonization without affecting the hepatic function, and on the other hand,
carvedilol elicited a slight irregular expression of cell proliferation markers.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/4706976 
PMCID: PMC6311259
PMID: 30643808  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

