
1. Tremor Other Hyperkinet Mov (N Y). 2019 Jan 9;8:559. doi: 10.7916/D8H438GS.
eCollection 2018.

Risk Factor Genes in Patients with Dystonia: A Comprehensive Review.

Siokas V(1), Aloizou AM(1), Tsouris Z(1), Michalopoulou A(1), Mentis AA(2)(3),
Dardiotis E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Laboratory of Neurogenetics, University of Thessaly, 
University Hospital of Larissa, Larissa, GR.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Thessaly, University Hospital of
Larissa, Larissa, GR.
(3)Public Health Laboratories, Hellenic Pasteur Institute, Athens, GR.

Background: Dystonia is a movement disorder with high heterogeneity regarding
phenotypic appearance and etiology that occurs in both sporadic and familial
forms. The etiology of the disease remains unknown. However, there is increasing 
evidence suggesting that a small number of gene alterations may lead to dystonia.
Although pathogenic variants to the familial type of dystonia have been
extensively reviewed and discussed, relatively little is known about the
contribution of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to dystonia. This review
focuses on the potential role of SNPs and other variants in dystonia
susceptibility.
Methods: We searched the PubMed database for peer-reviewed articles published in 
English, from its inception through January 2018, that concerned human studies of
dystonia and genetic variants. The following search terms were included:
"dystonia" in combination with the following terms: 1) "polymorphisms" and 2)
"SNPs" as free words.
Results: A total of 43 published studies regarding TOR1A, BDNF, DRD5, APOE, ARSG,
NALC, OR4X2, COL4A1, TH, DDC, DBH, MAO, COMT, DAT, GCH1, PRKRA, MR-1, SGCE,
ATP1A3, TAF1, THAP1, GNAL, DRD2, HLA-DRB, CBS, MTHFR, and MS genes, were included
in the current review.
Discussion: To date, a few variants, which are possibly involved in several
molecular pathways, have been related to dystonia. Large cohort studies are
needed to determine robust associations between variants and dystonia with
adjustment for other potential cofounders, in order to elucidate the pathogenic
mechanisms of dystonia and the net effect of the genes.

DOI: 10.7916/D8H438GS 
PMCID: PMC6329780
PMID: 30643666  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Funding: None. Conflict of Interests: The authors
report no conflict of interest. Ethics Statement: Not applicable for this
category of article.

