
1. Brain. 2019 Feb 1;142(2):344-361. doi: 10.1093/brain/awy322.

Sephin1, which prolongs the integrated stress response, is a promising
therapeutic for multiple sclerosis.

Chen Y(1), Podojil JR(2), Kunjamma RB(1), Jones J(1), Weiner M(1), Lin W(3),
Miller SD(2), Popko B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, The University of Chicago Center for Peripheral
Neuropathy, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology-Immunology and Interdepartmental Immunobiology
Center, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois,
USA.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, The Institute of Translational Neuroscience, The
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.

Multiple sclerosis is a chronic autoimmune demyelinating disorder of the CNS.
Immune-mediated oligodendrocyte cell loss contributes to multiple sclerosis
pathogenesis, such that oligodendrocyte-protective strategies represent a
promising therapeutic approach. The integrated stress response, which is an
innate cellular protective signalling pathway, reduces the cytotoxic impact of
inflammation on oligodendrocytes. This response is initiated by phosphorylation
of eIF2α to diminish global protein translation and selectively allow for the
synthesis of protective proteins. The integrated stress response is terminated by
dephosphorylation of eIF2α. The small molecule Sephin1 inhibits eIF2α
dephosphorylation, thereby prolonging the protective response. Herein, we tested 
the effectiveness of Sephin1 in shielding oligodendrocytes against inflammatory
stress. We confirmed that Sephin1 prolonged eIF2α phosphorylation in stressed
primary oligodendrocyte cultures. Moreover, by using a mouse model of multiple
sclerosis, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, we demonstrated that
Sephin1 delayed the onset of clinical symptoms, which correlated with a prolonged
integrated stress response, reduced oligodendrocyte and axon loss, as well as
diminished T cell presence in the CNS. Sephin1 is reportedly a selective
inhibitor of GADD34 (PPP1R15A), which is a stress-induced regulatory subunit of
protein phosphatase 1 complex that dephosphorylates eIF2α. Consistent with this
possibility, GADD34 mutant mice presented with a similar ameliorated experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis phenotype as Sephin1-treated mice, and Sephin1 did
not provide additional therapeutic benefit to the GADD34 mutant animals. Results 
presented from the adoptive transfer of encephalitogenic T cells between
wild-type and GADD34 mutant mice further indicate that the beneficial effects of 
Sephin1 are mediated through a direct protective effect on the CNS. Of particular
therapeutic relevance, Sephin1 provided additive therapeutic benefit when
combined with the first line multiple sclerosis drug, interferon β. Together, our
results suggest that a neuroprotective treatment based on the enhancement of the 
integrated stress response would likely have significant therapeutic value for
multiple sclerosis patients.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awy322 
PMCID: PMC6351782
PMID: 30657878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

