
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2019 Feb 26;510(1):116-121. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.01.061. Epub 2019 Jan 18.

Crystal structure and biochemical study on argininosuccinate lyase from
Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Chen X(1), Chen J(1), Zhang W(1), Wang H(1), Liu X(2), Zhou W(3), Yang H(4), Rao 
Z(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology and College of Pharmacy,
Nankai University, Tianjin, China; College of Life Sciences, Nankai University,
Tianjin, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology and College of Pharmacy,
Nankai University, Tianjin, China. Electronic address: liux@nankai.edu.cn.
(3)College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology and College of Pharmacy,
Nankai University, Tianjin, China. Electronic address: yanght@tju.edu.cn.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology and College of Pharmacy,
Nankai University, Tianjin, China; College of Life Sciences, Nankai University,
Tianjin, China; Laboratory of Structural Biology, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China.

Argininosuccinate lyase (ASL) participates in arginine synthesis through
catalysing a reversible reaction in which argininosuccinate (AS) converts into
arginine and fumarate. ASL from Mycobacterium tuberculosis is essential for its
growth. In this work, the crystal structure of the apo form of MtbASL was
determined and reveals a tetrameric structure that is essential for its activity 
since the active sites are formed by residues from three different monomers.
Subsequently, we determined the crystal structure of MtbASL-sulfate complex, and 
the ligand mimics the negatively charged intermediate. The complex structure and 
mutagenesis studies indicate that residues S282 and H161 might act as a catalytic
dyad. A major conformational change in the MtbASL-SO4 complex structure could be 
observed upon sulfate binding, and this movement facilitates the interaction
between substrate and the residues involved in catalysis. A different
conformational change in the C-terminal domain could be observed in the
MtbASL-SO4 complex compared with that in other homologues. This difference may be
responsible for the lower activity of MtbASL, which is related to the slow growth
rate of M. tuberculosis. The C-terminal domain is a potential allosteric site
upon inhibitor binding. The various conformational changes and the diversity of
the sequence of the potential allosteric site across the homologues might provide
clues for designing selective inhibitors against M. tuberculosis.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.01.061 
PMID: 30665717  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

