
1. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2019 Feb 1;51(2):159-167. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmy169.

Chronic intermittent hypoxia accelerates liver fibrosis in rats with combined
hypoxia and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis via angiogenesis rather than endoplasmic
reticulum stress.

Wu W(1), Li W(1), Wei J(1), Wang C(2), Yao Y(2), Zhu W(1), He W(1), Zhou W(1),
Liu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Huzhou Hospital, Zhejiang University School of
Medicine, Huzhou, China.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, Huzhou
University, China.

In the present study, we aimed to investigate the role of endoplasmic reticulum
stress (ERS) and its related inflammation and angiogenesis in liver fibrosis in a
rat model of combined hypoxia and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and to
confirm whether the intervention of hypoxia-inducible factor 1α (HIF1α) can
improve fibrosis. Liver histological changes and biochemical indices, HIF1α,
inflammatory factors, ERS-related parameters (GRP78, CHOP, caspase-3, and
caspase-12), and angiogenesis indices (VEGFA, VEGFR2, and CD34) were evaluated.
Compared with the control rats, the liver tissue of rats with hypoxia and NASH
had obvious NASH characteristics and hepatic fibrosis was significantly
aggravated, including bridging fibrosis in some rats. The mRNA expression levels 
of HIF1α, VEGFA, and VEGFR2 and total immunohistochemical staining scores of
VEGFR2 and CD34 were significantly increased. In addition, HIF1α silencing
significantly decreased HIF1α, biochemical indices (ALT, AST, and TG),
inflammatory factors (TNFα, IL6, and IL1β), and angiogenesis indices (CD34 and
VEGFR2), consequently, improved the hepatic fibrosis score in the rat model of
combined hypoxia and NASH. Taken together, chronic intermittent hypoxia
accelerates liver fibrosis in rats with combined hypoxia and NASH via
angiogenesis rather than ERS and HIF1α intervention can improve liver fibrosis,
angiogenesis, inflammatory factors, and biochemical indices. Therefore, HIF1α is 
a key regulatory factor of liver fibrosis in rats with combined hypoxia and NASH.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. For permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/abbs/gmy169 
PMID: 30668625  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

