
1. Nanomaterials (Basel). 2019 Jan 23;9(2). pii: E144. doi: 10.3390/nano9020144.

Antimicrobial and Antioxidant Performance of Various Essential Oils and Natural
Extracts and Their Incorporation into Biowaste Derived
Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate) Layers Made from Electrospun
Ultrathin Fibers.

Figueroa-Lopez KJ(1), Vicente AA(2), Reis MAM(3), Torres-Giner S(4), Lagaron
JM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Novel Materials and Nanotechnology Group, Institute of Agrochemistry and Food 
Technology (IATA), Spanish National Research Council (CSIC), Calle Catedrático
Agustín Escardino Benlloch 7, 46980 Paterna, Valencia, Spain.
kjfigueroal@iata.csic.es.
(2)Centre of Biological Engineering, University of Minho, Campus Gualtar,
4710-057 Braga, Portugal. avicente@deb.uminho.pt.
(3)UCIBIO-REQUIMTE, Departamento de Química, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, 
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Campus de Caparica, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal.
amr@fct.unl.pt.
(4)Novel Materials and Nanotechnology Group, Institute of Agrochemistry and Food 
Technology (IATA), Spanish National Research Council (CSIC), Calle Catedrático
Agustín Escardino Benlloch 7, 46980 Paterna, Valencia, Spain.
storresginer@iata.csic.es.
(5)Novel Materials and Nanotechnology Group, Institute of Agrochemistry and Food 
Technology (IATA), Spanish National Research Council (CSIC), Calle Catedrático
Agustín Escardino Benlloch 7, 46980 Paterna, Valencia, Spain.
lagaron@iata.csic.es.

In this research, the antibacterial and antioxidant properties of oregano
essential oil (OEO), rosemary extract (RE), and green tea extract (GTE) were
evaluated. These active substances were encapsulated into ultrathin fibers of
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate) (PHBV) derived from fruit waste
using solution electrospinning, and the resultant electrospun mats were annealed 
to produce continuous films. The incorporation of the active substances resulted 
in PHBV films with a relatively high contact transparency, but it also induced a 
slightly yellow appearance and increased the films opacity. Whereas OEO
significantly reduced the onset of thermal degradation of PHBV, both the RE and
GTE-containing PHBV films showed a thermal stability profile that was similar to 
the neat PHBV film. In any case, all the active PHBV films were stable up to
approximately 200 °C. The incorporation of the active substances also resulted in
a significant decrease in hydrophobicity. The antimicrobial and antioxidant
activity of the films were finally evaluated in both open and closed systems for 
up to 15 days in order to anticipate the real packaging conditions. The results
showed that the electrospun OEO-containing PHBV films presented the highest
antimicrobial activity against two strains of food-borne bacteria, as well as the
most significant antioxidant performance, ascribed to the films high content in
carvacrol and thymol. Therefore, the PHBV films developed in this study presented
high antimicrobial and antioxidant properties, and they can be applied as active 
layers to prolong the shelf life of the foods in biopackaging applications.

DOI: 10.3390/nano9020144 
PMCID: PMC6410073
PMID: 30678126 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

