
1. PLoS One. 2019 Jan 24;14(1):e0207675. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0207675.
eCollection 2019.

Bacterial regulation of macrophage bacterial recognition receptors in COPD are
differentially modified by budesonide and fluticasone propionate.

Provost KA(1)(2), Smith M(1), Miller-Larsson A(3), Gudleski GD(4), Sethi S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Health Administration, Veterans Affairs Western New York Healthcare
System at Buffalo, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine,
Buffalo, New York, United States of America.
(2)University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Jacobs School of Medicine
and Biomedical Sciences, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine,
Buffalo, New York, United States of America.
(3)Respiratory GMed, AstraZeneca Gothenburg, Mölndal, Sweden.
(4)University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Jacobs School of Medicine
and Biomedical Sciences, Department of Medicine, Buffalo, New York, United States
of America.

RATIONALE: Patients with COPD have an increased risk for community-acquired
pneumonia, which is further increased by inhaled corticosteroids.
OBJECTIVE: To assess effects of the corticosteroids, budesonide and fluticasone
propionate, on macrophage bacterial responses in COPD.
METHODS: Monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs) generated from blood monocytes from 
10 non-smoker controls (NoS), 20 smokers without COPD (Sm), and 40 subjects with 
moderate to severe COPD (21 ex-smokers (COPD-ES) and 19 current smokers (COPD-S))
were pre-treated with budesonide or fluticasone (10 nM-1 μM) and challenged with 
live non-typeable Haemophilus influenzae (NTHI) or Streptococcus pneumoniae (SP).
Cell surface bacterial recognition receptor expression (flow cytometry) and
cytokine release (bead array) were analyzed.
RESULTS: NTHI and SP reduced bacterial recognition receptor expression on MDMs
from COPD and Sm, but not NoS (except TLR4). SR-AI and MARCO were reduced by both
NTHI and SP, whereas other receptors by either NTHI or SP. Among COPD subjects,
COPD-ES demonstrated a greater number of reductions as compared to COPD-S. NTHI
reduced SR-AI, MARCO, CD11b, CD35 and CD206 in COPD-ES while only SR-AI and CD11b
in COPD-S. SP reduced SRA-1, CD1d, TLR2 and TLR4 in both COPD-ES and COPD-S, and 
reduced MARCO and CD93 only in COPD-ES. All receptors reduced in COPD by NTHI and
most by SP, were also reduced in Sm. Budesonide counteracted the receptor
reductions induced by both NTHI (CD206 p = 0.03, MARCO p = 0.08) and SP (SR-AI p 
= 0.02) in COPD-ES. Fluticasone counteracted only SP-induced reductions in TLR2
(p = 0.008 COPD-ES and p = 0.04 COPD-S) and TLR4 (p = 0.02 COPD-ES). Cytokine
release was equivalently reduced by both corticosteroids.
CONCLUSIONS: Reduction in macrophage bacterial recognition receptors during
bacterial exposure could provide a mechanism for the increased pneumonia risk in 
COPD. Differential effects of budesonide and fluticasone propionate on macrophage
bacterial recognition receptor expression may contribute to the higher pneumonia 
incidence reported with fluticasone propionate.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0207675 
PMCID: PMC6345465
PMID: 30677037  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author Karin Provost received research grant
funding from: 1. Pulmatrix, LLC that immediately preceded the work 2. Pfizer,
ASPIRE Awards in Adult Vaccine Research that followed the data collection and
overlapped with analysis 3. Clinical Advisory Board, ARSANIS, starting 2017.
Author Sanjay Sethi received research grant funding from: 1. AstraZeneca for a
separate project on the presence and role of biofilms that overlapped the time
frame of the research. 2. National Center for Advancing Translational Science
(National Institutes of Health (NIH), CTSA Award) 3. National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID) (NIH) (co-PI) 4. National Heart, Lung,
Blood Institute (NHLBI) Subcontract (NIH). Author Anna Miller-Laarson was a
full-time employee at AstraZeneca AB. Author Miyuki Smith, the lab technician,
received salary support from the grant funding of AstraZeneca AB, provided by the
Buffalo Institute of Medical Research. AstraZeneca AB was allowed, by the
VA-approved research CRADA, to review the data and provide comments, but were not
allowed to influence the data presented or withhold any parts from publication.
There are no patents, products in development or marketed products associated
with this research to declare. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE
policies on sharing data and materials.

