
1. Front Immunol. 2019 Jan 9;9:3025. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.03025. eCollection
2018.

Immunological Homeostasis at the Ovine Placenta May Reflect the Degree of
Maternal Fetal Interaction.

Wattegedera SR(1), Doull LE(2), Goncheva MI(3), Wheelhouse NM(4), Watson DM(5),
Pearce J(6), Benavides J(7), Palarea-Albaladejo J(8), McInnes CJ(1), Ballingall
K(1), Entrican G(1)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Vaccines Department, Moredun Research Institute, Penicuik, United Kingdom.
(2)Centre for Dementia Prevention, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United
Kingdom.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Western Ontario,
London, ON, Canada.
(4)School of Applied Sciences, Napier University, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(5)Triveritas Ltd., Brampton, United Kingdom.
(6)University College London Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(7)Instituto de Ganadería de Montaña (IGM), León, Spain.
(8)Biomathematics and Statistics Scotland, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(9)The Roslin Institute and Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies, University
of Edinburgh, Midlothian, United Kingdom.

Successful mammalian pregnancies are a result of complex physiological,
endocrinological, and immunological processes that combine to create an
environment where the mother is tolerant to the semi-allogeneic fetus. Our
knowledge of the mechanisms that contribute to maternal tolerance is derived
mainly from human and murine studies of haemochorial placentation. However, as
this is the most invasive type of placentation it cannot be assumed that
identical mechanisms apply to the less invasive epitheliochorial placentation
found in other species such as ruminants. Here, we examine three features
associated with reproductive immune regulation in a transformed ovine trophoblast
cell line and ex-vivo ovine reproductive tissues collected at term, namely: major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) expression, Indoleamine 2,3 dioxygenase-1
(IDO-1) expression, and Natural Killer (NK) cell infiltration. High levels of MHC
class I protein expression were detected at the surface of the trophoblast cell
line using a pan-MHC class I specific monoclonal antibody. The majority of MHC
class I transcripts isolated from the cell line clustered with classical MHC
alleles. Transcriptional analysis of placental tissues identified only classical 
MHC class I transcripts. We found no evidence of constitutive transcription of
IDO-1 in either the trophoblast cell line or placental tissues. Ex-vivo tissues
collected from the materno-fetal interface were negative for cells expressing
NKp46/NCR1. Collectively, these observations suggest that the relatively
non-invasive synepitheliochorial placentation found in sheep has a more limited
requirement for local immunoregulation compared to the more invasive haemochorial
placentation of primates and rodents.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.03025 
PMCID: PMC6334339
PMID: 30687304  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

