
1. PLoS Pathog. 2019 Feb 7;15(2):e1007551. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007551.
eCollection 2019 Feb.

PIKfyve/Fab1 is required for efficient V-ATPase and hydrolase delivery to
phagosomes, phagosomal killing, and restriction of Legionella infection.

Buckley CM(1)(2), Heath VL(3), Guého A(4), Bosmani C(4), Knobloch P(5), Sikakana 
P(1), Personnic N(5), Dove SK(6), Michell RH(6), Meier R(7), Hilbi H(5), Soldati 
T(4), Insall RH(8), King JS(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Membrane Interactions and Dynamics, Department of Biomedical
Sciences, University of Sheffield, Firth Court, Western Bank, Sheffield, United
Kingdom.
(2)Bateson Centre, University of Sheffield, Firth Court, Western Bank, Sheffield,
United Kingdom.
(3)Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences, Institute for Biomedical Research,
College of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston,
Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Sciences, University of Geneva, Geneva,
Switzerland.
(5)Institute of Medical Microbiology, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(6)School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, United
Kingdom.
(7)Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zürich, Zürich,
Switzerland.
(8)CRUK Beatson Institute, Switchback Road, Bearsden, Glasgow, United Kingdom.

By engulfing potentially harmful microbes, professional phagocytes are
continually at risk from intracellular pathogens. To avoid becoming infected, the
host must kill pathogens in the phagosome before they can escape or establish a
survival niche. Here, we analyse the role of the phosphoinositide (PI) 5-kinase
PIKfyve in phagosome maturation and killing, using the amoeba and model phagocyte
Dictyostelium discoideum. PIKfyve plays important but poorly understood roles in 
vesicular trafficking by catalysing formation of the lipids phosphatidylinositol 
(3,5)-bisphosphate (PI(3,5)2) and phosphatidylinositol-5-phosphate (PI(5)P). Here
we show that its activity is essential during early phagosome maturation in
Dictyostelium. Disruption of PIKfyve inhibited delivery of both the vacuolar
V-ATPase and proteases, dramatically reducing the ability of cells to acidify
newly formed phagosomes and digest their contents. Consequently, PIKfyve- cells
were unable to generate an effective antimicrobial environment and efficiently
kill captured bacteria. Moreover, we demonstrate that cells lacking PIKfyve are
more susceptible to infection by the intracellular pathogen Legionella
pneumophila. We conclude that PIKfyve-catalysed phosphoinositide production plays
a crucial and general role in ensuring early phagosomal maturation, protecting
host cells from diverse pathogenic microbes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007551 
PMCID: PMC6382210
PMID: 30730983  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

