
1. JCI Insight. 2019 Mar 7;4(5). pii: 122311. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.122311.
eCollection 2019 Mar 7.

Mature neutrophils suppress T cell immunity in ovarian cancer microenvironment.

Singel KL(1), Emmons TR(1), Khan ANH(2), Mayor PC(3), Shen S(4), Wong JT(5),
Morrell K(6), Eng KH(6), Mark J(3), Bankert RB(7), Matsuzaki J(8), Koya RC(8),
Blom AM(9), McLeish KR(10), Qu J(4), Ram S(11), Moysich KB(12), Abrams SI(1),
Odunsi K(3)(8), Zsiros E(3)(8), Segal BH(1)(2)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, and.
(3)Department of Surgery, Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Roswell Park
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Buffalo, New York, USA.
(4)New York State Center of Excellence Bioinformatics and Life Sciences,
University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and.
(6)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Roswell Park Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Buffalo, New York, USA.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University at Buffalo Jacobs School
of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Buffalo, New York, USA.
(8)Center for Immunotherapy, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center, Buffalo,
New York, USA.
(9)Division of Medical Protein Chemistry, Department of Translational Medicine,
Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.
(10)Department of Medicine, University of Louisville School of Medicine,
Louisville, Kentucky, USA.
(11)Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts, USA.
(12)Department of Cancer Prevention and Control, Roswell Park Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Buffalo, New York, USA.
(13)Department of Medicine, Jacobs School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences,
University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, USA.

Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) often presents with metastases and ascites.
Granulocytic myeloid-derived suppressor cells are an immature population that
impairs antitumor immunity. Since suppressive granulocytes in the ascites of
patients with newly diagnosed EOC were morphologically mature, we hypothesized
that PMN were rendered suppressive in the tumor microenvironment (TME).
Circulating PMN from patients were not suppressive but acquired a suppressor
phenotype (defined as ≥1 log10 reduction of anti-CD3/CD28-stimulated T cell
proliferation) after ascites supernatant exposure. Ascites supernatants (20 of 31
supernatants) recapitulated the suppressor phenotype in PMN from healthy donors. 
T cell proliferation was restored with ascites removal and restimulation. PMN
suppressors also inhibited T cell activation and cytokine production. PMN
suppressors completely suppressed proliferation in naive, central memory, and
effector memory T cells and in engineered tumor antigen-specific cytotoxic T
lymphocytes, while antigen-specific cell lysis was unaffected. Inhibition of
complement C3 activation and PMN effector functions, including CR3 signaling,
protein synthesis, and vesicular trafficking, abrogated the PMN suppressor
phenotype. Moreover, malignant effusions from patients with various metastatic
cancers also induced the C3-dependent PMN suppressor phenotype. These results
point to PMN impairing T cell expansion and activation in the TME and the
potential for complement inhibition to abrogate this barrier to antitumor
immunity.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.122311 
PMCID: PMC6483507
PMID: 30730851  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

