
1. mBio. 2019 Feb 19;10(1). pii: e02852-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02852-18.

Evolutionary Model of Cluster Divergence of the Emergent Marine Pathogen Vibrio
vulnificus: From Genotype to Ecotype.

López-Pérez M(1), Jayakumar JM(1), Haro-Moreno JM(2), Zaragoza-Solas A(2), Reddi 
G(1), Rodriguez-Valera F(2), Shapiro OH(3), Alam M(4), Almagro-Moreno S(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, University of
Central Florida, Orlando, Florida, USA.
(2)Evolutionary Genomics Group, División de Microbiología, Universidad Miguel
Hernández, Alicante, Spain.
(3)Institute for Postharvest and Food Sciences, Volcani Research Center, Rishon
LeZion, Israel.
(4)Molecular Ecology and Metagenomics Laboratory, International Center for
Diarrheal Disease Research, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(5)Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, University of
Central Florida, Orlando, Florida, USA samoreno@ucf.edu.
(6)National Center for Integrated Coastal Research, University of Central
Florida, Orlando, Florida, USA.

Vibrio vulnificus, an opportunistic pathogen, is the causative agent of a
life-threatening septicemia and a rising problem for aquaculture worldwide. The
genetic factors that differentiate its clinical and environmental strains remain 
enigmatic. Furthermore, clinical strains have emerged from every clade of V.
vulnificus In this work, we investigated the underlying genomic properties and
population dynamics of the V. vulnificus species from an evolutionary and
ecological point of view. Genome comparisons and bioinformatic analyses of 113 V.
vulnificus isolates indicate that the population of V. vulnificus is made up of
four different clusters. We found evidence that recombination and gene flow
between the two largest clusters (cluster 1 [C1] and C2) have drastically
decreased to the point where they are diverging independently. Pangenome and
phenotypic analyses showed two markedly different lifestyles for these two
clusters, indicating commensal (C2) and bloomer (C1) ecotypes, with differences
in carbohydrate utilization, defense systems, and chemotaxis, among other
characteristics. Nonetheless, we identified frequent intra- and interspecies
exchange of mobile genetic elements (e.g., antibiotic resistance plasmids, novel 
"chromids," or two different and concurrent type VI secretion systems) that
provide high levels of genetic diversity in the population. Surprisingly, we
identified strains from both clusters in the mucosa of aquaculture species,
indicating that manmade niches are bringing strains from the two clusters
together. We propose an evolutionary model of V. vulnificus that could be broadly
applicable to other pathogenic vibrios and facultative bacterial pathogens to
pursue strategies to prevent their infections and emergence.IMPORTANCE Vibrio
vulnificus is an emergent marine pathogen and is the cause of a deadly
septicemia. However, the genetic factors that differentiate its clinical and
environmental strains and its several biotypes remain mostly enigmatic. In this
work, we investigated the underlying genomic properties and population dynamics
of the V. vulnificus species to elucidate the traits that make these strains
emerge as a human pathogen. The acquisition of different ecological determinants 
could have allowed the development of highly divergent clusters with different
lifestyles within the same environment. However, we identified strains from both 
clusters in the mucosa of aquaculture species, indicating that manmade niches are
bringing strains from the two clusters together, posing a potential risk of
recombination and of emergence of novel variants. We propose a new evolutionary
model that provides a perspective that could be broadly applicable to other
pathogenic vibrios and facultative bacterial pathogens to pursue strategies to
prevent their infections.

Copyright © 2019 López-Pérez et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02852-18 
PMCID: PMC6381281
PMID: 30782660  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

