
1. Physiol Rep. 2019 Feb;7(4):e14005. doi: 10.14814/phy2.14005.

Short-chain fatty acid delivery: assessing exogenous administration of the
microbiome metabolite acetate in mice.

Shubitowski TB(1), Poll BG(1), Natarajan N(2), Pluznick JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland.
(2)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard Stem Cell Institute,
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) are fermentation by-products of gut microbes
which have been linked to positive effects on host physiology; the most abundant 
SCFA is acetate. Exogenous administration of acetate alters host metabolism,
immune function, and blood pressure, making it a biologic of interest. The
effects of acetate have been attributed to activation of G-protein-coupled
receptors and other proteins (i.e., HDACs), often occurring at locations distant 
from the gut such as the pancreas or the kidney. However, due to technical
difficulties and costs, studies have often delivered exogenous acetate without
determining if systemic plasma acetate levels are altered. Thus, it is unclear to
what extent each method of acetate delivery may alter systemic plasma acetate
levels. In this study, we aimed to determine if acetate is elevated after
exogenous administration by drinking water (DW), oral gavage (OG), or
intraperitoneal (IP) injection, and if so, over what timecourse, to best inform
future studies. Using a commercially available kit, we demonstrated that sodium
acetate delivered over 21 days in DW does not elicit a measurable change in
systemic acetate over baseline. However, when acetate is delivered by OG or IP
injection, there are rapid, reproducible, and dose-dependent changes in plasma
acetate. These studies report, for the first time, the timecourse of changes in
plasma acetate following acetate administration by three common methods, and thus
inform the best practices for exogenous acetate delivery.

© 2019 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on
behalf of The Physiological Society and the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.14814/phy2.14005 
PMCID: PMC6391713
PMID: 30810289  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

