
1. Front Immunol. 2019 Feb 19;10:177. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00177. eCollection
2019.

Two to Tango: Co-evolution of Hominid Natural Killer Cell Receptors and MHC.

Wroblewski EE(1), Parham P(2), Guethlein LA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anthropology, Washington University, St. Louis, MO, United
States.
(2)Departments of Structural Biology and Microbiology & Immunology, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States.

Natural killer (NK) cells have diverse roles in hominid immunity and
reproduction. Modulating these functions are the interactions between major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules that are ligands for two NK
cell surface receptor types. Diverse killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptors
(KIR) bind specific motifs encoded within the polymorphic MHC class I cell
surface glycoproteins, while, in more conserved interactions, CD94:NKG2A
receptors recognize MHC-E with bound peptides derived from MHC class I leader
sequences. The hominid lineage presents a choreographed co-evolution of KIR with 
their MHC class I ligands. MHC-A, -B, and -C are present in all great apes with
species-specific haplotypic variation in gene content. The Bw4 epitope recognized
by lineage II KIR is restricted to MHC-B but also present on some gorilla and
human MHC-A. Common to great apes, but rare in humans, are MHC-B possessing a C1 
epitope recognized by lineage III KIR. MHC-C arose from duplication of MHC-B and 
is fixed in all great apes except orangutan, where it exists on approximately 50%
of haplotypes and all allotypes are C1-bearing. Recent study showed that gorillas
possess yet another intermediate MHC organization compared to humans. Like
orangutans, but unlike the Pan-Homo species, duplication of MHC-B occurred.
However, MHC-C is fixed, and the MHC-C C2 epitope (absent in orangutans) emerges.
The evolution of MHC-C drove expansion of its cognate lineage III KIR. Recently, 
position -21 of the MHC-B leader sequence has been shown to be critical in
determining NK cell educational outcome. In humans, methionine (-21M) results in 
CD94:NKG2A-focused education whereas threonine (-21T) produces KIR-focused
education. This is another dynamic position among hominids. Orangutans have
exclusively -21M, consistent with their intermediate stage in lineage III
KIR-focused evolution. Gorillas have both -21M and -21T, like humans, but they
are unequally encoded by their duplicated B genes. Chimpanzees have near-fixed
-21T, indicative of KIR-focused NK education. Harmonious with this observation,
chimpanzee KIR exhibit strong binding and, compared to humans, smaller
differences between binding levels of activating and inhibitory KIR. Consistent
between these MHC-NK cell receptor systems over the course of hominid evolution
is the evolution of polymorphism favoring the more novel and dynamic KIR system.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00177 
PMCID: PMC6389700
PMID: 30837985  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

