
1. Front Microbiol. 2019 Feb 21;10:318. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00318. eCollection
2019.

Nutritional Interventions Improved Rumen Functions and Promoted Compensatory
Growth of Growth-Retarded Yaks as Revealed by Integrated Transcripts and
Microbiome Analyses.

Hu R(1), Zou H(1), Wang Z(1), Cao B(2), Peng Q(1), Jing X(1), Wang Y(3), Shao
Y(1), Pei Z(1), Zhang X(1), Xue B(1), Wang L(1), Zhao S(4), Zhou Y(4), Kong X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Low Carbon Culture and Safety Production in Cattle in
Sichuan, Animal Nutrition Institute, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu,
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, College of Animal Science and
Technology, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.
(3)Institute of Animal Genetics and Breeding, College of Animal Science and
Technology, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu, China.
(4)Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Institute, Haibei, China.

Growth retardation reduces the incomes of livestock farming. However, effective
nutritional interventions to promote compensatory growth and the mechanisms
involving digestive tract microbiomes and transcripts have yet to be elucidated. 
In this study, Qinghai plateau yaks, which frequently suffer from growth
retardation due to malnutrition, were used as an experimental model. Young
growth-retarded yaks were pastured (GRP), fed basal ration (GRB), fed basal
ration addition cysteamine hydrochloride (CSH; GRBC) or active dry yeast (ADY;
GRBY). Another group of growth normal yak was pastured as a positive control
(GNP). After 60-day nutritional interventions, the results showed that the
average daily gain (ADG) of GRB was similar to the level of GNP, and the growth
rates of GRBC and GRBY were significantly higher than the level of GNP (P <
0.05). Basal rations addition of CSH or ADY either improved the serum biochemical
indexes, decreased serum LPS concentration, facilitated ruminal epithelium
development and volatile fatty acids (VFA) fermentation of growth-retarded yaks. 
Comparative transcriptome in rumen epithelium between growth-retarded and normal 
yaks identified the differentially expressed genes mainly enriched in immune
system, digestive system, extracellular matrix and cell adhesion pathways. CSH
addition and ADY addition in basal rations upregulated ruminal VFA absorption
(SLC26A3, PAT1, MCT1) and cell junction (CLDN1, CDH1, OCLN) gene expression, and 
downregulated complement system (C2, C7) gene expression in the growth-retarded
yaks. 16S rDNA results showed that CSH addition and ADY addition in basal rations
increased the rumen beneficial bacterial populations (Prevotella_1,
Butyrivibrio_2, Fibrobacter) of growth-retarded yaks. The correlation analysis
identified that ruminal VFAs and beneficial bacteria abundance were significantly
positively correlated with cell junction and VFA absorption gene expressions and 
negatively correlated with complement system gene expressions on the ruminal
epithelium. Therefore, CSH addition and ADY addition in basal rations promoted
rumen health and body growth of growth-retarded yaks, of which basal ration
addition of ADY had the optimal growth-promoting effects. These results suggested
that improving nutrition and probiotics addition is a more effective method to
improve growth retardation caused by gastrointestinal function deficiencies.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00318 
PMCID: PMC6393393
PMID: 30846981 

