
1. J Bacteriol. 2019 Apr 24;201(10). pii: e00731-18. doi: 10.1128/JB.00731-18. Print
2019 May 15.

Entry Exclusion of Conjugative Plasmids of the IncA, IncC, and Related Untyped
Incompatibility Groups.

Humbert M(1), Huguet KT(1), Coulombe F(1), Burrus V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Département de biologie, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada.
(2)Département de biologie, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada 
Vincent.Burrus@USherbrooke.ca.

Conjugative plasmids of incompatibility group C (IncC), formerly known as A/C2,
disseminate antibiotic resistance genes globally in diverse pathogenic species of
Gammaproteobacteria. Salmonella genomic island 1 (SGI1) can be mobilized by IncC 
plasmids and was recently shown to reshape the conjugative type IV secretion
system (T4SS) encoded by these plasmids to evade entry exclusion. Entry exclusion
blocks DNA translocation between cells containing identical or highly similar
plasmids. Here, we report that the protein encoded by the entry exclusion gene of
IncC plasmids (eexC) mediates entry exclusion in recipient cells through
recognition of the IncC-encoded TraGC protein in donor cells. Phylogenetic
analyses based on EexC and TraGC homologs predicted the existence of at least
three different exclusion groups among IncC-related conjugative plasmids. Mating 
assays using Eex proteins encoded by representative IncC and IncA (former A/C1)
and related untyped plasmids confirmed these predictions and showed that the IncC
and IncA plasmids belong to the C exclusion group, thereby explaining their
apparent incompatibility despite their compatible replicons. Representatives of
the two other exclusion groups (D and E) are untyped conjugative plasmids found
in Aeromonas sp. Finally, we determined through domain swapping that the carboxyl
terminus of the EexC and EexE proteins controls the specificity of these
exclusion groups. Together, these results unravel the role of entry exclusion in 
the apparent incompatibility between IncA and IncC plasmids while shedding light 
on the importance of the TraG subunit substitution used by SGI1 to evade entry
exclusion.IMPORTANCE IncA and IncC conjugative plasmids drive antibiotic
resistance dissemination among several pathogenic species of Gammaproteobacteria 
due to the diversity of drug resistance genes that they carry and their ability
to mobilize antibiotic resistance-conferring genomic islands such as SGI1 of
Salmonella enterica While historically grouped as "IncA/C," IncA and IncC
replicons were recently confirmed to be compatible and to abolish each other's
entry into the cell in which they reside during conjugative transfer. The
significance of our study is in identifying an entry exclusion system that is
shared by IncA and IncC plasmids. It impedes DNA transfer to recipient cells
bearing a plasmid of either incompatibility group. The entry exclusion protein of
this system is unrelated to any other known entry exclusion proteins.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00731-18 
PMCID: PMC6482922
PMID: 30858294  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

