
1. Front Immunol. 2019 Mar 1;10:352. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00352. eCollection
2019.

Promotion or Suppression of Murine Intestinal Polyp Development by iNKT Cell
Directed Immunotherapy.

Wang Y(1), Sedimbi SK(1), Löfbom L(1), Besra GS(2), Porcelli SA(3), Cardell
SL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Biomedicine,
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)School of Biosciences, Institute of Microbiology and Infection, University of 
Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, and Department of Medicine, Albert 
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, United States.

The glycosphingolipid α-galactosylceramide (α-GalCer) is a well-described immune 
activator with strong anti-tumor properties in animal models. It is presented on 
CD1d and acts by stimulating the invariant, type I, natural killer T (iNKT)
lymphocytes to rapidly secrete TH1 and TH2 associated cytokines. This in turn
promotes activation of a diversity of immune cells including natural killer (NK) 
cells with anti-tumor functions. Prior to tumor development, iNKT cells can also 
perform tumor surveillance and naturally protect from emergence of cancer. In
contrast, we have recently demonstrated that iNKT cells naturally promote polyps 
in the spontaneous murine adenomatous polyposis coli (Apc) Apc Min/+ model for
colon cancer, associated with suppressed TH1 immunity and enhanced
immunoregulation. Here we investigated whether iNKT cell directed immunotherapy
could subvert the polyp promoting function of iNKT cells and reduce polyp growth 
in this model. We treated Apc Min/+ mice with α-GalCer, or synthetic derivatives 
of this ligand (C-glycoside and C20:2) that have enhanced immunoregulatory
properties. Treatment with iNKT cell ligands led to increased iNKT cell division,
but reduced iNKT cell frequencies, lower NK1.1 expression and elevation of PD-1. 
Apc Min/+ mice that had been treated either long-term (5-15 weeks of age), or
short-term (12-15 weeks of age) with α-GalCer demonstrated a significant decrease
in polyp burden. Surprisingly, long-term treatment with the TH1 biasing ligand
C-glycoside did not have significant effects on polyps, while long-term treatment
with the TH2 biasing ligand C20:2 enhanced polyp growth. In stark contrast,
short-term treatment with C20:2 led to reduction in polyp numbers and size.
Reduced polyp burden after long-term treatment was associated with increased
expression of genes indicating a pro-inflammatory polyp microenvironment.
Polyp-reducing short-term treatment led to CD8 T cell activation specifically in 
polyps, and decreased tumor infiltrating and splenic macrophages, and a switch
toward a pro-inflammatory phenotype. Thus, iNKT cell directed therapy could
subvert the natural polyp enhancing function of iNKT cells, overcome
immunosuppression, and reduce polyps. However, different iNKT cell activating
ligands had opposite effects, and the timing of treatment had a major influence
on outcomes.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00352 
PMCID: PMC6405695
PMID: 30881361  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

