
1. Front Microbiol. 2019 Mar 6;10:378. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00378. eCollection
2019.

High-Throughput Proteomics Identifies Proteins With Importance to Postantibiotic 
Recovery in Depolarized Persister Cells.

Spanka DT(1), Konzer A(2), Edelmann D(1), Berghoff BA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Justus Liebig University
Giessen, Giessen, Germany.
(2)Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry, Max-Planck-Institute for Heart and Lung
Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany.

Bacterial populations produce phenotypic variants called persisters to survive
harmful conditions. Persisters are highly tolerant to antibiotics and repopulate 
environments after the stress has vanished. In order to resume growth, persisters
have to recover from the persistent state, but the processes behind recovery
remain mostly elusive. Deciphering these processes is an essential step toward
understanding the persister phenomenon in its entirety. High-throughput
proteomics by mass spectrometry is a valuable tool to assess persister physiology
during any stage of the persister life cycle, and is expected to considerably
contribute to our understanding of the recovery process. In the present study, an
Escherichia coli strain, that overproduces the membrane-depolarizing toxin TisB, 
was established as a model for persistence by the use of high-throughput
proteomics. Labeling of TisB persisters with stable isotope-containing amino
acids (pulsed-SILAC) revealed an active translational response to ampicillin,
including several RpoS-dependent proteins. Subsequent investigation of the
persister proteome during postantibiotic recovery by label-free quantitative
proteomics identified proteins with importance to the recovery process. Among
them, AhpF, a component of alkyl hydroperoxide reductase, and the outer membrane 
porin OmpF were found to affect the persistence time of TisB persisters.
Assessing the role of AhpF and OmpF in TisB-independent persisters demonstrated
that the importance of a particular protein for the recovery process strongly
depends on the physiological condition of a persister cell. Our study provides
important insights into persister physiology and the processes behind recovery of
depolarized cells.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00378 
PMCID: PMC6414554
PMID: 30894840 

