
1. Front Immunol. 2019 Mar 19;10:404. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00404. eCollection
2019.

Abrogation of Endogenous Glycolipid Antigen Presentation on Myelin-Laden
Macrophages by D-Sphingosine Ameliorates the Pathogenesis of Experimental
Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis.

Ban Y(1), Dong W(1), Zhang L(2), Zhou T(3)(4), Altiti AS(5), Ali K(5), Mootoo
DR(5), Blaho VA(6)(7), Hla T(6), Ren Y(3), Ma X(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York,
NY, United States.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Sheng Yushou Center of Cell
Biology, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Florida State
University, Tallahassee, FL, United States.
(4)Key Laboratory of Biorheological Science and Technology, College of
Bioengineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China.
(5)Department of Chemistry, Hunter College, City University of New York, New
York, NY, United States.
(6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Center for Vascular Biology, 
Weill Medical Medicine, New York, NY, United States.
(7)Sanford Burnham Prepys Medical Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA, United
States.

Background: Although myelin is composed of mostly lipids, the pathological role
of myelin lipids in demyelinating diseases remains elusive. The principal lipid
of the myelin sheath is β-galactosylceramide (β-Galcer). Its α-anomer (α-Galcer) 
has been demonstrated to be antigenically presented by macrophages via CD1d, a
MHC class I-like molecule. Myelin, which is mostly composed of β-Galcer, has been
long considered as an immunologically-inert neuron insulator, because the
antigen-binding cleft of CD1d is highly α-form-restricted. Results: Here, we
report that CD1d-mediated antigenic presentation of myelin-derived
galactosylceramide (Mye-GalCer) by macrophages contributed significantly to the
progression of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). Surprisingly,
this presentation was recognizable by α-Galcer:CD1d-specific antibody (clone
L363), but incapable of triggering expansion of iNKT cells and production of iNKT
signature cytokines (IFNγ and IL-4). Likewise, a synthesized analog of
Mye-Galcer, fluorinated α-C-GalCer (AA2), while being efficiently presented via
CD1d on macrophages, failed to stimulate production of IFNγ and IL-4. However,
AA2 significantly exacerbated EAE progression. Further analyses revealed that the
antigenic presentations of both Mye-GalCer and its analog (AA2) in α-form via
CD1d promoted IL-17 production from T cells, leading to elevated levels of IL-17 
in EAE spinal cords and sera. The IL-17 neutralizing antibody significantly
reduced the severity of EAE symptoms in AA2-treated mice. Furthermore,
D-sphingosine, a lipid possessing the same hydrophobic base as ceramide but
without a carbohydrate residue, efficiently blocked this glycolipid antigen
presentation both in vitro and in spinal cords of EAE mice, and significantly
decreased IL-17 and ameliorated the pathological symptoms. Conclusion: Our
findings reveal a novel pathway from the presentation of Mye-GalCer to IL-17
production, and highlight the promising therapeutic potential of D-sphingosine
for the human disorder of multiple sclerosis.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00404 
PMCID: PMC6433838
PMID: 30941120  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

