
1. Bull Math Biol. 2019 Jun;81(6):2029-2050. doi: 10.1007/s11538-019-00604-1. Epub
2019 Apr 2.

Backward Bifurcation as a Desirable Phenomenon: Increased Fecundity Through
Infection.

Barradas I(1), Vázquez V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación en Matemáticas, Apartado Postal 402, 36000,
Guanajuato, Guanajuato, Mexico. barradas@cimat.mx.
(2)Instituto de Física y Matemáticas, Universidad Tecnológica de la Mixteca,
69000, Huajuapan de León, Oaxaca, Mexico.

Backward or subcritical bifurcation is usually considered an undesirable
phenomenon in epidemiology since control measures require a reduction in R0 not
below one but below a much smaller value. However, there are contexts for which a
backward or subcritical bifurcation is not a bad thing; it can even be desirable.
Such is the case for any characteristic that can be passed to the next generation
(genetically fixed or not) and that increases the effective reproductive rate of 
the host or the total number of individuals. In the present work, we study an
epidemiological model consisting of two classes, susceptible and "infected"
individuals; the model considers a characteristic that is passed from "infected" 
to "susceptible" by direct "contact," for instance increased fecundity. We
analyze conditions for the appearance of a backward or subcritical bifurcation.
We discuss the advantage for the population under infection, since the total
number of individuals increases at equilibrium. If one takes that as a proxy for 
increased fitness, it would increase the species' ecological success. One key
element in the model is the fact that "susceptible" individuals have
"susceptible" descendants, but "infected" individuals can have "infected"
descendants as well as "susceptible" ones. A somehow rare addition for
epidemiological models, the fact that "infected" individuals reproduce more
rapidly than the susceptible ones, leads to unexpected consequences. Facilitating
the "inoculation" increases the total population size, i.e., the backward or
subcritical bifurcation appears, with desirable consequences for the population. 
We show that an increase in the number of susceptible newborns is the main reason
for the appearance of a backward or subcritical bifurcation, which induces a
bigger population size. We analyze the effect of different combinations of
susceptible/infected birth rates. This kind of phenomenon has been observed for
bacterial infections in several insects-bacteria and nematodes-bacteria
interactions; in particular, it has been intensely studied in interactions of
wasps and flies with the genus Wolbachia. It has also been shown in amphibians.

DOI: 10.1007/s11538-019-00604-1 
PMID: 30941647  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

