
1. Cytometry A. 2019 May;95(5):478-487. doi: 10.1002/cyto.a.23755. Epub 2019 Apr 8.

A Subpopulation of Monocytes in Normal Human Blood Has Significant Magnetic
Susceptibility: Quantification and Potential Implications.

Kim J(1), Gómez-Pastora J(1), Weigand M(1), Potgieter M(2), A Walters N(1),
Reátegui E(1), F Palmer A(1), Yazer M(3), Zborowski M(4), Chalmers JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)William G. Lowrie Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.
(2)Center for Microbial Ecology and Genomics, Department of Biochemistry,
Genetics and Microbiology, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh and The Institute for
Transfusion Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(4)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio.

The presence of iron in circulating monocytes is well known as they play
essential roles in iron recycling. Also, the storage of this metal as well as its
incorrect uptake and/or release are important data to diagnose different
pathologies. It has been demonstrated that iron storage in human blood cells can 
be measured through their magnetic behavior with high accuracy; however, the
magnetic characteristics of monocytes have not been reported so far to the best
of our knowledge. Therefore, in this work, we report, for the first time, the
physical and magnetic properties of human monocytes, along with plasma platelets,
oxyhemoglobin red blood cells (oxyHb-RBCs), and methemoglobin red blood cells
(metHb-RBCs). The different cell populations were separated by Ficoll-density
gradient centrifugation, followed by a flow sorting step to isolate monocytes
from peripheral blood mononuclear cells. The different fractions were analyzed by
Coulter Counter (for determining the size distribution and concentration) and the
sorted monocytes were qualitatively analyzed on ImageStream, a state-of-the-art
imaging cytometer. The analysis of the Coulter Counter and ImageStream data
suggests that although there exists contamination in the monocyte fraction, the
integrity of the sorted monocytes appears to be intact and the concentration was 
high enough to precisely measure their magnetic velocity by Cell Tracking
Velocimetry. Surprisingly, monocytes reported the highest magnetic mobility from 
the four fractions under analysis, with an average magnetic velocity 7.8 times
higher than MetHb-RBCs, which is the only type of cells with positive magnetic
velocities. This value is equivalent to a susceptibility 2.5 times higher than
the value reported by fresh MetHb-RBCs. It should be noted that this is the first
study that reports that a subpopulation of human monocytes is much more magnetic 
than MetHb-RBCs, opening the door to the possible isolation of human monocytes by
label-free magnetic techniques. Further, it is suggested that these magnetic
monocytes could "contaminate" positively selected, immunomagnetically labeled
blood cells (i.e., during a process using magnetically conjugated antibodies
targeting cells, such as CD34 positive cells). Conversely, these magnetic
monocytes could be inadvertently removed from a desired blood population when one
is using a negative magnetic isolation technique to target cells for removal. ©
2019 International Society for Advancement of Cytometry.

© 2019 International Society for Advancement of Cytometry.

DOI: 10.1002/cyto.a.23755 
PMCID: PMC6985909
PMID: 30958642  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

