
1. J Fish Dis. 2019 Jun;42(6):809-815. doi: 10.1111/jfd.12993. Epub 2019 Apr 10.

Detection of the intranuclear microsporidian Enterospora nucleophila in gilthead 
sea bream by in situ hybridization.

Ahmed NH(1)(2), Caffara M(3), Sitjà-Bobadilla A(1), Fioravanti ML(3), Mazzone
A(3), Aboulezz AS(2), Metwally AM(4), Omar MA(4), Palenzuela OR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Aquaculture "Torre de la Sal" (IATS-CSIC), Castellón, Spain.
(2)National Institute of Oceanography and Fisheries (NIOF), Hurghada, Egypt.
(3)Department of Veterinary Medical Sciences, University of Bologna, Bologna,
Italy.
(4)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, South Valley
University, Qena, Egypt.

Enterospora nucleophila is an intranuclear microsporidian responsible for
emaciative microsporidiosis of gilthead sea bream (GSB). Its minute size and
cryptic nature make it easily misdiagnosed. An in situ hybridization (ISH)
technique based on antisense oligonucleotide probes specific for the parasite was
developed and used in clinically infected GSB in combination with calcofluor
white stain (CW) and other histopathological techniques. The ISH method was found
to label very conspicuously the cells containing parasite stages, with the signal
concentrating in merogonial and sporogonial plasmodia within the infected cell
nuclei. Comparison with CW demonstrated limited ISH signal in cells containing
mature spores, which was attributed mostly to the scarcity of probe targets
present in these stages. Although spores were detected in other organs of the
digestive system as well as in the peripheral blood, proliferative stages or
parasite reservoirs were not found in this work outside the intestines. The study
demonstrated a frequent disassociation between the presence of abundant spores
and the intensity of the infections as determined by the parasite activity. The
ISH allows confirmatory diagnosis of GSB microsporidiosis and estimation of
infection intensity and will be a valuable tool for a more precise determination 
of parasite dissemination pathways and pathogeny mechanisms.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jfd.12993 
PMID: 30968978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

