
1. Front Immunol. 2019 Mar 26;10:557. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00557. eCollection
2019.

Mesenteric Lymphatic Alterations Observed During DSS Induced Intestinal
Inflammation Are Driven in a TLR4-PAMP/DAMP Discriminative Manner.

Stephens M(1), Liao S(2), von der Weid PY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Inflammation Research Network,
Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB,
Canada.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Inflammation
Research Network, Cumming School of Medicine, Snyder Institute for Chronic
Diseases, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.

Background: Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is characterized by both acute and
chronic phase inflammation of the gastro-intestinal (GI) tract that affect a
large and growing number of people worldwide with little to no effective
treatments. This is in part due to the lack of understanding of the disease
pathogenesis and also the currently poorly described involvement of other systems
such as the lymphatics. During DSS induced colitis, mice also develop a severe
inflammation of terminal ileum with many features similar to IBD. As well as
inflammation within the ileum we have previously demonstrated lymphatic
remodeling within the mesentery and mesenteric lymph nodes of DSS-treated mice.
The lymphatic remodeling includes lymphangiogenesis, lymphatic vessel dilation
and leakiness, as well as cellular infiltration into the surrounding tissue and
peripheral draining lymph nodes. Methods: Intestinal inflammation was induced in 
C57BL/6 mice by administration of 2.5% DSS in drinking water for 7 days. Mice
were treated with TLR4 blocker C34 or Polymyxin-B (PMXB) daily from days 3 to 7
of DSS treatment via I.P. injection, and their therapeutic effects on disease
activity and lymphatic function were examined. TLR activity and subsequent effect
on lymphangiogenesis, lymphadenopathy, and mesenteric lymph node cellular
composition were assessed. Results: DSS Mice treated with TLR4 inhibitor, C34,
had a significantly improved disease phenotype characterized by reduced ileal and
colonic insult. The change correlated with significant reduction in colonic and
mesenteric inflammation, resolved mesenteric lymphangiectasia, and CD103+ DC
migration similar to that of healthy control. PMXB treatment however did not
resolve inflammation within the colon or associated mesenteric lymphatic
dysfunction but did however prevent lymphadenopathy within the MLN through
alteration of CCL21 gradients and CD103+ DC migration. Conclusions: TLR4 appears 
to mediate several changes within the mesenteric lymphatics, more specifically it
is shown to have different outcomes whether stimulation occurs through pathogen
derived factors such as LPS or tissue derived DAMPs, a novel phenomenon.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00557 
PMCID: PMC6443629
PMID: 30972059  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

