
1. Front Immunol. 2019 Mar 27;10:575. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00575. eCollection
2019.

Halted Lymphocyte Egress via Efferent Lymph Contributes to Lymph Node Hypertrophy
During Hypercholesterolemia.

Tay MHD(1), Lim SYJ(1), Leong YFI(1), Thiam CH(1), Tan KW(1), Torta FT(2),
Narayanaswamy P(2), Wenk M(2), Angeli V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Programme, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Life Science 
Institute, Yoon Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore,
Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Life Science Institute, SLING-Singapore Lipidomics
Incubator, Yoon Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore,
Singapore, Singapore.

Dyslipidemia is a central component of atherosclerosis and metabolic syndrome
linked to chronic inflammation and immune dysfunction. Previously, we showed that
hypercholesterolemic apolipoprotein E knock out (apoE-/-) mice exhibit systemic
effects including skin inflammation and hypertrophic lymph nodes (LNs). However, 
the mechanisms accounting for LN hypertrophy in these mice remain unknown. Here, 
we show that hypercholesterolemia led to the accumulation of lymphocytes in LNs. 
We excluded that the increased number of lymphocytes in expanded LNs resulted
from increased lymphocyte proliferation or entry into those LNs. Instead, we
demonstrated that the egress of lymphocytes from the enlarged LN of apoE-/- mice 
was markedly decreased. Impairment in efferent lymphatic emigration of
lymphocytes from LNs resulted from an aberrant expansion of cortical and
medullary sinuses that became hyperplastic. Moreover, CCL21 was more abundant on 
these enlarged sinuses whereas lymph levels of sphingosine 1 phosphate (S1P) were
decreased in apoE-/- mice. Normal LN size, lymphatic density and S1P levels were 
restored by reversing hypercholesterolemia. Thus, systemic changes in cholesterol
can sequester lymphocytes in tissue draining LNs through the extensive remodeling
of lymphatic sinuses and alteration of the balance between retention/egress
signals leading to LN hypertrophy which subsequently may contribute to poor
immunity. This study further illustrates the role of lymphatic vessels in
immunity through the regulation of immune cell trafficking.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00575 
PMCID: PMC6446103
PMID: 30972070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

