
1. PLoS One. 2019 Apr 15;14(4):e0215541. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0215541.
eCollection 2019.

Prevalence of kdr mutations and insecticide susceptibility among natural
population of Aedes aegypti in West Bengal.

Saha P(1)(2), Chatterjee M(1), Ballav S(1), Chowdhury A(2), Basu N(3), Maji
AK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine, Kolkata,
West Bengal, India.
(2)Department of Zoology, A. P. C. Roy Govt. College, Himachal Bihar, Matigara,
Siliguri, West Bengal, India.
(3)Department of Pathology, Jagannath Gupta Institute of Medical Sciences and
Hospital, Budge Budge, Kolkata, West Bengal, India.

BACKGROUND: Aedes albopictus and Aedes aegypti are the major vectors of arboviral
diseases. As effective vaccines are not available for most of the arboviral
diseases, vector control by using insecticides play the key role to reduce the
disease transmission. The emergence and spread of resistance to different classes
of insecticides by the vectors is a major obstacle to control the disease
transmission. Information about vector susceptibility to different insecticides
and their mechanisms are very important for formulating proper vector control
measures. The present study was designed to assess the susceptibility of Ae.
aegypti against three different classes of adulticides, one larvicidal agent
available and polymorphisms in the voltage-gated sodium channel (VGSC) gene
related to insecticide resistance.
METHODS: Immature stages of Ae. aegypti were collected from three dengue endemic 
municipal areas of West Bengal and reared in the laboratory. Larvae and adults
(F1 progeny) were used for insecticide bioassay as per WHO protocols. Knock down 
resistance gene (kdr) mutations were assessed by direct sequencing of PCR
products.
RESULTS: The Ae. aegypti population was found to be susceptible to type II
pyrethroids and malathion but highly resistant to DDT. A high rate of
polymorphisms in the VGSC gene was observed among the collected mosquitoes. A
double mutant V1016G + F1534C was found to be associated with DDT resistance but 
neither V1016G nor F1534C alone showed the same association. Association between 
the kdr mutations and the susceptibility status of pyrethroids could not be
established due to very small sample size. A low to moderate level of resistance 
was noticed against temephos among the larval population based on WHO criteria.
CONCLUSION: The replacement of DDT by type II pyrethroids for the management of
dengue vectors is an appropriate decision taken by the national program which is 
supported by the findings of a higher level of resistance to DDT. Persistence of 
polymorphisms in the VGSC gene might be an indication of emergence of resistance 
against pyrethroid insecticides that should be monitored at a regular interval.
Attempts should be made to determine the effectiveness of other larvicides for
replacement of temephos if needed in future. Along with the chemical insecticides
different biological vector control methods as well as biopesticides should also 
be used in vector control programmes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0215541 
PMCID: PMC6464230
PMID: 30986273  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

