
1. Pathog Immun. 2017 Jul 10;2(2):293-307. doi: 10.20411/pai.v2i2.205. eCollection
2017.

Effects of Helminth Eradication on the Immune System.

Weisman Z(1), Kalinkovich A(2)(3), Stein M(2), Greenberg Z(2)(3), Borkow G(1),
Adlerstein D(1)(4), Mahdi JA(5)(4), Bentwich Z(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Kaplan Medical Center, Ben-Ari Institute of Clinical Immunology and AIDS
Center, Rehovot, Israel.
(2)Hebrew University Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem, Israel.
(3)Public Health Laboratory, Ministry of Health, Jerusalem, Israel.
(4)Department of Microbiology Immunology and Genetics, Center for Emerging and
Tropical Diseases and AIDS, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheba,
Israel.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, College of Medicine
and Health Sciences, University of Gondar, Gondar, Ethiopia.

Introduction: Helminth infection has a profound effect on the immune system.
However, the precise nature of the immune changes that are elicited by helminth
infection have not been sufficiently characterized. Furthermore, the
reversibility of these changes after treatment has not been documented
sufficiently. We studied the immune profiles of Ethiopian immigrants to Israel at
baseline, that is on arrival and at one-year follow-up and compared individuals
who received antihelminth treatment during the study period with those who missed
the treatment.
Methods: A longitudinal follow up study involving different groups of subjects
was conducted. Baseline data was recorded from the newly arrived Ethiopian
immigrants for a series of peripheral blood tests, including: IgE and Eosinophil 
levels, T-cell populations, T-cell receptor phenotypes, and cytokine measurement.
These tests were all repeated after a 1-year interval. Results were compared
between the newly arrived Ethiopian immigrants (NEW-Eth-Il), long term Ethiopian 
immigrants (LT-Eth-Il), and non Ethiopian Israeli controls (NON-Imm-Il).
Results: Of the 184 individuals, 111 were NEW-Eth-Il, who had a high prevalence
of helminth infection, the immunological changes were elevated IgE levels and
eosinophil counts, decreased CD4/CD8 ratio, increased proportion of HLA-DR+CD3+, 
HLA-DR+CD4+ and HLA-DR+CD8+ cells, decreased proportion of CD45RA+CD4+ (naive)
and CD28+CD8+ cells, increased proportion of CD45RO+CD4+ (memory) cells, and
increased secretion of IL-4 and IL-5 (Th2 type cytokines). In the 42 LT-Eth-Il
participants, who all had negative tests for helminth infection, we did not
observe these immune changes and their immune profile did not differ markedly
from that of the NON-Imm-Il controls. The follow-up immune profiles of 33
NEW-Eth-Il who received succesful antihelminth treatment, showed a significant
normalization in the above-mentioned variables that was not observed in the 19
NEW-Eth-Il who missed and did not receive the antihelminth treatment.
Conclusions: These findings demonstrate that helminth infection is associated
with profound immune changes that are normalized within a short time after
helminth eradication. They also strengthen the hypothesis that effective
antihelminth interventions, in areas endemic for intestinal helminths, may have
an impact on AIDS and tuberculosis epidemics.

DOI: 10.20411/pai.v2i2.205 
PMCID: PMC6423624
PMID: 30993247 

Conflict of interest statement: No conflict of interest

