
1. Vaccine. 2019 May 9;37(21):2783-2790. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.04.040. Epub
2019 Apr 16.

A peptide-based vaccine for Mycobacterium avium subspecies paratuberculosis.

Abdellrazeq GS(1), Elnaggar MM(1), Bannantine JP(2), Schneider DA(3), Souza
CD(4), Hwang J(4), Mahmoud AHA(5), Hulubei V(6), Fry LM(3), Park KT(7), Davis
WC(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA, USA; Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Alexandria University, Egypt.
(2)USDA, ARS, National Animal Disease Center, Ames, IA, USA.
(3)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA, USA; USDA, ARS, Animal Disease Research Unit, Pullman,
WA, USA.
(4)Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, Washington State University,
Pullman, WA, USA.
(5)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA, USA; Veterinary Quarantine of Alexandria, General
Organization for Veterinary Services, Ministry of Agriculture, Egypt.
(6)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA, USA.
(7)Department of Biotechnology, Inje University, Injero 197, Kimhae-si,
Gyeongsangnam-do, Republic of Korea.
(8)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA, USA. Electronic address: davisw@wsu.edu.

Recent efforts to develop a live attenuated vaccine against Mycobacterium avium
subsp. paratuberculosis (Map), the causative agent of Johne's disease (JD),
revealed relA is important in Map virulence. Deletion of the relA gene impairs
the ability of Map to establish a persistent infection. Analysis of the basis for
this observation revealed infection with a relA deletion mutant (ΔrelA) elicits
development of cytotoxic CD8 T cells (CTL) with the ability to kill intracellular
bacteria. Further analysis of the recall response elicited by ΔrelA vaccination
showed a 35 kDa membrane peptide (MMP) is one of the targets of the immune
response, suggesting it might be possible to develop a peptide-based vaccine
based on MMP. To explore this possibility, ex vivo vaccination studies were
conducted with MMP alone and incorporated into a nanoparticle (NP) vector
comprised of poly (D, L-lactide-co-glycolide) and monophosphoryl lipid A
(PLGA/MPLA). As reported, ex vivo vaccination studies showed CD8 CTL were
elicited with classic and monocyte derived dendritic cells (cDC and MoDC) pulsed 
with MMP alone and incorporated into a PGLA/MPLA vector. Incorporation of MMP
into a NP vector enhanced the ability of CD8 CTL to kill intracellular bacteria. 
The findings indicate incorporation of MMP into a PGLA/MPLA nanoparticle vector
is one of the possible ways to develop a MMP based vaccine for Johne's disease.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.04.040 
PMID: 31003915  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

