
1. BMC Genomics. 2019 Apr 24;20(1):313. doi: 10.1186/s12864-019-5683-4.

Gene duplications in the E. coli genome: common themes among pathotypes.

Bernabeu M(1), Sánchez-Herrero JF(1)(2), Huedo P(3), Prieto A(1), Hüttener M(1), 
Rozas J(1)(2), Juárez A(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics, University of Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Biodiversity Research Institute (IRBio), University of Barcelona, Barcelona,
Spain.
(3)Institute of Biotechnology and Biomedicine (IBB), Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Cerdanyola del Vallès, Spain.
(4)Department of Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics, University of Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain. ajuarez@ub.edu.
(5)Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia, The Barcelona Institute of Science 
and Technology, Barcelona, Spain. ajuarez@ub.edu.

BACKGROUND: Gene duplication underlies a significant proportion of gene
functional diversity and genome complexity in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes.
Although several reports in the literature described the duplication of specific 
genes in E. coli, a detailed analysis of the extent of gene duplications in this 
microorganism is needed.
RESULTS: The genomes of the E. coli enteroaggregative strain 042 and other
pathogenic strains contain duplications of the gene that codes for the global
regulator Hha. To determine whether the presence of additional copies of the hha 
gene correlates with the presence of other genes, we performed a comparative
genomic analysis between E. coli strains with and without hha duplications. The
results showed that strains harboring additional copies of the hha gene also
encode the yeeR irmA (aec69) gene cluster, which, in turn, is also duplicated in 
strain 042 and several other strains. The identification of these duplications
prompted us to obtain a global map of gene duplications, first in strain 042 and 
later in other E. coli genomes. Duplications in the genomes of the
enteroaggregative strain 042, the uropathogenic strain CFT073 and the
enterohemorrhagic strain O145:H28 have been identified by a BLASTp protein
similarity search. This algorithm was also used to evaluate the distribution of
the identified duplicates among the genomes of a set of 28 representative E. coli
strains. Despite the high genomic diversity of E. coli strains, we identified
several duplicates in the genomes of almost all studied pathogenic strains. Most 
duplicated genes have no known function. Transcriptomic analysis also showed that
most of these duplications are regulated by the H-NS/Hha proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: Several duplicated genes are widely distributed among pathogenic E. 
coli strains. In addition, some duplicated genes are present only in specific
pathotypes, and others are strain specific. This gene duplication analysis shows 
novel relationships between E. coli pathotypes and suggests that newly identified
genes that are duplicated in a high percentage of pathogenic E. coli isolates may
play a role in virulence. Our study also shows a relationship between the
duplication of genes encoding regulators and genes encoding their targets.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-019-5683-4 
PMCID: PMC6480617
PMID: 31014240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

