
1. Stem Cells Transl Med. 2019 Aug;8(8):785-796. doi: 10.1002/sctm.18-0260. Epub
2019 Apr 29.

Human Adipose-Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells Modify Lung Immunity and Improve
Antibacterial Defense in Pneumosepsis Caused by Klebsiella pneumoniae.

Perlee D(1), de Vos AF(1), Scicluna BP(1)(2), Mancheño P(3), de la Rosa O(3),
Dalemans W(4), Nürnberg P(5)(6)(7), Lombardo E(3), van der Poll T(1)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Experimental & Molecular Medicine, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Biostatistics, and Bioinformatics,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)TiGenix SAU, Madrid, Spain.
(4)TiGenix NV, Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(6)Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated
Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(7)Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, 
Germany.
(8)Division of Infectious Diseases, Amsterdam University Medical Centers,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Adult mesenchymal stem cells exert immunomodulatory effects that might improve
the host response during sepsis. Knowledge on the effect of adipose-derived
mesenchymal stem cells (ASCs) in sepsis is limited. Klebsiella (K.) pneumoniae is
a common cause of gram-negative pneumonia and sepsis. This study sought to
determine the effect of human ASCs on the host response during pneumosepsis in
mice. Mice were infected with K. pneumoniae via the airways to induce a gradually
evolving infection in the lung culminating pneumosepsis. One or 6 hours after
infection, mice were infused intravenously with ASCs or vehicle, and euthanized
after 16 hours or 48 hours, respectively. The effects of freshly cultured and
cryopreserved ASCs were compared, the latter formulation being more clinically
relevant. Intravenously administered ASCs were visualized in lung tissue by
immunostaining at 1 and 3 hours, but not at 15 hours after infusion. Although
early after infection, ASCs did not or only modestly influence bacterial loads,
they reduced bacterial burdens in lungs and distant organs at 48 hours. ASCs
reduced the lung levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and attenuated lung
pathology, but did not influence distant organ injury. ASCs strongly modified the
lung transcriptome in uninfected mice and especially mice with pneumosepsis.
Cryopreserved and cultured ASCs induced largely similar effects on the lung
transcriptome. These data indicate that human ASCs induce profound immune
modulatory effects in the lungs, resulting in reduced bacterial burdens and lung 
inflammation during pneumosepsis caused by a common human pathogen, suggesting
that ASCs may be an adjunctive therapeutic in this condition. Stem Cells
Translational Medicine 2019;8:785&796.

© 2019 The Authors. Stem Cells Translational Medicine published by Wiley
Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press.

DOI: 10.1002/sctm.18-0260 
PMCID: PMC6646807
PMID: 31033196  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

