
1. BMC Genomics. 2019 May 9;20(1):358. doi: 10.1186/s12864-019-5749-3.

Comparative analyses of the variation of the transcriptome and proteome of
Rhodobacter sphaeroides throughout growth.

Bathke J(1), Konzer A(2), Remes B(3), McIntosh M(4), Klug G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioinformatics, University of Giessen, Giessen, Germany.
(2)Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry, Max-Planck-Institute for Heart and Lung
Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany.
(3)Institute of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, University of Giessen,
Giessen, Germany.
(4)Institute of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, University of Giessen,
Giessen, Germany. matthew.mcintosh@mikro.bio.uni-giessen.de.

BACKGROUND: In natural environments, bacteria must frequently cope with extremely
scarce nutrients. Most studies focus on bacterial growth in nutrient replete
conditions, while less is known about the stationary phase. Here, we are
interested in global gene expression throughout all growth phases, including the 
adjustment to deep stationary phase.
RESULTS: We monitored both the transcriptome and the proteome in cultures of the 
alphaproteobacterium Rhodobacter sphaeroides, beginning with the transition to
stationary phase and at different points of the stationary phase and finally
during exit from stationary phase (outgrowth) following dilution with fresh
medium. Correlation between the transcriptomic and proteomic changes was very low
throughout the growth phases. Surprisingly, even in deep stationary phase, the
abundance of many proteins continued to adjust, while the transcriptome analysis 
revealed fewer adjustments. This pattern was reversed during the first 90 min of 
outgrowth, although this depended upon the duration of the stationary phase. We
provide a detailed analysis of proteomic changes based on the clustering of
orthologous groups (COGs), and compare these with the transcriptome.
CONCLUSIONS: The low correlation between transcriptome and proteome supports the 
view that post-transcriptional processes play a major role in the adaptation to
growth conditions. Our data revealed that many proteins with functions in
transcription, energy production and conversion and the metabolism and transport 
of amino acids, carbohydrates, lipids, and secondary metabolites continually
increased in deep stationary phase. Based on these findings, we conclude that the
bacterium responds to sudden changes in environmental conditions by a radical and
rapid reprogramming of the transcriptome in the first 90 min, while the proteome 
changes were modest. In response to gradually deteriorating conditions, however, 
the transcriptome remains mostly at a steady state while the bacterium continues 
to adjust its proteome. Even long after the population has entered stationary
phase, cells are still actively adjusting their proteomes.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-019-5749-3 
PMCID: PMC6509803
PMID: 31072330  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

