
1. Int J Pharm. 2019 Jun 30;565:123-132. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2019.05.013. Epub
2019 May 7.

Nano spray dryer for vectorizing α-galactosylceramide in polymeric nanoparticles:
A single step process to enhance invariant Natural Killer T lymphocyte responses.

Gonzatti MB(1), Sousa MEP(2), Tunissi AS(3), Mortara RA(4), de Oliveira AM(5),
Pereira Cerize NN(6), Keller AC(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, Escola Paulista de
Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil; Institute for
Technological Research of State of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, Escola Paulista de
Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Institute for Technological Research of State of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
Electronic address: aritunussi@ipt.br.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, Escola Paulista de
Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic
address: ramortara@unifesp.br.
(5)Institute for Technological Research of State of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
Electronic address: amarim@ipt.br.
(6)Institute for Technological Research of State of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
Electronic address: ncerize@ipt.br.
(7)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, Escola Paulista de
Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic
address: ackeller@unifesp.br.

The recognition of α-galactosylceramide (αGC), a high-affinity CD1d antigen, by
the invariant Natural Killer T (iNKT) lymphocytes results in potent
immunostimulatory responses that have been exploited in advanced cancer patients.
Therefore, to improve αGC biological activity, several studies vectorized this
agonist in PLGA and/or PEG-based nanoparticles. Despite promising findings, these
approaches require several steps, from organic solvent decontamination through
extrusion in membrane systems. Using a nano spray dryer, we vectorized αGC into a
cationic copolymer (dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate, butyl methacrylate and
methyl methacrylate - DBM) in a single step process, free of organic solvent.
This methodology allowed the production of stable αGC-vectorized nanoparticles
(DBM + αGC) with a more potent biological activity than the free agonist. DBM
nanoparticles improved in vivo αGC loading into the CD1d molecule and induced a
higher frequency of IFN-γ-expressing iNKT cells. Consequently, mice treated with 
DBM + αGC presented higher levels of serum IFN-γ than those treated with free
agonist. Also, vectorized nanoparticles improved αGC ability to control the
growth of murine lung metastatic carcinoma. Thus, this is the first study showing
that nano spray dryer technology is a simple and alternative approach to enhance 
iNKT responses.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2019.05.013 
PMID: 31075434  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

