
1. Front Microbiol. 2019 Apr 24;10:887. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00887. eCollection
2019.

Core Gut Bacteria Analysis of Healthy Mice.

Wang J(1), Lang T(1), Shen J(2), Dai J(1), Tian L(1), Wang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory for Pancreatic Diseases, Institute of Translational
Medicine, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for Systems Biomedicine, Shanghai Centre 
for Systems Biomedicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.

Previous studies revealed that there existed great individual variations of gut
microbiota in mice, and the gut bacteria of mice were changed with the occurrence
and development of diseases. To identify the core gut bacteria in healthy mice
and explore their relationships with the host phenotypes would help to understand
the underlying mechanisms. In this study, we identified 37 genus-level core
bacteria from feces of 101 healthy mice with different ages, sexes, and mouse
strains in three previous studies. They collectively represented nearly half of
the total sequences, and predominantly included carbohydrate- and amino
acids-metabolizing bacteria and immunomodulatory bacteria. Among them,
Anaerostipes indwelt the gut of all healthy mice. Co-abundance analysis showed
that these core genera were clustered into five groups (Group C1-C5), which were 
ecologically related. For example, the abundances of Group C2 including
probiotics Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus slightly positively correlated with 
those of Group C1. Principal component analysis (PCA) and multivariate analysis
of variance test revealed that these core gut genera were distinguished with age 
and sex, and also associated with their health/disease state. Linear discriminant
analysis effect size (LEfSe) method showed that bacteria in Group C1 and C2/C3
increased with the age in infancy and early adulthood, and were more abundant in 
female mice than in male ones. The metabolic syndrome (MS) induced by high fat
diet (HFD) and accelerated postnatal growth would decrease Group C2 genera,
whereas probiotics intervention would reverse HFD-induced reduction of Group C2. 
Spearman correlation analysis indicated that the principal components based on
the abundance of the 37 core genera were significantly correlated with host
characteristic parameters of MS. These results demonstrated that the 37 core
genera in five co-abundance groups from healthy mice were related to host
phenotypes. It was indicated that these prevalent gut bacterial genera could be
representative of the healthy gut microbiome in gnotobiotic animal models, and
might also be candidates of probiotics and fecal microbiota transplantation.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00887 
PMCID: PMC6491893
PMID: 31105675 

