
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2019 Apr 30;9:128. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2019.00128.
eCollection 2019.

Application of Antimicrobial Peptides of the Innate Immune System in Combination 
With Conventional Antibiotics-A Novel Way to Combat Antibiotic Resistance?

Zharkova MS(1), Orlov DS(1), Golubeva OY(2), Chakchir OB(3), Eliseev IE(3),
Grinchuk TM(4), Shamova OV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Design and Synthesis of Biologically Active Peptides, Department
of General Pathology and Pathophysiology, FSBSI Institute of Experimental
Medicine, Saint Petersburg, Russia.
(2)Laboratory of Nanostructures Research, Institute of Silicate Chemistry of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences, Saint Petersburg, Russia.
(3)Nanobiotechnology Laboratory, Saint Petersburg National Research Academic
University of the Russian Academy of Science, Saint Petersburg, Russia.
(4)Laboratory of Intracellular Signaling, Institute of Cytology of the Russian
Academy of Science, Saint Petersburg, Russia.

Rapidly growing resistance of pathogenic bacteria to conventional antibiotics
leads to inefficiency of traditional approaches of countering infections and
determines the urgent need for a search of fundamentally new anti-infective
drugs. Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) of the innate immune system are promising
candidates for a role of such novel antibiotics. However, some cytotoxicity of
AMPs toward host cells limits their active implementation in medicine and forces 
attempts to design numerous structural analogs of the peptides with optimized
properties. An alternative route for the successful AMPs introduction may be
their usage in combination with conventional antibiotics. Synergistic
antibacterial effects have been reported for a number of such combinations,
however, the molecular mechanisms of the synergy remain poorly understood and
little is known whether AMPs cytotoxicy for the host cells increases upon their
application with antibiotics. Our study is directed to examination of a combined 
action of natural AMPs with different structure and mode of action (porcine
protegrin 1, caprine bactenecin ChBac3.4, human alpha- and beta-defensins (HNP-1,
HNP-4, hBD-2, hBD-3), human cathelicidin LL-37), and egg white lysozyme with
varied antibiotic agents (gentamicin, ofloxacin, oxacillin, rifampicin, polymyxin
B, silver nanoparticles) toward selected bacteria, including drug-sensitive and
drug-resistant strains, as well as toward some mammalian cells (human
erythrocytes, PBMC, neutrophils, murine peritoneal macrophages and Ehrlich
ascites carcinoma cells). Using "checkerboard titrations" for fractional
inhibitory concentration indexes evaluation, it was found that synergy in
antibacterial action mainly occurs between highly membrane-active AMPs (e.g.,
protegrin 1, hBD-3) and antibiotics with intracellular targets (e.g., gentamicin,
rifampcin), suggesting bioavailability increase as the main model of such
interaction. In some combinations modulation of dynamics of AMP-bacterial
membrane interaction in presence of the antibiotic was also shown. Cytotoxic
effects of the same combinations toward normal eukaryotic cells were rarely
synergistic. The obtained data approve that combined application of antimicrobial
peptides with antibiotics or other antimicrobials is a promising strategy for
further development of new approach for combating antibiotic-resistant bacteria
by usage of AMP-based therapeutics. Revealing the conventional antibiotics that
increase the activity of human endogenous AMPs against particular pathogens is
also important for cure strategies elaboration.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2019.00128 
PMCID: PMC6503114
PMID: 31114762  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

