
1. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2019 Oct;32(5):303-316. doi:
10.1089/jamp.2018.1502. Epub 2019 May 22.

The Cystic Fibrosis-Like Airway Surface Layer Is not a Significant Barrier for
Delivery of Eluforsen to Airway Epithelial Cells.

Brinks V(1), Lipinska K(1), de Jager M(1), Beumer W(1), Button B(2)(3),
Livraghi-Butrico A(3), Henig N(1), Matthee B(1).

Author information: 
(1)ProQR Therapeutics, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
(3)Marsico Lung Institute, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina.

Background: Eluforsen (previously known as QR-010) is a 33-mer antisense
oligonucleotide under development for oral inhalation in cystic fibrosis (CF)
patients with the delta F508 mutation. Previous work has shown that eluforsen
restores CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) function in vitro and in
vivo. To be effective, eluforsen has first to reach its primary target, the lung 
epithelial cells. Therefore, it has to diffuse through the CF airway surface
layer (ASL), which in CF is characterized by the presence of thick and viscous
mucus, impaired mucociliary clearance, and persistent infections. The goal of
this study was to assess delivery of eluforsen through CF-like ASL. Methods and
Results: First, air-liquid interface studies with cultured primary airway
epithelial cells revealed that eluforsen rapidly diffuses through CF-like mucus
at clinically relevant doses when nebulized once or repeatedly, over a range of
testing doses. Furthermore, eluforsen concentrations remained stable in CF
patient sputum for at least 48 hours, and eluforsen remained intact in the
presence of various inhaled CF medications for at least 24 hours. When testing
biodistribution of eluforsen after orotracheal administration in vivo, no
differences in lung, liver, trachea, and kidney eluforsen concentration were
observed between mice with a CF-like lung phenotype (ENaC-overexpressing mice)
and control wild-type (WT) littermates. Also, eluforsen was visualized in the
airway epithelial cell layer of CF-like muco-obstructed mice and WT littermates. 
Finally, studies of eluforsen uptake and binding to bacteria prevalent in CF
lungs, and diffusion through bacterial biofilms showed that eluforsen was stable 
and not absorbed by, or bound to bacteria. In addition, eluforsen was found to be
able to penetrate Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms. Conclusions: The thickened and
concentrated CF ASL does not constitute a significant barrier for delivery of
eluforsen, and feasibility of oral inhalation of eluforsen is supported by these 
data.

DOI: 10.1089/jamp.2018.1502 
PMCID: PMC6781260
PMID: 31120356  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

