
1. Harmful Algae. 2019 Apr;84:222-232. doi: 10.1016/j.hal.2019.04.005. Epub 2019 Apr
23.

Causal relationships of Raphidiopsis (formerly Cylindrospermopsis) dynamics with 
water temperature and N:P-ratios: A meta-analysis across lakes with different
climates based on inferential modelling.

Recknagel F(1), Zohary T(2), Rücker J(3), Orr PT(4), Branco CC(5), Nixdorf B(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Adelaide, School of Biological Sciences, Adelaide, Australia.
Electronic address: friedrich.recknagel@adelaide.edu.au.
(2)Israel Oceanographic and Limnological Research, Kinneret Limnological
Laboratory, Migdal, Israel.
(3)Brandenburg University of Technology, Department of Freshwater Conservation,
Bad Saarow, Germany.
(4)Seqwater, Brisbane, Australia.
(5)Federal University of the State of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Raphidiopsis raciborskii is a tropical toxic cyanobacterium that is rapidly
expanding to diverse lake habitats in different climate zones by sophisticated
adaptation mechanisms. This meta-analysis investigated correlations of R.
raciborskii with water temperature and N:P (nitrogen to phosphorus)-ratios across
four lakes with different climates and trophic states by means of long-term time 
series and the hybrid evolutionary algorithm HEA. The results have shown that in 
the lakes with temperate and Mediterranean climate, R. raciborskii is strongly
correlated with water temperature since germination and growth rely on rising
water temperatures in spring. In contrast, there was a weaker correlation with
water temperature in subtropical and tropical lakes where pelagic populations of 
R. raciborskii are overwintering, and are present all year round. However, the
highest abundances of R. raciborskii coincided with highest water temperature for
the Mediterranean, subtropical and tropical lakes, whilst in the temperate Langer
See the highest abundances of R. raciborskii occurred at 24.1 °C, even though
temperatures of up to 27 °C were recorded in 2013 and 2014. The correlation of R.
raciborskii with N:P-ratios proved to be strongest for the meso- to eutrophic
Lake Kinneret (r2 = 0.8) and lowest for the eutrophic Lake Paranoa (r2 = 0.16).
However, the assumption has been confirmed that R. raciborskii is growing fastest
when waters are N-limited regardless of trophic states. In terms of phenology,
the temperate and Mediterranean lakes displayed "fastest growth" in spring and
early summer. In contrast, the growing season in subtropical and tropical lakes
lasted from spring to autumn most likely because of overwintering populations,
and growing importance of direct and indirect biotic regulating factors such as
competition, grazing, remineralisation of nutrients along warming climate. In
order to carry out a meta-analysis of time series across four different lakes,
HEA served as powerful tool resulting in inferential models with predictive
capacity for population dynamics of R. raciborskii just driven by water
temperature or N:P-ratios, whilst coefficients of determination r2 served as
criteria for hypotheses testing.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hal.2019.04.005 
PMID: 31128807  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

