
1. Front Immunol. 2019 May 3;10:966. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00966. eCollection
2019.

Dynamically Driven Allostery in MHC Proteins: Peptide-Dependent Tuning of Class I
MHC Global Flexibility.

Ayres CM(1)(2), Abualrous ET(3), Bailey A(4), Abraham C(1)(2), Hellman LM(1)(2), 
Corcelli SA(1), Noé F(3), Elliott T(4), Baker BM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Notre Dame, Notre
Dame, IN, United States.
(2)Harper Cancer Research Institute, University of Notre Dame, South Bend, IN,
United States.
(3)Computational Molecular Biology Group, Institute for Mathematics, Freie
Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Institute for Life Sciences and Centre for Cancer Immunology, University of
Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom.

T cell receptor (TCR) recognition of antigenic peptides bound and presented by
class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins underlies the cytotoxic
immune response to diseased cells. Crystallographic structures of TCR-peptide/MHC
complexes have demonstrated how TCRs simultaneously interact with both the
peptide and the MHC protein. However, it is increasingly recognized that, beyond 
serving as a static platform for peptide presentation, the physical properties of
class I MHC proteins are tuned by different peptides in ways that are not always 
structurally visible. These include MHC protein motions, or dynamics, which are
believed to influence interactions with a variety of MHC-binding proteins,
including not only TCRs, but other activating and inhibitory receptors as well as
components of the peptide loading machinery. Here, we investigated the mechanisms
by which peptides tune the dynamics of the common class I MHC protein HLA-A2. By 
examining more than 50 lengthy molecular dynamics simulations of HLA-A2
presenting different peptides, we identified regions susceptible to dynamic
tuning, including regions in the peptide binding domain as well as the distal α3 
domain. Further analyses of the simulations illuminated mechanisms by which the
influences of different peptides are communicated throughout the protein, and
involve regions of the peptide binding groove, the β2-microglobulin subunit, and 
the α3 domain. Overall, our results demonstrate that the class I MHC protein is a
highly tunable peptide sensor whose physical properties vary considerably with
bound peptide. Our data provides insight into the underlying principles and
suggest a role for dynamically driven allostery in the immunological function of 
MHC proteins.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00966 
PMCID: PMC6509175
PMID: 31130956  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

