
1. mSphere. 2019 Jun 5;4(3). pii: e00327-19. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00327-19.

Vitamin A Metabolism by Dendritic Cells Triggers an Antimicrobial Response
against Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Kim EW(1)(2), De Leon A(3), Jiang Z(4), Radu RA(4), Martineau AR(5), Chan ED(6), 
Bai X(6), Su WL(7), Montoya DJ(8), Modlin RL(3)(1), Liu PT(9)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(2)UCLA and Orthopaedic Hospital Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The
Orthopaedic Hospital Research Center, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(3)Division of Dermatology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(4)Stein Eye Institute and Department of Ophthalmology, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(5)Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University
of London, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Medicine and Academic Affairs, National Jewish Health, Denver,
Colorado, USA.
(7)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Taipei Tzu Chi Hospital,
Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical Foundation, New Taipei, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(9)Division of Dermatology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA ptliu@mednet.ucla.edu.

Epidemiological evidence correlates low serum vitamin A (retinol) levels with
increased susceptibility to active tuberculosis (TB); however, retinol is
biologically inactive and must be converted into its bioactive form, all-trans
retinoic acid (ATRA). Given that ATRA triggers a Niemann-Pick type C2
(NPC2)-dependent antimicrobial response against Mycobacterium tuberculosis, we
investigated the mechanism by which the immune system converts retinol into ATRA 
at the site of infection. We demonstrate that granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)-derived dendritic cells (DCs), but not
macrophages, express enzymes in the vitamin A metabolic pathway, including
aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 family, member a2 (ALDH1A2) and short-chain
dehydrogenase/reductase family, member 9 (DHRS9), enzymes capable of the two-step
conversion of retinol into ATRA, which is subsequently released from the cell.
Additionally, mRNA and protein expression levels of ALDH1A2 and DC marker CD1B
were lower in tuberculosis lung tissues than in normal lung. The conditioned
medium from DCs cultured with retinol stimulated antimicrobial activity from M.
tuberculosis-infected macrophages, as well as the expression of NPC2 in
monocytes, which was blocked by specific inhibitors, including retinoic acid
receptor inhibitor (RARi) or N,N-diethylaminobenzaldehyde (DEAB), an ALDH1A2
inhibitor. These results indicate that metabolism of vitamin A by DCs
transactivates macrophage antimicrobial responses.IMPORTANCE Tuberculosis (TB) is
the leading cause of death by a single infectious agent worldwide. One factor
that contributes to the success of the microbe is the deficiency in
immunomodulatory nutrients, such as vitamin A (retinol), which are prevalent in
areas where TB is endemic. Clinical trials show that restoration of systemic
retinol levels in active TB patients is ineffective in mitigating the disease;
however, laboratory studies demonstrate that activation of the vitamin A pathway 
in Mycobacterium tuberculosis-infected macrophages triggers an antimicrobial
response. Therefore, the goal of this study was to determine the link between
host retinol levels and retinoic acid-mediated antimicrobial responses against M.
tuberculosis By combining established in vitro models with in situ studies of
lung tissue from TB patients, this study demonstrates that the innate immune
system utilizes transcellular metabolism leading to activation between dendritic 
cells and macrophages as a means to combat the pathogen.

Copyright © 2019 Kim et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00327-19 
PMCID: PMC6553556
PMID: 31167948  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

