
1. Genome Biol Evol. 2019 Jul 1;11(1):1780-1796. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evz119.

The Population Structure of Pseudomonas aeruginosa Is Characterized by Genetic
Isolation of exoU+ and exoS+ Lineages.

Ozer EA(1), Nnah E(2), Didelot X(3), Whitaker RJ(4), Hauser AR(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine.
(2)Lurie Children's Hospital, Chicago, Illinois.
(3)School of Life Sciences and Department of Statistics, University of Warwick,
Coventry, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Microbiology and the Carl R. Woese Institute of Genomic Biology,
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.
(5)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern University Feinberg School
of Medicine.

The diversification of microbial populations may be driven by many factors
including adaptation to distinct ecological niches and barriers to recombination.
We examined the population structure of the bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas
aeruginosa by analyzing whole-genome sequences of 739 isolates from diverse
sources. We confirmed that the population structure of P. aeruginosa consists of 
two major groups (referred to as Groups A and B) and at least two minor groups
(Groups C1 and C2). Evidence for frequent intragroup but limited intergroup
recombination in the core genome was observed, consistent with sexual isolation
of the groups. Likewise, accessory genome analysis demonstrated more gene flow
within Groups A and B than between these groups, and a few accessory genomic
elements were nearly specific to one or the other group. In particular, the exoS 
gene was highly overrepresented in Group A compared with Group B isolates (99.4% 
vs. 1.1%) and the exoU gene was highly overrepresented in Group B compared with
Group A isolates (95.2% vs. 1.8%). The exoS and exoU genes encode effector
proteins secreted by the P. aeruginosa type III secretion system. Together these 
results suggest that the major P. aeruginosa groups defined in part by the exoS
and exoU genes are divergent from each other, and that these groups are
genetically isolated and may be ecologically distinct. Although both groups were 
globally distributed and caused human infections, certain groups predominated in 
some clinical contexts.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evz119 
PMCID: PMC6690169
PMID: 31173069  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

